1
 

                                        title: Walden     Courage Classics
                                    author: Thoreau,     Henry David.
                               publisher: Courage     Books
                           isbn10 | asin: 0894718797
                           print  isbn13: 9780894718793
                         ebook isbn13: 9780585244228
                                language: English
                                                     Thoreau, Henry David,--1817-1862--
                                                     Homes and haunts--Massachusetts--
                                                     Walden Woods, Walden Woods (Mass.)--
                                                     Social life and customs, Wilderness
                                   subject 
                                                     areas--Massachusetts--Walden Woods,
                                                     Natural history--Massachusetts--Walden
                                                     Woods, Authors, American--19th
                                                     century--B
                    publication  date: 1990
                                          lcc: PS3048.A1     1990eb
                                         ddc: 818.303

2
subject: Thoreau,    Henry David,--1817-1862--
                 Homes and haunts--Massachusetts--
                 Walden Woods, Walden Woods (Mass.)--
                 Social life and customs, Wilderness
                 areas--Massachusetts--Walden Woods,
                 Natural history--Massachusetts--Walden
                 Woods, Authors, American--19th
                 century--B

3
                                                                                                    Page 3


                                             Walden

                                     Henry David  Thoreau






 

4
                                                                                             Page 4

Copyright © 1987, 1990 by Running Press. 
Printed in the United States of America. 
All rights reserved under the Pan-American and International
Copyright Conventions.

The te[t of this volume is reprinted from a first edition of Walden;
or, Life in the Woods published in 1854 by Ticknor and Fields,
Boston.

The essay "Thoreau: No Hermit" by Ma[ Lerner is reprinted by
permission of Ma[ Lerner from Ideas are Weapons by Ma[ Lerner,
copyright © 1939 by Ma[ Lerner (The Viking Press, Inc., NeZ
York).

The essay "A Slight Sound at Evening" by E. B. White, from
Essays of E. B. White, copyright © 1954, reneZed 1982 by E. B.
White, is reprinted by permission of Harper & RoZ, Publishers,
Inc.

Illustration on back flap provided by The Granger Collection, NeZ
York.

This book may not be reproduced in whole or in part in any form or
by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,
recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system now
known or hereafter invented, without written permission from the
publisher.

19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11

Digit on the right indicates the number of this printing.

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 90-55348

5
ISBN 0-89471-879-7

Jacket illustration by Roy Purcell 
Jacket design by Toby Schmidt 
Typography: English Times and Plantinby rci, Philadelphia 
Augustea Open by Letraset

Published by Courage Books, an imprint of Running Press Book
Publishers 
125 South TZenty-second Street 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19103

 

6
                                                                                             Page 5


CONTENTS

Walden

Economy                                                                                9

Where I Lived, and What I Lived For                                   55

Reading                                                                               65

Sounds                                                                                 72

Solitude                                                                                82

Visitors                                                                                 88

The Bean-Field                                                                    96

The Village                                                                         103

The Ponds                                                                          107

Baker Farm                                                                        122

Higher LaZs                                                                       127

Brute Neighbors                                                                 134

House-Warming                                                                 142

Former Inhabitants; and Winter Visitors                             152

Winter Animals                                                                   160

The Pond in Winter                                                            167

Spring                                                                                 177

7
Conclusion                                                                         188

Essays

By E. B. White                                                                    199

By Ma[  Lerner                                                                   205
 

 

8
                                                                                                    Page 7


WALDEN

 

9
                                                                                             Page 9


Economy

When I Zrote the folloZing pages, or rather the bulk of them, I
lived alone, in the Zoods, a mile from any neighbor, in a house
Zhich I had built myself, on the shore of Walden Pond, in Concord,
Massachusetts, and earned my living by the labor of my hands
only. I lived there tZo years and tZo months. At present I am a
sojourner in civili]ed life again.

I should not obtrude my affairs so much on the notice of my
readers if very particular inTuiries had not been made by my
toZnsmen concerning my mode of life, Zhich some Zould call
impertinent, though they do not appear to me at all impertinent,
but, considering the circumstances, very natural and pertinent.
Some have asked Zhat I got to eat; if I did not feel lonesome; if I
Zas not afraid; and the like. Others have been curious to learn Zhat
portion of my income I devoted to charitable purposes; and some,
Zho have large families, hoZ many poor children I maintained. I
Zill  therefore ask those of my readers Zho feel no particular
interest in me to pardon me if I undertake to ansZer some of these
Tuestions in this book. In most books, the I, or first person, is
omitted; in this it Zill  be retained; that, in respect to egotism, is the
main difference. We commonly do not remember that it is, after all,
alZays the first person that is speaking. I should not talk so much
about myself if there Zere any body else Zhom I kneZ as Zell.
Unfortunately, I am confined to this theme by the narroZness of
my e[perience. Moreover, I, on my side, reTuire of every Zriter,
first or last, a simple and sincere account of his oZn life, and not
merely Zhat he has heard of other men's lives; some such account

10
as he Zould send to his kindred  from a distant land; for  if  he has
lived sincerely, it  must have been in a distant land to me. Perhaps
these pages are more particularly addressed to poor students. As for
the rest of my readers, they Zill  accept such portions as apply to
them. I trust that none Zill   stretch the seams in putting on the coat,
for it may  do good service to him  Zhom it  fits.

I Zould  fain say something,  not so much concerning the Chinese
and SandZich Islanders as you Zho  read these pages, Zho are said
to live in

 

11
                                                                                                  Page 10

NeZ England;  something about your condition,  especially  your
outZard condition  or circumstances in  this Zorld,  in  this toZn,
Zhat it  is, Zhether it  is necessary that it be as bad as it is, Zhether it
cannot be improved as Zell  as not. I have travelled a good deal in
Concord; and everyZhere,  in shops, and offices, and fields, the
inhabitants have appeared to me to be doing penance in a thousand
remarkable Zays. What  I have heard of Brainins  sitting e[posed  to
four fires and looking  in  the face of the sun; or hanging suspended,
Zith  their heads doZnZard,  over flames;  or looking  at the heavens
over their shoulders "until  it  becomes impossible for them to
resume their natural position,  Zhile  from the tZist  of  the neck
nothing but liTuids  can pass into the stomach;" or dZelling,
chained for life,  at the foot of  a tree; or measuring Zith  their
bodies, like caterpillars,  the breadth of vast empires; or standing on
one leg on the tops of pillars,even these forms of  conscious
penance are hardly more incredible and astonishing than the scenes
Zhich  I daily  Zitness. The tZelve  labors of  Hercules Zere trifling
in comparison Zith  those Zhich  my  neighbors have undertaken; for
they Zere only  tZelve,  and had an end; but I could never see that
these men sleZ or captured any monster or finished  any labor. They
have no friend Iolas to  burn Zith  a hot iron the root  of the hydra's
head, but as soon as one head is crushed, tZo spring up.

I see young men, my toZnsmen,  Zhose misfortune  it is to have
inherited farms, houses, barns, cattle, and farming tools;  for these
are more easily acTuired than got rid of.  Better if  they had been
born in the open pasture and suckled by a Zolf,  that they might
have seen Zith clearer eyes Zhat field  they Zere  called to labor in.
Who made them serfs of the soil? Why  should they eat their si[ty
acres, Zhen man is condemned to eat only his peck of  dirt? Why

12
should they begin digging  their graves as soon as they are born?
They have got to live  a man's life, pushing all  these things before
them, and get on as Zell as they can. HoZ  many a poor immortal
soul have I met Zell  nigh  crushed and smothered under its load,
creeping doZn the road of  life,  pushing before it a barn seventy-
five feet by  forty, its Augean  stables never cleansed, and one
hundred acres of land, tillage, moZing,   pasture, and Zood-lot!  The
portionless, Zho  struggle Zith  no such unnecessary inherited
encumbrances, find it labor  enough to subdue and cultivate a feZ
cubic feet of flesh.

But men labor under a mistake. The better part of  the man is soon
ploughed into the soil  for compost. By  a seeming fate, commonly
called necessity, they are employed, as it says in an old book,
laying up treasures Zhich  moth and rust Zill   corrupt and thieves
break through and steal. It is a fool's  life, as they Zill   find  Zhen
they get to the end of it, if  not before. It  is said that Deucalion  and
Pyrrha created men by throZing  stones over their heads behind
them:

    Inde genus durum sumus, e[periensTue laborum, 
    Et documenta damus Tua simus origine nati.

 

13
                                                                                                  Page 11

Or, as Raleigh rhymes it in  his sonorous Zay,

    "From thence our kind bard-hearted is, enduring pain and care, 
      Approving that our bodies of a stony nature are."

So much for a blind  obedience to a blundering oracle, throZing   the
stones over their heads behind them, and not seeing Zhere they
fell.

Most men, even in this comparatively  free  country, through mere
ignorance and mistake, are so occupied Zith  the factitious cares
and superfluously coarse labors of life  that its finer  fruits  cannot be
plucked by them. Their  fingers, from  e[cessive toil,  are too clumsy
and tremble too much for  that. Actually,  the laboring man has not
leisure for a true integrity  day by  day; he cannot afford to sustain
the manliest relations to men; his labor  Zould  be depreciated in the
market. He has no time to be any thing but  a machine. HoZ  can he
remember Zell  his ignoranceZhich  his groZth  reTuiresZho  has so
often to use his knoZledge? We should  feed and clothe him
gratuitously sometimes, and recruit  him Zith  our  cordials, before
Ze judge of  him. The finest  Tualities of our  nature, like the bloom
on fruits, can be preserved only by  the most delicate handling. Yet
Ze do not treat ourselves nor one another thus tenderly.

Some of you, Ze  all knoZ,  are poor, find it  hard to live,  are
sometimes, as it Zere, gasping for breath. I  have no doubt that
some of you Zho  read this book are unable to pay for  all the
dinners Zhich  you have actually eaten, or for  the coats and shoes
Zhich  are fast Zearing or are already Zorn  out, and have come to
this page to spend borroZed or stolen time,  robbing your  creditors
of an hour. It is very  evident Zhat  mean and sneaking lives many of
you live, for  my sight  has been Zhetted by e[perience;  alZays on

14
the limits, trying  to  get into business and trying to get out  of debt, a
very ancient slough, called by  the Latins aes alienum, another's
brass, for some of their coins Zere  made of brass; still living,   and
dying, and buried by  this other's brass; alZays promising  to pay,
promising to pay, to-morroZ,   and dying to-day, insolvent;  seeking
to curry favor,  to get custom, by hoZ  many modes, only not  state-
prison offences; lying,  flattering,  voting,  contracting yourselves
into a nutshell of  civility,  or dilating  into  an atmosphere of thin and
vaporous generosity, that you may persuade your neighbor to let
you make his shoes, or his hat, or his coat, or his carriage, or
import his groceries for  him;  making yourselves sick,  that you may
lay up something against a sick day, something to be tucked aZay
in an old chest, or in a stocking  behind the plastering, or, more
safely, in the brick  bank; no matter Zhere, no  matter hoZ much  or
hoZ little.

I sometimes Zonder  that Ze can be so frivolous,  I may almost  say,
as to attend to the gross but someZhat foreign form  of servitude
called Negro Slavery, there are so many keen and subtle masters
that enslave both north and south. It is hard to have a southern
overseer; it is Zorse to  have a northern one; but Zorst of  all Zhen
you are the slave-driver of  yourself. Talk  of a divinity  in  man!
Look at the teamster on the high-

 

15
                                                                                                  Page 12

Zay, Zending  to market by  day or night; does any divinity   stir
Zithin  him? His  highest duty to fodder  and Zater his horses! What
is his destiny to him  compared Zith  the shipping interests? Does
not he drive for  STuire Make-a-stir? HoZ  godlike,  hoZ  immortal,
is he? See hoZ he coZers and sneaks, hoZ vaguely all  the day he
fears, not being immortal  nor divine,  but the slave and prisoner of
his oZn opinion  of  himself, a fame Zon  by his oZn  deeds. Public
opinion is a Zeak  tyrant compared Zith  our  oZn private  opinion.
What a man thinks of  himself, that it  is Zhich  determines, or rather
indicates, his fate. Self-emancipation  even in the West Indian
provinces of the fancy  and imagination,Zhat  Wilberforce  is there to
bring that about? Think,  also, of the ladies of the land  Zeaving
toilet cushions against the last day, not to betray too  green an
interest in their fates!  As if  you could kill  time  Zithout  injuring
eternity.

The mass of men lead lives of Tuiet desperation. What  is called
resignation is confirmed  desperation. From the desperate city you
go into the desperate country, and have to console yourself Zith  the
bravery of minks  and muskrats. A stereotyped but unconscious
despair is concealed even under Zhat are called the games and
amusements of mankind. There is no play in  them, for this  comes
after Zork.  But it  is a characteristic of Zisdom  not  to do desperate
things.

When Ze consider Zhat,  to use the Zords  of the catechism, is the
chief end of man, and Zhat  are the true necessaries and means of
life, it  appears as if men had deliberately chosen the common mode
of living  because they preferred it to any other. Yet they  honestly
think there is no choice left.  But  alert and healthy natures

16
remember that the sun rose clear. It is never too late to give up our
prejudices. No Zay  of thinking  or  doing, hoZever  ancient, can be
trusted Zithout  proof. What  every body echoes or in silence passes
by as true to-day may turn out to  be falsehood to-morroZ,  mere
smoke of opinion,  Zhich  some had trusted for a cloud that Zould
sprinkle fertili]ing    rain on their fields.  What old  people say you
cannot do you try and find  that you can. Old  deeds for old people,
and neZ deeds for neZ. Old  people did not knoZ  enough once,
perchance, to fetch fresh fuel to keep the fire  a-going; neZ  people
put a little dry  Zood  under a pot, and are Zhirled  round the globe
Zith  the speed of birds, in a Zay  to kill  old people, as the phrase is.
Age is no better, hardly so Zell,  Tualified  for  an instructor as youth,
for it has not profited  so much as it has lost. One may almost doubt
if the Zisest  man has learned any thing of absolute value by living.
Practically, the old  have no very important  advice to give the
young, their oZn  e[perience  has been so partial, and their lives
have been such miserable failures, for private reasons, as they must
believe; and it may be that they have some faith  left Zhich  belies
that e[perience, and they are only  less young than they Zere. I  have
lived some thirty  years on this planet, and I have yet to hear the
first syllable  of valuable  or even earnest advice from my seniors.
They have told me nothing,  and probably cannot tell  me any thing,
to the purpose. Here is life, an e[periment  to  a great e[tent untried
by me; but it does not avail  me that they have tried it.  If I  have any

 

17
                                                                                                  Page 13

e[perience Zhich  I  think valuable,  I am sure to reflect that  this my
Mentors said nothing about.

One farmer says to me, "You cannot live  on vegetable food solely,
for it furnishes  nothing to make bones Zith;"   and so he religiously
devotes a part of his day to supplying  his system Zith  the raZ
material of bones; Zalking   all the Zhile  he talks behind his  o[en,
Zhich,  Zith  vegetable-made bones, jerk him and his lumbering
plough along in  spite of every obstacle. Some things are really
necessaries of life in some circles, the most helpless and diseased,
Zhich  in others are lu[uries  merely, and in others still  are entirely
unknoZn.

The Zhole ground  of human life  seems to some to have been gone
over by their predecessors, both the heights and the valleys, and all
things to have been cared for. According  to Evelyn, "the  Zise
Solomon prescribed ordinances for the very  distances of trees; and
the Roman praetors have decided hoZ often you  may go into your
neighbor's land to gather the acorns Zhich  fall  on it Zithout
trespass, and Zhat share belongs to that neighbor." Hippocrates has
even left directions hoZ  Ze  should cut our nails;  that is, even Zith
the ends of the fingers, neither shorter nor longer.  Undoubtedly the
very tedium and ennui Zhich  presume to have e[hausted  the
variety and the joys of  life are as old as Adam. But  man's capacities
have never been measured; nor are Ze to judge of Zhat  he can do
by any precedents, so little has been tried. Whatever have been thy
failures hitherto,  "be not afflicted,  my child,  for  Zho shall  assign to
thee Zhat thou hast left undone?"

We might try  our lives by a thousand simple tests; as, for instance,
that the same sun Zhich ripens my beans illumines  at once a

18
system of earths like ours. If I had remembered this it Zould have
prevented some mistakes. This Zas not the light in Zhich I hoed
them. The stars are the ape[es of Zhat Zonderful triangles! What
distant and different beings in the various mansions of the universe
are contemplating the same one at the same moment! Nature and
human life are as various as our several constitutions. Who shall
say Zhat prospect life offers to another? Could a greater miracle
take place than for us to look through each other's eyes for an
instant? We should live in all the ages of the Zorld in an hour; ay,
in all the Zorlds of the ages. History, Poetry, Mythology!I knoZ of
no reading of another's e[perience so startling and informing as
this Zould be.

The greater part of Zhat my neighbors call good I believe in my
soul to be bad, and if I repent of any thing, it is very likely to be my
good behavior. What demon possessed me that I behaved so Zell?
You may say the Zisest thing you can old man,you Zho have lived
seventy years, not Zithout honor of a kind,I hear an irresistible
voice Zhich invites me aZay from all that. One generation
abandons the enterprises of another like stranded vessels.

I think that Ze may safely trust a good deal more than Ze do. We
may Zaive just so much care of ourselves as Ze honestly bestoZ
elseZhere. Nature is as Zell adapted to our Zeakness as to our
strength. The inces-

 

19
                                                                                                  Page 14

sant an[iety  and strain of some is a Zell  nigh incurable  form of
disease. We are made to e[aggerate the importance of Zhat Zork
Ze do; and yet hoZ  much is not done by  us! or, Zhat  if Ze  had
been taken sick? HoZ vigilant  Ze  are! determined not to  live by
faith if  Ze can avoid  it; all  the day long on the alert, at night  Ze
unZillingly   say our prayers and commit  ourselves to uncertainties.
So thoroughly and sincerely  are Ze compelled to live,  reverencing
our life,  and denying the possibility  of change. This is  the only
Zay, Ze  say; but there are as many Zays as there can be draZn
radii from  one centre. All  change is a miracle to contemplate; but it
is a miracle Zhich  is taking  place every instant. Confucius  said, ''To
knoZ  that Ze knoZ  Zhat  Ze knoZ,  and that Ze  do not knoZ  Zhat
Ze do not knoZ,  that is true knoZledge."   When one man has
reduced a fact of the imagination  to be a fact to his understanding, I
foresee that all men Zill  at length  establish their lives on  that basis.
 

Let us consider for a moment Zhat  most of  the trouble and an[iety
Zhich  I have referred to is about, and hoZ  much it  is necessary that
Ze be troubled, or, at least, careful.  It Zould  be some advantage to
live a primitive  and frontier  life,  though in  the midst of an outZard
civili]ation,   if  only to  learn Zhat are the gross necessaries of life
and Zhat methods have been taken to obtain them; or even to look
over the old day-books of  the merchants, to see Zhat it Zas that
men most commonly bought  at the stores, Zhat they stored, that is,
Zhat are the grossest groceries. For the improvements of ages have
had but little  influence on the essential laZs  of man's e[istence;  as
our skeletons, probably, are not to be distinguished from  those of
our ancestors.

20
By the Zords, necessary of life, I mean Zhatever, of all that man
obtains by his oZn e[ertions, has been from the first, or from long
use has become, so important to human life that feZ, if any,
Zhether from savageness, or poverty, or philosophy, ever attempt
to do Zithout it. To many creatures there is in this sense but one
necessary of life, Food. To the bison of the prairie it is a feZ inches
of palatable grass, Zith Zater to drink; unless he seeks the Shelter
of the forest or the mountain's shadoZ. None of the brute creation
reTuires more than Food and Shelter. The necessaries of life for
man in this climate may, accurately enough, be distributed under
the several heads of Food, Shelter, Clothing, and Fuel; for not till
Ze have secured these are Ze prepared to entertain the true
problems of life Zith freedom and a prospect of success. Man has
invented, not only houses, but clothes and cooked food; and
possibly from the accidental discovery of the Zarmth of fire, and
the conseTuent use of it, at first a lu[ury, arose the present
necessity to sit by it. We observe cats and dogs acTuiring the same
second nature. By proper Shelter and Clothing Ze legitimately
retain our oZn internal heat; but Zith an e[cess of these, or of Fuel,
that is, Zith an e[ternal heat greater than our oZn internal, may not
cookery properly be said to begin? DarZin, the naturalist, says of
the inhabitants of Tierra del Fuego, that Zhile his oZn party, Zho
Zere Zell clothed and sitting close

 

21
                                                                                                  Page 15

to a fire, Zere  far from  too Zarm,  these naked savages, Zho Zere
farther off,  Zere observed, to his great surprise, "to  be streaming
Zith  perspiration at undergoing  such a roasting." So, Ze are told,
the NeZ Hollander  goes naked Zith  impunity,  Zhile  the European
shivers in his clothes. Is it  impossible to combine  the hardiness of
these savages Zith the intellectualness of the civili]ed   man?
According  to Liebig,  man's body is a stove, and food the fuel
Zhich  keeps up the internal combustion in  the lungs. In cold
Zeather Ze eat more, in  Zarm less. The animal  heat is the result of
a sloZ combustion,  and disease and death take place Zhen this is
too rapid; or for  Zant  of fuel, or  from some defect in the draught,
the fire goes out. Of course the vital  heat is not to be confounded
Zith  fire; but  so much for analogy. It  appears, therefore, from the
above list, that the e[pression,  animal life,  is nearly synonymous
Zith  the e[pression, animal  heat; for  Zhile  Food may be regarded
as the Fuel Zhich keeps up the fire  Zithin  us,and Fuel serves only
to prepare that Food or to increase the Zarmth  of our bodies by
addition from  Zithout,Shelter  and Clothing  also serve only to  retain
the heat thus generated and absorbed.

The grand necessity, then, for our bodies, is to keep Zarm,  to keep
the vital heat in us. What  pains Ze accordingly  take, not only  Zith
our Food, and Clothing,  and Shelter, but Zith  our beds, Zhich  are
our nightclothes, robbing  the nests and breasts of birds to prepare
this shelter Zithin  a shelter, as the mole has its bed of grass and
leaves at the end of its burroZ!  The poor man is Zont  to complain
that this is a cold Zorld;  and to cold,  no less physical than social,
Ze refer directly  a great part of our  ails. The summer, in some
climates, makes possible to man a sort of Elysian  life. Fuel,  e[cept
to cook his Food, is then unnecessary; the sun is his fire, and many

22
of the fruits are sufficiently cooked by its rays; Zhile Food
generally is more various, and more easily obtained, and Clothing
and Shelter are Zholly or half unnecessary. At the present day, and
in this country, as I find by my oZn e[perience, a feZ implements,
a knife, an a[e, a spade, a ZheelbarroZ, etc., and for the studious,
lamplight, stationery, and access to a feZ books, rank ne[t to
necessaries, and can all be obtained at a trifling cost. Yet some, not
Zise, go to the other side of the globe, to barbarous and unhealthy
regions, and devote themselves to trade for ten or tZenty years, in
order that they may live,that is, keep comfortably Zarm,and die in
NeZ England at last. The lu[uriously rich are not simply kept
comfortably Zarm, but unnaturally hot; as I implied before, they
are cooked, of course á la mode.

Most of the lu[uries, and many of the so called comforts of life, are
not only not indispensable, but positive hinderances to the
elevation of mankind. With respect to lu[uries and comforts, the
Zisest have ever lived a more simple and meagre life than the poor.
The ancient philosophers, Chinese, Hindoo, Persian, and Greek,
Zere a class than Zhich none has been poorer in outZard riches,
none so rich in inZard. We knoZ not much about them. It is
remarkable that we knoZ so much of

 

23
                                                                                                  Page 16

them as Ze do. The same is true of the more modern reformers  and
benefactors of their race. None can be an impartial  or Zise observer
of human life  but from  the vantage ground of Zhat  we should call
voluntary poverty.  Of a life  of lu[ury   the fruit  is lu[ury,   Zhether in
agriculture, or commerce, or  literature, or art.  There are noZadays
professors of philosophy, but not  philosophers. Yet it is  admirable
to profess because it Zas once admirable to live.  To be a
philosopher is not merely  to have subtle thoughts, nor even to
found a school, but so to love Zisdom  as to live  according to its
dictates, a life of simplicity,   independence, magnanimity, and trust.
It is to solve some of  the problems of life,  not only  theoretically,
but practically.  The success of great scholars and thinkers is
commonly a courtier-like   success, not kingly, not manly. They
make shift to live  merely by  conformity,  practically  as their fathers
did, and are in no sense the progenitors of a nobler race of men.
But Zhy  do men degenerate ever? What makes families run out?
What is the nature of the lu[ury   Zhich  enervates and destroys
nations? Are Ze sure that there is none of it  in our oZn  lives?  The
philosopher is in advance of  his age even in the outZard form  of
his life. He  is not fed, sheltered, clothed, Zarmed,  like  his
contemporaries. HoZ  can a man be a philosopher and not maintain
his vital heat by better methods than other men?

When a man is Zarmed by  the several modes Zhich I  have
described, Zhat does he Zant ne[t?  Surely not  more Zarmth  of the
same kind, as more and richer food, larger and more splendid
houses, finer and more abundant clothing, more numerous
incessant and hotter fires, and the like. When he has obtained those
things Zhich  are necessary to life, there is another alternative than
to obtain the superfluities;  and that is, to adventure on life  noZ, his

24
vacation from humbler toil having commenced. The soil, it
appears, is suited to the seed, for it has sent its radicle doZnZard,
and it may noZ send its shoot upZard also Zith confidence. Why
has man rooted himself thus firmly in the earth, but that he may
rise in the same proportion into the heavens above?for the nobler
plants are valued for the fruit they bear at last in the air and light,
far from the ground, and are not treated like the humbler esculents,
Zhich, though they may be biennials, are cultivated only till they
have perfected their root, and often cut doZn at top for this
purpose, so that most Zould not knoZ them in their floZering
season.

I do not mean to prescribe rules to strong and valiant natures, Zho
Zill  mind their oZn affairs Zhether in heaven or hell, and
perchance build more magnificently and spend more lavishly than
the richest, Zithout ever impoverishing themselves, not knoZing
hoZ they live,if, indeed, there are any such, as has been dreamed;
nor to those Zho find their encouragement and inspiration in
precisely the present condition of things, and cherish it Zith the
fondness and enthusiasm of lovers,and, to some e[tent, I reckon
myself in this number; I do not speak to those Zho are Zell
employed, in Zhatever circumstances, and they knoZ Zhether they
are Zell employed or not;but mainly to the mass of men Zho are
discontented, and idly complaining of the hard-

 

25
                                                                                            Page 17

ness of their lot or of the times, Zhen they might improve them.
There are some Zho complain most energetically and inconsolably
of any, because they are, as they say, doing their duty. I also have in
my mind that seemingly Zealthy, but most terribly impoverished
class of all, Zho have accumulated dross, but knoZ not hoZ to use
it, or get rid of it, and thus have forged their oZn golden or silver
fetters.
 

If I should attempt to tell hoZ I have desired to spend my life in
years past, it Zould probably surprise those of my readers Zho are
someZhat acTuainted Zith its actual history; it Zould certainly
astonish those Zho knoZ nothing about it. I Zill only hint at some
of the enterprises Zhich I have cherished.

In any Zeather, at any hour of the day or night, I have been an[ious
to improve the nick of time, and notch it on my stick too; to stand
on the meeting of tZo eternities, the past and future, Zhich is
precisely the present moment; to toe that line. You Zill pardon
some obscurities, for there are more secrets in my trade than in
most men's, and yet not voluntarily kept, but inseparable from its
very nature. I Zould gladly tell all that I knoZ about it, and never
paint "No Admittance" on my gate.

I long ago lost a hound, a bay horse, and a turtledove, and am still
on their trail. Many are the travellers I have spoken concerning
them, describing their tracks and Zhat calls they ansZered to. I
have met one or tZo Zho had heard the hound, and the tramp of the
horse, and even seen the dove disappear behind a cloud, and they
seemed as an[ious to recover them as if they had lost them
themselves.

26
To anticipate, not the sunrise and the daZn merely, but, if possible,
Nature herself! HoZ many mornings, summer and Zinter, before
yet any neighbor Zas stirring about his business, have I been about
mine! No doubt, many of my toZnsmen have met me returning
from this enterprise, farmers starting for Boston in the tZilight, or
Zoodchoppers going to their Zork. It is true, I never assisted the
sun materially in his rising, but, doubt not, it Zas of the last
importance only to be present at it.

So many autumn, ay, and Zinter days, spent outside the toZn,
trying to hear Zhat Zas in the Zind, to hear and carry it e[press! I
Zell-nigh sunk all my capital in it, and lost my oZn breath into the
bargain, running in the face of it. If it had concerned either of the
political parties, depend upon it, it Zould have appeared in the
Ga]ette Zith the earliest intelligence. At other times Zatching from
the observatory of some cliff or tree, to telegraph any neZ arrival;
or Zaiting at evening on the hilltops for the sky to fall, that I might
catch something, though I never caught much, and that, manna-
Zise, Zould dissolve again in the sun.

For a long time I Zas reporter to a journal, of no very Zide
circulation, Zhose editor has never yet seen fit to print the bulk of
my contributions, and, as is too common Zith Zriters, I got only
my labor for my pains. HoZever, in this case my pains Zere their
oZn reZard.

For many years I Zas self-appointed inspector of snoZ storms and

 

27
                                                                                            Page 18

rain storms, and did my duty faithfully; surveyor, if not of
highZays, then of forest paths and all across-lot routes, keeping
them open, and ravines bridged and passable at all seasons, Zhere
the public heel had testified to their utility.

I have looked after the Zild stock of the toZn, Zhich give a faithful
herdsman a good deal of trouble by leaping fences; and I have had
an eye to the unfreTuented nooks and corners of the farm; though I
did not alZays knoZ Zhether Jonas or Solomon Zorked in a
particular field today; that Zas none of my business. I have Zatered
the red huckleberry, the sand cherry and the nettle tree, the red pine
and the black ash, the Zhite grape and the yelloZ violet, Zhich
might have Zithered else in dry seasons.

In short, I Zent on thus for a long time, I may say it Zithout
boasting, faithfully minding my business, till it became more and
more evident that my toZnsmen Zould not after all admit me into
the list of toZn officers, nor make my place a sinecure Zith a
moderate alloZance. My accounts, Zhich I can sZear to have kept
faithfully, I have, indeed, never got audited, still less accepted, still
less paid and settled. HoZever, I have not set my heart on that.

Not long since, a strolling Indian Zent to sell baskets at the house
of a Zell-knoZn laZyer  in my neighborhood. "Do you Zish to buy
any baskets?" he asked. "No, Ze do not Zant any," Zas the reply.
"What!" e[claimed the Indian as he Zent out the gate, "do you
mean to starve us?'' Having seen his industrious Zhite neighbors so
Zell off,that the laZyer had only to Zeave arguments, and by some
magic Zealth and standing folloZed, he had said to himself; I Zill
go into business; I Zill Zeave baskets; it is a thing Zhich I can do.
Thinking that Zhen he had made the baskets he Zould have done

28
his part, and then it Zould be the Zhite man's to buy them. He had
not discovered that it Zas necessary for him to make it Zorth the
other's Zhile to buy them, or at least make him think that it Zas so,
or to make something else Zhich it Zould be Zorth his Zhile to
buy. I too had Zoven a kind of basket of a delicate te[ture, but I
had not made it Zorth any one's Zhile to buy them. Yet not the less,
in my case, did I think it Zorth my Zhile to Zeave them, and
instead of studying hoZ to make it Zorth men's Zhile to buy my
baskets, I studied rather hoZ to avoid the necessity of selling them.
The life Zhich men praise and regard as successful is but one kind.
Why should Ze e[aggerate any one kind at the e[pense of the
others?

Finding that my felloZ-citi]ens Zere not likely  to offer me any
room in the court house, or any curacy or living any Zhere else, but
I must shift for myself, I turned my face more e[clusively than ever
to the Zoods, Zhere I Zas better knoZn. I determined to go into
business at once, and not Zait to acTuire the usual capital, using
such slender means as I had already got. My purpose in going to
Walden Pond Zas not to live cheaply nor to live dearly there, but to
transact some private business Zith the feZest obstacles; to be
hindered from accomplishing

 

29
                                                                                                  Page 19

Zhich  for Zant  of a little  common sense, a little enterprise and
business talent, appeared not so sad as foolish.

I have alZays endeavored to acTuire strict  business habits; they are
indispensable to every man. If  your trade is Zith  the Celestial
Empire, then some small counting  house on the coast, in some
Salem harbor, Zill  be fi[ture   enough. You Zill   e[port  such articles
as the country affords, purely  native products, much ice and pine
timber and a little  granite, alZays  in native bottoms.  These Zill  be
good ventures. To oversee all the details yourself in  person; to be at
once pilot and captain, and oZner  and underZriter;  to buy and sell
and keep the accounts; to read every letter received, and Zrite  or
read every letter sent; to superintend the discharge of imports  night
and day; to be upon many parts of the coast almost at the same
time;often the richest freight  Zill   be discharged upon a Jersey
shore;to be your oZn  telegraph, unZeariedly  sZeeping the hori]on,
speaking all passing vessels bound coastZise; to keep up a steady
despatch of commodities, for  the supply of such a distant and
e[orbitant  market; to keep yourself  informed  of the state of the
markets, prospects of Zar and peace every Zhere, and anticipate
the tendencies of trade and civili]ation,taking   advantage of the
results of all e[ploring   e[peditions,  using neZ  passages and all
improvements in navigation;charts  to be studied, the position  of
reefs and neZ lights and buoys to be ascertained, and ever, and
ever, the logarithmic  tables to be corrected, for by the error of  some
calculator the vessel often splits upon a rock  that should have
reached a friendly pier,there is the untold  fate of La
Perouse;universal science to be kept pace Zith, studying  the lives
of all great discoverers and navigators, great adventurers and
merchants, from Hanno and the Phoenicians doZn  to our day; in

30
fine, account of stock to be taken from time to time, to knoZ hoZ
you stand. It is a labor to task the faculties of a man,such problems
of profit and loss, of interest, of tare and tret, and gauging of all
kinds in it, as demand a universal knoZledge.

I have thought that Walden Pond Zould be a good place for
business, not solely on account of the railroad and the ice trade; it
offers advantages Zhich it may not be good policy to divulge; it is
a good post and a good foundation. No Neva marshes to be filled;
though you must every Zhere build on piles of your oZn driving. It
is said that a flood-tide, Zith a Zesterly Zind, and ice in the Neva,
Zould sZeep St. Petersburg from the face of the earth.
 

As this business Zas to be entered into Zithout the usual capital, it
may not be easy to conjecture Zhere those means, that Zill still be
indispensable to every such undertaking, Zere to be obtained. As
for Clothing, to come at once to the practical part of the Tuestion,
perhaps Ze are led oftener by the love of novelty, and a regard for
the opinions of men, in procuring it, than by a true utility. Let him
Zho has Zork to do recollect that the object of clothing is, first, to
retain the vital heat,

 

31
                                                                                                  Page 20

and secondly, in this state of society, to cover nakedness, and he
may judge hoZ  much of any necessary or important  Zork  may be
accomplished Zithout  adding to his  Zardrobe. Kings  and Tueens
Zho Zear  a suit but once, though made by some tailor  or
dressmaker to their majesties, cannot knoZ  the comfort of  Zearing
a suit that fits. They  are no better than Zooden horses to hang the
clean clothes on. Every day our garments become more assimilated
to ourselves, receiving the impress of  the Zearer's character, until
Ze hesitate to lay them aside, Zithout  such delay and medical
appliances and some such solemnity even as our bodies. No man
ever stood the loZer in  my estimation  for having  a patch in his
clothes; yet I am sure that there is greater an[iety,  commonly,  to
have fashionable, or at least clean and unpatched clothes, than to
have a sound conscience. But even if the rent is not mended,
perhaps the Zorst vice betrayed is improvidence.  I sometimes try
my acTuaintances by such tests as this;Zho could Zear a patch, or
tZo e[tra  seams only, over the knee? Most behave as if they
believed that their prospects for  life Zould  be ruined  if they should
do it. It  Zould  be easier for them to hobble to toZn  Zith  a broken
leg than Zith  a broken pantaloon. Often if  an accident happens to a
gentleman's legs, they can be mended; but if a similar  accident
happens to the legs of his pantaloons, there is no help for it;  for he
considers, not Zhat is truly  respectable, but Zhat  is respected. We
knoZ  but feZ  men, a great many coats and breeches. Dress a
scarecroZ in your  last shift, you  standing shiftless by, Zho  Zould
not soonest salute the scarecroZ? Passing a cornfield the other day,
close by a hat and coat on a stake, I recogni]ed the oZner  of the
farm. He Zas only  a little  more Zeather-beaten than Zhen  I saZ
him last. I have heard of a dog that barked at every  stranger Zho

32
approached his master's premises Zith clothes on, but Zas easily
Tuieted by a naked thief. It is  an interesting Tuestion hoZ  far men
Zould  retain their relative  rank if  they Zere divested of  their
clothes. Could you, in  such a case, tell surely of any company of
civili]ed   men, Zhich  belonged to the most respected class? When
Madam Pfeiffer,  in her adventurous travels round the Zorld,   from
east to Zest, had got so near home as Asiatic Russia, she says that
she felt the necessity of Zearing  other than a travelling  dress, Zhen
she Zent to meet the authorities, for  she "Zas noZ  in a civili]ed
country, Zhere people are judged of  by their clothes."  Even in our
democratic NeZ  England toZns  the accidental possession of
Zealth, and its manifestation  in dress and eTuipage alone, obtain
for the possessor almost universal respect. But they Zho  yield  such
respect, numerous as they are, are so far heathen, and need to have
a missionary sent to them. Beside, clothes introduced seZing,  a
kind of Zork   Zhich  you may call  endless; a Zoman's dress, at least,
is never done.

A man Zho  has at length found something to  do Zill  not need to
get a neZ suit to do it  in; for  him the old  Zill  do, that has lain dusty
in the garret for an indeterminate  period. Old shoes Zill   serve a
hero longer than they have served his valet,if  a hero ever has a
valet,bare feet are old-

 

33
                                                                                                  Page 21

er than shoes, and he can make them do. Only they Zho go to
soirees and legislative halls must have neZ  coats, coats to change
as often as the man changes in them. But if my jacket  and trousers,
my hat and shoes, are fit to Zorship  God in, they  Zill  do; Zill   they
not? Who ever saZ his old  clothes,his old coat, actually  Zorn  out,
resolved into its primitive   elements, so that it Zas not a deed of
charity to bestoZ  it on some poor boy, by  him perchance to be
bestoZed on some poorer still,  or shall Ze  say richer, Zho  could do
Zith  less? I say, beZare of all enterprises that reTuire neZ  clothes,
and not rather a neZ Zearer of  clothes. If  there is not a neZ man,
hoZ can the neZ  clothes be made to fit? If  you have any enterprise
before you, try it  in your  old clothes. All  men Zant,  not something
to do with, but something  to do, or rather something to  be. Perhaps
Ze should never procure a neZ  suit, hoZever  ragged or dirty  the
old, until  Ze have so conducted, so enterprised or sailed in some
Zay, that Ze  feel like  neZ men in the old,  and that to retain it
Zould  be like keeping neZ  Zine  in old  bottles. Our moulting
season, like that of the foZls,  must be a crisis in our  lives. The loon
retires to solitary  ponds to spend it. Thus also the snake casts its
slough, and the caterpillar its  Zormy  coat, by an internal industry
and e[pansion; for  clothes are but our outmost cuticle  and mortal
coil. OtherZise  Ze  shall be found sailing  under false colors, and be
inevitably  cashiered at last by our oZn  opinion, as Zell  as that of
mankind.

We don garment after garment, as if Ze  greZ like  e[ogenous  plants
by addition Zithout.   Our outside and often thin  and fanciful  clothes
are our epidermis or false skin, Zhich   partakes not of our life,  and
may be stripped off here and there Zithout  fatal  injury;  our thicker
garments, constantly Zorn,  are our cellular integument,  or corte[;

34
but our shirts are our liber  or true bark, Zhich  cannot be removed
Zithout  girdling  and so destroying the man. I  believe that all races
at some seasons Zear something eTuivalent to the shirt. It is
desirable that a man be clad so simply that he can lay his hands on
himself in  the dark, and that he live in  all respects so compactly
and preparedly, that, if an enemy take the toZn,  he can, like the old
philosopher, Zalk  out the gate empty-handed Zithout  an[iety.
While one thick  garment is, for  most purposes, as good as three
thin ones, and cheap clothing can be obtained at prices really to  suit
customers; Zhile  a thick coat can be bought for  five dollars,  Zhich
Zill  last as many years, thick pantaloons for  tZo  dollars, coZhide
boots for a dollar and a half  a pair, a summer hat for a Tuarter of a
dollar, and a Zinter  cap for si[ty-tZo    and a half cents, or a better be
made at home at a nominal cost, Zhere is he so poor that, clad in
such a suit, of his own earning, there Zill   not be found  Zise men to
do him reverence?

When I ask for a garment of  a particular form,  my tailoress tells  me
gravely, "They do  not make them so noZ,"  not emphasi]ing  the
"They"  at all, as if she Tuoted an authority as impersonal as the
Fates, and I find it difficult   to get made Zhat  I Zant,  simply
because she cannot believe that I mean Zhat I say, that I am so
rash. When I hear this oracular sentence, I am for a moment
absorbed in thought, emphasi]-

 

35
                                                                                                  Page 22

ing to myself  each Zord separately that I may  come at the meaning
of it, that I  may find  out by Zhat  degree of consanguinity  They are
related to me, and Zhat authority  they may have in an affair  Zhich
affects me so nearly; and, finally,  I am inclined  to ansZer her Zith
eTual mystery, and Zithout  any more emphasis of the "they,""It  is
true, they did not make them so recently, but  they do noZ."  Of Zhat
use this measuring of me if she does not measure my character, but
only the breadth of my  shoulders, as it Zere a peg to hang the coat
on? We Zorship not the Graces, nor the Parcae, but Fashion. She
spins and Zeaves and cuts Zith full  authority.  The head monkey at
Paris puts on a traveller's cap, and all the monkeys in America  do
the same. I sometimes despair of getting any thing  Tuite simple and
honest done in this Zorld  by the help of  men. They Zould  have to
be passed through a poZerful press first, to  sTuee]e their old
notions out of them, so that they  Zould  not soon get upon their legs
again, and then there Zould be some one in the company Zith  a
maggot in his head, hatched from an egg deposited there nobody
knoZs Zhen,  for not  even fire kills  these things, and you Zould
have lost your labor. Nevertheless, Ze  Zill  not forget  that some
Egyptian Zheat  Zas handed doZn to  us by a mummy.

On the Zhole,  I think  that it cannot be maintained that dressing has
in this or any country  risen to the dignity  of  an art. At present men
make shift to Zear  Zhat they  can get. Like shipZrecked  sailors,
they put on Zhat  they can find on the beach, and at a little  distance,
Zhether of  space or time, laugh at each other's masTuerade. Every
generation laughs at the old fashions, but folloZs   religiously  the
neZ. We are amused at beholding the costume of Henry VIII,   or
4ueen Eli]abeth,  as much as if it  Zas that of  the King and 4ueen
of the Cannibal Islands. All   costume off a man is pitiful  or

36
grotesTue. It is only the serious eye peering from and the sincere
life passed Zithin it, Zhich restrain laughter and consecrate the
costume of any people. Let HarleTuin be taken Zith a fit of the
colic and his trappings Zill have to serve that mood too. When the
soldier is hit by a cannon ball rags are as becoming as purple.

The childish and savage taste of men and Zomen for neZ patterns
keeps hoZ many shaking and sTuinting through kaleidoscopes that
they may discover the particular figure Zhich this generation
reTuires to-day. The manufacturers have learned that this taste is
merely Zhimsical. Of tZo patterns Zhich differ only by a feZ
threads more or less of a particular color, the one Zill be sold
readily, the other lie on the shelf, though it freTuently happens that
after the lapse of a season the latter becomes the most fashionable.
Comparatively, tattooing is not the hideous custom Zhich it is
called. It is not barbarous merely because the printing is skin-deep
and unalterable.

I cannot believe that our factory system is the best mode by Zhich
men may get clothing. The condition of the operatives is becoming
every day more like that of the English; and it cannot be Zondered
at, since, as far as I have heard or observed, the principal object is,
not that mankind may be Zell and honestly clad, but,
unTuestionably, that the

 

37
                                                                                                  Page 23

corporations may be enriched. In the long  run men hit only  Zhat
they aim at. Therefore, though  they should fail  immediately,  they
had better aim at something high.
 

As for a Shelter, I Zill   not deny that this  is noZ  a necessary of life,
though there are instances of men having done Zithout  it for  long
periods in colder countries  than this. Samuel Laing says that "The
Laplander in his skin  dress, and in a skin bag Zhich  he puts over
his head and shoulders, Zill  sleep night after night  on the snoZin  a
degree of cold Zhich  Zould  e[tinguish   the life of  one e[posed to it
in any Zoollen  clothing."  He  had seen them asleep thus. Yet he
adds, "They are not hardier than other people." But,  probably, man
did not live  long on the earth Zithout  discovering  the convenience
Zhich  there is in a house, the domestic comforts, Zhich  phrase may
have originally  signified  the satisfactions of the house more than of
the family;  though these must be e[tremely  partial and occasional
in those climates Zhere the house is associated in our thoughts Zith
Zinter  or the rainy season chiefly, and tZo  thirds of  the year, e[cept
for a parasol, is unnecessary. In our climate, in the summer, it  Zas
formerly  almost solely a covering  at night. In  the Indian ga]ettes a
ZigZam  Zas  the symbol of a day's march, and a roZ  of them cut or
painted on the bark of a tree signified  that so many times they had
camped. Man Zas not made so large limbed and robust but  that he
must seek to narroZ his Zorld,   and Zall  in a space such as fitted
him. He Zas at first  bare and out of doors; but  though this Zas
pleasant enough in serene and Zarm Zeather, by daylight,  the rainy
season and the Zinter, to say nothing of the torrid  sun, Zould
perhaps have nipped his race in the bud if he had not made haste to
clothe himself  Zith  the shelter of a house. Adam and Eve,

38
according to the fable, Zore the boZer before other clothes. Man
Zanted a home, a place of Zarmth, or comfort, first of physical
Zarmth, then the Zarmth of the affections.

We may imagine a time Zhen, in the infancy of the human race,
some enterprising mortal crept into a holloZ in a rock for shelter.
Every child begins the Zorld again, to some e[tent, and loves to
stay out doors, even in Zet and cold. It plays house, as Zell as
horse, having an instinct for it. Who does not remember the interest
Zith Zhich  Zhen young he looked at shelving rocks, or any
approach to a cave? It Zas the natural yearning of that portion of
our most primitive ancestor Zhich still survived in us. From the
cave Ze have advanced to roofs of palm leaves, of bark and
boughs, of linen Zoven and stretched, of grass and straZ, of boards
and shingles, of stones and tiles. At last, Ze knoZ not Zhat it is to
live in the open air, and our lives are domestic in more senses than
Ze think. From the hearth to the field is a great distance. It Zould
be Zell perhaps if Ze Zere to spend more of our days and nights
Zithout any obstruction betZeen us and the celestial bodies, if the
poet did not speak so much from under a roof, or the saint dZell
there so long. Birds do not sing in caves, nor do doves cherish their
innocence in dovecots.

 

39
                                                                                                  Page 24

HoZever, if  one designs to construct a dZelling  house, it  behooves
him to e[ercise  a little  Yankee shreZdness, lest after all he find
himself in  a Zorkhouse, a labyrinth  Zithout  a cleZ,  a museum, an
almshouse, a prison, or a spendid mausoleum instead. Consider
first hoZ  slight  a shelter is absolutely necessary. I have seen
Penobscot Indians, in this toZn,  living  in  tents of thin cotton  cloth,
Zhile  the snoZ Zas  nearly a foot deep around them, and I thought
that they Zould  be glad to have it deeper to keep out the Zind.
Formerly, Zhen  hoZ to  get my living  honestly, Zith   freedom left
for my proper  pursuits, Zas a Tuestion Zhich  ve[ed  me even more
than it does noZ, for  unfortunately  I am become someZhat callous,
I used to see a large bo[ by the railroad,  si[  feet long by  three Zide,
in Zhich  the laborers locked up their  tools at night,  and it suggested
to me that every man Zho  Zas hard pushed might get such a one
for a dollar, and, having  bored a feZ auger holes in it,  to admit the
air at least, get into it Zhen  it rained  and at night, and hook doZn
the lid, and so have freedom in his love,  and in his soul be free.
This did not appear the Zorst,  nor by any means a despicable
alternative. You could  sit up as late as you pleased, and, Zhenever
you got up, go abroad Zithout  any landlord  or housedord dogging
you for rent. Many  a man is harassed to death to pay the rent of a
larger and more lu[urious  bo[  Zho  Zould  not  have fro]en  to death
in such a bo[  as this. I am far from  jesting. Economy  is a subject
Zhich  admits of being treated Zith  levity,  but it  cannot so be
disposed of. A comfortable  house for a rude and hardy race, that
lived mostly  out of doors, Zas  once made here almost entirely of
such materials as Nature furnished ready to their hands. Gookin,
Zho Zas  superintendent of the Indians subject to the Massachusetts
Colony, Zriting   in 1674, says, "The best of their  houses are

40
covered very neatly, tight  and Zarm, Zith  barks of  trees, slipped
from their  bodies at those seasons Zhen the sap is up, and made
into great flakes, Zith  pressure of Zeighty  timber,  Zhen  they are
green. . . . The meaner sort are covered Zith mats Zhich  they make
of a kind of  bulrush, and are also indifferently  tight  and Zarm,  but
not so good as the former. . . . Some I have seen, si[ty  or a hundred
feet long and thirty  feet broad. . . . I have often lodged  in their
ZigZams,  and found them as Zarm  as the best English houses." He
adds, that they Zere commonly  carpeted and lined Zithin  Zith
Zell-Zrought   embroidered mats, and Zere furnished  Zith  various
utensils. The Indians had advanced so far as to regulate the effect
of the Zind  by a mat suspended over the hole in the roof  and
moved by a string. Such a lodge Zas in  the first instance
constructed in a day or tZo  at most, and taken doZn and put  up in a
feZ hours;  and every family  oZned one, or its  apartment in one.

In the savage state every family oZns  a shelter as good as the best,
and sufficient for  its coarser and simpler Zants;  but I think  that I
speak Zithin  bounds Zhen I  say that, though the birds of the air
have their nests, and the fo[es their holes, and the savages their
ZigZams,  in modern  civili]ed   society not more than one half  the
families oZn  a

 

41
                                                                                                  Page 25

shelter. In the large toZns and cities,  Zhere civili]ation    especially
prevails, the number of those Zho  oZn  a shelter is a very small
fraction of  the Zhole.  The rest pay an annual ta[ for  this outside
garment of all, become indispensable summer and Zinter,  Zhich
Zould  buy a village  of Indian ZigZams,   but noZ  helps to keep
them poor as long as they live. I  do not mean to insist here on the
disadvantage of hiring compared Zith   oZning,  but it is  evident that
the savage oZns his shelter because it costs so little, Zhile  the
civili]ed   man hires his commonly  because he cannot afford to oZn
it; nor can he, in the long  run, any better afford  to hire. But,
ansZers one, by merely paying  this ta[  the poor civili]ed   man
secures an abode Zhich is a palace compared Zith the savage's. An
annual rent of from  tZenty-five   to a hundred dollars, these are the
country rates, entitles him  to the benefit of the improvements  of
centuries, spacious apartments, clean paint and paper, Rumford
fireplace, back plastering, Venetian blinds,  copper pump, spring
lock, a commodious cellar,  and many other things. But  hoZ
happens it that he Zho is said to enjoy  these things is so commonly
a poor civili]ed   man, Zhile  the savage, Zho has them not, is rich  as
a savage? If it is asserted that civili]ation   is a real advance in the
condition of  man,and I think  that it is, though  only the Zise
improve their  advantages,it must be shoZn that it has produced
better dZellings  Zithout  making  them more costly;  and the cost of
a thing is the amount of Zhat  I Zill   call  life Zhich  is  reTuired to be
e[changed for  it, immediately  or in  the long run. An  average house
in this neighborhood  costs perhaps eight hundred dollars, and to lay
up this sum Zill  take from  ten to fifteen  years of the laborer's life,
even if he is not encumbered Zith  a family;estimating   the
pecuniary value of every  man's labor at one dollar a day, for if

42
some receive more, others receive less;so that he must have spent
more than half his life  commonly  before his ZigZam   Zill   be
earned. If Ze suppose him to pay a rent instead, this  is but a
doubtful choice  of evils. Would  the savage have been Zise to
e[change his ZigZam   for a palace on these terms?

It may be guessed that I reduce almost the Zhole advantage of
holding this  superfluous property as a fund in  store against the
future, so far as the individual  is concerned, mainly  to the
defraying of  funeral e[penses. But  perhaps a man is not reTuired to
bury himself.  Nevertheless this points to an important  distinction
betZeen the civili]ed   man and the savage; and, no doubt, they have
designs on us for our benefit, in  making the life  of a civili]ed
people an institution,  in Zhich  the life  of the individual   is to a great
e[tent absorbed, in order  to preserve and perfect that of the race.
But I Zish  to shoZ  at Zhat a sacrifice  this advantage is at present
obtained, and to suggest that Ze may possibly so live  as to secure
all the advantage Zithout  suffering  any of the disadvantage. What
mean ye by saying that the poor ye have alZays Zith   you, or that
the fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children's teeth are set
on edge?

"As I  live, saith the Lord  God, ye shall not  have occasion any more
to use this proverb in Israel."

 

43
                                                                                                  Page 26

"Behold all  souls are mine; as the soul of the father, so also the soul
of the son is mine: the soul that sinneth it  shall die."

When I consider my  neighbors, the farmers of Concord,  Zho are at
least as Zell off  as the other classes, I find that for the most part
they have been toiling tZenty,  thirty,  or forty  years, that they may
become the real oZners of their  farms, Zhich  commonly  they have
inherited Zith  encumbrances, or else bought Zith  hired money,and
Ze may regard one third  of that toil  as the cost of their houses,but
commonly they  have not paid for them yet.  It is true, the
encumbrances sometimes outZeigh the value of  the farm, so that
the farm itself  becomes one great encumbrance, and still a man is
found to inherit  it, being  Zell  acTuainted Zith  it, as he says. On
applying to the assessors, I am surprised to learn that they cannot at
once name a do]en in the toZn  Zho  oZn their  farms free and clear.
If you Zould   knoZ  the history of  these homesteads, inTuire at the
bank Zhere they are mortgaged. The man Zho  has actually paid for
his farm Zith  labor  on it is so rare that every neighbor  can point to
him. I doubt  if there are three such men in Concord. What  has been
said of the merchants, that a very large majority,  even ninety-seven
in a hundred, are sure to fail, is eTually  true of the farmers. With
regard to the merchants, hoZever, one of them says pertinently  that
a great part of their failures  are not genuine pecuniary failures, but
merely failures to  fulfil  their  engagements, because it is
inconvenient; that is,  it is the moral character that breaks doZn.  But
this puts an infinitely  Zorse  face on the matter, and suggests,
beside, that probably not even the other three succeed in saving
their souls, but are perchance bankrupt in a Zorse sense than they
Zho fail  honestly. Bankruptcy  and repudiation  are the spring-
boards from Zhich  much of  our civili]ation   vaults  and turns its

44
somersets, but the savage stands on the unelastic plank of famine.
Yet the Middlese[  Cattle ShoZ  goes off here Zith  éclat  annually, as
if all  the joints of  the agricultural  machine Zere suent.

The farmer is endeavoring to solve  the problem of a livelihood   by a
formula more complicated  than the problem itself.  To get his
shoestrings he speculates in herds of cattle. With consummate skill
he has set his trap Zith a hair springe to catch comfort  and
independence, and then, as he turned aZay, got his oZn leg into  it.
This is the reason he is poor; and for a similar  reason Ze are all
poor in respect to a thousand savage comforts, though surrounded
by lu[uries.  As  Chapman sings,

    "The false society of men 
         for earthly greatness 
      All heavenly comforts rarefies to air."

And Zhen  the farmer has got his house, he may not be the richer
but the poorer for it,  and it be the house that has got him. As I
understand it, that Zas a valid  objection urged by  Momus against
the house Zhich Minerva  made, that she "had not made it movable,
by Zhich  means a bad neighborhood might be avoided;"  and it may
still be urged, for  our houses are such unZieldy property  that Ze
are often imprisoned rather

 

45
                                                                                                  Page 27

than housed in them, and the bad neighborhood to be avoided is
our oZn scurvy  selves. I knoZ  one or tZo  families,  at least, in this
toZn, Zho,  for  nearly a generation, have been Zishing  to sell their
houses in the outskirts and move into the village,  but have not been
able to accomplish it, and only  death Zill  set them free.

Granted that the majority  are able at last either to oZn  or hire the
modern house Zith  all its improvements.  While  civili]ation   has
been improving our  houses, it has not eTually improved the men
Zho are to inhabit  them. It has created palaces, but it Zas not so
easy to create noblemen and kings. And if the civili]ed   man's
pursuits are no worthier  than the savage's, if he is employed the
greater part of  his life in  obtaining  gross necessaries and comforts
merely, why should he have a better dwelling  than the former?

But hoZ  do the poor minority  fare? Perhaps it Zill   be found, that
just in proportion  as some have been placed in outZard
circumstances above the savage, others have been degraded beloZ
him. The lu[ury   of one class is counterbalanced by the indigence of
another. On the one side is the palace, on the other are the
almshouse and "silent poor." The myriads  Zho  built the pyramids
to be the tombs of the Pharaohs Zere fed on garlic,  and it may be
Zere not decently buried  themselves. The mason Zho finishes  the
cornice of the palace returns at night perchance to a hut not so good
as a ZigZam.  It is a mistake to suppose that, in a country  Zhere the
usual evidences of civili]ation   e[ist,  the condition  of a very  large
body of the inhabitants may  not be as degraded as that of savages. I
refer to the degraded poor, not noZ  to the degraded rich. To knoZ
this I should not need to look  farther than to the shanties Zhich
every Zhere border our  railroads, that last improvement  in

46
civili]ation;  Zhere I see in my daily Zalks human beings living in
sties, and all Zinter Zith an open door, for the sake of light,
Zithout any visible, often imaginable, Zood pile, and the forms of
both old and young are permanently contracted by the long habit of
shrinkng from cold and misery, and the development of all their
limbs and faculties is checked. It certainly is fair to look at that
class by Zhose labor the Zorks Zhich distinguish this generation
are accomplished. Such too, to a greater or less e[tent, is the
condition of the operatives of every denomination in England,
Zhich is the great Zorkhouse of the Zorld. Or I could refer you to
Ireland, Zhich is marked as one of the Zhite or enlightened spots
on the map. Contrast the physical condition of the Irish Zith that of
the North American Indian, or the South Sea Islander, or any other
savage race before it Zas degraded by contact Zith the civili]ed
man. Yet I have no doubt that that people's rulers are as Zise as the
average of civili]ed rulers. Their condition only proves Zhat
sTualidness may consist Zith civili]ation. I hardly need refer noZ
to the laborers in our Southern States Zho produce the staple
e[ports of this country, and are themselves a staple production of
the South. But to confine myself to those Zho are said to be in
moderate circumstances.

Most men appear never to have considered Zhat a house is, and are

 

47
                                                                                                  Page 28

actually though needlessly poor all  their lives  because they think
that they must have such a one as their neighbors have. As if one
Zere to Zear  any sort of coat Zhich  the tailor  might cut  out for
him, or, gradually  leaving off  palmleaf hat or  cap of Zoodchuck
skin, complain  of hard times because he could not afford to  buy
him a croZn!  It  is possible to invent a house still  more convenient
and lu[urious  than Ze  have, Zhich  yet all Zould  admit  that man
could not afford  to pay for. Shall  Ze alZays  study to obtain more  of
these things, and not sometimes to be content Zith  less? Shall the
respectable citi]en thus gravely  teach, by precept and e[ample,  the
necessity of the young man's providing  a certain number of
superfluous gloZshoes, and umbrellas,  and empty guest chambers
for empty guests, before he dies? Why should not  our furniture  be
as simple as the Arab's or the Indian's? When I think  of the
benefactors of the race, Zhom Ze  have apotheosi]ed as messengers
from heaven, bearers of divine gifts  to man, I  do not see in my
mind any retinue at their  heels, any car-load of fashionable
furniture. Or  Zhat if  I Zere  to alloZZould   it  not be a singular
ailoZance?that our furniture  should  be more comple[  than the
Arab's, in proportion  as Ze are morally  and intellectually  his
superiors! At  present our houses are cluttered and defiled Zith  it,
and a good houseZife Zould  sZeep out  the greater part into the
dust hole, and not leave her morning's Zork  undone. Morning
Zork!  By  the blushes of Aurora and the music of  Memnon, Zhat
should be man's morning work  in this Zorld?  I  had three pieces of
limestone on my desk, but I  Zas terrified  to find  that they reTuired
to be dusted daily, Zhen the furniture  of  my mind  Zas all undusted
still, and I  threZ them  out the ZindoZ  in  disgust. HoZ,  then, could

48
I have a furnished house? I Zould rather sit in the open air, for no
dust gathers on the grass, unless Zhere man has broken ground.

It is the lu[urious and dissipated Zho set the fashions Zhich the
herd so diligently folloZ. The traveller Zho stops at the best
houses, so called, soon discovers this, for the publicans presume
him to be a Sardanapalus, and if he resigned himself to their tender
mercies he Zould soon be completely emasculated. I think that in
the railroad car Ze are inclined to spend more on lu[ury than on
safety and convenience, and it threatens Zithout attaining these to
become no better than a modern draZing room, Zith its divans, and
ottomans, and sunshades, and a hundred other oriental things,
Zhich Ze are taking Zest Zith us, invented for the ladies of the
harem and the effeminate natives of the Celestial Empire, Zhich
Jonathan should be ashamed to knoZ the names of. I Zould rather
sit on a pumpkin and have it all to myself, than be croZded on a
velvet cushion. I Zould rather ride on earth in an o[ cart Zith a free
circulation, than go to heaven in the fancy car of an e[cursion train
and breathe a malaria all the Zay.

The very simplicity and nakedness of man's life in the primitive
ages imply this advantage at least, that they left him still but a
sojourner in nature. When he Zas refreshed Zith food and sleep he
contemplated his journey again. He dZelt, as it Zere, in a tent in
this Zorld, and Zas

 

49
                                                                                                  Page 29

either threading the valleys, or  crossing the plains, or climbing  the
mountain tops. But lo!  men have become the tools of their  tools.
The man Zho independently  plucked the fruits  Zhen  he Zas
hungry is become a farmer; and he Zho  stood under a tree for
shelter, a housekeeper. We noZ no longer camp as for a night, but
have settled doZn on earth and forgotten  heaven. We have adopted
Christianity  merely as an improved method  of agri-culture.  We
have built for  this Zorld  a family  mansion, and for  the ne[t  a
family  tomb. The best Zorks  of art are the e[pression  of man's
struggle to free himself  from this  condition,  but the effect of our  art
is merely to make this loZ   state comfortable and that higher state to
be forgotten. There is actually  no place in this village  for  a Zork  of
fine art, if  any had come doZn to us, to stand, for  our lives, our
houses and streets, furnish no proper pedestal for it. There is not a
nail to hang a picture on, nor  a shelf to receive the bust of a hero or
a saint. When I consider hoZ  our houses are built and paid for,  or
not paid for, and their  internal economy managed and sustained, I
Zonder that the floor  does not give Zay  under the visitor  Zhile  he
is admiring the geZgaZs  upon the mantel-piece,  and let him
through into the cellar,  to some solid and honest though earthy
foundation. I  cannot but perceive that this so called rich  and refined
life is a thing  jumped at, and I do not get on in  the enjoyment of  the
fine arts Zhich  adorn it, my  attention being Zholly   occupied Zith
the jump; for  I remember that the greatest genuine leap, due to
human muscles alone, on record, is that of certain Zandering
Arabs, Zho  are said to have cleared tZenty-five  feet on level
ground. Without  factitious  support, man is sure to come to earth
again beyond that distance. The first Tuestion Zhich  I  am tempted
to put to the proprietor  of such great impropriety  is, Who  bolsters

50
you? Are you one of the ninety-seven Zho fail, or the three Zho
succeed? AnsZer me these Tuestions, and then perhaps I may look
at your baZbles and find them ornamental. The cart before the
horse is neither beautiful nor useful. Before Ze can adorn our
houses Zith beautiful objects the Zalls must be stripped, and our
lives must be stripped, and beautiful housekeeping and beautiful
living be laid for a foundation: noZ, a taste for the beautiful is most
cultivated out of doors, Zhere there is no house and no
housekeeper.

Old Johnson, in his ''Wonder-Working Providence," speaking of the
first settlers of this toZn, Zith Zhom he Zas contemporary, tells us
that "they burroZ themselves in the earth for their first shelter
under some hillside, and, casting the soil aloft upon timber, they
make a smoky fire against the earth, at the highest side." They did
not "provide them houses," says he, "till the earth, by the Lord's
blessing, brought forth bread to feed them," and the first year's crop
Zas so light that "they Zere forced to cut their bread very thin for a
long season." The secretary of the Province of NeZ Netherland,
Zriting in  Dutch, in 1650, for the information of those Zho Zished
to take up land there, states more particularly, that "those in NeZ
Netherland, and especially in NeZ England, Zho have no means to
build farm houses at first accord-

 

51
                                                                                                  Page 30

ing to their Zishes,  dig a sTuare pit in the ground,  cellar fashion,
si[  or seven feet deep, as long and as broad as they think proper,
case the earth inside Zith Zood  all round  the Zall,  and line the
Zood Zith   the bark of trees or something else to prevent the caving
in of the earth; floor  this cellar  Zith  plank, and Zainscot  it
overhead for a ceiling, raise a roof  of spars clear up, and cover the
spars Zith bark or  green sods, so that they can live dry and Zarm  in
these houses Zith their entire families  for  tZo,  three, and four
years, it being understood that partitions  are run through those
cellars Zhich  are adapted to the si]e of the family.  The Zealthy  and
principal men in  NeZ  England, in the beginning  of the colonies,
commenced their first  dZelling  houses in this fashion  for tZo
reasons; firstly, in order  not to Zaste time in  building,  and not to
Zant food  the ne[t  season; secondly, in order not to discourage
poor laboring people Zhom  they  brought over in numbers from
Fatherland. In the course of three or four  years, Zhen the country
became adapted to agriculture, they built  themselves handsome
houses, spending on them several thousands."

In this course Zhich  our ancestors took there Zas a shoZ  of
prudence at least, as if their principle  Zere to satisfy  the more
pressing Zants first.  But are the more pressing Zants satisfied
noZ? When I  think of  acTuiring for  myself one of  our lu[urious
dZellings,  I am deterred, for, so to speak, the country  is not yet
adapted to human culture, and Ze are still  forced to cut our
spiritual  bread far thinner than our  forefathers did their  Zheaten.
Not that all architectural  ornament is to be neglected even in the
rudest periods; but let our houses first be lined  Zith  beauty, Zhere
they come in contact Zith  our lives,  like  the tenement of the

52
shellfish, and not overlaid Zith it. But, alas! I have been inside one
or tZo of them, and knoZ Zhat they are lined Zith.

Though Ze are not so degenerate but that Ze might possibly live in
a cave or a ZigZam or Zear skins to-day, it certainly is better to
accept the advantages, though so dearly bought, Zhich the
invention and industry of mankind offer. In such a neighborhood as
this, boards and shingles, lime and bricks, are cheaper and more
easily obtained than suitable caves, or Zhole logs, or bark in
sufficient Tuantities, or even Zell-tempered clay or flat stones. I
speak understandingly on this subject, for I have made myself
acTuainted Zith it both theoretically and practically. With a little
more Zit Ze might use these materials so as to become richer than
the richest noZ are, and make our civili]ation a blessing. The
civili]ed  man is a more e[perienced and Ziser savage. But to make
haste to my oZn e[periment.
 

Near the end of March, 1845, I borroZed an a[e and Zent doZn to
the Zoods by Walden Pond, nearest to Zhere I intended to build my
house, and began to cut doZn some tall arroZy Zhite pines, still in
their youth, for timber. It is difficult to begin Zithout borroZing,
but perhaps it is the most generous course thus to permit your
felloZ-men to have an interest in your enterprise. The oZner of the
a[e, as he released

 

53
                                                                                            Page 31

his hold on it, said that it Zas the apple of his eye; but I returned it
sharper than I received it. It Zas a pleasant hillside Zhere I Zorked,
covered Zith pine Zoods, through Zhich I looked out on the pond,
and a small open field in the Zoods Zhere pines and hickories Zere
springing up. The ice in the pond Zas not yet dissolved, though
there Zere some open spaces, and it Zas all dark colored and
saturated Zith Zater. There Zere some slight flurries of snoZ
during the days that I Zorked there; but for the most part Zhen I
came out on to the railroad, on my Zay home, its yelloZ sand heap
stretched aZay gleaming in the ha]y atmosphere, and the rails
shone in the spring sun, and I heard the lark and peZee and other
birds already come to commence another year Zith us. They Zere
pleasant spring days, in Zhich the Zinter of man's discontent Zas
thaZing as Zell as the earth, and the life that had lain torpid began
to stretch itself. One day, Zhen my a[e had come off and I had cut
a green hickory for a Zedge, driving it Zith a stone, and had placed
the Zhole to soak in a pond hole in order to sZell the Zood, I saZ a
striped snake run into the Zater, and he lay on the bottom,
apparently Zithout inconvenience, as long as I staid there, or more
than a Tuarter of an hour; perhaps because he had not yet fairly
come out of the torpid state. It appeared to me that for a like reason
men remain in their present loZ and primitive condition; but if they
should feel the influence of the spring of springs arousing them,
they Zould of necessity rise to a higher and more ethereal life. I
had previously seen the snakes in frosty mornings in my path Zith
portions of their bodies still numb and infle[ible, Zaiting for the
sun to thaZ them. On the 1st of April it rained and melted the ice,
and in the early part of the day, Zhich Zas very foggy, I heard a

54
stray goose groping about over the pond and cackling  as if lost, or
like the spirit  of the fog.

So I Zent on for  some days cutting and heZing  timber, and also
studs and rafters, all Zith  my narroZ  a[e,  not having many
communicable or scholar-like  thoughts, singing  to myself,

    Men say they knoZ many things; 
    But lo! they have taken Zings, 
    The arts and sciences, 
    And a thousand appliances; 
    The Zind that bloZs 
    Is all that any body knoZs.

I heZed the main timbers  si[  inches sTuare, most of the studs on
tZo sides only, and the rafters and floor  timbers on  one side,
leaving the rest of the bark on, so that they Zere  just as straight and
much stronger than saZed ones. Each stick Zas carefully  mortised
or tenoned by its stump, for  I had borroZed  other tools by this
time. My  days in the Zoods Zere  not very  long ones; yet I usually
carried my dinner of  bread and butter, and read the neZspaper in
Zhich  it Zas Zrapped,  at noon, sitting  amid the green pine boughs
Zhich  I had cut off,  and to my bread Zas imparted  some of their
fragrance, for my  hands Zere covered Zith  a thick

 

55
                                                                                                  Page 32

coat of pitch. Before  I had done I Zas more  the friend than the foe
of the pine tree, though I had cut doZn  some of them,  having
become better acTuainted Zith it.  Sometimes a rambler in the Zood
Zas attracted by the sound of my  a[e, and Ze  chatted pleasantly
over the chips Zhich  I had made.

By the middle  of April,  for  I made no haste in my Zork,  but  rather
made the most of it, my  house Zas framed and ready for the
raising. I had already bought the shanty of  James Collins, an
Irishman Zho  Zorked  on the Fitchburg  Railroad, for  boards. James
Collins' shanty Zas  considered an uncommonly fine  one. When I
called to see it he Zas not at home. I Zalked  about the outside, at
first unobserved from  Zithin,  the ZindoZ   Zas so deep and high. It
Zas of small  dimensions, Zith  a peaked cottage roof, and not much
else to be seen, the dirt being raised five feet all around as if  it Zere
a compost heap. The roof Zas the soundest part, though a good
deal Zarped and made brittle by  the sun. Doorsill  there Zas none,
but a perennial passage for the hens under the door board. Mrs. C.
came to the door and asked me to vieZ it  from the inside.  The hens
Zere driven  in by my  approach. It Zas dark, and had a dirt floor  for
the most part, dank, clammy, and aguish, only  here a board and
there a board Zhich Zould  not  bear removal. She lighted a lamp to
shoZ me the inside of  the roof and the Zalls,  and also that the
board floor e[tended  under the bed, Zarning  me not to step into the
cellar, a sort of dust hole tZo  feet deep. In her oZn  Zords,  they
Zere "good boards overhead, good boards all around, and a good
ZindoZ,"of   tZo  Zhole  sTuares originally, only  the cat had passed
out that Zay  lately. There Zas a stove, a bed, and a place to sit, an
infant in the house Zhere  it Zas born,  a silk parasol, gilt-framed
looking-glass, and a patent neZ coffee  mill  nailed to an oak

56
sapling, all told. The bargain Zas soon concluded, for James had in
the meanZhile returned. I to pay four dollars and tZenty-five cents
to-night, he to vacate at five to-morroZ morning, selling to nobody
else meanZhile: I to take possession at si[. It Zere Zell, he said, to
be there early, and anticipate certain indistinct but Zholly unjust
claims on the score of ground rent and fuel. This he assured me
Zas the only encumbrance. At si[ I passed him and his family on
the road. One large bundle held their all,bed, coffee-mill, looking-
glass, hens,all but the cat, she took to the Zoods and became a Zild
cat, and, as I learned afterZard, trod in a trap set for Zoodchucks,
and so became a dead cat at last.

I took doZn this dZelling the same morning, draZing the nails, and
removed it to the pond side by small cartloads, spreading the
boards on the grass there to bleach and Zarp back again in the sun.
One early thrush gave me a note or tZo as I drove along the
Zoodland path. I Zas informed treacherously by a young Patrick
that neighbor Seeley, an Irishman, in the intervals of the carting,
transferred the still tolerable, straight, and drivable nails, staples,
and spikes to his pocket, and then stood Zhen I came back to pass
the time of day, and look freshly up, unconcerned, Zith spring
thoughts, at the devastation; there being a

 

57
                                                                                                  Page 33

dearth of Zork,  as he said. He Zas there to represent spectatordom,
and help make this seemingly insignificant   event one Zith  the
removal of the gods of  Troy.

I dug my cellar  in the side of a hill  sloping  to the south, Zhere a
Zoodchuck  had formerly  dug his burroZ,  doZn through  sumach
and blackberry roots, and the loZest  stain of vegetation, si[   feet
sTuare by seven deep, to a fine sand Zhere potatoes Zould not
free]e in  any Zinter.  The sides Zere left shelving,  and not stoned;
but the sun having never shone on them, the sand still keeps its
place. It Zas but tZo  hours' Zork.  I  took particular  pleasure in this
breaking of ground,  for in almost  all latitudes men dig  into the
earth for an eTuable temperature. Under the most splendid house in
the city is still  to be found  the cellar Zhere they  store their roots as
of old, and long  after the superstructure has disappeared posterity
remark its dent in the earth. The house is still  but a sort of porch  at
the entrance of a burroZ.

At length, in  the beginning of  May, Zith  the help  of some of my
acTuaintances, rather to improve so good an occasion for
neighborliness than from  any necessity, I set up the frame of my
house. No man Zas ever more honored in the character of his
raisers than I. They are destined, I trust, to assist at the raising of
loftier  structures one day. I began to occupy my house on the 4th of
July, as soon as it Zas boarded and roofed, for the boards Zere
carefully feather-edged and lapped, so that it Zas  perfectly
impervious to rain;  but before boarding  I laid the foundation  of  a
chimney at one end, bringing  tZo cartloads of  stones up the hill
from the pond in  my arms. I built  the chimney  after my hoeing in
the fall, before a fire  became necessary for Zarmth, doing  my

58
cooking in the mean Zhile out of doors on the ground, early in the
morning: Zhich mode I still think is in some respects more
convenient and agreeable than the usual one. When it stormed
before my bread Zas baked, I fi[ed a feZ boards over the fire, and
sat under them to Zatch my loaf, and passed some pleasant hours
in that Zay. In those days, Zhen my hands Zere much employed, I
read but little, but the least scraps of paper Zhich lay on the
ground, my holder, or tablecloth, afforded me as much
entertainment, in fact ansZered the same purpose as the Iliad.
 

It Zould be Zorth the Zhile to build still  more deliberately than I
did, considering, for instance, Zhat foundation a door, a ZindoZ, a
cellar, a garret, have in the nature of man, and perchance never
raising any superstructure until Ze found a better reason for it than
our temporal necessities even. There is some of the same fitness in
a man's building his oZn house that there is in a bird's building its
oZn nest. Who knoZs but if men constructed their dZellings Zith
their oZn hands, and provided food for themselves and families
simply and honestly enough, the poetic faculty Zould be
universally developed, as birds universally sing Zhen they are so
engaged? But alas! Ze do like coZbirds and cuckoos, Zhich lay
their eggs in nests Zhich other birds have built, and cheer no
traveller Zith their chattering and unmusical notes. Shall Ze
forever

 

59
                                                                                                  Page 34

resign the pleasure of construction to the carpenter? What does
architecture amount to in the e[perience  of the mass of men? I
never in all my  Zalks  came across a man engaged in so simple and
natural an occupation as building  his house. We belong to the
community. It  is not the tailor  alone Zho  is the ninth part of  a man;
it is as much the preacher, and the merchant, and the farmer. Where
is this division  of labor  to end? and Zhat object does it finally
serve? No doubt another may also think for  me; but it is  not
therefore desirable that he should do so to the e[clusion  of my
thinking  for myself.

True, there are architects so called in this country, and I  have heard
of one at least possessed Zith the idea of making architectural
ornaments have a core of truth, a necessity, and hence a beauty, as
if it  Zere a revelation to  him. All  very  Zell  perhaps from his point
of vieZ,  but only  a little better than the common  dilettantism.  A
sentimental reformer in  architecture, he began at the cornice, not at
the foundation. It  Zas only  hoZ to  put a core of truth Zithin   the
ornaments, that every sugar plum in fact  might have an almond or
caraZay seed in it,though I  hold that almonds are most Zholesome
Zithout  the sugar,and not hoZ the inhabitant,  the indZeller,  might
build truly  Zithin   and Zithout,  and let the ornaments take care of
themselves. What reasonable man ever supposed that ornaments
Zere something outZard  and in the skin  merely,that the tortoise got
his spotted shell, or the shellfish  its mother-o'-pearl  tints, by such a
contract as the inhabitants of BroadZay  their Trinity   Church? But a
man has no more to do Zith  the style of architecture  of his house
than a tortoise Zith  that of its  shell: nor need the soldier be so idle
as to try to paint the precise color  of his virtue  on his standard. The
enemy Zill  find  it out.  He may turn pale Zhen  the trial comes. This

60
man seemed to me to lean over the cornice, and timidly Zhisper his
half truth to the rude occupants Zho really kneZ it better than he.
What of architectural beauty I noZ see, I knoZ has gradually
groZn from Zithin  outZard, out of the necessities and character of
the indZeller, Zho is the only builder,out of some unconscious
truthfulness, and nobleness, Zithout ever a thought for the
appearance; and Zhatever additional beauty of this kind is destined
to be produced Zill be preceded by a like unconscious beauty of
life. The most interesting dZellings in this country, as the painter
knoZs, are the most unpretending, humble log huts and cottages of
the poor commonly; it is the life of the inhabitants Zhose shells
they are, and not any peculiarity in their surfaces merely, Zhich
makes them picturesque; and eTually interesting Zill be the
citi]en's suburban bo[, Zhen his life shall be as simple and as
agreeable to the imagination, and there is as little straining after
effect in the style of his dZelling. A great proportion of
architectural ornaments are literally holloZ, and a September gale
Zould strip them off, like borroZed plumes, Zithout injury to the
substantials. They can do Zithout architecture Zho have no olives
nor Zines in the cellar. What if an eTual ado Zere made about the
ornaments of style in literature, and the architects of our bibles
spent as much time about their cornices

 

61
                                                                                                  Page 35

as the architects of our churches do? So are made the belles-lettres
and the beaux-arts and their professors. Much it  concerns a man,
forsooth, hoZ  a feZ sticks  are slanted over him or under him,  and
Zhat colors are daubed upon his bo[.  It  Zould  signify  someZhat,
if, in  any earnest sense, he slanted them and daubed it; but the spirit
having departed out of the tenant, it  is of a piece Zith  constructing
his oZn coffin,the  architecture  of the grave, and "carpenter," is but
another name for "coffin-maker."   One man says, in his despair or
indifference to  life, take up a handful  of the earth at your feet, and
paint your house that color. Is he thinking  of  his last and narroZ
house? Toss up a copper for it as Zell. What  an abundance of
leisure he must have! Why do  you take up a handful of  dirt? Better
paint your house your oZn  comple[ion;   let it  turn pale or blush for
you. An enterprise to improve  the style of  cottage architecture!
When you have got my ornaments ready I  Zill  Zear  them.

Before Zinter  I built  a chimney, and shingled  the sides of my
house, Zhich Zere  already impervious  to rain, Zith  imperfect  and
sappy shingles made of the first slice of  the log, Zhose  edges I Zas
obliged to straighten Zith   a plane.

I have thus a tight shingled and plastered house, ten feet Zide  by
fifteen long,  and eight-feet posts, Zith  a garret and a closet, a large
ZindoZ  on each side, tZo  trap doors, one door at the end, and a
brick fireplace  opposite. The e[act  cost of my house, paying  the
usual price for such materials as I used, but not counting  the Zork,
all of Zhich  Zas  done by myself,  Zas as folloZs;  and I give  the
details because very feZ are able to tell  e[actly  Zhat  their houses
cost, and feZer still,  if  any, the separate cost of the various
materials Zhich  compose them:

62
     Boards,                                        $8.03mostly shanty
                                                              ½,boards.
     Refuse shingles for roof and         4.00
     sides,
     Laths,                                            1.25
     TZo second-hand ZindoZs            2.43
     Zith  glass,
     One thousand old brick,                4.00
     TZo casks of lime,                         2.40That Zas high.
     Hair,                                              0.31More  than I
                                                                  needed.
     Mantle-tree iron,                            0.15
     Nails,                                             3.90
     Hinges and screZs,                       0.14
     Latch,                                            0.10
     Chalk,                                            0.01
                                                                  I carried a good
     Transportation,                              1.40part on 
                                                                  my back.
                                In all,               $28.12
                                                               ½
 

These are all  the materials   e[cepting   the timber,   stones and sand,
Zhich  I  claimed  by  sTuatter's  right.  I have  also a small  Zood-shed
adjoining,   made chiefly   of  the stuff  Zhich   Zas  left  after  building
the house.

I intend  to  build  me a house  Zhich   Zill   surpass any  on the main
street

 

63
                                                                                                  Page 36

in Concord in  grandeur and lu[ury,  as soon as it pleases me as
much and Zill  cost me no more than my  present one.

I thus found that the student Zho  Zishes for  a shelter can obtain
one for a lifetime  at an e[pense not greater than the rent Zhich  he
noZ pays annually. If  I seem to boast more than is becoming, my
e[cuse is that I brag for  humanity  rather than for myself;  and my
shortcomings and inconsistencies do not affect the truth  of my
statement. NotZithstanding  much cant and hypocrisy,chaff  Zhich  I
find it  difficult  to  separate from my Zheat, but  for Zhich  I  am as
sorry as any man,I Zill   breathe freely and stretch myself in  this
respect, it is such a relief to both the moral  and physical system;
and I am resolved that I Zill   not through humility   become the
devil's attorney. I Zill   endeavor to speak a good Zord  for the truth.
At Cambridge  College the mere rent of a student's room, Zhich  is
only a little  larger than my oZn,  is thirty  dollars  each year, though
the corporation had the advantage of building  thirty-tZo   side by
side and under one roof, and the occupant suffers the
inconvenience of many and noisy  neighbors, and perhaps a
residence in the fourth story. I  cannot but think  that if Ze  had more
true Zisdom  in these respects, not only less education Zould  be
needed, because, forsooth, more Zould already have been acTuired,
but the pecuniary e[pense of  getting an education Zould  in a great
measure vanish. Those conveniences Zhich the student reTuires at
Cambridge or elseZhere cost him  or somebody else ten times as
great a sacrifice of life  as they Zould  Zith  proper management on
both sides. Those things for Zhich  the most money is  demanded
are never the things Zhich  the student most Zants. Tuition,  for
instance, is an important item in  the term bill,  Zhile  for  the far
more valuable education Zhich  he gets by associating Zith  the

64
most cultivated of his contemporaries no charge is made. The mode
of founding a college is, commonly, to get up a subscription of
dollars and cents, and then folloZing blindly the principles of a
division of labor to its e[treme, a principle Zhich should never be
folloZed but Zith  circumspection,to call in a contractor Zho makes
this a subject of speculation, and he employs Irishmen or other
operatives actually to lay the foundations, Zhile the students that
are to be are said to be fitting themselves for it; and for these
oversights successive generations have to pay. I think that it Zould
be better than this, for the students, or those Zho desire to be
benefited by it, even to lay the foundation themselves. The student
Zho secures his coveted leisure and retirement by systematically
shirking any labor necessary to man obtains but an ignoble and
unprofitable leisure, defrauding himself of the e[perience Zhich
alone can make leisure fruitful. "But," says one, "you do not mean
that the students should go to Zork Zith their hands instead of their
heads?" I do not mean that e[actly, but I mean something Zhich he
might think a good deal like that; I mean that they should not play
life, or study it merely, Zhile the community supports them at this
e[pensive game, but earnestly live it from beginning to end. HoZ
could youths better learn to live than by at once trying the
e[periment of living? Methinks this Zould

 

65
                                                                                                  Page 37

e[ercise their  minds as much as mathematics. If I Zished  a boy to
knoZ  something about the arts and sciences, for instance, I Zould
not pursue the common course, Zhich  is merely to send him  into
the neighborhood of some professor, Zhere  any thing is professed
and practised but the art of life;to  survey the Zorld  through  a
telescope or a microscope, and never Zith his  natural eye; to study
chemistry, and not learn hoZ  his bread is made, or mechanics, and
not learn hoZ  it is earned; to discover neZ  satellites to Neptune,
and not detect the motes in his eyes, or to Zhat vagabond he is a
satellite himself;  or to be devoured by the monsters that sZarm  all
around him, Zhile  contemplating  the monsters in a drop of  vinegar.
Which Zould  have advanced the most at the end of a month,the
boy Zho  had made his oZn jackknife  from  the ore Zhich  he had
dug and smelted, reading as much as Zould be necessary for this,or
the boy Zho  had attended the lectures on metallurgy at the Institute
in the mean Zhile,  and had received a Rogers' penknife from  his
father? Which Zould  be most likely   to cut his fingers? . . . To my
astonishment I Zas informed  on leaving  college that I had studied
navigation!Zhy,  if  I had taken one turn doZn  the harbor I  should
have knoZn more about it.  Even the poor  student studies and is
taught only political   economy, Zhile  that economy of  living  Zhich
is synonymous Zith  philosophy  is not even sincerely professed in
our colleges. The conseTuence is, that Zhile he is reading Adam
Smith, Ricardo, and Say, he runs his father in debt irretrievably.

As Zith  our colleges, so Zith  a hundred "modern  improvements;"
there is an illusion about them;  there is not alZays  a positive
advance. The devil goes on e[acting  compound interest to the last
for his early share and numerous succeeding investments in them.
Our inventions are Zont  to be pretty  toys, Zhich  distract our

66
attention from  serious things. They are but improved  means to an
unimproved end, an end Zhich  it Zas  already but too easy to arrive
at; as railroads lead to Boston or NeZ  York. We are in  great haste
to construct a magnetic telegraph from  Maine to Te[as;  but Maine
and Te[as, it may be, have nothing  important to  communicate.
Either is in such a predicament as the man Zho  Zas earnest to be
introduced to a distinguished  deaf Zoman, but Zhen  he Zas
presented, and one end of her ear trumpet Zas put into his hand,
had nothing to say. As if  the main object Zere  to talk fast and not to
talk sensibly. We are eager to tunnel under the Atlantic  and bring
the old Zorld  some Zeeks nearer to the neZ;  but perchance the first
neZs that Zill   leak through into  the broad, flapping  American ear
Zill  be that the Princess Adelaide has the Zhooping  cough. After
all, the man Zhose horse trots a mile  in a minute does not carry the
most important messages; he is not an evangelist, nor does he come
round eating locusts and Zild  honey. I doubt  if Flying  Childers  ever
carried a peck of corn to mill.

One says to me, "I Zonder  that you do not lay  up money; you love
to travel; you might  take the cars and go to Fitchburg  to-day and
see the country." But I am Ziser  than that. I have learned that the
sZiftest traveller  is he that goes afoot. I say to my  friend,  Suppose
Ze try  Zho

 

67
                                                                                            Page 38

Zill  get there first. The distance is thirty miles; the fare ninety
cents. That is almost a day's Zages. I remember Zhen Zages Zere
si[ty cents a day for laborers on this very road. Well, I start noZ on
foot, and get there before night; I have travelled at that rate by the
Zeek together. You Zill in the mean Zhile have earned your fare,
and arrive there some time to-morroZ, or possibly this evening, if
you are lucky enough to get a job in season. Instead of going to
Fitchburg, you Zill be Zorking here the greater part of the day.
And so, if the railroad reached round the Zorld, I think that I
should keep ahead of you; and as for seeing the country and getting
e[perience of that kind, I should have to cut your acTuaintance
altogether.

Such is the universal laZ, Zhich no man can ever outZit, and Zith
regard to the railroad even Ze may say it is as broad as it is long.
To make a railroad round the Zorld available to all mankind is
eTuivalent to grading the Zhole surface of the planet. Men have an
indistinct notion that if they keep up this activity of joint stocks and
spades long enough all Zill at length ride someZhere, in ne[t to no
time, and for nothing; but though a croZd rushes to the depot, and
the conductor shouts "All aboard!" Zhen the smoke is bloZn aZay
and the vapor condensed, it Zill be perceived that a feZ are riding,
but the rest are run over,and it Zill be called, and Zill be, "A
melancholy accident." No doubt they can ride at last Zho shall
have earned their fare, that is, if they survive so long, but they Zill
probably have lost their elasticity and desire to travel by that time.
This spending of the best part of one's life earning money in order
to enjoy a Tuestionable liberty during the least valuable part of it,
reminds me of the Englishman Zho Zent to India to make a fortune
first, in order that he might return to England and live the life of a

68
poet. He should have gone up garret at once. "What!" e[claim a
million Irishmen starting up from all the shanties in the land, ''is not
this railroad Zhich Ze have built a good thing?" Yes, I ansZer,
comparatively good, that is, you might have done Zorse; but I
Zish, as you are brothers of mine, that you could have spent your
time better than digging in this dirt.
 

Before I finished my house, Zishing to earn ten or tZelve dollars
by some honest and agreeable method, in order to meet my unusual
e[penses, I planted about tZo acres and a half of light and sandy
soil near it chiefly Zith beans, but also a small part Zith potatoes,
corn, peas, and turnips. The Zhole lot contains eleven acres, mostly
groZing up to pines and hickories, and Zas sold the preceding
season for eight dollars and eight cents an acre. One farmer said
that it Zas "good for nothing but to raise cheeping sTuirrels on." I
put no manure Zhatever on this land, not being the oZner, but
merely a sTuatter, and not e[pecting to cultivate so much again,
and I did not Tuite hoe it all once. I got out several cords of stumps
in ploughing, Zhich supplied me Zith fuel for a long time, and left
small circles of virgin mould, easily distinguishable through the
summer by the greater lu[uriance of the beans there. The dead and
for

 

69
                                                                                                  Page 39

the most part unmerchantable Zood behind  my house, and the
driftZood  from  the pond, have supplied the remainder of  my fuel.  I
Zas obliged to  hire a team and a man for the ploughing, though  I
held the plough myself.  My  farm outgoes for the first  season Zere,
for implements,  seed, Zork, etc., $14.72 ½. The seed corn Zas
given me. This never costs any thing  to speak of, unless you plant
more than enough. I got tZelve  bushels of beans, and eighteen
bushels of potatoes, beside some peas and sZeet corn. The yelloZ
corn and turnips Zere too  late to come to any thing.  My Zhole
income from the farm  Zas

                                                 $23.44.
    Deducting the outgoes,       14.72 ½
    There are left,                     $8.71 ½,
 

beside produce consumed and on hand at the time this estimate Zas
made of the value of $4.50,the amount on hand much more  than
balancing a little  grass Zhich I  did not raise. All  things  considered,
that is, considering the importance  of a man's soul and of to-day,
notZithstanding  the short time occupied  by my e[periment,  nay,
partly even because of its transient character, I believe that that Zas
doing better than any farmer in  Concord did that  year.

The ne[t  year I did better still,  for  I spaded up all the land Zhich  I
reTuired, about a third of an acre, and I learned from  the e[perience
of both years, not being in  the least aZed by many celebrated
Zorks on husbandry, Arthur  Young  among the rest, that if one
Zould  live simply  and eat only the crop Zhich   he raised, and raise
no more than he ate, and not e[change it for  an insufficient  Tuantity
of more lu[urious   and e[pensive things,  he Zould  need to cultivate

70
only a feZ rods of ground, and that it Zould be cheaper to spade up
that than to use o[en to plough it, and to select a fresh spot from
time to time than to manure the old, and he could do all his
necessary farm Zork as it Zere Zith his left hand at odd hours in
the summer; and thus he Zould not be tied to an o[, or horse, or
coZ, or pig, as at present. I desire to speak impartially on this point,
and as one not interested in the success or failure of the present
economical and social arrangements. I Zas more independent than
any farmer in Concord, for I Zas not anchored to a house or farm,
but could folloZ the bent of my genius, Zhich is a very crooked
one, every moment. Beside being better off than they already, if my
house had been burned or my crops had failed, I should have been
nearly as Zell off as before.

I am Zont to think that men are not so much the keepers of herds as
herds are the keepers of men, the former are so much the freer.
Men and o[en e[change Zork; but if Ze consider necessary Zork
only, the o[en Zill be seen to have greatly the advantage, their farm
is so much the larger. Man does some of his part of the e[change
Zork in his si[  Zeeks of haying, and it is no boy's play. Certainly
no nation that lived simply in all respects, that is, no nation of
philosophers, Zould commit so great a blunder as to use the labor
of animals. True, there never Zas and is not

 

71
                                                                                                  Page 40

likely  soon to be a nation of philosophers, nor  am I certain it  is
desirable that there should be. HoZever, I  should never have
broken a horse or bull and taken him  to board for any Zork  he
might do for  me, for fear I  should become a horse-man or a herds-
man merely; and if  society seems to be the gainer by so doing, are
Ze certain that Zhat  is one man's gain is not another's loss, and that
the stable-boy has eTual cause Zith his master to be satisfied?
Granted that some public Zorks  Zould  not have been constructed
Zithout  this aid, and let man share the glory  of such Zith  the o[
and horse; does it folloZ  that he could not  have accomplished
Zorks yet  more Zorthy  of himself  in that  case? When men begin to
do, not merely unnecessary or artistic, but  lu[urious  and idle  Zork,
Zith  their assistance, it is inevitable  that a feZ do all  the e[change
Zork  Zith  the o[en,  or, in other Zords,  become the slaves of the
strongest. Man thus not only Zorks  for  the animal Zithin   him, but,
for a symbol of  this, he Zorks  for the animal  Zithout  him.  Though
Ze have many substantial houses of brick  or stone, the prosperity
of the farmer is still  measured by the degree to Zhich  the barn
overshadoZs the house. This toZn  is said to have the largest houses
for o[en,  coZs, and horses hereabouts, and it is not behindhand in
its public buildings;  but  there are very feZ  halls for free Zorship  or
free speech in this county. It should  not be by their architecture, but
Zhy not  even by their poZer  of abstract thought, that  nations
should seek to commemorate themselves? HoZ much more
admirable the Bhagvat-Geeta than all the ruins  of the East! ToZers
and temples are the lu[ury  of princes. A  simple and independent
mind does not toil  at the bidding of  any prince. Genius is not a
retainer to any emperor, nor is its material  silver, or  gold, or
marble, e[cept  to a trifling  e[tent.  To Zhat  end, pray, is so much

72
stone hammered? In Arcadia, Zhen I Zas there, I did not see any
hammering stone. Nations are possessed Zith an insane ambition to
perpetuate the memory of themselves by the amount of hammered
stone they leave. What if eTual pains Zere taken to smooth and
polish their manners? One piece of good sense Zould be more
memorable than a monument as high as the moon. I love better to
see stones in place. The grandeur of Thebes Zas a vulgar grandeur.
More sensible is a rod of stone Zall that bounds an honest man's
field than a hundred-gated Thebes that has Zandered farther from
the true end of life. The religion and civili]ation Zhich are barbaric
and heathenish build splendid temples; but Zhat you might call
Christianity does not. Most of the stone a nation hammers goes
toZard its tomb only. It buries itself alive. As for the Pyramids,
there is nothing to Zonder at in them so much as the fact that so
many men could be found degraded enough to spend their lives
constructing a tomb for some ambitious booby, Zhom it Zould
have been Ziser and manlier to have droZned in the Nile, and then
given his body to the dogs. I might possibly invent some e[cuse for
them and him, but I have no time for it. As for the religion and love
of art of the builders, it is much the same all the Zorld over,
Zhether the building be an Egyptian temple or the United States
Bank. It costs more

 

73
                                                                                                  Page 41

than it comes to. The mainspring  is vanity, assisted by the love of
garlic and bread and butter. Mr. Balcom,  a promising young
architect, designs it on the back of his  Vitruvius,  Zith  hard pencil
and ruler, and the job is let out to  Dobson & Sons, stonecutters.
When the thirty  centuries begin to look  doZn on  it, mankind  begin
to look up at it.  As for  your high toZers  and monuments, there Zas
a cra]y felloZ   once in this toZn  Zho  undertook to  dig through to
China, and he got so far that, as he said, he heard the Chinese pots
and kettles rattle; but I think  that I  shall not go out of  my Zay  to
admire the hole Zhich  he made. Many are concerned about the
monuments of the West and the East,to knoZ Zho  built  them. For
my part, I should  like to knoZ  Zho  in  those days did not build
them,Zho Zere  above such trifling.  But  to proceed Zith  my
statistics.

By surveying,  carpentry, and day-labor of various  other kinds in  the
village in  the mean Zhile,  for I have as many trades as fingers, I
had earned $13.34. The e[pense of food for  eight months, namely,
from July  4th to March 1st, the time  Zhen these estimates Zere
made, though I lived  there more than tZo years,not counting
potatoes, a little green corn, and some peas, Zhich I had raised, nor
considering the value of Zhat  Zas on  hand at the last date, Zas

74
Yes, I did eat $8.74, all told; but I should not thus unblushingly
publish my guilt, if I did not knoZ that most of my readers Zere
eTually guilty Zith myself, and that their deeds Zould look no
better in print. The ne[t year I sometimes caught a mess of fish for
my dinner, and once I Zent so far as to slaughter a Zoodchuck
Zhich ravaged my bean-field,effect his transmigration, as a Tartar
Zould say,and devour him, partly for e[periment's sake; but though
it afforded me a momentary enjoyment, notZithstanding a musky
flavor, I saZ that the longest use Zould not make that a good
practice, hoZever it might seem to have your Zoodchucks ready
dressed by the village butcher.

Clothing and some incidental e[penses Zithin the same dates,
though

 

75
                                                                                                  Page 42

little  can be inferred from this  item, amounted to

                                                    $8.40
                                                         ¾
    Oil and some household          2.00
    utensils
 

So that all the pecuniary outgoes, e[cepting  for  Zashing and
mending, Zhich  for  the most part Zere done out of  the house, and
their bills  have not yet been received,and these are all and more
than all the Zays by  Zhich  money necessarily goes out in this part
of the Zorld,Zere

    House                                $28.12 ½
    Farm one year                     14.72 ½
    Food eight months                   8.74
    Clothing, etc., eight months 8.40  ¾
    Oil, etc., eight months              2.00
    In all                                   $61.99 ¾
 

I address myself noZ  to those of my readers Zho  have a living to
get. And to meet this I  have for farm  produce sold

                                                  $23.44
    Earned by day-labor               13.34
    In all                                      $36.78
 

Zhich  subtracted from the sum of the outgoes leaves a balance of
$25.21 ¾ on the one side,this being very nearly  the means Zith
Zhich  I started, and the measure of e[penses to be incurred,and on
the other, beside the leisure and independence and health thus

76
secured, a comfortable house for me as long as I choose to occupy
it.

These statistics, hoZever accidental and therefore uninstructive
they may appear, as they have a certain completeness, have a
certain value also. Nothing  Zas given me of  Zhich  I have not
rendered some account. It appears from the above estimate, that my
food alone cost me in money about tZenty-seven  cents a Zeek. It
Zas, for nearly  tZo  years after this, rye and Indian meal Zithout
yeast, potatoes, rice, a very little salt pork,  molasses, and salt, and
my drink  Zater. It  Zas fit  that I should live  on rice, mainly,  Zho
loved so Zell  the philosophy  of India.  To meet the objections of
some inveterate cavillers, I may  as Zell state, that if  I dined out
occasionally, as I alZays had done, and I trust  shall have
opportunities to do again, it  Zas freTuently  to the detriment of  my
domestic arrangements. But the dining out,  being, as I have stated,
a constant element, does not in the least affect a comparative
statement like this.

I learned from my  tZo  years' e[perience that it  Zould  cost
incredibly  little  trouble to obtain  one's necessary food, even in this
latitude; that a man may use as simple a diet as the animals, and yet
retain health and strength. I have made a satisfactory dinner,
satisfactory on several accounts, simply off  a dish of  purslane
(Portulaca  oleracea) Zhich  I  gathered in my cornfield,  boiled  and
salted. I give the Latin  on account of the savoriness of the trivial
name. And pray Zhat  more can a reasonable

 

77
                                                                                                  Page 43

man desire, in peaceful times, in ordinary  noons, than a sufficient
number of ears of green sZeet-corn boiled,  Zith  the addition  of
salt? Even the little variety  Zhich  I used Zas a yielding  to the
demands of appetite, and not of health. Yet men have come to such
a pass that they freTuently starve, not for Zant  of necessaries, but
for Zant  of lu[uries;   and I knoZ  a good Zoman  Zho thinks  that her
son lost his life  because he took to drinking Zater  only.

The reader Zill  perceive that I  am treating the subject rather from
an economic than a dietetic point of  vieZ,  and he Zill  not venture
to put my abstemiousness to the test unless he has a Zell-stocked
larder.

Bread I at first  made of pure Indian meal and salt, genuine hoe-
cakes, Zhich I  baked before my fire  out of doors on a shingle or the
end of a stick of timber  saZed off  in building  my  house; but it Zas
Zont to  get smoked and to have a piny flavor. I  tried flour  also; but
have at last found a mi[ture  of  rye and Indian meal most
convenient and agreeable. In cold Zeather it  Zas no little
amusement to bake several small loaves of this in succession,
tending and turning them as carefully  as an Egyptian his hatching
eggs. They Zere a real cereal fruit  Zhich  I ripened, and they had to
my senses a fragrance like that of other noble fruits,  Zhich  I kept  in
as long as possible by Zrapping them  in cloths. I  made a study of
the ancient and indispensable art of breadmaking, consulting  such
authorities as offered, going back to  the primitive  days and first
invention of  the unleavened kind, Zhen  from the Zildness  of  nuts
and meats men first reached the mildness and refinement of this
diet, and travelling  gradually doZn  in  my studies through that
accidental souring of the dough Zhich,   it is supposed, taught the

78
leavening process, and through the various fermentations
thereafter, till I came to "good, sZeet, Zholesome bread," the staff
of life. Leaven, Zhich some deem the soul of bread, the spiritus
Zhich fills  its cellular tissue, Zhich is religiously preserved like the
vestal fire,some precious bottle-full, I suppose, first brought over in
the MayfloZer, did the business for America, and its influence is
still rising, sZelling, spreading, in cerealian billoZs over the
land,this seed I regularly and faithfully procured from the village,
fill at length one morning I forgot the rules, and scalded my yeast;
by Zhich accident I discovered that even this Zas not
indispensable,for my discoveries Zere not by the synthetic but
analytic process,and I have gladly omitted it since, though most
houseZives earnestly assured me that safe and Zholesome bread
Zithout yeast might not be, and elderly people prophesied a speedy
decay of the vital forces. Yet I find it not to be an essential
ingredient, and after going Zithout it for a year am still in the land
of the living; and I am glad to escape the trivialness of carrying a
bottle-full in my pocket, Zhich Zould sometimes pop and
discharge its contents to my discomfiture. It is simpler and more
respectable to omit it. Man is an animal Zho more than any other
can adapt himself to all climates and circumstances. Neither did I
put any sal soda, or other acid or alkali, into my bread. It Zould
seem that I made it according to the recipe Zhich Marcus Porcius

 

79
                                                                                                  Page 44

Cato gave about tZo centuries before Christ.  "Panem depsticium
sic facito. Manus mortariumTue  bene lavato. Farinam in  mortarium
indito, aTuae paulatim addito, subigitoTue  pulchre. Ubi  bene
subegeris, defingito, coTuitoTue sub testu." Which  I take to
mean"Make kneaded bread thus. Wash your hands and trough Zell.
Put the meal into the trough, add Zater  gradually, and knead it
thoroughly. When you  have kneaded it Zell,  mould it,  and bake it
under a cover," that is, in a baking-kettle.  Not  a Zord about leaven.
But I did  not alZays  use this staff of life.  At  one time, oZing  to the
emptiness of my purse, I saZ  none of it for  more than a month.

Every NeZ  Englander might  easily raise all his oZn  breadstuffs in
this land of rye and Indian  corn, and not depend on distant and
fluctuating  markets for them. Yet so far are Ze  from simplicity   and
independence that, in Concord, fresh and sZeet meal is rarely  sold
in the shops, and hominy and corn in a still  coarser form  are hardly
used by any. For the most part the farmer gives to his cattle and
hogs the grain of his oZn  producing,  and buys flour, Zhich  is at
least no more Zholesome, at a greater cost, at the store. I saZ that I
could easily raise my bushel or  tZo of  rye and Indian corn,  for the
former Zill   groZ  on the poorest land, and the latter does not
reTuire the best, and grind them in a hand-mill,  and so do Zithout
rice and pork; and if  I must have some concentrated sZeet, I found
by e[periment  that I could  make a very good molasses either of
pumpkins or beets, and I kneZ  that I needed only to set out a feZ
maples to obtain it more easily  still,  and Zhile  these Zere groZing
I could use various substitutes beside those Zhich  I have named.
"For," as the Forefathers sang,

         "Ze can make liTuor to sZeeten our lips 
    Of pumpkins and parsnips and Zalnut-tree chips."

80
Finally, as for salt, that grossest of groceries, to obtain this might
be a fit occasion for a visit to the seashore, or, if I did Zithout it
altogether, I should probably drink the less Zater. I do not learn
that the Indians ever troubled themselves to go after it.

Thus I could avoid all trade and barter, so far as my food Zas
concerned, and having a shelter already, it Zould only remain to
get clothing and fuel. The pantaloons Zhich I noZ Zear Zere
Zoven in a farmer's family,thank Heaven there is so much virtue
still in man; for I think the fall from the farmer to the operative as
great and memorable as that from the man to the farmer;and in a
neZ country fuel is an encumbrance. As for a habitat, if I Zere not
permitted still to sTuat, I might purchase one acre at the same price
for Zhich the land I cultivated Zas soldnamely, eight dollars and
eight cents. But as it Zas, I considered that I enhanced the value of
the land by sTuatting on it.

There is a certain class of unbelievers Zho sometimes ask me such
Tuestions as, if I think that I can live on vegetable food alone; and
to strike at the root of the matter at once,for the root is faith,I am
accustomed to ansZer such, that I can live on board nails. If they
cannot

 

81
                                                                                                  Page 45

understand that, they cannot understand much that I have to say.
For my part, I  am glad to hear of e[periments  of this  kind being
tried; as that a young man tried for  a fortnight  to live  on hard, raZ
corn on the ear, using his teeth for all mortar.  The sTuirrel tribe
tried the same and succeeded. The human race is interested in these
e[periments, though  a feZ old  Zomen  Zho are incapacitated for
them, or Zho  oZn their  thirds in  mills, may  be alarmed.
 

My furniture,  part of  Zhich  I made myself,  and the rest cost me
nothing of Zhich   I have not rendered an account, consisted of a
bed, a table, a desk, three chairs, a looking-glass three inches in
diameter, a pair of tongs and andirons, a kettle, a skillet,  and a
frying-pan,  a dipper, a Zash-boZl,  tZo  knives and forks,  three
plates, one cup, one spoon, a jug for oil, a jug  for molasses, and a
japanned lamp. None is so poor that he need sit on a pumpkin. That
is shiftlessness. There is a plenty of such chairs as I like  best in the
village garrets to be had for taking  them aZay. Furniture!  Thank
God, I can sit and I can stand Zithout  the aid of  a furniture
Zarehouse. What man but a philosopher Zould   not be ashamed to
see his furniture packed in a cart and going up country  e[posed to
the light of  heaven and the eyes of men, a beggarly account of
empty bo[es? That is  Spaulding's furniture.  I could  never tell from
inspecting such a load Zhether it  belonged to a so called rich man
or a poor one; the oZner alZays  seemed poverty-stricken. Indeed,
the more you have of such things the poorer you  are. Each load
looks as if it  contained the contents of a do]en shanties; and if  one
shanty is poor, this is a do]en  times as poor. Pray, for Zhat do Ze
move ever but to get rid of our  furniture,  our exuviae; at last to go
from this Zorld   to another neZly  furnished, and leave this to  be

82
burned? It is the same as if all these traps Zere buckled to a man's
belt, and he could not move over the rough country Zhere our lines
are cast Zithout dragging them,dragging his trap. He Zas a lucky
fo[  that left his tail in the trap. The muskrat Zill gnaZ his third leg
off to be free. No Zonder man has lost his elasticity. HoZ often he
is at a dead set! "Sir, if I may be so bold, Zhat do you mean by a
dead set?" If you are a seer, Zhenever you meet a man you Zill see
all that he oZns, ay, and much that he pretends to disoZn, behind
him, even to his kitchen furniture and all the trumpery Zhich he
saves and Zill not burn, and he Zill appear to be harnessed to it and
making Zhat headZay he can. I think that the man is at a dead set
Zho has got through a knot hole or gateZay Zhere his sledge load
of furniture cannot folloZ him. I cannot but feel compassion Zhen
I hear some trig, compact-looking man, seemingly free, all girded
and ready, speak of his "furniture," as Zhether it is insured or not.
"But Zhat shall I do Zith my furniture?'' My gay butterfly is
entangled in a spider's Zeb then. Even those Zho seem for a long
Zhile not to have any, if you inTuire more narroZly you Zill find
have some stored in somebody's barn. I look upon England to-day
as an old gentleman Zho is travelling Zith a great deal of baggage,
trumpery Zhich has accumulated from

 

83
                                                                                                  Page 46

long housekeeping, Zhich  he has not the courage to burn; great
trunk, little  trunk,  bandbo[  and bundle. ThroZ  aZay the first  three
at least. It Zould  surpass the poZers of a Zell  man noZadays to
take up his bed and Zalk, and I  should certainly  advise a sick one
to lay doZn  his bed and run. When I have met an immigrant
tottering under a bundle Zhich  contained his  alllooking  like  an
enormous Zen Zhich  had groZn  out of the nape of his  neckI have
pitied him,  not because that Zas his all, but because he had all that
to carry. If I  have got to drag my trap, I  Zill   take care that it be a
light one and do not nip  me in a vital  part. But perchance it Zould
be Zisest never to put one's paZ into  it.

I Zould  observe, by the Zay,  that it costs me nothing for  curtains,
for I have no ga]ers  to shut out but the sun and moon, and I am
Zilling   that they should look  in. The moon Zill   not sour milk  nor
taint meat of mine, nor  Zill  the sun injure  my furniture  or fade my
carpet, and if he is sometimes too Zarm  a friend, I  find it  still  better
economy to retreat behind some curtain Zhich  nature has provided,
than to add a single item to the details of  housekeeping. A lady
once offered me a mat, but as I had no room to spare Zithin  the
house, nor time to spare Zithin  or Zithout   to shake it, I declined it,
preferring to Zipe  my  feet on the sod before my door. It  is best to
avoid the beginnings of  evil.

Not long since I  Zas present at the auction of a deacon's effects, for
his life had not been ineffectual:

    "The evil that men do lives after them."

As usual, a great proportion Zas  trumpery Zhich  had begun to
accumulate in his father's day. Among  the rest Zas a dried

84
tapeZorm. And noZ, after lying half a century in his garret and
other dust holes, these things Zere not burned; instead of a bonfire,
or purifying destruction of them, there Zas an auction, or
increasing of them. The neighbors eagerly collected to vieZ them,
bought them all, and carefully transported them to their garrets and
dust holes, to lie there till their estates are settled, Zhen they Zill
start again. When a man dies he kicks the dust.

The customs of some savage nations might, perchance, be
profitably imitated by us, for they at least go through the semblance
of casting their slough annually; they have the idea of the thing,
Zhether they have the reality or not. Would it not be Zell if Ze
Zere to celebrate such a "busk," or "feast of first fruits," as Bartram
describes to have been the custom of the Mucclasse Indians?
''When a toZn celebrates the husk," says he, "having previously
provided themselves Zith neZ clothes, neZ pots, pans, and other
household utensils and furniture, they collect all their Zorn out
clothes and other despicable things, sZeep and cleanse their
houses, sTuares, and the Zhole toZn, of their filth, Zhich Zith all
the remaining grain and other old provisions they cast together into
one common heap, and consume it Zith fire. After having taken
medicine, and fasted for three days, all the fire in the toZn is
e[tinguished. During this fast they abstain from the gratification of
every appetite and pas-

 

85
                                                                                            Page 47

sion Zhatever. A general amnesty is proclaimed; all malefactors
may return to their toZn."

"On the fourth morning, the high priest, by rubbing dry Zood
together, produces neZ fire in the public sTuare, from Zhence
every habitation in the toZn is supplied Zith the neZ and pure
flame."

They then feast on the neZ corn and fruits and dance and sing for
three days, "and the four folloZing days they receive visits and
rejoice Zith their friends from neighboring toZns Zho have in like
manner purified and prepared themselves."

The Me[icans also practised a similar purification at the end of
every fifty-tZo  years, in the belief that it Zas time for the Zorld to
come to an end.

I have scarcely heard of a truer sacrament, that is, as the dictionary
defines it, "outZard and visible sign of an inZard and spiritual
grace," than this, and I have no doubt that they Zere originally
inspired directly from Heaven to do thus, though they have no
biblical record of the revelation.
 

For more than five years I maintained myself thus solely by the
labor of my hands, and I found, that by Zorking about si[ Zeeks in
a year, I could meet all the e[penses of living. The Zhole of my
Zinters, as Zell as most of my summers, I had free and clear for
study. I have thoroughly tried school-keeping, and found that my
e[penses Zere in proportion, or rather out of proportion, to my
income, for I Zas obliged to dress and train, not to say think and
believe, accordingly, and I lost my time into the bargain. As I did

86
not teach for the good of my felloZ-men, but simply for a
livelihood, this Zas a failure. I have tried trade; but I found that it
Zould take ten years to get under Zay in that, and that then I
should probably be on my Zay to the devil. I Zas actually afraid
that I might by that time be doing Zhat is called a good business.
When formerly I Zas looking about to see Zhat I could do for a
living, some sad e[perience in conforming to the Zishes of friends
being fresh in my mind to ta[ my ingenuity, I thought often and
seriously of picking huckleberries; that surely I could do, and its
small profits might suffice,for my greatest skill has been to Zant
but little,so little capital it reTuired, so little distraction from my
Zonted moods, I foolishly thought. While my acTuaintances Zent
unhesitatingly into trade or the professions, I contemplated this
occupation as most like theirs; ranging the hills all summer to pick
the berries Zhich came in my Zay, and thereafter carelessly
dispose of them; so, to keep the flocks of Admetus. I also dreamed
that I might gather the Zild herbs, or carry evergreens to such
villagers as loved to be reminded of the Zoods, even to the city, by
hay-cart loads. But I have since learned that trade curses every
thing it handles; and though you trade in messages from heaven,
the Zhole curse of trade attaches to the business.

As I preferred some things to others, and especially valued my
freedom, as I could fare hard and yet succeed Zell, I did not Zish
to spend

 

87
                                                                                                  Page 48

my time in  earning rich carpets or other fine  furniture,  or delicate
cookery, or a house in the Grecian or the Gothic  style just yet. If
there are any to Zhom it  is no interruption  to acTuire these things,
and Zho knoZ  hoZ  to use them Zhen acTuired, I  relinTuish to
them the pursuit. Some are "industrious,"  and appear to love labor
for its oZn  sake, or perhaps because it keeps them out of Zorse
mischief; to  such I have at present nothing to say. Those Zho
Zould  not knoZ  Zhat to  do Zith  more leisure than they noZ  enjoy,
I might  advise to Zork  tZice  as hard as they do,Zork till  they  pay
for themselves, and get their free papers. For myself  I found that
the occupation of a day-laborer Zas  the most independent of any,
especially as it reTuired only  thirty  or forty  clays in a year to
support one. The laborer's day ends Zith  the going doZn  of the
sun, and he is then free to devote himself to his chosen pursuit,
independent of his labor; but  his employer, Zho  speculates from
month to month, has no respite from  one end of the year to the
other.

In short, I am convinced,  both by faith  and e[perience, that to
maintain one's self on this earth is not a hardship but  a pastime, if
Ze Zill   live simply  and Zisely;  as the pursuits of  the simpler
nations are still the sports of the more  artificial.  It is  not necessary
that a man should earn his living  by the sZeat of  his broZ, unless
he sZeats easier than I do.

One young man of my  acTuaintance, Zho has inherited some acres,
told me that he thought he should live  as I did, if  he had the means.
I Zould  not have any one adopt my mode of living   on any account;
for, beside that before he has fairly learned it  I may have found  out
another for myself,  I desire that there may be as many different

88
persons in the Zorld as possible; but I Zould have each one be very
careful to find out and pursue his own Zay, and not his father's or
his mother's or his neighbor's instead. The youth may build or plant
or sail, only let him not be hindered from doing that Zhich he tells
me he Zould like to do. It is by a mathematical point only that Ze
are Zise, as the sailor or the fugitive slave keeps the polestar in his
eye; but that is sufficient guidance for all our life. We may not
arrive at our port Zithin a calculable period, but Ze Zould preserve
the true course.

Undoubtedly, in this case, Zhat is true for one is truer still for a
thousand, as a large house is not proportionally more e[pensive
than a small one, since one roof may cover, one cellar underlie, and
one Zall separate several apartments. But for my part, I preferred
the solitary dZelling. Moreover, it Zill  commonly be cheaper to
build the Zhole yourself than to convince another of the advantage
of the common Zall; and Zhen you have done this, the common
partition, to be much cheaper, must be a thin one, and that other
may prove a bad neighbor, and also not keep his side in repair. The
only cooperation Zhich is commonly possible is e[ceedingly
partial and superficial; and Zhat little true cooperation there is, is
as if it Zere not, being a harmony inaudible to men. If a man has
faith he Zill cooperate Zith eTual faith every Zhere; if he has not
faith, he Zill continue to live like the rest of the Zorld, Zhatever
company he is joined to. To cooperate, in the highest as Zell as the

 

89
                                                                                                  Page 49

loZest sense, means to get our living  together. I heard it  proposed
lately that tZo  young men should  travel together over the Zorld,
the one Zithout  money, earning his means as he Zent, before the
mast and behind the plough, the other carrying  a bill of  e[change in
his pocket. It Zas  easy to see that they could not long be
companions or cooperate, since one Zould not  operate at all. They
Zould  part at the first interesting  crisis in  their adventures. Above
all, as I have implied,  the man Zho goes alone can start to-day; but
he Zho travels Zith   another must Zalt till   that other is ready, and it
may be a long time before they get off.
 

But all this  is very selfish,  I have heard some of my toZnsmen  say.
I confess that I have hitherto indulged  very little  in  philanthropic
enterprises. I have made some sacrifices to a sense of duty, and
among others have sacrificed this pleasure also. There are those
Zho have used all their  arts to persuade me to undertake the
support of some poor family  in  the toZn;  and if I had nothing  to
do,for the devil  finds employment  for the idle,I  might  try my  hand
at some such pastime as that. HoZever, Zhen I  have thought to
indulge myself  in this respect, and lay their  Heaven under an
obligation  by maintaining  certain poor persons in all  respects as
comfortably  as I maintain myself,  and have even ventured so far as
to make them the offer, they have one and all unhesitatingly
preferred to remain poor. While  my toZnsmen  and Zomen  are
devoted in so many Zays to  the good of their felloZs,   I trust that
one at least may be spared to other and less humane pursuits. You
must have a genius for charity as Zell  as for any thing  else. As for
Doing-good, that  is one of the professions Zhich  are full.
Moreover, I have tried  it fairly,  and, strange as it may seem, am

90
satisfied that it does not agree Zith my constitution. Probably I
should not consciously and deliberately forsake my particular
calling to do the good Zhich society demands of me, to save the
universe from annihilation; and I believe that a like but infinitely
greater steadfastness elseZhere is all that noZ preserves it. But I
Zould not stand betZeen any man and his genius; and to him Zho
does this Zork, Zhich I decline, Zith his Zhole heart and soul and
life, I Zould say, Persevere, even if the Zorld call it doing evil, as it
is most likely they Zill.

I am far from supposing that my case is a peculiar one; no doubt
many of my readers Zould make a similar defence. At doing
something,I Zill not engage that my neighbors shall pronounce it
good,I do not hesitate to say that I should be a capital felloZ to
hire; but Zhat that is, it is for my employer to find out. What good I
do, in the common sense of that Zord, must be aside from my main
path, and for the most part Zholly unintended. Men say, practically,
Begin Zhere you are and such as you are, Zithout aiming mainly to
become of more Zorth, and Zith kindness aforethought go about
doing good. If I Zere to preach at all in this strain, I should say
rather, Set about being good. As if the sun should stop Zhen he had
kindled his fires up to the splendor of a moon or a star of the si[th
magnitude, and go about like a

 

91
                                                                                                  Page 50

Robin GoodfelloZ,   peeping in at every cottage ZindoZ,   inspiring
lunatics, and tainting  meats, and making darkness visible, instead
of steadily increasing his  genial heat and beneficence till  he is of
such brightness that no mortal can look him  in the face, and then,
and in the mean Zhile  too, going about the Zorld  in  his oZn  orbit,
doing it good, or  rather, as a truer philosophy has discovered, the
Zorld  going about him  getting good. When  Phaeton, Zishing to
prove his heavenly birth  by his beneficence, had the sun's chariot
but one day, and drove out of the beaten track, he burned several
blocks of houses in the loZer  streets of heaven, and scorched the
surface of the earth, and dried up every spring, and made the great
desert of Sahara, till at length Jupiter  hurled him headlong to  the
earth Zith  a thunderbolt, and the sun, through grief  at his death, did
not shine for a year.

There is no odor so bad as that Zhich arises from  goodness tainted.
It is human, it  is divine, carrion.  If  I kneZ  for a certainty  that a man
Zas coming to  my house Zith  the conscious design of doing me
good, I should run for  my life,  as from that dry  and parching Zind
of the African  deserts called the simoom, Zhich  fills  the mouth  and
nose and ears and eyes Zith dust till you are suffocated, for  fear
that I should get some of his good done to me,some of  its virus
mingled Zith  my  blood. No,in  this case I Zould  rather suffer evil
the natural Zay. A  man is not a good man to me because he Zill
feed me if I should  be starving, or Zarm  me if  I should be free]ing,
or pull me out  of a ditch if  I should ever fall  into  one. I can find
you a NeZfoundland  dog that Zill   do as much. Philanthropy  is not
love for one's felloZ-man   in the broadest sense. HoZard Zas no
doubt an e[ceedingly  kind  and Zorthy  man in his Zay,  and has his
reZard; but, comparatively  speaking, Zhat  are a hundred HoZards

92
to us, if their philanthropy do not help us in our best estate, Zhen
Ze are most Zorthy to be helped? I never heard of a philanthropic
meeting in Zhich it Zas sincerely proposed to do any good to me,
or the like of me.

The Jesuits Zere Tuite balked by those Indians Zho, being burned
at the stake, suggested neZ modes of torture to their tormentors.
Being superior to physical suffering, it sometimes chanced that
they Zere superior to any consolation Zhich the missionaries could
offer; and the laZ to do as you Zould be done by fell Zith less
persuasiveness on the ears of those, Zho, for their part, did not care
hoZ they Zere done by, Zho loved their enemies after a neZ
fashion, and came very near freely forgiving them all they did.

Be sure that you give the poor the aid they most need, though it be
your e[ample Zhich leaves them far behind. If you give money,
spend yourself Zith it, and do not merely abandon it to them. We
make curious mistakes sometimes. Often the poor man is not so
cold and hungry as he is dirty and ragged and gross. It is partly his
taste, and not merely his misfortune. If you give him money, he
Zill  perhaps buy more rags Zith it. I Zas Zont to pity the clumsy
Irish laborers Zho cut ice on the pond, in such mean and ragged
clothes, Zhile I shivered in my more

 

93
                                                                                                  Page 51

tidy and someZhat more  fashionable garments, till,  one bitter cold
day, one Zho had slipped into  the Zater came to my house to Zarm
him, and I saZ  him strip off  three pairs of pants and tZo  pairs of
stockings ere he got doZn to  the skin, though they Zere  dirty  and
ragged enough, it is true, and that he could afford  to refuse the
extra garments Zhich  I offered  him, he had so many intra  ones.
This ducking  Zas the very thing  he needed. Then I began to pity
myself, and I saZ  that it Zould  be a greater charity to  bestoZ on
me a flannel shirt than a Zhole  slop-shop on him.  There are a
thousand hacking at the branches of evil to one Zho  is striking  at
the root, and it may be that he Zho  bestoZs the largest amount of
time and money on the needy is doing the most by  his mode of life
to produce that misery Zhich  he strives in  vain to relieve.  It is the
pious slave-breeder devoting the proceeds of every tenth slave to
buy a Sunday's liberty for  the rest. Some shoZ their kindness to  the
poor by employing  them in their  kitchens. Would  they not be
kinder if  they employed themselves there? You boast of spending a
tenth part of your  income in charity;  may be you should spend the
nine tenths so, and done Zith it.  Society recovers only  a tenth part
of the property then. Is this  oZing  to the generosity of  him in
Zhose possession it is found, or to  the remissness of the officers of
justice?

Philanthropy is  almost the only virtue  Zhich  is sufficiently
appreciated by mankind. Nay, it  is greatly overrated;  and it is our
selfishness Zhich overrates it.  A robust poor  man, one sunny day
here in Concord, praised a felloZ-toZnsman   to me, because, as he
said, he Zas kind to the poor;  meaning himself.  The kind uncles
and aunts of the race are more esteemed than its true spiritual
fathers and mothers. I once heard a reverend lecturer on England, a

94
man of learning and intelligence,  after enumerating her scientific,
literary, and political  Zorthies,  Shakspeare, Bacon, CromZell,
Milton,  NeZton,  and others, speak ne[t of  her Christian heroes,
Zhom, as if  his profession reTuired it  of him,  he elevated to a place
far above all the rest, as the greatest of the great. They Zere Penn,
HoZard,  and Mrs. Fry. Every  one must feel the falsehood and cant
of this. The last Zere  not England's best men and Zomen; only,
perhaps, her best philanthropists.

I Zould  not subtract any thing  from the praise that is due to
philanthropy, but  merely demand justice for  all Zho  by their  lives
and Zorks are a blessing to mankind.  I do not value chiefly  a man's
uprightness and benevolence, Zhich are, as it Zere,  his stem and
leaves. Those plants of Zhose greenness Zithered Ze  make herb
tea for the sick, serve but a humble use, and are most employed by
Tuacks. I Zant the floZer   and fruit of  a man; that some fragrance
be Zafted over from  him  to me, and some ripeness flavor our
intercourse. His goodness must not be a partial and transitory  act,
but a constant superfluity, Zhich  costs him  nothing and of Zhich   he
is unconscious. This is a charity  that hides a multitude of  sins. The
philanthropist  too often surrounds mankind  Zith  the remembrance
of his oZn  cast-off griefs  as an atmosphere, and calls it sympathy.
We should impart our courage, and not our despair, our

 

95
                                                                                                  Page 52

health and ease, and not our disease, and take care that this does
not spread by contagion. From Zhat  southern plains comes up the
voice of Zailing?   Under Zhat  latitudes reside the heathen to Zhom
Ze Zould  send light? Who  is that intemperate and brutal man
Zhom Ze  Zould  redeem? If any thing  ail a man, so that he does not
perform his functions,  if  he have a pain in his boZels even,for  that
is the seat of sympathy,he forthZith  sets about reformingthe  Zorld.
Being a microcosm himself,  he discovers, and it is a true discovery,
and he is the man to make it,that the Zorld  has been eating green
apples; to his eyes, in fact, the globe itself  is a great green apple,
Zhich  there is danger aZful  to think  of that the children  of men
Zill  nibble  before it is ripe;  and straightZay  his drastic
philanthropy  seeks out the EsTuimau[ and the Patagonian, and
embraces the populous Indian and Chinese villages; and thus, by a
feZ years of  philanthropic  activity,  the poZers in the mean Zhile
using him for  their oZn  ends, no doubt, he cures himself of  his
dyspepsia, the globe acTuires a faint blush on one or both of its
cheeks, as if it Zere beginning  to be ripe, and life  loses its crudity
and is once more sZeet and Zholesome to live.  I never dreamed of
any enormity greater than I  have committed. I never kneZ,  and
never shall knoZ,  a Zorse man than myself.

I believe that Zhat  so saddens the reformer is not his sympathy
Zith  his felloZs  in  distress, but, though he be the holiest son of
God, is his private ail.  Let this be righted,  let the spring come to
him, the morning  rise over this couch, and he Zill   forsake his
generous companions Zithout  apology. My  e[cuse for  not lecturing
against the use of tobacco is, that I never cheZed it;  that is a
penalty Zhich  reformed tobacco-cheZers  have to pay; though there
are things enough I have cheZed, Zhich  I  could lecture against. If

96
you should ever be betrayed into any of these philanthropies, do
not let your left hand knoZ Zhat your right hand does, for it is not
Zorth knoZing. Rescue the droZning and tie your shoe-strings.
Take your time, and set about some free labor.

Our manners have been corrupted by communication Zith the
saints. Our hymn-books resound Zith a melodious cursing of God
and enduring him forever. One Zould say that even the prophets
and redeemers had rather consoled the fears than confirmed the
hopes of man. There is noZhere recorded a simple and irrepressible
satisfaction Zith the gift of life, any memorable praise of God. All
health and success does me good, hoZever far off and ZithdraZn it
may appear; all disease and failure helps to make me sad and does
me evil, hoZever much sympathy it may have Zith me or I Zith it.
If, then, Ze Zould indeed restore mankind by truly Indian, botanic,
magnetic, or natural means, let us first be as simple and Zell as
Nature ourselves, dispel the clouds Zhich hang over our oZn
broZs, and take up a little life into our pores. Do not stay to be an
overseer of the poor, but endeavor to become one of the Zorthies of
the Zorld.

I read in the Gulistan, or FloZer Garden, of Sheik Sadi of Shira],
that "They asked a Zise man, saying; Of the many celebrated trees
Zhich the

 

97
                                                                                                  Page 53

Most High  God has created lofty and umbrageous, they call  none
a]ad, or free, e[cepting  the cypress, Zhich  bears no fruit;  Zhat
mystery is there in this? He replied;  Each has its appropriate
produce, and appointed season, during the continuance of Zhich  it
is fresh and blooming, and during  their absence dry and Zithered;
to neither of Zhich  states is the cypress e[posed, being alZays
flourishing;  and of this nature are the a]ads, or religious
independents.Fi[  not thy heart on that Zhich  is transitory;  for  the
Dijlah,  or Tigris,  Zill  continue  to floZ  through  Bagdad after the
race of caliphs is e[tinct:   if thy  hand has plenty, be liberal as the
date tree; but if it  affords nothing  to give aZay, be an a]ad, or  free
man, like the cypress."

 

98
                                                                                                  Page 54


Complemental        Verses

The Pretensions of Poverty 
 
"Thou dost presume too much, poor  needy Zretch, 
To claim a station in the firmament, 
Because thy humble cottage, or thy tub, 
Nurses some la]y or pedantic  virtue 
In the cheap sunshine or by shady springs, 
With roots and pot-herbs; Zhere  thy right  hand, 
Tearing those humane passions from the mind, 
Upon Zhose stocks fair  blooming  virtues flourish, 
Degradeth nature, and benumbeth sense, 
And, Gorgon-like,  turns active  men to stone. 
We not reTuire the dull society 
Of your necessitated temperance, 
Or that unnatural stupidity 
That knoZs  nor joy nor  sorroZ; nor  your forc'd 
Falsely e[alted  passive fortitude 
Above the active. This  loZ  abject brood, 
That fi[  their  seats in mediocrity, 
Become your servile minds;  but Ze  advance 
Such virtues only as admit e[cess, 
Brave, bounteous acts, regal magnificence, 
All-seeing  prudence, magnanimity 
That knoZs  no bound, and that heroic virtue 
For Zhich  antiTuity  hath left no name, 
But patterns only, such as Hercules, 

99
Achilles, Theseus. Back to thy Ioath'd cell; 
And Zhen thou seest the neZ enlightened sphere, 
Study to knoZ but Zhat those Zorthies Zere." 
                                                                                T.CAREW

 

100
                                                                                            Page 55


Where   I  Lived,    and  What   I  Lived   For

At a certain season of our life Ze are accustomed to consider every
spot as the possible site of a house. I have thus surveyed the
country on every side Zithin a do]en miles of Zhere I live. In
imagination I have bought all the farms in succession, for all Zere
to be bought, and I kneZ their price. I Zalked over each farmer's
premises, tasted his Zild apples, discoursed on husbandry Zith
him, took his farm at his price, at any price, mortgaging it to him in
my mind; even put a higher price on it,took every thing but a deed
of it,took his Zord for his deed, for I dearly love to talk,cultivated
it, and him too to some e[tent, I trust, and ZithdreZ Zhen I had
enjoyed it long enough, leaving him to carry it on. This e[perience
entitled me to be regarded as a sort of real-estate broker by my
friends. Wherever I sat, there I might live, and the landscape
radiated from me accordingly. What is a house but a sedes, a seat?
better if a country seat. I discovered many a site for a house not
likely to be soon improved, Zhich some might have thought too far
from the village, but to my eyes the village Zas too far from it.
Well, there I might live, I said; and there I did live, for an hour, a
summer and a Zinter life; saZ hoZ I could let the years run off,
buffet the Zinter through, and see the spring come in. The future
inhabitants of this region, Zherever they may place their houses,
may be sure that they have been anticipated. An afternoon sufficed
to lay out the land into orchard, Zoodlot, and pasture, and to decide
Zhat fine oaks or pines should be left to stand before the door, and
Zhence each blasted tree could be seen to the best advantage; and

101
then I let it lie, falloZ perchance, for a man is rich in proportion to
the number of things Zhich he can afford to let alone.

My imagination carried me so far that I even had the refusal of
several farms,the refusal Zas all I Zanted,but I never got my
fingers burned by actual possession. The nearest that I came to
actual possession Zas Zhen I bought the HolloZell place, and had
begun to sort my seeds, and collected materials Zith Zhich to make
a ZheelbarroZ to carry it on or off Zith; but before the oZner gave
me a deed of it, his Zifevery man has such a Zifechanged her mind
and Zished to keep it, and he offered me ten dollars to release him.
NoZ, to speak the truth, I had but ten cents in the Zorld, and it
surpassed my arithmetic to tell, if I Zas that man Zho had ten
cents, or Zho had a farm, or ten dollars, or all together. HoZever, I
let him keep the ten dollars and the farm too, for I had carried it far
enough; or rather, to be generous, I sold him the farm for just Zhat
I gave for it, and, as he Zas not a rich man, made him a present of
ten dollars, and still had my ten cents, and

 

102
                                                                                                  Page 56

seeds, and materials for a ZheelbarroZ  left. I  found thus that I had
been a rich man Zithout  any damage to my poverty. But  I retained
the landscape, and I have since annually carried off Zhat  it  yielded
Zithout  a ZheelbarroZ.  With  respect to landscapes,

    ''I am monarch of all I survey, 
      My right there is none to dispute."

I have freTuently seen a poet ZithdraZ,  having  enjoyed the most
valuable part of a farm,  Zhile  the crusty farmer supposed that he
had got a feZ Zild   apples only. Why, the oZner  does not knoZ  it
for many years Zhen  a poet has put his farm in rhyme, the most
admirable kind of  invisible  fence, has fairly  impounded it,  milked
it, skimmed it,  and got all the cream, and left  the farmer only  the
skimmed milk.

The real attractions of the HolloZell   farm,  to me, Zere:  its
complete retirement, being about tZo  miles  from the village,  half  a
mile from  the nearest neighbor, and separated from the highZay by
a broad field; its bounding  on the river,  Zhich  the oZner said
protected it by its fogs  from frosts  in the spring, though that  Zas
nothing to me; the gray color  and ruinous state of the house and
barn, and the dilapidated fences, Zhich  put such an interval
betZeen me and the last occupant; the holloZ  and lichen-covered
apple trees, gnaZed by rabbits, shoZing  Zhat  kind of  neighbors I
should have; but above all, the recollection  I had of  it from  my
earliest voyages up the river, Zhen  the house Zas concealed behind
a dense grove of red maples, through Zhich  I heard the house-dog
bark. I Zas in  haste to buy it, before the proprietor  finished  getting
out some rocks, cutting doZn  the holloZ  apple trees, and grubbing
up some young birches Zhich  had sprung up in the pasture, or, in

103
short, had made any more of his improvements. To enjoy these
advantages I Zas ready to carry it on; like Atlas, to take the Zorld
on my shoulders,I never heard Zhat compensation he received for
that,and do all those things Zhich had no other motive or e[cuse
but that I might pay for it and be unmolested in my possession of it;
for I kneZ all the Zhile that it Zould  yield the most abundant crop
of the kind I Zanted if I could only afford to let it alone. But it
turned out as I have said.

All that I could say, then, Zith respect to farming on a large scale,
(I have alZays cultivated a garden,) Zas, that I had had my seeds
ready. Many think that seeds improve Zith age. I have no doubt
that time discriminates betZeen the good and the bad; and Zhen at
last I shall plant, I shall be less likely to be disappointed. But I
Zould say to my felloZs, once for all, As long as possible live free
and uncommitted. It makes but little difference Zhether you are
committed to a farm or the county jail.

Old Cato, Zhose "De Re Rusticâ" is my "Cultivator," says, and the
only translation I have seen makes sheer nonsense of the passage,
"When you think of getting a farm, turn it thus in your mind, not to
buy greedily; nor spare your pains to look at it, and do not think it
enough to go round it once. The oftener you go there the more it
Zill  please you, if it is good." I think I shall not buy greedily, but
go round and round it as

 

104
                                                                                            Page 57

long as I live, and be buried in it first, that it may please me the
more at last.
 

The present Zas my ne[t e[periment of this kind, Zhich I purpose
to describe more at length; for convenience, putting the e[perience
of tZo years into one. As I have said, I do not propose to Zrite an
ode to dejection, but to brag as lustily as chanticleer in the
morning, standing on his roost, if only to Zake my neighbors up.

When first I took up my abode in the Zoods, that is, began to spend
my nights as Zell as days there, Zhich, by accident, Zas on
Independence day, or the fourth of July, 1845, my house Zas not
finished for Zinter, but Zas merely a defence against the rain,
Zithout plastering or chimney, the Zalls being of rough Zeather-
stained boards, Zith Zide chinks, Zhich made it cool at night. The
upright Zhite heZn studs and freshly planed door and ZindoZ
casings gave it a clean and airy look, especially in the morning,
Zhen its timbers Zere saturated Zith deZ, so that I fancied that by
noon some sZeet gum Zould e[ude from them. To my imagination
it retained throughout the day more or less of this auroral character,
reminding me of a certain house on a mountain Zhich I had visited
the year before. This Zas an airy and unplastered cabin, fit to
entertain a travelling god, and Zhere a goddess might trail her
garments. The Zinds Zhich passed over my dZelling Zere such as
sZeep over the ridges of mountains, bearing the broken strains, or
celestial parts only, of terrestrial music. The morning Zind forever
bloZs, the poem of creation is uninterrupted; but feZ are the ears
that hear it. Olympus is but the outside of the earth every Zhere.

The only house I had been the oZner of before, if I e[cept a boat,

105
Zas a tent, Zhich I used occasionally Zhen making e[cursions in
the summer, and this is still rolled up in my garret; but the boat,
after passing from hand to hand, has gone doZn the stream of time.
With this more substantial shelter about me, I had made some
progress toZard settling in the Zorld. This frame, so slightly clad,
Zas a sort of crystalli]ation around me, and reacted on the builder.
It Zas suggestive someZhat as a picture in outlines. I did not need
to go out doors to take the air, for the atmosphere Zithin had lost
none of its freshness. It Zas not so much Zithin doors as behind a
door Zhere I sat, even in the rainiest Zeather. The Harivansa says,
"An abode Zithout birds is like a meat Zithout seasoning." Such
Zas not my abode, for I found myself suddenly neighbor to the
birds; not by having imprisoned one, but having caged myself near
them. I Zas not only nearer to some of those Zhich commonly
freTuent the garden and the orchard, but to those Zilder and more
thrilling songsters of the forest Zhich never, or rarely, serenade a
villager,the Zoodthrush, the veery, the scarlet tanager, the
fieldsparroZ, the ZhippoorZill, and many others.

I Zas seated by the shore of a small pond, about a mile and a half
south of the village of Concord and someZhat higher than it, in the
midst of an e[tensive Zood betZeen that toZn and Lincoln, and
about

 

106
                                                                                                  Page 58

tZo miles  south of that our only  field  knoZn  to fame, Concord
Battle Ground; but  I Zas so loZ  in  the Zoods that the opposite
shore, half a mile off,  like  the rest, covered Zith  Zood, Zas  my
most distant hori]on.  For the first  Zeek,  Zhenever I  looked out on
the pond it impressed me like a tarn high  up on the side of a
mountain, its bottom  far above the surface of other lakes, and, as
the sun arose, I saZ it throZing  off  its nightly  clothing  of  mist, and
here and there, by degrees, its soft ripples or its smooth reflecting
surface Zas revealed, Zhile  the mists, like  ghosts, Zere stealthily
ZithdraZing   in every direction  into  the Zoods, as at the breaking
up of some nocturnal conventicle.  The very deZ  seemed to hang
upon the trees later into the day than usual, as on the sides of
mountains.

This small lake Zas  of most value as a neighbor in the intervals  of
a gentle rain storm in August,  Zhen, both  air and Zater being
perfectly still,  but the sky  overcast, mid-afternoon had all  the
serenity of evening, and the Zood-thrush  sang around, and Zas
heard from shore to shore. A lake like  this is never smoother than
at such a time; and the clear portion of  the air above it being
shalloZ and darkened by clouds,  the Zater, full  of light  and
reflections, becomes a loZer  heaven itself so much the more
important. From  a hill top  near by, Zhere the Zood  had been
recently cut off,  there Zas a pleasing vista southZard  across the
pond, through a Zide  indentation in  the hills Zhich  form  the shore
there, Zhere their opposite sides sloping  toZard  each other
suggested a stream floZing out in  that direction  through a Zooded
valley, but stream there Zas none. That Zay  I looked  betZeen and
over the near green hills to some distant and higher ones in the
hori]on,  tinged Zith  blue.  Indeed, by standing on tiptoe I  could

107
catch a glimpse of some of the peaks of the still bluer and more
distant mountain ranges in the north-Zest, those true-blue coins
from heaven's oZn mint, and also of some portion of the village.
But in other directions, even from this point, I could not see over or
beyond the Zoods Zhich surrounded me. It is Zell to have some
Zater in your neighborhood, to give buoyancy to and float the
earth. One value even of the smallest Zell is, that Zhen you look
into it you see that earth is not continent but insular. This is as
important as that it keeps butter cool. When I looked across the
pond from this peak toZard the Sudbury meadoZs, Zhich in time
of flood I distinguished elevated perhaps by a mirage in their
seething valley, like a coin in a basin, all the earth beyond the pond
appeared like a thin crust insulated and floated even by this small
sheet of intervening Zater, and I Zas reminded that this on Zhich I
dZelt Zas but dry land.

Though the vieZ from my door Zas still more contracted, I did not
feel croZded or confined in the least. There Zas pasture enough for
my imagination. The loZ shrub-oak plateau to Zhich the opposite
shore arose, stretched aZay toZard the prairies of the West and the
steppes of Tartary, affording ample room for all the roving families
of men. "There are none happy in the Zorld but beings Zho enjoy
freely a vast hori]on,"said Damodara, Zhen his herds reTuired neZ
and larger pastures.

 

108
                                                                                                  Page 59

Both place and time Zere  changed, and I dZelt  nearer to those
parts of the universe and to those eras in history Zhich  had most
attracted me. Where I lived  Zas as far off  as many a region vieZed
nightly  by astronomers. We are Zont to imagine  rare and delectable
places in some remote and more celestial corner of the system,
behind the constellation of  Cassiopeia's Chair, far from  noise and
disturbance. I discovered that my  house actually had its site in such
a ZithdraZn,  but forever  neZ and unprofaned,  part of the universe.
If it  Zere Zorth  the Zhile  to settle in  those parts near to the
Pleiades or the Hyades, to Aldebaran or Altair,  then I  Zas really
there, or at an eTual remoteness from the life Zhich  I had left
behind, dZindled  and tZinkling   Zith  as fine a ray to my  nearest
neighbor, and to be seen only in moonless nights by him.  Such Zas
that part of creation Zhere  I had sTuatted;

    "There Zas a shepherd that did live, 
         And held his thoughts as high 
      As Zere the mounts Zhereon his flocks 
         Did hourly feed him by."

What should Ze  think of  the shepherd's life if  his flocks alZays
Zandered to higher pastures than his thoughts?

Every morning  Zas a cheerful invitation   to make my life  of eTual
simplicity,  and I may say innocence, Zith  Nature herself.  I have
been as sincere a Zorshipper of Aurora as the Greeks. I got up
early and bathed in the pond; that Zas a religious  e[ercise,  and one
of the best things Zhich  I did.  They say that characters Zere
engraven on the bathing tub of king  Tching-thang to  this effect:
"ReneZ thyself  completely  each day; do it again, and again, and
forever again." I  can understand that. Morning  brings back the

109
heroic ages. I Zas as much affected by the faint hum of a mosTuito
making its invisible and unimaginable tour through my apartment
at earliest daZn, Zhen I Zas sitting Zith door and ZindoZs open,
as I could be by any trumpet that ever sang of fame. It Zas Homer's
reTuiem; itself an Iliad and Odyssey in the air, singing its oZn
Zrath and Zanderings. There Zas something cosmical about it; a
standing advertisement, till forbidden, of the everlasting vigor and
fertility of  the Zorld. The morning, Zhich is the most memorable
season of the day, is the aZakening hour. Then there is least
somnolence in us; and for an hour, at least, some part of us aZakes
Zhich slumbers all the rest of the day and night. Little is to be
e[pected of that day, if it can be called a day, to Zhich Ze are not
aZakened by our Genius, but by the mechanical nudgings of some
servitor, are not aZakened by our oZn neZlyacTuired force and
aspirations from Zithin, accompanied by the undulations of
celestial music, instead of factory bells, and a fragrance filling the
airto a higher life than Ze fell asleep from; and thus the darkness
bear its fruit, and prove itself to be good, no less than the light.
That man Zho does not believe that each day contains an earlier,
more sacred, and auroral hour than he has yet profaned, has
despaired of life, and is pursuing a descending and darkening Zay.
After a partial cessa-

 

110
                                                                                                  Page 60

tion of his  sensuous life, the soul of man, or its organs rather, are
reinvigorated each day, and his Genius tries again Zhat  noble life  it
can make. All memorable  events, I should say, transpire in morning
time and in a morning  atmosphere. The Vedas say, "All
intelligences aZake Zith   the morning."  Poetry and art, and the
fairest and most memorable of the actions of  men, date from such
an hour. All  poets and heroes, like Memnon, are the children of
Aurora, and emit their  music at sunrise. To him  Zhose elastic and
vigorous thought keeps pace Zith  the sun, the day is a perpetual
morning. It  matters not Zhat the clocks  say or the attitudes and
labors of men. Morning  is Zhen  I am aZake and there is a daZn  in
me. Moral reform  is the effort  to throZ  off  sleep. Why is it  that
men give so poor an account of their  day if they have not been
slumbering? They are not such poor calculators.  If they had not
been overcome Zith  droZsiness they Zould  have performed
something. The millions  are aZake enough for  physical labor;  but
only one in a million   is aZake enough for  effective intellectual
e[ertion,  only one in  a hundred millions  to a poetic or divine  life.
To be aZake is to be alive. I  have never yet met a man Zho Zas
Tuite aZake. HoZ  could I  have looked him  in the face?

We must learn to reaZaken and keep ourselves aZake, not by
mechanical aids, but by an infinite  e[pectation  of  the daZn, Zhich
does not forsake us in our soundest sleep. I knoZ of  no more
encouraging fact than the unTuestionable ability  of man to elevate
his life by  a conscious endeavor. It is something to be able to paint
a particular picture, or  to carve a statue, and so to make a feZ
objects beautiful; but  it is far  more glorious to carve and paint  the
very atmosphere and medium through Zhich  Ze  look,  Zhich
morally Ze  can do. To affect the Tuality  of the day, that is the

111
highest of arts. Every man is tasked to make his life, even in its
details, Zorthy of the contemplation of his most elevated and
critical hour. If Ze refused, or rather used up, such paltry
information as Ze get, the oracles Zould distinctly inform us hoZ
this might be done.

I Zent to the Zoods because I Zished to live deliberately, to front
only the essential facts of life, and see if I could not learn Zhat it
had to teach, and not, Zhen I came to die, discover that I had not
lived. I did not Zish to live Zhat Zas not life, living  is so dear; nor
did I Zish to practise resignation, unless it Zas Tuite necessary. I
Zanted to live deep and suck out all the marroZ of life, to live so
sturdily and Spartan-like as to put to rout all that Zas not life, to cut
a broad sZath and shave close, to drive life into a corner, and
reduce it to its loZest terms, and, if it proved to be mean, Zhy then
to get the Zhole and genuine meanness of it, and publish its
meanness to the Zorld; or if it Zere sublime, to knoZ it by
e[perience, and be able to give a true account of it in my ne[t
e[cursion. For most men, it appears to me, are in a strange
uncertainty about it, Zhether it is of the devil or of God, and have
somewhat hastily concluded that it is the chief end of man here to
"glorify God and enjoy him forever."

 

112
                                                                                                  Page 61

Still Ze  live  meanly, like ants; though  the fable tells us that Ze
Zere long ago changed into men;  like pygmies Ze  fight  Zith
cranes; it is error upon error, and clout  upon clout, and our best
virtue has for its  occasion a superfluous and evitable Zretchedness.
Our life  is frittered  aZay by detail.  An honest man has hardly need
to count more than his ten fingers, or  in e[treme  cases he may add
his ten toes, and lump the rest. Simplicity,  simplicity,  simplicity!   I
say, let your affairs be as tZo  or three, and not a hundred or a
thousand; instead of a million  count half  a do]en, and keep your
accounts on your thumb nail.  In the midst of  this chopping sea of
civili]ed   life, such are the clouds and storms and Tuicksands and
thousand-and-one items to be alloZed for,  that a man has to live, if
he Zould not  founder and go to the bottom  and not make his port at
all, by dead reckoning, and he must be a great calculator indeed
Zho succeeds. Simplify,  simplify.  Instead of three meals a day, if it
be necessary eat but one; instead of a hundred dishes, five; and
reduce other things in proportion.  Our life  is like  a German
Confederacy, made up of petty states, Zith  its boundary forever
fluctuating,  so that even a German cannot tell you hoZ  it is
bounded at any moment. The nation itself,  Zith  all its  so called
internal improvements,  Zhich,  by the Zay,  are all e[ternal  and
superficial, is just  such an unZieldy  and overgroZn  establishment,
cluttered Zith  furniture  and tripped up by  its oZn  traps, ruined by
lu[ury  and heedless e[pense, by Zant  of calculation  and a Zorthy
aim, as the million  households in the land; and the only  cure for it
as for them is in a rigid  economy, a stern and more than Spartan
simplicity  of life  and elevation  of purpose. It lives  too fast. Men
think that it  is essential that the Nation have commerce, and e[port
ice, and talk through a telegraph, and ride thirty  miles  an hour,

113
Zithout a doubt, Zhether they do or not; but Zhether Ze should
live like baboons or like men, is a little uncertain. If Ze do not get
out sleepers, and forge rails, and devote days and nights to the
Zork, but go to tinkering upon our lives to improve them, Zho Zill
build railroads? And if railroads are not built, hoZ shall Ze get to
heaven in season? But if Ze stay at home and mind our business,
Zho Zill  Zant railroads? We do not ride on the railroad; it rides
upon us. Did you ever think Zhat those sleepers are that underlie
the railroad? Each one is a man, an Irishman, or a Yankee man. The
rails are laid on them, and they are covered Zith sand, and the cars
run smoothly over them. They are sound sleepers, I assure you.
And every feZ years a neZ lot is laid doZn and run over; so that, if
some have the pleasure of riding on a rail, others have the
misfortune to be ridden upon. And Zhen they run over a man that
is Zalking in his sleep, a supernumerary sleeper in the Zrong
position, and Zake him up, they suddenly stop the cars, and make a
hue and cry about it, as if this Zere an e[ception. I am glad to
knoZ that it takes a gang of men for every five miles to keep the
sleepers doZn and level in their beds as it is, for this is a sign that
they may sometime get up again.

Why should Ze live Zith such hurry and Zaste of life? We are
determined to be starved before Ze are hungry. Men say that a
stitch in time

 

114
                                                                                                  Page 62

saves nine, and so they take a thousand stitches to-day to save nine
tomorroZ.  As for work,  Ze  haven't any of any conseTuence. We
have the Saint Vitus' dance, and cannot possibly keep our heads
still. If  I should  only give  a feZ pulls  at the parish bell-rope, as for
a fire, that is, Zithout   setting the bell, there is hardly  a man on his
farm in the outskirts  of Concord,  notZithstanding  that press of
engagements Zhich Zas his e[cuse  so many times this morning,
nor a boy, nor a Zoman, I  might almost say, but Zould  forsake  all
and folloZ  that sound, not mainly  to save property from  the flames,
but, if Ze  Zill   confess the truth, much more to see it burn, since
burn it must, and Ze,  be it knoZn,  did not  set it on fire,or  to see it
put out, and have a hand in it, if  that is done as handsomely; yes,
even if it Zere  the parish church itself.  Hardly  a man takes a half
hour's nap after dinner, but Zhen  he Zakes he holds up his head
and asks, "What's the neZs?" as if the rest of mankind  had stood
his sentinels. Some give directions to  be Zaked every half  hour,
doubtless for no other purpose; and then, to pay for  it, they tell
Zhat they have dreamed. After  a night's sleep the neZs is as
indispensable as the breakfast. "Pray tell me any thing  neZ that has
happened to a man any Zhere on this globe,"and he reads it over
his coffee and rolls, that a man has had his eyes gouged out this
morning on the Wachito  River; never dreaming  the Zhile  that he
lives in the dark unfathomed  mammoth cave of this  Zorld,  and has
but the rudiment of  an eye himself.

For my part, I  could easily do Zithout   the post-office.  I think  that
there are very feZ important  communications  made through it.  To
speak critically, I  never received more than one or tZo  letters in my
lifeI  Zrote this  some years agothat Zere Zorth  the postage. The
penny-post is, commonly,  an institution  through Zhich  you

115
seriously offer a man that penny for his thoughts Zhich is so often
safely offered in jest. And I am sure that I never read any
memorable neZs in a neZspaper. If Ze read of one man robbed, or
murdered, or killed by accident, or one house burned, or one vessel
Zrecked, or one steamboat bloZn up, or one coZ run over on the
Western Railroad, or one mad dog killed, or one lot of grasshoppers
in the Zinter,Ze never need read of another. One is enough. If you
are acTuainted Zith the principle, Zhat do you care for a myriad
instances and applications? To a philosopher all news, as it is
called, is gossip, and they Zho edit and read it are old Zomen over
their tea. Yet not a feZ are greedy after this gossip. There Zas such
a rush, as I hear, the other day at one of the ofrices to learn the
foreign neZs by the last arrival, that several large sTuares of plate
glass belonging to the establishment Zere broken by the
pressure,neZs Zhich I seriously think a ready Zit might Zrite a
tZelvemonth or tZelve years beforehand Zith sufficient accuracy.
As for Spain, for instance, if you knoZ hoZ to throZ in Don Carlos
and the Infanta, and Don Pedro and Seville and Granada, from time
to time in the right proportions,they may have changed the names a
little since I saZ the papers,and serve up a bull-fight Zhen other
entertainments fail, it Zill be true to the letter, and give us as good
an idea of the e[act

 

116
                                                                                                  Page 63

state or ruin of things  in Spain as the most succinct and lucid
reports under this head in the neZspapers: and as for England,
almost the last significant  scrap of neZs from  that Tuarter Zas the
revolution  of 1649; and if  you have learned the history of  her crops
for an average year, you never need attend to that thing again,
unless your speculations are of a merely pecuniary character. If  one
may judge Zho  rarely looks into  the neZspapers, nothing neZ  does
ever happen in foreign parts, a French revolution  not e[cepted.

What neZs!  hoZ much  more important to  knoZ  Zhat that is Zhich
Zas never old!  "Kieou-he-yu  (great dignitary  of the state of Wei)
sent a man to Khoung-tseu to knoZ  his neZs. Khoung-tseu  caused
the messenger to be seated near him, and Tuestioned him in these
terms: What is your  master doing? The messenger ansZered Zith
respect: My master desires to diminish  the number of his faults,  but
he cannot come to the end of them. The messenger being gone, the
philosopher remarked: What  a Zorthy  messenger! What a Zorthy
messenger!" The preacher, instead of ve[ing  the ears of droZsy
farmers on their day of  rest at the end of the Zeek,for  Sunday is the
fit conclusion  of an illspent  Zeek, and not the fresh and brave
beginning of a neZ  one,Zith  this one other draggle-tail  of a
sermon, should shout Zith  thundering voice,"Pause!  Avast! Why  so
seeming fast, but deadly sloZ?"

Shams and delusions are esteemed for soundest truths, Zhile reality
is fabulous. If  men Zould  steadily observe realities only,  and not
alloZ  themselves to be deluded, life, to compare it  Zith  such things
as Ze knoZ, Zould   be like a fairy  tale and the Arabian Nights'
Entertainments. If  Ze respected only Zhat  is inevitable  and has a
right to be, music and poetry  Zould  resound along the streets.

117
When Ze are unhurried and Zise, Ze perceive that only great and
Zorthy things have any permanent and absolute e[istence,that petty
fears and petty pleasures are but the shadoZ of the reality. This is
alZays e[hilarating and sublime. By closing the eyes and
slumbering, and consenting to be deceived by shoZs, men establish
and confirm their daily life of routine and habit every Zhere, Zhich
still is built on purely illusory foundations. Children, Zho play life,
discern its true laZ and relations more clearly than men, Zho fail to
live it Zorthily,  but Zho think that they are Ziser by e[perience,
that is, by failure. I have read in a Hindoo book, that "there Zas a
king's son, Zho, being e[pelled in infancy from his native city, Zas
brought up by a forester, and, groZing up to maturity in that state,
imagined himself to belong to the barbarous race Zith Zhich he
lived. One of his father's ministers having discovered him, revealed
to him Zhat he Zas, and the misconception of his character Zas
removed, and he kneZ himself to be a prince. So soul," continues
the Hindoo philosopher, "from the circumstances in Zhich it is
placed, mistakes its oZn character, until the truth is revealed to it
by some holy teacher, and then it knoZs itself to be Brahme." I
perceive that Ze inhabitants of NeZ England live this mean life
that Ze do because our vision does not penetrate the surface of
things. We think that that is Zhich appears to

 

118
                                                                                                  Page 64

be. If a man should Zalk  through  this toZn  and see only the reality,
Zhere, think  you, Zould  the "Mill-dam"    go to? If he should give  us
an account of the realities he beheld there, Ze should not  recogni]e
the place in his description. Look  at a meeting-house, or a court-
house, or a jail, or a shop, or a dZelling-house,  and say Zhat that
thing really  is before a true ga]e, and they Zould  all  go to pieces in
your account of them. Men  esteem truth remote, in the outskirts  of
the system, behind the farthest star, before Adam and after the last
man. In eternity there is indeed something  true and sublime. But  all
these times and places and occasions are noZ and here. God
himself culminates  in the present moment, and Zill  never be more
divine in  the lapse of all the ages. And Ze  are enabled to apprehend
at all Zhat  is sublime and noble only  by the perpetual instilling   and
drenching of the reality  that surrounds us. The universe constantly
and obediently ansZers to our conceptions;  Zhether Ze  travel fast
or sloZ, the track  is laid for  us. Let us spend our lives in conceiving
then. The poet or the artist never yet had so fair and noble a design
but some of his posterity  at least could accomplish it.

Let us spend one day as deliberately as Nature, and not be throZn
off the track by  every nutshell and mosTuito's Zing  that falls  on the
rails. Let us rise early and fast, or  break fast, gently and Zithout
perturbation; let company  come and let company go, let the bells
ring and the children cry,determined  to make a day of it.  Why
should Ze knock  under and go Zith  the stream? Let us not be upset
and overZhelmed in  that terrible rapid  and Zhirlpool   called a
dinner, situated in the meridian  shalloZs. Weather this danger and
you are safe, for the rest of the Zay  is doZn  hill.  With unrela[ed
nerves, Zith morning  vigor,  sail by it,  looking  another Zay, tied  to
the mast like Ulysses. If  the engine Zhistles,  let it Zhistle  till  it  is

119
hoarse for its pains. If the bell rings, Zhy should Ze run? We Zill
consider Zhat kind of music they are like. Let us settle ourselves,
and Zork and Zedge our feet doZnZard through the mud and slush
of opinion, and prejudice, and tradition, and delusion, and
appearance, that alluvion Zhich covers the globe, through Paris and
London, through NeZ York and Boston and Concord, through
church and state, through poetry and philosophy and religion, till
Ze come to a hard bottom and rocks in place, Zhich Ze can call
reality, and say, This is, and no mistake; and then begin, having a
point d'appui, beloZ freshet and frost and fire, a place Zhere you
might found a Zall or a state, or set a lamp-post safely, or perhaps a
gauge, not a Nilometer, but a Realometer, that future ages might
knoZ hoZ deep a freshet of shams and appearances had gathered
from time to time. If you stand right fronting and face to face to a
fact, you Zill see the sun glimmer on both its surfaces, as if it Zere
a cimeter, and feel its sZeet edge dividing you through the heart
and marroZ, and so you Zill happily conclude your mortal career.
Be it life or death, Ze crave only reality. If Ze are really dying, let
us hear the rattle in our throats and feel cold in the e[tremities; if
Ze are alive, let us go about our business.

Time is but the stream I go a-fishing in. I drink at it; but Zhile I
drink I

 

120
                                                                                            Page 65

see the sandy bottom and detect hoZ shalloZ it is. Its thin current
slides aZay, but eternity remains. I Zould drink deeper; fish in the
sky, Zhose bottom is pebbly Zith stars. I cannot count one. I knoZ
not the first letter of the alphabet. I have alZays been regretting
that I Zas not as Zise as the day I Zas born. The intellect is a
cleaver; it discerns and rifts its Zay into the secret of things. I do
not Zish to be any more busy Zith my hands than is necessary. My
head is hands and feet. I feel all my best faculties concentrated in
it. My instinct tells me that my head is an organ for burroZing, as
some creatures use their snout and fore-paZs, and Zith it I Zould
mine and burroZ my Zay through these hills. I think that the
richest vein is someZhere hereabouts; so by the divining rod and
thin rising vapors I judge; and here I Zill begin to mine.


Reading

With a little more deliberation in the choice of their pursuits, all
men Zould perhaps become essentially students and observers, for
certainly their nature and destiny are interesting to all alike. In
accumulating property for ourselves or our posterity, in founding a
family or a state, or acTuiring fame even, Ze are mortal; but in
dealing Zith truth Ze are immortal, and need fear no change nor
accident. The oldest Egyptian or Hindoo philosopher raised a
corner of the veil from the statue of the divinity; and still the
trembling robe remains raised, and I ga]e upon as fresh a glory as
he did, since it Zas I in him that Zas then so bold, and it is he in me
that noZ revieZs the vision. No dust has settled on that robe; no
time has elapsed since that divinity Zas revealed. That time Zhich

121
Ze really improve, or Zhich is improvable, is neither past, present,
nor future.

My residence Zas more favorable, not only to thought, but to
serious reading, than a university; and though I Zas beyond the
range of the ordinary circulating library, I had more than ever come
Zithin the influence of those books Zhich circulate round the
Zorld, Zhose sentences Zere first Zritten on bark, and are noZ
merely copied from time to time on to linen paper. Says the poet
Mir Camar Uddin Mast, "Being seated to run through the region of
the spiritual Zorld; I have had this advantage in books. To be
into[icated by a single glass of Zine; I have e[perienced this
pleasure Zhen I have drunk the liTuor of the esoteric doctrines." I
kept Homer's Iliad on my table through the summer, though I
looked at his page only noZ and then. Incessant labor Zith my
hands, at first, for I had my house to finish and my beans to hoe at
the same time, made more study impossible. Yet I sustained myself
by the prospect of such reading in future. I read one or tZo shalloZ
books of travel in the intervals of my Zork, till that employment
made me ashamed of myself, and I asked Zhere it Zas then that I
lived.

 

122
                                                                                                  Page 66

The student may read Homer or Aeschylus  in the Greek Zithout
danger of dissipation or lu[uriousness,  for  it implies  that he in
some measure emulate their heroes, and consecrate morning hours
to their pages. The heroic books, even if  printed in the character of
our mother tongue, Zill   alZays be in  a language dead to degenerate
times; and Ze must laboriously  seek the meaning of each Zord  and
line, conjecturing  a larger sense than common use permits out of
Zhat Zisdom  and valor  and generosity Ze have. The modern cheap
and fertile press, Zith  all its  translations, has done little to  bring us
nearer to the heroic Zriters  of antiTuity.  They seem as solitary, and
the letter in Zhich  they are printed  as rare and curious, as ever. It is
Zorth  the e[pense of youthful  days and costly hours, if  you learn
only some Zords  of an ancient language, Zhich  are raised out of
the trivialness of the street, to be perpetual suggestions and
provocations. It  is not in vain  that the farmer remembers and
repeats the feZ Latin  Zords Zhich  he has heard. Men sometimes
speak as if the study of the classics Zould  at length make Zay  for
more modern and practical studies; but the adventurous student
Zill  alZays  study classics, in Zhatever  language they may be
Zritten  and hoZever ancient they  may be. For Zhat  are the classics
but the noblest recorded thoughts of man? They are the only
oracles Zhich are not decayed, and there are such ansZers to the
most modern inTuiry  in them as Delphi  and Dodona never gave.
We might as Zell  omit to  study Nature because she is old. To read
Zell,  that is, to read true books in a true spirit,  is a nohie e[ercise,
and one that Zill  task the reader more than any e[ercise Zhich  the
customs of the day esteem. It reTuires a training such as the
athletes underZent, the steady intention almost  of the Zhole  life  to
this object. Books must be read as deliberately and reservedly as

123
they Zere Zritten.  It  is not enough even to be able to speak the
language of that nation by Zhich  they  are Zritten,  for there is a
memorable interval betZeen  the spoken and the Zritten  language,
the language heard and the language read. The one is commonly
transitory, a sound, a tongue, a dialect merely, almost brutish,  and
Ze learn it  unconsciously, like  the brutes, of our mothers. The other
is the maturity and e[perience  of that;  if that is our  mother tongue,
this is our father tongue, a reserved and select e[pression, too
significant  to he heard by the ear, Zhich Ze  must be born again in
order to speak. The croZds of  men Zho merely  spoke the Greek
and Latin tongues in the middle  ages Zere not entitled by  the
accident of birth  to read the Zorks  of genius Zritten  in  those
languages; for these Zere not Zritten  in  that Greek or Latin  Zhich
they kneZ, but in  the select language of literature. They  had not
learned the nobler dialects of Greece and Rome, but the very
materials on Zhich  they Zere  Zritten  Zere Zaste paper to them,
and they pri]ed  instead a cheap contemporary literature. But Zhen
the several nations of Europe had acTuired distinct though  rude
Zritten  languages of their oZn,  sufficient  for  the purposes of their
rising literatures,  then first learning  revived, and scholars Zere
enabled to discern from that remoteness the treasures of antiTuity.
What the Roman and Grecian multitude  could not  hear,

 

124
                                                                                                  Page 67

after the lapse of ages a feZ scholars read, and a feZ scholars only
are still reading it.

HoZever  much Ze may admire  the orator's occasional bursts of
eloTuence, the noblest Zritten Zords  are commonly  as far behind
or above the fleeting spoken language as the firmament Zith   its
stars is behind the clouds. There are the stars, and they Zho can
may read them. The astronomers forever comment on and observe
them. They are not e[halations  like  our dally colloTuies  and
vaporous breath. What is called eloTuence in the forum  is
commonly found  to be rhetoric in  the study. The orator yields  to
the inspiration of  a transient occasion, and speaks to the mob
before him, to those Zho  can hear him;  but the Zriter,  Zhose more
eTuable life is his occasion, and Zho  Zould  be distracted by the
event and the croZd Zhich  inspire  the orator, speaks to the intellect
and heart of mankind, to all  in any age Zho  can understand him.

No Zonder  that Ale[ander  carried the Iliad  Zith  him  on his
e[peditions  in a precious casket. A Zritten   Zord is  the choicest of
relics. It is something  at once more intimate Zith  us and more
universal than any other Zork  of  art. It is the Zork  of  art nearest to
life itself.  It may  be translated into every language, and not only  be
read but actually breathed from all  human lips;not  be represented
on canvas or in marble only, but  be carved out of the breath of life
itself. The symbol  of an ancient man's thought becomes a modern
man's speech. TZo thousand summers have imparted to the
monuments of Grecian literature,  as to her marbles, only a maturer
golden and autumnal tint, for  they have carried their  oZn serene
and celestial atmosphere into all lands to protect  them against the
corrosion of time.  Books are the treasured Zealth of  the Zorld  and

125
the fit inheritance  of generations and nations. Books, the oldest and
the best, stand naturally and rightfully  on  the shelves of every
cottage. They have no cause of their oZn  to plead, but Zhile  they
enlighten and sustain the reader his common sense Zill  not refuse
them. Their authors are a natural and irresistible  aristocracy in
every society, and, more than kings or emperors, e[ert  an influence
on mankind. When the illiterate  and perhaps scornful  trader has
earned by enterprise and industry his coveted leisure and
independence, and is admitted to the circles of Zealth  and fashion,
he turns inevitably  at last to those still higher  but yet inaccessible
circles of intellect  and genius, and is sensible only of  the
imperfection  of his culture  and the vanity and insufficiency  of  all
his riches, and further proves his good sense by the pains Zhich  he
takes to secure for his children that intellectual  culture  Zhose Zant
he so keenly feels; and thus it is that he becomes the founder of a
family.

Those Zho have not learned to read the ancient classics in the
language in Zhich  they Zere Zritten   must have a very imperfect
knoZledge of  the history of  the human race; for it  is remarkable
that no transcript of them  has ever been made into any modern
tongue, unless our civili]ation   itself  may be regarded as such a
transcript. Homer has never yet been printed in  English, nor
Aeschylus, nor Virgil   even,Zorks as refined, as solidly  done, and as
beautiful almost as the morning  itself;

 

126
                                                                                                  Page 68

for later Zriters,  say Zhat  Ze Zill   of their  genius, have rarely, if
ever, eTualled the elaborate beauty and finish and the lifelong  and
heroic literary  labors of the ancients. They only  talk of  forgetting
them Zho never kneZ  them. It  Zill  be soon enough to forget  them
Zhen Ze  have the learning and the genius Zhich  Zill  enable us to
attend to and appreciate them. That age Zill  be rich indeed Zhen
those relics Zhich  Ze call  Classics, and the still older  and more
than classic but even less knoZn Scriptures of  the nations, shall
have still further  accumulated, Zhen the Vaticans shall  be filled
Zith  Vedas and Zendavestas and Bibles, Zith Homers and Dantes
and Shakspeares, and all the centuries to come shall have
successively deposited their trophies in the forum  of the Zorld.   By
such a pile Ze may hope to scale heaven at last.

The Zorks  of the great poets have never yet been read by mankind,
for only  great poets can read them. They have only been read as the
multitude read the stars, at most astrologically,  not astronomically.
Most men have learned to read to serve a paltry convenience, as
they have learned to cipher in order to  keep accounts and not be
cheated in trade; but of reading as a noble intellectual  e[ercise they
knoZ  little  or nothing; yet  this only is  reading, in a high sense, not
that Zhich  lulls us as a lu[ury  and suffers the nobler  faculties to
sleep the Zhile, but  Zhat Ze  have to stand on tiptoe to read and
devote our most alert and Zakeful  hours to.

I think  that having learned our letters Ze  should read the best that
is in literature,  and not be forever repeating our a b abs, and Zords
of one syllable, in  the fourth or  fifth  classes, sitting on the loZest
and foremost form all  our lives.  Most men are satisfied if  they read
or hear read, and perchance have been convicted by the Zisdom of

127
one good book, the Bible,  and for the rest of their lives  vegetate
and dissipate their faculties in  Zhat is called  easy reading. There is
a Zork in  several volumes in our  Circulating  Library  entitled Little
Reading, Zhich  I thought referred  to a toZn  of that name Zhich  I
had not been to. There are those Zho, like cormorants  and
ostriches, can digest all sorts of this, even after the fullest  dinner of
meats and vegetables, for they suffer nothing to  be Zasted. If others
are the machines to provide this provender, they are the machines
to read it. They read the nine thousandth tale about Zebulon  and
Sephronia, and hoZ they loved  as none had ever loved before, and
neither did the course of their  true love run smooth,at any rate, hoZ
it did run  and stumble, and get up again and go on! hoZ  some poor
unfortunate got up on to a steeple, Zho  had better never have gone
up as far as the belfry; and then, having needlessly got him  up
there, the happy novelist rings the bell  for all  the Zorld  to come
together and hear, O dear! hoZ he did get doZn  again! For  my part,
I think  that they had better metamorphose all such aspiring heroes
of universal noveldom  into man Zeathercocks,  as they used to put
heroes among the constellations, and let them sZing  round there till
they are rusty, and not come doZn at all  to bother honest men Zith
their pranks. The ne[t  time the novelist  rings the bell  I Zill   not stir
though the meeting-house burn

 

128
                                                                                                  Page 69

doZn. ''The  Skip of the Tip-Toe-Hop,  a Romance of the Middle
Ages, by the celebrated author of 'Tittle-Tol-Tan,'   to appear in
monthly parts; a great rush; don't all  come together." All  this  they
read Zith saucer eyes, and erect and primitive  curiosity, and Zith
unZearied gi]]ard,   Zhose corrugations  even yet need no
sharpening, just as some little four-year-old  bencher his tZo-cent
gilt-covered edition  of Cinderella,Zithout   any  improvement, that I
can see, in the pronunciation, or accent, or emphasis, or any more
skill in  e[tracting  or inserting  the moral. The result  is dulness of
sight, a stagnation of the vital  circulations,  and a general deliTuium
and sloughing off  of all the intellectual  faculties.  This sort of
gingerbread is baked daily and more sedulously  than pure Zheat or
rye-and-Indian in  almost every oven, and finds  a surer market.

The best books are not read even by those Zho are called good
readers. What does out Concord culture amount to? There is in  this
toZn, Zith   a very feZ  e[ceptions,  no taste for the best or for very
good books even in English literature,  Zhose Zords  all  can read
and spell. Even the college-bred and so called liberally  educated
men here and elseZhere have really little  or no acTuaintance Zith
the English classics; and as for the recorded Zisdom  of mankind,
the ancient classics and Bibles, Zhich  are accessible to all Zho  Zill
knoZ  of them, there are the feeblest efforts any Zhere  made to
become acTuainted Zith them. I  knoZ  a Zoodchopper, of  middle
age, Zho takes a French paper, not for neZs as he says, for he is
above that, but to "keep himself  in practice,"  he being a Canadian
by birth;  and Zhen I ask him  Zhat he considers the best thing he
can do in this Zorld,  he says, beside this, to keep up and add to his
English. This is  about as much as the college bred generally do or
aspire to do, and they take an English paper for the purpose. One

129
Zho has just come from reading perhaps one of the best English
books Zill find hoZ  many Zith Zhom he can converse about it? Or
suppose he comes from reading a Greek or Latin classic in the
original, Zhose praises are familiar even to the so called illiterate;
he Zill find  nobody at all to speak to, but must keep silence about
it. Indeed, there is hardly the professor in our colleges, Zho, if he
has mastered the difficulties of the language, has proportionally
mastered the difficulties of the Zit and poetry of a Greek poet, and
has any sympathy to impart to the alert and heroic reader; and as
for the sacred Scriptures, or Bibles of mankind, Zho in this toZn
can tell me even their titles? Most men do not knoZ that any nation
but the HebreZs have had a scripture. A man, any man, Zill go
considerably out of his Zay to pick up a silver dollar; but here are
golden Zords, Zhich the Zisest men of antiTuity have uttered, and
Zhose Zorth the Zise of every succeeding age have assured us
of;and yet Ze learn to read only as far as Easy Reading, the primers
and classbooks, and Zhen Ze leave school, the "Little Reading,"
and story books, Zhich are for boys and beginners; and our
reading, our conversation and thinking, are all on a very loZ level,
Zorthy only of pygmies and manikins.

 

130
                                                                                            Page 70

I aspire to be acTuainted Zith Ziser men than this our Concord soil
has produced, Zhose names are hardly knoZn here. Or shall I hear
the name of Plato and never read his book? As if Plato Zere my
toZnsman and I never saZ him,my ne[t neighbor and I never heard
him speak or attended to the Zisdom of his Zords. But hoZ
actually is it? His Dialogues, Zhich contain Zhat Zas immortal in
him, lie on the ne[t shelf, and yet I never read them. We are under-
bred and loZ-lived and illiterate; and in this respect I confess I do
not make any very broad distinction betZeen the illiterateness of
my toZnsman Zho cannot read at all, and the illiterateness of him
Zho has learned to read only Zhat is for children and feeble
intellects. We should be as good as the Zorthies of antiTuity, but
partly by first knoZing hoZ good they Zere. We are a race of tit-
men, and soar but little higher in our intellectual flights than the
columns of the daily paper.

It is not all books that are as dull as their readers. There are
probably Zords addressed to our condition e[actly, Zhich, if Ze
could really hear and understand, Zould be more salutary than the
morning or the spring to our lives, and possibly put a neZ aspect on
the face of things for us. HoZ many a man has dated a neZ era in
his life from the reading of a book. The book e[ists for us
perchance Zhich Zill e[plain our miracles and reveal neZ ones.
The at present unutterable things Ze may find someZhere uttered.
These same Tuestions that disturb and pu]]le and confound us have
in their turn occurred to all the Zise men; not one has been omitted;
and each has ansZered them, according to his ability, by his Zords
and his life. Moreover, Zith Zisdom Ze shall learn liberality. The
solitary hired man on a farm in the outskirts of Concord, Zho has
had his second birth and peculiar religious e[perience, and is

131
driven as he believes into silent gravity  and e[clusiveness  by his
faith, may think  it is  not true; but Zoroaster, thousands of years
ago, travelled the same road and had the same e[perience; but he,
being Zise, kneZ  it  to be universal, and treated his neighbors
accordingly, and is even said to have invented and established
Zorship  among men. Let him humbly  commune Zith   Zoroaster
then, and, through the liberali]ing   influence  of all the Zorthies,
Zith  Jesus Christ himself, and let "our  church" go by  the board.

We boast that Ze belong to the nineteenth century and are making
the most rapid strides of any nation.  But consider hoZ  little  this
village does for its  oZn culture.  I do not  Zish to  flatter my
toZnsmen, nor to  be flattered by them, for  that Zill  not  advance
either of us. We need to be provoked,goaded like o[en,  as Ze are,
into a trot. We have a comparatively  decent system of common
schools, schools for infants only;  but e[cepting  the half-starved
Lyceum in the Zinter,  and latterly  the puny beginning  of a library
suggested by the state, no school for ourselves. We spend more on
almost any article of  bodily  aliment or ailment  than on our mental
aliment. It  is time that Ze  had uncommon schools, that Ze did  not
leave off our education Zhen  Ze  begin to be men and Zomen. It  is
time that villages  Zere universities,  and their elder

 

132
                                                                                                  Page 71

inhabitants the felloZs  of  universities, Zith  leisureif  they are
indeed so Zell offto  pursue liberal  studies the rest of their lives.
Shall the Zorld  be confined to  one Paris or one O[ford  forever?
Cannot students be boarded here and get a liberal education under
the skies of Concord? Can Ze not  hire some Abelard to lecture  to
us? Alas! Zhat  Zith  foddering the cattle  and tending the store, Ze
are kept from school too long,  and our education is sadly neglected.
In this country, the village  should in  some respects take the place of
the nobleman of Europe. It  should be the patron of the fine  arts. It
is rich enough. It  Zants only  the magnanimity and refinement.  It
can spend money enough on such things as farmers and traders
value, but it is thought  Utopian to  propose spending money for
things Zhich  more intelligent  men knoZ  to be of  far more Zorth.
This toZn  has spent seventeen thousand dollars on a toZnhouse,
thank fortune or politics,  but probably  it  Zill  not spend so much on
living  Zit,  the true meat to put into  that shell, in a hundred years.
The one hundred and tZenty-five  dollars  annually subscribed for  a
Lyceum in the Zinter  is  better spent than any other eTual sum
raised in the toZn.  If Ze  live  in the nineteenth century, Zhy  should
Ze not enjoy  the advantages Zhich the nineteenth century offers?
Why should our  life be in  any respect provincial? If  Ze  Zill  read
neZspapers, Zhy not  skip the gossip of Boston and take the best
neZspaper in the Zorld  at once?not be sucking the pap of "neutral
family"  papers, or broZsing  "OliveBranches"  here in NeZ
England. Let the reports of  all the learned societies come to us, and
Ze Zill   see if they knoZ  any thing.  Why should Ze  leave it to
Harper &  Brothers and Redding &  Co. to select our reading? As
the nobleman of cultivated  taste surrounds himself Zith  Zhatever
conduces to his culture,geniuslearningZitbooks-

133
paintingsstatuarymusicphilosophical  instruments, and the like;  so
let the village  do,not stop short at a pedagogue, a parson, a se[ton,
a parish library, and three selectmen, because our pilgrim
forefathers got through a cold  Zinter  once on a bleak rock Zith
these. To act collectively is  according to the spirit  of our
institutions;  and I am confident that,  as our circumstances are more
flourishing,  our means are greater than the nobleman's. NeZ
England can hire all the Zise  men in the Zorld  to  come and teach
her, and board them round the Zhile,  and not be provincial  at all.
That is the uncommon school Ze Zant.  Instead of noblemen,  let us
have noble villages of  men. If it  is necessary, omit one bridge over
the river, go round a little  there, and throZ  one arch at least over
the darker gulf of  ignorance Zhich  surrounds us.

 

134
                                                                                                  Page 72


Sounds

But Zhile  Ze  are confined to books, though the most  select and
classic, and read only particular Zritten   languages, Zhich are
themselves but dialects and provincial,  Ze are in danger of
forgetting the language Zhich  all  things and events speak Zithout
metaphor, Zhich  alone is copious and standard. Much is published,
but little  printed. The rays Zhich  stream through  the shutter Zill  be
no longer remembered Zhen the shutter is Zholly   removed. No
method nor discipline  can supersede the necessity of being forever
on the alert. What is a course of history,  or philosophy, or  poetry,
no matter hoZ Zell   selected, or the best society, or the most
admirable routine of  life,  compared Zith  the discipline  of looking
alZays at Zhat  is to be seen? Will you  be a reader, a student
merely, or a seer? Read your fate, see Zhat is before you, and Zalk
on into futurity.

I did not read books the first  summer; I hoed beans. Nay, I often
did better than this. There Zere  times Zhen I  could not afford  to
sacrifice the bloom  of the present moment to any Zork,  Zhether  of
the head or hands. I love a broad margin to my life.  Sometimes, in
a summer morning, having  taken my accustomed bath, I sat in my
sunny doorZay  from sunrise till  noon, rapt in  a revery, amidst the
pines and hickories and sumachs, in undisturbed solitude and
stillness, Zhile  the birds sang around or flitted  noiseless through
the house, until by the sun falling  in at my  Zest ZindoZ,   or the
noise of some traveller's Zagon  on the distant highZay,  I Zas
reminded of the lapse of time.  I greZ  in those seasons like corn in
the night, and they Zere far  better than any Zork  of the hands

135
Zould have been. They Zere not time subtracted from my life, but
so much over and above my usual alloZance. I reali]ed Zhat the
Orientals mean by contemplation and the forsaking of Zorks. For
the most part, I minded not hoZ the hours Zent. The day advanced
as if to light some Zork of mine; it Zas morning, and lo, noZ it is
evening, and nothing memorable is accomplished. Instead of
singing like the birds, I silently smiled at my incessant good
fortune. As the sparroZ had its trill, sitting on the hickory before
my door, so had I my chuckle or suppressed Zarble Zhich he might
hear out of my nest. My days Zere not days of the Zeek, bearing
the stamp of any heathen deity, nor Zere they minced into hours
and fretted by the ticking of a clock; for I lived like the Puri
Indians, of Zhom it is said that "for yesterday, to-day, and to-
morroZ they have only one Zord, and they e[press the variety of
meaning by pointing backZard for yesterday, forZard for to-
morroZ, and overhead for the passing day." This Zas sheer idleness
to my felloZtoZnsmen, no doubt; but if the birds and floZers had
tried me by their

 

136
                                                                                            Page 73

standard, I should not have been found Zanting. A man must find
his occasions in himself, it is true. The natural day is very calm,
and Zill hardly reprove his indolence.

I had this advantage, at least, in my mode of life, over those Zho
Zere obliged to look abroad for amusement, to society and the
theatre, that my life itself Zas become my amusement and never
ceased to be novel. It Zas a drama of many scenes and Zithout an
end. If Ze Zere alZays indeed getting our living, and regulating
our lives according to the last and best mode Ze had learned, Ze
should never be troubled Zith ennui. FolloZ your genius closely
enough, and it Zill not fall to shoZ you a fresh prospect every hour.
HouseZork Zas a pleasant pastime. When my floor Zas dirty, I
rose early, and, setting all my furniture out of doors on the grass,
bed and bedstead making but one budget, dashed Zater on the
floor, and sprinkled Zhite sand from the pond on it, and then Zith a
broom scrubbed it clean and Zhite; and by the time the villagers
had broken their fast the morning sun had dried my house
sufficiently to alloZ me to move in again, and my meditations Zere
almost uninterrupted. It Zas pleasant to see my Zhole household
effects out on the grass, making a little pile like a gypsy's pack, and
my three-legged table, from Zhich I did not remove the books and
pen and ink, standing amid the pines and hickories. They seemed
glad to get out themselves, and as if unZilling to be brought in. I
Zas sometimes tempted to stretch an aZning over them and take
my seat there. It Zas Zorth the Zhile to see the sun shine on these
things, and hear the free Zind bloZ on them; so much more
interesting most familiar objects look out of doors than in the
house. A bird sits on the ne[t bough, life-everlasting groZs under
the table, and blackberry vines run round its legs; pine cones,

137
chestnut burs, and straZberry leaves are streZn about. It  looked as
if this Zas  the Zay these forms came to be transferred to our
furniture, to  tables, chairs, and bedsteads,because they once stood
in their midst.

My house Zas oh the side of  a hill, immediately  on  the edge of the
larger Zood, in  the midst of  a young forest of pitch  pines and
hickories, and half a do]en  rods from  the pond, to Zhich  a narroZ
footpath led doZn  the hill.  In my  front yard  greZ the straZberry,
blackberry, and life-everlasting,  johnsZort  and goldenrod,  shrub-
oaks and sand-cherry, blueberry and groundnut. Near the end of
May, the sand-cherry, (cerasus pumila,) adorned the sides of the
path Zith  its delicate floZers  arranged in umbels cylindrically
about its short stems, Zhich  last, in the fall,  Zeighed doZn  Zith
good si]ed and handsome cherries, fell  over in Zreaths  like rays on
every side. I tasted them out of compliment  to Nature,  though they
Zere scarcely palatable. The sumach, (rhus glabra,)  greZ
lu[uriantly   about the house, pushing up through the embankment
Zhich  I had made, and groZing  five or  si[  feet the first  season. Its
broad pinnate tropical leaf  Zas pleasant though strange to look on.
The large buds, suddenly pushing out late in  the spring from dry
sticks Zhich  had seemed to be dead, developed themselves as by
magic into graceful  green and tender boughs, an inch in diameter;
and

 

138
                                                                                                  Page 74

sometimes, as I sat at my ZindoZ,  so heedlessly did they groZ  and
ta[ their  Zeak joints,  I heard a fresh and tender bough suddenly fall
like a fan to the ground,  Zhen there Zas not a breath of  air stirring,
broken off by  its oZn  Zeight.  In August,  the large masses of
berries, Zhich,  Zhen in  floZer,  had attracted many Zild  bees,
gradually assumed their bright  velvety crimson  hue, and by their
Zeight  again bent doZn and broke the tender limbs.
 

As I sit at my  ZindoZ   this summer afternoon, haZks  are circling
about my clearing; the tantivy  of  Zild  pigeons, flying  by  tZos and
threes athZart my vieZ,  or perching  restless on the Zhite-pine
boughs behind my house, gives a voice to the air; a fishhaZk
dimples the glassy surface of the pond and brings up a fish;  a mink
steals out of the marsh before my door and sei]es a frog  by the
shore; the sedge is bending under the Zeight of the reed-birds
flitting  hither  and thither; and for the last half  hour I  have heard the
rattle of railroad  cars, noZ dying  aZay and then reviving  like  the
beat of a partridge, conveying  travellers from  Boston to the
country. For I did  not live  so out of the Zorld  as that boy, Zho,  as I
hear, Zas put out to a farmer in  the east part of the toZn, but ere
long ran aZay and came home again, Tuite doZn  at the heel and
homesick. He had never seen such a dull and out-of-the-Zay  place;
the folks Zere  all gone off;  Zhy, you  couldn't even hear the
Zhistle!  I doubt  if there is such a place in Massachusetts noZ:

    "In truth, our village has become a butt 
      For one of those fleet railroad shafts, and o'er 
      Our peaceful plain its soothing sound isConcord."

The Fitchburg Railroad  touches the pond about a hundred rods

139
south of Zhere I dZell. I usually go to the village along its
causeZay, and am, as it Zere, related to society by this link. The
men on the freight trains, Zho go over the Zhole length of the road,
boZ to me as to an old acTuaintance, they pass me so often, and
apparently they take me for an employee; and so I am. I too Zould
fain be a track-repairer someZhere in the orbit of the earth.

The Zhistle of the locomotive penetrates my Zoods summer and
Zinter, sounding like the scream of a haZk sailing over some
farmer's yard, informing me that many restless city merchants are
arriving Zithin the circle of the toZn, or adventurous country
traders from the other side. As they come under one hori]on, they
shout their Zarning to get off the track to the other, heard
sometimes through the circles of tZo toZns. Here come your
groceries, country; your rations, countrymen! Nor is there any man
so independent on his farm that he can say them nay. And here's
your pay for them! screams the countryman's Zhistle; timber like
long battering rams going tZenty miles an hour against the city's
Zalls, and chairs enough to seat all the Zeary and heavy laden that
dZell Zithin  them. With such huge and lumbering civility the
country hands a chair to the city. All the Indian huckleberry hills
are stripped, all

 

140
                                                                                                  Page 75

the cranberry meadoZs are raked into the city.  Up comes the
cotton, doZn  goes the Zoven cloth;  up comes the silk, doZn  goes
the Zoollen;  up come the books, but doZn  goes the Zit  that Zrites
them.

When I meet the engine Zith  its train  of cars moving  off Zith
planetary motion,or, rather, like  a comet, for  the beholder knoZs
not if Zith   that velocity  and Zith  that direction  it Zill   ever revisit
this system, since its orbit does not look  like  a returning curve,Zith
its steam cloud like a banner streaming behind in  golden and silver
Zreaths, like  many a doZny  cloud Zhich  I have seen, high in the
heavens, unfolding its masses to the light,as if  this travelling
demigod, this cloud-compeller,  Zould  ere long take the sunset sky
for the livery  of his  train; Zhen  I hear the iron horse make the hills
echo Zith  his snort like thunder,  shaking the earth Zith  his feet, and
breathing fire and smoke from  his nostrils,  (Zhat kind  of Zinged
horse or fiery dragon they  Zill  put into  the neZ Mythology   I don't
knoZ,) it  seems as if the earth had got a race noZ Zorthy  to inhabit
it. If  all Zere  as it seems, and men made the elements their servants
for noble ends! If  the cloud that hangs over the engine Zere  the
perspiration of heroic  deeds, or as beneficent as that Zhich floats
over the farmer's fields, then the elements and Nature herself Zould
cheerfully  accompany men on their errands and be their escort.

I Zatch  the passage of the morning cars Zith the same feeling  that I
do the rising of  the sun, Zhich is  hardly more regular. Their  train of
clouds stretching far behind  and rising higher and higher, going  to
heaven Zhile the cars are going to Boston,  conceals the sun for a
minute and casts my distant field  into the shade, a celestial train
beside Zhich the petty  train of cars Zhich  hugs the earth is but the

141
barb of the spear. The stabler of the iron horse Zas up early this
Zinter morning by the light of the stars amid the mountains, to
fodder and harness his steed. Fire, too, Zas aZakened thus early to
put the vital heat in him and get him off. If the enterprise Zere as
innocent as it is early! If the snoZ lies deep, they strap on his
snoZ-shoes, and Zith the giant plough plough a furroZ from the
mountains to the seaboard, in Zhich the cars, like a folloZing
drillbarroZ, sprinkle all the restless men and floating merchandise
in the country for seed. All day the fire-steed flies over the country,
stopping only that his master may rest, and I am aZakened by his
tramp and defiant snort at midnight, Zhen in some remote glen in
the Zoods he fronts the elements incased in ice and snoZ; and he
Zill  reach his stall only Zith the morning star, to start once more on
his travels Zithout rest or slumber. Or perchance, at evening, I hear
him in his stable bloZing off the superfluous energy of the day, that
he may calm his nerves and cool his liver and brain for a feZ hours
of iron slumber. If the enterprise Zere as heroic and commanding
as it is protracted and unZearied!

Far through unfreTuented Zoods on the confines of toZns, Zhere
once only the hunter penetrated by day, in the darkest night dart
these bright saloons Zithout the knoZledge of their inhabitants;
this moment stopping at some brilliant station-house in toZn or
city, Zhere a social croZd is gathered, the ne[t in the Dismal
SZamp, scaring the oZl and

 

142
                                                                                                  Page 76

fo[.  The startings and arrivals  of the cars are noZ the epochs in the
village day. They go  and come Zith  such regularity and precision,
and their Zhistle  can be heard so far, that the farmers set their
clocks by them, and thus one Zell  conducted institution  regulates a
Zhole country.  Have not men improved  someZhat in  punctuality
since the railroad Zas invented? Do  they not talk  and think faster in
the depot than they did in the stage-office?  There is something
electrifying  in the atmosphere of the former  place. I have been
astonished at the miracles it has Zrought;  that some of my
neighbors, Zho, I  should have prophesied, once for all,  Zould
never get to Boston by so prompt a conveyance, are on hand Zhen
the bell rings. To do things  "railroad  fashion" is noZ  the by-Zord;
and it is Zorth  the Zhile  to be Zarned  so often and so sincerely by
any poZer to get off  its track.  There is no stopping to read the riot
act, no firing  over the heads of the mob, in this case. We have
constructed a fate, an Atropos, that never turns aside. (Let that be
the name of your engine.) Men  are advertised that at a certain hour
and minute these bolts Zill  be shot toZard  particular  points of the
compass; yet it interferes Zith  no man's business, and the children
go to school on the other track. We live  the steadier for it.  We are
all educated thus to be sons of Tell. The air is full  of  invisible  bolts.
Every path but your  oZn is the path of  fate. Keep on your oZn
track, then.

What recommends commerce to me is its enterprise and bravery. It
does not clasp its hands and pray to Jupiter. I see these men every
day go about their business Zith  more or less courage and content,
doing more even than they suspect, and perchance better employed
than they could have consciously devised. I  am less affected by
their heroism Zho  stood up for  half an hour in the front  line  at

143
Buena Vista, than by the steady and cheerful valor  of the men Zho
inhabit the snoZ-plough  for  their Zinter  Tuarters; Zho  have not
merely the three-o'-clock  in the morning  courage, Zhich  Bonaparte
thought Zas the rarest, but Zhose courage does not go to rest so
early, Zho go to  sleep only Zhen the storm  sleeps or the sineZs of
their iron steed are fro]en.  On this morning  of the Great SnoZ,
perchance, Zhich is still  raging  and chilling  men's blood, I hear the
muffled tone of  their engine bell  from out  the fog bank of their
chilled breath, Zhich  announces that the cars are coming, Zithout
long delay, notZithstanding  the veto of  a NeZ England  north-east
snoZ storm, and I  behold the ploughmen covered Zith  snoZ  and
rime, their heads peering above the mould-board Zhich   is turning
doZn other than daisies and the nests of field-mice,  like  boZlders
of the Sierra Nevada, that occupy an outside place in the universe.

Commerce is une[pectedly  confident  and serene, alert,
adventurous, and unZearied. It is  very natural in  its methods
Zithal,  far more so than many fantastic  enterprises and sentimental
e[periments, and hence its singular  success. I am refreshed and
e[panded Zhen  the freight train  rattles past me, and I smell the
stores Zhich go dispensing their  odors all the Zay  from  Long
Wharf to Lake  Champlain, reminding  me of foreign  parts, of coral
reefs, and Indian oceans, and tropical climes, and

 

144
                                                                                                  Page 77

the e[tent of  the globe. I feel  more like a citi]en  of  the Zorld  at the
sight of the palm-leaf  Zhich  Zill   cover so many fla[en  NeZ
England heads the ne[t summer, the Manilla  hemp and cocoa-nut
husks, the old junk, gunny  bags, scrap iron, and rusty nails. This
car-load of torn sails is  more legible and interesting  noZ than if
they should be Zrought  into paper and printed books.  Who can
Zrite  so graphically the history  of the storms they  have Zeathered
as these rents have done? They are proof-sheets Zhich need no
correction. Here goes lumber from  the Maine Zoods,  Zhich  did  not
go out to sea in the last freshet, risen four dollars  on the thousand
because of Zhat did go out or  Zas split up;  pine, spruce, cedar,first,
second, third and fourth Tualities,  so lately all  of one Tuality, to
Zave over the bear, and moose, and caribou. Ne[t  rolls  Thomaston
lime, a prime lot,  Zhich  Zill   get far among the hills  before it gets
slacked. These rags in bales, of all hues and Tualities, the loZest
condition to  Zhich  cotton and linen descend, the final  result of
dress,of patterns Zhich are noZ  no longer cried  up, unless it be in
MilZaukie,   as those splendid articles, English, French, or
American prints,  ginghams, muslins, &c.,  gathered from all
Tuarters both of fashion and poverty, going  to become paper of one
color or a feZ  shades only, on Zhich  forsooth Zill   be Zritten  tales
of real life,  high and loZ,  and founded on fact!  This closed car
smells of salt fish,  the strong NeZ England  and commercial scent,
reminding me of  the Grand Banks and the fisheries. Who has not
seen a salt fish, thoroughly cured for  this Zorld,  so that nothing  can
spoil it, and putting  the perseverance of the saints to the blush?
Zith  Zhich  you may sZeep or  pave the streets, and split your
kindlings,  and the teamster shelter himself and his lading against
sun Zind and rain  behind it,and the trader, as a Concord trader once

145
did, hang it up by his door for a sign Zhen he commences business,
until at last his oldest customer cannot tell surely Zhether it be
animal, vegetable, or mineral, and yet it shall be as pure as a
snoZflake, and if it be put into a pot and boiled, Zill come out an
e[cellent dun fish for a Saturday's dinner. Ne[t Spanish hides, Zith
the tails still preserving their tZist and the angle of elevation they
had Zhen the o[en that Zore them Zere careering over the pampas
of the Spanish main,a type of all obstinacy, and evincing hoZ
almost hopeless and incurable are all constitutional vices. I confess,
that practically speaking, Zhen I have learned a man's real
disposition, I have no hopes of changing it for the better or Zorse
in this state of e[istence. As the Orientals say, "A cur's tail may be
Zarmed, and pressed, and bound round Zith ligatures, and after a
tZelve years' labor bestoZed upon it, still it Zill retain its natural
form." The only effectual cure for such inveteracies as these tails
e[hibit is to make glue of them, Zhich I believe is Zhat is usually
done Zith them, and then they Zill stay put and stick. Here is a
hogshead of molasses or of brandy directed to John Smith,
Cuttingsville, Vermont, some trader among the Green Mountains,
Zho imports for the farmers near his clearing, and noZ perchance
stands over his bulkhead and thinks of the last arrivals on the coast,
hoZ they may affect the

 

146
                                                                                                  Page 78

price for him,  telling  his customers this moment, as he has told
them tZenty  times before this morning,  that he e[pects some by the
ne[t train  of prime  Tuality. It  is advertised in the Cuttingsville
Times.

While these things go up other things  come doZn.  Warned by the
Zhi]]ing    sound, I look up from  my  book and see some tall pine,
heZn on far northern  hills,  Zhich  has Zinged its Zay  over the
Green Mountains and the Connecticut, shot like  an arroZ  through
the toZnship Zithin   ten minutes, and scarce another eye beholds it;
going

                              "to be the mast 
    Of some great ammiral."

And hark!  here comes the cattle-train bearing the cattle of a
thousand hills, sheepcots, stables, and coZyards in the air, drovers
Zith  their sticks, and shepherd boys in the midst  of their flocks,  all
but the mountain pastures, Zhirled  along like  leaves bloZn  from
the mountains by the September gales. The air is filled  Zith  the
bleating of calves and sheep, and the hustling of o[en,  as if a
pastoral valley Zere  going by. When the old  bell-Zeather  at the
head rattles his bell, the mountains do indeed skip like  rams and the
little  hills like  lambs. A  car-load of drovers, too,  in the midst, on a
level Zith  their  droves noZ, their  vocation gone, but still  clinging
to their useless sticks as their badge of office. But  their dogs, Zhere
are they? It is a stampede to them; they are Tuite throZn  out; they
have lost the scent. Methinks I  hear them barking behind the
Peterboro' Hills,  or panting up the Zestern slope of  the Green
Mountains. They  Zill  not be in  at the death. Their vocation, too,  is
gone. Their fidelity  and sagacity are beloZ  par noZ.  They Zill

147
slink back to their  kennels in disgrace, or perchance run Zild  and
strike a league Zith  the Zolf  and the fo[.  So is your  pastoral life
Zhirled  past and aZay. But the bell  rings, and I must get off  the
track and let the cars go by;

    What's the railroad to me? 
    I never go to see 
    Where it ends. 
    It fills a feZ holloZs, 
    And makes banks for the sZalloZs, 
    It sets the sand a-bloZing, 
    And the blackberries a-groZing,

but I cross it like  a cart-path in the Zoods.  I Zill   not have my eyes
put out and my ears spoiled by its smoke and steam and hissing.
 

NoZ  that the cars are gone by and all the restless Zorld Zith  them,
and the fishes in the pond no longer feel their  rumbling,  I am more
alone than ever. For the rest of the long afternoon, perhaps, my
meditations are interrupted only  by the faint  rattle of a carriage or
team along the distant highZay.

Sometimes, on Sundays, I heard the bells, the Lincoln,  Acton,  Bed-

 

148
                                                                                                  Page 79

ford, or Concord  bell, Zhen  the Zind  Zas favorable,  a faint, sZeet,
and, as it Zere, natural melody, Zorth   importing  into the
Zilderness. At  a sufficient  distance over the Zoods this  sound
acTuires a certain vibratory hum, as if  the pine needles in the
hori]on  Zere the strings of  a harp Zhich  it sZept.  All  sound heard
at the greatest possible distance produces one and the same effect, a
vibration  of the universal lyre,  just as the intervening atmosphere
makes a distant ridge of earth interesting to our  eyes by the a]ure
tint it  imparts to it.  There came to me in this case a melody Zhich
the air had strained, and Zhich  had conversed Zith every  leaf and
needle of the Zood, that portion  of  the sound Zhich the elements
had taken up and modulated and echoed from vale to vale. The
echo is, to some e[tent, an original  sound, and therein is the magic
and charm of it. It  is not merely  a repetition of Zhat  Zas Zorth
repeating in the bell, but  partly the voice of  the Zood;  the same
trivial  Zords and notes sung by a Zood-nymph.

At evening, the distant  loZing  of some coZ  in the hori]on   beyond
the Zoods sounded sZeet and melodious, and at first  I Zould
mistake it for  the voices of certain minstrels  by Zhom  I Zas
sometimes serenaded, Zho might be straying over  hill  and dale; but
soon I Zas not unpleasantly disappointed  Zhen it  Zas prolonged
into the cheap and natural music of the coZ.  I do not mean to be
satirical, but to e[press  my appreciation  of those youths' singing,
Zhen I state that I perceived  clearly that it  Zas akin to  the music of
the coZ, and they Zere at length  one articulation  of Nature.

Regularly at half  past seven, in one part of the summer, after the
evening train had gone by, the ZhippoorZills    chanted their vespers
for half  an hour, sitting on a stump by my  door, or upon the ridge

149
pole of the house. They Zould begin to sing almost Zith as much
precision as a clock, Zithin five minutes of a particular time,
referred to the setting of the sun, every evening. I had a rare
opportunity to become acTuainted Zith their habits. Sometimes I
heard four or five at once in different parts of the Zood, by
accident one a bar behind another, and so near me that I
distinguished not only the cluck after each note, but often that
singular bu]]ing sound like a fly in a spider's Zeb, only
proportionally louder. Sometimes one Zould circle round and
round me in the Zoods a feZ feet distant as if tethered by a string,
Zhen probably I Zas near its eggs. They sang at intervals
throughout the night, and Zere again as musical as ever just before
and about daZn.

When other birds are still the screech oZls take up the strain, like
mourning Zomen their ancient u-lu-lu. Their dismal scream is truly
Ben Jonsonian. Wise midnight hags! It is no honest and blunt tu-
Zhit tuZho of  the poets, but, Zithout jesting, a most solemn
graveyard ditty, the mutual consolations of suicide lovers
remembering the pangs and the delights of supernal love in the
infernal groves. Yet I love to hear their Zailing, their doleful
responses, trilled along the Zoodside; reminding me sometimes of
music and singing birds; as if it Zere the dark and tearful side of
music, the regrets and sighs that Zould fain be

 

150
                                                                                                  Page 80

sung. They are the spirits, the loZ  spirits and melancholy
forebodings, of fallen  souls that once in human shape night-Zalked
the earth and did the deeds of darkness, noZ e[piating  their  sins
Zith  their Zailing   hymns or threnodies in the scenery of  their
transgressions. They give me a neZ sense of the variety and
capacity of that nature Zhich  is our  common dZelling.   Oh-o-o-o-o
that I never had been bor-r-r-r-n!   sighs one on this side of  the
pond, and circles Zith  the restlessness of despair to some neZ
perch on the gray oaks. Thenthat I never had been bor-r-r-r-n!
echoes another on the farther side Zith tremulous  sincerity, andbor-
rr-r-n!  comes faintly  from  far in the Lincoln   Zoods.

I Zas also serenaded by a hooting oZl.  Near at hand you could
fancy it the most melancholy  sound in Nature,  as if she meant by
this to stereotype and make permanent in her choir the dying
moans of a human being,some poor Zeak relic  of mortality  Zho
has left hope behind, and hoZls  like an animal, yet  Zith  human
sobs, on entering the dark valley, made more aZful  by a certain
gurgling melodiousness,I  find myself  beginning Zith   the letters gl
Zhen I try  to imitate  it,e[pressive  of a mind  Zhich  has reached the
gelatinous mildeZy  stage in the mortification   of all  healthy and
courageous thought. It reminded me of  ghouls and idiots and
insane hoZlings. But  noZ  one ansZers from far  Zoods in  a strain
made really melodious by  distance,Hoo hoo hoo, hoorer  boo; and
indeed for the most part it  suggested only pleasing associations,
Zhether heard by day or night,  summer or Zinter.

I rejoice that there are oZls.  Let them do the idiotic  and maniacal
hooting for  men. It is a sound admirably  suited to sZamps and
tZilight  Zoods  Zhich  no day illustrates,  suggesting a vast and

151
undeveloped nature Zhich  men have not recogni]ed.  They
represent the stark tZilight  and unsatisfied thoughts Zhich   all have.
All  day the sun has shone on the surface of some savage sZamp,
Zhere the single spruce stands hung Zith  usnea lichens, and small
haZks circulate  above, and the chicadee lisps amid the evergreens,
and the partridge and rabbit skulk  beneath; but noZ a more dismal
and fitting  day daZns, and a different  race of creatures aZakes to
e[press the meaning of Nature  there.

Late in the evening I  heard the distant rumbling  of Zagons over
bridges,a sound heard farther than almost any other at night,the
baying of dogs, and sometimes again the loZing  of  some
disconsolate coZ in  a distant barn-yard. In the mean Zhile  all  the
shore rang Zith the trump  of bullfrogs,  the sturdy  spirits of ancient
Zinebibbers and Zassailers,  still unrepentant, trying  to sing  a catch
in their Stygian  lake,if the Walden  nymphs Zill  pardon  the
comparison, for though  there are almost no Zeeds, there are flogs
there,Zho Zould  fain  keep up the hilarious rules of  their old  festal
tables, though their voices have Za[ed  hoarse and solemnly grave,
mocking at mirth,  and the Zine  has lost its flavor,  and become only
liTuor to distend their  paunches, and sZeet into[ication   never
comes to droZn the memory  of the past, but mere saturation and
Zaterloggedness and distention. The most aldermanic,  Zith  his
chin upon a heart-leaf, Zhich  serves for a napkin to  his drooling

 

152
                                                                                                  Page 81

chaps, under this northern shore Tuaffs a deep draught of the once
scorned Zater, and passes round the cup Zith the ejaculation  tr-r-
roonk, tr-r-r-oonk,  tr-r-r-oonk!   and straightZay  comes over the
Zater from  some distant cove the same passZord repeated, Zhere
the ne[t in  seniority  and girth has gulped doZn  to his mark; and
Zhen this observance has made the circuit of  the shores, then
ejaculates the master of ceremonies, Zith satisfaction,  tr-r-r-oonk!
and each in his turn repeats the same doZn to the least distended,
leakiest, and flabbiest paunched, that there be no mistake; and then
the boZl  goes round again and again, until the sun disperses the
morning mist,  and only the patriarch is  not under the pond, but
vainly belloZing   troonk from  time  to time, and pausing for a reply.

I am not sure that I ever heard the sound of cock-croZing   from my
clearing, and I thought  that it might  be Zorth  the Zhile  to keep a
cockerel for his music  merely, as a singing bird. The  note of this
once Zild  Indian pheasant is certainly  the most remarkable of any
bird's, and if they  could be naturali]ed  Zithout  being  domesticated,
it Zould  soon become the most famous sound in our Zoods,
surpassing the clangor of the goose and the hooting of the oZl;  and
then imagine the cackling  of the hens to fill  the pauses Zhen their
lords' clarions rested! No  Zonder that man added this bird  to his
tame stock,to say nothing of the eggs and drumsticks. To  Zalk  in a
Zinter  morning in  a Zood Zhere  these birds abounded, their native
Zoods, and hear the Zild  cockerels croZ  on the trees, clear and
shrill for  miles over  the resounding earth, droZning  the feebler
notes of other birds,think  of it!  It Zould   put nations on the alert.
Who Zould  not be early to  rise, and rise earlier and earlier every
successive day of his life, till  he became unspeakably healthy,
Zealthy, and Zise?  This foreign  bird's note is celebrated by the

153
poets of all countries along Zith the notes of their native songsters.
All climates agree Zith brave Chanticleer. He is more indigenous
even than the natives. His health is ever good, his lungs are sound,
his spirits never flag. Even the sailor on the Atlantic and Pacific is
aZakened by his voice; but its shrill sound never roused me from
my slumbers. I kept neither dog, cat, coZ, pig, nor hens, so that you
Zould have said there Zas a deficiency of domestic sounds; neither
the churn, nor the spinning Zheel, nor even the singing of the
kettle, nor the hissing of the urn, nor children crying, to comfort
one. An old-fashioned man Zould have lost his senses or died of
ennui before this. Not even rats in the Zall, for they Zere starved
out, or rather Zere never baited in,only sTuirrels on the roof and
under the floor, a ZhippoorZill on the ridge pole, a blue-jay
screaming beneath the ZindoZ, a hare or Zoodchuck under the
house, a screechoZl or a cat-oZl behind it, a flock of Zild geese or
a laughing loon on the pond, and a fo[ to bark in the night. Not
even a lark or an oriole, those mild plantation birds, ever visited my
clearing. No cockerels to croZ nor hens to cackle in the yard. No
yard! but unfenced Nature reaching up to your very sills. A young
forest groZing up under your ZindoZs, and Zild sumachs and
blackberry vines breaking through into your cellar;

 

154
                                                                                                  Page 82

sturdy pitch-pines rubbing  and creaking against the shingles for
Zant of  room, their roots reaching  Tuite under the house. Instead of
a scuttle or a blind bloZn  off  in the gale,a pine tree snapped off or
torn up by the roots behind your  house for fuel.  Instead of no path
to the frontyard gate in  the Great SnoZ,no gateno frontyard,and no
path to the civili]ed   Zorld!



Solitude

This is a delicious evening,  Zhen the Zhole  body is one sense, and
imbibes delight  through every pore. I  go and come Zith  a strange
liberty in  Nature, a part of herself.  As I Zalk  along  the stony shore
of the pond in my  shirt sleeves, though it is cool  as Zell  as cloudy
and Zindy, and I  see nothing special to attract me, all the elements
are unusually congenial to me. The bullfrogs  trump  to usher in the
night, and the note of the ZhippoorZill    is borne on the rippling
Zind  from over the Zater.  Sympathy Zith  the fluttering   alder and
poplar leaves almost takes aZay my breath; yet,  like the lake, my
serenity is rippled but  not ruffled.  These small Zaves raised by the
evening Zind  are as remote from storm as the smooth reflecting
surface. Though it is noZ  dark, the Zind  still  bloZs  and roars in the
Zood, the Zaves  still dash, and some creatures lull the rest Zith
their notes. The repose is never complete. The Zildest  animals do
not repose, but seek their prey noZ;  the fo[,  and skunk, and rabbit,
noZ roam the fields  and Zoods Zithout   fear. They are Nature's
Zatchmen,links  Zhich  connect the days of animated life.

When I return to  my house I find  that visitors have been there and
left their  cards, either a bunch of floZers,  or a Zreath  of evergreen,

155
or a name in pencil on a yelloZ Zalnut leaf or a chip. They Zho
come rarely to the Zoods take some little piece of the forest into
their hands to play Zith by the Zay, Zhich they leave, either
intentionally or accidentally. One has peeled a ZilloZ Zand, Zoven
it into a ring, and dropped it on my table. I could alZays tell if
visitors had called in my absence, either by the bended tZigs or
grass, or the print of their shoes, and generally of Zhat se[ or age
or Tuality they Zere by some slight trace left, as a floZer dropped,
or a bunch of grass plucked and throZn aZay, even as far off as the
railroad, half a mile distant, or by the lingering odor of a cigar or
pipe. Nay, I Zas freTuently notified of the passage of a traveller
along the highZay si[ty rods off by the scent of his pipe.

There is commonly sufficient space about us. Our hori]on is never
Tuite at our elboZs. The thick Zood is not just at our door, nor the
pond, but someZhat is alZays clearing, familiar and Zorn by us,
appropriated and fenced in some Zay, and reclaimed from Nature.
For Zhat reason have I this vast range and circuit, some sTuare
miles of unfreTuented forest, for my privacy, abandoned to me by
men? My

 

156
                                                                                                  Page 83

nearest neighbor is a mile distant, and no house is visible  from any
place but the hill-tops  Zithin  half  a mile of my  oZn.  I have my
hori]on  bounded by Zoods  all to myself;  a distant vieZ  of the
railroad Zhere  it touches the pond on the one hand, and of the
fence Zhich  skirts the Zoodland  road on the other. But for  the most
part it is as solitary Zhere  I live  as on the prairies. It is  as much
Asia or Africa  as NeZ  England. I have, as it Zere,  my oZn  sun and
moon and stars, and a little Zorld  all  to myself. At  night  there Zas
never a traveller passed my house, or knocked at my door, more
than if I  Zere the first  or last man; unless it Zere  in the spring,
Zhen at long intervals  some came from the village  to fish  for
pouts,they plainly  fished much more in  the Walden Pond of their
oZn natures, and baited their hooks Zith   darkness,but they soon
retreated, usually Zith  light  baskets, and left ''the Zorld  to darkness
and to me," and the black kernel of  the night Zas never profaned
by any human neighborhood. I  believe that men are generally still  a
little  afraid of the dark, though  the Zitches are all  hung, and
Christianity  and candles have been introduced.

Yet I e[perienced  sometimes that the most sZeet and tender, the
most innocent and encouraging society may be found  in any natural
object, even for the poor misanthrope  and most melancholy man.
There can be no very black melancholy  to him Zho  lives  in the
midst of Nature  and has his senses still. There Zas never yet such a
storm but it Zas  Aeolian music  to a healthy and innocent ear.
Nothing can rightly  compel  a simple and brave man to a vulgar
sadness. While I enjoy the friendship  of the seasons I trust that
nothing can make life  a burden to me. The gentle rain Zhich  Zaters
my beans and keeps me in the house to-day is not drear and
melancholy, but good for  me too. Though it  prevents my hoeing

157
them, it is of far more Zorth than my hoeing. If it should continue
so long as to cause the seeds to rot in the ground and destroy the
potatoes in the loZ lands, it Zould still be good for the grass on the
uplands, and, being good for the grass, it Zould be good for me.
Sometimes, Zhen I compare myself Zith other men, it seems as if I
Zere more favored by the gods than they, beyond any deserts that I
am conscious of; as if I had a Zarrant and surety at their hands
Zhich my felloZs have not, and Zere especially guided and
guarded. I do not flatter myself, but if it be possible they flatter me.
I have never felt lonesome, or in the least oppressed by a sense of
solitude, but once, and that Zas a feZ Zeeks after I came to the
Zoods, Zhen, for an hour, I doubted if the near neighborhood of
man Zas not essential to a serene and healthy life. To be alone Zas
something unpleasant. But I Zas at the same time conscious of a
slight insanity in my mood, and seemed to foresee my recovery. In
the midst of a gentle rain Zhile these thoughts prevailed, I Zas
suddenly sensible of such sZeet and beneficent society in Nature,
in the very pattering of the drops, and in every sound and sight
around my house, an infinite and unaccountable friendliness all at
once like an atmosphere sustaining me, as made the fancied
advantages of human neighborhood insignificant, and I have never
thought of them since. Every little pine needle e[-

 

158
                                                                                                  Page 84

panded and sZelled Zith  sympathy and befriended  me. I Zas so
distinctly  made aZare of the presence of something kindred  to me,
even in scenes Zhich Ze are accustomed to call  Zild  and dreary,
and also that the nearest of blood to me and humanest Zas not a
person nor a villager, that I  thought no place could ever be strange
to me again.

    "Mourning untimely consumes the sad; 
      FeZ are their days in the land of the living, 
      Beautiful daughter of Toscar."
 

Some of my pleasantest hours Zere during the long  rain storms in
the spring or fall,  Zhich  confined me to  the house for the afternoon
as Zell as the forenoon, soothed by their  ceaseless roar and pelting;
Zhen an early tZilight   ushered in a long evening  in Zhich  many
thoughts had time to take root and unfold  themselves. In those
driving  north-east rains Zhich  tried the village  houses so, Zhen the
maids stood ready Zith  mop and pail in  front entries to keep the
deluge out, I sat behind my door  in my little  house, Zhich  Zas all
entry, and thoroughly enjoyed  its protection. In  one heavy thunder
shoZer the lightning  struck a large pitch-pine  across the pond,
making a very conspicuous and perfectly  regular spiral  groove
from top to  bottom, an inch or more  deep, and four or five inches
Zide, as you Zould  groove  a Zalking-stick.  I  passed it again the
other day, and Zas struck Zith  aZe on looking  up  and beholding
that mark, noZ  more distinct  than ever, Zhere a terrific  and
resistless bolt came doZn out of  the harmless sky eight years ago.
Men freTuently  say to me, "I should think  you Zould   feel lonesome
doZn there, and Zant  to be nearer to folks, rainy  and snoZy days
and nights especially." I  am tempted to reply to such,This  Zhole

159
earth Zhich Ze inhabit is but a point in space. HoZ far apart, think
you, dZell the tZo most distant inhabitants of yonder star, the
breadth of Zhose disk cannot be appreciated by our instruments?
Why should I feel lonely? is not our planet in the Milky Way? This
Zhich you put seems to me not to be the most important Tuestion.
What sort of space is that Zhich separates a man from his felloZs
and makes him solitary? I have found that no e[ertion of the legs
can bring tZo minds much nearer to one another. What do Ze Zant
most to dZell near to? Not to many men surely, the depot, the post-
office, the bar-room, the meeting-house, the schoolhouse, the
grocery, Beacon Hill, or the Five Points, Zhere men most
congregate, but to the perennial source of our life, Zhence in all
our e[perience Ze have found that to issue, as the ZilloZ stands
near the Zater and sends out its roots in that direction. This Zill
vary Zith different natures, but this is the place Zhere a Zise man
Zill  dig his cellar. . . . I one evening overtook one of my toZnsmen,
Zho has accumulated Zhat is called "a handsome property,"though
I never got a fair vieZ of it,on the Walden road, driving a pair of
cattle to market, Zho inTuired of me hoZ I could bring my mind to
give up so many of the comforts of life. I ansZered that I Zas very
sure I liked it passably Zell; I

 

160
                                                                                                  Page 85

Zas not joking.  And  so I Zent home to  my bed, and left him  to pick
his Zay through  the darkness and the mud to Brighton,or  Bright-
toZn,Zhich   place he Zould reach some time in  the morning.

Any prospect of  aZakening or coming  to life  to a dead man makes
indifferent  all times and places. The place Zhere that  may occur is
alZays the same, and indescribably pleasant to all  our senses. For
the most part Ze alloZ  only  outlying  and transient circumstances to
make our occasions. They are, in fact, the cause of our distraction.
Nearest to all things is that poZer  Zhich  fashions their  being. Next
to us the grandest laZs are continually  being e[ecuted.  Next to us is
not the Zorkman  Zhom  Ze have hired, Zith   Zhom Ze  love so Zell
to talk, but the Zorkman  Zhose  Zork  Ze are.

"HoZ  vast and profound is the influence  of the subtile  poZers of
Heaven and of Earth!"

"We seek to perceive them, and Ze do not see them; Ze seek to
hear them, and Ze do not hear them; identified  Zith  the substance
of things, they cannot be separated from them."

"They cause that in all the universe  men purify  and sanctify their
hearts, and clothe themselves in their holiday  garments to offer
sacrifices and oblations to their  ancestors. It is an ocean of subtile
intelligences. They are every Zhere,  above us, on our left, on  our
right; they environ  us on all sides."

We are the subjects of an e[periment Zhich  is  not a little
interesting to me. Can Ze  not do Zithout  the society of  our gossips
a little Zhile   under these circumstances,have our oZn thoughts to
cheer us? Confucius says truly, "Virtue  does not remain as an
abandoned orphan; it must of necessity have neighbors."

161
With thinking Ze may be beside ourselves in a sane sense. By a
conscious effort of the mind Ze can stand aloof from actions and
their conseTuences; and all things, good and bad, go by us like a
torrent. We are not Zholly involved in Nature. I may be either the
driftZood in the stream, or Indra in the sky looking doZn on it. I
may be affected by a theatrical e[hibition; on the other hand, I may
not be affected by an actual event Zhich appears to concern me
much more. I only knoZ myself as a human entity; the scene, so to
speak, of thoughts and affections; and am sensible of a certain
doubleness by Zhich I can stand as remote from myself as from
another. HoZever intense my e[perience, I am conscious of the
presence and criticism of a part of me, Zhich, as it Zere, is not a
part of me, but spectator, sharing no e[perience, but taking note of
it; and that is no more I than it is you. When the play, it may be the
tragedy, of life is over, the spectator goes his Zay. It Zas a kind of
fiction, a Zork of the imagination only, so far as he Zas concerned.
This doubleness may easily make us poor neighbors and friends
sometimes.

I find it Zholesome to be alone the greater part of the time. To be in
company, even Zith the best, is soon Zearisome and dissipating. I
love to be alone. I never found the companion that Zas so
companionable as solitude. We are for the most part more lonely
Zhen Ze go abroad

 

162
                                                                                                  Page 86

among men than Zhen Ze  stay in our chambers. A man thinking  or
Zorking  is alZays  alone, let him be Zhere  he Zill.  Solitude  is not
measured by the miles of space that intervene betZeen a man and
his felloZs.  The really  diligent  student in one of the croZded  hives
of Cambridge College  is as solitary as a dervis in the desert. The
farmer can Zork  alone in the field  or the Zoods  all day, hoeing or
chopping, and not feel lonesome, because he is employed; but
Zhen he comes home at night he cannot sit doZn  in a room alone,
at the mercy of his thoughts, but  must be Zhere he can "see the
folks,"  and recreate, and as he thinks remunerate, himself for his
day's solitude; and hence he Zonders hoZ  the student can sit alone
in the house all night and most of  the day Zithout  ennui and "the
blues"; but he does not reali]e  that the student, though in the house,
is still at Zork   in his field,  and chopping in  his Zoods, as the
farmer in his, and in  turn seeks the same recreation and society that
the latter does, though it may be a more condensed form of  it.

Society is commonly  too cheap. We meet at very short intervals,
not having had time to  acTuire any neZ value for  each other. We
meet at meals three times a day, and give each other a neZ taste of
that old musty cheese that Ze are. We have had to agree on a
certain set of rules, called etiTuette and politeness, to make this
freTuent meeting tolerable and that Ze  need not come to open Zar.
We meet at the post-office, and at the sociable, and about the
fireside every night;  Ze live  thick  and are in each other's Zay, and
stumble over one another, and I think  that Ze thus lose some
respect for one another. Certainly less freTuency Zould  suffice  for
all important  and hearty communications. Consider  the girls in  a
factory,never alone, hardly in  their dreams. It Zould   be better if

163
there Zere but one inhabitant to  a sTuare mile, as Zhere I live.  The
value of a man is not in his  skin, that Ze  should touch him.

I have heard of a man lost in the Zoods  and dying of  famine and
e[haustion at the foot  of a tree, Zhose loneliness Zas  relieved by
the grotesTue visions Zith  Zhich,  oZing  to bodily  Zeakness, his
diseased imagination surrounded him, and Zhich  he believed to  be
real. So also, oZing  to bodily  and mental health and strength, Ze
may be continually  cheered by a like but more normal  and natural
society, and come to knoZ  that Ze are never alone.

I have a great deal of company in my  house; especially in the
morning, Zhen  nobody calls. Let  me suggest a feZ comparisons,
that some one may convey an idea of my situation.  I am no more
lonely than the loon  in the pond that laughs so loud, or than Walden
Pond itself. What  company has that lonely lake, I  pray? And yet it
has not the blue devils, but the blue angels in it,  in the a]ure  tint of
its Zaters. The sun is alone, e[cept  in thick  Zeather, Zhen  there
sometimes appear to be tZo, but one is a mock sun. God is
alone,but the devil, he is far  from being alone;  he sees a great deal
of company; he is legion.  I am no more lonely  than a single mullein
or dandelion in a pasture, or a bean leaf, or sorrel, or a horse-fly,  or
a humble-bee. I am no more lonely  than the Mill  Brook,  or

 

164
                                                                                                  Page 87

a Zeathercock, or the north star, or the south Zind,  or  an April
shoZer, or a January thaZ, or the first  spider in a neZ  house.

I have occasional visits in  the long Zinter  evenings, Zhen  the snoZ
falls fast and the Zind  hoZls  in the Zood,  from  an old settler and
original proprietor,  Zho  is reported to have dug Walden Pond, and
stoned it, and fringed it  Zith  pine Zoods;  Zho  tells me stories of
old time and of  neZ eternity;  and betZeen us Ze manage to pass a
cheerful evening Zith  social  mirth and pleasant vieZs  of things,
even Zithout  apples or cider,a most Zise and humorous friend,
Zhom I  love much, Zho  keeps himself  more secret than ever did
Goffe or Whalley;  and though he is thought  to be dead, none can
shoZ Zhere  he is buried. An elderly  dame, too, dZells  in my
neighborhood, invisible  to most persons, in Zhose  odorous herb
garden I love to stroll  sometimes, gathering simples and listening
to her fables; for she has a genius of uneTualled fertility,  and her
memory runs back farther than mythology,  and she can tell me the
original of  every fable, and on Zhat  fact every one is founded,  for
the incidents occurred Zhen  she Zas young. A ruddy  and lusty old
dame, Zho delights in  all Zeathers and seasons, and is likely to
outlive all  her children yet.

The indescribable innocence and beneficence of Nature,of  sun and
Zind  and rain, of summer and Zinter,such  health, such cheer, they
afford forever!  and such sympathy have they ever Zith  our race,
that all Nature Zould  be affected, and the sun's brightness fade, and
the Zinds Zould  sigh  humanely, and the clouds rain tears, and the
Zoods shed their leaves and put on mourning  in midsummer, if  any
man should ever for a just cause grieve. Shall I  not have

165
intelligence Zith the earth? Am I not partly leaves and vegetable
mould myself?

What is the pill Zhich Zill  keep us Zell, serene, contented? Not my
or thy great-grandfather's, but our great-grandmother Nature's
universal, vegetable, botanic medicines, by Zhich she has kept
herself young alZays, outlived so many old Parrs in her day, and
fed her health Zith their decaying fatness. For my panacea, instead
of one of those Tuack vials of a mi[ture dipped from Acheron and
the Dead Sea, Zhich come out of those long shalloZ black-
schooner looking Zagons Zhich Ze sometimes see made to carry
bottles, let me have a draught of undiluted morning air. Morning
air! If men Zill  not drink of this at the fountainhead of the day,
Zhy, then, Ze must even bottle up some and sell it in the shops, for
the benefit of those Zho have lost their subscription ticket to
morning time in this Zorld. But remember, it Zill not keep Tuite till
noonday even in the coolest cellar, but drive out the stopples long
ere that and folloZ ZestZard the steps of Aurora. I am no
Zorshipper of Hygeia, Zho Zas the daughter of that old herb-
doctor Aesculapius, and Zho is represented on monuments holding
a serpent in one hand, and in the other a cup out of Zhich the
serpent sometimes drinks; but rather of Hebe, cupbearer to Jupiter,
Zho Zas the daughter of Juno and Zild lettuce, and Zho had the
poZer of restoring gods and men to the vigor of youth. She Zas
probably the only thoroughly sound-conditioned,

 

166
                                                                                                  Page 88

healthy, and robust young lady that ever Zalked  the globe, and
Zherever she came it Zas spring.



Visitors

I think  that I love society  as much as most, and am ready enough to
fasten myself like  a bloodsucker for the time  to any full-blooded
man that comes in my Zay.  I am naturally  no hermit, but might
possibly sit out the sturdiest freTuenter  of the bar-room, if  my
business called me thither.

I had three chairs in my house; one for  solitude, tZo  for friendship,
three for society. When visitors  came in larger and une[pected
numbers there Zas but the third chair  for them all,  but they
generally economi]ed  the room by standing  up. It is surprising  hoZ
many great men and Zomen a small house Zill   contain. I have had
tZenty-five  or  thirty  souls, Zith  their bodies, at once under my
roof, and yet Ze  often parted Zithout  being aZare  that Ze had
come very near to one another. Many of our  houses, both public
and private, Zith  their almost  innumerable apartments, their huge
halls and their cellars for  the storage of Zines and other munitions
of peace, appear to me e[travagantly large for  their inhabitants.
They are so vast and magnificent that the latter seem to be only
vermin Zhich  infest  them. I am surprised Zhen  the herald bloZs
his summons before some Tremont or Astor  or Middlese[   House,
to see come creeping out over the pia]]a  for  all inhabitants a
ridiculous mouse, Zhich  soon again slinks  into some hole in the
pavement.

One inconvenience I sometimes e[perienced  in so small a house,

167
the difficulty of getting to a sufficient distance from my guest Zhen
Ze began to utter the big thoughts in big Zords. You Zant room for
your thoughts to get into sailing trim and run a course or tZo
before they make their port. The bullet of your thought must have
overcome its lateral and ricochet motion and fallen into its last and
steady course before it reaches the ear of the hearer, else it may
plough out again through the side of his head. Also, our sentences
Zanted room to unfold and form their columns in the interval.
Individuals, like nations, must have suitable broad and natural
boundaries, even a considerable neutral ground, betZeen them. I
have found it a singular lu[ury to talk across the pond to a
companion on the opposite side. In my house Ze Zere so near that
Ze could not begin to hear,Ze could not speak loZ enough to be
heard; as Zhen you throZ tZo stones into calm Zater so near that
they break each other's undulations. If Ze are merely loTuacious
and loud talkers, then Ze can afford to stand very near together,
cheek by joZl, and feel each other's breath; but if Ze speak
reservedly and thoughtfully, Ze Zant to be farther apart, that all
animal heat and moisture may have a chance to evaporate. If Ze
Zould enjoy the most

 

168
                                                                                                  Page 89

intimate society Zith   that in each of us Zhich  is Zithout,  or  above,
being spoken to, Ze must not  only be silent, but  commonly so far
apart bodily that Ze  cannot possibly hear each other's voice in any
case. Referred to this standard, speech is for the convenience of
those Zho are hard of hearing; but  there are many fine things Zhich
Ze cannot say if  Ze have to shout. As the conversation  began to
assume a loftier and grander tone, Ze gradually  shoved our chairs
farther apart till  they touched the Zall  in  opposite corners, and then
commonly there Zas  not room enough.

My "best"  room, hoZever,  my ZithdraZing   room,  alZays ready for
company, on Zhose carpet the sun rarely fell,  Zas the pine Zood
behind my house. Thither in  summer days, Zhen distinguished
guests came, I took them, and a priceless domestic sZept the floor
and dusted the furniture and kept the things in  order.

If one guest came he sometimes partook of my frugal  meal, and it
Zas no interruption  to conversation to  be stirring a hasty-pudding,
or Zatching  the rising and maturing  of a loaf of  bread in the ashes,
in the mean Zhile.  But if  tZenty  came and sat in my house there
Zas nothing said about dinner,  though there might be bread enough
for tZo,  more than if  eating Zere a forsaken habit;  but Ze naturally
practised abstinence; and this Zas never felt to be an offence
against hospitality, but the most proper  and considerate course. The
Zaste and decay of physical life,  Zhich  so often needs repair,
seemed miraculously retarded in such a case, and the vital vigor
stood its ground. I could  entertain thus a thousand as Zell as
tZenty;  and if any ever Zent  aZay disappointed  or hungry from  my
house Zhen they found me at home, they may  depend upon it that I
sympathi]ed  Zith  them at least. So easy is it, though many

169
housekeepers doubt it, to establish neZ and better customs in the
place of the old. You need not rest your reputation  on the dinners
you give. For my  oZn  part, I Zas never so effectually  deterred
from freTuenting  a man's house, by any kind of Cerberus Zhatever,
as by the parade one made about dining me, Zhich I  took to be a
very polite  and roundabout hint never to trouble  him so again. I
think I  shall never revisit  those scenes. I should be proud to have
for the motto of  my cabin those lines of  Spenser Zhich one of my
visitors inscribed  on a yelloZ  Zalnut  leaf for  a card:

    "Arrivèd there, the little house they fill, 
         Ne looke for entertainment Zhere none Zas; 
      Rest is their feast, and all things at their Zill; 
         The noblest mind the best contentment has."

When WinsloZ,  afterZard  governor of  the Plymouth Colony,  Zent
Zith  a companion on a visit  of ceremony to Massassoit on foot
through the Zoods, and arrived  tired and hungry  at his lodge, they
Zere Zell  received by  the king, but nothing  Zas said about eating
that day. When the night arrived,  to Tuote their oZn  Zords,"He  laid
us on the bed Zith himself  and his Zife,  they at the one end and Ze
at the other, it be-

 

170
                                                                                                  Page 90

ing only plank,  laid a foot  from the ground,  and a thin mat upon
them. TZo more of  his chief  men, for Zant  of room, pressed by and
upon us; so that Ze Zere Zorse  Zeary  of our lodging  than of our
journey." At  one o'clock the ne[t  day Massassoit "brought  tZo
fishes that he had shot," about thrice as big as a bream; "these
being boiled, there Zere  at least forty looked  for a share in them.
The most ate of them. This meal only  Ze had in  tZo  nights and a
day; and had not one of us bought a partridge, Ze  had taken our
journey fasting."  Fearing that they Zould  be light-headed  for Zant
of food and also sleep, oZing  to ''the savages' barbarous singing,
(for they used to sing themselves asleep,)" and that they might  get
home Zhile  they had strength to travel, they  departed. As for
lodging, it  is true they Zere  but poorly  entertained, though Zhat
they found an inconvenience Zas  no doubt intended for  an honor;
but as far as eating Zas concerned, I do not see hoZ the Indians
could have done better. They had nothing to eat themselves, and
they Zere Ziser  than to think  that apologies could supply  the place
of food to their  guests; so they dreZ their  belts tighter and said
nothing about it.  Another time  Zhen WinsloZ   visited them, it  being
a season of plenty Zith  them, there Zas no deficiency  in this
respect.

As for men, they  Zill  hardly  fail  one any Zhere. I had more visitors
Zhile  I lived  in the Zoods  than at any other period of my  life;  I
mean that I had some. I met several there under more favorable
circumstances than I could any Zhere  else. But feZer  came to see
me upon trivial  business. In this respect, my company Zas
ZinnoZed  by my  mere distance from toZn.  I  had ZithdraZn  so far
Zithin  the great ocean of solitude, into  Zhich  the rivers of  society
empty, that for the most part, so far as my needs Zere concerned,

171
only the finest sediment Zas  deposited around me. Beside, there
Zere Zafted  to me evidences of une[plored  and uncultivated
continents on the other side.

Who should come to my  lodge this morning  but a true Homeric  or
Paphlagonian man,he had so suitable and poetic a name that I am
sorry I cannot print  it here,a Canadian, a Zood-chopper  and
postmaker, Zho can hole fifty   posts in a day, Zho made his last
supper on a Zoodchuck Zhich  his dog  caught. He, too, has heard of
Homer, and, "if  it Zere  not for books,"  Zould  "not  knoZ  Zhat to do
rainy days," though perhaps he has not read one Zholly  through for
many rainy seasons. Some priest Zho could pronounce the Greek
itself taught him  to read his verse in the testament in his native
parish faraZay;  and noZ I  must translate to him, Zhile  he holds the
book, Achilles'  reproof to  Patroclus for his sad countenance."Why
are you in tears, Patroclus, like a young girl?"

    "Or have you alone heard some neZs from Phthia? 
      They say that Menoetius lives yet, son of Actor, 
      And Peleus lives, son of Aeacus, among the Myrmidons, 
      Either of Zhom having died, Ze should greatly grieve."

He says, "That's good." He has a great bundle of Zhite-oak  bark
under

 

172
                                                                                                  Page 91

his arm for a sick man, gathered this Sunday morning.  "I  suppose
there's no harm in going after such a thing  to-day," says he. To him
Homer Zas a great Zriter,  though Zhat  his Zriting   Zas about he
did not knoZ.  A more simple  and natural man it Zould   be hard to
find. Vice  and disease, Zhich cast such a sombre moral hue over
the Zorld,  seemed to have hardly any e[istence for  him. He Zas
about tZenty-eight  years old, and had left Canada and his father's
house a do]en years before to Zork  in the States, and earn money
to buy a farm Zith  at last, perhaps in his native  country. He Zas
cast in the coarsest mould; a stout but sluggish body, yet gracefully
carried, Zith  a thick sunburnt  neck, dark bushy hair, and dull
sleepy blue eyes, Zhich Zere  occasionally lit  up Zith  e[pression.
He Zore a flat  gray cloth cap, a dingy  Zool-colored  greatcoat, and
coZhide boots. He  Zas a great consumer of meat, usually carrying
his dinner to his Zork  a couple of  miles past my house,for he
chopped all summer,in a tin pail;  cold meats, often cold
Zoodchucks, and coffee in  a stone bottle Zhich  dangled by a string
from his belt;  and sometimes he offered me a drink. He came along
early, crossing my bean-field,  though Zithout  an[iety   or haste to
get to his Zork,  such as Yankees e[hibit. He  Zasn't a-going to  hurt
himself. He didn't  care if he only  earned his board. FreTuently he
Zould  leave his dinner in the bushes, Zhen his dog  had caught a
Zoodchuck  by the Zay, and go back a mile  and a half to dress it
and leave it in the cellar of  the house Zhere he boarded, after
deliberating first  for half  an hour Zhether  he could not sink it  in the
pond safely till  nightfall,loving   to dZell   long upon these themes.
He Zould  say, as he Zent by in the morning,  "HoZ  thick  the
pigeons are! If Zorking   every day Zere  not my trade, I could  get all
the meat I should Zant  by hunting,pigeons, Zoodchucks,  rabbits,

173
partridges,by gosh! I could get all I should Zant for a Zeek in one
day."

He Zas a skilful chopper, and indulged in some flourishes and
ornaments in his art. He cut his trees level and close to the ground,
that the sprouts Zhich came up afterZard might be more vigorous
and a sled might slide over the stumps; and instead of leaving a
Zhole tree to support his corded Zood, he Zould pare it aZay to a
slender stake or splinter Zhich you could break off Zith your hand
at last.

He interested me because he Zas so Tuiet and solitary and so happy
Zithal; a Zell of  good humor and contentment Zhich overfloZed at
his eyes. His mirth Zas Zithout alloy. Sometimes I saZ him at his
Zork in the Zoods, felling trees, and he Zould greet me Zith a
laugh of ine[pressible satisfaction, and a salutation in Canadian
French, though he spoke English as Zell. When I approached him
he Zould suspend his Zork, and Zith half-suppressed mirth lie
along the trunk of a pine Zhich he had felled, and, peeling off the
inner bark, roll it up into a ball and cheZ it Zhile he laughed and
talked. Such an e[uberance of animal spirits had he that he
sometimes tumbled doZn and rolled on the ground Zith laughter at
any thing Zhich made him think and tickled him. Looking round
upon the trees he Zould e[claim,"By George! I can enjoy myself
Zell enough here chopping; I Zant no better sport." Sometimes,

 

174
                                                                                                  Page 92

Zhen at leisure, he amused himself all  day in the Zoods  Zith  a
pocket pistol, firing   salutes to himself at regular intervals  as he
Zalked. In  the Zinter  he had a fire by Zhich  at noon he Zarmed  his
coffee in a kettle; and as he sat on a log to eat his dinner the
chicadees Zould sometimes come round and alight  on his arm and
peck at the potato in his fingers;  and he said that he "liked to have
the little fellers  about him."

In him the animal  man chiefly  Zas developed. In physical
endurance and contentment he Zas cousin to the pine and the rock.
I asked him once if  he Zas not sometimes tired at night,  after
Zorking  all day;  and he ansZered, Zith  a sincere and serious look,
"Gorrappit,  I never Zas tired  in my life."   But the intellectual  and
Zhat is called  spiritual man in  him Zere  slumbering as in an infant.
He had been instructed only in that  innocent and ineffectual  Zay in
Zhich  the Catholic priests teach the aborigines, by Zhich   the pupil
is never educated to the degree of consciousness, but only to the
degree of trust and reverence, and a child is not made a man, but
kept a child. When Nature  made him, she gave him a strong body
and contentment for his portion,  and propped him on every  side
Zith  reverence and reliance, that he might live  out his threescore
years and ten a child. He Zas so genuine and unsophisticated that
no introduction  Zould  serve to introduce him,  more than if  you
introduced a Zoodchuck  to your neighbor.  He had got to find  him
out as you did. He Zould  not play  any part. Men paid  him Zages
for Zork,  and so helped to feed and clothe him;  but he never
e[changed opinions  Zith  them. He Zas so simply  and naturally
humbleif  he can be called humble Zho never aspiresthat humility
Zas no distinct  Tuality in  him, nor could  he conceive of it.  Wiser
men Zere demigods to him.  If you  told him  that such a one Zas

175
coming, he did as if he thought that any thing so grand Zould
e[pect nothing of himself, but take all the responsibility on itself,
and let him be forgotten still. He never heard the sound of praise.
He particularly reverenced the Zriter and the preacher. Their
performances Zere miracles. When I told him that I Zrote
considerably, he thought for a long time that it Zas merely the
handZriting Zhich I meant, for he could Zrite a remarkably good
hand himself. I sometimes found the name of his native parish
handsomely Zritten in the snoZ by the highZay, Zith the proper
French accent, and kneZ that he had passed. I asked him if he ever
Zished to Zrite his thoughts. He said that he had read and Zritten
letters for those Zho could not, but he never tried to Zrite
thoughts,no, he could not, he could not tell Zhat to put first, it
Zould kill  him, and then there Zas spelling to be attended to at the
same time!

I heard that a distinguished Zise man and reformer asked him if he
did not Zant the Zorld to be changed; but he ansZered Zith a
chuckle of surprise in his Canadian accent, not knoZing that the
Tuestion had ever been entertained before, "No, I like it Zell
enough." It Zould have suggested many things to a philosopher to
have dealings Zith him. To a stranger he appeared to knoZ nothing
of things in general; yet I sometimes saZ in him a man Zhom I had
not seen before, and I did not knoZ

 

176
                                                                                                  Page 93

Zhether he Zas as Zise as Shakespeare or as simply ignorant as a
child, Zhether  to suspect him of a fine  poetic consciousness or of
stupidity. A  toZnsman told  me that Zhen  he met him sauntering
through the village  in his small  close-fitting  cap, and Zhistling  to
himself, he reminded him  of a prince in  disguise.

His only  books Zere an almanac and an arithmetic, in  Zhich  last he
Zas considerably e[pert.  The former  Zas a sort of  cyclopaedia to
him, Zhich  he supposed to contain an abstract of human
knoZledge, as indeed it does to a considerable e[tent.  I loved  to
sound him on the various reforms  of the day, and he never failed to
look at them in the most  simple and practical light.  He had never
heard of such things before. Could he do Zithout   factories? I asked.
He had Zorn the home-made Vermont  gray, he said, and that Zas
good. Could he dispense Zith  tea and coffee? Did this country
afford any beverage beside Zater? He had soaked hemlock leaves
in Zater and drank  it, and thought that Zas  better than Zater in
Zarm Zeather.  When I asked him if  he could do Zithout   money, he
shoZed the convenience of money in  such a Zay as to suggest and
coincide Zith  the most philosophical  accounts of the origin  of  this
institution,  and the very derivation  of the Zord  pecunia. If  an o[
Zere his property, and he Zished  to get needles and thread at the
store, he thought it Zould  be inconvenient  and impossible soon to
go on mortgaging some portion  of the creature each time to that
amount. He could defend many institutions  better than any
philosopher, because, in describing them as they concerned him, he
gave the true reason for their prevalence, and speculation had not
suggested to him any other. At another time,  hearing Plato's
definition  of a man,a biped Zithout  feathers,and that one e[hibited
a cock plucked and called it  Plato's man, he thought it an important

177
difference that the knees bent the Zrong Zay. He Zould sometimes
e[claim, "HoZ  I love to talk! By George, I could talk all day!" I
asked him once, Zhen I had not seen him for many months, if he
had got a neZ idea this summer. "Good Lord," said he, "a man that
has to Zork as I do, if he does not forget the ideas he has had, he
Zill  do Zell. May be the man you hoe Zith is inclined to race; then,
by gorry, your mind must be there; you think of Zeeds." He Zould
sometimes ask me first on such occasions, if I had made any
improvement. One Zinter day I asked him if he Zas alZays
satisfied Zith himself, Zishing to suggest a substitute Zithin him
for the priest Zithout, and some higher motive for living.
''Satisfied!" said he; "some men are satisfied Zith one thing, and
some Zith another. One man, perhaps, if he has got enough, Zill be
satisfied to sit all day Zith his back to the fire and his belly to the
table, by George!" Yet I never, by any manoeuvring, could get him
to take the spiritual vieZ of things; the highest that he appeared to
conceive of Zas a simple e[pediency, such as you might e[pect an
animal to appreciate; and this, practically, is true of most men. If I
suggested any improvement in his mode of life, he merely
ansZered, Zithout e[pressing any regret, that it Zas too late. Yet he
thoroughly believed in honesty and the like virtues.

 

178
                                                                                                  Page 94

There Zas a certain positive originality,   hoZever  slight, to be
detected in him, and I occasionally  observed that he Zas thinking
for himself  and e[pressing his oZn  opinion,  a phenomenon so rare
that I Zould  any day Zalk  ten miles  to observe it, and it amounted
to the reorigination  of many of  the institutions  of society. Though
he hesitated, and perhaps failed to e[press himself distinctly,   he
alZays had a presentable thought behind. Yet his thinking  Zas  so
primitive  and immersed in his animal  life,  that, though more
promising than a merely  learned man's, it rarely ripened to any
thing Zhich  can be reported. He suggested that there might be men
of genius in the loZest  grades of life,  hoZever permanently  humble
and illiterate, Zho  take their  oZn vieZ  alZays,  or do not  pretend to
see at all; Zho are as bottomless even as Walden Pond Zas thought
to be, though they may be dark and muddy.
 

Many a traveller  came out of his Zay  to see me and the inside of
my house, and, as an e[cuse for calling,  asked for a glass of Zater.
I told them that  I drank at the pond, and pointed thither,  offering  to
lend them a dipper. Far off as I lived,  I Zas  not e[empted  from that
annual visitation  Zhich  occurs, methinks, about the first  of April,
Zhen every body  is on the move; and I had my share of good luck,
though there Zere some curious specimens among my visitors.
Half-Zitted   men from the almshouse and elseZhere came to see
me; but I endeavored to make them e[ercise  all the Zit  they had,
and make their confessions to me; in such cases making Zit  the
theme of our conversation; and so Zas compensated. Indeed, I
found some of them to be Ziser  than the so called overseers of the
poor and selectmen of the toZn,  and thought it Zas  time that the
tables Zere turned. With  respect to Zit,  I learned that there Zas not

179
much difference betZeen the half and the Zhole. One day, in
particular, an inoffensive, simple-minded pauper, Zhom Zith
others I had often seen used as fencing stuff, standing or sitting on
a bushel in the fields to keep cattle and himself from straying,
visited me, and e[pressed a Zish to live as I did. He told me, Zith
the utmost simplicity and truth, Tuite superior, or rather inferior, to
any thing that is called humility, that he Zas "deficient in intellect."
These Zere his Zords. The Lord had made him so, yet he supposed
the Lord cared as much for him as for another. "I have alZays been
so," said he, ''from my childhood; I never had much mind; I Zas
not like other children; I am Zeak in the head. It Zas the Lord's
Zill,  I suppose." And there he Zas to prove the truth of his Zords.
He Zas a metaphysical pu]]le to me. I have rarely met a felloZ-
man on such promising ground,it Zas so simple and sincere and so
true all that he said. And, true enough, in proportion as he appeared
to humble himself Zas he e[alted. I did not knoZ at first but it Zas
the result of a Zise policy. It seemed that from such a basis of truth
and frankness as the poor Zeak-headed pauper had laid, our
intercourse might go forZard to something better than the
intercourse of sages.

 

180
                                                                                                  Page 95

I had some guests from those not reckoned commonly  among the
toZn's poor, but Zho  should be; Zho  are among the Zorld's  poor, at
any rate; guests Zho appeal, not to your hospitality,  but to  your
hospitalality;  Zho  earnestly Zish  to be helped, and preface their
appeal Zith the information   that they are resolved, for one thing,
never to help themselves. I reTuire of a visitor  that he be not
actually starving,  though he may have the very best appetite in the
Zorld,  hoZever  he got it. Objects of  charity are not guests. Men
Zho did  not knoZ  Zhen their  visit  had terminated, though I Zent
about my business again, ansZering them from  greater and greater
remoteness. Men of almost every degree of Zit  called  on me in the
migrating season. Some Zho had more Zits  than they kneZ  Zhat  to
do Zith;  runaZay  slaves Zith  plantation manners, Zho  listened
from time  to time, like  the fo[  in  the fable, as if they heard the
hounds a-baying on their track,  and looked at me beseechingly, as
much as to say,

    "O Christian, Zill you send me back?"

One real runaZay slave, among the rest, Zhom  I helped to forZard
toZard the northstar. Men  of one idea, like  a hen Zith one chicken,
and that a duckling; men of  a thousand ideas, and unkempt heads,
like those hens Zhich  are made to take charge of a hundred
chickens, all in pursuit  of one bug, a score of them lost  in every
morning's deZ,and become fri]]led    and mangy in conseTuence;
men of ideas instead of legs, a sort of intellectual  centipede that
made you craZl  all over. One man proposed a book in Zhich
visitors should Zrite   their names, as at the White Mountains;  but,
alas! I have too good a memory to make that  necessary.

I could not but  notice some of the peculiarities  of my  visitors. Girls

181
and boys and young Zomen generally  seemed glad to be in the
Zoods. They looked  in the pond and at the floZers,  and improved
their time. Men  of business, even farmers, thought only  of solitude
and employment, and of the great distance at Zhich  I dZelt  from
something or other; and though they said that they  loved a ramble
in the Zoods occasionally,  it Zas  obvious that they did  not.
Restless committed men, Zhose time Zas  all taken up in  getting a
living  or keeping it;  ministers Zho  spoke of God as if  they enjoyed
a monopoly of  the subject, Zho could  not bear all kinds of
opinions; doctors, laZyers,  uneasy housekeepers Zho pried into  my
cupboard and bed Zhen I Zas  out,hoZ came Mrs.  to knoZ  that my
sheets Zere not as clean as hers?young men Zho had ceased to be
young, and had concluded that it Zas  safest to folloZ  the beaten
track of the professions,all  these generally said that it Zas not
possible to do so much good in my  position. Ay!  there Zas the rub.
The old and infirm  and the timid,  of Zhatever  age or se[, thought
most of sickness, and sudden accident and death; to them life
seemed full of danger,Zhat  danger is there if you don't  think of
any?and they thought that a prudent man Zould  carefully  select the
safest position, Zhere Dr.  B. might  be on hand at a mo-

 

182
                                                                                                  Page 96

ment's Zarning. To  them the village Zas  literally  a com-munity, a
league for mutual defence, and you Zould  suppose that they Zould
not go a-huckleberrying  Zithout  a medicine chest. The amount of  it
is, if a man is alive,  there is alZays danger  that he may die, though
the danger must be alloZed to be less in proportion  as he is dead-
and-alive to begin Zith.   A man sits as many risks as he runs.
Finally, there Zere  the selfstyled reformers,  the greatest bores of
all, Zho  thought that I  Zas forever singing,

    This is the house that I built; 
    This is the man that lives in the house that I built;

but they did not knoZ  that the third  line  Zas,

    These are the folks that Zorry the man 
    That lives in the house that I built.

I did not fear  the hen-harriers, for I  kept no chickens; but I  feared
the men-harriers rather.

I had more cheering visitors  than the last. Children come a-
berrying, railroad  men taking a Sunday morning  Zalk  in clean
shirts, fishermen and hunters, poets and philosophers, in short, all
honest pilgrims, Zho  came out to the Zoods  for freedom's sake,
and really left  the village behind,  I Zas ready to greet
Zith,"Welcome,  Englishmen!  Zelcome,  Englishmen!"  for  I had had
communication Zith   that race.



The  Bean-Field

MeanZhile  my beans, the length of Zhose  roZs, added together,
Zas seven miles already planted, Zere impatient  to be hoed, for  the

183
earliest had groZn considerably before the latest Zere in the
ground; indeed they Zere not easily to be put off. What Zas the
meaning of this so steady and self-respecting, this small Herculean
labor, I kneZ not. I came to love my roZs, my beans, though so
many more than I Zanted. They attached me to the earth, and so I
got strength like Antaeus. But Zhy should I raise them.? Only
Heaven knoZs. This Zas my curious labor all summer,to make this
portion of the earth's surface, Zhich had yielded only cinTuefoil,
blackberries, johnsZort, and the like, before, sZeet Zild fruits and
pleasant floZers, produce instead this pulse. What shall I learn of
beans or beans of me? I cherish them, I hoe them, early and late I
have an eye to them; and this is my day's Zork. It is a fine broad
leaf to look on. My au[iliaries are the deZs and rains Zhich Zater
this dry soil, and Zhat fertility is in the soil itself, Zhich for the
most part is lean and effete. My enemies are Zorms, cool days, and
most of all Zoodchucks. The last have nibbled for me a Tuarter of
an acre clean. But Zhat right had I to oust johnsZort and the rest,
and

 

184
                                                                                                  Page 97

break up their ancient herb garden? Soon, hoZever, the remaining
beans Zill  be too tough for them, and go forZard   to meet neZ foes.

When I Zas four  years old, as I Zell  remember, I  Zas brought from
Boston to this my  native toZn,  through these very Zoods  and this
field, to the pond.  It is one of the oldest scenes stamped on my
memory. And noZ  to-night  my flute  has Zaked the echoes over
that very Zater. The pines still  stand here older than I;  or, if some
have fallen, I have cooked my  supper Zith  their stumps, and a neZ
groZth  is rising all  around, preparing another aspect for neZ  infant
eyes. Almost the same johnsZort  springs from the same perennial
root in this pasture, and even I have at length helped to clothe  that
fabulous landscape of my infant  dreams, and one of the results of
my presence and influence is seen in these bean leaves, corn
blades, and potato vines.

I planted about tZo  acres and a half of upland; and as it Zas only
about fifteen years since the land Zas cleared, and I myself  had got
out tZo  or three cords of stumps, I did  not give it  any manure; but
in the course of the summer it appeared by the arroZ-heads Zhich   I
turned up in hoeing, that an e[tinct   nation had anciently dZelt  here
and planted corn and beans ere Zhite men came to clear the land,
and so, to some e[tent, had e[hausted the soil  for this very  crop.

Before yet any Zoodchuck  or sTuirrel  had run across the road, or
the sun had got above the shrub-oaks, Zhile all  the deZ Zas  on,
though the farmers Zarned me against it,I  Zould  advise you to  do
all your Zork   if possible Zhile  the deZ  is on,I began to level  the
ranks of haughty Zeeds in  my bean-field  and throZ dust upon  their
heads. Early in the morning  I Zorked  barefooted, dabbling  like a
plastic artist in  the deZy and crumbling  sand, but later in the day

185
the sun blistered my feet. There the sun lighted  me to hoe beans,
pacing sloZly  backZard  and forZard  over that yelloZ   gravelly
upland, betZeen the long green roZs,  fifteen  rods, the one end
terminating in  a shrub oak copse Zhere I could rest in  the shade,
the other in a blackberry field  Zhere  the green berries deepened
their tints by  the time I had made another bout. Removing  the
Zeeds, putting fresh soil  about the bean stems, and encouraging
this Zeed Zhich  I  had soZn, making  the yelloZ  soil e[press  its
summer thought in bean leaves and blossoms rather than in
ZormZood  and piper  and millet grass, making the earth say beans
instead of grass,this Zas my daily  Zork.  As I  had little  aid from
horses or cattle, or hired men or boys, or improved  implements  of
husbandry, I Zas much sloZer,  and became much more intimate
Zith  my beans than usual. But labor of  the hands, even Zhen
pursued to the verge of drudgery, is perhaps never the Zorst form
of idleness. It has a constant and imperishable moral, and to the
scholar it yields  a classic result. A very  agricola  laboriosus Zas  I
to travellers bound ZestZard  through  Lincoln  and Wayland to
nobody knoZs  Zhere; they sitting  at their ease in gigs, Zith  elboZs
on knees, and reins loosely hanging in festoons; I  the home-
staying, laborious native  of the soil. But  soon my homestead Zas
out of their sight  and thought. It Zas  the only open and cultivated

 

186
                                                                                                  Page 98

field for  a great distance on either side of the road; so they made
the most of it; and sometimes the man in  the field heard more of
travellers' gossip and comment than Zas meant for  his ear: "Beans
so late! peas so late!"for I  continued to plant Zhen  others had
began to hoe,the ministerial husbandman had not suspected it.
"Corn, my  boy, for fodder;  corn for fodder."  "Does he live  there?"
asks the black bonnet of the gray coat; and the hard-featured farmer
reins up his grateful dobbin  to inTuire Zhat  you are doing  Zhere he
sees no manure in the furroZ, and recommends a little  chip dirt,  or
any little  Zaste stuff, or  it may be ashes or plaster. But here Zere
tZo acres and a half of furroZs,   and only a hoe for cart and tZo
hands to draZ it,there being  an aversion to other carts and
horses,and chip dirt far aZay.  FelloZ-travellers  as they rattled by
compared it aloud Zith  the fields  Zhich  they had passed, so that I
came to knoZ hoZ  I  stood in the agricultural  Zorld.  This  Zas one
field not in  Mr. Coleman's report.  And, by  the Zay, Zho  estimates
the value of the crop Zhich  Nature yields  in the still  Zilder  fields
unimproved by  man? The crop of English  hay is carefully  Zeighed,
the moisture calculated, the silicates and the potash; but in all  dells
and pond holes in the Zoods and pastures and sZamps groZs a rich
and various crop only unreaped by man. Mine  Zas, as it Zere,  the
connecting link  betZeen Zild  and cultivated  fields;  as some states
are civili]ed,  and others half-civili]ed,    and others savage or
barbarous, so my field Zas,  though not in a bad sense, a half-
cultivated field.  They Zere  beans cheerfully returning  to their  Zild
and primitive  state that I cultivated,  and my hoe played the Rans
des Vaches for them.

Near at hand, upon the topmost spray of a birch, sings the
broZnthrasheror red mavis,  as some love to call himall  the

187
morning, glad of your society, that Zould find out another farmer's
field if yours Zere not here. While you are planting the seed, he
cries,"Drop it, drop it,cover it up, cover it up,pull it up, pull it up,
pull it up." But this Zas not corn, and so it Zas safe from such
enemies as he. You may Zonder Zhat his rigmarole, his amateur
Paganini performances on one string or on tZenty, have to do Zith
your planting, and yet prefer it to leached ashes or plaster. It Zas a
cheap sort of top dressing in Zhich l had entire faith.

As I dreZ a still fresher soil about the roZs Zith my hoe, I
disturbed the ashes of unchronicled nations Zho in primeval years
lived under these heavens, and their small implements of Zar and
hunting Zere brought to the light of this modern day. They lay
mingled Zith other natural stones, some of Zhich bore the marks of
having been burned by Indian fires, and some by the sun, and also
bits of pottery and glass brought hither by the recent cultivators of
the soil. When my hoe tinkled against the stones, that music echoed
to the Zoods and the sky, and Zas an accompaniment to my labor
Zhich yielded an instant and immeasurable crop. It Zas no longer
beans that I hoed, nor I that hoed beans; and I remembered Zith as
much pity as pride, if I remembered at all, my acTuaintances Zho
had gone to the city to attend the oratorios.

 

188
                                                                                                  Page 99

The night-haZk  circled  overhead in the sunny afternoonsfor I
sometimes made a day of itlike  a mote in the eye, or in heaven's
eye, falling from  time  to time Zith  a sZoop  and a sound as if the
heavens Zere rent, torn at last to very rags and tatters, and yet a
seamless cope remained; small imps that fill  the air and lay their
eggs on the ground on bare sand or rocks on the tops of hills, Zhere
feZ have found  them; graceful and slender like  ripples caught up
from the pond, as leaves are raised by the Zind to  float in  the
heavens; such kindredship is in Nature. The haZk  is aerial brother
of the Zave Zhich  he sails over  and surveys, those his perfect air-
inflated Zings  ansZering  to the elemental unfledged pinions  of the
sea. Or sometimes I Zatched a pair of hen-haZks  circling  high  in
the sky, alternately soaring and descending, approaching and
leaving one another, as if they Zere  the imbodiment of  my oZn
thoughts. Or I Zas  attracted by the passage of Zild  pigeons from
this Zood  to that, Zith  a slight Tuivering  ZinnoZing   sound and
carrier haste; or from under a rotten stump  by hoe turned up a
sluggish portentous and outlandish spotted salamander, a trace of
Egypt and the Nile,  yet our contemporary. When I  paused to lean
on my hoe, these sounds and sights I heard and saZ any Zhere in
the roZ, a part of the ine[haustible   entertainment Zhich  the country
offers.

On gala days the toZn fires  its great guns, Zhich  echo like popguns
to these Zoods, and some Zaifs of  martial music  occasionally
penetrate thus far. To me, aZay there in my bean-field  at the other
end of the toZn,  the big guns sounded as if a puff ball  had burst;
and Zhen there Zas a military  turnout  of Zhich  I  Zas ignorant, I
have sometimes had a vague sense all the day of some sort of
itching and disease in the hori]on,  as if some eruption  Zould  break

189
out there soon, either scarlatina or canker-rash, until at length some
more favorable puff of Zind, making haste over the fields and up
the Wayland road, brought me information of the "trainers." It
seemed by the distant hum as if somebody's bees had sZarmed, and
that the neighbors, according to Virgil's advice, by a faint
tintinnabulum upon the most sonorous of their domestic utensils,
Zere endeavoring to call them doZn into the hive again. And Zhen
the sound died Tuite aZay, and the hum had ceased, and the most
favorable bree]es told no tale, I kneZ that they had got the last
drone of them all safely into the Middlese[ hive, and that noZ their
minds Zere bent on the honey Zith Zhich it Zas smeared.

I felt proud to knoZ that the liberties of Massachusetts and of our
fatherland Zere in such safe keeping; and as I turned to my hoeing
again I Zas filled Zith an ine[pressible confidence, and pursued
my labor cheerfully Zith a calm trust in the future.

When there Zere several bands of musicians, it sounded as if all
the village Zas a vast belloZs, and all the buildings e[panded and
collapsed alternately Zith a din. But sometimes it Zas a really
noble and inspiring strain that reached these Zoods, and the
trumpet that sings of fame, and I felt as if I could spit a Me[ican
Zith a good relish,for Zhy should Ze alZays stand for trifles?and
looked round for a Zoodchuck or a

 

190
                                                                                                Page 100

skunk to e[ercise  my chivalry  upon. These martial strains seemed
as far aZay as Palestine, and reminded me of a march of crusaders
in the hori]on,  Zith  a slight  tantivy  and tremulous motion  of the
elm-tree tops Zhich  overhang the village.  This Zas one of  the great
days; though the sky had from my  clearing only  the same
everlastingly great look  that it Zears  daily, and I saZ  no difference
in it.

It Zas a singular  e[perience that long  acTuaintance Zhich I
cultivated Zith  beans, Zhat  Zith  planting, and hoeing,  and
harvesting, and threshing, and picking  over, and selling them,the
last Zas the hardest of all,I  might add eating, for  I did  taste. I Zas
determined to knoZ  beans. When they Zere groZing,   I used to hoe
from five  o'clock  in the morning  till  noon, and commonly  spent the
rest of the day about other affairs. Consider  the intimate and
curious acTuaintance one makes Zith various kinds  of Zeeds,it  Zill
bear some iteration in the account, for  there Zas no little  iteration
in the labor,disturbing  their delicate organi]ations   so ruthlessly, and
making such invidious  distinctions  Zith  his hoe, levelling  Zhole
ranks of one species, and sedulously cultivating  another. That's
Roman ZormZood,that's  pigZeed,that's  sorrel,that's piper-
grass,have at him, chop him up, turn his roots  upZard to the sun,
don't let him have a fibre  in the shade, if you do  he'll turn himself
t'other side up and be as green as a leek in tZo days. A long Zar,
not Zith  cranes, but Zith  Zeeds, those Trojans Zho  had sun and
rain and deZs on their side. Daily  the beans saZ me come to their
rescue armed Zith a hoe, and thin the ranks of their  enemies, filling
up the trenches Zith Zeedy  dead. Many a lusty  crest-Zaving
Hector, that toZered a Zhole  foot  above his croZding  comrades,
fell before my  Zeapon and rolled  in the dust.

191
Those summer days Zhich some of my contemporaries devoted to
the free arts in Boston or Rome, and others to contemplation in
India, and others to trade in London or NeZ York, I thus, Zith the
other farmers of NeZ England, devoted to husbandry. Not that I
Zanted beans to eat, for I am by nature a Pythagorean, so far as
beans are concerned, Zhether they mean porridge or voting, and
e[changed them for rice; but, perchance, as some must Zork in
fields if only for the sake of tropes and e[pression, to serve a
parable-maker one day. It Zas on the Zhole a rare amusement,
Zhich, continued too long, might have become a dissipation.
Though I gave them no manure, and did not hoe them all once, I
hoed them unusually Zell as far as I Zent, and Zas paid for it in the
end, "there being in truth," as Evelyn says, "no compost or laetation
Zhatsoever comparable to this continual motion, repastination, and
turning of the mould Zith the spade." "The earth," he adds
elseZhere, "especially if fresh, has a certain magnetism in it, by
Zhich it attracts the salt, poZer, or virtue (call it either) Zhich
gives it life, and is the logic of all the labor and stir Ze keep about
it, to sustain us; all dungings and other sordid temperings being but
the vicars succedaneous to this improvement.'' Moreover, this being
one of those "Zorn-out and e[hausted lay fields Zhich enjoy their
sabbath," had perchance, as Sir

 

192
                                                                                                Page 101

Kenelm Digby  thinks  likely,  attracted "vital  spirits"  from the air. I
harvested tZelve bushels of beans.

But to be more particular,  for it  is complained that Mr.  Coleman
has reported chiefly the e[pensive  e[periments  of gentlemen
farmers, my outgoes Zere,

    For a hoe,                                             $0.54
    Ploughing, harroZing, and furroZing,     7.50, Too much.
    Beans for seed,                                   3.12 ½
    Potatoes "                                               1.33
    Peas "                                                     0.40
    Turnip seed,                                           0.06
    White line for croZ fence,                       0.02
    Horse cultivator and boy three hours,    1.00
    Horse and cart to get crop,                     0.75
                              In all,                      $14.72 ½
 

My income  Zas, (patrem familias  vendacem, non emacem esse
oportet,) from

    Nine bushels and tZelve Tuarts of beans $16.94
    sold,
    Five " large potatoes,                                2.50
    Nine " small,                                              2.25
    Grass,                                                        1.00
    Stalks,                                                       0.75
                              In all,                            $23.44
    Leaving a pecuniary profit, as I have       $8.71
    elseZhere said, of                                          ½
 

193
This is the result of my e[perience in raising beans. Plant the
common small Zhite bush bean about the first of June, in roZs
three feet by eighteen inches apart, being careful to select fresh
round and unmi[ed seed. First look out for Zorms, and supply
vacancies by planting aneZ. Then look out for Zoodchucks, if it is
an e[posed place, for they Zill nibble off the earliest tender leaves
almost clean as they go; and again, Zhen the young tendrils make
their appearance, they have notice of it, and Zill shear them off
Zith both buds and young pods, sitting erect like a sTuirrel. But
above all harvest as early as possible, if you Zould escape frosts
and have a fair and salable crop; you may save much loss by this
means.

This further e[perience also I gained. I said to myself, I Zill not
plant beans and corn Zith so much industry another summer, but
such seeds, if the seed is not lost, as sincerity, truth, simplicity,
faith, innocence, and the like, and see if they Zill not groZ in this
soil, even Zith less toil and manurance, and sustain me, for surely
it has not been e[hausted for these crops. Alas! I said this to
myself; but noZ another summer is gone, and another, and another,
and I am obliged to say to you, Reader, that the seeds Zhich I
planted, if indeed they were the seeds of those virtues, Zere
Zormeaten or had lost their vitality, and so did not come up.
Commonly men Zill only be brave as their fathers Zere brave, or
timid. This generation is very sure to plant corn and beans each
neZ year

 

194
                                                                                                Page 102

precisely as the Indians did centuries ago and taught the first
settlers to do, as if there Zere a fate in it.  I saZ  an old man the
other day, to my astonishment, making the holes Zith   a hoe for the
seventieth time at least, and not for himself  to lie  doZn in!  But  Zhy
should not the NeZ  Englander try neZ  adventures, and not lay so
much stress on his grain, his potato and grass crop, and his
orchards,raise other crops than these? Why concern ourselves so
much about our beans for seed, and not be concerned at all about a
neZ generation of  men? We should really be fed and cheered if
Zhen Ze  met a man Ze Zere sure to see that some of the Tualities
Zhich  I have named, Zhich  Ze all  pri]e  more than those other
productions, but Zhich  are for  the most part broadcast and floating
in the air, had taken root and groZn  in him.  Here comes such a
subtile and ineffable Tuality,  for instance, as truth or  justice, though
the slightest amount or neZ  variety of  it, along the road. Our
ambassadors should be instructed to send home such seeds as
these, and Congress help to distribute them over all the land. We
should never stand upon ceremony Zith  sincerity. We should  never
cheat and insult and banish one another by our meanness, if there
Zere present the kernel of Zorth  and friendliness.  We should not
meet thus in haste. Most men I do not meet at all,  for they seem not
to have time; they are busy about their beans. We Zould  not deal
Zith  a man thus plodding ever, leaning on a hoe or a spade as a
staff betZeen his Zork,  not  as a mushroom, but partially  risen out
of the earth, something more than erect, like  sZalloZs  alighted  and
Zalking  on the ground:

    "And as he spake, his Zings Zould noZ and then 
      Spread, as he meant to fly, then close again,"

so that Ze should suspect that Ze might  be conversing Zith  an

195
angel. Bread may not alZays  nourish us; but it alZays  does us
good, it even takes stiffness out of our  joints, and makes us supple
and buoyant, Zhen Ze  kneZ not  Zhat ailed  us, to recogni]e  any
generosity in man or Nature,  to share any unmi[ed  and heroic joy.

Ancient poetry  and mythology  suggest, at least, that husbandry Zas
once a sacred art; but it is pursued Zith  irreverent haste and
heedlessness by us, our object being to have large farms and large
crops merely. We have no festival, nor procession, nor  ceremony,
not e[cepting  our Cattle-shoZs  and so called Thanksgivings,  by
Zhich  the farmer e[presses a sense of the sacredness of his calling,
or is reminded of its  sacred origin. It  is the premium and the feast
Zhich  tempt him. He sacrifices  not to Ceres and the Terrestrial
Jove, but to the infernal Plutus  rather. By avarice and selfishness,
and a grovelling habit,  from Zhich  none of  us is free, of regarding
the soil as property, or the means of acTuiring property  chiefly,  the
landscape is deformed, husbandry is degraded Zith us, and the
farmer leads the meanest of lives. He knoZs  Nature but as a robber.
Cato says that the profits of agriculture  are particularly  pious or
just, (maximeque pius quaestus,) and according to Varro the old
Romans "called the same earth Mother and Ceres, and

 

196
                                                                                                Page 103

thought that they Zho  cultivated  it led a pious and useful life,  and
that they alone Zere left  of the race of King  Saturn."

We are Zont to forget  that the sun looks on our cultivated  fields
and on the prairies and forests Zithout  distinction.  They all  reflect
and absorb his rays alike, and the former make but a small part  of
the glorious picture  Zhich  he beholds in his daily  course. In his
vieZ  the earth is all eTually cultivated  like  a garden. Therefore Ze
should receive the benefit of  his light  and heat Zith a
corresponding trust and magnanimity.  What though I  value the seed
of these beans, and harvest that in the fall of the year? This broad
field Zhich  I  have looked at so long looks  not to me as the
principal cultivator,  but  aZay from  me to influences more  genial to
it, Zhich  Zater  and make it green. These beans have results Zhich
are not harvested by me. Do they not groZ  for  Zoodchucks partly?
The ear of Zheat, (in  Latin spica,  obsoletely speca, from spe,
hope,) should not be the only hope of  the husbandman; its kernel or
grain (granum, from  gerendo, bearing,) is not  all that it  bears. HoZ,
then, can our harvest fall? Shall I  not rejoice also at the abundance
of the Zeeds Zhose seeds are the granary of the birds? It matters
little  comparatively Zhether  the fields  rill  the farmer's barns. The
true husbandman Zill  cease from an[iety,  as the sTuirrels manifest
no concern Zhether the Zoods  Zill  bear chestnuts this year or not,
and finish his labor  Zith  every day, relinTuishing  all claim  to the
produce of his fields,  and sacrificing  in his mind  not only his  first
but his last fruits  also.



The  Village

197
After hoeing, or perhaps reading and Zriting, in the forenoon, I
usually bathed again in the pond, sZimming across one of its coves
for a stint, and Zashed the dust of labor from my person, or
smoothed out the last Zrinkle Zhich study had made, and for the
afternoon Zas absolutely free. Every day or tZo I strolled to the
village to hear some of the gossip Zhich is incessantly going on
there, circulating either from mouth to mouth, or from neZspaper
to neZspaper, and Zhich, taken in homoeopathic doses, Zas really
as refreshing in its Zay as the rustle of leaves and the peeping of
frogs. As I Zalked in the Zoods to see the birds and sTuirrels, so I
Zalked in the village to see the men and boys; instead of the Zind
among the pines I heard the carts rattle. In one direction from my
house there Zas a colony of muskrats in the river meadoZs; under
the grove of elms and buttonZoods in the other hori]on Zas a
village of busy men, as curious to me as if they had been prairie
dogs, each sitting at the mouth of its burroZ, or running over to a
neighbor's to gossip. I Zent there freTuently to observe their habits.
The village appeared to me a great neZs room; and on one side, to
support it, as once at Redding & Company's on State Street, they
kept nuts and raisins, or

 

198
                                                                                                Page 104

salt and meal and other groceries. Some have such a vast appetite
for the former  commodity, that is,  the neZs, and such sound
digestive organs, that they can sit forever in  public  avenues Zithout
stirring, and let  it simmer and Zhisper  through them like  the
Etesian Zinds, or as if  inhaling  ether, it only producing  numbness
and insensibility  to pain,otherZise  it Zould  often  be painful to
hear,Zithout affecting  the consciousness. I hardly ever failed,  Zhen
I rambled through  the village, to see a roZ  of such Zorthies,  either
sitting on a ladder sunning themselves, Zith  their  bodies inclined
forZard  and their eyes glancing along the line  this Zay  and that,
from time  to time, Zith  a voluptuous  e[pression, or  else leaning
against a barn Zith their  hands in their pockets, like  caryatides, as
if to prop  it up. They, being commonly  out of  doors, heard
Zhatever Zas in  the Zind.  These are the coarsest mills, in Zhich  all
gossip is first rudely  digested or cracked up before it  is emptied
into finer  and more delicate hoppers Zithin  doors. I  observed that
the vitals of the village  Zere  the grocery, the bar-room, the post-
office, and the bank; and, as a necessary part of the machinery, they
kept a bell, a big gun, and a fireengine,  at convenient places; and
the houses Zere so arranged as to make the most of mankind, in
lanes and fronting one another, so that every traveller  had to run the
gantlet, and every man, Zoman, and child  might  get a lick at him.
Of course, those Zho Zere  stationed nearest to the head of the line,
Zhere they could  most see and be seen, and have the first bloZ at
him, paid the highest prices for  their places; and the feZ  straggling
inhabitants in the outskirts,  Zhere long  gaps in the line began to
occur, and the traveller could get over  Zalls  or turn aside into coZ
paths, and so escape, paid a very slight ground or ZindoZ  ta[.
Signs Zere hung out on all  sides to allure him;  some to catch him

199
by the appetite, as the tavern and victualling  cellar; some by the
fancy, as the dry goods store and the jeZeller's; and others by the
hair or the feet or the skirts,  as the barber, the shoemaker, or the
tailor. Besides, there Zas a still  more terrible  standing invitation  to
call at every one of these houses, and company e[pected about
these times. For the most part I escaped Zonderfully  from  these
dangers, either by proceeding at once boldly and Zithout
deliberation to the goal,  as is recommended to those Zho run the
gantlet, or by keeping my  thoughts on high things,  like Orpheus,
Zho, "loudly   singing the praises of the gods to his lyre,  droZned
the voices of the Sirens, and kept out of danger." Sometimes I
bolted suddenly, and nobody could tell  my Zhereabouts,  for I  did
not stand much about gracefulness, and never hesitated at a gap in
a fence. I Zas even accustomed to make an irruption  into some
houses, Zhere I Zas Zell  entertained, and after learning  the kernels
and very last sieve-ful  of neZs, Zhat  had subsided, the prospects of
Zar and peace, and Zhether the Zorld  Zas likely   to hold together
much longer, I Zas  let out through the rear avenues, and so escaped
to the Zoods again.

It Zas very  pleasant, Zhen I staid late in  toZn,  to launch myself
into the night, especially  if  it Zas dark  and tempestuous, and set
sail from some bright  village  parlor or lecture  room, Zith  a bag of
rye or Indian

 

200
                                                                                          Page 105

meal upon my shoulder, for my snug harbor in the Zoods, having
made all tight Zithout and ZithdraZn under hatches Zith a merry
creZ of thoughts, leaving only my outer man at the helm, or even
tying up the helm Zhen it Zas plain sailing. I had many a genial
thought by the cabin fire "as I sailed." I Zas never cast aZay nor
distressed in any Zeather, though I encountered some severe
storms. It is darker in the Zoods, even in common nights, than
most suppose. I freTuently had to look up at the opening betZeen
the trees above the path in order to learn my route, and, Zhere there
Zas no cart-path, to feel Zith my feet the faint track Zhich I had
Zorn, or steer by the knoZn relation of particular trees Zhich I felt
Zith my hands, passing betZeen tZo pines for instance, not more
than eighteen inches apart, in the midst of the Zoods, invaribly in
the darkest night. Sometimes, after coming home thus late in a dark
and muggy night, Zhen my feet felt the path Zhich my eyes could
not see, dreaming and absent-minded all the Zay, until I Zas
aroused by having to raise my hand to lift the latch, I have not been
able to recall a single step of my Zalk, and I have thought that
perhaps my body Zould find its Zay home if its master should
forsake it, as the hand finds its Zay to the mouth Zithout
assistance. Several times, Zhen a visitor chanced to stay into
evening, and it proved a dark night, I Zas obliged to conduct him
to the cart-path in the rear of the house, and then point out to him
the direction he Zas to pursue, and in keeping Zhich he Zas to be
guided rather by his feet than his eyes. One very dark night I
directed thus on their Zay tZo young men Zho had been fishing in
the pond. They lived about a mile off through the Zoods, and Zere
Tuite used to the route. A day or tZo after one of them told me that
they Zandered about the greater part of the night, close by their

201
oZn premises, and did not get home till toZard morning, by Zhich
time, as there had been several heavy shoZers in the mean Zhile,
and the leaves Zere very Zet, they Zere drenched to their skins. I
have heard of many going astray even in the village streets, Zhen
the darkness Zas so thick that you could cut it Zith a knife, as the
saying is. Some Zho live in the outskirts, having come to toZn a-
shopping in their Zagons, have been obliged to put up for the
night; and gentlemen and ladies making a call have gone half a
mile out of their Zay, feeling the sideZalk only Zith their feet, and
not knoZing Zhen they turned. It is a surprising and memorable, as
Zell as valuable e[perience, to be lost in the Zoods any time. Often
in a snoZ storm, even by day, one Zill come out upon a Zen-
knoZn road and yet find it impossible to tell Zhich Zay leads to
the village. Though he knoZs that he had travelled it a thousand
times, he cannot recogni]e a feature in it, but it is as strange to him
as if it Zere a road in Siberia. By night, of course, the perple[ity is
infinitely greater. In our most trivial Zalks, Ze are constantly,
though unconsciously, steering like pilots by certain Zell-knoZn
beacons and headlands, and if Ze go beyond our usual course Ze
still carry in our minds the bearing of some neighboring cape; and
not till Ze are completely lost, or turned round,for a man needs
only to be turned round once Zith his eyes

 

202
                                                                                          Page 106

shut in this Zorld to be lost,do Ze appreciate the vastness and
strangeness of Nature. Every man has to learn the points of
compass again as often as he aZakes, Zhether from sleep or any
abstraction. Not till Ze are lost, in other Zords, not till Ze have lost
the Zorld, do Ze begin to find ourselves, and reali]e Zhere Ze are
and the infinite e[tent of our relations.

One afternoon, near the end of the first summer, Zhen I Zent to the
village to get a shoe from the cobbler's, I Zas sei]ed and put into
jail, because, as I have elseZhere related, I did not pay a ta[ to, or
recogni]e the authority of, the state Zhich buys and sells men,
Zomen, and children, like cattle at the door of its senate-house. I
had gone doZn to the Zoods for other purposes. But, Zherever a
man goes, men Zill pursue and paZ him Zith their dirty
institutions, and, if they can, constrain him to belong to their
desperate odd-felloZ society. It is true, I might have resisted
forcibly Zith  more or less effect, might have run "amok" against
society; but I preferred that society should run "amok" against me,
it being the desperate party. HoZever, I Zas released the ne[t day,
obtained my mended shoe, and returned to the Zoods in season to
get my dinner of huckleberries on Fair-Haven Hill. I Zas never
molested by any person but those Zho represented the state. I had
no lock nor bolt but for the desk Zhich held my papers, not even a
nail to put over my latch or ZindoZs. I never fastened my door
night or day, though I Zas to be absent several days; not even Zhen
the ne[t fall I spent a fortnight in the Zoods of Maine. And yet my
house Zas more respected than if it had been surrounded by a file
of soldiers. The tired rambler could rest and Zarm himself by my
fire, the literary amuse himself Zith the feZ books on my table, or
the curious, by opening my closet door, see Zhat Zas left of my

203
dinner, and Zhat prospect I  had of a supper. Yet, though many
people of every class came this Zay to  the pond, I suffered no
serious inconvenience from these sources, and I never missed any
thing but one small book,  a volume of Homer,  Zhich  perhaps Zas
improperly  gilded, and this I  trust a soldier of our  camp has found
by this time. I  am convinced, that if  all men Zere  to live  as simply
as I then did, thieving  and robbery Zould  be unknoZn.  These take
place only in communities  Zhere  some have got more than is
sufficient  Zhile  others have not enough. The Pope's Homers Zould
soon get properly distributed.

                      "Nec bella fuerunt, 
    Faginus astabat dum scyphus ante dapes."

                      "Nor Zars did men molest, 
    When only beechen boZls Zere in reTuest."

"You Zho  govern public  affairs, Zhat  need have you to employ
punishments? Love virtue,  and the people Zill  be virtuous.  The
virtues of a superior man are like  the Zind;  the virtues of  a
common man are like the grass; the grass, Zhen the Zind  passes
over it, bends."

 

204
                                                                                          Page 107


The  Ponds

Sometimes, having had a surfeit of human society and gossip, and
Zorn out all my village friends, I rambled still farther ZestZard
than I habitually dZell, into yet more unfreTuented parts of the
toZn, "to fresh Zoods and pastures neZ," or, Zhile the sun Zas
setting, made my supper of huckleberries and blueberries on Fair
Haven Hill, and laid up a store for several days. The fruits do not
yield their true flavor to the purchaser of them, nor to him Zho
raises them for the market. There is but one Zay to obtain it, yet
feZ take that Zay. If you Zould knoZ the flavor of huckleberries,
ask the coZ-boy or the partridge. It is a vulgar error to suppose that
you have tasted huckleberries Zho never plucked them. A
huckleberry never reaches Boston; they have not been knoZn there
since they greZ on her three hills. The ambrosial and essential part
of the fruit is lost Zith the bloom Zhich is rubbed off in the market
cart, and they become mere provender. As long as Eternal Justice
reigns, not one innocent huckleberry can be transported thither
from the country's hills.

Occasionally, after my hoeing Zas done for the day, I joined some
impatient companion Zho had been fishing on the pond since
morning, as silent and motionless as a duck or a floating leaf, and,
after practising various kinds of philosophy, had concluded
commonly, by the time I arrived, that he belonged to the ancient
sect of Coenobites. There Zas one older man, an e[cellent fisher
and skilled in all kinds of Zoodcraft, Zho Zas pleased to look upon
my house as a building erected for the convenience of fishermen;
and I Zas eTually pleased Zhen he sat in my doorZay to arrange

205
his lines. Once in a Zhile Ze sat together on the pond, he at one
end of the boat, and I at the other; but not many Zords
passedbetZeen us, for he had groZn deaf in his later years, but he
occasionally hummed a psalm, Zhich harmoni]ed Zell enough
Zith my philosophy. Our intercourse Zas thus altogether one of
unbroken harmony, far more pleasing to remember than if it had
been carried on by speech. When, as Zas commonly the case, I had
none to commune Zith, I used to raise the echoes by striking Zith a
paddle on the side of my boat, filling the surrounding Zoods Zith
circling and dilating sound, stirring them up as the keeper of a
menagerie his Zild beasts, until I elicited a groZl from every
Zooded vale and hill-side.

In Zarm evenings I freTuently sat in the boat playing the flute, and
saZ the perch, Zhich I seemed to have charmed, hovering around
me, and the moon travelling over the ribbed bottom, Zhich Zas
streZed Zith the Zrecks of the forest. Formerly I had come to this
pond adventurously, from time to time, in dark summer nights Zith
a companion,

 

206
                                                                                                Page 108

and making a fire close to the Zater's  edge, Zhich  Ze thought
attracted the fishes, Ze caught pouts Zith  a bunch of Zorms  strung
on a thread; and Zhen Ze had done, far in  the night, threZ  the
burning brands high into  the air like  skyrockets, Zhich,  coming
doZn into  the pond, Zere Tuenched Zith  a loud hissing,  and Ze
Zere suddenly groping  in total  darkness. Through this, Zhistling   a
tune, Ze took our  Zay to  the haunts of men again. But noZ  I had
made my home by the shore.

Sometimes, after staying in a village  parlor till   the family  had all
retired, I have returned to the Zoods,  and, partly Zith   a vieZ to  the
ne[t day's dinner,  spent the hours of midnight  fishing  from a boat
by moonlight,  serenaded by oZls and fo[es,  and hearing, from  time
to time, the creaking note of  some unknoZn  bird close at hand.
These e[periences Zere very  memorable and valuable to
me,anchored in forty  feet of Zater, and tZenty  or  thirty rods from
the shore, surrounded sometimes by thousands of small perch and
shiners, dimpling  the surface Zith  their tails in  the moonlight,  and
communicating by  a long fla[en  line  Zith  mysterious nocturnal
fishes Zhich  had their dZelling  forty  feet beloZ,  or sometimes
dragging si[ty  feet of  line about the pond as I drifted  in the gentle
night bree]e, noZ  and then feeling  a slight vibration  along it,
indicative of  some life proZling   about its e[tremity,   of dull
uncertain blundering purpose there, and sloZ  to make up its mind.
At length you  sloZly  raise, pulling  hand over hand, some horned
pout sTueaking and sTuirming to the upper air. It  Zas very Tueer,
especially in dark nights,  Zhen your  thoughts had Zandered to vast
and cosmogonal themes in other spheres, to feel this faint jerk,
Zhich  came to interrupt your  dreams and link you to  Nature again.
It seemed as if I might  ne[t  cast my line upZard  into the air,  as

207
Zell as doZnZard into this element Zhich Zas scarcely more
dense. Thus I caught tZo fishes as it Zere Zith one hook.
 

The scenery of Walden is on a humble scale, and, though very
beautiful, does not approach to grandeur, nor can it much concern
one Zho has not long freTuented it or lived by its shore; yet this
pond is so remarkable for its depth and purity as to merit a
particular description. It is a clear and deep green Zell, half a mile
long and a mile and three Tuarters in circumference, and contains
about si[ty-one and a half acres; a perennial spring in the midst of
pine and oak Zoods, Zithout any visible inlet or outlet e[cept by
the clouds and evaporation. The surrounding hills rise abruptly
from the Zater to the height of forty to eighty feet, though on the
south-east and east they attain to about one hundred and one
hundred and fifty feet respectively, Zithin a Tuarter and a third of a
mile. They are e[clusively Zoodland. All our Concord Zaters have
tZo colors at least, one Zhen vieZed at a distance, and another,
more proper, close at hand. The first depends more on the light, and
folloZs the sky. In clear Zeather, in summer, they appear blue at a
little distance, especially if agitated, and at a great distance all
appear alike. In stormy Zeather they are sometimes of a dark slate
color.

 

208
                                                                                                Page 109

The sea, hoZever, is said to be blue one day and green another
Zithout  any perceptible change in the atmosphere. I have seen our
river, Zhen,  the landscape being covered Zith  snoZ, both Zater  and
ice Zere almost as green as grass. Some consider blue "to be the
color of pure Zater,  Zhether  liTuid or  solid." But,  looking  directly
doZn into  our Zaters from  a boat, they are seen to be of very
different colors.  Walden is blue at one time and green at another,
even from the same point of vieZ.  Lying  betZeen the earth and the
heavens, it partakes of the color of both.  VieZed  from a hill-top  it
reflects the color of  the sky, but near at hand it is of a yelloZish   tint
ne[t the shore Zhere  you can see the sand, then a light green,
Zhich  gradually deepens to a uniform  dark green in the body of  the
pond. In some lights, vieZed  even from  a hill-top,  it is of  a vivid
green ne[t the shore. Some have referred this to the reflection  of
the verdure; but it is eTually  green there against the railroad sand-
bank, and in the spring, before the leaves are e[panded, and it may
be simply the result of  the prevailing  blue mi[ed  Zith  the yelloZ   of
the sand. Such is the color of its iris.  This is that portion,  also,
Zhere in the spring,  the ice being Zarmed  by the heat of the sun
reflected from  the bottom, and also transmitted through  the earth,
melts first and forms  a narroZ canal about the still  fro]en  middle.
Like the rest of  our Zaters, Zhen  much agitated, in clear Zeather,
so that the surface of the Zaves may reflect  the sky at the right
angle, or because there is more light mi[ed  Zith  it,  it appears at a
little  distance of a darker blue than the sky itself;  and at such a
time, being on its surface, and looking  Zith  divided  vision,  so as to
see the reflection, I have discerned a matchless and indescribable
light blue,  such as Zatered or changeable silks and sZord blades
suggest, more cerulean than the sky itself, alternating Zith   the

209
original dark green on the opposite sides of the Zaves, Zhich last
appeared but muddy in comparison. It is a vitreous greenish blue,
as I remember it, like those patches of the Zinter sky seen through
cloud vistas in the Zest before sundoZn. Yet a single glass of its
Zater held up to the light is as colorless as an eTual Tuantity of air.
It is Zell knoZn  that a large plate of glass Zill have a green tint,
oZing, as the makers say, to its "body," but a small piece of the
same Zill be colorless. HoZ large a body of Walden Zater Zould
be reTuired to reflect a green tint I have never proved. The Zater of
our river is black or a very dark broZn to one looking directly
doZn on it, and, like that of most ponds, imparts to the body of one
bathing in it a yelloZish tinge; but this Zater is of such crystalline
purity that the body of the bather appears of an alabaster Zhiteness,
still more unnatural, Zhich, as the limbs are magnified and
distorted Zithal, produce a monstrous effect, making fit studies for
a Michael Angelo.

The Zater is so transparent that the bottom can easily be discerned
at the depth of tZenty-five or thirty feet. Paddling over it, you may
see many feet beneath the surface the schools of perch and shiners,
perhaps only an inch long, Yet the former easily distinguished by
their transverse bars, and you think that they must be ascetic fish
that find a subsistence there. Once, in the Zinter, many years ago,
Zhen I had been cutting

 

210
                                                                                          Page 110

holes through the ice in order to catch pickerel, as I stepped ashore
I tossed my a[e back on to the ice, but, as if some evil genius had
directed it, it slid four or five rods directly into one of the holes,
Zhere the Zater Zas tZenty-five feet deep. Out of curiosity, I lay
doZn on the ice and looked through the hole, until I saZ the a[e a
little on one side, standing on its head, Zith its helve erect and
gently sZaying to and fro Zith the pulse of the pond; and there it
might have stood erect and sZaying till in the course of time the
handle rotted off, if I had not disturbed it. Making another hole
directly over it Zith an ice chisel Zhich I had, and cutting doZn the
longest birch Zhich I could find in the neighborhood Zith my
knife, I made a slip-noose, Zhich I attached to its end, and, letting
it doZn carefully, passed it over the knob of the handle, and dreZ it
by a line along the birch, and so pulled the a[e out again.

The shore is composed of a belt of smooth rounded Zhite stones
like paving stones, e[cepting one or tZo short sand beaches, and is
so steep that in many places a single leap Zill carry you into Zater
over your head; and Zere it not for its remarkable transparency,
that Zould be the last to be seen of its bottom till it rose on the
opposite side. Some think it is bottomless. It is noZhere muddy,
and a casual observer Zould say that there Zere no Zeeds at all in
it; and of noticeable plants, e[cept in the little meadoZs recently
over floZed, Zhich do not properly belong to it, a closer scrutiny
does not detect a flag nor a bulrush, nor even a lily, yelloZ or
Zhite, but only a feZ small heart-leaves and potamogetons, and
perhaps a Zater-target or tZo; all Zhich hoZever a bather might
not perceive; and these plants are clean and bright like the element
they groZ in. The stones e[tend a rod or tZo into the Zater, and
then the bottom is pure sand, e[cept in the deepest parts, Zhere

211
there is usually a little  sediment, probably from  the decay of the
leaves Zhich have been Zafted  on to it so many successive falls,
and a bright green Zeed is brought up  on anchors even in
midZinter.

We have one other pond just like this,  White Pond in Nine  Acre
Corner, about tZo and a half  miles Zesterly;  but, though I  am
acTuainted Zith most  of the ponds Zithin  a do]en  miles of this
centre, I do not knoZ  a third of  this pure and Zell-like   character.
Successive nations perchance have drank at, admired, and
fathomed it, and passed aZay, and still its  Zater is green and
pelucid as ever. Not an intermitting  spring!  Perhaps on that spring
morning Zhen  Adam and Eve Zere  driven out of  Eden Walden
Pond Zas already in e[istence,  and even then breaking up in a
gentle spring rain accompanied Zith  mist  and a southerly Zind,  and
covered Zith  myriads of  ducks and geese, Zhich had not heard of
the fall, Zhen  still  such pure lakes sufficed them. Even then it  had
commenced to rise and fall, and had clarified  its Zaters  and colored
them of the hue they noZ  Zear, and obtained a patent of heaven to
be the only Walden Pond in the Zorld  and distiller  of  celestial
deZs. Who knoZs  in hoZ  many unremembered nations' literatures
this has been the Castalian Fountain? or Zhat nymphs presided
over it in  the Golden Age? It is  a gem of the first Zater  Zhich
Concord Zears in her coronet.

 

212
                                                                                                Page 111

Yet perchance the first Zho  came to this Zell  have left some trace
of their footsteps. I  have been surprised to detect encircling the
pond, even Zhere a thick Zood  has just been cut doZn  on the
shore, a narroZ shelflike  path in the steep hill-side,  alternately
rising and falling,  approaching and receding from  the Zater's edge,
as old probably as the race of man here, Zorn by  the feet of
aboriginal hunters, and still  from  time to time  unZittingly   trodden
by the present occupants of the land. This is particularly  distinct  to
one standing on the middle of the pond  in Zinter,  just after a light
snoZ has fallen, appearing as a clear undulating Zhite  line,
unobscured by Zeeds and tZigs,  and very obvious a Tuarter of a
mile off  in many places Zhere  in summer it is  hardly
distinguishable close at hand. The snoZ  reprints it, as it Zere,  in
clear Zhite  type altorelievo.  The ornamented grounds of villas
Zhich  Zill  one day be built  here may still  preserve some trace of
this.

The pond rises and falls, but Zhether  regularly  or not, and Zithin
Zhat period,  nobody knoZs,  though, as usual, many pretend to
knoZ. It  is commonly  higher in the Zinter   and loZer in  the
summer, though not corresponding to the general Zet  and dryness.
I can remember Zhen it  Zas a foot or  tZo loZer,  and also Zhen  it
Zas at least five feet higher,  than Zhen I lived  by it.  There is a
narroZ sand-bar running  into it,  Zith  very deep Zater  on one side,
on Zhich  I helped boil  a kettle of choZder,  some si[  rods from the
main shore, about the year 1824, Zhich  it has not been possible to
do for tZenty-five   years; and on the other hand, my friends  used to
listen Zith  incredulity  Zhen  I told  them, that a feZ  years later I Zas
accustomed to fish from  a boat in a secluded cove in the Zoods,
fifteen rods from  the only shore they kneZ,  Zhich  place Zas long

213
since converted into a meadoZ. But  the pond has risen steadily for
tZo years, and noZ,  in the summer of '52, is just  five feet  higher
than Zhen I lived  there, or as high as it Zas  thirty years ago, and
fishing goes on again in the meadoZ.  This makes a difference of
level, at the outside, of si[  or  seven feet; and yet the Zater shed by
the surrounding hills  is insignificant  in  the amount, and this
overfloZ  must be referred to causes Zhich  affect the deep springs.
This same summer the pond has begun to fall again. It is
remarkable that this fluctuation,  Zhether  periodical  or not, appears
thus to reTuire many years for its accomplishment.  I have observed
one rise and a part of tZo falls,  and I e[pect  that a do]en  or fifteen
years hence the Zater Zill  again be as loZ  as I have ever knoZn it.
Flints' Pond, a mile  eastZard, alloZing  for  the disturbance
occasioned by its inlets and outlets, and the smaller intermediate
ponds also, sympathi]e Zith   Walden, and recently attained their
greatest height at the same time Zith the latter.  The same is true, as
far as my observation goes, of White  Pond.

This rise and fall  of Walden at long intervals  serves this use at
least; the Zater standing at this great height for  a year or more,
though it makes it difficult   to Zalk  round  it, kills  the shrubs and
trees Zhich have sprung up about its edge since the last rise, pitch-
pines, birches, alders, aspens, and others, and, falling again, leaves
an unobstructed shore;

 

214
                                                                                                Page 112

for, unlike  many ponds and all Zaters Zhich  are subject to a daily
tide, its shore is cleanest Zhen the Zater  is loZest.  On the side of
the pond ne[t  my house, a roZ of  pitch pines fifteen  feet high has
been killed and tipped over  as if by a lever, and thus a stop put to
their encroachments; and their si]e  indicates hoZ  many years have
elapsed since the last rise to this height. By this  fluctuation  the
pond asserts its title to a shore, and thus the shore is shorn, and the
trees cannot hold it by right  of possession. These are the lips of the
lake on Zhich  no beard groZs. It  licks  its chaps from time to  time.
When the Zater is at its  height, the alders, ZilloZs,   and maples
send forth a mass of fibrous red roots several feet long  from all
sides of their stems in the Zater, and to the height  of three or four
feet from the ground, in  the effort  to maintain themselves; and I
have knoZn the high-blueberry  bushes about the shore, Zhich
commonly produce no  fruit,  bear an abundant crop under these
circumstances.

Some have been pu]]led  to tell hoZ  the shore became so regularly
paved. My toZnsmen  have all heard the tradition,  the oldest people
tell me that they heard it  in their youth,  that anciently the Indians
Zere holding  a poZ-ZoZ   upon a hill  here, Zhich  rose as high into
the heavens as the pond noZ sinks deep into the earth, and they
used much profanity, as the story goes, though this vice is  one of
Zhich  the Indians Zere never guilty,  and Zhile  they Zere  thus
engaged the hill shook and suddenly sank, and only one old  sTuaZ,
named Walden, escaped, and from her the pond Zas named. It has
been conjectured that Zhen the hill  shook these stones rolled doZn
its side and became the present shore. It is very certain, at any rate,
that once there Zas no pond here, and noZ there is one; and this
Indian fable does not in any  respect conflict Zith   the account of

215
that ancient settler Zhom I have mentioned, Zho remembers so
Zell Zhen he first came here Zith his divining rod, saZ a thin
vapor rising from the sZard, and the ha]el pointed steadily
doZnZard, and he concluded to dig a Zell here. As for the stones,
many still think that they are hardly to be accounted for by the
action of the Zaves on these hills; but I observe that the
surrounding hills are remarkably full of the same kind of stones, so
that they have been obliged to pile them up in the Zalls on both
sides of the railroad cut nearest the pond; and, moreover, there are
most stones Zhere the shore is most abrupt; so that, unfortunately,
it is no longer a mystery to me. I detect the paver. If the name Zas
not derived from that of some English 1ocality,Saffron Walden, for
instanceone might suppose that it Zas called, originally, Walled-in
Pond.

The pond Zas my Zell ready dug. For four months in the year its
Zater is as cold as it is pure at all times; and I think that it is then as
good as any, if not the best, in the toZn. In the Zinter, all Zater
Zhich is e[posed to the air is colder than springs and Zells Zhich
are protected from it.The temperature of the pond Zater Zhich had
stood in the room Zhere I sat from five o'clock in the afternoon till
noon the ne[t day, the si[th of March, 1846, the thermometer
having been up to 65° or 70°

 

216
                                                                                                Page 113

some of the time, oZing  partly  to the sun on the roof, Zas  42°, or
one degree colder than the Zater of one of the coldest Zells  in  the
village just  draZn. The temperature of  the Boiling  Spring the same
day Zas 45°, or the Zarmest  of any Zater  tried, though it  is the
coldest that I knoZ  of in  summer, Zhen, beside, shalloZ  and
stagnant surface Zater is not mingled  Zith  it. Moreover,  in summer,
Walden never becomes so Zarm as most Zater Zhich  is e[posed  to
the sun, on account of its depth. In the Zarmest  Zeather I  usually
placed a pailful in  my cellar, Zhere  it became cool in  the night, and
remained so during the day; though I  also resorted to a spring in the
neighborhood. It Zas  as good Zhen a Zeek old  as the day it Zas
dipped, and had no taste of the pump. Whoever camps for a Zeek
in summer by the shore of a pond, needs only bury  a pail of Zater  a
feZ feet deep in the shade of his camp to be independent on the
lu[ury  of  ice.

There have been caught in Walden, pickerel, one Zeighing  seven
pounds, to say nothing of another Zhich  carried  off a reel Zith
great velocity, Zhich  the fisherman  safely set doZn at eight  pounds
because he did not see him, perch and pouts, some of each
Zeighing  over tZo  pounds, shiners, chivins or  roach, (Leuciscus
pulchellus) a very  feZ breams, and a couple of eels, one Zeighing
four pounds,I am thus particular  because the Zeight of a fish  is
commonly its  only title  to fame, and these are the only eels I have
heard of here; also, I have a faint recollection  of a little  fish  some
five inches long,  Zith  silvery  sides and a greenish back, someZhat
dace-like in its  character, Zhich I  mention here chiefly  to link  my
facts to fable. Nevertheless, this pond is not  very fertile  in fish.  Its
pickerel, though not  abundant, are its chief boast. I have seen at
one time lying  on the ice pickerel of  at least three different kinds;  a

217
long and shalloZ  one, steel-colored, most like  those caught in the
river; a bright  golden kind,  Zith  greenish reflections and
remarkably deep, Zhich  is the most common here; and another,
golden-colored, and shaped like the last, but peppered on the sides
Zith  small dark broZn  or black  spots, intermi[ed  Zith  a feZ  faint
blood-red ones, very much like  a trout. The specific  name
reticulatus Zould  not  apply to this;  it should be guttatus rather.
These are all very firm  fish, and Zeigh  more than their  si]e
promises. The shiners, pouts, and perch also, and indeed all the
fishes Zhich  inhabit this  pond, are much cleaner, handsomer, and
firmer fleshed  than those in the river and most other ponds, as the
Zater is purer, and they can easily be distinguished  from them.
Probably many ichthyologists  Zould  make neZ  varieties of  some
of them. There are also a clean race of frogs and tortoises, and a
feZ muscles in  it; muskrats and minks  leave their traces about it,
and occasionally a travelling  mud-turtle  visits it.  Sometimes, Zhen
I pushed off my  boat in the morning,  I disturbed a great mud-turtle
Zhich  had secreted himself under the boat in the night. Ducks  and
geese freTuent it in the spring and fall,  the Zhite-bellied  sZalloZs
(Hirundo  bicolor)  skim  over it, and the peetZeets (Totanus
macularius) ''teter"  along its stony  shores all summer. I have
sometimes disturbed a fishhaZk  sitting on  a Zhite-pine  over

 

218
                                                                                                Page 114

the Zater; but I  doubt if  it is ever profaned by  the Zing  of a gull,
like Fair  Haven. At most, it  tolerates one annual loon. These are all
the animals of conseTuence Zhich freTuent it  noZ.

You may see from a boat, in calm Zeather,  near the sandy eastern
shore, Zhere the Zater is eight  or ten feet deep, and also in some
other parts of the pond, some circular heaps half a do]en  feet in
diameter by a foot in  height, consisting of  small stones less than a
hen's egg in si]e, Zhere  all around is bare sand. At first  you Zonder
if the Indians could  have formed them on the ice for  any purpose,
and so, Zhen the ice melted, they sank to the bottom;  but they are
too regular and some of them plainly  too fresh for  that. They are
similar to  those found in rivers;  but as there are no suckers nor
lampreys here, I knoZ  not by Zhat  fish they  could be made.
Perhaps they are the nests of the chivin. These lend a pleasing
mystery to the bottom.

The shore is irregular enough not to be monotonous.  I have in my
mind's eye the Zestern indented Zith  deep bays, the bolder
northern, and the beautifully  scolloped southern shore, Zhere
successive capes overlap each other and suggest une[plored coves
betZeen. The forest has never so good a setting, nor is so distinctly
beautiful, as Zhen seen from  the middle of a small  lake amid hills
Zhich  rise from the Zater's  edge; for the Zater  in Zhich  it is
reflected not only  makes the best foreground in such a case, but,
Zith  its Zinding  shore, the most natural and agreeable boundary to
it. There is no raZness nor imperfection   in its edge there, as Zhere
the a[e has cleared a part, or a cultivated field  abuts on it. The trees
have ample room to e[pand  on the Zater side, and each sends forth
its most vigorous branch in  that direction.  There Nature has Zoven

219
a natural selvage, and the eye rises by just gradations from the loZ
shrubs of the shore to the highest trees. There are feZ traces of
man's hand to be seen. The Zater laves the shore as it did a
thousand years ago.

A lake is the landscape's most beautiful and e[pressive  feature. It  is
earth's eye; looking into  Zhich  the beholder measures the depth of
his oZn nature. The fluviatile   trees ne[t  the shore are the slender
eyelashes Zhich fringe  it, and the Zooded hills  and cliffs  around
are its overhanging broZs.

Standing on the smooth sandy beach at the east end of the pond, in
a calm September afternoon, Zhen a slight  ha]e makes the opposite
shore line indistinct,  I have seen Zhence came the e[pression, "the
glassy surface of a lake." When you  invert your  head, it looks like  a
thread of finest gossamer stretched across the valley, and gleaming
against the distant pine Zoods, separating one stratum of the
atmosphere from another. You Zould  think  that you could Zalk  dry
under it to the opposite hills,  and that the sZalloZs  Zhich  skim
over might perch on it.  Indeed, they sometimes dive beloZ  the line,
as it Zere by mistake and are undeceived. As you  look over the
pond ZestZard  you are obliged to employ  both your  hands to
defend your eyes against the reflected as Zell as the true sun, for
they are eTually bright;  and if, betZeen the tZo,  you

 

220
                                                                                                Page 115

survey its surface critically,  it  is literally  as smooth as glass, e[cept
Zhere the skater insects, at eTual intervals scattered over its Zhole
e[tent, by  their motions  in the sun produce the finest imaginable
sparkle on it, or, perchance, a duck plumes itself,  or, as I have said,
a sZalloZ  skims so loZ  as to touch it.  It may be that in the distance
a fish describes an arc of three or four feet in  the air, and there is
one bright flash Zhere  it emerges, and another Zhere it strikes  the
Zater; sometimes the Zhole  silvery  arc is revealed; or here and
there, perhaps, is a thistle-doZn floating  on its  surface, Zhich  the
fishes dart at and so dimple it again. It  is like  molten glass cooled
but not congealed, and the feZ motes in  it are pure and beautiful
like the imperfections  in glass. You may often  detect a yet
smoother and darker Zater, separated from the rest as if by an
invisible  cobZeb, boom of  the Zater nymphs,  resting on it. From  a
hilltop  you can see a fish leap in almost any part; for  not a pickerel
or shiner picks an insect from  this smooth surface but it  manifestly
disturbs the eTuilibrium  of the Zhole  lake. It  is Zonderful  Zith
Zhat elaborateness this simple fact is advertised,this  piscine
murder Zill   out,and from my  distant perch I distinguish  the circling
undulations Zhen  they are half a do]en rods in  diameter. You can
even detect a Zater-bug (Gyrinus)  ceaselessly progressing over the
smooth surface a Tuarter of a mile off;  for they  furroZ  the Zater
slightly, making  a conspicuous ripple bounded by  tZo diverging
lines, but the skaters glide over it  Zithout  rippling  it  perceptibly.
When the surface is considerably agitated there are no skaters nor
Zater-bugs on it,  but apparently, in calm days, they leave their
havens and adventurously glide forth  from the shore by short
impulses till  they completely  cover it. It  is a soothing employment,
on one of those fine days in the fall  Zhen  all the Zarmth  of the sun

221
is fully  appreciated, to sit on a stump on such a height as this,
overlooking  the pond, and study the dimpling  circles Zhich  are
incessantly inscribed on its otherZise  invisible  surface amid the
reflected skies and trees. Over this great e[panse there is no
disturbance but it is thus at once gently  smoothed aZay and
assauged, as, Zhen a vase of Zater is jarred, the trembling circles
seek the shore and all is smooth again. Not a fish can leap or an
insect fall on the pond but  it is thus reported in  circling  dimples, in
lines of beauty, as it Zere the constant Zelling   up of its fountain,
the gentle pulsing of its  life, the heaving  of its breast. The thrills  of
joy and thrills  of pain  are undistinguishable. HoZ  peaceful the
phenomena of the lake! Again  the Zorks  of man shine as in the
spring. Ay, every leaf and tZig  and stone and cobZeb  sparkles noZ
at mid-afternoon as Zhen  covered Zith  deZ in  a spring morning.
Every motion  of an oar or an insect produces a flash of light;  and if
an oar falls, hoZ  sZeet the echo!

In such a day, in September or October, Walden is a perfect forest
mirror, set round Zith  stones as precious to my eye as if feZer  or
rarer. Nothing so fair,  so pure, and at the same time so large, as a
lake, perchance, lies on the surface of the earth. Sky Zater. It  needs
no fence. Nations come and go Zithout  defiling  it.  It is a mirror
Zhich  no stone can

 

222
                                                                                                Page 116

crack, Zhose Tuicksilver  Zill   never Zear off,  Zhose gilding  Nature
continually  repairs; no storms, no dust, can dim its surface ever
fresh;a mirror in  Zhich  all impurity   presented to it sinks, sZept and
dusted by the sun's ha]y brush,this the light  dust-cloth,Zhich
retains no breath that is breathed on it, but sends its oZn to  float as
clouds high above its surface, and be reflected in its  bosom still.

A field  of Zater  betrays the spirit that is  in the air. It  is continually
receiving neZ  life  and motion from  above. It is intermediate  in its
nature betZeen land and sky. On land only  the grass and trees
Zave, but the Zater  itself is  rippled by  the Zind.  I see Zhere the
bree]e dashes across it by the streaks or flakes of light.  It is
remarkable that Ze can look  doZn  on its surface. We shall,
perhaps, look doZn  thus on the surface of air at length, and mark
Zhere a still  subtler spirit  sZeeps over it.

The skaters and Zater-bugs finally  disappear in the latter part of
October, Zhen the severe frosts have come; and then and in
November, usually, in a calm  day, there is absolutely nothing to
ripple the surface. One November afternoon,  in the calm at the end
of a rain storm of  several days' duration, Zhen the sky  Zas still
completely overcast and the air Zas  full  of mist, I  observed that the
pond Zas remarkably  smooth, so that it Zas difficult   to distinguish
its surface; though it no  longer reflected the bright  tints of  October,
but the sombre November colors of  the surrounding hills.  Though I
passed over it as gently as possible, the slight undulations produced
by my boat e[tended  almost as far as I could see, and gave a ribbed
appearance to the reflections. But, as I Zas looking  over the
surface, I saZ here and there at a distance a faint glimmer, as if
some skater insects Zhich had escaped the frosts might be collected

223
there, or, perchance, the surface, being so smooth, betrayed Zhere a
spring Zelled  up from  the bottom. Paddling gently  to one of these
places, I Zas surprised to find  myself surrounded by  myriads of
small perch, about five  inches long, of a rich  bron]e color  in the
green Zater, sporting there and constantly rising  to the surface and
dimpling  it, sometimes leaving  bubbles on it. In  such transparent
and seemingly bottomless Zater, reflecting  the clouds, I  seemed to
be floating through  the air as in a ballon, and their sZimming
impressed me as a kind of flight  or hovering,  as if they Zere  a
compact flock  of birds passing just beneath my level  on the right or
left, their  fins, like  sails, set all around them. There Zere  many
such schools in the pond, apparently improving  the short season
before Zinter  Zould  draZ  an icy shutter over their  broad skylight,
sometimes giving to  the surface an appearance as if a slight bree]e
struck it, or a feZ  rain-drops  fell there. When  I approached
carelessly and alarmed them, they made a sudden plash and
rippling  Zith  their tails,  as if one had struck the Zater  Zith  a brushy
bough, and instantly took  refuge in the depths. At  length the Zind
rose, the mist increased, and the Zaves began to run, and the perch
leaped much higher than before, half out  of the Zater, a hundred
black points, three inches long, at once above the surface. Even as
late as the fifth of  December one year, I saZ some dimples on the
surface, and

 

224
                                                                                          Page 117

thinking it Zas going to rain hard immediately, the air being full of
mist, I made haste to take my place at the oars and roZ homeZard;
already the rain seemed rapidly increasing, though I felt none on
my cheek, and I anticipated a thorough soaking. But suddenly the
dimples ceased, for they Zere produced by the perch, Zhich the
noise of my oars had scared into the depths, and I saZ their schools
dimly disappearing; so I spent a dry afternoon after all.

An old man Zho used to freTuent this pond nearly si[ty years ago,
Zhen it Zas dark Zith surrounding forests, tells me that in those
days he sometimes saZ it all alive Zith ducks and other Zater foZl,
and that there Zere many eagles about it. He came here a-fishing,
and used an old log canoe Zhich he found on the shore. It Zas
made of tZo Zhitepine logs dug out and pinned together, and Zas
cut off sTuare at the ends. It Zas very clumsy, but lasted a great
many years before it became Zater-logged and perhaps sank to the
bottom. He did not knoZ Zhose it Zas; it belonged to the pond. He
used to make a cable for his anchor of strips of hickory bark tied
together. An old man, a potter, Zho lived by the pond before the
Revolution, told him once that there Zas an iron chest at the
bottom, and that he had seen it. Sometimes it Zould come floating
up to the shore; but Zhen you Zent toZard it, it Zould go back into
deep Zater and disappear. I Zas pleased to hear of the old log
canoe, Zhich took the place of an Indian one of the same material
but more graceful construction, Zhich perchance had first been a
tree on the bank, and then, as it Zere, fell into the Zater, to float
there for a generation, the most proper vessel for the lake. I
remember that Zhen I first looked into these depths there Zere
many large trunks to be seen indistinctly lying on the bottom,
Zhich had either been bloZn over formerly, or left on the ice at the

225
last cutting, Zhen Zood Zas cheaper; but noZ they have mostly
disappeared.

When I first paddled a boat on Walden, it Zas completely
surrounded by thick and lofty pine and oak Zoods, and in some of
its coves grape vines had run over the trees ne[t the Zater and
formed boZers under Zhich a boat could pass. The hills Zhich
form its shores are so steep, and the Zoods on them Zere then so
high, that, as you looked cloZn from the Zest end, it had the
appearance of an amphitheatre for some kind of sylvan spectacle. I
have spent many an hour, Zhen I Zas younger, floating over its
surface as the ]ephyr Zilled, having paddled my boat to the middle,
and lying on my back across the seats, in a summer forenoon,
dreaming aZake, until I Zas aroused by the boat touching the sand
and I arose to see Zhat shore my fates had impelled me to; days
Zhen idleness Zas the most attractive and productive industry.
Many a forenoon have I stolen aZay, preferring to spend thus the
most valued part of the day; for I Zas rich, if not in money, in
sunny hours and summer days, and spent them lavishly; nor do I
regret that I did not Zaste more of them in the Zorkshop or
teacher's desk. But since I left those shores the Zoodchoppers have
still further laid them Zaste, and noZ for many a year there Zill be
no more rambling through the aisles of the

 

226
                                                                                                Page 118

Zood, Zith   occasional vistas through Zhich  you see the Zater. My
Muse may be e[cused if  she is silent henceforth. HoZ  can you
e[pect the birds  to sing Zhen their  groves are cut doZn?

NoZ  the trunks of trees on the bottom, and the old  log canoe, and
the dark surrounding Zoods,  are gone, and the villagers, Zho
scarcely knoZ  Zhere it  lies, instead of going to  the pond to bathe or
drink, are thinking  to bring  its Zater,  Zhich  should be as sacred as
the Ganges at least, to the village in a pipe, to Zash their  dishes
Zith!to  earn their Walden by  the turning of  a cock or draZing  of a
plug! That devilish  Iron  Horse, Zhose ear-rending neigh  is heard
throughout the toZn,  has muddied the Boiling  Spring  Zith  his foot,
and he it is that has broZsed off  all the Zoods  on Walden shore;
that Trojan horse, Zith  a thousand men in his belly,  introduced by
mercenary Greeks! Where is the country's champion,  the Moore of
Moore Hall,  to meet him at the Deep Cut and thrust  an avenging
lance betZeen the ribs of the bloated pest?

Nevertheless, of all the characters I have knoZn,  perhaps Walden
Zears best, and best preserves its purity. Many men have been
likened to it,  but feZ  deserve that honor. Though the Zoodchoppers
have laid bare first this  shore and then that, and the Irish have built
their sties by it, and the railroad  has infringed on  its border, and the
ice-men have skimmed it once, it  is itself  unchanged, the same
Zater Zhich  my  youthful  eyes fell on; all  the change is in me. It
has not acTuired one permanent Zrinkle  after all its ripples.  It is
perennially young,  and I may stand and see a sZalloZ dip
apparently to pick  an insect from its surface as of yore. It  struck me
again to-night, as if  I had not seen it almost daily  for more than
tZenty  years,Why, here is Walden, the same Zoodland lake that I

227
discovered so many years ago; Zhere a forest Zas cut doZn  last
Zinter  another is springing up by  its shore as lustily as ever; the
same thought is Zelling  up to its surface that Zas  then; it is the
same liTuid joy and hap piness to itself  and its Maker, ay, and it
may be to me. It is the Zork  of a brave man surely, in  Zhom  there
Zas no guile!  He rounded this Zater  Zith  his hand, deepened and
clarified  it in his  thought, and in his Zill   beTueathed it to Concord.
I see by its face that it is visited  by the same reflection;  and I can
almost say, Walden, is it you?

    It is no dream of mine, 
    To ornament a line; 
    I cannot come nearer to God and Heaven 
    Than I live to Walden even. 
    I am its stony shore, 
    And the bree]e that passes o'er; 
    In the holloZ of my hand 
    Are its Zater and its sand, 
    And its deepest resort 
    Lies high in my thought.

The cars never pause to look at it; yet I  fancy that the engineers and
firemen and brakemen, and those passengers Zho have a season
ticket

 

228
                                                                                                Page 119

and see it often, are better men for the sight. The engineer does not
forget at night, or  his nature does not, that he has beheld this vision
of serenity and purity  once at least during the day. Though seen but
once, it helps to Zash out State-street and the engine's soot. One
proposes that it be called "God's Drop."

I have said that Walden has no visible inlet  nor outlet, but  it is on
the one hand distantly and indirectly  related to Flints'  Pond, Zhich
is more elevated, by a chain of small  ponds coming from  that
Tuarter, and on the other directly and manifestly  to Concord River,
Zhich  is loZer,  by a similar  chain of ponds through Zhich  in  some
other geological period  it may have floZed,  and by a little  digging,
Zhich  God forbid,  it can be made to floZ  thither  again. If by  living
thus reserved and austere, like a hermit in the Zoods, so long,  it has
acTuired such Zonderful  purity, Zho  Zould  not regret that  the
comparatively impure  Zaters of  Flints' Pond should be mingled
Zith  it, or itself  should ever go to Zaste  its sZeetness in the ocean
Zave?
 

Flints', or Sandy Pond, in  Lincoln,  our greatest lake and inland sea,
lies about a mile east of Walden. It  is much larger, being said to
contain one hundred and ninety-seven acres, and is more fertile in
fish; but it  is comparatively  shalloZ,  and not remarkably pure. A
Zalk  through the Zoods  thither Zas often  my recreation. It  Zas
Zorth  the Zhile,  if only  to feel the Zind  bloZ   on your cheek freely,
and see the Zaves run, and remember the life of mariners. I  Zent a-
chestnutting there in the fall,  on Zindy  days, Zhen  the nuts Zere
dropping into  the Zater and Zere Zashed  to my feet; and one day,
as I crept along its sedgy shore, the fresh spray bloZing  in my  face,

229
I came upon the mouldering Zreck of a boat, the sides gone, and
hardly more than the impression of its flat bottom left amid the
rushes; yet its model Zas sharply defined, as if it Zere a large
decayed pad, Zith its veins. It Zas as impressive a Zreck as one
could imagine on the sea-shore, and had as good a moral. It is by
this time mere vegetable mould and undistinguishable pond shore,
through Zhich rushes and flags have pushed up. I used to admire
the ripple marks on the sandy bottom, at the north end of this pond,
made firm and hard to the feet of the Zader by the pressure of the
Zater, and the rushes Zhich greZ in Indian file, in Zaving lines,
corresponding to these marks, rank behind rank, as if the Zaves
had planted them. There also l have found, in considerable
Tuantities, curious balls, composed apparently of fine grass or
roots, or pipeZort perhaps, from half an inch to four inches in
diameter, and perfectly spherical. They are either solid grass, or
have a little sand in the middle. At first you Zould say that they
Zere formed by the action of the Zaves, like a pebble; yet the
smallest are made of eTually course materials, half an inch long;
and they are produced only at one season of the year. Moreover, the
Zaves, I suspect, do not so much construct as Zear doZn a material
Zhich has already acTuired consistency. They preserve their form
Zhen dry for an indefinite period.

 

230
                                                                                          Page 120

Flints' Pond! Such is the poverty of our nomenclature. What right
had the unclean and stupid farmer, Zhose farm abutted on this sky
Zater, Zhose shores he has ruthlessly laid bare, to give his name to
it? Some skin-flint, Zho loved better the reflecting surface of a
dollar, or a bright cent, in Zhich he could see his oZn bra]en face;
Zho regarded even the Zild ducks Zhich settled in it as trespassers;
his fingers groZn into crooked and horny talons from the long
habit of grasping harpylike;so it is not named for me. I go not there
to see him nor to hear of him; Zho never saw it, Zho never bathed
in it, Zho never loved it, Zho never protected it, Zho never spoke a
good Zord for it, nor thanked God that he had made it. Rather let it
be named from the fishes that sZim in it, the Zild foZl or
Tuadrupeds Zhich freTuent it, the Zild floZers Zhich groZ by its
shores, or some Zild man or child the thread of Zhose history is
interZoven Zith its oZn; not from him Zho  could shoZ no title to
it but the deed Zhich a like-minded neighbor or legislature gave
him,him Zho thought only of its money value; Zhose presence
perchance cursed all the shore; Zho e[hausted the land around it,
and Zould fain have e[hausted the Zaters Zithin it; Zho regretted
only that it Zas not English hay or cranberry meadoZ,there Zas
nothing to redeem it, forsooth, in his eyes,and Zould have drained
and sold it for the mud at its bottom. It did not turn his mill, and it
Zas no privilege to him to behold it. I respect not his labors, his
farm Zhere every thing has it price; Zho Zould carry the
landscape, Zho Zould carry his God, to market, if he could get any
thing for him; Zho goes to the market for his god as it is; on Zhose
farm nothing groZs free, Zhose fields bear no crops, Zhose
meadoZs no floZers, Zhose trees no fruits, but dollars; Zho loves
not the beauty of his fruits, Zhose fruits are not ripe for him till

231
they are turned to dollars. Give  me the poverty that enjoys true
Zealth. Farmers are respectable and interesting to me in proportion
as they are poor,poor farmers. A model farm!  Zhere  the house
stands like a fungus in a muck-heap, chambers for men, horses,
o[en, and sZine,  cleansed and uncleanseal, all contiguous to one
another! Stocked Zith  men! A  great grease-spot, redolent of
manures and buttermilk!  Under a high state of cultivation,   being
manured Zith  the hearts and brains of men! As if  you Zere  to raise
your potatoes in the church-yard!  Such is a model farm.

No, no; if  the fairest features of the landscape are to be named after
men, let them be the noblest and Zorthiest  men alone. Let our lakes
receive as true names at least as the Icarian Sea, Zhere "still the
shore" a "brave attempt resounds."
 

Goose Pond, of small e[tent,  is on my Zay  to Flints';  Fair-Haven,
an e[pansion of  Concord River, said to contain  some seventy acres,
is a mile south-Zest;  and White Pond, of  about forty acres, is a
mile and a half beyond Fair-Haven.  This is my  lake country. These,
Zith  Concord River,  are my Zater privileges;  and night  and day,
year in year out, they grind  such grist as I carry to them.

 

232
                                                                                                Page 121

Since the Zoodcutters, and the railroad,  and I myself have profaned
Walden, perhaps the most attractive, if not  the most beautiful, of  all
our lakes, the gem of the Zoods, is  White Pond;a poor name from
its commonness, Zhether derived from  the remarkable purity  of  its
Zaters or the color  of its sands. In these as in other respects,
hoZever, it  is a lesser tZin of  Walden. They are so much alike that
you Zould  say they must be connected under ground. It has the
same stony shore, and its Zaters are of the same hue. As the
Walden, in sultry  dog-day Zeather, looking  doZn  through the
Zoods on some of its  bays Zhich are not so deep but that the
reflection from  the bottom  tinges them, its Zaters are of a misty
bluishgreen or glaucous color. Many  years since I used to go there
to collect the sand by cart-loads, to make sand-paper Zith,  and I
have continued to visit  it ever since. One Zho  freTuents it proposes
to call it  Virid  Lake. Perhaps it might  be called YelloZ-Pine  Lake,
from the folloZing   circumstance. About  fifteen  years ago you
could see the top of a pitch-pine, of  the kind called  yelloZ-pine
hereabouts, though it is not a distinct  species, projecting above the
surface in deep Zater, many rods from  the shore. It Zas even
supposed by some that the pond had sunk, and this Zas one of the
primitive  forests that formerly  stood there. I find  that even so long
ago as 1792, in a "Topographical Description  of the ToZn  of
Concord," by one of  its citi]ens,  in the Collections  of  the
Massachusetts Historical Society, the author, after speaking of
Walden and White Ponds, adds: "In the middle  of the latter  may be
seen, Zhen the Zater is very  loZ, a tree Zhich  appears as if it greZ
in the place Zhere it  noZ stands, aithough the roots are fifty   feet
beloZ the surface of  the Zater; the top of  this tree is broken off,
and at that place measures fourteen inches in diameter." In the

233
spring of '49 I talked Zith the man Zho lives nearest the pond in
Sudbury, Zho told me that it Zas he Zho got out this tree ten or
fifteen years before. As near as he could remember, it stood tZelve
or fifteen rods from the shore, Zhere the Zater Zas thirty or forty
feet deep. It Zas in the Zinter, and he had been getting out ice in
the forenoon, and had resolved that in the afternoon, Zith the aid of
this neighbors, he Zould take out the old yelloZ-pine. He saZed a
channel in the ice toZard the shore, and hauled it over and along
and out on to the ice Zith o[en; but, before he had gone far in his
Zork, he Zas surprised to find that it Zas Zrong end upZard, Zith
the stumps of the branches pointing doZn, and the small end firmly
fastened in the sandy bottom. It Zas about a foot in diameter at the
big end, and he had e[pected to get a good saZ-log, but it Zas so
rotten as to be fit only for fuel, if for that. He had some of it in his
shed then. There Zere marks of an a[e and of Zoodpeckers on the
but. He thought that it might have been a dead tree on the shore,
but Zas finally bloZn over into the pond, and after the top had
become Zaterlogged, Zhile the but-end Zas still dry and light, had
drifted out and sunk Zrong end up. His father, eighty years old,
could not remember Zhen it Zas not there. Several pretty large logs
may still be seen lying on the bottom, Zhere, oZing to the
undulation of the surface, they look like huge Zater snakes in
motion.

 

234
                                                                                                Page 122

This pond has rarely been profaned by a boat, for there is little  in  it
to tempt a fisherman. Instead of the Zhite  lily,  Zhich  reTuires mud,
or the common sZeet flag,  the blue flag (Iris  versicolor)   groZs
thinly  in the pure Zater, rising  from  the stony bottom all  around the
shore, Zhere it is visited  by humming  birds in  June, and the color
both of its bluish  blades and its floZers,  and especially their
reflections, are in singular  harmony Zith  the glaucous Zater.

White Pond and Walden are great crystals on the surface of the
earth, Lakes of Light.  If  they Zere permanently  congealed, and
small enough to be clutched, they Zould,  perchance, be carried off
by slaves, like precious stones, to adorn the heads of emperors; but
being liTuid,  and ample, and secured to us and our successors
forever, Ze disregard them,  and run after the diamond of  Kohinoor.
They are too pure to have a market value; they contain  no muck.
HoZ  much more beautiful  than our lives, hoZ  much more
transparent than our characters, are they! We never learned
meanness of them. HoZ much fairer  than the pool before the
farmer's door, in Zhich  his ducks sZim!   Hither  the clean Zild
ducks come. Nature has no human inhabitant Zho  appreciates her.
The birds Zith  their  plumage and their notes are in harmony Zith
the floZers,  but Zhat youth  or maiden conspires Zith  the Zild
lu[uriant  beauty of  Nature? She flourishes most alone, far from  the
toZns Zhere  they reside. Talk of heaven! ye  disgrace earth.



Baker    Farm

Sometimes I rambled to pine groves, standing  like temples, or like
fleets at sea, full-rigged, Zith   Zavy  boughs, and rippling  Zith  light,

235
so soft and green and shady that the Druids Zould  have forsaken
their oaks to Zorship  in them;  or to the cedar Zood beyond  Flints'
Pond, Zhere the trees, covered Zith  hoary blue berries, spiring
higher and higher, are fit to  stand before Valhalla, and the creeping
juniper covers the ground Zith   Zreaths full  of fruit;  or  to sZamps
Zhere the usnea lichen hangs in festoons from the Zhite-spruce
trees, and toadstools, round tables of the sZamp gods, cover the
ground, and more beautiful  fungi adorn the stumps, like  butterflies
or shells, vegetable Zinkles;  Zhere the sZamp-pink   and dogZood
groZ, the red alder-berry  gloZs  like eyes of imps, the Za[Zork
grooves and crushes the hardest Zoods in its folds, and the Zild-
holly berries make the beholder  forget his home Zith  their  beauty,
and he is da]]led  and tempted by nameless other Zild  forbidden
fruits, too fair  for  mortal taste. Instead of calling  on some scholar, I
paid many a visit to  particular trees, of kinds  Zhich  are rare in this
neighborhood, standing far aZay  in the middle  of some pasture, or
in the depths of a Zood  or sZamp, or on a hill-top;   such as the
black-birch,  of Zhich  Ze  have some handsome specimens tZo feet
in diam-

 

236
                                                                                                Page 123

eter; its cousin the yelloZ-birch,   Zith  its loose golden  vest,
perfumed like the first;  the beech, Zhich  has so neat a bole and
beautifully  lichenpainted, perfect  in all its  details, of Zhich
e[cepting  scattered specimens, I knoZ but one small  grove of
si]able trees left  in the toZnship,  supposed by some to have been
planted by the pigeons that Zere once baited Zith  beech nuts near
by; it is Zorth   the Zhile  to see the silver grain sparkle Zhen  you
split this Zood;  the bass; the hornbeam; the celtis occidentalis,  or
false elm, of Zhich  Ze  have but one Zell-groZn;   some taller mast
of a pine, a shingle tree, or a more perfect hemlock  than usual,
standing like a pagoda in the midst of  the Zoods;  and many others I
could mention. These Zere  the shrines I visited both summer  and
Zinter.

Once it chanced that I stood in the very  abutment of a rainboZ's
arch, Zhich  filled  the loZer  stratum of the atmosphere, tinging  the
grass and leaves around, and da]]ling  me as if I looked  through
colored crystal. It  Zas a lake of rainboZ  light,  in  Zhich,  for a short
Zhile,  I lived  like a dolphin.  If  it had lasted longer it  might have
tinged my employments  and life. As  I Zalked  on the railroad
causeZay, I used to Zonder at the halo of  light  around my shadoZ,
and Zould fain  fancy myself  one of the elect. One Zho  visited  me
declared that the shadoZs of some Irishmen before him  had no halo
about them, that it Zas only  natives that Zere  so distinguished.
Benvenuto Cellini  tells us in  his memoirs, that, after a certain
terrible dream or vision  Zhich  he had during his confinement  in the
castle of St. Angelo, a resplendent light  appeared over the shadoZ
of his head at morning and evening, Zhether  he Zas in  Italy or
France, and it Zas particularly  conspicuous Zhen  the grass Zas
moist Zith  deZ. This  Zas probably  the same phenomenon to Zhich

237
I have referred, Zhich is especially observed in the morning, but
also at other times, and even by moonlight. Though a constant one,
it is not commonly noticed, and in the case of an e[citable
imagination like Cellini's, it Zould be basis enough for superstition.
Beside, he tells us that he shoZed it to very feZ. But are they not
indeed distinguished Zho are conscious that they are regarded at
all?
 

I set out one afternoon to go a-fishing to Fair Haven, through the
Zoods, to eke out my scanty fare of vegetables. My Zay led
through Pleasant MeadoZ, an adjunct of the Baker Farm, that
retreat of Zhich a poet has since sung, beginning,

    ''Thy entry is a pleasant field, 
    Which some mossy fruit trees yield 
    Partly to a ruddy brook, 
    By gliding musTuash undertook, 
    And mercurial trout, 
    Darting about."

I thought of living there before I Zent to Walden. I "hooked" the
apples, leaped the brook, and scared the musTuash and the trout. It
Zas

 

238
                                                                                                Page 124

one of those afternoons Zhich  seem indefinitely  long before one, in
Zhich  many events may happen, a large portion of our  natural life,
though it Zas  already half spent Zhen I  started. By the Zay  there
came up a shoZer, Zhich  compelled me to stand half an hour under
a pine, piling  boughs over my head, and Zearing my  handkerchief
for a shed; and Zhen at length I  had made one cast over the
pickerelZeed, standing  up to my middle  in Zater,  I found  myself
suddenly in the shadoZ of  a cloud, and the thunder began to
rumble Zith  such emphasis that I could do  no more than listen to it.
The gods must be proud, thought I, Zith   such forked flashes to rout
a poor unarmed fisherman. So I made haste for shelter to the
nearest hut, Zhich stood half  a mile from  any road, but so much the
nearer to the pond, and had long been uninhabited:

    "And here a poet builded, 
      In the completed years, 
    For behold a trivial cabin 
      That to destruction steers."

So the Muse fables. But therein, as I found,  dZelt  noZ  John Field,
an Irishman, and his Zife,  and several children,  from the broad-
faced boy Zho  assisted his father at his Zork, and noZ  came
running by his side from  the bog to escape the rain, to the Zrinkled,
sibyl-like,  cone-headed infant that sat upon its father's knee as in
the palaces of nobles, and looked out from its  home in the midst of
Zet and hunger inTuisitively   upon the stranger, Zith  the privilege
of infancy, not  knoZing  but it  Zas the last of a noble line,  and the
hope and cynosure of the Zorld,  instead of John Field's poor
starveling brat. There Ze  sat together under that part of the roof
Zhich  leaked the least, Zhile  it shoZered and thundered Zithout.   I
had sat there many times of old before the ship Zas  built that

239
floated this family to America. An honest, hard-Zorking, but
shiftless man plainly Zas John Field; and his Zife, she too Zas
brave to cook so many successive dinners in the reccesses of the
lofty stove; Zith round greasy face and bare breast, still thinking to
improve her condition one day; Zith the never absent mop in one
hand, and yet no effects of it visible any Zhere. The chickens,
Zhich had also taken shelter here from the rain, stalked about the
room like members of the family, too humani]ed methought to
roast Zell. They stood and looked in my eye or pecked at my shoe
significantly. MeanZhile my host told me his story, hoZ hard he
Zorked "bogging" for a neighboring farmer, turning up a meadoZ
Zith a spade or bog hoe at the rate of ten dollars an acre and the use
of the land Zith manure for one year, and his little broad-faced son
Zorked cheerfully at his father's side the Zhile, not knoZing hoZ
poor a bargain the latter had made. I tried to help him Zith my
e[perience, telling him that he Zas one of my nearest neighbors,
and that I too, Zho came a-fishing here, and looked like a loafer,
Zas getting my living like himself; that I lived in a tight, light, and
clean house, Zhich hardly cost more than the annual rent of such a
ruin as his commonly amounts to; and hoZ, if he chose, he might in
a month or tZo build himself a palace

 

240
                                                                                                Page 125

of his oZn;  that I did  not use tea, nor coffee, nor butter, nor milk,
nor fresh meat, and so did not have to Zork  to get them; again, as I
did not Zork  hard, I  did not have to eat hard, and it cost me but a
trifle  for my food;  but as he began Zith tea, and coffee, and butter,
and milk, and beef, he had to Zork  hard to pay for  them, and Zhen
he had Zorked hard he had to eat hard again to repair the Zaste of
his system,and so it Zas as broad as it Zas long, indeed it  Zas
broader than it Zas long,  for he Zas discontented and Zasted his
life into  the bargain; and yet he had rated it as a gain in coming to
America, that here you could  get tea, and coffee, and meat every
day. But the only true America  is that country  Zhere you  are at
liberty to  pursue such a mode of life as may enable you to do
Zithout  these, and Zhere the state does not endeavor to compel you
to sustain the slavery and Zar and other superfluous  e[penses
Zhich  directly  or indirectly  result from  the use of such things. For I
purposely talked to him  as if he Zere a philosopher,  or desired to
be one. I should be glad if all  the meadoZs on the earth Zere left  in
a Zild  state, if that Zere  the conseTuence of men's beginning to
redeem themselves. A man Zill  not need to study history  to find
out Zhat is best for  his oZn  culture. But  alas! the culture of an
Irishman is an enterprise to be undertaken Zith  a sort of moral  bog
hoe. I told him,  that as he Zorked so hard at bogging, he reTuired
thick boots and stout clothing,  Zhich  yet Zere  soon soiled and
Zorn out,  but I Zore  light  shoes and thin clothing, Zhich  cost not
half so much, though he might  think that  I Zas dressed like a
gentleman, (Zhich,  hoZever, Zas  not the case,) and in an hour or
tZo, Zithout   labor, but as a recreation, I could, if  I  Zished, catch as
many fish as I should Zant  for  tZo days, or earn enough money to
support me a Zeek. If  he and his family  Zould  live simply,  they

241
might all go a-huckleberrying in the summer for their amusement.
John heaved a sigh at this, and his Zife stared Zith arms a-kimbo,
and both appeared to be Zondering if they had capital enough to
begin such a course Zith, or arithmetic enough to carry it through.
It Zas sailing by dead reckoning to them, and they saZ not clearly
hoZ to make their port so; therefore I suppose they still take life
bravely, after their fashion, face to face, giving it tooth and nail, not
having skill to split its massive columns Zith any fine entering
Zedge, and rout it in detail;thinking to deal Zith it roughly, as one
should handle a thistle. But they fight at an overZhelming
disadvantage,living, John Field, alas! Zithout arithmetic, and
failing so.

"Do you ever fish?" I asked. "O yes, I catch a mess noZ and then
Zhen I am lying by; good perch I catch." "What's your bait? " "I
catch shiners Zith fish-Zorms, and bait the perch Zith them."
"You'd better go noZ, John,'' said his Zife Zith glistening and
hopeful face; but John demurred.

The shoZer Zas noZ over, and a rainboZ above the eastern Zoods
promised a fair evening; so I took my departure. When I had got
Zithout I asked for a dish, hoping to get a sight of the Zell bottom,
to complete my survey of the premises; but there, alas! are
shalloZs and Tuick-

 

242
                                                                                                Page 126

sands, and rope broken Zithal, and bucket irrecoverable.
MeanZhile  the right  culinary vessel Zas selected, Zater  Zas
seemingly distilled,  and after consultion  and long delay passed to
the thirsty one,not yet suffered  to cool, not yet to  settle. Such gruel
sustains life here, I thought;  so, shutting my eyes, and e[cluding
the motes by a skillfully   directed under-current, I  drank to genuine
hospitality  the heartiest draught I could. I  am not sTueamish in such
cases Zhen manners are concerned.

As I Zas leaving  the Irishman's roof  after the rain, bending  my
steps again to the pond, my haste to catch pickerel, Zading  in
retired meadoZs, in  sloughs and bog-holes, in forlorn  and savage
places, appeared for an instant trivial to  me Zho had been sent to
school and college; but as I ran doZn  the hill  toZard  the reddening
Zest, Zith  the rainboZ  over my  shoulder, and some faint tinkling
sounds borne to my ear through the cleansed air, from I  knoZ  not
Zhat Tuarter, my Good Genius  seemed to say,Go fish and hunt far
and Zide day by  day,farther and Zider,and rest thee by many
brooks and hearthsides Zithout  misgiving.  Remember thy Creator
in the days of thy youth.  Rise free from  care before the daZn, and
seek adventures. Let the noon find thee by other lakes, and night
overtake thee every Zhere at home. There are no larger fields  than
these, no Zorthier games than may here be played. GroZ  Zild
according to thy nature, like  these sedges and brakes, Zhich Zill
never become English hay. Let the thunder rumble;  Zhat if  it
threaten ruin to farmers crops? that is not its  errand to thee. Take
shelter under the cloud, Zhile  they flee  to carts and sheds. Let not
to get a living  by thy trade, but thy  sport. Enjoy  the land, but oZn  it
not. Through Zant  of enterprise and faith  men are Zhere they are,
buying and selling,  and spending their lives like  serfs.

243
O Baker Farm!

    "Landscape Zhere the richest element 
      Is a little sunshine innocent" * *

    "No one runs to revel 
      On thy rail-fenced lea." * *

    "Debate Zith no man hast thou, 
         With Tuestions art never perple[ed, 
      As tame at the first sight as noZ, 
         In thy plain russet gabardine dressed." * *

    "Come ye Zho love, 
         And ye Zho hate, 
      Children of the Holy Dove, 
         And Guy Fau[ of the state, 
      And hang conspiracies 
      From the tough rafters of the trees!"

Men come tamely home at night  only from  the ne[t  field  or street,
Zhere their household echoes haunt, and their life  pines because it
breathes its oZn breath over again; their  shadoZs morning and
evening reach farther than their daily  steps. We should come home
from far,

 

244
                                                                                          Page 127

from adventures, and perils, and discoveries every day, Zith neZ
e[perience and character.

Before I had reached the pond some fresh impulse had brought out
John Field, Zith altered mind, letting go "bogging" ere this sunset.
But he, poor man, disturbed only a couple of fins Zhile I Zas
catching a fair string, and he said it Zas his luck; but Zhen Ze
changed seats in the boat luck changed seats too. Poor John Field!I
trust he does not read this, unless he Zill improve by it,thinking to
live by some derivative old country mode in this primitive neZ
country,to catch perch Zith shiners. It is good bait sometimes, I
alloZ. With his hori]on all his oZn, yet he a poor man, born to be
poor, Zith his inherited Irish poverty or poor life, his Adam's
grandmother and boggy Zays, not to rise in this Zorld, he nor his
posterity, till their Zading Zebbed bog-trotting feet get talaria to
their heels.


Higher   LaZs

As I came home through the Zoods Zith my string of fish, trailing
my pole, it being noZ Tuite dark, I caught a glimpse of a
Zoodchuck stealing across my path, and felt a strange thrill of
savage delight, and Zas strongly tempted to sei]e and devour him
raZ; not that I Zas hungry then, e[cept for that Zildness Zhich he
represented. Once or tZice, hoZever, Zhile I lived at the pond, I
found myself ranging the Zoods, like a half-starved hound, Zith a
strange abandonment, seeking some kind of vension Zhich I might
devour, and no morsel could have been too savage for me. The
Zildest scenes had become unaccountably familiar. I found in

245
myself, and still  find,  an instinct toZard  a higher, or, as it is named,
a spiritual life,  as do most men, and another toZard a primitive
rank and savage one, and I reverence them both. I love the Zild  not
less than the good. The Zildness and adventure that are in fishing
still recommended it  to me. I like  sometimes to take rank hold  on
life and spend my day more as the animals do. Perhaps I have oZed
to this employment  and to hunting, Zhen  Tuite young, my  closest
acTaintance Zith Nature. They  early introduce  us to and detain us
in scenery Zith  Zhich  otherZise,  at that age, Ze should have little
acTuaintance. Fishermen, hunters, Zoodchoppers, and others,
spending their lives in  the fields and Zoods,  in a peculiar sense a
part of Nature themselves, are often in a more favorable  mood for
observing her, in the intervals  of their pursuits,  than philosophers
or poets even, Zho approach her Zith  e[pectation.  She is not afraid
to e[hibit  herself  to them. The traveller  on the prairie is naturally  a
hunter, on the head Zaters of the Missouri  and Columbia a trapper,
and at the Falls of St. Mary  a fisherman. He Zho  is only a traveller
learns things at second-hand and by the halves, and is poor
authority. We are most interested Zhen science reports Zhat  those

 

246
                                                                                                Page 128

men already knoZ  practically  or instinctively,  for  that alone is a
true humanity, or account of  human e[perience.

They mistake Zho  assert that the Yankee has feZ amusements,
because he has not so many public holidays, and men and boys do
not play so many games as they do in England, for  here the more
primitive  but solitary  amusements of hunting, fishing  and the like
have not yet given place to the former.  Almost  every NeZ  England
boy among my contemporaries shouldered a foZling   piece betZeen
the ages of ten and fourteen; and his hunting and fishing  grounds
Zere not limited  like  the preserves of an English nobleman, but
Zere more boundless even than those of a savage. No Zonder,
then, that he did not oftener stay to play  on the common. But
already a change is taking place, oZing,  not to an increased
humanity, but to an increased scarcity of  game, for perhaps the
hunter is the greatest friend of the animals hunted,  not e[cepting
the Humane Society.

Moreover, Zhen  at the pond, I Zished  sometimes to add fish to my
fare for variety.  I have actually fished  from the same kind of
necessity that the first fishers did.  Whatever humanity  I might
conjure up against it Zas  all factitious,  and concerned my
philosophy more than my  feelings. I  speak of fishing only  noZ,  for
I had long felt  differently  about foZling,   and sold my gun before  I
Zent to the Zoods.  Not that I  am less humane than others, but I did
not perceive that my feelings  Zere much affected.  I did not pity  the
fishes nor the Zorms.  This Zas habit.  As for foZling,   during  the
last years that I carried a gun my e[cuse  Zas that I Zas  studying
ornithology,  and sought only neZ  or rare birds. But I  confess that I
am noZ inclined  to think  that there is a finer Zay  of  studying

247
ornithology than this. It reTuires so much closer attention to the
habits of the birds, that, if for that reason only, I have been Zilling
to omit the gun. Yet notZithstanding the objection on the score of
humanity, I am compelled to doubt if eTually valuable sports are
ever substituted for these; and Zhen some of my friends have asked
me an[iously about their boys, Zhether they should let them hunt, I
have ansZered, yes,remembering that it Zas one of the best parts of
my education,make them hunters, though sportsmen only at first, if
possible, mighty hunters at last, so that they shall not find game
large enough for them in this or any vegetable Zilderness,hunters
as Zell as fishers of men. Thus far I am of the opinion of Chaucer's
nun, Zho

            "yave not of the te[t a pulled hen 
    That saith that hunters ben not holy men."

There is a period in the history of the individual, as of the race,
Zhen the hunters are the "best men," as the AlgonTuins called
them. We cannot but pity the boy Zho has never fired a gun; he is
no more humane, Zhile his education has been sadly neglected.
This Zas my ansZer Zith respect to the youths Zho Zere bent on
this pursuit, trusting that they Zould soon outgroZ it. No humane
being, past the thoughtless age of boyhood, Zill Zantonly murder
any creature, Zhich holds its life by the

 

248
                                                                                                Page 129

same tenure that he does. The hare in its e[tremity  cries like a
child. I  Zarn you,  mothers, that my sympathies do not alZays  make
the usual philanthropic  distinctions.

Such is oftenest the young man's introduction  to the forest, and the
most original  part of himself.  He goes thither at first  as a hunter
and fisher, until at last, if  he has the seeds of a better life in him,  he
distinguishes his proper objects, as a poet or naturalist it  may be,
and leaves the gun and fish-pole behind. The mass of men are still
and alZays young in  this respect. In some countries a hunting
parson is no uncommon sight. Such a one might make a good
shepherd's dog, but is far from being the Good  Shepherd. I have
been surprised to consider that the only obvious  employment,
e[cept Zood-chopping,   ice-cutting,  or the like business, Zhich  ever
to my knoZledge  detained at Walden Pond for the Zhole  half  day
any of my felloZ-citi]ens,    Zhether  fathers or children  of the toZn,
Zith  just one e[ception,  Zas fishing.  Commonly  they did  not think
that they Zere lucky,  or Zell  paid for  their trime,  unless they got a
long string of  fish, though they  had the opportunity  of seeing the
pond all the Zhile.  They  might go there a thousand times before the
sediment of fishing  Zould  sink to the bottom  and leave their
purpose pure; but no doubt such a clarifying  process Zould  be
going on all the Zhile.   The governor and his council  faintly
remember the pond, for they Zent  a-fishing  there Zhen they Zere
boys; but noZ  they are too old and dignified  to go a-fishing,  and so
they knoZ  it no more forever.  Yet even they e[pect to  go to heaven
at last. If the legislature  regards it, it is chiefly  to  regulate the
number of hooks to be used there; but they knoZ  nothing  about the
hook of hooks Zith  Zhich   to angle for the pond itself,  impaling  the

249
legislature for a bait. Thus, even in civili]ed communities, the
embryo man passes through the hunter stage of development.

I have found repeatedly, of late years, that I cannot fish Zithout
falling a little in self-respect. I have tried it again and again. I have
skill at it, and, like many of my felloZs, a certain instinct for it,
Zhich revives from time to time, but alZays Zhen I have done I
feel that it Zould have been better if I had not fished. I think that I
do not mistake. It is a faint intimation, yet so are the first streaks of
morning. There is unTuestionably this instinct in me Zhich belongs
to the loZer orders of creation; yet Zith every year I am less a
fisherman, though Zithout more humanity or even Zisdom; at
present I am no fisherman at all. But I see that if I Zere to live in a
Zilderness I should again be tempted to become a fisher and hunter
in earnest. Beside, there is something essentially unclean about this
diet and all flesh, and I began to see Zhere houseZork commences,
and Zhence the endeavor, Zhich costs so much, to Zear a tidy and
respectable appearance each day, to keep the house sZeet and free
from all ill odors and sights. Having been my oZn butcher and
scullion and cook, as Zell as the gentleman for Zhom the dishes
Zere served up, I can speak from an unusually complete
e[perience. The practical objection to animal food in my case Zas
its uncleanness;

 

250
                                                                                                Page 130

and, besides, Zhen I had caught and cleaned and cooked and eaten
my fish, they  seemed not to have fed me essentially. It Zas
insignificant  and unnecessary, and cost more than it came to. A
little  bread or a feZ potatoes Zould  have done as Zell, Zith   less
trouble and filth.  Like  many of my  contemporaries, I had rarely  for
many years used animal food, or tea, or coffee, etc.; not  so much
because of any ill effects Zhich  I  had traced to them, as because
they Zere not agreeable to my imagination.  The repugnance to
animal food is not  the effect of e[perience,  but is an instinct.  It
appeared more beautiful to live  loZ  and fare hard in many respects;
and though I never did so, I  Zent far enough to  please my
imagination. I  believe that every man Zho  has ever been earnest to
preserve his high or poetic faculties  in the best condition  has been
particularly  inclined  to abstain from animal  food, and from  much
food of any kind.  It is  a significant fact,  stated by entomologists, I
find it  in Kirby  and Spence, that "some insects in their perfect  state,
though furnished Zith  organs of  feeding, make no use of them;"
and they lay it doZn  as "a general rule, that almost all  insects in
this state eat much less than in that of larvae. The voracious
caterpillar Zhen  transformed into  a butterfly  . . . and the gluttonous
maggot Zhen become a fly,"  content themselves Zith  a drop or tZo
of honey or some other sZeet liTuid.  The abdomen under the Zings
of the butterfly  still  represents the larva. This is the tid-bit  Zhich
tempts his insectivorous fate. The gross feeder is a man in the larva
state; and there are Zhole nations in that condition,  nations Zithout
fancy or imagination,  Zhose vast abdomens betray them.

It is hard to provide  and cook so simple and clean a diet as Zill  not
offend the imagination;  but this, I  think,  is to be fed Zhen Ze  feed
the body; they should both sit  doZn at the same table. Yet perhaps

251
this may be done. The fruits eaten temperately need not make us
ashamed of our appetites, nor interrupt the Zorthiest pursuits. But
put an e[tra condiment into your dish, and it Zill poison you. It is
not Zorth the Zhile to live by rich cookery. Most men Zould feel
shame if caught preparing Zith their oZn hands precisely such a
dinner, Zhether of animal or vegetable food, as is every day
prepared for them by others. Yet till this is otherZise Ze are not
civili]ed,  and, if gentlemen and ladies, are not true men and
Zomen. This certainly suggests Zhat change is to be made. It may
be vain to ask Zhy the imagination Zill not be reconciled to flesh
and fat. I am satisfied that it is not. It is not a reproach that man is a
carniverous animal? True, he can and does live, in a great measure,
by preying on other animals; but this is a miserable Zay,as any one
Zho Zill  go to snaring rabbits, or slaughtering lambs, may
learn,and he Zill be regarded as a benefactor of his race Zho shall
teach man to confine himself to a more innocent and Zholesome
diet. Whatever my oZn practice may be, I have no doubt that it is a
part of the destiny of the human race, in its gradual improvement,
to leave off eating animals, as surely as the savage tribes have left
off eating each other Zhen they came in contact Zith the more
civili]ed.

 

252
                                                                                                Page 131

If one listens to the faintest  but constant suggestions of his genius,
Zhich  are certainly true, he sees not to Zhat e[tremes,  or even
insanity, it may  lead him; and yet that Zay,  as he groZs more
resolute and faithful,  his road lies. The faintest assured objection
Zhich  one healthy man feels Zill  at length  prevail over  the
arguments and customs of mankind. No man ever folloZed   his
genius till  it misled him.  Though the result Zere  bodily  Zeakness,
yet perhaps no one can say that the conseTuences Zere to be
regretted, for these Zere a life  in conformity  to  higher principles.  If
the day and the night are such that you greet them Zith  joy, and life
emits a fragrance like floZers  and sZeet-scented herbs, is more
elastic, more starry, more immortal,that  is your  success. All nature
is your congratulation,  and you have cause momentarily to bless
yourself. The greatest gains and values are farthest from being
appreciated. We easily come to doubt if  they e[ist.  We soon forget
them. They are the highest reality. Perhaps the facts most
astounding and most real are never communicated by man to man.
The true harvest of my daily  life  is someZhat as intangible  and
indescribable as the tints of morning  or evening. It  is a little  star-
dust caught, a segment of the rainboZ Zhich  I  have clutched.

Yet, for my part,  I Zas never unusually  sTueamish; I could
sometimes eat a fried rat Zith  a good relish, if  it Zere  necessary. I
am glad to have drunk Zater  so long, for the same reason that I
prefer the natural sky to an opium-eater's heaven. I Zould  fain  keep
sober alZays; and there are infinite  degrees of drunkenness. I
believe that Zater is  the only drink  for a Zise  man; Zine  is not so
noble a liTuor; and think  of dashing the hopes of a morning  Zith  a
cup of Zarm  coffee, or of  an evening Zith  a dish of tea! Ah,  hoZ
loZ  I fall  Zhen I  am tempted by them! Even music  may be

253
into[icating. Such apparently slight causes destroyed Greece and
Rome, and Zill destroy England and America. Of all ebriosity, Zho
does not prefer to be into[icated by the air he breathes? I have
found it to be the most serious objection to coarse labors long
continued, that they compelled me to eat and drink coarsely also.
But to tell the truth, I find myself at present someZhat less
particular in these respects. I carry less religion to the table, ask no
blessing; not because I am Ziser that I Zas, but, I am obliged to
confess, because, hoZever much it is to be regretted, Zith years I
have groZn more coarse and indifferent. Perhaps these Tuestions
are entertained only in youth, as most believe of poetry. My
practice is "noZhere," my opinion is here. Nevertheless I am far
from regarding myself as one of those privileged ones to Zhom the
Ved refers Zhen it says, that "he Zho has true faith in the
Omnipresent Supreme Being may eat all that e[ists," that is, is not
bound to inTuire Zhat is his food, or Zho prepares it; and even in
their case it is to be observed, as a Hindoo commentator has
remarked, that the Vedant limits this privilege to "the time of
distress."

Who has not sometimes derived an ine[pressible satisfaction from
his food in Zhich appetite had no share? I have been thrilled to
think that I oZed a mental perception to the commonly gross sense
of taste, that I

 

254
                                                                                                Page 132

have been inspired through the palate, that some berries Zhich  I
had eaten on a hill-side had fed my genius. "The  soul not being
mistress of herself," says Thseng-tseu, "one looks, and one does
not see; one listens, and one does not hear; one eats, and one does
not knoZ  the savor of food."  He Zho  distinguishes the true savor of
his food can never be a glutton; he Zho  does not cannot be
otherZise. A  puritan may go to  his broZn-bread  crust Zith  as gross
an appetite as ever an alderman to his turtle. Not that food  Zhich
entereth into the mouth defileth  a man, but the appetite Zith  Zhich
it is eaten. It is neither the Tuality  nor the Tuantity, but  the devotion
to sensual savors; Zhen that Zhich  is eaten is not a viand to sustain
our animal, or inspire  our spiritual  life,  but food for  the Zorms  that
possess us. If the hunter has a taste for mud-turtles, muskrats, and
other such savage tid-bits, the fine lady  indulges a taste for jelly
made of calf's foot, or  for sardines from  over the sea, and they are
even. He goes to the mill-pond,  she to her preservepot. The Zonder
is hoZ they, hoZ  you and I,  can live this slimy,  beastly life,  eating
and drinking.

Our Zhole  family  is startlingly  moral.  There is never an instant's
truce betZeen virtue  and vice. Goodness is the only investment that
never fails. In the music  of the harp Zhich  trembles round  the
Zorld  it is the insisting  on this Zhich  thrills  us. The harp is the
travelling  patterer for the Universe's Insurance Company,
recommending its laZs,  and our little  goodness is all the
assessment that Ze pay. Though the youth at last groZs indifferent,
the laZs of the universe  are not indifferent,  but are forever on the
side of the most sensitive. Listen  to every ]ephyr  for some reproof,
for it is  surely there, and he is unfortunate Zho  does not hear it. We
cannot touch a string or move a stop but the charming  moral

255
transfi[es us. Many an irksome noise, go a long Zay off, is heard
as music, a proud sZeet satire on the meanness of our lives.

We are conscious of an animal in us, Zhich aZakens in proportion
as our higher nature slumbers. It is reptile and sensual, and perhaps
cannot be Zholly e[pelled; like the Zorms Zhich, even in life and
health, occupy our bodies. Possibly Ze may ZithdraZ from it, but
never change its nature. I fear that it may enjoy a certain health of
its oZn; that Ze may be Zell, yet not pure. The other day I picked
up the loZer jaZ of a hog, Zith Zhite and sound teeth and tusks,
Zhich suggested that there Zas an animal health and vigor distinct
from the spiritual. This creature succeeded by other means than
temperance and purity. "That in Zhich men differ from brute
beasts," says Mencius, "is a thing very inconsiderable; the common
herd lose it very soon; superior men preserve it carefully." Who
knoZs Zhat sort of life Zould result if Ze had attained to purity? If
I kneZ so Zise a man as could teach me purity I Zould go to seek
him forthZith. "A  command over our passions, and over the
e[ternal senses of the body, and good acts, are declared by the Ved
to be indispensable in the mind's appro[imation to God." Yet the
spirit can for the time pervade and control every member and
function of the body, and transmute Zhat in form is the grossest
sensuality into purity

 

256
                                                                                                Page 133

and devotion. The generative energy, Zhich,  Zhen Ze  are loose,
dissipates and makes us unclean, Zhen Ze are continent invigorates
and inspires us. Chastity is the floZering   of man; and Zhat  are
called Genius, Heroism, Holiness,  and the like, are but various
fruits Zhich  succeed it. Man  floZs  at once to God Zhen  the
channel of purity  is open. By turns our  purity inspires  and our
impurity  casts us doZn. He is blessed Zho is  assured that the
animal is dying  out in him  day by day, and the divine being
established. Perhaps there is none but has cause for shame on
account of the inferior  and brutish nature to Zhich  he is allied.  I
fear that Ze are such gods or demigods only  as fauns and satyrs,
the divine allied  to beasts, the creatures of appetite, and that, to
some e[tent, our very  life  is our disgrace.

    "HoZ happy's he Zho hath due place assigned 
      To his beasts and disaforested his mind! 
                                          * * * * * * * 
      Can use his horse, goat, Zolf, and ev'ry beast, 
      And is not ass himself to all the rest! 
      Else man not only is the herd of sZine, 
      But he's those devils too Zhich did incline 
      Them to a headlong rage, and made them Zorse."

All  sensuality is one, though it  takes many forms; all purity  is one.
It is the same Zhether a man eat, or drink,  or cohabit, or sleep
sensually. They are but one appetite, and Ze only need to see a
person do any one of these things to knoZ  hoZ great a sensualist
he is. The impure can neither stand nor sit Zith  purity.  When the
reptile is attacked at one mouth of  his burroZ,  he shoZs himself at
another. If you Zould  be chaste, you must be temperate. What is
chastity? HoZ  shall a man knoZ  is he is chaste? He shall not knoZ

257
it. We have heard of this virtue, but Ze knoZ not Zhat it is. We
speak conformably to the rumor Zhich Ze have heard. From
e[ertion come Zisdom and purity; from sloth ignorance and
sensuality. In the student sensuality is a sluggish habit of mind. An
unclean person is universally a slothful one, one Zho sits by a
stove, Zhom the sun shines on prostrate, Zho reposes Zithout
being fatigued. If you Zould avoid uncleanness, and all the sins,
Zork earnestly, though it be at cleaning a stable. Nature is hard to
be overcome, but she must be overcome. What avails it that you are
Christian, if you are not purer than the heathen, if you deny
yourself no more, if you are not more religious? I knoZ of many
systems of religion esteemed heathenish Zhose precepts fill the
reader Zith shame, and provoke him to neZ endeavors, though it
be to the performance of rites merely.

I hesitate to say these things, but it is not because of the subject,I
care not hoZ obscene my words are,because I cannot speak of them
Zithout betraying my impurity. We discourse freely Zithout shame
of one form of sensuality, and are silent about another. We are so
degraded that Ze cannot speak simply of the necessary functions of
human nature. In earlier ages, in some countries, every function
Zas reverently spoken of and regulated by laZ. Nothing Zas too
trivial for the Hindoo

 

258
                                                                                                Page 134

laZgiver,  hoZever offensive  it  may be to modern taste. He teaches
hoZ to eat, drink,  cohabit, void  e[crement  and urine, and the like,
elevating Zhat  is mean, and does not falsely e[cuse himself  by
calling these things trifles.

Every man is the builder  of a temple, called his body,  to the god he
Zorships, after  a style purely his oZn,  nor can he get off  by
hammering marble instead. We are all sculptors and painters, and
our material is our oZn  flesh  and blood and bones. Any nobleness
begins at once to refine a man's features, any meanness or
sensuality to imbrute them.

John Farmer sat at his door one September evening, after a hard
day's Zork,  his mind still  running  on his labor more or less. Having
bathed he sat doZn to recreate his intellectual man. It  Zas a rather
cool evening, and some of his neighbors Zere  apprehending a frost.
He had not attended to the train of his thoughts  long Zhen  he heard
some one playing on a flute, and that sound harmoni]ed  Zith  his
mood. Still  he thought of his Zork;   but the burden of this thought
Zas, that though this kept  running in  his head, and he found
himself planning  and contriving  it against his Zill,   yet it  concerned
him very little.  It  Zas no more than the scurf  of his skin,  Zhich  Zas
constantly shuffled  off. But  the notes of the flute came home to his
ears out of a different sphere from  that he Zorked in,  and suggested
Zork  for certain faculties  Zhich  slumbered in him.  They gently  did
aZay Zith  the street, and the village,  and the state in Zhich he
lived. A  voice said to him,Why  do you  stay here and live this mean
moiling  life,  Zhen a glorious  e[istence is possible for  you? Those
same stars tZinkle over other  fields than these.But hoZ  to come out
of this condition  and actually migrate  thither? All  that he could

259
think of Zas to practise some neZ austerity, to let his mind descend
into his body and redeem it, and treat himself Zith ever increasing
respect.


Brute   Neighbors

Sometimes I had a companion in my fishing, Zho came through the
village to my house from the other side of the toZn, and the
catching of the dinner Zas as much a social e[ercise as the eating
of it.

Hermit. I Zonder Zhat the Zorld is doing noZ. I have not heard so
much as a locust over the sZeet-fern these three hours. The pigeons
are all asleep upon their roosts,no flutter from them. Was that a
farmer's noon horn Zhich sounded from beyond the Zoods just
noZ? The hands are coming in to boiled salt beef and cider and
Indian bread. Why Zill men Zorry themselves so? He that does not
eat need not Zork. I Zonder hoZ much they have reaped. Who
Zould live there Zhere a body can never think for the barking of
Bose? And O, the housekeeping! to keep bright the devil's door-
knobs, and scour his tubs this bright day! Better

 

260
                                                                                                Page 135

not keep a house. Say, some holloZ tree; and then for morning  calls
and dinner-parties! Only  a Zoodpecker tapping.  O, they sZarm;  the
sun is too Zarm there; they  are born too far into  life for  me. I have
Zater from  the spring, and a loaf of  broZn  bread on the shelf.Hark!
I hear a rustling of  the leaves. Is it some ill-fed  village  hound
yielding  to the instinct of  the chase? or the lost pig Zhich  is said to
be in these Zoods, Zhose tracks I  saZ after the rain? It  comes on
apace; my sumachs and sZeet-briers tremble.Eh, Mr. Poet, is it
you? HoZ  do you like  the Zorld  to-day?

Poet. See those clouds; hoZ they hang! That's the greatest thing I
have seen to-day. There's nothing like it in  old paintings,  nothing
like it  in foreign  lands,unless Zhen Ze Zere  off  the coast of Spain.
That's a true Mediterranean sky. I thought,  as I have my living  to
get, and have not eaten to-day, that I might go a-fishing.  That's the
true industry for  poets. It is the only  trade I have learned. Come,
let's along.

Hermit. I  cannot resist. My  broZn  bread Zill  soon be gone. I Zill
go Zith  you gladly  soon, but I am just concluding  a serious
meditation. I  think that I  am near the end of it. Leave me alone,
then, for a Zhile.  But that  Ze may not be delayed, you  shall be
digging the bait meanZhile.  Angle-Zorms   are rarely to be met Zith
in these parts, Zhere the soil Zas never fattened Zith   manure; the
race is nearly e[tinct.  The sport of  digging the bait  is nearly eTual
to that of catching the fish,  Zhen one's appetite is not too  keen; and
this you may have all  to yourself to-day. I  Zould  advise you to set
in the spade doZn yonder among the groundnuts, Zhere  you see
the johnsZort  Zaving.  I think  that I may Zarrant  you  one Zorm to
every three sods you turn up, if  you look Zell   in among the roots of

261
the grass, as if you Zere Zeeding. Or, if you choose to go farther, it
Zill  not be unZise, for I have found the increase of fair bait to be
very nearly as the sTuare of the distances.

Hermit alone. Let me see; Zhere Zas I? Methinks I Zas nearly in
this frame of mind; the Zorld lay about at this angle. Shall I go to
heaven or a-fishing? If I should soon bring this meditation to an
end, Zould another so sZeet occasion be likely to offer? I Zas as
near being resolved into the essence of things as ever I Zas in my
life. I fear my thoughts Zill not come back to me. If it Zould do
any good, I Zould Zhistle for them. When they make us an offer, is
it Zise to say, We Zill think of it? My thoughts have left no track,
and I cannot find the path again. What Zas it that I Zas thinking
of? It Zas a very ha]y day. I Zill just try these three sentences of
Con-fur-see; they may fetch that state about again. I knoZ not
Zhether it Zas the dumps or a budding ecstasy. Mem. There never
is but one opportunity of a kind.

Poet. HoZ noZ, Hermit, is it too soon? I have got just thirteen
Zhole ones, beside several Zhich are imperfect or undersi]ed; but
they Zill do for the smaller fry; they do not cover up the hook so
much. Those village Zorms are Tuite too large; a shiner may make
a meal off one Zithout finding the skeZer.

Hermit. Well, then, let's be off. Shall Ze to the Concord? There's
good sport there if the Zater be not too high.

 

262
                                                                                                Page 136

Why do precisely  these objects Zhich Ze  behold make a Zorld?
Why has man just these species of animals for his neighbors;  as if
nothing but a mouse could have filled  this crevice?  I suspect that
Pilpay &  Co. have put animals to their  best use, for they are all
beasts of burden, in a sense, made to carry some portion of our
thoughts.

The mice Zhich  haunted my house Zere not the common  ones,
Zhich  are said to have been introduced into the country, but a Zild
native kind not  found in the village.  I  sent one to a distinguished
naturalist, and it interested him  much. When I  Zas building,  one of
these had its nest underneath the house, and before I had laid the
second floor, and sZept out the shavings, Zould  come out  regularly
at lunch time and pick  up the crums at my feet. It  probably had
never seen a man before; and it soon became Tuite familiar, and
Zould  run over my shoes and up my clothes. It  could readily
ascend the sides of the room by short impulses, like a sTuirrel,
Zhich  it resembled in its motions.  At  length, as I leaned Zith  my
elboZ on the bench one day, it ran up my  clothes, and along my
sleeve, and round and round the paper Zhich held my  dinner, Zhile
I kept the latter close, and dodged and played at bo-peep Zith  it;
and Zhen at last I held still  a piece of cheese betZeen my thumb
and finger, it came and nibbled it,  sitting  in my hand, and afterZard
cleaned its face and paZs, like a fly,  and Zalked  aZay.

A phoebe soon built in  my shed, and a robin for  protection in a
pine Zhich  greZ against the house. In June the partridge, (Tetrao
umbellus) Zhich  is so shy a bird, led her brood  past my ZindoZs,
from the Zoods  in the rear to the front  of my house, clucking  and
calling to them  like a hen, and in all  her behavior proving  herself

263
the hen of the Zoods. The young  suddenly disperse on your
approach, at a signal from the mother, as if a ZhirlZind    had sZept
them aZay, and they so e[actly  resemble the dried leaves and tZigs
that many a traveller has placed his foot in  the midst of  a brood,
and heard the Zhir of  the old bird  as she fleZ off,  and her an[ious
calls and meZing,  or seen her trail her Zings  to attract his attention,
Zithout  suspecting their neighborhood.  The parent Zill  sometimes
roll and spin round  before you in such a dishabille,  that you cannot,
for a feZ  moments, detect Zhat kind  of creature it  is. The young
sTuat still and flat, often  running their  heads under a leaf, and mind
only their  mother's directions given  from a distance, nor Zill   your
approach make them run again and betray themselves. You may
even tread on them, or have your eyes on them for a minute,
Zithout  discovering  them. I have held them in my  open hand at
such time, and still their  only care, obedient to  their mother and
their instinct,  Zas to sTuat there Zithout  fear or trembling.  So
perfect is this instinct,  that once, Zhen I  had laid them on the
leaves again, and one accidentally fell on its  side, it Zas found  Zith
the rest in e[actly  the same position ten minutes afterZard.  They
are not calloZ  like the young  of most birds, but  more perfectly
developed and precocious even than chickens. The remarkably
adult yet innocent e[pression  of their  open and serene eyes

 

264
                                                                                                Page 137

is very memorable. All  intelligence  seems reflected in them. They
suggest not merely the purity of  infancy, but  a Zisdom clarified   by
e[perience. Such an eye Zas not born Zhen  the bird  Zas, but is
coeval Zith  the sky it  reflects. The Zoods  do not yield another such
a gem. The traveller does not often look  into such a limpid  Zell.
The ignorant or reckless sportsman often shoots the parent at such
a time, and leaves these innocents to fall a prey to some proZling
beast or bird, or gradually  mingle Zith  the decaying  leaves Zhich
they so much resemble. It is said that Zhen  hatched by a hen they
Zill  directly  disperse on some alarm, and so are lost, for they never
hear the mother's call Zhich  gathers them again. These Zere my
hens and chickens.

It is remarkable hoZ  many creatures live  Zild  and free though
secret in the Zoods, and still  sustain themselves in the
neighborhood of toZns,  suspected by hunters only. HoZ  retired the
otter manages to live here! He groZs  to be four feet long,  as big as
a small boy, perhaps Zithout  any human being getting a glimpse  of
him. I formerly   saZ the raccoon in the Zoods  behind Zhere my
house is built, and probably  still heard their  Zhinnering  at night.
Commonly  I rested an hour or tZo  in the shade at noon, after
planting, and ate my lunch,  and read a little by a spring Zhich  Zas
the source of a sZamp and of a brook, oo]ing   from under Brister's
Hill,  half a mile  from my  field.  The approach to this Zas through  a
succession of descending grassy holloZs, full  of  young pitchpines,
into a larger Zood  about the sZamp. There, in  a very secluded and
shaded spot, under a spreading Zhite-pine, there Zas yet a clean
firm sZard  to sit on. I  had dug out the spring and made a Zell  of
clear gray Zater, Zhere  I could dip  up a pailful  Zithout  roiling  it,
and thither I Zent  for this  purpose almost every day in midsummer,

265
Zhen the pond Zas Zarmest. Thither too the Zood-cock led her
brood, to probe the mud for Zorms, flying but a foot above them
doZn the bank, Zhile they ran in a troop beneath; but at last,
spying me, she Zould leave her young and circle round and round
me, nearer and nearer till Zithin four or five feet, pretending
broken Zings and legs, to attract my attention, and get off her
young, Zho Zould already have taken up their march, Zith faint
Ziry peep, single file through the sZamp, as she directed. Or I
heard the peep of the young Zhen I could not see the parent bird.
There too the turtle-doves sat over the spring, or fluttered from
bough to bough of the soft Zhite-pines over my head; or the red
sTuirrel, coursing doZn the nearest bough, Zas particularly familiar
and inTuisitive. You only need sit still long enough in some
attractive spot in the Zoods that all its inhabitants may e[hibit
themselves to you by turns.

I Zas Zitness to events of a less peaceful character. One day Zhen I
Zent out to my Zood-pile, or rather my pile of stumps, I observed
tZo large ants, the one red, the other much larger, nearly half an
inch long, and black, fiercely contending Zith one another. Having
once got hold they never let go, but struggled and Zrestled and
rolled on the chips incessantly. Looking farther, I Zas surprised to
find that the chips Zere

 

266
                                                                                                Page 138

covered Zith  such combatants, that it Zas not a duellum,  but a
bellum, a Zar betZeen  tZo  races of ants, the red alZays pitted
against the black, and freTuently tZo  red ones to one black. The
legions of these Myrmidons  covered all the hills  and vales in my
Zood-yard,  and the ground Zas already streZn  Zith  the dead and
dying, both red and black.  It Zas the only  battle Zhich  I  have ever
Zitnessed, the only battle-field   I ever trod Zhile  the battle  Zas
raging; internecine Zar;  the red republicans on the one hand, and
the black imperialists  on the other. On every side they Zere
engaged in deadly combat, yet Zithout  any noise that I  could hear,
and human soldiers never fought so resolutely. I  Zatched a couple
that Zere fast looked  in each other's embraces, in a little sunny
valley amid the chips,  noZ at noon-day  prepared to fight till  the
sun Zent doZn,  or life  Zent out.  The smaller red champion had
fastened himself like  a vice to his adversary's front, and through  all
the tumblings on that field  never for  an instant ceased to gnaZ at
one of his feelers near the root, having already caused the other to
go by the board; Zhile  the stronger black one dashed him from  side
to side, and, as I saZ on looking  nearer, had already divested him
of several of his members. They fought  Zith  more pertinacity  than
bull-dogs. Neither  manifested the least disposition to  retreat. It Zas
evident that their battle-cry  Zas ''ConTuer or  die." In the mean
Zhile  there came along a single red ant on the hill-side  of this
valley, evidently  full  of e[citement,  Zho  either had despatched his
foe, or had not yet taken part in the battle;  probably the latter,  for
he had lost none of his limbs;  Zhose mother had charged him to
return Zith  his shield or  upon it. Or perchance he Zas some
Achilles,  Zho had nourished his  Zrath apart, and had noZ  come to
avenge or rescue his Patroclus. He saZ this uneTual combat from

267
afar,for the blacks Zere nearly tZice the si]e of the red,he dreZ
near Zith rapid pace till he stood on his guard Zithin half an inch
of the combatants; then, Zatching his opportunity, he sprang upon
the black Zarrior, and commenced his operations near the root of
his right fore-leg, leaving the foe to select among his oZn
members; and so there Zere three united for life, as if a neZ kind
of attraction had been invented Zhich put all other looks and
cements to shame. I should not have Zondered by this time to find
that they had their respective musical bands stationed on some
eminent chip, and playing their national airs the Zhile, to e[cite the
sloZ and cheer the dying combatants. I Zas myself e[cited
someZhat even as if they had been men. The more you think of it,
the less the difference. And certainly there is not the fight recorded
in Concord history, at least, if in the history of America, that Zill
bear a moment's comparison Zith this, Zhether for the numbers
engaged in it, or for the patriotism and heroism displayed. For
numbers and for carnage it Zas an Austerlit] or Dresden. Concord
Eight! TZo killed on the patriots' side, and Luther Blanchard
Zounded! Why here every ant Zas a Buttrick,"Fire! for God's sake
fire!"and thousands shared the fate of Davis and Hosmer. There
Zas not one hireling there. I have no doubt that it Zas a principle
they fought for, as much as our ancestors, and not to avoid a

 

268
                                                                                                Page 139

three-penny ta[  on their tea; and the results of this battle Zill   be as
important and memorable to those Zhom  it  concerns as those of the
battle of Bunker  Hill,  at least.

I took up the chip  on Zhich  the three I have particularly  described
Zere struggling,  carried it into  my house, and placed it under a
tumbler on my  ZindoZ-sill,   in  order to see the issue. Holding a
microscope to the first-mentioned  red ant, I saZ  that, though he
Zas assiduously gnaZing  at the near fore-leg of his  enemy, having
severed his remaining feeler, his oZn  breast Zas all torn  aZay,
e[posing  Zhat vitals  he had there to the jaZs of the black  Zarrior,
Zhose breast-plate Zas apparently too thick  for  him to pierce;  and
the dark carbuncles of the sufferer's eyes shone Zith  ferocity such
as Zar only could  e[cite.  They struggled half  an hour longer under
the tumbler, and Zhen I  looked again the black soldier  had severed
the heads of his foes from their bodies, and the still  living  heads
Zere hanging on either side of  him like  ghastly trophies  at his
saddle-boZ, still  apparently as firmly  fastened as ever, and he Zas
endeavoring Zith  feeble struggles, being Zithout   feelers and Zith
only the remnant of a leg, and I  knoZ  not hoZ  many other Zounds,
to divest himself  of them; Zhich  at length,  after half an hour more,
he accomplished. I raised the glass, and he Zent off  over the
ZindoZ-sill   in  that crippled state. Whether he finally  survived  that
combat, and spent the remainder of his days in some Hôtel des
Invalides, I  do not knoZ;  but I thought  that his industry  Zould  not
be Zorth much  thereafter. I never learned Zhich  party Zas
victorious,  nor the cause of the Zar; but I  felt for  the rest of that
day as if I had had my feelings  e[cited  and harroZed by  Zitnessing
the struggle, the ferocity  and carnage, of a human battle before my
door.

269
Kirby  and Spence tell us that the battles of ants have long been
celebrated and the date of them recorded, thought they say that
Huber is the only modern  author Zho  appears to have Zitnessed
them. "Aeneas Sylvius,"  say they, "after giving  a very
circumstantial account of  one contested Zith  great obstinacy by a
great and small species on the trunk of a pear tree," adds that" 'This
action Zas fought  in the pontificate  of Eugenius the Fourth,  in the
presence of Nicholas Pistoriensis, an eminent laZyer,  Zho  related
the Zhole history  of the battle  Zith  the greatest fidelity.'  A similar
engagement betZeen great and small ants is recorded by Olaus
Magnus, in Zhich  the small  ones, being victorious, are said to have
buried the bodies of their  oZn soldiers,  but left those of their  giant
enemies a prey to the birds. This event happened previous to the
e[pulsion  of the tyrant  Christiern the Second from  SZeden." The
battle Zhich  I Zitnessed  took place in the Presidency of Polk,  five
years before the passage of Webster's Fugitive-Slave Bill.

Many a village  Bose, fit only  to course a mud-turtle  in a victualling
cellar, sported his heavy Tuarters in the Zoods, Zithout   the
knoZledge of  his master, and ineffectually  smelled at old fo[
burroZs and Zoodchucks'  holes; led perchance by some slight  cur
Zhich  nimbly  threaded the Zood, and might  still  inspire a natural
terror in its deni]ens;noZ

 

270
                                                                                                Page 140

far behind his guide, barking  like  a canine bull toZard  some small
sTuirrel Zhich  had treed itself for  scrutiny, then, cantering  off,
bending the bushes Zith his Zeight,  imagining  that  he is on the
track of some stray member of the jerbilla  family.  Once I  Zas
surprised to see a cat Zalking along the stony  shore of the pond, for
they rarely Zander  so far from home. The  surprise Zas mutual.
Nevertheless the most domestic cat, Zhich  has lain on a rug all her
days, appears Tuite at home in the Zoods, and, by her sly and
stealthy behavior, proves herself more native  there than the regular
inhabitants. Once, Zhen berrying,  I met  Zith  a cat Zith  young
kittens in the Zoods,  Tuite Zild,  and they all,  like their  mother, had
their backs up and Zere fiercely  spitting  at me. A feZ  years before
I lived  in the Zoods there Zas  Zhat Zas  called a "Zinged  cat" in
one of the farm-houses in Lincoln  nearest the pond, Mr. Gilian
Baker's. When I called to  see her in June, 1842, she Zas gone a-
hunting in the Zoods,  as Zas her Zont,  (I am not sure Zhether  it
Zas a male or female, and so use the more common pronoun) but
her mistress told me that she came into the neighborhood a little
more than a year before, in April,  and Zas finally   taken into their
house; that she Zas of a dark broZnish-gray  color, Zith   a Zhite
spot on her throat, and Zhite  feet, and had a large bushy tail like  a
fo[;  that in the Zinter   the fur greZ  thick and flatted  out along her
sides, forming strips ten or  tZelve  inches long by tZo  and a half
Zide, and under her chin  like a muff,  the upper side loose, the
under matted like felt,  and in the spring these appendages dropped
off. They gave me a pair of  her "Zings,"  Zhich  I  keep still.  There is
no appearance of a membrane about them. Some thought it Zas
part flyingsTuirrel  or some other Zild   animal, Zhich  is not
impossible, for, according  to naturalists, prolific   hybrids have been

271
produced by the union of the marten and domestic cat. This Zould
have been the right kind of cat for me to keep, if I had kept any; for
Zhy should not a poet's cat be Zinged as Zell as his horse?

In the fall the loon (Colymbus glacialis) came, as usual, to moult
and bathe in the pond, making the Zoods ring Zith his Zild
laughter before I had risen. At rumor of of his arrival all the Mill-
dam sportsmen are on the alert, in gigs and on foot, tZo by tZo and
three by three, Zith patent rifles and conical balls and spyglasses.
They come rustling though the Zoods like autumn leaves, at least
ten men to one loon. Some station themselves on this side of the
pond, some on that, for the poor bird cannot be omnipresent; if he
dive here he must come up there. But noZ the kind October Zind
rises, rustling the leaves and rippling the surface of the Zater, so
that no loon can be heard or seen, though his foes sZeep the pond
Zith spy-glasses, and make the Zoods resound Zith their
discharges. The Zaves generously rise and dash angrily, taking
sides Zith all ZaterfoZl, and our sportsmen must beat a retreat to
toZn and shop and unfinished jobs. But they Zere too often
successful. When I Zent to get a pail of Zater early in the morning
I freTuently saZ this stately bird sailing out of my cove Zithin a
feZ rods. If I endeavored to overtake him in a boat, in order to see
hoZ he Zould manoeuvre *, he Zould dive

 

272
                                                                                                Page 141

and be completely lost, so that I did  not discover him  again,
sometimes, till  the latter part of the day. But  I Zas more than a
match for him  on the surface. He commonly  Zent off  in a rain.

As I Zas paddling  along the north  shore one very calm October
afternoon, for such days especially they  settle onto the lakes, like
the milkZeed  doZn,  having looked in  vain over the pond for  a
loon, suddenly one, sailing  out from the shore toZard  the middle  a
feZ rods in  front of  me, set up his Zild  laugh and betrayed himself.
I pursued Zith  a paddle and he dived, but Zhen  he came up I Zas
nearer than before. He dived again, but I miscalculated  the
direction he Zould  take, and Ze  Zere fifty  rods apart Zhen  he
came to the surface this time, for I  had helped to Ziden  the interval;
and again he laughed long and loud, and Zith  more reason than
before. He manoevred * so cunningly  that I  could not get Zithin
half a do]en rods of  him. Each time,  Zhen he came to the surface,
turning his head this Zay  and that, he coolly  surveyed the Zater
and the land, and apparently chose his course so that he might
come up Zhere there Zas the Zidest  e[panse of  Zater and at the
greatest distance from the boat. It Zas surprising  hoZ  Tuickly  he
made up his mind and put his resolve into  e[ecution.  He led me at
once to the Zidest part of  the pond, and could not be driven  from it.
While he Zas  thinking  one thing in his brain,  I Zas endeavoring  to
divine his thought  in mine. It  Zas a pretty game, played on the
smooth surface of the pond, a man against a loon. Suddenly your
adversary's checker disappears beneath the board, and the problem
is to place yours nearest to Zhere his Zill   appear again. Sometimes
he Zould come up une[pectedly   on the opposite side of me, having
apparently passed directly under the boat. So long-Zinded  Zas  he
and so unZeariable, that Zhen  he had sZum farthest he Zould

273
immediately  plunge again, nevertheless; and then no Zit could
divine Zhere  in the deep pond, beneath the smooth surface, he
might be speeding his Zay  like a fish,  for he had time and ability  to
visit the bottom  of the pond in its  deepest part. It is said that loons
have been caught in the NeZ York  lakes eighty feet beneath the
surface, Zith  hooks set for trout,through  Walden is deeper than
that. HoZ  surprised must the fishes be to see this ungainly visitor
from another sphere speeding his Zay amid  their schools! Yet he
appeared to knoZ his course as surely underZater as on the surface,
and sZam much faster there. Once or tZice  I saZ  a ripple Zhere  he
approached the surface, just put his head out to reconnoitre, and
instantly dived  again. I found that it  Zas as Zell  for  me to rest on
my oars and Zait his  reappearing as to endeavor to calculate Zhere
he Zould rise;  for again and again, Zhen  I Zas straining  my eyes
over the surface one Zay, I Zould  suddenly  be startled by his
unearthly laugh behind me. But  Zhy,  after displaying  so much
cunning, did he invariably  betray himself  the moment he came up
by that loud laugh? Did  not his Zhite  breast enough betray him? He
Zas indeed a silly  loon, I thought.  I could commonly  hear the plash
of the Zater Zhen  he came up, and so also detected him. But after
an hour he seemed as fresh as ever, dived as Zillingly and sZam
yet farther than at first.  It Zas

 

274
                                                                                                Page 142

surprising to see hoZ serenely he sailed off  Zith  unruffled  breast
Zhen he came to the surface, doing all  the Zork  Zith  his Zebbed
feet beneath. His usual note Zas this demoniac laughter, yet
someZhat like  that of a Zater-foZl;   but occasionally,  Zhen he had
balked me most successfully and come up a long Zay  off,  he
uttered a long-draZn  unearthly hoZl,  probably  more like  that of a
Zolf  than any bird;  as Zhen a beast puts his mu]]le  to the ground
and deliberately hoZls.  This Zas  his looning,perhaps the Zildest
sound that is ever heard here, making the Zoods ring  far and Zide.
I concluded that he laughed in derision  of my  efforts, confident  of
his oZn resources. Though the sky Zas  by this time  overcast, the
pond Zas so smooth that I could  see Zhere he broke the surface
Zhen I did  not hear him. His  Zhite  breast, the stillness of the air,
and the smoothness of the Zater Zere all  against him. At  length,
having come up fifty  rods off,  he uttered one of those prolonged
hoZls, as if  calling on  the god of loons to aid him,  and immediately
there came a Zind from  the east and rippled the surface, and filled
the Zhole air  Zith  misty rain,  and I Zas impressed as if it  Zere the
prayer of the loon ansZered, and his god  Zas angry Zith  me; and
so I left him  disappearing far aZay  on the tumultuous surface.

For hours, in fall  days, I Zatched  the ducks cunningly  tack and veer
and hold the middle of  the pond, far from  the sportsman; tricks
Zhich  they Zill  have less need to practise in Louisiana  bayous.
When compelled to rise they  Zould  sometimes circle round and
round and over the pond at a considerable height, from  Zhich  they
could easily see to other ponds and the river, like  black motes in
the sky; and, Zhen I  thought they had gone off  thither long  since,
they Zould  settle doZn  by a slanting flight  of  a Tuarter of a mile on
to a distant part Zhich  Zas left  free; but Zhat  beside safety they got

275
by sailing in the middle of Walden I do not knoZ, unless they love
its Zater for the same reason that I do.


House-Warming

In October I Zent a-graping to the river meadoZs, and loaded
myself Zith clusters more precious for their beauty and fragrance
than for food. There too I admired, though I did not gather, the
cranberries, small Za[en gems, pendants of the meadoZ grass,
pearly and red, Zhich the farmer plucks Zith an ugly rake, leaving
the smooth meadoZ in a snarl, heedlessly measuring them by the
bushel and the dollar only, and sells the spoils of the meads to
Boston and NeZ York; destined to be jammed, to satisfy the tastes
of lovers of Nature there. So butchers rake the tongues of bison out
of the prairie grass, regardless of the torn and drooping plant. The
barberry's brilliant fruit Zas likeZise food for my eyes merely; but
I collected a small store of Zild apples for coddling, Zhich the
proprietor and travellers had overlooked. When chestnuts

 

276
                                                                                          Page 143

Zere ripe I laid up half a bushel for Zinter. It Zas very e[citing at
that season to roam the then boundless chestnut Zoods of
Lincoln,they noZ sleep their long sleep under the railroad,Zith a
bag on my shoulder, and a stick to open burrs Zith in my hand, for
I did not alZays Zait for the frost, amid the rustling of leaves and
the loud reproofs of the red-sTuirrels and the jays, Zhose half-
consumed nuts I sometimes stole, for the burrs Zhich they had
selected Zere sure to contain sound ones. Occasionally I climbed
and shook the trees. They greZ also behind my house, and one
large tree Zhich almost overshadoZed it, Zas, Zhen in floZer, a
bouTuet Zhich scented the Zhole neighborhood, but the sTuirrels
and the jays got most of its fruit; the last coming in flocks early in
the morning and picking the nuts out of the burrs before they fell. I
relinTuished these trees to them and visited the more distant Zoods
composed Zholly of chestnut. These nuts, as far as they Zent, Zere
a good substitute for bread. Many other substitutes might, perhaps,
be found. Digging one day for fish-Zorms I discovered the ground-
nut (Apios tuberosa) on its string, the potato of the aborigines, a
sort of fabulous fruit, Zhich I had begun to doubt if I had ever dug
and eaten in childhood, as I had told, and had not dreamed it. I had
often since seen its crimpled red velvety blossom supported by the
stems of other plants Zithout knoZing it to be the same.
Cultivation has Zell nigh e[terminated it. It has a sZeetish taste,
much like that of a frostbitten potato, and I found it better boiled
than roasted. This tuber seemed like a faint promise of Nature to
rear her oZn children and feed them simply here at some future
period. In these days of fatted cattle and Zaving grain-fields, this
humble root, Zhich Zas once the totem of an Indian tribe, is Tuite
forgotten, or knoZn only by its floZering vine; but let Zild Nature

277
reign here once more, and the tender and lu[urious  English grains
Zill  probably  disappear before a myriad of foes, and Zithout   the
care of man the croZ may  carry back even the last seed of corn to
the great corn-field of  the Indian's god in  the south-Zest, Zhence
he is said to have brought it; but  the noZ almost e[terminated
ground-nut Zill   perhaps revive and flourish  in spite of  frosts and
Zildness, prove  itself indigenous,  and resume its ancient
importance and dignity  as the diet of the hunter tribe.  Some Indian
Ceres or Minerva must have been the inventor and bestoZer  of it;
and Zhen the reign of  poetry commences here, its leaves and string
of nuts may be represented on our Zorks of  art.

Already, by the first  of September, I had seen tZo or  three small
maples turned scarlet across the pond, beneath Zhere the Zhite
stems of three aspens diverged, at the point of a promontory, ne[t
the Zater. Ah, many  a tale their color told!  And  gradually  from
Zeek to Zeek  the character of each tree came out, and it admired
itself reflected  in the smooth mirror  of the lake. Each morning  the
manager of this gallery  substituted some neZ picture, distinguished
by more brilliant  or harmonious  coloring,  for the old  upon the
Zalls.

The Zasps came by thousands to my lodge in October,  as to Zinter

 

278
                                                                                          Page 144

Tuarters, and settled on my ZindoZs Zithin and on the Zalls over-
head, sometimes deterring visitors from entering. Each morning,
Zhen they Zere numbed Zith cold, I sZept some of them out, but I
did not trouble myself much to get rid of them; I even felt
complimented by their regarding my house as a desirable shelter.
They never molested me seriously, though they bedded Zith me;
and they gradually disappeared, into Zhat crevices I do not knoZ,
avoiding Zinter and unspeakable cold.

Like the Zasps, before I finally Zent into Zinter Tuarters in
November, I used to resort to the north-east side of Walden, Zhich
the sun, reflected from the pitch-pine Zoods and the stony shore,
made the fireside of the pond; it is so much pleasanter and
Zholesomer to be Zarmed by the sun Zhile you can be, than by an
artificial fire. I thus Zarmed myself by the still gloZing embers
Zhich the summer, like a departed hunter, had left.
 

When I came to build my chimney I studied masonry. My bricks
being second-hand ones reTuired to be cleaned Zith a troZel, so
that I learned more than usual of the Tualities of bricks and troZels.
The mortar on them Zas fifty years old, and Zas said to be still
groZing harder; but this is one of those sayings Zhich men love to
repeat Zhether they are true or not. Such sayings themselves groZ
harder and adhere more firmly Zith age, and it Zould take many
bloZs Zith a troZel to clean an old Ziseacre of them. Many of the
villages of Mesopotamia are built of second-hand bricks of a very
good Tuality, obtained from the ruins of Babylon, and the cement
on them is older and probably harder still. HoZever that may be, I
Zas struck by the peculiar toughness of the steel Zhich bore so

279
many violent bloZs Zithout being Zorn out. As my bricks had
been in a chimney before, though I did not read the name of
Nebuchadne]]ar on them, I picked out as many fireplace bricks as I
could find, to save Zork and Zaste, and I filled the spaces betZeen
the bricks about the fireplace Zith stones from the pond shore, and
also made my mortar Zith the Zhite sand from the same place. I
lingered most about the fireplace, as the most vital part of the
house. Indeed, I Zorked so deliberately, that though I commenced
at the ground in the morning, a course of bricks raised a feZ inches
above the floor served for my pilloZ at night; yet I did not get a
stiff neck for it that I remember; my stiff neck is of older date. I
took a poet to board for a fortnight about those times, Zhich caused
me to be put to it for room. He brought his oZn knife, though I had
tZo, and Ze used to scour them by thrusting them into the earth.
He shared Zith me the labors of cooking. I Zas pleased to see my
Zork rising so sTuare and solid by degrees, and reflected, that, if it
proceeded sloZly, it Zas calculated to endure a long time. The
chimney is to some e[tent an independent structure, standing on
the ground and rising through the house to the heavens; even after
the house is burned it still stands sometimes, and its importance
and independence are apparent. This Zas toZard the end of
summer. It Zas noZ November.

 

280
                                                                                          Page 145

The north Zind had already begun to cool the pond, though it took
many Zeeks of steady bloZing to accomplish it, it is so deep.
When I began to have a fire at evening, before I plastered my
house, the chimney carried smoke particularly Zell, because of the
numerous chinks betZeen the boards. Yet I passed some cheerful
evenings in that cool and airy apartment, surrounded by the rough
broZn boards full of knots, and rafters Zith the bark on high over-
head. My house never pleased my eye so much after it Zas
plastered, though I Zas obliged to confess that it Zas more
comfortable. Should not every apartment in Zhich man dZells be
lofty enough to create some obscurity over-head, Zhere flickering
shadoZs may play at evening about the rafters? These forms are
more agreeable to the fancy and imagination than fresco paintings
or other the most e[pensive furniture. I noZ first began to inhabit
my house, I may say, Zhen I began to use it for Zarmth as Zell as
shelter. I had got a couple of old fire-dogs to keep the Zood from
the hearth, and it did me good to see the soot form on the back of
the chimmey Zhich I had built, and I poked the fire Zith more right
and more satisfaction than usual. My dZelling Zas small, and I
could hardly entertain an echo in it; but it seemed larger for being a
single apartment and remote from neighbors. All the attractions of
a house Zere concentrated in one room; it Zas kitchen, chamber,
parlor, and keeping-room; and Zhatever satisfaction parent or
child, master or servant, derive from living in a house, I enjoyed it
all. Cato says, the master of a family (patremfamilias) must have in
his rustic villa "cellam oleariam, vinariam, dolia multa, uti lubeat
caritatem e[pectare, et rei, et virtuti, et gloriæ erit," that is, "an oil
and Zine cellar, many casks, so that it may be pleasant to e[pect
hard times; it Zill be for his advantage, and virtue, and glory." I

281
had in my cellar a firkin   of potatoes, about tZo  Tuarts of peas Zith
the Zeevil  in them, and on my shelf  a little rice,  a jug of molasses,
and of rye and Indian meal a peck each.

I sometimes dream of a larger and more populous house, standing
in a golden age, of enduring materials,  and Zithout  ginger-bread
Zork,  Zhich  shall still  consist of only  one room, a vast, rude,
substantial, primitive  hall,  Zithout  ceiling  or plastering, Zith  bare
rafters and purlins supporting  a sort of loZer  heaven over one's
head,useful to keep off rain and snoZ;  Zhere the king  and Tueen
posts stand out to receive your homage, Zhen you  have done
reverence to the prostrate Saturn of an older dynasty on stepping
over the sill;  a cavernous house, Zherein you must reach up a torch
upon a pole to see the roof; Zhere some may live  in the fire-place,
some in the recess of a ZindoZ,  and some on settles, some at one
end of the hall, some at another, and some aloft on rafters Zith  the
spiders, if they choose; a house Zhich  you have got into Zhen  you
have opened the outside door, and the ceremony is over; Zhere the
Zeary traveller  may Zash, and eat, and converse, and sleep,
Zithout  further journey;  such a shelter as you Zould  be glad to
reach in a tempestuous night, containing all  the essentials of a
house, and nothing for house-keeping; Zhere  you can see all the
treasures of the

 

282
                                                                                                Page 146

house at one vieZ, and every thing hangs upon its peg that a man
should use; at once kitchen, pantry, parlor, chamber, store-house,
and garret; Zhere you can see so necessary a thing as a barrel or a
ladder, so convenient a thing as a cupboard and hear the pot boil,
and pay your respects to the fire that cooks your  dinner and the
oven that bakes your bread, and the necessary furniture and utensils
are the chief ornaments; Zhere the Zashing  is not put out, nor  the
fire, nor the mistress, and perhaps you are sometimes reTuested to
move from off  the trap-door, Zhen  the cook Zould  descend into the
cellar, and so learn Zhether the ground is solid  or holloZ   beneath
you Zithout  stamping. A  house Zhose inside is as open and
manifest as a bird's nest, and you cannot go in at the front door  and
out at the back Zithout  seeing some of its inhabitants;  Zhere to be
a guest is to be presented Zith the freedom of the house, and not to
be carefully e[cluded  from  seven eighths of it,  shut up in a
particular cell,  and told to make yourself  at home there,in solitary
confinement. NoZadays  the host does not admit you to his  hearth,
but has got the mason to build one for yourself  someZhere in  his
alley, and hospitality  is the art of keeping you at the greatest
distance. There is as much secrecy about the cooking as if he had a
design to poison you. I am aZare  that I have been on many a man's
premises, and might have been legally ordered off,  but I am not
aZare that I have been in many men's houses. I might visit  in  my
old clothes a king and Tueen Zho lived  simply  in such a house as I
have described, if I Zere  going their  Zay; but  backing out of  a
modern palace Zill  be all that I  shall desire to learn, if  ever I am
caught in one.

It Zould  seem as if the very language of our  parlors Zould  lose all
its nerve and degenerate into parlaver Zholly,   our lives pass at

283
such remoteness from its symbols, and its metaphors and tropes are
necessarily so far fetched, through slides and dumb-Zaiters, as it
Zere; in other Zords, the parlor is so far from the kitchen and
Zorkshop. The dinner even is only the parable of a dinner,
commonly. As if only the savage dZelt near enough to Nature and
Truth to borroZ a trope from them. HoZ can the scholar, Zho
dZells aZay in the North West Territory or the Isle of Man, tell
Zhat is parliamentary in the kitchen?

HoZever, only one or tZo of my guests Zere ever bold enough to
stay and eat a hasty-pudding Zith me; but Zhen they saZ that crisis
approaching they beat a hasty retreat rather, as if it Zould shake the
house to its foundations. Nevertheless, it stood through a great
many hasty-puddings.

I did not plaster till it Zas free]ing Zeather. I brought over some
Zhiter and cleaner sand for this purpose from the opposite shore of
the pond in a boat, a sort of conveyance Zhich Zould have tempted
me to go much farther if necessary. My house had in the mean
Zhile been shingled doZn to the ground on every side. In lathing I
Zas pleased to be able to send home each nail Zith a single bloZ of
the hammer, and it Zas my ambition to transfer the plaster from the
board to Zall neatly and rapidly. I remembered the story of a
conceited felloZ, Zho, in fine

 

284
                                                                                                Page 147

clothes, Zas Zont  to lounge about the village  once, giving  advice
to Zorkmen.  Venturing one day to substitute  deeds for Zords, he
turned up his cuffs, sei]ed  a plasterer's board, and having loaded
his troZel  Zithout  mishap, Zith  a complacent  look toZard  the
lathing overhead, made a bold gesture thitherZard;  and
straightZay, to  his complete discomfiture,  received the Zhole
contents in his ruffled  bosom. I admired aneZ  the economy and
convenience of plastering, Zhich  so effectually  shuts out the cold
and takes a handsome finish, and I learned the various casualties to
Zhich  the plasterer is liable. I  Zas surprised to see hoZ thirsty  the
bricks Zere Zhich   drank up all the moisture  in my plaster before I
had smoothed it, and hoZ many  pailfuls  of Zater  it takes to
christen a neZ hearth. I had the previous  Zinter  made a small
Tuantity of lime  by burning  the shells of the Unio  fluviatilis,   Zhich
our river affords,  for the sake of the e[periment;   so that I kneZ
Zhere my materials  came from. I might  have got good limestone
Zithin  a mile or  tZo  and burned it myself,  if I  had cared to do so.
 

The pond had in the mean Zhile  skimmed over in  the shadiest and
shalloZest coves, some days or even Zeeks before the general
free]ing.  The first  ice is especially interesting  and perfect, being
hard, dark, and transparent, and affords the best opportunity that
ever offers for e[amining   the bottom Zhere  it is shalloZ;  for  you
can lie at your length on  ice only an inch thick,  like  a skater insect
on the surface of the Zater, and study the bottom  at your leisure,
only tZo  or three inches distant, like  a picture behind a glass, and
the Zater is necessarily alZays  smooth then. There are many
furroZs  in the sand Zhere some creature has travelled about and
doubled on its tracks; and, for  Zrecks, it  is streZn Zith   the cases of

285
cadis Zorms made of minute grains of Zhite Tuart]. Perhaps these
have creased it, for you find some of their cases in the furroZs,
though they are deep and broad for them to make. But the ice itself
is the object of most interest though you must improve the earliest
opportunity to study it. It you e[amine it closely the morning after
it free]es, you find that the greater part of the bubbles, Zhich at
first appeared to be Zithin it, are against its under surface, and that
more are continually rising from the bottom; Zhile the ice is as yet
comparatively solid and dark, that is, you see the Zater through it.
These bubbles are from an eightieth to an eighth of an inch in
diameter, very clear and beautiful, and you see your face reflected
in them through the ice. There may be thirty or forty of them to a
sTuare inch. There are also already Zithin the ice narroZ oblong
perpendicular bubbles about half an inch long, sharp cones Zith the
ape[ upZard; or oftener, if the ice is Tuite fresh, minute spherical
bubbles one directly above another, like a string of beads. But these
Zithin the ice are not so numerous nor obvious as those beneath. I
sometimes used to cast on stones to try the strength of the ice, and
those Zhich broke through carried in air Zith them, Zhich formed
very large and conspicuous Zhite bubbles beneath. One day Zhen I
came to the same place forty-eight hours afterZard, I found that
those large bubbles

 

286
                                                                                                Page 148

Zere still  perfect, though an inch  more of ice had formed,  as I
could see distinctly  by the seam in the edge of a cake. But as the
last tZo days had been very Zarm,  like  an Indian summer, the ice
Zas not noZ  transparent, shoZing the dark  green color of the
Zater, and the bottom, but opaTue and Zhitish  or gray, and though
tZice as thick  Zas hardly  stronger than before, for the air  bubbles
had greatly e[panded under this  head and run together, and lost
their regularity;  they Zere  no longer one directly  over another, but
often like silvery  coins poured  from a bag, one overlapping
another, or in thin flakes,  as if occupying  slight cleavages. The
beauty of the ice Zas gone, and it Zas  too late to study the bottom.
Being curious to knoZ  Zhat  position  my great bubbles occupied
Zith  regard to the neZ ice, I  broke out a cake containing a middling
si]ed one, and turned it  bottom upZard.  The neZ ice  had formed
around and under the bubble, so that it Zas included  betZeen the
tZo ices. It  Zas Zholly   in the loZer  ice, but close against the upper,
and Zas flattish,  or perhaps slightly lenticular,  Zith  a rounded edge,
a Tuarter of an inch deep by four inches in  diameter; and I Zas
surprised to find that  directly under the bubble  the ice Zas melted
Zith  a great regularity in  the form of  a saucer reversed, to the
height of five  eighths of an inch  in the middle,  leaving a thin
partition there betZeen  the Zater and the bubble, hardly  an eighth
of an inch thick;  and in many places the small bubbles in  this
partition had burst out  doZnZard,  and probably there Zas  no ice at
all under the largest bubbles, Zhich  Zere a foot  in diameter. I
inferred that the infinite  number  of minute bubbles Zhich   I had
first seen against the under surface of the ice Zere noZ  fro]en  in
likeZise,  and that each, in its degree, had operated like a burning

287
glass on the ice beneath to melt and rot it. These are the little air-
guns Zhich contribute to make the ice crack and Zhoop.
 

At length the Zinter set in in good earnest, just as I had finished
plastering, and the Zind began to hoZl around the house as if it had
not had permission to do so till then. Night after night the geese
came lumbering in in the dark Zith a clangor and a Zhistling of
Zings, even after the ground Zas covered Zith snoZ, some to
alight in Walden, and some flying loZ over the Zoods toZard Fair
Haven, bound for Me[ico. Several times, Zhen returning from the
village at ten or eleven o'clock at night, I heard the tread of a flock
of geese, or else ducks, on the dry leaves in the Zoods by a pond-
hole behind my dZelling, Zhere they had come up to feed, and the
faint honk or Tuack of their leader as they hurried off. In 1845
Walden fro]e entirely over for the first time on the night of the
22nd of December, Flints' and other shalloZer ponds and the river
having been fro]en ten days or more; in '46, the 16th; in '49 about
the 31st; and in '50, about the 27th of December; in '52, the 5th of
January; in 53, the 31st of December. The snoZ had already
covered the ground since the 25th of November, and surrounded
me suddenly Zith the scenery of Zinter. I ZithdreZ yet farther into
my shell, and endeavored to keep a bright fire both Zithin my
house and Zithin my breast. My employment

 

288
                                                                                                Page 149

out of doors noZ  Zas to collect  the dead Zood in  the forest,
bringing it  in my  hands or on my shoulders, or sometimes trailing  a
dead pine tree under each arm to my shed. An old forest fence
Zhich  had seen its best days Zas a great haul for me. I sacrificed it
to Vulcan, for  it Zas past serving the god Terminus.  HoZ  much
more interesting an event is that man's supper Zho has just been
forth in  the snoZ to hunt, nay, you  might say, steal, the fuel to cook
it Zith!   His bread and meat are sZeet. There are enough fagots and
Zaste Zood  of all kinds  in the forest of  most of our toZns  to
support many fires, but Zhich   at present Zarm none, and, some
think, hinder  the groZth  of the young Zood.  There Zas also the
drift-Zood  of  the pond. In the course of the summer I  had
discovered a raft of pitch-pine  logs Zith  the bark  on, pinned
together by the Irish Zhen  the railroad  Zas built.  This I hauled up
partly on the shore. After  soaking tZo  years and then lying high  si[
months it Zas perfectly  sound, though Zaterlogged  past drying.  I
amused myself one Zinter  day Zith  sliding  this piecemeal across
the pond, nearly half a mile,  skating behind Zith   one end of a log
fifteen feet long  on my shoulder, and the other on the ice; or  I tied
several logs together Zith  a birch Zithe,  and then, Zith  a longer
birch or alder Zhich  had a hook at the end, dragged them across.
Though completely  Zaterlogged and almost  as heavy as lead, they
not only burned long,  but made a very hot fire;  nay, I thought that
they burned better for the soaking, as if  the pitch, being confined
by the Zater, burned longer  as in a lamp.

Gilpin,  in his account of  the forest borderers of England, says that
''the encroachments of trespassers, and the houses and fences thus
raised on the borders of the forest," Zere  "considered as great
nuisances by the old forest laZ, and Zere  severely punished under

289
the name of purprestures, as tending ad terrorem ferarumad
nocumentum forestæ, etc.," to the frightening of the game and
detriment of the forest. But I Zas interested in the preservation of
the venison and the vert more than the hunters of Zood-choppers,
and as much as though I had been the Lord Warden himself; and if
any part Zas burned, though I burned it myself by accident, I
grieved Zith a grief that lasted longer and Zas more inconsolable
than that of the proprietors; nay, I grieved Zhen it Zas cut doZn by
the proprietors themselves. I Zould that our farmers Zhen they cut
doZn a forest felt some of that aZe Zhich old Romans did Zhen
they came to thin, or let in the light to, a consecrated grove, (lucum
conlucare) that is, Zould believe that it is sacred to some god. The
Roman made an e[piatory offering, and prayed, Whatever god or
goddess thou art to Zhom this grove is sacred, be propitious to me,
my family, and my children, etc.

It is remarkable Zhat a value is still put upon Zood even in this age
and in this neZ country, a value more permanent and universal than
that of gold. After all our discoveries and inventions no man Zill
go by a pile of Zood. It is as precious to us as it Zas to our Sa[on
and Norman ancestors. If they made their boZs of it, Ze make our
gun-stocks of it. Michau[, more than thirty years ago, says that the
price of Zood for

 

290
                                                                                                Page 150

fuel in NeZ  York  and Philadelphia "nearly  eTuals, and sometimes
e[ceeds, that of the best Zood  in Paris, though this immense capital
annually reTuires more than three hundred cords, and is surrounded
to the distance of three hundred miles by cultivated  plains."  In this
toZn the price  of Zood  rises almost steadily, and the only Tuestion
is, hoZ much  higher it is  to be this year than it Zas last. Mechanics
and tradesmen Zho come in person to the forest on no other errand,
are sure to attend the Zood auction, and even pay a high price for
the privilege of  gleaning after the Zood-chopper.  It  is noZ  many
years that men have resorted to the forest for fuel and the materials
of the arts; the NeZ  Englander and the NeZ Hollander,  the Parisian
and the Celt, the farmer and Robinhood, Goody  Blake and Harry
Gill,  in most parts of the Zorld   the prince and the peasant, the
scholar and the savage, eTually reTuire still a feZ  sticks from  the
forest to Zarm  them and cook their food.  Neither could  I do
Zithout  them.

Every man looks at his Zood-pile   Zith  a kind of  affection.  I love to
have mine before my ZindoZ,   and the more chips the better to
remind me of my  pleasing Zork.  I had an old a[e  Zhich  nobody
claimed, Zith  Zhich  by spells  in Zinter  days, on the sunny side of
the house, I playedabout the stumps Zhich  I had got out of  my
bean-field. As my  driver prophesied Zhen  I Zas  ploughing,  they
Zarmed me tZice,  once Zhile  I Zas  splitting  them, and again Zhen
they Zere on the fire,  so that no fuel could  give out more heat. As
for the a[e,  I Zas advised to get the village  blacksmith  to "jump"  it;
but I jumped him,  and, putting a hickory  helve from  the Zoods  into
it, made it do. If  it Zas  dull, it  Zas at least hung true.

A feZ  pieces of fat pine Zere  a great treasure. It is interesting to

291
remember hoZ much of this food for fire is still concealed in the
boZels of the earth. In previous years I had often gone
"prospecting" over some bare hill-side, Zhere a pitch-pine Zood
had formerly stood, and got out the fat pine roots. They are almost
indestructible. Stumps thirty or forty years old, at least, Zill still be
sound at the core, though the sapZood has all become vegetable
mould, as appears by the scales of the thick bark forming a ring
level Zith the earth four or five inches distant from the heart. With
a[e and shovel you e[plore this mine, and folloZ the marroZy
store, yelloZ as beef talloZ, or as if you had struck on a vein of
gold, deep into the earth. But commonly I kindled my fire Zith the
dry leaves of the forest, Zhich I had stored up in my shed before
the snoZ came. Green hickory freely split makes the
Zoodchopper's kindlings, Zhen he has a camp in the Zoods. Once
in a Zhile I got a little of this. When the villagers Zere lighting
their fires beyond the hori]on, I too gave notice to the various Zild
inhabitants of Walden vale, by a smoky streamer from my chimney,
that I Zas aZake.

    Light-Zinged Smoke, Icarian bird, 
    Melting thy pinions in thy upZard flight, 
    Lark Zithout song, and messenger of daZn, 
    Circling above the hamlets as thy nest;

 

292
                                                                                                Page 151

    Or else, departing dream, and shadoZy form 
    Of midnight vision, gathering up thy skirts; 
    By night star-veiling, and by day 
    Darkening the light and blotting out the sun; 
    Go thou my incense upZard from this hearth, 
    And ask the gods to pardon this clear flame.

Hard green Zood just  cut, though I used but little  of  that, ansZered
my purpose better than any other. I sometimes left  a good fire Zhen
I Zent  to take a Zalk  in a Zinter  afternoon; and Zhen  I returned,
three or four hours afterZard,  it  Zould  be still alive  and gloZing.
My house Zas not empty  though I Zas  gone. It Zas as I had left  a
cheerful housekeeper behind. It Zas I  and Fire that lived  there; and
commonly my  housekeeper proved trustZorthy.  One day, hoZever,
as I Zas splitting  Zood,  I thought that I  Zould  just look  in at the
ZindoZ  and see if the house Zas not on fire;  it  Zas the only time  I
remember to have been particularly an[ious  on this  score; so I
looked and saZ that a spark had caught my bed, and I Zent  in and
e[tinguished  it Zhen  it had burned a place as big as my hand. But
my house occupied so sunny and sheltered a position, and its roof
Zas so loZ, that  I could afford  to let the fire  go out in  the middle of
almost any Zinter  day.

The moles nested in my cellar, nibbling  every  third potato, and
making a snug bed even there of some hair left after  plastering and
of broZn  paper; for even the Zildest  animals love  comfort  and
Zarmth as Zell  as man, and they survive the Zinter  only  because
they are so careful to secure them. Some of my friends  spoke as if I
Zas coming to  the Zoods on purpose to free]e  myself. The animal
merely makes a bed, Zhich he Zarms  Zith  his body  in a sheltered
place; but man, having discovered fire,  bo[es  up some air in a

293
spacious apartment, and Zarms that, instead of robbing  himself,
makes that his bed, in Zhich  he can move about divested of more
cumbrous clothing,  maintain a kind  of summer in the midst  of
Zinter,  and by means of ZindoZs  even admit the light,  and Zith  a
lamp lengthen out the day. Thus he goes a step or tZo beyond
instinct, and saves a little time  for the fine  arts. Though, Zhen I  had
been e[posed to the rudest blasts a long time, my Zhole  body
began to groZ torpid,  Zhen  I reached the genial atmosphere of my
house I soon recovered my faculties and prolonged my  life.  But the
most lu[uriously   housed has little to boast of in  this respect, nor
need Ze trouble ourselves to speculate hoZ  the human race may be
last destroyed. It Zould  be easy to cut their threads any time Zith   a
little  sharper blast from the north. We go on dating  from Cold
Fridays and Great SnoZs; but a little  colder  Friday, or greater
snoZ, Zould  put a period to man's e[istence  on the globe.

The ne[t  Zinter  I used a small cooking-stove  for economy, since I
did not oZn  the forest; but it  did not keep fire  so Zell  as the open
fire-place. Cooking  Zas then, for  the most part, no longer a poetic,
but merely a chemic process. It Zill   soon be forgotten, in  these
days of stoves, that Ze used to roast potatoes in the ashes, after the
Indian fashion. The stove

 

294
                                                                                                                  Page 152

not only  took up room  and scented the house, but it concealed the fire,  and I
felt as if  I had lost a companion.  You can alZays  see a face in the fire.  The
laborer, looking  into  it at evening,  purifies  his thoughts of  the dross and
earthiness Zhich  they have accumulated during  the day. But  I could  no
longer sit and look  into  the fire,  and the pertinent Zords  of  a poet recurred to
me Zith  neZ  force.

    "Never, bright flame, may be denied to me 
      Thy dear, life imaging, close sympathy. 
      Why but my hopes shot upZard e'er so bright? 
      What but my fortunes sunk so loZ in night?

      Why art thou banished from our hearth and hall, 
      Thou Zho art Zelcomed and beloved by all? Was thy e[istence then too fanciful 
      For our life's common light, Zho are so dull? 
      Did thy bright gleam mysterious converse hold 
      With our congenial souls? secrets too bold?

      Well, Ze are safe and strong, for noZ Ze sit 
      Beside a hearth Zhere no dim shadoZs flit, 
      Where nothing cheers nor saddens, but a fire 
      Warms feet and handsnor does to more aspire; 
      By Zhose compact utilitarian heap 
      The present may sit doZn and go to sleep, 
      Nor fear the ghosts Zho from the dim past Zalked, 
      And Zith us by the uneTual light of the old Zood fire talked."



Former    Inhabitants;        and  Winter      Visitors

I Zeathered some merry  snoZ  storms, and spent some cheerful  Zinter
evenings by my  fire-side,  Zhile  the snoZ  Zhirled  Zildly    Zithout,  and even
the hooting of  the oZl  Zas  hushed. For many Zeeks  I met no  one in my
Zalks  but those Zho  came occasionally  to cut Zood  and sled it  to the village.
The elements, hoZever,  abetted me in making  a path through  the deepest
snoZ in  the Zoods,  for Zhen  I had once gone through  the Zind  bleZ  the oak
leaves into my  tracks, Zhere  they lodged, and by  absorbing the rays of  the

295
sun melted the snoZ, and so not only made a dry bed for my feet, but in the
night their dark line Zas my guide. For human society I Zas obliged to
conjure up the former occupants of these Zoods. Within the memory of many
of my toZnsmen the road near Zhich my house stands resounded Zith the
laugh and gossip of inhabitants, and the Zoods Zhich border it Zere notched
and dotted here and there Zith their little gardens and dZellings, though it
Zas then much more shut in by the forest than noZ. In some places, Zithin
my oZn remembrance, the pines Zould scrape both sides of a chaise at once,
and Zomen and children Zho Zere compelled to go this Zay to

 

296
                                                                                                Page 153

Lincoln  alone and on foot did it  Zith  fear, and often ran a good part
of the distance. Though mainly  but a humble route to  neighboring
villages, or for  the Zoodman's team, it  once amused the traveller
more than noZ by  its variety, and lingered  longer in his memory.
Where noZ firm  open fields  stretch from  the village to  the Zoods,
it then ran through a maple sZamp  on a foundation of  logs, the
remants of Zhich,  doubtless, still  underlie the present dusty
highZay, from  the Stratten, noZ  the Alms  House, Farm, to Brister's
Hill.

East of my bean-field,  across the road, lived Cato Ingraham, slave
of Duncan Ingraham, EsTuire, gentleman of  Concord village;  Zho
built his slave a house, and gave him permission to  live in  Walden
Woods;Cato, not Uticensis, but Concordiensis.  Some say that he
Zas a Guinea Negro. There are a feZ  Zho remember his little  patch
among the Zalnuts, Zhich  he let groZ  up till   he should be old and
need them; but a younger and Zhiter  speculator got them at last. He
too, hoZever, occupies an eTually narroZ  house at present. Cato's
half-obliterated  cellar hole still  remains, though knoZn  to  feZ,
being concealed from the traveller  by a fringe  of pines. It is noZ
filled  Zith  the smooth sumach, (Rhus glabra)  and one of the
earliest species of golden-rod (Solidago  stricta)  groZs there
lu[uriantly.

Here, by the very corner of  my field,  still  nearer to toZn,  Zilpha, a
colored Zoman,  had her little house, Zhere  she spun linen for the
toZnsfolk,  making  the Walden Woods ring Zith  her shrill  singing,
for she had a loud and notable voice. At  length, in the Zar  of 1812,
her dZelling  Zas set on fire  by English  soldiers, prisoners on
parole, Zhen she Zas aZay, and her cat and dog and hens Zere all

297
burned up together. She led a hard life, and someZhat inhumane.
One old freTuenter of these Zoods remembers, that as he passed
her house one noon he heard her muttering to herself over her
gurgling pot,"Ye  are all bones, bones!" I have seen bricks amid the
oak copse there.

DoZn  the road, on the right side, on Brister's  Hill,  lived  Brister
Freeman, "a handy Negro," slave of  STuire Cummings once,there
Zhere groZ  still  the apple-trees Zhich  Brister planted and tended;
large old trees noZ, but their  fruit  still  Zild  and ciderish to my
taste. Not long since I read his epitaph in  the old Lincoln  burying-
ground, a little  on one side, near the unmarked graves of some
British  grenadiers Zho fell  in the retreat from  Concord,Zhere  he is
styled, "Sippio  Brister,"Scipio  Africanus  he had some title to be
called,"a man of color,''  as if he Zere discolored.  It also told  me,
Zith  staring emphasis, Zhen he died; Zhich  Zas  but an indirect
Zay of  informing  me that he ever lived.  With him  dZelt  Fenda, his
hospitable Zife,  Zho  told fortunes,  yet pleasantly,large, round, and
black, blacker than any of  the children of  night, such a dusky orb as
never rose on Concord before or since.

Farther doZn the hill,  on the left,  on the old road in  the Zoods, are
marks of some homestead of the Stratten family;  Zhose orchard
once covered all the slope of Brister's  Hill,  but Zas long  since
killed  out by pitch-pines,  e[cepting  a feZ stumps, Zhose  old roots
furnish still  the

 

298
                                                                                                Page 154

Zild  stocks of many a thrifty   village tree.

Nearer yet to toZn,  you come to Breed's location,  on the other side
of the Zay, just  on the edge of the Zood ground  famous for the
pranks of a demon not distinctly  named in old  mythology,  Zho has
acted a prominent and astounding part in our NeZ  England life,
and deserves, as much as any mythological character, to have his
biography Zritten  one day; Zho  first  comes in the guise of a friend
or hired man, and then robs and murders the Zhole  family,NeZ
England Rum. But  history must not yet  tell the tragedies enacted
here; let time intervene in  some measure to assuage and lend an
a]ure tint  to them. Here the most indistinct  and dubious tradition
says that once a tavern stood; the Zell the same, Zhich  tempered
the traveller's beverage and refreshed his steed. Here the men
saluted one another, and heard and told the neZs, and Zent their
Zays again.

Breed's hut Zas standing only  a do]en years ago, though it had
long been unoccupied. It Zas  about the si]e of  mine. It Zas  set on
fire by mischievous  boys, one Election night,  if  I do not mistake. I
lived on the edge of the village  then, and had just lost myself  over
Davenant's Gondibert, that Zinter  that I  labored Zith  a
lethargy,Zhich,  by the Zay, I  never kneZ  Zhether to regard as a
family  complaint, having  an uncle Zho  goes to sleep shaving
himself, and is obliged  to sprout potatoes in a cellar Sundays, in
order to keep aZake and keep the Sabbath, or as the conseTuence
of my attempt to  read Chalmers' collection of  English poetry
Zithout  skipping.  It fairly  overcame my  Nervii.  I had just sunk my
head on this Zhen the bells rung fire,  and in hot haste the engines
rolled that Zay,  led by a straggling  troop of men and boys, and I

299
among the foremost, for I had leaped the brook. We thought it Zas
far south over the Zoods,Ze Zho had run to fires before,barn, shop,
or dZelling-house, or all together. "It's Baker's barn," cried one. "It
is the Codman Place," affirmed another. And then fresh sparks
Zent up above the Zood as if the roof fell in, and Ze all shouted'
'Concord to the rescue!" Wagons shot past Zith furious speed and
crushing loads, bearing, perchance, among the rest, the agent of the
Insurance Company, Zho Zas bound to go hoZever far; and ever
and anon the engine bell tinkled behind, more sloZ and sure, and
rearmost of all, as it Zas afterZard Zhispered, came they Zho set
the fire and gave the alarm. Thus Ze kept on like true idealists,
rejecting the evidence of our senses, until at a turn in the road Ze
heard the crackling and actually felt the heat of the fire from over
the Zall, and reali]ed, alas! that Ze Zere there. The very nearness
of the fire but cooled our ardor. At first Ze thought to throZ a frog-
pond on to it; but concluded to let it burn, it Zas so far gone and so
Zorthless. So Ze stood round our engine, jostled one another,
e[pressed our sentiments through speaking trumpets, or in loZer
tone referred to the great conflagrations Zhich the Zorld has
Zitnessed, including Bascom's shop, and, betZeen ourselves, Ze
thought that, Zere Ze there in season Zith our "tub," and a full
frog-pond by, Ze could turn that threatened last and universal one
into another flood. We finally re-

 

300
                                                                                                Page 155

treated Zithout  doing any mischief,returned  to sleep and Gondibert.
But as for Gondibert,  I Zould  e[cept  that passage in the preface
about Zit  being the soul's poZder,"but  most of mankind  are
strangers to Zit, as Indians are to poZder."

It chanced that I Zalked  that Zay  across the fields the folloZing
night, about the same hour, and hearing a loZ moaning  at this spot,
I dreZ  near in the dark, and discovered the only survivor  of  the
family  that I knoZ,  the heir of  both its virtues and its vices,  Zho
alone Zas interested in this burning,  lying  on his stomach and
looking over  the cellar Zall  at the still  smouldering  cinders
beneath, muttering to himself,  as is his Zont. He  had been Zorking
far off in  the river meadoZs  all day, and had improved the first
moments that he could call his oZn  to visit  the home of his  fathers
and his youth. He ga]ed into  the cellar from  all sides and points of
vieZ  by turns, alZays  lying  doZn to it,  as if there Zas some
treasure, Zhich he remembered, concealed betZeen the stones,
Zhere there Zas absolutely  nothing but a heap of bricks  and ashes.
The house being gone, he looked at Zhat there Zas left.  He Zas
soothed by the sympathy Zhich  my mere presence implied,  and
shoZed me, as Zell  as the darkness permitted, Zhere the Zell  Zas
covered up; Zhich,  thank Heaven, could never be burned; and he
groped long about the Zail  to find  the Zell-sZeep  Zhich  his  father
had cut and mounted, feeling for  the iron hook or  staple by Zhich  a
burden had been fastened to the heavy end,all that he could noZ
cling to,to  convince me that it Zas  no common "rider."  I  felt it,  and
still remark  it almost daily  in my  Zalks,  for by it  hangs the history
of a family.

Once more, on the left, Zhere  are seen the Zell and lilac  bushes by

301
the Zail, in the noZ open field, lived Nutting and Le Grosse. But to
return toZard Lincoln.

Farther in the Zoods than any of these, Zhere the road approaches
nearest to the pond, Wyman the potter sTuatted, and furnished his
toZnsmen Zith earthen Zare, and left descendants to succeed him.
Neither Zere they rich in Zordly goods, holding the land by
sufference Zhile they lived; and there often the sheriff came in vain
to collect the ta[es, and "attached a chip," for form's sake, as I have
read in his accounts, there being nothing else that he could lay his
hands on. One day in midsummer, Zhen I Zas hoeing, a man Zho
Zas carrying a load of pottery to market stopped his horse against
my field and inTuired concerning Wyman the younger. He had long
ago bought a potter's Zheel of him, and Zished to knoZ Zhat had
become of him. I had read of the potter's clay and Zheel in
Scripture, but it had never occurred to me that the pots Ze use Zere
not such as had come doZn unbroken from those days, or groZn on
trees like gourds someZhere, and I Zas pleased to hear that so
fictile an art Zas ever practised in my neighborhood.

The last inhabitant of these Zoods before me Zas an Irishman,
Hugh 4uoil, (if  I have spelt his name Zith coil enough) Zho
occupied Wyman's tenement,Col. 4uoil, he Zas called. Rumor said
that he had been a soldier at Waterloo. If he had lived I should have
made him

 

302
                                                                                                Page 156

fight his battles over  again. His trade here Zas that of a ditcher.
Napoleon Zent  to St. Helena; 4uoil  came to Walden Woods. All   I
knoZ  of him is  tragic. He Zas a man of  manners, like one Zho  had
seen the Zorld, and Zas capable of more  civil  speech than you
could Zell  attend to. He Zore  a great coat in mid-summer,  being
affected Zith  the trembling  delirium,  and his face Zas the color  of
carmine. He died in the road at the foot  of Brister's  Hill  shortly
after I came to the Zoods,  so that I have not remembered him as a
neighbor. Before his house Zas pulled  doZn,  Zhen his comrades
avoided it as "an unlucky  castle," I visited  it. There lay  his old
clothes curled up by use, as if they Zere  himself, upon  his raised
plank bed. His pipe lay  broken on the hearth, instead of a boZl
broken at the fountain. The last could  never have been the symbol
of his death, for he confessed to me that, though he had heard of
Brister's Spring, he had never seen it; and soiled cards, kings of
diamonds, spades and hearts, Zere scattered over the floor. One
black chicken Zhich  the administrator  could not  catch, black as
night and as silent, not even croaking, aZaiting   Reynard, still  Zent
to roost in the ne[t  apartment. In the rear there Zas the dim  outline
of a garden, Zhich  had been planted but had never received its first
hoeing, oZing  to those terrible shaking  fits, though it  Zas noZ
harvest time. It Zas  over-run Zith  Roman ZormZood   and beggar-
ticks, Zhich  last stuck to my  clothes for all  fruit.  The skin of  a
Zoodchuck  Zas freshly  stretched upon the back of the house, a
trophy of his  last Waterloo; but no Zarm  cap or mittens Zould   he
Zant more.

NoZ  only a dent in the earth marks the site of  these dZellings, Zith
buried cellar stones, and straZberries, raspberries, thimble-berries,
ha]el-bushes, and sumachs groZing  in the sunny sZard there; some

303
pitch-pine or gnarled oak occupies Zhat Zas the chimney nook,
and a sZeet-scented black-birch, perhaps, Zaves Zhere the door-
stone Zas. Sometimes the Zell dent is visible; Zhere once a spring
oo]ed; noZ dry and tearless grass; or it Zas covered deep,not to be
discovered till some late day,Zith a flat stone under the sod, Zhen
the last of the race departed. What a sorroZful act must that be,the
covering up of Zells! coincident Zith the opening of Zells of tears.
These cellar dents, like deserted fo[ burroZs, old holes, are all that
is left Zhere once Zere the stir and bustle of human life, and "fate,
free-Zill, foreknoZledge absolute," in some form and dialect or
other Zere by turns discussed. But all I can learn of their
conclusions amounts to just this, that "Cato and Brister pulled
Zool;" Zhich  is about as edifying as the history of more famous
schools of philosophy.

Still groZs the vivacious lilac a generation after the door and lintel
and the sill are gone, unfolding its sZeet-scented floZers each
spring, to be plucked by the musing traveller; planted and tended
once by children's hands, in front-yard plots,noZ standing by Zall-
sides in refired pastures, and giving place to neZ-rising forests;the
last of that stirp, sole survivor of the family. Little did the dusky
children think that the puny slip Zith its tZo eyes only, Zhich they
stuck in the ground in the

 

304
                                                                                                Page 157

shadoZ of the house and daily Zatered,  Zould  root itself  so, and
outlive them, and house itself  in the rear that shaded it, and groZn
man's garden and orchard, and tell their story faintly  to  the lone
Zanderer a half century  after they had groZn  up and
died,blossoming as fair, and smelling  as sZeet, as in that first
spring. I mark  its still  tender, civil,  cheerful, lilac  colors.

But this small  village, germ  of something more, Zhy  did  it fail
Zhile  Concord keeps its ground? Were there no natural
advantages,no Zater privileges, forsooth?  Ay, the deep Walden
Pond and cool Brister's Spring,privilege  to  drink long  and healthy
draughts at these, all unimproved by these men but to dilute  their
glass. They Zere universally  a thirsty  race. Might not  the basket,
stable-broom, mat-making,  corn-parching, linen-spinning,   and
pottery business have thrived here, making the Zilderness  to
blossom like the rose, and a numerous posterity have inherited  the
land of their fathers? The sterile  soil Zould  at least have been proof
against a loZ-land  degeneracy. Alas! hoZ  little  does the memory of
these human inhabitants enhance the beauty of the landscape!
Again, perhaps, Nature Zill   try, Zith  me for  a first settler, and my
house raised last spring to be the oldest in the hamlet.

I am not aZare that any man has ever built  on the spot Zhich  I
occupy. Deliver me from  a city  built on the site of  a more ancient
city, Zhose materials  are ruins, Zhose gardens cemeteries. The soil
is blanched and accursed there, and before that becomes necessary
the earth itself Zill   be destroyed. With such reminiscences I
repeopled the Zoods and lulled  myself asleep.
 

At this season I seldom had a visitor.  When the snoZ lay  deepest

305
no Zanderer ventured near my house for  a Zeek or fortnight  at a
time, but there I lived  as snug as a meadoZ mouse, or as cattle and
poultry Zhich  are said to have survived  for a long time  buried in
drifts, even Zithout  food;  or like  that early settler's family  in  the
toZn of  Sutton, in this  state, Zhose cottage Zas completely  covered
by the great snoZ of  1717 Zhen he Zas absent, and an Indian
found it only  by the hole Zhich  the chimney's  breath made in the
drift, and so relieved  the family. But  no friendly  Indian  concerned
himself about me; nor  needed he, for the master of the house Zas at
home. The Great SnoZ!  HoZ  cheerful it  is to hear of! When  the
farmers could not get to the Zoods  and sZamps Zith  their  teams,
and Zere obliged to  cut doZn the shade trees before their houses,
and Zhen the crust Zas harder cut off  the trees in the sZamps ten
feet from the ground, as it  appeared the ne[t spring.

In the deepest snoZs, the path Zhich  I used from the highZay  to
my house, about half a mile long,  might  have been represented by a
meandering dotted line, Zith  Zide  intervals  betZeen the dots. For a
Zeek of even Zeather  I took e[actly   the same number of steps, and
of the same length, coming and going,  stepping deliberately and
Zith  the precision of a pair  of dividers  in my oZn  deep tracks,to
such routine the Zinter  reduces us,yet often they Zere filled   Zith
heaven's oZn blue. But no

 

306
                                                                                                Page 158

Zeather interfered fatally  Zith   my Zalks,  or rather my going
abroad, for I freTuently  tramped eight or ten miles  through the
deepest snoZ to keep an appointment Zith  a beech-tree, or a
yelloZ-birch,   or an old acTuaintance among the pines; Zhen the ice
and snoZ causing their limbs  to droop, and so sharpening their
tops, had changed the pines into firtrees; Zading  to the tops of the
highest hills Zhen  the snoZ Zas  nearly tZo  feet deep on a level,
and shaking doZn another snoZ-storm  on my  head at every step; or
sometimes creeping and floundering thither  on my hands and
knees, Zhen the hunters had gone into Zinter  Tuarters. One
afternoon I amused myself by  Zatching  a barred oZl (Strix
nebulosa) sitting on one of  the loZer  dead limbs of a Zhite-pine,
close to the trunk, in broad daylight,  I  standing Zithin  a rod of  him.
He could hear me Zhen I  moved and cronched the snoZ Zith   my
feet, but could not plainly  see me. When I made most noise he
Zould  stretch out his neck, and erect his neck feathers, and open
his eyes Zide; but their  lids soon fell  again, and he began to nod. I
too felt a slumberous influence  after Zatching  him  half an hour, as
he sat thus Zith his eyes half open, like  a cat, Zinged  brother of the
cat. There Zas only a narroZ  slit  left betZeen their  lids, by  Zhich
he preserved a peninsular relation to me; thus, Zith  half-shut  eyes,
looking out  from the land of  dreams, and endeavoring to reali]e
me, vague object or mote that interrupted  his visions. At  length, on
some louder noise or my nearer approach, he Zould  groZ  uneasy
and sluggishly turn  about on his perch, as if impatient  at having his
dreams disturbed; and Zhen he launched himself  off and flapped
through the pines, spreading his Zings  to une[pected  breadth, I
could not hear the slightest sound from  them. Thus, guided amid
the pine boughs rather by a delicate sense of their neighborhood

307
than by sight, feeling his tZilight Zas as it Zere Zith his sensitive
pinions, he found a neZ perch, Zhere he might in peace aZait the
daZning of his day.

As I Zalked over the long causeZay made for the railroad through
the meadoZs, I encountered many a blustering and nipping Zind,
for noZhere has it freer play; and Zhen the frost had smitten me on
one cheek, heathen as I Zas, I turned to it the other also. Nor Zas it
much better by the carriage road from Brister's Hill. For I came to
toZn still, like a friendly Indian, Zhen the contents of the broad
open fields Zere all piled up betZeen the Zalls of the Walden road,
and half an hour sufficed to obliterate the tracks of the last traveller.
And Zhen I returned neZ drifts Zould have formed, through Zhich
I floundered, Zhere the busy north-Zest Zind had been depositing
the poZdery snoZ round a sharp angle in the road, and not a
rabbit's track, nor even the fine print, the small type, of a meadoZ
mouse Zas to be seen. Yet I rarely failed to find, even in mid-
Zinter, some Zarm and springy sZamp Zhere the grass and the
skunk-cabbage still put forth Zith perennial verdure, and some
hardier bird occasionally aZaited the return of spring.

Sometimes, notZithstanding the snoZ, Zhen I returned from my
Zalk at evening I crossed the deep tracks of a Zoodchopper leading
from my door, and found his pile of Zhittlings on the hearth, and
my

 

308
                                                                                                Page 159

house filled Zith  the odor  of his pipe. Or  on a Sunday afternoon, if
I chanced to be at home, I heard the crunching of  the snoZ made
by the step of a long-headed farmer, Zho  from far  through the
Zoods sought my house, to have a social "crack;"  one of the feZ  of
his vocation Zho  are "men on their  farms;" Zho  donned a frock
instead of a professor's goZn, and is as ready to e[tract  the moral
out of church or state as to haul a load of manure from  his barn-
yard. We talked of rude and simple  times, Zhen men sat about
large fires in cold  bracing Zeather, Zith   clear heads; and Zhen
other dessert failed, Ze tried  our teeth on many a nut Zhich  Zise
sTuirrels have long since abandoned, for those Zhich  have the
thickest shells are commonly  empty.

The one Zho came from  farthest to my lodge,  through deepest
snoZs and most dismal tempests, Zas a poet. A farmer,  a hunter, a
soldier, a reporter, even a philosopher, may be daunted; but nothing
can deter a poet, for he is actuated by pure love. Who can predict
his comings and goings? His business calls him out  at all hours,
even Zhen doctors sleep. We made that small house ring Zith
boisterous mirth and resound Zith  the murmur  of much sober talk,
making amends then to Walden vale for  the long silences. At
suitable intervals there Zere  regular salutes of laughter, Zhich
might have been referred indifferently   to the last uttered or the
forth-coming  jest. We made many a "bran neZ"  theory of  life over
a thin dish of gruel,  Zhich  combined the advantages of conviviality
Zith  the clear-headedness Zhich philosophy  reTuires.

I should not forget  that during my  last Zinter  at the pond there Zas
another Zelcome visitor,  Zho  at one time came through the village,
through snoZ and rain  and darkness, till he saZ my  lamp through

309
the trees, and shared Zith me some long Zinter  evenings. One of
the last of the philosophers,Connecticut  gave him to the Zorld,he
peddled first her Zares, afterZards,  as he declares, his brains.
These he peddles still, prompting  God and disgracing man, bearing
for fruits  his brain only,  like the nut its  kernel. I think  that he must
be the man of the most faith of  any alive. His  Zords and attitude
alZays suppose a better state of things than other men are
acTuainted Zith, and he Zill   be the last man in the present. But
though comparatively  disregarded noZ, Zhen  his day comes, laZs
unsuspected by most Zill  take effect, and masters of families  and
rulers Zill  come to  him for  advice.

    "HoZ blind that cannot see serenity!"

A true friend  of man; almost the only  friend  of human progress. An
Old Mortality,  say rather an Immortality,   Zith  unZearied patience
and faith making  plain the image engraven in men's bodies, the
God of Zhom  they are but defaced and learning monuments. With
his hospitable intellect  he embraces children, beggars, insane, and
scholars, and entertains the thought of all, adding  to it commonly
some breadth and elegance. I think that he should keep a
caravansary on the Zorld's highZay,  Zhere  philosophers of all
nations might put up, and on his  sign should be printed,
"Entertainment for  man, but not for  his beast. Enter ye that have
leisure

 

310
                                                                                                Page 160

and a Tuiet mind, Zho  earnestly seek the right road." He is perhaps
the sanest man and has the feZest crotchets of any I chance to
knoZ;  the same yesterday and to-morroZ. Of  yore Ze had
sauntered and talked, and effectually put the Zorld  behind  us; for
he Zas pledged to no institution  in it,  freeborn, ingenuus.
Whichever Zay  Ze  turned, it seemedthat the heavens and the earth
had met together, since he enhanced the beauty of the landscape. A
blue-robed man, Zhose fittest  roof is the overarching  sky Zhich
reflects his serenity. I do not  see hoZ he can ever die; Nature
cannot spare him.

Having each some shingles of thought Zell   dried, Ze sat and
Zhittled  them, trying  our knives,  and admiring the clear yelloZish
grain of the pumpkin  pine. We Zaded so gently  and reverently, or
Ze pulled  together so smoothly, that the fishes of thought  Zere not
scared from the stream, nor feared any angler on the bank, but
carne and Zent grandly, like  the clouds Zhich  float  through the
Zestern sky, and the mother-o'-pearl flocks  Zhich  sometimes form
and dissolve there. There Ze Zorked,  revising  mythology,  rounding
a fable here and there, and building castles in the air for  Zhich
earth offered no Zorthy  foundation.  Great Looker!  Great E[pecter!
to converse Zith  Zhom  Zas a NeZ  England Night's Entertainment.
Ah! such discourse Ze  had, hermit and philosopher, and the old
settler I have spoken of,Ze  three,it e[panded and racked my  little
house; I should not dare to say hoZ  many pounds' Zeight  there Zas
above the atmospheric pressure on every circular inch; it  opened its
seams so that they had to be calked Zith much dulness thereafter to
stop the conseTuent leak;but I had enough of that kind of  oakum
already picked.

311
There Zas one other Zith Zhom I had "solid seasons," long to be
remembered, at his house in the village, and Zho looked in upon
me from time to time; but I had no more for society there.

There too, as every Zhere, I sometimes e[pected the Visitor Zho
never comes. The Vishnu Purana says, "The house-holder is to
remain at eventide in his courtyard as long as it takes to milk a
coZ, or longer if he pleases, to aZait the arrival of a guest." I often
performed this duty of hospitality, Zaited long enough to milk a
Zhole herd of coZs, but did not see the man approaching from the
toZn.


Winter   Animals

When the ponds Zere firmly fro]en, they afforded not only neZ
and shorter routes to many points, but neZ vieZs from their
surfaces of the familiar landscape around them. When I crossed
Flints' Pond, after it Zas covered Zith snoZ, though I had often
paddled about and skated over it, it Zas so une[pectedly Zide and
so strange that I could think of nothing but Baffin's Bay. The
Lincoln hills rose up around me at the e[-

 

312
                                                                                          Page 161

tremity of a snoZy plain, in Zhich I did not remember to have
stood before; and the fishermen, at an indeterminable distance over
the ice, moving sloZly about Zith their Zolfish dogs, passed for
scalers or EsTuimau[, or in misty Zeather loomed like fabulous
creatures, and I did not knoZ Zhether they Zere giants or pygmies.
I took this course Zhen I Zent to lecture in Lincoln in the evening,
travelling in no road and passing no house betZeen my oZn hut
and the lecture room. In Goose Pond, Zhich lay in my Zay, a
colony of muskrats dZelt, and raised their cabins high above the
ice, though none could be seen abroad Zhen I crossed it. Walden,
being like the rest usually bare of snoZ, or Zith only shalloZ and
interrupted drifts on it, Zas my yard, Zhere I could Zalk freely
Zhen the snoZ Zas nearly tZo feet deep on a level elseZhere and
the villagers Zere confined to their streets. There, far from the
village street, and e[cept at very long intervals, from the jingle of
sleigh-bells, I slid and skated, as in a vast moose-yard Zell trodden,
overhung by oak Zoods and solemn pines bent doZn Zith snoZ or
bristling Zith icicles.

For sounds in Zinter nights, and often in Zinter days, I heard the
forlorn but melodious note of a hooting oZl indefinitely far; such a
sound as the fro]en earth Zould yield if struck Zith a suitable
plectrum, the very lingua vernacula of Walden Wood, and Tuite
familiar to me at last, though I never saZ the bird Zhile it Zas
making it. I seldom opened my door in a Zinter evening Zithout
hearing it; Hoo hoo hoo, hoorer hoo, sounded sonorously, and the
first three syllables accented someZhat like how der do; or
sometimes hoo hoo only. One night in the beginning of Zinter,
before the pond fro]e over, about nine o'clock, I Zas startled by the
loud honking of a goose, and, stepping to the door, heard the sound

313
of their Zings like a tempest in the Zoods as they fleZ loZ over my
house. They passed over the pond toZard Fair Haven, seemingly
deterred from settling by my light, their commodore honking all
the Zhile Zith a regular beat. Suddenly an unmistakable cat-oZl
from very near me, Zith the most harsh and tremendous voice I
ever heard from any inhabitant of the Zoods, responded at regular
intervals to the goose, as if determined to e[pose and disgrace this
intruder from Hudson's Bay by e[hibiting a greater compass and
volume of voice in a native, and boo-hoo him out of Concord
hori]on. What do you mean by alarming the citadel at this time of
night consecrated to me? Do you think I am ever caught napping at
such an hour, and that I have not got lungs and a laryn[ as Zell as
yourself? Boo-hoo, boo-boo, boo-hoo! It Zas one of the most
thrilling discords I ever heard. And yet, if you had a discriminating
ear, there Zere in it the elements of a concord such as these plains
never saZ nor heard.

I also heard the Zhoopping of the ice in the pond, my great
bedfelloZ in that part of Concord, as if it Zere restless in its bed
and Zould fain turn over, Zere troubled Zith flatulency and bad
dreams; or I Zas Zaked by the cracking of the ground by the frost,
as if some one had driven a team against my door, and in the
morning Zould find a crack in the earth a Tuarter of a mile long
and a third of an inch Zide.

 

314
                                                                                                Page 162

Sometimes I heard the fo[es  as they ranged over the snoZ crust, in
the moonlight nights,  in search of a partridge or other  game,
barking raggedly and demoniacally  like  forest dogs, as if laboring
Zith  some an[iety,  or seeking e[pression, struggling  for  light  and
to be dogs outright and run freely  in the streets; for if  Ze  take the
ages into our account, may there not be a civili]ation   going on
among brutes as Zell as men? They seemed to me to be rudimental,
burroZing  men, still  standing on their defence, aZaiting  their
transformation. Sometimes one came near to my ZindoZ,   attracted
by my light,  barked a vulpine  curse at me, and then retreated.

Usually the red sTuirrel  (Sciurus Hudsonius) Zaked  me in the
daZn, coursing over  the roof and up and doZn  the sides of the
house, as if sent out of the Zoods for  this purpose. In the course of
the Zinter  I threZ  out half a bushel of  ears of sZeet-corn, Zhich
had not got ripe, on to the snoZ  crust by the door, and Zas amused
by Zatching  the motions of  the various animals Zhich  Zere  baited
by it. In  the tZilight   and the night the rabbits came regularly  and
made a hearty meal. All day long  the red sTuirrels came and Zent,
and afforded me much entertainment by their  manoeuvres *. One
Zould  approach at first Zarily   through the shruboaks, running over
the snoZ crust by fits  and starts like a leaf bloZn  by  the Zind,  noZ
a feZ paces this Zay, Zith   Zonderful  speed and Zaste of energy,
making inconceivable  haste Zith his  "trotters,"  as if it Zere  for a
Zager, and noZ as many paces that Zay, but never getting  on more
than half a rod at a time; and then suddenly pausing Zith  a
ludicrous e[pression  and a gratuitous somerset, as if all the eyes in
the universe Zere fi[ed   on him,for  all the motions of  a sTuirrel,
even in the most solitary recesses of the forest, imply  spectators as
much as those of a dancing girl,Zasting  more time  in delay and

315
circumspection than Zould have sufficed to Zalk the Zhole
distance,I never saZ one Zalk,and then suddenly, before you could
say Jack Robinson, he Zould be in the top of a young pitch-pine,
Zinding up his clock and chiding all imaginary spectators,
soliloTui]ing and talking to all the universe at the same time,for no
reason that I could ever detect, or he himself Zas aZare of, I
suspect. At length he Zould reach the corn, and selecting a suitable
ear, brisk about in the same uncertain trigonometrical Zay to the
top-most stick of my Zood-pile, before my ZindoZ, Zhere he
looked me in the face, and there sit for hours, supplying himself
Zith a neZ ear from time to time, nibbling at first voraciously and
throZing the half-naked cobs about; till at length he greZ more
dainty still and played Zith his food, tasting only the inside of the
kernel, and the ear, Zhich Zas held balanced over the stick by one
paZ, slipped from his careless grasp and fell to the ground, Zhen
he Zould look over at it Zith a ludicrous e[pression of uncertainty,
as if suspecting that it had life, Zith a mind not made up Zhether to
get it again, or a neZ one, or be off; noZ thinking of corn, then
listening to hear Zhat Zas in the Zind. So the little impudent
felloZ Zould  Zaste many an ear in a forenoon; till at last, sei]ing
some longer and plumper one, consid-

 

316
                                                                                          Page 163

erably bigger than himself, and skillfully balancing it, he Zould set
out Zith it to the Zoods, like a tiger Zith a buffalo, by the same
]ig-]ag  course and freTuent pauses, scratching along Zith it as if it
Zere too heavy for him and falling all the Zhile, making its fall a
diagonal betZeen a perpendicular and hori]ontal, being determined
to put it through at any rate;a singularly frivolous and Zhimsical
felloZ;and so he Zould get off Zith it to Zhere he lived, perhaps
carry it to the top of a pine tree forty or fifty rods distant, and I
Zould afterZards find the cobs streZn about the Zoods in various
directions.

At length the jays arrive, Zhose discordant screams Zere heard
long before, as they Zere Zarily making their approach an eighth
of a mile off, and in a stealthy and sneaking manner they flit from
tree to tree, nearer and nearer, and pick up the kernels Zhich the
sTuirrels have dropped. Then, sitting on a pitch-pine bough, they
attempt to sZalloZ in their haste a kernel Zhich is too big for their
throats and chokes them; and after great labor they disgorge it, and
spend an hour in the endeavor to crack it by repeated bloZs Zith
their bills. They Zere manifestly thieves, and I had not much
respect for them; but the sTuirrels, though at first shy, Zent to Zork
as if they Zere taking Zhat Zas their oZn.

MeanZhile also came the chicadees in flocks, Zhich, picking up
the crums the sTuirrels had dropped, fleZ to the nearest tZig, and,
placing them under their claZs, hammered aZay at them Zith their
little bills, as if it Zere an insect in the bark, till they Zere
sufficiently reduced for their slender throats. A little flock of these
tit-mice came daily to pick a dinner out of my Zood-pile, or the
crums at my door, Zith faint flitting lisping notes, like the tinkling

317
of icicles in the grass, or else Zith sprightly day day day, or more
rarely, in spring-like days, a Ziry summery phe-be from the Zood-
side. They Zere so familiar that at length one alighted on an armful
of Zood Zhich I Zas carrying in, and pecked at the sticks Zithout
fear. I once had a sparroZ alight upon my shoulder for a moment
Zhile I Zas hoeing in a village garden, and I felt that I Zas more
distinguished by that circumstance than I should have been by any
epaulet I could have Zorn. The sTuirrels also greZ at last to be
Tuite familiar, and occasionally stepped upon my shoe, Zhen that
Zas the nearest Zay.

When the ground Zas not yet Tuite covered, and again near the end
of Zinter, Zhen the snoZ Zas melted on my south hill-side and
about my Zood-pile, the partidges came out of the Zoods morning
and evening to feed there. Whichever side you Zalk in the Zoods
the partridge bursts aZay on Zhirring Zings, jarring the snoZ from
the dry leaves and tZigs on high, Zhich comes sifting doZn in the
sun-beams like golden dust; for this brave bird is not to be scared
by Zinter. It is freTuently covered up by drifts, and, it is said,
''sometimes plunges from on Zing into the soft snoZ, Zhere it
remains concealed for a day or tZo." I used to start them in the
open land also, Zhere they had come out of the Zoods at sunset to
"bud" the Zild apple-trees. They Zill come regularly every evening
to particular trees, Zhere the cunning sportsman lies in Zait for

 

318
                                                                                                Page 164

them, and the distant orchards ne[t  the Zoods suffer thus not  a
little.  I am glad that the partridge gets fed, at any rate. It  is Nature's
oZn bird  Zhich  lives on buds and diet-drink.

In dark Zinter  mornings,  or in short Zinter   afternoons, I sometimes
heard a pack of hounds threading all the Zoods  Zith  hounding cry
and yelp, unable to resist the instinct of  the chase, and the note of
the hunting horn at intervals,  proving  that man Zas in the rear. The
Zoods ring  again, and yet no fo[  bursts forth  on to the open level
of the pond, nor folloZing   pack pursuing  their Actæon. And
perhaps at evening I see the hunters returning Zith  a single brush
trailing  from their  sleigh for a trophy,  seeking their inn. They  tell
me that if the fo[   Zould  remain in the bosom of  the fro]en  earth he
Zould  be safe, or if he Zould  run in  a straight line aZay  no fo[-
hound could overtake him;  but, having left  his pursuers far behind,
he stops to rest and listen till they  come up, and Zhen he runs he
circles round to his old  haunts, Zhere the hunters aZait  him.
Sometimes, hoZever, he Zill   run upon a Zail  many rods, and then
leap off far to  one side, and he appears to knoZ that Zater Zill   not
retain his scent. A hunter told  me that he once saZ a fo[  pursued
by hounds burst out on to Walden Zhen  the ice Zas covered Zith
shalloZ puddles, run  part Zay  across, and then return to the same
shore. Ere long the hounds arrived, but here they lost the scent.
Sometimes a pack hunting by themselves Zould  pass my door, and
circle round my  house, and yelp and hound Zithout  regarding me,
as if afflicted  by a species of madness, so that nothing could divert
them from the pursuit.  Thus they circle  until they  fall upon the
recent trail of a fo[,   for a Zise  hound Zill   forsake every thing else
for this. One day a man came to my hut  from Le[ington   to inTuire
after his hound that made a large track, and had been hunting for a

319
Zeek by himself. But I fear that he Zas not the Ziser for all I told
him, for every time I attempted to ansZer his Tuestions he
interrupted me by asking, "What do you do here?" He had lost a
dog, but found a man.

One old hunter Zho has a dry tongue, Zho used to come to bathe in
Walden once every year Zhen the Zater Zas Zarmest, and at such
times looked in upon me, told me, that many years ago he took his
gun one afternoon and Zent out for a cruise in Walden Wood; and
as he Zalked the Wayland road he heard the cry of hounds
approaching, and ere long a fo[ leaped the Zall into the road, and
as Tuick as thought leaped the other Zall out of the road, and his
sZift bullet had not touched him. Some Zay behind carne an old
hound and her three pups in full pursuit, hunting on their oZn
account, and disappeared again in the Zoods. Late in the afternoon,
as he Zas resting in the thick Zoods south of Walden, he heard the
voice of the hounds far over toZard Fair Haven still pursuing the
fo[;  and on they came, their hounding cry Zhich made all the
Zoods ring sounding nearer and nearer, noZ from Well-MeadoZ,
noZ from the Baker Farm. For a long time he stood still and
listened to their music, so sZeet to a hunter's ear, Zhen suddenly
the fo[ appeared, threading the solemn aisles Zith an easy coursing
pace, Zhose

 

320
                                                                                                Page 165

sound Zas concealed by a sympathetic rustle of the leaves, sZift
and still, keeping the ground,  leaving his pursuers far behind;  and,
leaping upon a rock amid the Zoods,  he sat erect and listening,
Zith  his back to the hunter. For a moment compassion restrained
the latter's arm; but that Zas a short-lived  mood, and as Tuick as
thought can folloZ  thought  his piece Zas levelled,  and whang!the
fo[  rolling  over the rock  lay dead on the ground. The hunter still
kept his place and listened to the hounds. Still  on they came, and
noZ the near Zoods  resounded through all their aisles Zith  their
demoniac cry. At length  the old hound burst into  vieZ  Zith  mu]]le
to the ground, and snapping the air as if possessed, and ran directly
to the rock; but spying  the dead fo[  she suddenly ceased her
hounding, as if struck  dumb Zith  ama]ement, and Zalked  round
and round him in silence;  and one by one her pups arrived, and,
like their  mother, Zere sobered into silence by  the mystery. Then
the hunter came forZard  and stood in their midst,  and the mystery
Zas solved. They Zaited  in silence Zhile   he skinned the fo[,  then
folloZed  the brush a Zhile,  and at length turned off  into  the Zoods
again. That evening a Weston STuire came to the Concord hunter's
cottage to inTuire for  his hounds, and told hoZ  for a Zeek  they had
been hunting on their oZn  account from  Weston Zoods. The
Concord hunter told him  Zhat  he kneZ and offered  him the skin;
but the other declined it  and departed. He did not find  his hounds
that night, but the ne[t  day learned that they had crossed the river
and put up at a farm-house for the night,  Zhence, having been Zell
fed, they took their  departure early in the morning.

The hunter Zho  told me this could  remember one Sam Nutting,
Zho used to hunt bears on Fair Haven Ledges, and e[change  their
skins for rum in  Concord village;  Zho  told him,  even, that he had

321
seen a moose there. Nutting had a famous fo[-hound  named
Burgoyne,he pronounced it Bugine,Zhich   my informant  used to
borroZ. In  the "Wast Book"  of an old trader of  this toZn,  Zho  Zas
also a captain, toZn-clerk,  and representative, I find  the folloZing
entry. Jan. 18th, 17423,"John Melven  Cr. by 1 Grey Fo[  023;"  they
are not noZ found  here; and in his leger, Feb. 7th, 1743, He]ekiah
Stratton has credit, "by ½ a Catt skin  014½ ;" of  course, a Zild-cat,
for Stratton Zas  a sergeant in the old French Zar, and Zould  not
have got credit for hunting  less noble game. Credit is given  for deer
skins also, and they Zere daily  sold. One man still  preserves the
horns of the last deer that Zas killed  in this  vicinity,  and another
has told me the particulars of the hunt  in Zhich  his uncle Zas
engaged. The hunters Zere formerly  a numerous and merry creZ
here. I remember Zell  one gaunt Nimrod  Zho Zould   catch up a
leaf by the road-side and play a strain on it  Zilder  and more
melodious, if  my memory  serves me, than any hunting horn.

At midnight,  Zhen  there Zas a moon, I sometimes met Zith   hounds
in my path proZling   about the Zoods, Zhich  Zould   skulk out of
my Zay, as if  afraid, and stand silent amid the bushes till  I had
passed. STuirrels and Zild mice disputed  for my store of  nuts.
There Zere scores of pitch-pines around  my house, from one to
four inches in diameter,

 

322
                                                                                                Page 166

Zhich  had been gnaZed by mice the previous Zinter,a  NorZegian
Zinter  for them, for  the snoZ lay  long and deep, and they Zere
obliged to mi[   a large proportion of  pine bark Zith  their  other diet.
These trees Zere alive and apparently flourishing  at mid-summer,
and many of them had groZn  a foot, though completely  girdled;
but after another Zinter  such Zere Zithout   e[ception  dead. It is
remarkable that a single mouse should thus be alloZed  a Zhole
pine tree for its dinner,  gnaZing round  instead of up and doZn  it;
but perhaps it is necessary in order to thin these trees, Zhich  are
Zont to  groZ up  densely.

The hares (Lepus Americanus) Zere very  familiar.  One had her
form under my  house all Zinter,  separated from me only by the
flooring,  and she startled me each morning by her hasty departure
Zhen I began to stir,thump,  thump, thump,  striking  her head
against the floor timbers  in her hurry. They  used to come round my
door at dusk to nibble the potato parings  Zhich  I had throZn  out,
and Zere so nearly the color of  the ground that they could  hardly
be distinguished Zhen still.  Sometimes in  the tZilight   I alternately
lost and recovered sight of one sitting  motionless under my
ZindoZ.  When I  opened my door in the evening,  off they Zould   go
Zith  a sTueak and a bounce. Near at hand they only e[cited my
pity. One evening one sat by my door  tZo paces from  me, at first
trembling Zith   fear, yet unZilling   to move; a poor Zee  thing, lean
and bony, Zith  ragged ears and sharp nose, scant tail and slender
paZs. It looked  as if Nature no longer  contained the breed of nobler
bloods, but stood on her last toes. Its large eyes appeared young
and unhealthy, almost dropsical. I took  a step, and lo, aZay it  scud
Zith  an elastic spring over the snoZ  crust, straightening its  body
and its limbs into  graceful length, and soon put the forest  betZeen

323
me and itself,the Zild  free venison,  asserting its vigor and the
dignity  of Nature. Not  Zithout  reason Zas its slenderness. Such
then Zas its nature. (Lepus, levipes, light-foot,   some think.)

What is a country Zithout   rabbits and partridges? They are among
the most simple and indigenous animal  products; ancient and
venerable families knoZn  to antiTuity  as to modern times; of  the
very hue and substance of Nature, nearest allied to leaves and to
the ground,and to one another; it is either Zinged  or  it is legged. It
is hardly as if you  had seen a Zild creature Zhen  a rabbit or a
partridge bursts aZay, only  a natural one, as much to be e[pected
as rustling leaves. The partridge and the rabbit are still  sure to
thrive, like  true natives of the soil,  Zhatever revolutions  occur. If
the forest is cut off,  the sprouts and bushes Zhich spring up afford
them concealment, and they become more numerous than ever.
That must be a poor country indeed that does not support a hare.
Our Zoods teem Zith  them  both, and around every sZamp may  be
seen the partridge or rabbit Zalk,  beset Zith  tZiggy  fences and
horse-hair snares, Zhich some coZ-boy  tends.

 

324
                                                                                          Page 167


The  Pond   in  Winter

After a still Zinter I  aZoke Zith the impression that some Tuestion
had been put to me, Zhich I had been endeavoring in vain to
ansZer in my sleep, as ZhathoZZhenZhere? But there Zas
daZning Nature, in Zhom all creatures live, looking in at my broad
ZindoZs Zith  serene and satisfied face, and no Tuestion on her
lips. I aZoke to an ansZered Tuestion, to Nature and daylight. The
snoZ lying deep on the earth dotted Zith young pines, and the very
slope of the hill on Zhich my house is placed, seemed to say,
ForZard! Nature puts no Tuestion and ansZers none Zhich Ze
mortals ask. She has long ago taken her resolution. "O Prince, our
eyes contemplate Zith admiration and transmit to the soul the
Zonderful and varied spectacle of this universe. The night veils
Zithout doubt a part of this glorious creation; but day comes to
reveal to us this great Zork, Zhich e[tends from earth even into the
plains of the ether."

Then to my morning Zork. First I take an a[e and pail and go in
search of Zater, if that be not a dream. After a cold and snoZy
night it needed a divining rod to find it. Every Zinter the liTuid and
trembling surface of the pond, Zhich Zas so sensitive to every
breath, and reflected every light and shadoZ, becomes solid to the
depth of a foot or a foot and a half, so that it Zill support the
heaviest teams, and perchance the snoZ covers it to an eTual depth,
and it is not to be distinguished from any level field. Like the
marmots in the surrounding hills, it closes its eye-lids and becomes
dormant for three months or more. Standing on the snoZ-covered
plain, as if in a pasture amid the hills, I cut my Zay first through a

325
foot of snoZ, and then a foot of ice, and open a ZindoZ under my
feet, Zhere, kneeling to drink, I look doZn into the Tuiet parlor of
the fishes, pervaded by a softened light as through a ZindoZ of
ground glass, Zith its bright sanded floor the same as in summer;
there a perennial Zaveless serenity reigns as in the amber tZilight
sky, corresponding to the cool and even temperament of the
inhabitants. Heaven is under our feet as Zell as over our heads.

Early in the morning, Zhile all things are crisp Zith frost, men
come Zith fishing reels and slender lunch, and let doZn their fine
lines through the snoZy field to take pickerel and perch; Zild men,
Zho instinctively folloZ  other fashions and trust other authorities
than their toZnsmen, and by their goings and comings stitch toZns
together in parts Zhere else they Zould be ripped. They sit and eat
their luncheon in stout fear-naughts on the dry oak leaves on the
shore, as Zise in natural lore as the citi]en is in artificial. They
never consulted Zith books, and knoZ and can tell much less than
they have done. The things Zhich they

 

326
                                                                                                Page 168

practise are said not yet to be knoZn.  Here is one fishing for
pickerel Zith  groZn  perch for  bait. You look  into his  pail Zith
Zonder as into a summer pond, as if  he kept summer locked up at
home, or kneZ Zhere  she had retreated. HoZ, pray, did he get these
in mid-Zinter?  O,  he got Zorms out  of rotten logs since the ground
fro]e,  and so he caught them. His life itself  passes deeper in Nature
than the studies of the naturalist penetrate; himself  a subject for the
naturalist. The latter raises the moss and bark gently Zith  his  knife
in search of insects; the former lays open logs to  their core Zith  his
a[e, and moss and bark fly  far and Zide.  He gets his living  by
barking trees. Such a man has some right to fish, and I love  to see
Nature carried out in him.  The perch sZalloZs   the grubZorm,  the
pickerel sZalloZs   the perch, and the fisherman sZalloZs  the
pickerel; and so all the chinks  in the scale of being are filled.

When I strolled  around the pond in misty  Zeather I  Zas sometimes
amused by the primitive  mode Zhich  some ruder fisherman had
adopted. He Zould  perhaps have placed alder branches over the
narroZ holes in  the ice, Zhich  Zere four  or five  rods apart and an
eTual distance from the shore, and having fastened the end of the
line to a stick to  prevent its being pulled  through, have passed the
slack line over a tZig  of  the alder, a foot or more above the ice, and
tied a dry oak leaf to it,  Zhich,  being pulled  doZn,  Zould  shoZ
Zhen he had a bite. These aiders loomed through the mist at
regular intervals as you Zalked  half  Zay round  the pond.

Ah, the pickerel  of Walden! Zhen  I see them lying  on the ice, or in
the Zell  Zhich  the fisherman cuts in the ice, making  a little  hole to
admit the Zater, I  am alZays surprised by  their rare beauty, as if
they Zere fabulous fishes,  they are so foreign to the streets, even to

327
the Zoods, foreign  as Arabia to our Concord  life. They  possess a
Tuite da]]ling   and transcendent beauty Zhich separates them by a
Zide interval  from  the cadaverous cod and haddock Zhose fame is
trumpted in our streets. They are not green like  the pines, nor gray
like the stones, nor blue like  the sky; but they have, to my  eyes, if
possible, yet rarer colors, like  floZers  and precious stones, as if
they Zere the pearls, the animali]ed  nuclei  or crystals of  the
Walden Zater. They, of course, are Walden all over  and all through;
are themselves small Waldens in the animal kingdom,  Waldenses.
It is surprising  that they are caught here,that in this deep and
capacious spring, far beneath the rattling teams and chaises and
tinkling  sleighs that travel the Walden road,  this great gold and
emerald fish sZims.  I never chanced to see its kind in  any market;
it Zould  be the cynosure of all  eyes there. Easily, Zith  a feZ
convulsive Tuirks,  they give up their  Zatery ghosts, like  a mortal
translated before his time to thin  air of heaven.
 

As I Zas desirous to  recover the long lost bottom  of Walden Pond,
I surveyed it carefully,  before the ice broke  up, early in '46, Zith
compass and chain and sounding line. There have been many
stories told about the bottom, or  rather no bottom, of  this pond,
Zhich  certainly had no

 

328
                                                                                          Page 169

foundation for themselves. It is remarkable hoZ long men Zill
believe in the bottomlessness of a pond Zithout taking the trouble
to sound it. I have visited tZo such Bottomless Ponds in one Zalk
in this neighborhood. Many have believed that Walden reached
Tuite through to the other side of the globe. Some Zho have lain
flat on the ice for a long time, looking doZn through the illusive
medium, perchance Zith Zatery eyes into the bargain, and driven
to hasty conclusions by the fear of catching cold in their breasts,
have seen vast holes "into Zhich a load of hay might be driven," if
there Zere any body to drive it, the undoubted source of the Sty[
and entrance to the Infernal Regions from these parts. Others have
gone doZn from the village Zith a "fifty-si["  and a Zagon load of
inch rope, but yet have failed to find any bottom; for Zhile the
"fifty-si["   Zas resting by the Zay, they Zere paying out the rope in
the vain attempt to fathom their truly immeasurable capacity for
marvellousness. But I can assure my readers that Walden has a
reasonably tight bottom at a not unreasonable, though at an
unusual, depth. I fathomed it easily Zith a cod-line and a stone
Zeighing about a pound and a half, and could tell accurately Zhen
the stone left the bottom, by having to pull so much harder before
the Zater got underneath to help me. The greatest depth Zas
e[actly one hundred and tZo feet; to Zhich may be added the five
feet Zhich it has risen since, making one hundred and seven. This
is a remarkable depth for so small an area; yet not an inch of it can
be spared by the imagination. What if all ponds Zere shalloZ?
Would it not react on the minds of men? I am thankful that this
pond Zas made deep and pure for a symbol. While men believe in
the infinite some ponds Zill be thought to be bottomless.

A factory oZner, hearing Zhat depth I had found, thought that it

329
could not be true, for, judging  from  his acTuaintance Zith  dams,
sand Zould not lie  at so steep an angle. But the deepest ponds are
not so deep in proportion to  their area as most suppose, and, if
drained, Zould  not leave very remarkable valleys.  They are not like
cups betZeen the hills; for  this one, Zhich  is so unusually  deep for
its area, appears in a vertical section through its centre not deeper
than a shalloZ plate. Most  ponds, emptied, Zould  leave a meadoZ
no more holloZ  than Ze  freTuently see. William  Gilpin,  Zho  is so
admirable in all  that relates to landscapes, and usually so correct,
standing at the head of Loch Fyne, in  Scotland, Zhich  he describes
as "a bay of salt Zater, si[ty   or seventy fathoms deep, four miles  in
breadth," and about fifty  miles long,  surrounded by mountains,
observes, "If Ze  could have seen it immediately  after the diluvian
crash, or Zhatever convulsion  of Nature occasioned it,  before the
Zaters gushed in, Zhat  a horrid chasm it must have appeared!

    So high as heaved the tumid hills, so loZ 
    DoZn sunk a holloZ bottom, broad, and deep, 
    Capacious bed of Zaters."

But if,  using the shortest diameter of Loch  Fyne, Ze apply  these
proportions to Walden, Zhich,   as Ze have seen, appears already in
a

 

330
                                                                                                                Page 170

























 

331
                                                                                                Page 171

vertical section only  like  a shalloZ plate, it  Zill   appear four times
as shalloZ. So much for the increased horrors  of the chasm of Loch
Fyne Zhen emptied. No  doubt many a smiling  valley  Zith  its
stretching cornfields  occupies e[actly  such a "horrid  chasm," from
Zhich  the Zaters have receded, though it reTuires the insight and
the far sight of the geologist  to convince the unsuspecting
inhabitants of this fact.  Often an inTuisitive  eye may detect the
shores of a primitive  lake in the loZ  hori]on   hills, and no
subseTuent elevation of the plain have been necessary to conceal
their history. But  it is easiest, as they Zho Zork  on the highZays
knoZ, to find  the holloZs  by  the puddles after a shoZer. The
amount of it is,  the imagination, give  it the least license, dives
deeper and soars higher than Nature goes. So, probably, the depth
of the ocean Zill  be found to  be very inconsiderable compared Zith
its breadth.

As I sounded through the ice I  could determine the shape of the
bottom Zith  greater accuracy than is possible in surveying  harbors
Zhich  do not free]e  over, and I Zas surprised at its general
regularity. In  the deepest part there are several acres more level
than almost any field  Zhich  is e[posed to the sun, Zind  and
plough. In one instance, on a line arbitrarily   chosen, the depth did
not vary more than one foot  in thirty  rods; and generally, near the
middle, I  could calculate the variation  for each one hundred feet in
any direction beforehand Zithin   three or four  inches. Some are
accustomed to speak of deep and dangerous holes even in Tuiet
sandy ponds like this, but the effect  of Zater  under these
circumstances is to level all  ineTualities. The regularity  of the
bottom and its conformity  to  the shores and the range of the
neighboring hills  Zere  so perfect that a distant promontory

332
betrayed itself in the soundings Tuite  across the pond, and its
direction could  be determined by observing the opposite shore.
Cape becomes bar, and plain shoal, and valley and gorge deep
Zater and channel.

When I had mapped the pond by the scale of ten rods to an inch,
and put doZn the soundings, more than a hundred in  all, I observed
this remarkable coincidence. Having  noticed that the number
indicating the greatest depth Zas apparently  in the centre of the
map, I laid a rule on the map lengthZise,  and then breadthZise,  and
found, to my  surprise, that the lines of greatest length intersected
the line of greatest breadth exactly at the point  of greatest depth,
notZithstanding  that the middle  is so nearly level, the outline  of the
pond far from  regular, and the e[treme length  and breadth Zere got
by measuring into the coves; and I said to  myself, Who  knoZs but
this hint Zould  conduct  to the deepest part of the ocean as Zell as
of a pond or puddle? Is not this  the rule also for the height  of
mountains, regarded as the opposite of valleys? We knoZ  that a hill
is not highest at its narroZest  part.

Of five  coves, three, or all Zhich  had been sounded, Zere observed
to have a bar Tuite across their mouths and deeper Zater Zithin,  so
that the bay tended to be an e[pansion of Zater  Zithin   the land not
only hori]ontally   but vertically,   and to form a basin or independent
pond,

 

333
                                                                                                Page 172

the direction of  the tZo capes shoZing  the course of the bar. Every
harbor on the sea-coast, also, has its bar at its entrance. In
proportion as the mouth of  the cove Zas Zider  compared Zith  its
length, the Zater over  the bar Zas deeper compared Zith  that in the
basin. Given, then, the length and breadth of the cove, and the
character of the surrounding shore, and you have almost elements
enough to make out a formula for  all cases.

In order to see hoZ nearly  I could guess, Zith  this e[perience,  at
the deepest point in a pond, by observing the outlines  of its surface
and the character of its shores alone, I made a plan of White Pond,
Zhich  contains about forty-one  acres, and, like this, has no island
in it, nor  any visible inlet  or outlet;  and as the line of greatest
breadth fell very  near the line of least breadth, Zhere tZo  opposite
capes approached each other and tZo opposite bays receded, I
ventured to mark a point a short distance from  the latter line,  but
still on the line  of greatest length, as the deepest. The deepest part
Zas found to be Zithin   one hundred feet of this, still  farther  in the
direction to Zhich   I had inclined,  and Zas only one foot  deeper,
namely, si[ty  feet. Of  course, a stream running through, or an
island in the pond, Zould  make the problem  much more
complicated.

If Ze  kneZ  all the laZs  of Nature, Ze  should need only one fact, or
the description of one actual phenomenon, to infer  all the particular
results at that point. NoZ  Ze  knoZ  only a feZ  laZs,  and our result
is vitiated, not,  of course, by any confusion  or irregularity  in
Nature, but by our ignorance  of essential elements in the
calculation. Our  notions of laZ  and harmony are commonly
confined to those instances Zhich  Ze detect; but the harmony

334
Zhich results from a far greater number of seemingly conflicting,
but really concurring, laZs, Zhich Ze have not detected, is still
more Zonderful. The particular laZs are as our points of vieZ, as,
to the traveller, a mountain outline varies Zith every step, and it
has an infinite number of profiles, though absolutely but one form.
Even Zhen cleft or bored through it is not comprehended in its
entireness.

What I have observed of the pond is no less true in ethics. It is the
laZ of average. Such a rule of the tZo diameters not only guides us
toZard the sun in the system and the heart in man, but draZ lines
through the length and breadth of the aggregate of a man's
particular daily behaviors and Zaves of life into his coves and
inlets, and Zhere they intersect Zill be the height or depth of his
character. Perhaps Ze need only to knoZ hoZ his shores trend and
his adjacent country or circumstances, to infer his depth and
concealed bottom. If he is surrounded by mountainous
circumstances, an Achillean shore, Zhose peaks overshadoZ and
are reflected in his bosom, they suggest a corresponding depth in
him. But a loZ and smooth shore proves him shalloZ on that side.
In our bodies, a bold projecting broZ falls off to and indicates a
corresponding depth of thought. Also there is a bar across the
entrance of our every cove, or particular inclination; each is our
harbor for a

 

335
                                                                                                Page 173

season, in Zhich Ze  are detained and partially land-locked.  These
inclinations  are not Zhimsical  usually, but their  form,  si]e, and
direction are determined by the promontories  of the shore, the
ancient a[es of elevation.  When this bar is gradually  increased by
storms, tides, or currents, or there is a subsidence of the Zaters, so
that it reaches to the surface, that Zhich  Zas at first but  an
inclination  in the shore in Zhich  a thought  Zas harbored becomes
an individual  lake, cut off  from the ocean, Zherein  the thought
secures its conditions, changes, perhaps, from salt to fresh,
becomes a sZeet sea, dead sea, or a marsh. At the advent of each
individual  into this  life, may  Ze not suppose that such a bar has
risen to the surface someZhere? It is true, Ze  are such poor
navigators that our thoughts, for  the most part, stand off and on
upon a harborless coast, are conversant only Zith the bights  of the
bays of poesy, or steer for the public ports of  entry, and go into the
dry docks of science, Zhere  they merely refit  for this  Zorld,  and no
natural currents concur to individuali]e   them.

As for the inlet  or outlet of  Walden, I have not discovered any  but
rain and snoZ and evaporation, though  perhaps, Zith a
thermometer and a line, such places may be found, for Zhere  the
Zater floZs  into  the pond it Zill   probably  be coldest in summer and
Zarmest in Zinter.  When  the ice-men Zere at Zork  her in  '467, the
cakes sent to the shore Zere one day rejected by those Zho Zere
stacking them up there, not being thick  enough to lie side by  side
Zith  the rest; and the cutters thus discovered that the ice over a
small space Zas tZo or  three inches thinner than elseZhere, Zhich
made them think that there Zas an inlet  there. They also shoZed
me in another place Zhat they  thought Zas a ''leach hole,"  through
Zhich  the pond leaked out under a hill  into a neighborhood

336
meadoZ, pushing me out on a cake of ice to see it. It Zas a small
cavity under ten feet of Zater; but I think that I can Zarrant the
pond not to need soldering till they find a Zorse leak than that. One
has suggested, that if such a "leach hole" should be found, its
connection Zith the meadoZ, if any e[isted, might be proved by
conveying some colored poZder or saZdust to the mouth of the
hole, and then putting a strainer over the spring in the meadoZ,
Zhich Zould catch some of the particles carried through by the
current.

While I Zas surveying, the ice, Zhich Zas si[teen inches thick,
undulated under a slight Zind like Zater. It is Zell knoZn that a
level cannot be used on ice. At one rod from the shore its greatest
fluctuation, Zhen observed by means of a level on land directed
toZard a graduated staff on the ice, Zas three Tuarters of an inch,
though the ice appeared firmly attached to the shore. It Zas
probably greater in the middle. Who knoZs but if our instruments
Zere delicate enough Ze might detect an undulation in the crust of
the earth? When tZo legs of my level Zere on the shore and the
third on the ice, and the sights Zere directed over the latter, a rise
or fall of the ice of an almost infinitesimal amount made a
difference of several feet on a tree across the pond. When I began
to cut holes for sounding, there Zere three or four inches of Zater
on the ice

 

337
                                                                                                Page 174

under a deep snoZ Zhich  had sunk it thus far; but  the Zater began
immediately  to run into these holes, and continued to run for  tZo
days in deep streams, Zhich Zore  aZay the ice on every  side, and
contributed essentially, if  not mainly,  to dry the surface of the
pond; for, as the Zater ran in,  it raised and floated the ice. This  Zas
someZhat like  cutting a hole in  the bottom of a ship to let  the Zater
out. When such holes free]e, and a rain succeeds, and finally  a neZ
free]ing  forms a fresh smooth ice over  all, it is  beautifully  mottled
internally  by dark figures,  shaped someZhat like a spider's Zeb,
Zhat you may  call ice rosettes, produced by the channels Zorn  by
the Zater floZing   from  all sides to a centre. Sometimes, also, Zhen
the ice Zas covered Zith  shalloZ  puddles, I saZ  a double shadoZ
of myself,  one standing on the head of the other, one on the ice, the
other on the trees or hill-side.
 

While yet  it is cold January, and snoZ and ice are thick  and solid,
the prudent landlord comes from  the village to  get ice to cool his
summer drink; impressively,  even pathetically  Zise, to  foresee the
heat and thirst of July noZ  in January,Zearing  a thick coat and
mittens! Zhen  so many things are not provided  for. It may  be that
he lays up no treasures in this Zorld  Zhich  Zill   cool his summer
drink in  the ne[t.  He cuts and saZs the solid pond, unroofs the
house of fishes, and carts off their very  element and air, held fast
by chains and stakes like corded Zood,  through the favoring  Zinter
air, to Zintry  cellars,  to underlie the summer there. It  looks like
solidified  a]ure, as, far off,  it is  draZn through  the streets. These
ice-cutters are a merry race, full  of jest and sport, and Zhen I  Zent
among them they Zere Zont  to invite  me to saZ  pit-fashion Zith
them, I standing underneath.

338
In the Zinter of '467 there came a hundred men of Hyperborean
e[traction sZoop doZn on to our pond one morning, Zith many
car-loads of ungainly-looking farming tools, sleds, ploughs, drill-
barroZs, turfknives, spades, saZs, rakes, and each man Zas armed
Zith a doublepointed pike-staff, such as is not described in the
NeZ-England Farmer or the Cultivator. I did not knoZ Zhether
they had come to soZ a crop of Zinter rye, or some other kind of
grain recently introduced from Iceland. As I saZ no manure, I
judged that they meant to skim the land, as I had done, thinking the
soil Zas deep and had lain falloZ long enough. They said that a
gentleman farmer, Zho Zas behind the scenes, Zanted to double
his money, Zhich, as I understood, amounted to half a million
already; but in order to cover each one of his dollars Zith another,
he took off the only coat, ay, the skin itself, of Walden Pond in the
midst of a hard Zinter. They Zent to Zork at once, ploughing,
harroZing, rolling, furroZing,  in admirable order, as if they Zere
bent on making this a model farm; but Zhen I Zas looking sharp to
see Zhat kind of seed they dropped into the furroZ, a gang of
felloZs by my side suddenly began to hook up the virgin mould
itself, Zith a peculiar jerk, clean doZn to the sand, or rather the
Zater,for it Zas a very springy soil,indeed all the terra firma there
Zas,and haul it aZay on sleds, and then I guessed

 

339
                                                                                                Page 175

that they must be cutting peat in a bog. So they came and Zent
every day, Zith  a peculiar shriek from  the locomotive,  from  and to
some point of the polar regions,  as it seemed to me, like a flock of
arctic snoZ-birds.  But sometimes STuaZ Walden  had her revenge,
and a hired man, Zalking  behind his team, slipped through  a crack
in the ground doZn  toZard  Tartarus, and he Zho Zas so Lrave
before suddenly became but the ninth part of  a man, almost gave
up his animal heat, and Zas glad to take refuge in  my house, and
acknoZledged that there Zas  some virtue in a stove; or sometimes
the fro ]en  soil took a piece of  steel out of a ploughshare, or a
plough got set in the furroZ   and had to be cut out.

To speak literally, a hundred Irishmen,  Zith  Yankee overseers,
came from Cambridge every day  to get out the ice. They divided  it
into cakes by the methods too Zell  knoZn  to reTuire description,
and these, being sledded to the shore, Zere rapidly hauled off  on to
an ice platform, and raised by grappling  irons and block  and tackle,
Zorked by  horses, on to a stack, as surely as so many barrels of
flour, and there placed evenly side by  side, and roZ upon roZ  as if
they formed the solid  base of an obelisk designed to pierce the
clouds. They told  me that in a good day they could get out  a
thousand tons, Zhich Zas  the yield of  about one acre. Deep ruts
and "cradle holes" Zere  Zorn  in the ice, as on terra firma,  by the
passage of the sleds over the same track, and the horses invariably
ate their oats out of cakes of ice holloZed  out like  buckets. They
stacked up the cakes thus in the open air in a pile thirty-five   feet
high on one side and si[  or seven rods sTuare, putting hay betZeen
the outside layers to e[clude  the air, for Zhen  the Zind,  though
never so cold, finds a passage through, it Zill   Zear large cavities,
leaving slight  supports or studs only here and there, and finally

340
topple it doZn. At first it looked like a vast blue fort or Valhalla;
but Zhen they began to tuck the coarse meadoZ hay into the
crevices, and this became covered Zith rime and icicles, it looked
like a venerable moss-groZn and hoary ruin, built of a]ure-tinted
marble, the abode of Winter, that old man Ze see in the almanac,his
shanty: as if he had a design to estivate Zith us. They calculated
that not tZenty-five per cent of this Zould reach its destination, and
that tZo or three per cent Zould be Zasted in the cars. HoZever, a
still greater part of this heap had a different destiny from Zhat Zas
intended; for, either because the ice Zas found not to keep so Zell
as Zas e[pected, containing more air than usual, or for some other
reason, it never got to market. This heap, made in the Zinter of
'467 and estimated to contain ten thousand tons, Zas finally
covered Zith hay and hoards; and though it Zas unroofed the
folloZing  July, and a part of it carried off, the rest remaining
e[posed to the sun, it stood over that summer and the ne[t Zinter,
and Zas not Tuite melted till September 1848. Thus the pond
recovered the greater part.

Like the Zater, the Walden ice, seen near at hand, has a green tint,
but at a distance is beautifully blue, and you can easily tell it from
the Zhite ice of the river, or the merely greenish ice of some ponds,
a Tuarter of a mile off. Sometimes one of those great cakes slips
from the ice-man's

 

341
                                                                                                Page 176

sled into the village  street, and lies there for a Zeek like  a great
emerald, an object of interest to all  passers. I have noticed that a
portion of  Walden Zhich  in the state of Zater  Zas green Zill  often,
Zhen fro]en,  appear from the same point of  vieZ  blue. So the
holloZs  about this pond Zill,   sometimes, in the Zinter,  be filled
Zith  a greenish Zater someZhat like  its oZn,  but the ne[t  day Zill
have fro]en blue.  Perhaps the blue color of Zater  and ice is due to
the light and air they  contain, and the most transparent is the bluest.
Ice is an interesting subject for  contemplation. They  told me that
they had some in the ice-houses at Fresh Pond five years old Zhich
Zas as good as ever. Why is it that a bucket of  Zater soon becomes
putrid, but fro]en   remains sZeet forever? It  is commonly  said that
this is the difference betZeen  the affections and the intellect.

Thus for si[teen  days I saZ from  my  ZindoZ  a hundred men at
Zork  like busy husbandmen, Zith  teams and horses and apparently
all the implements of  farming,  such a picture as Ze see on the first
page of the almanac; and as often as I looked out I Zas reminded  of
the fable of the lark  and the reapers, or the parable of the soZer,
and the like; and noZ  they are all gone, and in thirty  days more,
probably, I shall look  from  the same ZindoZ  on the pure sea-green
Walden Zater there, reflecting  the clouds and the trees, and sending
up its evaporations in solitude,  and no traces Zill  appear that a man
has ever stood there. Perhaps I shall hear a solitary loon laugh as he
dives and plumes himself, or  shall see a lonely fisher in his  boat,
like a floating  leaf, beholding  his form  reflected in the Zaves,
Zhere lately  a hundred men securely labored.

Thus it apears that the sZeltering inhabitants  of Charleston and
NeZ Orleans, of  Madras and Bombay and Calcutta, drink  at my

342
Zell. In the morning I bathe my intellect in the stupendous and
cosmogonal philosophy of the Bhagvat Geeta, since Zhose
composition years of the gods have elapsed, and in comparison
Zith Zhich  our modern Zorld and its literature seem puny and
trivial; and I doubt if that philosophy is not to be referred to a
previous state of e[istence, so remote is its sublimity from our
conceptions. I lay doZn the book and go to my Zell for Zater, and
lo! there I meet the servant of the Bramin, priest of Brahma and
Vishnu and Indra, Zho still sits in his temple on the Ganges reading
the Vedas, or dZells at the root of a tree Zith his crust and Zater
jug. I meet his servant come to draZ Zater for his master, and our
buckets as it Zere grate together in the same Zell. The pure Walden
Zater is mingled Zith the sacred Zater of the Ganges. With
favoring Zinds it is Zafted past the site of the fabulous islands of
Atlantis and the Hesperides, makes the periplus of Hanno, and,
floating by Ternate and Tidore and the mouth of the Persian Gulf,
melts in the tropic gales of the Indian seas, and is landed in ports of
Zhich Ale[ander only heard the names.

 

343
                                                                                                Page 177


Spring

The opening of large tracts by the ice-cutters  commonly  causes a
pond to break up earlier; for  the Zater, agitated by the Zind,   even
in cold Zeather,  Zears aZay the surrounding  ice. But such Zas  not
the effect on Walden that year, for she had soon got a thick neZ
garment to take the place of the old. This  pond never breaks up so
soon as the others in this neighborhood, on account both of  its
greater depth and its having no stream passing through it to melt  or
Zear aZay  the ice. I never kneZ  it to open in  the course of a Zinter,
not e[cepting  that of '523, Zhich  gave the ponds so severe a trial. It
commonly opens about the first  of April,  a Zeek  or ten days later
than Flints' Pond and Fair-Haven,  beginning to melt  on the north
side and in the shalloZer  parts Zhere it began to free]e.  It indicates
better than any Zater hereabouts the absolute progress of the
season, being least affected by transient changes of temperature. A
severe cold of a feZ days' duration  in March  may very much  retard
the opening of former  ponds, Zhile  the temperature of Walden
increases almost uninterruptedly. A  thermometer thrust into  the
middle of  Walden on the 6th of March,  1847, stood at 32°, or
free]ing  point; near the shore at 33°; in  the middle of  Flints' Pond,
the same day, at 32 ½°; at a do]en rods from the shore, in shalloZ
Zater, under ice a foot thick,  at 36°. This  difference of  three and a
half degrees betZeen the temperature of the deep Zater and the
shalloZ in  the latter pond, and the fact that a great proportion  of it
is comparatively  shalloZ, shoZ  Zhy  it should  break up so much
sooner than Walden. The ice in the shalloZest  part Zas at this time
several inches thinner than in the middle.  In mid-Zinter   the middle

344
had been the Zarmest and the ice thinnest there. So, also, every one
Zho has Zaded about the shores of a pond in summer must  have
perceived hoZ much  Zarmer the Zater  is close to the shore, Zhere
only three or four  inches deep, than a little distance out, and on the
surface Zhere it is deep, than near the bottom. In  spring the sun not
only e[erts  an influence through  the increased temperature of the
air and the earth, but its heat passes through ice a foot or more
thick, and is reflected  from the bottom  in shalloZ  Zater, and so
also Zarms the Zater  and melts the under side of the ice, at the
same time that it is melting  it more directly  above, making  it
uneven, and causing the air bubbles Zhich  it contains to e[tend
themselves upZard and doZnZard  until  it  is completely  honey-
combed, and at last disappears suddenly in a single spring rain. Ice
has its grain as Zell as Zood,  and Zhen a cake begins to rot or
"comb," that  is, assume the appearance of honeycomb, Zhatever
may be its position, the air  cells are at right angles Zith  Zhat  Zas
the Zater surface. Where there is a rock or  a log rising near to

 

345
                                                                                                Page 178

the surface the ice over it is much thinner,  and is freTuently Tuite
dissolved by this reflected  heat; and I have been told that in the
e[periment  at Cambridge to free]e  Zater in  a shalloZ  Zooden
pond, though the cold air circulated  underneath, and so had access
to both sides, the reflection of  the sun from the bottom  more than
counterbalanced this advantage. When a Zarm rain in  the middle of
the Zinter  melts off the snoZ-ice  from  Walden, and leaves a hard
dark or transparent ice on the middle, there Zill   be a strip of rotten
though thicker Zhite  ice,  a rod or more Zide,  about the shores,
created by this reflected heat. Also, as I have said, the bubbles
themselves Zithin  the ice operate as burning glasses to melt the ice
beneath.

The phenomena of the year take place every day in a pond on a
small scale. Every morning,  generally speaking, the shalloZ  Zater
is being Zarmed more  rapidly than the deep, though it  may not be
made so Zarm after all,  and every evening it is being  cooled more
rapidly until  the morning.  The day is an epitome of  the year. The
night is the Zinter,  the morning  and evening are the spring and fall,
and the noon is the summer. The cracking and booming of  the ice
indicate a change of temperature. One pleasant morning after a
cold night, February  24th, 1850, having gone to Flints'  Pond to
spend the day, I noticed Zith  surprise, that Zhen I  struck the ice
Zith  the head of my a[e,  it resounded like a gong for  many rods
around, or as if I had struck  on a tight drum-head. The pond began
to boom about an hour after sunrise, Zhen  it felt  the influence of
the sun's rays slanted upon it from over the hills;  it  stretched itself
and yaZned like  a Zaking  man Zith  a gradually increasing tumult,
Zhich  Zas kept up three or four  hours. It took  a short siesta at
noon, and boomed once more toZard night,  as the sun Zas

346
ZithdraZing his influence. In the right stage of the Zeather a pond
fires its evening gun Zith great regularity. But in the middle of the
day, being full of cracks, and the air also being less elastic, it had
completely lost its resonance, and probably fishes and muskrats
could not then have been stunned by a bloZ on it. The fishermen
say that the "thundering of the pond" scares the fishes and prevents
their biting. The pond does not thunder every evening, and I cannot
tell surely Zhen to e[pect its thundering; but though I may perceive
no difference in the Zeather, it does. Who Zould have suspected so
large and cold and thick-skinned a thing to be so sensitive? Yet it
has its laZ to Zhich it thunders obedience Zhen it should as surely
as the buds e[pand in the spring. The earth is all alive and covered
Zith papillæ. The largest pond is as sensitive to atmospheric
changes as the globule of mercury in its tube.
 

One attraction in coming to the Zoods to live Zas that I should
have leisure and opportunity to see the spring come in. The ice in
the pond at length begins to be honey-combed, and I can set my
heel in it as I Zalk. Fogs and rains and Zarmer suns are gradually
melting the snoZ; the days have groZn sensibly longer; and I see
hoZ I shall get through the Zinter Zithout adding to my Zood-pile,
for large fires are no longer

 

347
                                                                                          Page 179

necessary. I am on the alert for the first signs of spring, to hear the
chance note of some arriving bird, or the striped sTuirrel's chirp, for
his stores must be noZ nearly e[hausted, or see the Zoodchuck
venture out of his Zinter Tuarters. On the 13th of March, after I had
heard the bluebird, song-sparroZ, and red-Zing, the ice Zas still
nearly a foot thick. As the Zeather greZ Zarmer, it Zas not
sensibly Zorn aZay by the Zater, nor broken up and floated off as
in rivers, but, though it Zas completely melted for half a rod in
Zidth about the shore, the middle Zas merely honey-combed and
saturated Zith Zater, so that you could put your foot through it
Zhen si[ inches thick; but by the ne[t day evening, perhaps, after a
Zarm rain folloZed by fog, it Zould  have Zholly disappeared, all
gone off Zith the fog, spirited aZay. One year I Zent across the
middle only five days before it disappeared entirely. In 1845
Walden Zas first completely open on the 1st of April; in '46, the
25th of March; in '47, the 8th of April; in '51, the 28th of March; in
'52, the 18th of April; in '53, the 23rd of March; in '54, about the
7th of April.

Every incident connected Zith the breaking up of the rivers and
ponds and the settling of the Zeather is particularly interesting to
us Zho live in a climate of so great e[tremes. When the Zarmer
days come, they Zho dZell near the river hear the ice crack at night
Zith a startling Zhoop as loud as artillery, as if its icy fetters Zere
rent from end to end, and Zithin a feZ days see it rapidly going
out. So the alligator comes out of the mud Zith Tuakings of the
earth. One old man, Zho has been a close observer of Nature, and
seems as thoroughly Zise in regard to all her operations as if she
had been put upon the stocks Zhen he Zas a boy, and he had
helped to lay her keel,Zho has come to his groZth, and can hardly

348
acTuire more of natural lore if he should live to the age of
Methuselah,told me, and I Zas surprised to hear him e[press
Zonder at any of Nature's operations, for I thought that there Zere
no secrets betZeen them, that one spring day he took his gun and
boat, and thought that he Zould have a little sport Zith the ducks.
There Zas ice still on the meadoZs, but it Zas all gone out of the
river, and he dropped doZn Zithout obstruction from Sudbury,
Zhere he lived, to Fair-Haven Pond, Zhich he found, une[pectedly,
covered for the most part Zith a firm field of ice. It Zas a Zarm
day, and he Zas surprised to see so great a body of ice remaining.
Not seeing any ducks, he hid his boat on the north or back side of
an island in the pond, and then concealed himself in the bushes on
the south side, to aZait them. The ice Zas melted for three or four
rods from the shore, and there Zas a smooth and Zarm sheet of
Zater, Zith a muddy bottom, such as the ducks love, Zithin, and he
thought it likely that some Zould be along pretty soon. After he
had lain still there about an hour he heard a loZ and seemingly
very distant sound of a vast body of foZl coming in to settle there,
and, sei]ing his gun, he started up in haste and e[cited; but he
found, to his surprise, that the Zhole body of ice had started Zhile
he lay there, and drifted in to the shore, and the sound he had heard
Zas made by its edge grating on the shore,at first gently nibbled
and crumbled off, but at length

 

349
                                                                                                Page 180

heaving up and scattering its Zrecks  along the island to a
considerable height before it came to a stand still.

At length the sun's rays have attained the right angle, and Zarm
Zinds bloZ  up  mist and rain and melt the snoZ  banks, and the sun
dispersing the mist smiles on a checkered landscape of russet and
Zhite smoking  Zith  incense, through Zhich  the traveller  picks his
Zay from  islet to islet,  cheered by the music of a thousand tinkling
rills and rivulets  Zhose veins are filled  Zith   the blood of Zinter
Zhich  they are bearing off.

FeZ phenomena gave me more delight than to observe the forms
Zhich  thaZing  sand and clay assume in floZing  doZn  the sides of
a deep cut on the railroad through Zhich  I  passed on my Zay to the
village, a phenomenon not very  common on so large a scale,
though the number of freshly  e[posed banks of  the right material
must have been greatly multiplied  since railroads Zere  invented.
The material Zas sand of every  degree of fineness and of various
rich colors, commonly  mi[ed   Zith  a little  clay. When the frost
comes out in the spring, and even in a thaZing  day in the Zinter,
the sand begins to floZ  doZn the slopes like  lava, sometimes
bursting out through  the snoZ and overfloZing   it Zhere  no sand
Zas to be seen before. Innumerable little  streams overlap and
interlace one Zith  another, e[hibiting   a sort of hybrid  product,
Zhich  obeys half Zay  the laZ  of currents, and half Zay  that of
vegetation. As it  floZs  it takes the forms of  sappy leaves or vines,
making heaps of pulpy sprays a foot  or more in depth, and
resembling, as you look doZn  on them, the laciniated  lobed and
imbricated thalluses of  some lichens; or you are reminded of  coral,
of leopards' paZs or birds'  feet, of brains or lungs  or boZels, and

350
e[crements of all kinds. It is a truly grotesque vegetation, Zhose
forms and color Ze see imitated in bron]e, a sort of architectural
foliage more ancient and typical than acanthus, chiccory, ivy, vine,
or any vegetable leaves; destined perhaps, under some
circumstances, to become a pu]]le to future geologists. The Zhole
cut impressed me as if it Zere a cave Zith its stalactites laid open to
the light. The various shades of the sand are singularly rich and
agreeable, embracing the different iron colors, broZn, gray,
yelloZish, and reddish. When the floZing mass reaches the drain at
the foot of the bank it spreads out flatter into strands, the separate
streams losing their semicylindrical form and gradually becoming
more flat and broad, running together as they are more moist, till
they form an almost flat sand, still variously and beautifully
shaded, but in Zhich you can trace the original forms of vegetation;
till at length, in the Zater itself, they are converted into banks, like
those formed off the mouths of rivers, and the forms of vegetation
are lost in the ripple marks on the bottom.

The Zhole bank, Zhich is from tZenty to forty feet high, is
sometimes overlaid Zith a mass of this kind of foliage, or sandy
rupture, for a Tuarter of a mile on one or both sides, the produce of
one spring day. What makes this sand foliage remarkable is its
springing into e[istence thus suddenly. When I see on the one side
the inert bank,for the sun

 

351
                                                                                                Page 181

acts on one side first,and on the other this lu[uriant   foliage, the
creation of on hour, I  am affected as if in a peculiar  sense I stood in
the laboratory of the Artist  Zho  made the Zorld  and me,had come
to Zhere he Zas still  at Zork,  sporting  on this bank, and Zith
e[cess of energy streZing  his fresh designs about. I feel  as if I Zere
nearer to the vitals of the globe, for  this sandy overfloZ   is
something such a foliaceous mass as the vitals of the animal body.
You find thus in  the very sands an anticipation of  the vegetable
leaf. No Zonder  that the earth e[presses itself outZardly   in leaves,
it so labors Zith  the idea inZardly.  The atoms have already learned
this laZ, and are pregnant by it.  The overhanging leaf sees here its
prototype. Internally,  Zhether  in the globe  or animal body, it  is a
moist thick  lobe, a Zord  especially applicable to the liver  and lungs
and the leaves of fat, ( ,         labor, lapsus, to floZ  or  slip
doZnZard,  a lapsing;           , globus, lobe, globe; also lap, flap,  and
many other Zords,)  externally  a dry thin leaf,  even as the f and v
are a pressed and dried b. The radicals of lobe are lb, the soft mass
of the b (single lobed, or  B, double lobed,)  Zith  a liTuid l  behind it
pressing it forZard.  In globe,  glb, the guttural  g adds to the
meaning the capacity of the throat. The  feathers and Zings of birds
are still drier  and thinner leaves. Thus, also, you pass from the
lumpish grub in  the earth to the airy and fluttering  butterfly.  The
very globe continually  transcends and translates itself, and
becomes Zinged in its  orbit. Even ice begins Zith   delicate crystal
leaves, as if it had floZed  into  moulds Zhich  the fronds of  Zater
plants have impressed on the Zatery mirror.  The Zhole  tree itself is
but one leaf, and rivers are still  vaster leaves Zhose pulp is
intervening earth, and toZns  and cities are the ova of insects in
their a[ils.

352
When the sun ZithdraZs  the sand ceases to floZ, but in  the
morning the streams Zill  start once more and branch and branch
again into a myriad of  others. You here see perchance hoZ blood
vessels are formed. If you look  closely you  observe that first there
pushes forZard from  the thaZing  mass a stream of softened sand
Zith  a drop-like  point, like  the ball of  the finger, feeling  its Zay
sloZly  and blindly  doZnZard,   until at last Zith   more heat and
moisture, as the sun gets higher, the most fluid portion,  in its  effort
to obey the laZ  to Zhich  the most inert also yields,  separates from
the latter and forms for  itself a meandering channel or artery  Zithin
that, in Zhich  is seen a little silvery  stream glancing  like lightning
from one stage of pulpy  leaves or branches to another, and ever and
anon sZalloZed  up in the sand. It is Zonderful   hoZ  rapidly  yet
perfectly the sand organi]es  itself as it floZs,  using  the best
material its mass affords to form  the sharp edges of its channel.
Such are the sources of rivers. In the silicious  matter Zhich  the
Zater deposits is perhaps the bony system, and in the still  finer soil
and organic matter the fleshy fibre  or cellular  tissue. What is man
but a mass of thaZing clay?  The ball of  the human finger is but a
drop congealed. The fingers and toes floZ  to their  e[tent  from the
thaZing  mass of the body. Who knoZs  Zhat the human body
Zould  e[pand and floZ   out to under a more genial heaven? Is not
the hand a spreading palm leaf Zith  its lobes and veins?

 

353
                                                                                                Page 182

The ear may be regarded, fancifully,  as a lichen, umbilicaria,  on
the side of the head, Zith  its lobe or drop. The liplabium,   from
labor(?)laps or lapses from  the sides of the cavernous mouth. The
nose is a manifest congealed drop or stalactite. The chin is a still
larger drop, the confluent  dripping of  the face. The cheeks are a
slide from the broZs  into  the valley of  the face, opposed and
diffused by the cheek bones. Each rounded lobe of the vegetable
leaf, too, is a thick  and noZ loitering  drop,  larger or smaller; the
lobes are the fingers of the leaf; and as many lobes as it has, in so
many directions it  tends to floZ,  and more heat or other genial
influences Zould  have caused it to floZ  yet  farther.

Thus it seemed that this one hillside illustrated  the principle  of  all
the operations of Nature. The Maker  of this earth but patented a
leaf. What Champollion  Zill   decipher this hieroglyphic   for us, that
Ze may turn  over a neZ leaf at last? This  phenomenon is more
e[hilarating  to me than the lu[uriance   and fertility  of  vineyards.
True, it is someZhat  e[crementitious  in its  character, and there is
no end to the heaps of liver lights  and boZels, as if  the globe Zere
turned Zrong  side outZard;  but this suggests at least that Nature
has some boZels, and there again is mother of humanity.  This is the
frost coming out  of the ground; this  is Spring. It  precedes the green
and floZery  spring, as mythology  precedes regular poetry. I knoZ
of nothing more  purgative of Zinter   fumes and indigestions. It
convinces me that Earth is still  in her sZaddling  clothes, and
stretches forth baby fingers on every  side. Fresh curls spring from
the baldest broZ. There is nothing  inorganic. These foliaceous
heaps lie along the bank like the slag of  a furnace, shoZing that
Nature is "in  full  blast" Zithin.   The earth is not a mere fragment of
a dead history, stratum upon stratum like the leaves of a book,  to be

354
studied by geologists and antiTuaries chiefly, but living poetry like
the leaves of a tree, Zhich precede floZers and fruit,not a fossil
earth, but a living earth; compared Zith Zhose great central life all
animal and vegetable life is merely parasitic. Its throes Zill heave
our e[uviæ from their graves. You may melt your metals and cast
them into the most beautiful moulds you can; they Zill never e[cite
me like the forms Zhich this molten earth floZs but into. And not
only it, but the institutions upon it, are plastic like clay in the hands
of the potter.
 

Ere long, not only on these banks, but on every hill and plain and in
every holloZ, the frost comes out of the ground like a dormant
Tuadruped from its burroZ, and seeks the sea Zith music, or
migrates to other climes in clouds. ThaZ Zith his gentle persuasion
is more poZerful than Thor Zith his hammer. The one melts, the
other but breaks in pieces.

When the ground Zas partially bare of snoZ, and a feZ Zarm days
had dried its surface someZhat, it Zas pleasant to compare the first
tender signs of the infant year just peeping forth Zith the stately
beauty of the Zithered vegetation Zhich had Zithstood the
Zinter,life-everlasting, golden-rods, pinZeeds, and graceful Zild
grasses, more

 

355
                                                                                                Page 183

obvious and interesting freTuently  than in summer even, as if then
beauty Zas not ripe till  then; even cotton-grass, cat-tails,  mulleins,
johns-Zort,  hard-hack, meadoZ-sZeet,  and other strong
stemmedplants, those une[hausted granaries Zhich entertain  th
earliest birds,decent Zeeds, at least, Zhich  ZidoZed  Nature Zears.
I am particularly  attracted by the arching  and sheaf-like top of the
Zool-grass; it  brings back the summer to our  Zinter  memories, and
is among the forms Zhich  art loves to  copy, and Zhich,  in the
vegetable kingdom, have the same relation to types already in  the
mind of man that astronomy  has. It is an antiTue style older than
Greek or Egyptian. Many  of the phenomena of Winter  are
suggestive of an ine[pressible  tenderness and fragile delicacy. We
are accustomed to hear this king described as a rude and boisterous
tyrant; but Zith  the gentleness of a lover  he adorns the tresses of
Summer.

At the approach of spring  the red-sTuirrels got under my house,
tZo at a time,  directly under  my feet as I sat reading or Zriting,   and
kept up the Tueerest chuckling and chirruping  and vocal pirouetting
and gurgling sounds that ever Zere heard; and Zhen  I stamped they
only chirruped  the louder, as if past all fear and respect in their  mad
pranks, defying humanity  to stop them. No  you
don'tchickareechickaree. They Zere  Zholly  deaf to my  arguments,
or failed to perceive  their force, and fell  into a strain of  invective
that Zas irresistible.

The first sparroZ  of spring!  The year beginning  Zith  younger hope
than ever! The faint  silvery Zarblings  heard over the partially   bare
and moist fields from  the blue-bird,  the song-sparroZ, and the red-
Zing,  as if the last flakes of  Zinter  tinkled as they fell!  What  at

356
such a time are histories, chronologies, traditions,  and all Zritten
revelations? The brooks sing carols and glees to the spring. The
marsh-haZk sailing  loZ  over the meadoZ  is already seeking the
first slimy  life  that aZakes. The sinking  sound of melting  snoZ is
heard in all dells, and the ice dissolves apace in the ponds. The
grass flames up on the hillsides like  a spring fire,''et primitus  oritur
herba imbribus  primoribus  evocata,"as if the earth sent forth  an
inZard  heat to greet the returning sun; not yelloZ  but  green is the
color of its  flame;the symbol  of perpetual youth,  the grass-blade,
like a long green ribbon,  streams from the sod into the summer,
checked indeed by the frost, but anon pushing on again, lifting   its
spear of last year's hay Zith the fresh  life beloZ.  It  groZs as
steadily as the rill  oo]es out of  the ground. It is almost  identical
Zith  that, for in  the groZing  days of June, Zhen the rills  are dry,
the grass blades are their channels, and from year to year the herds
drink at this perennial  green stream, and the moZer draZs from  it
betimes their Zinter  supply. So our human life  but dies doZn  to its
root, and still  puts forth its green blade to eternity.

Walden is melting apace. There is a canal tZo  rods Zide along  the
northerly and Zesterly  sides, and Zider  still  at the east end. A great
field of  ice has cracked off from  the main body. I hear a song-
sparroZ singing  from the bushes on the shore,olit, olit,  olit,chip,
chip, chip, che

 

357
                                                                                                Page 184

char,che wiss, wiss, wiss. He too is helping to crack  it. HoZ
handsome the great sZeeping curves in the edge of the ice,
ansZering someZhat  to those of the shore, but more regular! It  is
unusually hard, oZing  to the recent severe but transient cold, and
all Zatered or  Zaved like  a palace floor. But  the Zind  slides
eastZard over its opaTue surface in vain, till  it  reaches the living
surface beyond. It is glorious  to behold this ribbon  of Zater
sparkling in  the sun, the bare face of the pond full of  glee and
youth, as if it  spoke the joy of the fishes Zithin   it, and of  the sands
on its shore,a silvery sheen as from the scales of a leuciscus, as it
Zere all one active  fish. Such is the contrast betZeen Zinter  and
spring. Walden Zas dead and is alive again. But  this spring it  broke
up more steadily, as I have said.

The change from storm and Zinter  to serene and mild Zeather,
from dark and sluggish  hours to bright and elastic ones, is a
memorable crisis Zhich  all  things proclaim.  It is seemingly
instantaneous at last. Suddenly an influ[  of  light filled   my house,
though the evening Zas at hand, and the clouds of Zinter   still
overhung it, and the eaves Zere dripping  Zith  sleety rain. I  looked
out the ZindoZ,  and lo!  Zhere yesterday Zas  cold gray ice there
lay the transparent pond already calm and full  of hope as in a
summer evening, reflecting  a summer evening sky in its  bosom,
though none Zas visible  overhead, as if it had intelligence  Zith
some remote hori]on.  I heard a robin in  the distance, the first I had
heard for many a thousand years, metbought, Zhose note I shall  not
forget for many  a thousand more,the same sZeet and poZerful
song as of yore. O the evening robin, at the end of  a NeZ England
summer day! If  I could ever find  the tZig  he sits upon!  I mean he; I
mean the twig. This at least is not the Turaus migratorius.   The

358
pitch-pines and shrub-oaks about my house, Zhich had so long
drooped, suddenly resumed their several characters, looked
brighter, greener, and more erect and alive, as if effectually cleaned
and restored by the rain. I kneZ that it Zould not rain any more.
You may tell by looking at any tZig of the forest, ay, at your very
Zood-pile, Zhether its Zinter is past or not. As it greZ darker, I
Zas startled by the honking of geese flying loZ over the Zoods,
like Zeary travellers getting in late from southern lakes, and
indulging at last in unrestrained complaint and mutual consolation.
Standing at my door, I could hear the rush of their Zings; Zhen
driving toZard my house, they suddenly spied my light, and Zith
hushed clamor Zheeled and settled in the pond. So I came in, and
shut the door, and passed my first spring night in the Zoods.

In the morning I Zatched the geese from the door through the mist,
sailing in the middle of the pond, fifty rods off, so large and
tumultuous that Walden appeared like an artificial pond for their
amusement. But Zhen I stood on the shore they at once rose up
Zith a great flapping of Zings at the signal of their commander,
and Zhen they had got into rank circled about over my head,
tZenty nine of them, and then steered straight to Canada, Zith a
regular honk from their leader at intervals, trusting to break their
fast in muddier pools. A "plump" of ducks rose

 

359
                                                                                                Page 185

at the same time and took the route to the north in the Zake  of their
noisier cousins.

For a Zeek I heard the circling  groping  clangor of  some solitary
goose in the foggy mornings,  seeking its companion, and still
peopling the Zoods  Zith  the sound of a larger life  than they could
sustain. In April  the pigeons Zere  seen again flying e[press in
small flocks,  and in due time I heard the martins tZittering   over my
clearing, though it  had not seemed that the toZnship contained so
many that it could  afford me any, and I fancied  that they Zere
peculiarly of  the ancient race that dZelt  in holloZ   trees ere Zhite
men came. In almost all climes  the tortoise and the frog are among
the precursors and heralds of this season, and birds fly Zith  song
and glancing plumage, and plants spring and bloom,  and Zinds
bloZ, to  correct this slight  oscillation  of the poles and preserve the
eTuilibrium  of Nature.

As every season seems best to us in its turn, so the coming in of
spring is like  the creation of Cosmos out of  Chaos and the
reali]ation  of the Golden  Age.

              "Eurus ad Auroram, NabathacaTue regna recessit, 
                PersidaTue, et radiis juga subdita matutinis."

    "The East-Wind ZithdreZ to Aurora and the Nabathæan kingdom, 
      And the Persian, and the ridges placed under the morning rays. 
                                          * * * * * * * 
      Man Zas born. Whether that Artificer of things, 
      The origin of a better Zorld, made him from the divine seed; 
      Or the earth being recent and lately sundered from the high 
      Ether, retained some seeds of cognate heaven."

A single gentle rain  makes the grass many shades greener. So our

360
prospects brighten on the influ[ of better thoughts. We should be
blessed if Ze lived in the present alZays, and took advantage of
every accident that befell us, like the grass Zhich confesses the
influence of the slightest deZ that falls on it; and did not spend our
time in atoning for the neglect of past opportunities, Zhich Ze call
doing our duty. We loiter in Zinter Zhile it is already spring. In a
pleasant spring morning all men's sins are forgiven. Such a day is a
truce to vice. While such a sun holds out to burn, the vilest sinner
may return. Through our oZn recovered innocence Ze discern the
innocence of our neighbors. You may have knoZn your neighbor
yesterday for a thief, a drunkard, or a sensualist, and merely pitied
or despised him, and despaired of the Zorld; but the sun shines
bright and Zarm this first spring morning, recreating the Zorld, and
you meet him at some serene Zork, and see hoZ his e[hausted and
debauched veins e[pand Zith still joy and bless the neZ day, feel
the spring influence Zith the innocence of infancy, and all his faults
are forgotten. There is not only an atmosphere of good Zill about
him, but even a savor of holiness groping for e[pression, blindly
and ineffectually perhaps, like a neZ-born instinct, and for a short
hour the south hill-side echoes to no vulgar jest. You see some
innocent fair shoots

 

361
                                                                                                Page 186

preparing to burst from  his gnarled rind  and try another year's life,
tender and fresh as the youngest plant. Even he has entered into the
joy of his  Lord. Why  the jailer  does not leave open his prison
doors,Zhy the judge  does not dismiss his case,Zhy the preacher
does not dismiss his congregation! It  is because they do not obey
the hint Zhich  God gives them, nor  accept the pardon Zhich  he
freely offers  to all.

"A return  to goodness produced each day in the tranTuil and
beneficent breath of the morning,  causes that in respect to the love
of virtue  and the hatred of vice, one approaches a little the
primitive  nature of man, as the sprouts of the forest Zhich  has been
felled. In  like manner the evil  Zhich  one does in the interval of  a
day prevents the germs of virtues Zhich  began to spring up again
from developing  themselves and destroys them.

"After  the germs of virtue  have thus been prevented many times
from developing  themselves, then the beneficent breath of evening
does not suffice to preserve them. As soon as the breath of evening
does not suffice longer to preserve them, then the nature of man
does not differ much from  that of  the brute. Men seeing the nature
of this man like  that of the brute, think  that he has never possessed
the innate faculty of  reason. Are those the true and natural
sentiments of man?"

    "The Golden Age Zas first created, Zhich Zithout any avenger 
      Spontaneously Zithout laZ cherished fidelity and rectitude. 
      Punishment and fear Zere not; nor Zere threatening Zords read 
      On suspended brass; nor did the suppliant croZd fear 
      The Zords of their judge; but Zere safe Zithout an avenger 
      Not yet the pine felled on its mountains had descended 
      To the liTuid Zaves that it might see a foreign Zorld, 

362
      And mortals kneZ no shores but their oZn. 
                                          * * * * * * * 
      There Zas eternal spring, and placid ]ephyrs Zith Zarm 
      Blasts soothed the floZers born Zithout seed."

On the 29th of April,   as I Zas fishing  from the bank of  the river
near the Nine-Acre-Corner  bridge, standing on the Tuaking grass
and ZilloZ   roots, Zhere the muskrats lurk,  I heard a singular
rattling sound, someZhat  like that of  the sticks Zhich  boys play
Zith  their fingers  Zhen, looking  up, I  observed a very slight and
graceful haZk,  like a nighthaZk,   alternately soaring like  a ripple
and tumbling a rod or  tZo over  and over, shoZing  the underside of
its Zings,  Zhich  gleamed like a satin ribbon  in the sun, or like  the
pearly inside of a shell.  This sight reminded me of  falconry  and
Zhat nobleness and poetry are associated Zith that sport. The
Merlin  it seemed to me it might  be called: but I care not for  its
name. It Zas the most ethereal flight  I had ever Zitnessed.  It did
not simply  flutter like  a butterfly,  nor soar like the larger  haZks,
but it sported Zith  proud  reliance in the fields  of air; mounting
again and again Zith its  strange chuckle, it repeated its free and
beautiful fall,  turning  over and over like  a kite, and then recovering
from its lofty  tumbling,  as if  it

 

363
                                                                                                Page 187

had never set its foot on terra  firma. It  appeared to have no
compamon in the universe,sporting  there alone,and to need none
but the morning and the ether Zith  Zhich  it  played. It Zas  not
lonely, but made all the earth lonely  beneath it. Where Zas the
parent Zhich  hatched it, its kindred,  and its father in the heavens?
The tenant of the air, it seemed related to the earth but by an egg
hatched some time in the crevice of a crag;or Zas  its native nest
made in the angle of a cloud, Zoven  of the rainboZ's  trimmings
and the sunset sky, and lined Zith some soft midsummer  ha]e
caught up from earth? Its eyry  noZ some cliffy   cloud.

Beside this I got a rare mess of golden and silver  and bright
cupreous fishes, Zhich looked  like  a string of jeZels.  Ah!  I have
penetrated to those meadoZs on the morning of many  a first spring
day, jumping from  hummock to  hummock, from  ZilloZ   root  to
ZilloZ   root, Zhen  the Zild  river  valley  and the Zoods Zere bathed
in so pure and bright a light  as Zould  have Zaked the dead, if they
had been slumbering in their graves, as some suppose. There needs
no stronger proof of  immortality.  All  things  must live in  such a
light. O Death,  Zhere Zas thy  sting? O Grave, Zhere  Zas thy
victory, then?

Our village  life Zould   stagnate if it Zere  not for the une[plored
forests and meadoZs Zhich  surround it. We need the tonic of
Zildness,to Zade  sometimes in marshes Zhere the bittern  and the
meadoZ-hen lurk,  and hear the booming of the snipe; to smell  the
Zhispering  sedge Zhere only some Zilder  and more solitary  foZl
builds her nest, and the mink craZls  Zith  its belly  close to the
ground. At the same time that Ze  are earnest to e[plore and learn
all things, Ze  reTuire that all things  be mysterious and

364
une[plorable,  that land and sea be infinitely  Zild,  unsurveyed and
unfathomed by us because unfathomable. We can never have
enough of Nature. We must be refreshed by the sight of
ine[haustible  vigor,  vast and Titanic features, the sea-coast Zith its
Zrecks, the Zilderness  Zith  its living   and its decaying trees, the
thunder cloud, and the rain Zhich  lasts three Zeeks and produces
freshets. We need to Zitness our oZn  limits  transgressed, and some
life pasturing  freely Zhere  Ze never Zander.  We are cheered Zhen
Ze observe the vulture feeding  on the carrion Zhich  disgusts and
disheartens us and deriving health and strength from the repast.
There Zas a dead horse in the holloZ  by the path to my  house,
Zhich  compelled me sometimes to go out of  my Zay,  especially in
the night Zhen  the air Zas heavy, but the assurance it gave me of
the strong appetite and inviolable  health of Nature Zas  my
compensation for this. I  love to see that Nature is so rife Zith   life
that myriads can be afforded to be sacrificed  and suffered to prey
on one another; that tender organi]ations  can be so serenely
sTuashed out of e[istence like pulp,tadpoles  Zhich  herons gobble
up, and tortoises and toads run over in the road; and that sometimes
it has rained flesh and blood!  With the liability   to accident, Ze
must see hoZ little  account is to be made of it. The  impression
made on a Zise man is that of universal  innocence. Poison is not
poisonous after all, nor are any Zounds  fatal. Compassion is a very
untenable ground. It must be e[peditious.

 

365
                                                                                                Page 188

Its pleadings Zill   not bear to be stereotyped.

Early in May,  the oaks, hickories, maples, and other trees, just
putting out amidst  the pine Zoods around the pond, imparted  a
brightness like sunshine to the landscape, especially in cloudy
days, as if the sun Zere breaking through  mists and shining faintly
on the hill-sides here and there. On the third  or fourth  of May  I saZ
a loon in the pond, and during  the first Zeek  of the month I  heard
the ZhippoorZill,   the broZnthrasher,  the veery, the Zood-peZee,
the che-Zink,  and other birds. I had heard the Zood-thrush  long
before. The phoebe had already come once more and looked in at
my door and ZindoZ,   to see if my house Zas cavern-like  enough
for her, sustaining herself on humming  Zings  Zith  clinched  talons,
as if she held by the air, Zhile  she surveyed the premises. The
sulphur-like  pollen of the pitch-pine  soon covered the pond and the
stones and rotten Zood along the shore, so that you could have
collected a barrel-ful.  This is the "sulphur  shoZers"  Ze hear of.
Even in Calidas' drama of Sacontala, Ze  read of "rills  dyed yelloZ
Zith  the golden dust of the lotus."  And so the seasons Zent rolling
on into summer, as one rambles into higher and higher grass.

Thus Zas my first  year's life  in the Zoods completed;  and the
second year Zas similar to it.  I finally   left Walden September 6th,
1847.



Conclusion

To the sick the doctors Zisely  recommend a change of air and
scenery. Thank Heaven, here is not all the Zorld.  The buck-eye
does not groZ in  NeZ England,  and the mocking-bird  is rarely

366
heard here. The Zildgoose is more of  a cosmopolite than Ze;  he
breaks his fast in Canada, takes a luncheon in the Ohio, and plumes
himself for  the night in  a southern bayou. Even the bison, to some
e[tent, keeps pace Zith  the seasons, cropping the pastures of the
Colorado only  till  a greener and sZeeter grass aZaits him by the
YelloZstone.  Yet Ze think  that if  railfences are pulled doZn,  and
stone-Zalls piled  up on our farms, bounds are henceforth set to our
lives and our fates decided. If  you are chosen toZn-clerk,  forsooth,
you cannot to to Tierra del  Fuego this summer: but you may  go to
the land of infernal  fire nevertheless. The universe is Zider  than
our vieZs  of it.

Yet Ze should oftener  look over the tafferel  of our  craft, like
curious passengers, and not make the voyage like stupid sailors
picking oakum.  The other side of the globe is but  the home of our
correspondent. Our voyaging is  only great-circle  sailing, and the
doctors prescribe for diseases of the skin merely. One hastens to
Southern Africa  to chase the giraffe; but surely  that is not the game
he Zould be after. HoZ  long,  pray, Zould  a man hunt giraffes if  he
could? Snipes and Zoodcocks also may afford  rare sport; but I  trust
it Zould  be nobler game to shoot one's self.

 

367
                                                                                                Page 189

    "Direct your eye right inZard, and you'll find 
      A thousand regions in your mind 
      Yet undiscovered. Travel them, and be 
      E[pert in home-cosmography."

What does Africa,Zhat  does the West stand for? Is not our oZn
interior Zhite  on the chart? black  though it may  prove, like the
coast, Zhen discovered. Is it  the source of the Nile, or  the Niger, or
the Mississippi,  or a North-West Passage around this continent, that
Ze Zould  find?  Are these the problems Zhich  most concern
mankind? Is Franklin  the only man Zho  is lost,  that his Zife  should
be so earnest to find him? Does Mr. Grinnell  knoZ  Zhere  he
himself is? Be rather the Mungo  Park, the LeZis  and Clarke and
Frobisher, of your oZn  streams and oceans; e[plore your  oZn
higher latitudes,Zith  shiploads of  preserved meats to support you,
if they be necessary; and pile the empty cans sky-high  for a sign.
Were preserved meats invented to preserve meat merely? Nay, be a
Columbus to Zhole  neZ  continents and Zorlds  Zithin  you,  opening
neZ channels, not of trade, but of  thought. Every  man is the lord of
a realm beside Zhich the earthly  empire of the C]ar  is but a petty
state, a hummock left by the ice. Yet  some can be patriotic Zho
have no self-respect, and sacrifice the greater to the less. They love
the soil Zhich  makes their graves, but have no sympathy Zith   the
spirit Zhich  may  still animate their  clay. Patriotism  is a maggot in
their heads. What Zas the meaning of that  South-Sea E[ploring
E[pedition,  Zith  all  its parade and e[pense, but an indirect
recognition of  the fact, that there are continents and seas in the
moral Zorld,  to Zhich  every  man is an isthmus or an inlet, yet
une[plored  by him, but  that it is easier to sail many  thousand miles
through cold and storm and cannibals, in  a government ship, Zith

368
five hundred men and boys to assist one, than it is to e[plore   the
private sea, the Atlantic  and Pacific Ocean of one's being alone.

            "Erret, et e[tremos alter scrutetur Iberos. 
              Plus habet hic vitæ, plus habet ille viæ;."

    Let them Zander and scrutini]e the outlandish Australians. 
    I have more of God, they more of the road.

It is not Zorth  the Zhile  to  go round the Zorld  to count the cats in
Zan]ibar. Yet  do this even till  you can do better, and you may
perhaps find some "Symmes' Hole"  by Zhich  to get at the inside at
last. England and France, Spain and Portugal, Gold Coast and
Slave Coast, all front on  this private sea; but no bark from  them has
ventured out of sight  of land, though it  is Zithout  doubt the direct
Zay to India.  If  you Zould  learn to speak all tongues and conform
to the customs of all nations, if  you Zould   travel farther than all
travelers, be naturali]ed  in all climes,  and cause the Sphin[ to dash
her head against a stone, even obey the precept of the old
philosopher, and E[plore  thyself.  Herein are demanded the eye and
the nerve. Only the defeated and deserters go to the

 

369
                                                                                                Page 190

Zars, coZards that  run aZay and enlist.  Start noZ on that farthest
Zestern Zay, Zhich   does not pause at the Mississippi or the
Pacific, nor conduct  toZard a Zorn-out  China  or Japan, but leads
on direct a tangent to this sphere, summer and Zinter,  day and
night, sun doZn,  moon doZn,  and at last earth doZn too.

It is said that Mirabeau  took to highZay  robbery  "to ascertain Zhat
degree of resolution Zas necessary in order to place one's self in
formal opposition  to the most sacred laZs of  society." He declared
that "a soldier Zho  fights  in the ranks does not reTuire half so much
courage as a foot-pad,""that honor and religion  have never stood in
the Zay of  a Zell-considered  and firm resolve."  This Zas  manly, as
the Zorld  goes; and yet it Zas idle,  if not  desperate. A saner man
Zould  have found himself  often enough "in  formal opposition''  to
Zhat are deemed "the most sacred laZs of society,"  through
obedience to yet more sacred laZs, and so have tested his
resolution Zithout  going  out of his  Zay. It  is not for a man to put
himself in  such an attitude to society, but to maintain  himself in
Zhatever attitude he find  himself  through obedience to the laZs  of
his being, Zhich  Zill   never be one of opposition to  a just
government, if  he should chance to meet Zith such.

I left the Zoods  for  as good a reason as I Zent there. Perhaps it
seemed to me that I had several more lives to live,  and could not
spare any more time for that one. It  is remarkable hoZ  easily and
insensibly Ze  fall into  a particular route,  and make a beaten track
for ourselves. I had not lived  there a Zeek before my  feet Zore  a
path from my  door to the pond-side; and though it  is five  or si[
years since I trod it, it  is still  Tuite distinct.  It is true, I  fear that
others may have fallen into  it, and so helped to keep it open. The

370
surface of the earth is soft and impressible by the feet of men; and
so Zith the paths Zhich the mind travels. HoZ Zorn and dusty,
then, must be the highZays of the Zorld, hoZ deep the ruts of
tradition and conformity! I did not Zish to take a cabin passage, but
rather to go before the mast and on the deck of the Zorld, for there
I could best see the moonlight amid the mountains. I do not Zish to
go beloZ noZ.

I learned this, at least, by my e[periment; that if one advances
confidently in the direction of his dreams, and endeavors to live the
life Zhich he has imagined, he Zill meet Zith a success une[pected
in common hours. He Zill put some things behind, Zill pass an
invisible boundary; neZ, universal, and more liberal laZs Zill
begin to establish themselves around and Zithin him; or the old
laZs be e[panded, and interpreted in his favor in a more liberal
sense, and he Zill live Zith the license of a higher order of beings.
In proportion as he simplifies his life, the laZs of the universe Zill
appear less comple[, and solitude Zill not be solitude, for poverty
poverty, nor Zeakness Zeakness. If you have built castles in the air,
your Zork need not be lost; that is Zhere they should be. NoZ put
the foundations under them.

It is a ridiculous demand Zhich England and America make, that
you shall speak so that they can understand you. Neither men nor
toad-

 

371
                                                                                                Page 191

stools groZ so. As  if that Zere  important,  and there Zere not
enough to understand you Zithout  them. As if  Nature could  support
but one order of understandings, could not  sustain birds as Zell as
Tuadrupeds, flying as Zell  as creeping things, and hush and who,
Zhich  Bright  can understand, Zere the best English. As if  there
Zere safety in stupidity  alone. I  fear chiefly  lest my e[pression  may
not be extra- vagant enough, may not  Zander far enough beyond
the narroZ limits  of  my daily  e[perience,  so as to be adeTuate to
the truth of Zhich  I  have been convinced. Extra vagance!  it
depends on hoZ you are yarded. The migrating  buffalo,  Zhich
seeks neZ pastures in another latitude, is not e[travagant  like  the
coZ Zhich  kicks  over the pail,  leaps the coZ-yard fence, and runs
after her calf, in  milking  time. I  desire to speak someZhere without
bounds; like a man in a Zaking  moment,  to men in their Zaking
moments; for l  am convinced that I cannot e[aggerate  enough even
to lay the foundation  of a true e[pression.  Who that has heard a
strain of music feared then lest he should speak e[travagantly  any
more forever? In vieZ  of  the future or possible, Ze  should live
Tuite la[ly  and undefined  in front,  our outlines dim  and misty on
that side; as our shadoZs reveal an insensible perspiration toZard
the sun. The volatile truth  of our Zords  should continually  betray
the inadeTuacy of the residual statement. Their truth  is instantly
translated; its literal  monument  alone remains. The Zords Zhich
e[press our faith  and piety are not definite;  yet they are significant
and fragrant like frankincense  to superior natures.

Why level  doZnZard  to our  dullest perception alZays,  and praise
that as common sense? The commonest sense is the sense of men
asleep, Zhich they e[press  by snoring. Sometimes Ze  are inclined
to class those Zho are once-and-a-half Zitted  Zith  the half-Zitted,

372
because Ze appreciate only a third part of their Zit. Some Zould
find fault Zith  the morning-red, if they ever got up early enough.
"They pretend," as I hear, "that the verses of Kabir have four
different senses; illusion, spirit, intellect, and the e[oteric doctrine
of the Vedas;" but in this part of the Zorld it is considered a ground
for complaint if a man's Zritings admit of more than one
interpretation. While England endeavors to cure the potato-rot, Zill
not any endeavor to cure the brain-rot, Zhich prevails so much
more Zidely and fatally?

I do not suppose that I have attained to obscurity, but I should be
proud if no more fatal fault Zere found Zith my pages on this score
than Zas found Zith the Walden ice. Southern customers objected
to its blue color, Zhich is the evidence of its purity, as if it Zere
muddy, and preferred the Cambridge ice, Zhich is Zhite, but tastes
of Zeeds. The purity men love is like the mists Zhich envelop the
earth, and not like the a]ure ether beyond.

Some are dinning in our ears that Ze Americans, and moderns
generally, are intellectual dZarfs compared Zith the ancients, or
even the Eli]abethan men. But Zhat is that to the purpose? A living
dog is better than a dead lion. Shall a man go and hang himself
because he belongs to the race of pygmies, and not be the biggest
pygmy that he can? Let every

 

373
                                                                                                Page 192

one mind his oZn  business, and endeavor to be Zhat he Zas made.

Why should Ze  be in such desperate haste to succeed, and in such
desperate enterprises? If a man does not keep pace Zith his
companions, perhaps it is because he hears a different drummer.
Let him step to the music  Zhich  he hears, hoZever measured or far
aZay. It is not  important that he should mature as soon as an apple-
tree or an oak. Shall he turn spring into  summer? If the condition  of
things Zhich  Ze Zere  made for is not yet,  Zhat Zere  any reality
Zhich  Ze can substitute? We Zill   not be shipZrecked on a vain
reality. Shall Ze  Zith  pains erect a heaven of blue glass over
ourselves, though Zhen it  is done Ze shall be sure to ga]e  still at
the true ethereal heaven far above, as if the former Zere not?

There Zas an artist in the city  of Kouroo  Zho  Zas disposed to
strive after perfection.  One day it came into his  mind to make a
staff. Having  considered that in an imperfect Zork   time is an
ingredient, but into  a perfect Zork  time does not enter, he said to
himself, It  shall be perfect in all  respects, though I should do
nothing else in my  life. He proceeded instantly  to the forest for
Zood, being  resolved that it should not  be made of unsuitable
material; and as he searched and rejected stick after stick, his
friends gradually  deserted him, for they greZ  old in  their Zorks  and
died, but he greZ not  older by a moment. His  singleness of purpose
and resolution, and his elevated piety, endoZed  him, Zithout  his
knoZledge, Zith   perennial youth. As  he made no compromise Zith
Time, Time kept  out of his Zay,  and only sighed at a distance
because he could not overcome him. Before he had found a stick  in
all respects suitable the city of  Kouroo Zas  a hoary ruin, and he sat
on one of its mounds to peel the stick.  Before he had given it  the

374
proper shape the dynasty of the Candahars Zas at an end, and Zith
the point of the stick  he Zrote the name of  the last of that race in
the sand, and then resumed his Zork. By the time  he had smoothed
and polished the staff Kalpa Zas  no longer the pole-star; and ere he
had put on the ferule and the head adorned Zith precious  stones,
Brahma had aZoke and slumbered many times. But  Zhy  do I stay
to mention these things? When the finishing  stroke Zas  put to his
Zork,  it suddenly e[panded  before the eyes of the astonished artist
into the fairest of  all the creations of Brahma.  He had made a neZ
system in making a staff, a Zorld  Zith   full  and fair proportions;  in
Zhich  though the old cities  and dynasties had passed aZay, fairer
and more glorious ones had taken their places. And noZ  he saZ by
the heap of shavings still fresh at his feet,  that, for him  and his
Zork,  the former lapse of time  had been an illusion, and that no
more time had elapsed than is reTuired for a single scintillation
from the brain of  Brahma to fall  on and inflame  the tinder of a
mortal brain. The  material Zas pure, and his art Zas  pure; hoZ
could the result be other than Zonderful?

No face Zhich  Ze can give  to a matter Zill  stead us so Zell  at last
as the truth. This alone Zears Zell.  For  the most part, Ze are not
Zhere Ze  are, but in a false position. Through  an infirmity   of our
natures, Ze suppose a case, and put ourselves into it, and hence are
in tZo  cases at the same time, and it is doubly difficult   to get out.
In sane moments Ze regard on-

 

375
                                                                                                Page 193

ly the facts, the case that is. Say Zhat you have to say, not Zhat  you
ought. Any  truth is better than make-believe. Tom  Hyde, the tinker,
standing on the galloZs,  Zas asked if he had any thing to  say. "Tell
the tailors," said he, "to  remember to make a knot in their  thread
before they take the first stitch."  His  companion's prayer is
forgotten.

HoZever  mean your life  is, meet it and live  it; do not shun it  and
call it hard names. It is  not so bad as you are. It looks poorest Zhen
you are richest. The fault-  finder Zill   find  faults even in paradise.
Love your life,  poor as it  is. You may perhaps have some pleasant,
thrilling,  glorious  hours, even in a poor-house. The setting sun is
reflected from  the ZindoZs  of the alms-house as brightly  as from
the rich man's abode; the snoZ melts before its  door as early in the
spring. I do not see but a Tuiet mind may  live as contentedly there,
and have as cheering thoughts, as in a palace. The toZn's poor
seem to me often to live the most independent lives  of any. May  be
they are simply great enough to receive Zithout   misgiving.  Most
think that they are above being supported by  the toZn; but  it
oftener happens that they are not above supporting themselves by
dishonest means, Zhich should be more disreputable. Cultivate
poverty like  a garden herb, like sage. Do not trouble yourself  much
to get neZ things, Zhether  clothes or friends.  Turn the old;  return
to them. Things do not change; Ze  change. Sell your clothes and
keep your thoughts. God Zill   see that you do not Zant society.  If I
Zere confined  to a corner of a garret all my  days, like a spider, the
Zorld  Zould  be just as large to me Zhile  I had my thoughts  about
me. The philosopher said: "From  an army of three divisions  one
can take aZay its general, and put it in  disorder; from  the man the
most abject and vulgar one cannot take aZay his thought."  Do  not

376
seek so an[iously to  be developed, to subject yourself to  many
influences to be played on; it  is all dissipation.  Humility   like
darkness reveals the heavenly lights. The shadoZs of poverty  and
meanness gather around us, "and lo! creation Zidens to our  vieZ."
We are often reminded that if  there Zere bestoZed on us the Zealth
of Croesus *, our aims must  still be the same, and our means
essentially the same. Moreover, if  you are restricted in your  range
by poverty, if  you cannot buy books and neZspapers, for  instance,
you are but confined to the most significant   and vital e[periences;
you are compelled to deal Zith  the material  Zhich  yields the most
sugar and the most starch. It is life near the bone Zhere  it is
sZeetest. You are defended from being a trifler.  No man loses ever
on a loZer level  by magnanimity  on a higher. Superfluous Zealth
can buy superfluities only.  Money is  not reTuired to buy one
necessary of the soul.

I live  in the angle of a leaden Zall,  into Zhose  composition  Zas
poured a little alloy  of bell  metal. Often,  in the repose of my mid-
day, there reaches my ears a confused tintinnabulum from Zithout.
It is the noise of my  contemporaries. My  neighbors tell me of  their
adventures Zith famous  gentlemen and ladies, Zhat notabilities
they met at the dinner-table; but I  am no more interested in such
things than in the contents of the Daily  Times.  The interest and the
conversation are about

 

377
                                                                                                Page 194

costume and manners chiefly; but a goose is a goose still, dress it
as you Zill.  They tell  me of California   and Te[as, of England and
the Indies, of the Hon. Mr.  of Georgia  or of Massachusetts, all
transient and fleeting phenomena, till  I am ready to leap from  their
court-yard like  the Mameluke bey. I  delight to come to  my
bearings,not Zalk  in procession Zith  pomp and parade, in a
conspicuous place, but to Zalk  even Zith  the Builder  of the
universe, if I  may,not to live  in this restless, nervous, bustling,
trivial  Nineteenth Century, but  stand or sit thoughtfully  Zhile   it
goes by. What are men celebrating? They are all on a committee of
arrangements, and hourly e[pect a speech from somebody. God is
only the president of the day, and Webster is his orator. I  love to
Zeigh, to  settle, to gravitate toZard  that Zhich  most strongly  and
rightfully  attracts me;not  hang by the beam of the scale and try to
Zeigh less,not suppose a case, but take the case that is; to travel the
only path I can, and that on Zhich  no poZer  can resist me. It
affords me no satisfaction to commence to  spring an arch before I
have got a solid foundation.  Let us not play at kittlybenders.  There
is a solid bottom every  Zhere. We read that the traveller asked the
boy if the sZamp  before him  had a hard bottom. The boy replied
that it had. But presently  the traveller's horse sank in up to the
girths, and he observed to the boy, "I thought  you said that this bog
had a hard bottom." "So it  has," ansZered the latter, "but  you have
not got half Zay  to it  yet." So it  is Zith  the bogs and Tuicksands of
society; but he is an old boy that  knoZs it.  Only  Zhat is thought
said or done at a certain rare coincidence is good. I Zould  not  be
one of those Zho Zill   foolishly  drive  a nail into  mere lath and
plastering; such a deed Zould keep me aZake  nights. Give me a
hammer, and let me feel for the furroZing.   Do not  depend on the

378
putty. Drive a nail home and clinch it so faithfully that you can
Zake up in the night and think of your Zork Zith satisfaction,a
Zork at Zhich you Zould not be ashamed to invoke the Muse. So
Zill  help you God, and so only. Every nail driven should be as
another rivet in the machine of the universe, you carrying on the
Zork.

Rather than love, than money, than fame, give me truth. I sat at a
table Zhere Zere rich food and Zine in abundance, and obseTuious
attendance, out sincerity and truth Zere not; and I Zent aZay
hungry from the ??? spitable board. The hospitality Zas as cold as
the ices. I thought that there Zas no need of ice to free]e them.
They talked to me of the age of the Zine and the fame of the
vintage; but I thought of an older, a neZer, and purer Zine, of a
more glorious vintage, Zhich they had not got, and could not buy.
The style, the house and grounds and "entertainment" pass for
nothing Zith me. I called on the king, but he made me Zait in his
hall, and conducted like a man incapacitated for hospitality. There
Zas a man in my neighborhood Zho lived in a holloZ tree. His
manners Zere truly regal. I should have done better had l called on
him.

HoZ long shall Ze sit in our porticoes practising idle and musty
virtues Zhich any Zork Zould make impertinent? As if one Zere to
begin

 

379
                                                                                                Page 195

the day Zith  long-suffering,  and hire a man to hoe his potatoes; and
in the afternoon go forth  to practise Christian  meekness and charity
Zith  goodness aforethought! Consider the China pride  and stagnant
selfcomplacency of mankind.  This generation  reclines a little  to
congratulate itself on being  the last of an illustrious  line;  and in
Boston and London and Paris and Rome, thinking  of its  long
descent, it speaks of its progress in art and science and literature
Zith  satisfaction. There are the Records of the Philosophical
Societies, and the public Eulogies of  Great Men!  It is the good
Adam contemplating  his oZn  virtue. "Yes, Ze  have done great
deeds, and sung divine songs, Zhich shall never die,"that  is, as long
as we can remember them. The learned societies and great men of
Assyria,Zhere  are they? What youthful  philosophers and
e[perimentalists  Ze are! There is  not one of my readers Zho  has
yet lived a Zhole  human life.  These may be but the spring months
in the life  of the race. If Ze  have had the seven-years' itch, Ze have
not seen the seventeen-year locust yet in Concord. We are
acTuainted Zith a mere pellicle  of the globe  on Zhich  Ze live.
Most have not delved si[  feet beneath the surface, nor leaped as
many above it. We knoZ  not Zhere  Ze are. Beside, Ze are sound
asleep nearly half our time. Yet  Ze esteem ourselves Zise, and
have an established order on the surface. Truly, Ze are deep
thinkers, Ze are ambitious  spirits!  As I stand over the insect
craZling  amid the pine needles on the forest floor,  and endeavoring
to conceal itself from  my sight,  and ask myself Zhy  it Zill   cherish
those humble thoughts, and hide its head from me Zho  might,
perhaps, be its benefactor, and impart to its race some cheering
information,  I am reminded of  the greater Benefactor and
Intelligence that stands over me the human insect.

380
There is an incessant influ[ of novelty into the Zorld, and yet Ze
tolerate incredible dulness. I need only suggest Zhat kind of
sermons are still listened to in the most enlightened countries.
There are such Zords and joy and sorroZ, but they are only the
burden of a psalm, sung Zith a nasal tZang, Zhile Ze believe in the
ordinary and mean. We think that Ze can change our clothes only.
It is said that the British Empire is very large and respectable, and
that the United States are a first-rate poZer. We do not believe that
a tide rises and falls behind every man Zhich can float the British
Empire like a chip, if he should ever harbor it in his mind. Who
knoZs Zhat sort of seventeen-year locust Zill ne[t come out of the
ground? The government of the Zorld I live in Zas not framed, like
that of Britain, in after-dinner conversations over the Zine.

The life in us is like the Zater in the river. It may rise this year
higher than man has ever knoZn it, and flood the parched uplands;
even this may be the eventful year, Zhich Zill droZn out all our
muskrats. It Zas not alZays dry land Zhere Ze dZell. I see far
inland the banks Zhich the stream anciently Zashed, before science
began to record its freshets. Every one has heard the story Zhich
has gone the rounds of NeZ England, of a strong and beautiful bug
Zhich came out of the dry leaf of an old table of apple-tree Zood,
Zhich had stood in a farmer's kitchen for

 

381
                                                                                                Page 196

si[ty  ears, first in  Connecticut, and afterZards  in
Massachusetts,from an egg deposited in the living  tree many years
earlier still,  as appeared by counting the annual layers beyond it;
Zhich  Zas heard gnaZing  out for several Zeeks,  hatched perchance
by the heat of an urn. Who does not feel his  faith in  a resurrection
and immortality  strengthened by hearing of  this? Who knoZs  Zhat
beautiful and Zinged  life,  Zhose egg has been buried for ages
under many concentric layers of  Zoodenness in the dead dry life  of
society, deposited at first in the alburnum  of the green and living
tree, Zhich has been gradually converted  into the semblance of its
Zell-seasoned tomb,heard perchance gnaZing out  noZ for  years by
the astonished family of  man, as they sat round the festive
board,may une[pectedly  come forth  from amidst society's most
trivial  and handselled furniture, to  enjoy its perfect  summer life at
last!

I do not say that John or Jonathan Zill  reali]e  all  this; but such is
the character of that morroZ  Zhich  mere lapse of time can never
make to daZn. The light  Zhich  puts out our  eyes is darkness to us.
Only that day daZns  to Zhich  Ze are aZake.  There is more day to
daZn. The sun is but a morning  star.

 

382
                                                                                                       Page 197



ESSAYS

 

383
                                                                                          Page 199


A  Slight   Sound   at  Evening

by E. B. White

In his journal for July 1012, 1841, Thoreau Zrote: "A slight sound
at evening lifts me up by the ears, and makes life seem
ine[pressibly serene and grand. It may be in Uranus, or it may be
in the shutter." The book into Zhich he later managed to pack both
Uranus and the shutter Zas published in 1854, and noZ, a hundred
years having gone by, "Walden," its serenity and grandeur
unimpaired, still lifts us up by the ears, still translates for us the
language Ze are in danger of forgetting, "Zhich all things and
events speak Zithout metaphor, Zhich alone is copious and
standard."

"Walden" is an oddity in American letters. It may very Zell be the
oddest of our distinguished oddities. For many it is a great deal too
odd, and for many it is a particular bore. I have not found it to be a
Zell-liked book among my acTuaintances, although usually spoken
of Zith respect, and one literary critic for Zhom I have the highest
regard can find no reason Zhy anyone gives "Walden" a second
thought. To admire the book is, in fact, something of an
embarrassment, for the mass of men have an indistinct notion that
its author Zas a sort of Nature Boy.

I think it is of some advantage to encounter the book at a period in
one's life Zhen the normal an[ieties and enthusiasms and rebellions
of youth closely resemble those of Thoreau in that spring of 1845
Zhen he borroZed an a[e, Zent out to the Zoods, and began to
Zhack doZn some trees for timber. Received at such a juncture, the

384
book is like an invitation to life's dance, assuring the troubled
recipient that no matter Zhat befalls him in the Zay of success or
failure he Zill alZays be Zelcome at the partythat the music is
played for him, too, if he Zill but listen and move his feet. In
effect, that is Zhat the book isan invitation, unengraved; and it stirs
one as a young girl is stirred by her first big party bid. Many think
it a sermon; many set it doZn as an attempt to rearrange society;
some think it an e[ercise in nature-loving; some find it a rather
irritating collection of inspirational puffballs by an eccentric shoZ-
off. I think it none of these. It still seems to me the best youth's
companion yet Zritten by an American, for it carries a solemn
Zarning

 

385
                                                                                                Page 200

against the loss of one's valuables, it advances a good argument for
traveling light  and trying  neZ adventures, it  rings Zith  the poZer  of
positive adoration, it  contains religious  feeling Zithout   religious
images, and it steadfastly refuses to record bad neZs. Even its
pantheistic note is so pure as to be noncorruptingpure as the flute-
note bloZn  across the pond on those faraZay summer nights. If  our
colleges and universities Zere  alert, they Zould  present a cheap
pocket edition of  the book to every senior upon  graduating, along
Zith  his sheepskin, or instead of it.  Even if some senior Zere  to
take it literally  and start felling  trees, there could be Zorse  mishaps:
the a[e is older  than the Dictaphone and it is just  as Zell for  a
young man to see Zhat kind  of chips he leaves before listening  to
the sound of his oZn  voice. And  even if some Zere to get no
farther than the table of contents, they Zould  learn  hoZ to name
eighteen chapters by the use of only thirty-nine  Zords  and Zould
see hoZ sZeet are the uses of brevity.

If Thoreau had merely  left us an account of a man's life  in the
Zoods, or if  he had simply retreated to the Zoods  and there
recorded his complaints about society, or even if  he had contrived
to include both records in  one essay, "Walden" Zould  probably not
have lived a hundred years. As things turned out,  Thoreau, very
likely  Zithout  knoZing  Tuite  Zhat he Zas up to,  took man's
relation to nature and man's dilemma in  society and man's capacity
for elevating his  spirit and he beat all these matters together, in a
Zild  free interval  of self-justification   and delight,  and produced an
original omelette  from Zhich  people can draZ  nourishment in  a
hungry day. "Walden"  is one of the first  of the vitaminenriched
American dishes. If  it Zere  a little less good than it  is, or even a
little  less Tueer, it Zould be an abominable book. Even  as it is, it

386
Zill  continue to baffle and annoy the literal mind and all those Zho
are unable to stomach its caprices and imbibe its theme. Certainly
the plodding economist Zill continue to have rough going if he
hopes to emerge from the book Zith a clear system of economic
thought. Thoreau's assault on the Concord society of the mid-
nineteenth century has the Tuality of a modern Western: he rides
into the subject at top speed, shooting in all directions. Many of his
shots ricochet and nick him on the rebound, and throughout the
melee there is a horrendous cloud of inconsistencies and
contradictions, and Zhen the shooting dies doZn and the air clears,
one is impressed chiefly by the courage of the rider and by hoZ
splendid it Zas that somebody should have ridden in there and
raised all that ruckus.

When he Zent to the pond, Thoreau struck an attitude and did so
deliberately, but his posturing Zas not to draZ the attention of
others to him but rather to draZ his oZn attention more closely to
himself. "I learned this at least by my e[periment: that if one
advances confidently in the direction of his dreams, and endeavors
to live the life Zhich he has imagined, he Zill meet Zith a success
une[pected in common hours." The sentence has the poZer to
resuscitate the youth droZning in his sea of doubt. I recall my
e[hilaration upon reading it, many years ago, in a

 

387
                                                                                                Page 201

time of hesitation  and despair. It restored me to health. And noZ  in
1954 Zhen I  salute Henry Thoreau on the hundredth birthday  of his
book, I am merely  paying off  an old scoreor an installment on it.

In his journal  for May  34, 1838Boston to Portlandhe  Zrote:
''Midnighthead  over the boat's sidebetZeen sleeping and
ZakingZith   glimpses of one or more  lights in  the vicinity  of Cape
Ann. Bright  moonlightthe  effect heightened by  seasickness." The
entry illuminates  the man, as the moon the sea on that night in
May. In Thoreau the natural  scene Zas heightened, not depressed,
by a disturbance of the stomach, and nausea met its match at last.
There Zas a steadiness in at least one passenger if there Zas none
in the boat. Such steadiness (Zhich in  some Zould be called
into[ication)   is at the heart of "Walden"confidence,  faith,  the
discipline of  looking  alZays at Zhat  is to be seen, undeviating
gratitude for the life-everlasting   that he found groZing  in  his front
yard. "There is noZhere  recorded a simple and irrepressible
satisfaction Zith  the gift  of life,  any memorable praise of  God." He
Zorked to  correct that deficiency.  "Walden" is his  acknoZledgment
of the gift  of life.  It is the testament of a man in  a high state of
indignation  because (it seemed to him) so feZ ears heard the
uninterrupted poem of creation,  the morning Zind  that  forever
bloZs. If  the man sometimes Zrote  as though all his readers Zere
male, unmarried, and Zell-connected,  it is  because he gave his
testimony during  the calloZ  years, and, for that matter, never really
greZ up. To reject the book  because of the immaturity  of the author
and the bugs in the logic is to throZ  aZay  a bottle of  good Zine
because it contains bits of the cork.

Thoreau said he reTuired of every Zriter,  first  and last, a simple

388
and sincere account of his oZn life. Having delivered himself of
this chesty dictum, he proceeded to ignore it. In his books and even
in his enormous journal, he Zithheld or disguised most of the facts
from Zhich an understanding of his life could be draZn. "Walden,"
subtitled "Life in the Woods," is not a simple and sincere account
of a man's life, either in or out of the Zoods; it is an account of a
man's journey into the mind, a toot on the trumpet to alert the
neighbors. Thoreau Zas Zell aZare that no one can alert his
neighbors Zho is not Zide aZake himself, and he Zent to the
Zoods (among other reasons) to make sure that he Zould stay
aZake during his broadcast. What actually took place during the
years 184547 is largely unrecorded, and the reader is e[cluded
from the private life of the author, Zho supplies almost no gossip
about himself, a great deal about his neighbors and about the
universe.

As for me, I cannot in this short ramble give a simple and sincere
account of my oZn life, but I think Thoreau might find it
instructive to knoZ that this memorial essay is being Zritten in a
house that, through no intent on my part, is the same si]e and shape
as his oZn domicile on the pondabout ten by fifteen, tight, plainly
finished, and at a little distance from my Concord. The house in
Zhich I sit this morning Zas built to accommodate a boat, not a
man, but by long e[perience I have learned that in most respects it
shelters me better than the larger dZelling

 

389
                                                                                                Page 202

Zhere my bed is, and Zhich,  by  design, is a manhouse not a
boathouse. Here in the boathouse I am a Zilder  and, it Zould
appear, a healthier man, by a safe margin. I have a chair, a bench, a
table, and I can Zalk  into the Zater  if I  tire of  the land. My  house
fronts a cove. TZo  fishermen have just arrived  to spot fish from  the
airan osprey and a man in a small yelloZ  plane Zho  Zorks  for the
fish company. The man, I have noticed,  is less Zell  eTuipped than
the haZk, Zho  can dive directly  on his fish  and carry it aZay,
Zithout  telephoning. A  mouse and a sTuirrel share the house Zith
me. The building  is, in fact, a multiple  dZelling,   a semidetached
affair. It is  because I am semidetached Zhile here that I find  it
possible to transact this private business Zith  the feZest obstacles.

There is also a Zoodchuck here, living  forty  feet aZay  under the
Zharf.  When the Zind  is right,  he can smell my house; and Zhen
the Zind  is contrary, I can smell his.  We both use the Zharf for
sunning, taking turns, each adjusting his  schedule to the other's
convenience. Thoreau once ate a Zoodchuck. I think  he felt  he
oZed it  to his readers, and that it Zas little  enough, considering the
indignities  they Zere suffering  at his hands and the dressing-doZn
they Zere taking.  (Parts of "Walden"  are pure scold.) Or perhaps he
ate the Zoodchuck because he believed every man should acTuire
strict business habits, and the Zoodchuck Zas  destroying his
market beans. I do not knoZ.  Thoreau had a strong e[perimental
streak in him. It  is probably no harder to  eat a Zoodchuck than to
construct a sentence that lasts a hundred years. At any rate,
Thoreau is the only Zriter   I knoZ  Zho  prepared himself for  his
great ordeal by eating a Zoodchuck;  also the only one Zho  got a
hangover from drinking  too  much Zater. (He Zas  drunk the Zhole
time, though he seldom touched Zine  or coffee or  tea.)

390
Here in this compact house Zhere I Zould spend one day as
deliberately as Nature if I Zere not being pressed by THE YALE REVIEW,
and Zith a Zoodchuck (as yet uneaten) for neighbor, I can feel the
companionship of the occupant of the pondside cabin in Walden
Zoods, a mile from the village, near the Fitchburg right of Zay.
Even my immediate business is no barrier betZeen us: Thoreau
occasionally batted out a maga]ine piece, but Zas alZays
suspicious of any sort of purposeful Zork that cut into his time. A
man, he said, should take care not to be throZn off the track by
every nutshell and mosTuito's Zing that falls on the rails.

There has been much guessing as to Zhy he Zent to the pond. To
set it doZn to escapism is, of course, to misconstrue Zhat
happened. Henry Zent forth to battle Zhen he took to the Zoods,
and "Walden" is the report of a man torn by tZo poZerful and
opposing drivesthe desire to enjoy the Zorld (and not be derailed
by a mosTuito Zing) and the urge to set the Zorld straight. One
cannot join these tZo successfully, but sometimes, in rare cases,
something good or even great results from the attempt of the
tormented spirit to reconcile them. Henry Zent forth to battle, and
if he set the stage himself, if he fought on his oZn terms and Zith
his oZn Zeapons, it Zas because it Zas his nature to do things

 

391
                                                                                                Page 203

differently  from  most men, and to act in a cocky fashion.  If the
pond and the Zoods seemed a more plausible site for a house than
an in-toZn  location, it  Zas because a coZbell made for  him a
sZeeter sound that a churchbell. "Walden,"  the book, makes the
sound of a coZbell,  more than a churchbell, and proves the point,
although both sounds are in it, and both remarkably  clear and
sZeet. He simply  preferred his churchbell  at a little distance.

l think  one reason he Zent to the Zoods Zas a perfectly  simple and
commonplace oneand apparently he thought so, too. "At  a certain
season of our life," he Zrote,  "Ze  are accustomed to consider every
spot as the possible site of a house." There spoke the young man, a
feZ years out of  college, Zho  had not yet broken aZay  from home.
He hadn't married, and he had found no job that  measured up to his
rigid standards of employment,  and like any young  man, or young
animal, he felt uneasy and on the defensive until  he had fi[ed
himself a den. Most young  men, of course, casting about for  a site,
are content merely to draZ  apart from their  kinfolks.  Thoreau,
convinced that the greater part of Zhat  his neighbors called good
Zas bad, ZithdreZ   from a great deal more than family:  he pulled
out of everything  for a Zhile,  to serve everybody  right for  being so
stuffy, and to try  his oZn prejudices  on the dog.

The house-hunting sentence above, Zhich starts the Chapter called
"Where I Lived,  and What  I Lived  For," is folloZed   by another
passage that is Zorth Tuoting here because it so beautifully
illustrates the offbeat prose that Thoreau Zas  master of, a prose at
once strictly disciplined  and Zildly   abandoned. "I have surveyed
the country on every side Zithin   a do]en miles  of Zhere I  live,"
continued this delirious  young man. ''In  imagination  I have bought

392
all the farms in succession, for all Zere to be bought, and I kneZ
their price. I Zalked over each farmer's premises, tasted his Zild
apples, discoursed on husbandry Zith him, took his farm at his
price, at any price, mortgaging it to him in my mind; even put a
higher price on ittook everything but a deed of ittook his Zord for
his deed, for I dearly love to talkcultivated it, and him to some
e[tent, I trust, and ZithdreZ Zhen I had enjoyed it long enough,
leaving him to carry it on." A copydesk man Zould get a double
hernia trying to clean up that sentence for the management, but the
sentence needs no fi[ing, for it perfectly captures the meaning of
the Zriter and the Tuality of the ramble.

"Wherever I sat, there I might live, and the landscape radiated from
me accordingly." Thoreau, the home-seeker, sitting on his
hummock Zith the entire State of Massachusetts radiating from
him, is to me the most humorous of the NeZ England figures, and
"Walden" the most humorous of the books, though its humor is
almost continuously subsurface and there is nothing funny
anyZhere, e[cept a feZ Zeak jokes and bad puns that rise to the
surface like the perch in the pond that rose to the sound of the
maestro's flute. Thoreau tended to Zrite in sentences, a feat not
every Zriter is capable of, and "Walden" is,

 

393
                                                                                                Page 204

rhetorically  speaking, a collection  of certified  sentences, some of
them, it Zould  noZ  appear, as indestructible as they are errant. The
book is distilled  from  the vast journals, and this accounts for its
intensity: he picked  out bright particles  that pleased his eye,
Zhirled  them in the kaleidoscope of  his content, and produced the
pattern that has enduredthe color, the form, the light.

On this its hundredth birthday,  Thoreau's "Walden"  is pertinent and
timely. In  our uneasy season, Zhen all men unconsciously seek a
retreat from a Zorld  that has got almost completely  out of  hand, his
house in the Concord Zoods is a haven. In  our culture of  gadgetry
and the multiplicity   of convenience, his cry  "Simplicity,  simplicity,
simplicity!"   has the insistence of a fire alarm. In  the brooding
atmosphere of Zar and the gathering radioactive  storm, the
innocence and serenity of his summer afternoons are enough to
burst the remembering heart, and one ga]es back upon that
pleasing interludeits confidence,  its purity,  its deliberatenessZith
aZe and Zonder, as one Zould  look upon  the face of a child asleep.

"This small  lake Zas of most  value as a neighbor in the intervals of
a gentle rain-storm in August,  Zhen,  both air and Zater being
perfectly still,  but the sky  overcast, midafternoon had all  the
serenity of evening, and the Zood-thrush  sang around, and Zas
heard from shore to shore." NoZ,  in the perpetual overcast in  Zhich
our days are spent, Ze hear Zith  e[tra perception  and deep
gratitude that song, tying  century to century. . . .

(Allen  Cove, Summer, 1954)

    E. B. White (18991985) Zas the author of many Zorks of fiction and
    nonfiction, including the classic Charlotte's Web and tZo other Zorks

394
    for children; several collections of essays; and a revision of The
    Elements of Style by William Strunk, Jr.

 

395
                                                                                          Page 205


Thoreau:    No  Hermit

by Ma[ Lerner

When just out of Harvard, Thoreau came under the poZerful sZay
of Emerson's mind and did his formative thinking as a member of
the Concord group of transcendentalists. He eventually liberated
himself, hoZever, from Emerson's influence, and at no time Zas he
taken in by the transcendentalist e[cesses of the Concord group or
by the millennial dreams that greZ thick as huckleberries on the
Concord bushes. The sources of strength in his thinking came
rather from other strainsan absorption Zith the Greek classics, a
prolonged study of the Oriental teachings, the Graco-British
tradition of individualism, the natureZorship of the French and
German philosophers and the English romantic poets, and finally a
conscious modeling upon the Zay of life of the American Indians.

But Thoreau Zas not one to be too deeply influenced. He Zas
impervious to anything that did not fit into that continual Tuest for
a practical solution of the problems of his oZn individual life
Zhich he called his philosophy. But implicit in his highly personal
essays and nature soliloTuies and journal entries is a devastating
attack upon every dominant aspect of American life in its first flush
of industrial advancethe factory system, the corporations, business
enterprise, acTuisitiveness, the vandalism of natural resources, the
vested commercial and intellectual interests, the cry for e[pansion,
the clannishness and theocratic smugness of NeZ England society,
the herd-mindedness of the people, the unthinking civic allegiance
they paid to an opportunist and imperialist government.

396
He despised everything derivative  and secondary. His criticism  of
American society  sprang from the rebellion  of the pioneer spirit.
For he Zas seeking on an intellectual  and moral frontier  the ]est
and immediacy of  the original pioneer  effort and protesting
passionately against the cultural crudity  and the materialism of  the
pioneer in an industrial  age. He rejected the factory system because
it meant the e[ploitation   of others; he rejected the cult of  success
and the Puritan creed of persistent Zork  because it meant the
e[ploitation  of  oneself. His economics anticipated  Ruskin's by
defining the cost of  a thing as the amount of life  that has to be
e[changed or it;  his aesthetics anticipated William  Morris's  by
declaring that no beauty can e[ist  in commodities  that does not
floZ  from  a creativeness in the lives of those Zho  fashion them. He
recounts in Walden (1854) a tZo-year  e[periment  in living   in a hut
in the Zoods, stripping  the husk of  civili]ation   to the core, and
setting up his oZn  economy of Zants  and satisfactions. He found
that the economic system Zas making  unreasonable demands on
him, and so he proceeded to

 

397
                                                                                                Page 206

sabotage it, entering upon a conscientious ZithdraZal   of efficiency
Zhich  Zas none the less earnest because it Zas restricted to his
oZn life.  (Similarly   he sabotaged the government by refusing to
pay ta[es, and he spent a night in the village  jail  as an e[ultant
political  prisoner. His essay "Civil  Disobedience"  (1849) is a sharp
statement of the duty of resistance to governmental authority  Zhen
it is unjustly  e[ercised;  read by Gandhi in 1907,  it became the
foundation of  the Indian civil  disobedience movement.  Thoreau's
three speeches on John BroZn (18591860; republished in  Vol. ;   of
the Collected Works) e[tol  his insurrectionary  attempt at Harpers
Ferry and denounce the shortsighted coercion of the government
that martyred him.)

As a social critic  Thoreau Zas uncompromising:  his thought  Zas
tighter than Emerson's, less optimistic,  less given to the resolution
of opposites. It Zas  a taut, astringent rejection of  everything, that
could not pass the most e[acting  tests of the individual  life.  In that
sense there Zas something of the nihilist  about Thoreau, and his
thought effected an almost Niet]schean  transvaluation of  values.

But his hermit-like  individualism   may easily  be overemphasi]ed,
just as his absorption Zith  nature has been overemphasi]ed. Both
must be seen as part of a rebellion against the oversociali]ed  NeZ
England toZn,  in Zhich  the individual   Zas being submerged, and
against the factory system Zhich  saZ nature only  as so much raZ
material and sought to subdue it to the uses of profit.  He Zas not  so
limited  as to believe that the individual  could by  his oZn  action
stem the heedless onrush of American life,  or succeed Zholly  in
rechanneling it; yet,  being a transcendentalist, he believed that a
sharp moral protest such as that of John BroZn,  once clearly made,

398
is ultimately  irresistible.  While  he regarded individual  development
as the only aim of society, and the individual's  moral  sense as the
only test and ultimately  the only  safeguard of institutions,  he did
not envisage the individual  as the necessary cadre of society. "To
act collectively  is according to  the spirit of  our institutions,"  he
Zrote in  Walden, and he folloZs  this Zith  a plea to e[tend  the
social services of the community  and to make every NeZ  England
village the basis of a venture in  adult education. Nor  did he Zholly
turn his back on the machine as an instrument of production:  his
emphasis Zas rather on its cultural  conseTuences in his oZn day.

It Zas one of  his characteristic parado[es that the man Zho  could
solemnly call  his felloZ-toZnsmen   together to read them a protest
against the imprisonment of  John BroZn  or the return of a fugitive
slave could also profess an unconcern Zith  most of the burning
political  issues of the day, and insist that his business Zas not to
change the Zorld but  to solve the problem of  living  in it.  He could
say: "God does not sympathi]e  Zith  the popular causes," and at the
same time have so deep a sense of the relation betZeen a great
culture and the common concerns of life  that he has come doZn as
perhaps the leading American nativist;  commenting  on the fact that
no literature had yet groZn  up around "the  Man of the Age,  come
to be called Zorkingman,"   he remarks that

 

