2
                Thank     you    for   downloading         this    Scribner     eBook.





Sign up for our newsletter and receive special offers, access to bonus content, and info on the latest


                 new releases and other great eBooks from Scribner and Simon & Schuster.





                                                 CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP





                                               or visit us online to sign up at


                                           eBookNews.SimonandSchuster.com

4
Thinking of John D. MacDonald

5
“It is by going down into the abyss that we recover the treasures of life.”


                                                                                       Joseph Campbell






                                    “Shit don’t mean shit.”


                                                                                             Jimmy Gold

6
PART  1 : BURIED    TREASURE

7
                                                         1978









“Wake up, genius.”



    Rothstein  didn’t  want  to wake up.  The dream was too good. It  featured his



ﬁrst wife  months  before she became his ﬁrst wife,  seventeen and perfect from



head to toe.  Naked and  shimmering.  Both  of  them naked.  He was nineteen,



with  grease under his ﬁngernails, but she hadn’t minded that, at least not then,



because his head was full  of dreams and that  was what  she cared about.  She



believed in the dreams even more than he did, and she was right  to believe. In



this dream she was laughing  and reaching for the  part of  him  that was easiest



to grab. He tried  to go deeper, but then a hand began shaking his shoulder, and



the dream popped like a soap bubble.



    He  was no longer nineteen and living  in a two-room  New Jersey apartment,



he was six months shy of  his eightieth  birthday   and living  on  a farm in  New



Hampshire, where  his will   speciﬁed he should be  buried. There  were men in



his bedroom. They were wearing ski  masks, one red, one blue, and one canary-



yellow. He saw this  and tried  to believe it  was just  another dream—the  sweet



one had slid into  a nightmare,  as they sometimes did—but   then  the hand let



go of his arm, grabbed his shoulder, and tumbled him  onto the ﬂoor. He  struck



his head and cried out.



    “Quit    that,”  said  the  one in  the  yellow  mask.  “You  want  to  knock  him



unconscious?”



    “Check  it  out.”  The one in  the red  mask pointed. “Old   fella’s got a woody.



Must have been having one hell of a dream.”



    Blue  Mask,  the one who  had done the  shaking, said, “Just  a piss hard-on.



When they’re that  age, nothing else gets em up. My grandfather—”



    “Be  quiet,”  Yellow Mask said. “Nobody  cares about your grandfather.”

8
    Although   dazed and still   wrapped in  a fraying  curtain  of  sleep, Rothstein



knew he was in trouble here. Two words surfaced in his mind: home invasion. He



looked up at the trio  that  had materialized in his bedroom, his  old head aching



(there was going  to  be a huge  bruise on  the right   side, thanks  to  the blood



thinners he took),  his heart  with  its  perilously  thin  walls banging  against the



left side of his  ribcage. They loomed over him,  three men with  gloves on their



hands, wearing   plaid  fall   jackets  below  those  terrifying    balaclavas. Home



invaders, and here he was, ﬁve miles from town.



    Rothstein   gathered  his  thoughts  as  best  he could,   banishing  sleep and



telling  himself  there  was one good thing   about  this  situation:  if  they  didn’t



want him to  see their faces, they intended to leave him alive.



    Maybe.



    “Gentlemen,”   he said.



    Mr.  Yellow laughed and gave him a thumbs-up.  “Good start, genius.”



    Rothstein  nodded, as if  at a compliment.   He glanced at  the bedside clock,



saw it was quarter  past two  in  the morning,  then  looked back  at Mr.  Yellow,



who might  be the leader. “I  have only a little  money, but you’re welcome to it.



If you’ll  only leave without  hurting  me.”



    The  wind  gusted, rattling  autumn  leaves against the west side of the house.



Rothstein was aware that  the furnace was running  for  the ﬁrst  time  this  year.



Hadn’t it  just been summer?



    “According   to our info, you got  a lot more than a little.”   This was Mr. Red.



    “Hush.”    Mr.  Yellow   extended  a hand  to   Rothstein.  “Get   off  the   ﬂoor,



genius.”



    Rothstein  took  the offered hand, got shakily to  his feet, then sat on the bed.



He was breathing hard, but  all too  aware (self-awareness had been both a curse



and a blessing all his  life)  of the  picture he  must make: an old  man in  ﬂappy



blue pajamas, nothing  left  of his hair  but  white  popcorn puffs  above the ears.



This  was  what  had  become  of  the  writer    who,  in   the  year  JFK  became



president, had  been on  the  cover  of  Time magazine: JOHN   ROTHSTEIN,



AMERICA’S RECLUSIVE  GENIUS.



    Wake up, genius.

9
    “Get   your breath,”  Mr.  Yellow  said. He  sounded solicitous,  but  Rothstein



did not  trust  this.  “Then  we’ll  go into  the  living   room, where normal  people



have their discussions. Take your time. Get serene.”



    Rothstein   breathed slowly  and  deeply, and  his heart  quieted  a little.    He



tried  to think   of Peggy, with   her teacup-sized breasts (small but  perfect) and



her long, smooth legs, but  the dream was as gone as Peggy herself, now an old



crone living   in  Paris.  On  his  money. At  least  Yolande, his  second effort  at



marital bliss, was dead, thus putting  an end to the alimony.



    Red  Mask left the room,  and now Rothstein  heard rummaging in  his study.



Something fell over. Drawers were opened and closed.



    “Doing   better?” Mr.  Yellow  asked, and when Rothstein nodded: “Come on,



then.”



    Rothstein  allowed himself  to be led  into the  small living   room, escorted by



Mr. Blue  on his left  and Mr.  Yellow on his  right.  In  his study  the rummaging



went on.  Soon Mr. Red would  open  the closet and push  back his two  jackets



and three sweaters, exposing the safe. It was inevitable.



    All   right.  As  long as they leave the notebooks, and why would they take them?



Thugs like these are only interested in money. They probably can’t even read anything



more challenging than the letters in Penthouse.



    Only   he wasn’t sure about the  man in  the yellow  mask. That  one sounded



educated.



    All   the  lamps were on  in  the living   room,  and the  shades weren’t drawn.



Wakeful neighbors might  have wondered what was going on in the old  writer’s



house . . .  if  he had neighbors. The  closest ones were two miles away, on the



main highway. He had no friends, no visitors.  The occasional salesman was sent



packing.  Rothstein  was just  that   peculiar old   fella.  The retired   writer.  The



hermit. He  paid his taxes and was left alone.



    Blue  and Yellow  led  him  to the  easy chair facing the  seldom-watched TV,



and when he didn’t immediately  sit, Mr.  Blue pushed him into  it.



    “Easy!”  Yellow  said sharply,  and Blue  stepped back a bit,   muttering.   Mr.



Yellow was the one in charge, all right. Mr.  Yellow was the wheeldog.

10
    He  bent over Rothstein,  hands on the knees of his corduroys. “Do you want



a little  splash of something to settle you?”



    “If  you mean alcohol, I quit  twenty  years ago. Doctor’s orders.”



    “Good  for you. Go to meetings?”



    “I  wasn’t an alcoholic,” Rothstein said, nettled. Crazy to  be nettled in  such a



situation .  . . or  was it? Who  knew how  one was supposed to react after being



yanked out of bed in the middle  of the  night  by men in colorful  ski  masks? He



wondered how he might  write  such a scene and had no idea; he did  not write



about situations  like  this.  “People  assume any twentieth-century   white  male



writer must  be an alcoholic.”



    “All    right,   all  right,”   Mr.   Yellow  said. It   was as if   he were  placating  a



grumpy child.  “Water?”



    “No,   thank  you. What  I  want is  for you  three to leave, so I’m  going  to be



honest with you.”  He wondered if Mr.  Yellow understood the most basic rule of



human discourse: when someone says they’re going to be honest with you, they



are in most cases preparing to lie faster than a horse can trot. “My   wallet is on



the dresser in the bedroom.  There’s a little  over eighty  dollars  in  it.  There’s a



ceramic teapot on the mantel . . .”



    He  pointed.  Mr.  Blue  turned to  look,  but  Mr.  Yellow did  not.  Mr.  Yellow



continued to study  Rothstein, the eyes behind the mask almost amused. It’s not



working, Rothstein thought,  but he persevered. Now that he was awake, he was



pissed off as well as scared, although he knew he’d do well not to show that.



    “It’s  where I  keep the housekeeping money. Fifty  or sixty  dollars. That’s all



there is in the house. Take it and go.”



    “Fucking   liar,” Mr.  Blue said. “You got  a lot more than that,  guy. We know.



Believe me.”



    As  if  this were a stage play  and that line  his  cue, Mr. Red  yelled from  the



study. “Bingo! Found a safe! Big one!”



    Rothstein  had known  the man  in the  red mask would  ﬁnd it,  but  his heart



sank anyway. Stupid  to  keep cash, there was no  reason for it   other than  his



dislike of credit  cards and checks and stocks and instruments of transfer, all the



tempting  chains that   tied  people to  America’s overwhelming  and  ultimately

11
destructive debt-and-spend machine. But the cash might  be his salvation. Cash



could be replaced. The notebooks, over a hundred and ﬁfty of them, could not.



    “Now   the combo,”  said Mr.  Blue.  He snapped his gloved  ﬁngers. “Give  it



up.”



    Rothstein  was almost  angry enough  to refuse, according  to Yolande anger



had been his lifelong default  position (“Probably  even in your  goddam cradle,”



she had said), but he was also tired and frightened. If  he balked, they’d  beat it



out of  him.   He might   even have another  heart attack,  and  one more would



almost certainly ﬁnish him.



    “If   I  give you  the combination  to  the safe, will  you  take the money  inside



and go?”



    “Mr.   Rothstein,”   Mr.  Yellow  said with   a  kindliness  that  seemed genuine



(and thus  grotesque), “you’re  in   no position   to  bargain. Freddy,  go  get the



bags.”



    Rothstein  felt  a huff  of  chilly  air  as Mr. Blue,  also known as Freddy, went



out  through   the  kitchen  door.  Mr.  Yellow,   meanwhile,  was smiling   again.



Rothstein already detested that smile. Those red lips.



    “Come  on, genius—give. Soonest begun, soonest done.”



    Rothstein   sighed and recited  the combination   of the  Gardall  in  his study



closet. “Three left two  turns, thirty-one  right   two turns,  eighteen left one turn,



ninety-nine right  one turn,  then back to zero.”



    Behind  the  mask, the  red lips  spread wider,  now  showing teeth.  “I  could



have guessed that. It’s your birth date.”



    As  Yellow called the  combination  to the man  in his closet, Rothstein  made



certain unpleasant deductions. Mr. Blue and Mr.  Red had come for money, and



Mr. Yellow  might  take his share, but he didn’t  believe money was the primary



objective of the  man who kept  calling  him  genius. As if to underline  this,  Mr.



Blue reappeared, accompanied by another puff of cool outside air. He  had four



empty duffel bags, two slung over each shoulder.



    “Look,”   Rothstein  said to Mr.  Yellow, catching  the man’s eyes and holding



them. “Don’t.   There’s nothing in  that  safe worth taking  except for the  money.



The rest is just a bunch of random scribbling,  but it’s  important  to me.”

12
    From  the  study  Mr.  Red cried:  “Holy   hopping  Jesus, Morrie! We  hit   the



jackpot! Eee-doggies, there’s a ton of cash! Still in  the bank envelopes! Dozens



of them!”



    At   least sixty,  Rothstein  could have said,  maybe as many as eighty.  With



four hundred  dollars in  each one. From  Arnold  Abel,  my  accountant in  New



York. Jeannie cashes the expense checks and brings back the cash envelopes and



I put  them in  the safe. Only I  have few expenses, because Arnold also pays the



major bills  from  New  York.  I tip   Jeannie once in awhile, and the  postman at



Christmas, but  otherwise, I  rarely spend the  cash. For years this has gone on,



and why? Arnold  never asks what I use the money for. Maybe he thinks  I have



an arrangement with  a call  girl  or  two.  Maybe he thinks  I  play the  ponies at



Rockingham.



    But  here is the funny thing,  he could have said to Mr. Yellow  (also known as



Morrie). I  have never asked myself. Any more than I’ve asked myself why I keep



ﬁlling  notebook after notebook. Some things just are.



    He  could have said these things,  but  kept  silent.  Not   because Mr. Yellow



wouldn’t  understand, but  because that knowing  red-lipped  smile  said he just



might.



    And  wouldn’t  care.



    “What   else is  in  there?” Mr.  Yellow  called.  His  eyes were still  locked  on



Rothstein’s. “Boxes? Manuscript boxes? The size I told you?”



    “Not   boxes, notebooks,” Mr.  Red  reported back.  “Fuckin  safe’s ﬁlled with



em.”



    Mr.  Yellow  smiled, still   looking  into  Rothstein’s eyes. “Handwritten?  That



how you do it, genius?”



    “Please,” Rothstein  said. “Just  leave them. That  material  isn’t  meant to be



seen. None of it’s ready.”



    “And   never  will   be,  that’s  what  I   think.   Why,   you’re  just  a  great  big



hoarder.” The  twinkle   in  those eyes—what Rothstein  thought   of as an  Irish



twinkle—was  gone now. “And   hey, it  isn’t  as if you  need to publish anything



else, right? Not   like  there’s any ﬁnancial imperative. You’ve got royalties from



The Runner. And  The Runner Sees Action. And The Runner Slows Down. The

13
famous Jimmy  Gold  trilogy.  Never  out of  print.  Taught  in  college classes all



over this great nation  of ours. Thanks  to a cabal of lit   teachers who think  you



and Saul Bellow hung the moon,  you’ve got a captive audience of book-buying



undergrads. You’re all set, right?  Why  take a chance on publishing  something



that might  put  a dent in your  solid gold reputation?  You can hide out here and



pretend the  rest of the  world  doesn’t exist.”  Mr.  Yellow  shook his head. “My



friend, you give a whole new meaning to anal retentive.”



    Mr.  Blue  was still  lingering  in  the doorway. “What   do you want  me to do,



Morrie?”



    “Get  in  there with  Curtis. Pack everything  up. If  there isn’t room for  all the



notebooks in the duffels,  look around.  Even a cabin rat like  him  must  have at



least one suitcase. Don’t waste time counting  the  money, either. I want  to  get



out of here ASAP.”



    “Okay.”  Mr.  Blue—Freddy—left.



    “Don’t   do  this,”   Rothstein  said,  and was  appalled at  the  tremble  in   his



voice. Sometimes he forgot how old he was, but not tonight.



    The  one  whose name was Morrie   leaned toward  him,   greenish-gray eyes



peering through  the holes in  the yellow  mask. “I  want  to know  something.  If



you’re honest, maybe we’ll  leave the notebooks. Will   you be  honest with  me,



genius?”



    “I’ll   try,”  Rothstein  said. “And  I  never called myself that,  you know. It  was



Time magazine that called me a genius.”



    “But   I bet you never wrote a letter of protest.”



    Rothstein  said nothing.  Sonofabitch, he was thinking.  Smartass sonofabitch.



You won’t leave anything, will  you? It  doesn’t matter what I say.



    “Here’s  what   I  want   to  know—why   in   God’s name  couldn’t   you  leave



Jimmy  Gold alone? Why  did  you have to  push his face down in  the  dirt  like



you did?”



    The  question  was so unexpected that  at  ﬁrst  Rothstein  had no  idea what



Morrie  was talking   about,  even  though  Jimmy   Gold  was his  most  famous



character, the one he would be remembered for (assuming he was remembered



for anything).  The  same Time cover story that  had referred  to Rothstein   as a

14
genius had  called  Jimmy  Gold   “an  American  icon  of  despair  in  a  land  of



plenty.” Pretty  much horseshit, but it  had sold books.



    “If   you mean I should have stopped with  The Runner, you’re not alone.” But



almost, he could have added. The Runner Sees Action had solidiﬁed his reputation



as an important   American  writer,  and  The Runner Slows Down had been the



capstone of his career: critical  bouquets up the  wazoo, on the New York Times



bestseller list for sixty-two  weeks. National  Book Award, too—not   that he had



appeared in person to accept it.   “The  Iliad  of postwar  America,”  the  citation



had called it, meaning not just  the last one but the trilogy  as a whole.



    “I’m   not  saying  you should  have stopped  with  The Runner,” Morrie   said.



“The Runner Sees Action was just as good, maybe even better. They were true. It



was the last one. Man, what a crap carnival. Advertising? I mean, advertising?”



    Mr.   Yellow   then  did   something   that  tightened   Rothstein’s   throat  and



turned his  belly  to lead. Slowly,  almost reﬂectively, he  stripped off  his yellow



balaclava, revealing a young man of classic Boston Irish countenance: red hair,



greenish eyes, pasty-white  skin  that  would  always burn  and  never tan.  Plus



those weird red lips.



    “House   in  the  suburbs? Ford sedan in the  driveway? Wife  and  two  little



kiddies? Everybody sells out, is that  what  you  were trying   to say? Everybody



eats the poison?”



    “In  the  notebooks . . .”



    There  were two more  Jimmy  Gold  novels in the  notebooks, that was what



he wanted to  say, ones that completed the circle.  In  the ﬁrst  of  them, Jimmy



comes to see the hollowness of his suburban life and leaves his family, his  job,



and his  comfy   Connecticut  home.  He  leaves on  foot,  with    nothing  but   a



knapsack and the clothes on his back. He  becomes an older version of the kid



who dropped out of school, rejected his materialistic family,  and decided to join



the army after a booze-ﬁlled weekend spent wandering in New York City.



    “In   the notebooks what?”  Morrie  asked. “Come on,  genius, speak. Tell me



why you had to knock him  down and step on the back of his head.”



    In  The Runner  Goes West he becomes himself again, Rothstein wanted to say.



His essential self. Only now Mr. Yellow had shown his face, and he was removing

15
a pistol from the right  front  pocket of his plaid  jacket. He looked sorrowful.



    “You  created one of the greatest characters in American literature, then  shit



on him,”  Morrie said. “A  man who could do that  doesn’t deserve to live.”



    The   anger roared  back like   a  sweet surprise.  “If   you  think   that,”   John



Rothstein said, “you never understood a word I wrote.”



    Morrie  pointed  the pistol. The muzzle was a black eye.



    Rothstein  pointed an arthritis-gnarled   ﬁnger back, as if it were his own gun,



and felt  satisfaction when he saw Morrie  blink  and ﬂinch  a little.   “Don’t   give



me your  dumbass literary  criticism.   I  got  a bellyful   of  that  long  before you



were born. What   are you,  anyway, twenty-two?  Twenty-three? What   do you



know about life, let  alone literature?”



    “Enough  to  know  not  everyone sells out.”  Rothstein  was astounded to see



tears swimming   in  those Irish   eyes. “Don’t  lecture  me  about life,   not  after



spending the last twenty years hiding away from the world  like  a rat in a hole.”



    This    old   criticism—how     dare  you   leave  the    Fame  Table?—sparked



Rothstein’s anger into  full-blown   rage—the  sort of glass-throwing,  furniture-



smashing rage both  Peggy and Yolande would  have recognized—and  he was



glad. Better to die raging  than to do so cringing  and begging.



    “How   will  you turn  my work  into cash? Have you thought of that? I  assume



you have.  I  assume you  know  that  you  might   as  well  try   to  sell  a stolen



Hemingway   notebook,  or   a  Picasso painting.    But   your  friends   aren’t  as



educated as you are, are they? I can tell by the way  they speak. Do they know



what you  know? I’m  sure they  don’t. But  you  sold them  a bill  of  goods. You



showed them a large pie in the sky and told  them  they could each have a slice.



I think  you’re capable of that. I  think  you have a lake of words at your disposal.



But I  believe it’s a shallow lake.”



    “Shut  up. You sound like my  mother.”



    “You’re  a common thief,  my  friend.  And  how stupid  to  steal what you can



never sell.”



    “Shut  up, genius, I’m  warning you.”



    Rothstein   thought,  And  if  he  pulls  the trigger?  No   more pills.  No   more



regrets about the past, and the litter  of broken relationships  along the way like

16
so many  cracked-up  cars. No  more  obsessive writing,   either,  accumulating



notebook  after  notebook  like  little    piles  of  rabbit   turds   scattered along  a



woodland trail.  A  bullet  in  the head would not  be so bad, maybe. Better than



cancer or  Alzheimer’s,  that  prime   horror  of  anyone who  has  spent his  life



making a living  by his wits.  Of course there would be headlines, and I’d gotten



plenty  of those  even before that  damned Time story  . .  .  but  if  he  pulls  the



trigger, I  won’t have to read them.



    “You’re  stupid,” Rothstein said. All  at once he was in a kind  of ecstasy. “You



think   you’re  smarter  than  those  other  two,   but  you’re  not.   At   least they



understand that  cash can be spent.”  He  leaned forward,  staring at  that  pale,



freckle-spattered face.  “You  know   what,  kid?  It’s   guys  like  you  who   give



reading a bad name.”



    “Last  warning,”  Morrie said.



    “Fuck  your  warning.  And  fuck your  mother. Either  shoot me or  get out  of



my house.”



    Morris  Bellamy  shot him.

17
                                                        2009









The ﬁrst  argument  about money  in  the Saubers household—the ﬁrst  one the



kids  overheard, at least—happened  on an  evening in   April.   It  wasn’t  a big



argument, but  even the greatest storms begin as gentle breezes. Peter and Tina



Saubers were in the living   room, Pete  doing homework  and Tina  watching  a



SpongeBob DVD. It  was one  she’d seen before,  many  times,  but   she never



seemed to tire of it.  This  was fortunate, because these days there was no access



to the  Cartoon Network  in  the  Saubers household. Tom Saubers had canceled



the cable service two months ago.



    Tom  and Linda  Saubers were in the  kitchen,  where Tom  was cinching  his



old pack shut after loading  it  up with  PowerBars, a Tupperware ﬁlled with  cut



veggies, two bottles of water, and a can of Coke.



    “You’re  nuts,”  Linda  said. “I  mean, I’ve  always known  you were a Type  A



personality, but this  takes it to  a whole new level. If  you want  to set the alarm



for ﬁve, ﬁne. You can pick up  Todd, be at City Center by  six, and you’ll still   be



ﬁrst in line.”



    “I  wish,”  Tom said. “Todd says there was one of these job fairs in Brook Park



last month, and people started lining  up the day before. The day before, Lin!”



    “Todd  says a lot of things.  And you  listen. Remember when Todd said Pete



and Tina would just love that Monster Truck Jam thingie—”



    “This   isn’t  a Monster  Truck  Jam, or  a concert in  the  park,  or a ﬁreworks



show. This is our lives.”



    Pete  looked up  from  his homework  and brieﬂy  met  his  little   sister’s eyes.



Tina’s shrug was eloquent: Just the parents. He went back to  his algebra. Four



more problems and he could go down  to Howie’s  house. See if Howie had any

18
new comic books. Pete certainly had none to trade; his  allowance had gone the



way of the cable TV.



    In  the kitchen,  Tom had begun to pace. Linda caught up with  him  and took



his arm gently. “I  know it’s our lives,”  she said.



    Speaking  low, partly  so the  kids  wouldn’t   hear and be nervous (she knew



Pete already was), mostly to  lower  the temperature.  She knew how  Tom felt,



and her heart went out to him.  Being  afraid was bad; being humiliated  because



he could no longer  fulﬁll  what  he saw as his primary responsibility  to  support



his family  was worse. And humiliation    really wasn’t the  right  word.  What  he



felt   was  shame. For   the   ten  years  he’d  been  at   Lakefront   Realty,  he’d



consistently been one of their top salesmen, often with his smiling  photo  at the



front  of  the shop.  The money  she brought  in  teaching  third   grade was just



icing on the cake. Then, in the fall  of 2008, the bottom  fell  out of the economy,



and the Sauberses became a single-income family.



    It   wasn’t as if Tom  had been let go  and might  be called back  when things



improved;  Lakefront Realty  was now  an empty  building   with   grafﬁti  on  the



walls and a FOR SALE OR  LEASE sign out  front. The  Reardon brothers, who



had inherited  the  business from  their  father  (and their  father  from  his),  had



been deeply invested in   stocks, and lost  nearly  everything  when  the market



tanked. It  was little  comfort  to  Linda that  Tom’s best friend,  Todd Paine, was



in the same boat. She thought Todd was a dingbat.



    “Have  you  seen the weather forecast? I have. It’s going  to be cold.  Fog off



the lake by morning,  maybe even freezing drizzle. Freezing drizzle, Tom.”



    “Good.   I  hope it  happens. It’ll   keep the  numbers  down and  improve  the



odds.” He  took  her  by  the  forearms, but  gently.  There  was no  shaking,  no



shouting. That  came later. “I’ve  got to  get something,  Lin,  and the  job fair  is



my best shot this spring. I’ve been pounding  the pavement—”



    “I  know—”



    “And   there’s nothing. I mean zilch. Oh, a few jobs down at  the docks, and a



little  construction  at  the shopping  center out  by the  airport,  but  can you  see



me doing  that  kind  of work?  I’m  thirty   pounds overweight  and twenty  years



out  of  shape.  I  might   ﬁnd   something   downtown  this   summer—clerking,

19
maybe—if things  ease up a little . . . but  that  kind of  job would  be low-paying



and probably  temporary.  So Todd  and  me’re going   at  midnight,   and  we’re



going to  stand in  line until   the doors open tomorrow  morning,  and I  promise



you I’m going  to come back with a job that  pays actual money.”



    “And   probably  with   some bug  we can all  catch.  Then we  can scrimp  on



groceries to pay the doctor’s bills.”



    That  was when he grew really angry with   her. “I would  like  a little  support



here.”



    “Tom,  for God’s sake, I’m try—”



    “Maybe  even an  attaboy. ‘Way  to  show some initiative,   Tom.  We’re  glad



you’re going the  extra mile  for the  family, Tom.’  That sort  of thing.  If  it’s  not



too much to ask.”



    “All   I’m  saying—”



    But  the  kitchen  door opened and closed before she could ﬁnish. He’d  gone



out back to smoke a cigarette. When  Pete looked up this  time,  he saw distress



and worry on Tina’s face. She was only eight, after all. Pete smiled and dropped



her a wink.  Tina  gave him  a doubtful  smile  in return,  then  went  back to the



doings in  the  deepwater kingdom  called  Bikini   Bottom,  where dads did  not



lose their  jobs  or  raise their  voices, and  kids  did  not   lose their  allowances.



Unless they were bad, that was.




                                                            •••




Before leaving that  night,  Tom  carried his daughter  up to  bed and kissed her



goodnight.  He added one for Mrs. Beasley, Tina’s favorite doll—for  good luck,



he said.



    “Daddy?  Is everything going  to be okay?”



    “You  bet, sugar,” he said. She remembered that. The conﬁdence in his voice.



“Everything’s  going   to  be  just   ﬁne.  Now   go  to   sleep.”  He  left,   walking



normally. She remembered that, too, because she never saw him walk that way



again.




                                                            •••

20
At  the  top  of  the  steep drive  leading  from  Marlborough  Street  to  the  City



Center parking lot,  Tom said, “Whoa, hold  it, stop!”



    “Man,  there’s cars behind me,” Todd said.



    “This’ll   just  take a second.” Tom raised his phone and snapped a picture of



the people standing  in  line.  There had to  be a hundred  already. At  least that



many. Running above the auditorium   doors was a banner reading 1000 JOBS



GUARANTEED!       And  “We Stand With  the People of Our City!”—MAYOR



RALPH   KINSLER.



    Behind  Todd Paine’s rusty ’04 Subaru, someone laid on his horn.



    “Tommy,   I   hate to   be  a party   pooper  while  you’re  memorializing    this



wonderful occasion, but—”



    “Go,  go. I got  it.”  And,  as Todd drove into the parking lot,  where the spaces



nearest the building  had already been ﬁlled: “I  can’t  wait to  show that  picture



to Linda. You  know what  she said? That if we got  here by six, we’d be ﬁrst  in



line.”



    “Told  you,  my man.  The Toddster does not lie.”  The Toddster  parked. The



Subaru died with  a fart  and a wheeze. “By  daybreak, there’s gonna be, like,  a



couple-thousand people here. TV,  too.  All   the  stations. City  at  Six,  Morning



Report, MetroScan. We might get interviewed.”



    “I’ll   settle for a job.”



    Linda  had  been right  about  one thing,  it   was damp. You could  smell  the



lake in  the air:  that  faintly  sewery aroma. And  it  was almost cold enough  for



him  to see his breath. Posts with  yellow  DO  NOT   CROSS tape had been set



up, folding   the job-seekers back and  forth  like  pleats in  a human  accordion.



Tom and Todd took  their  places between the ﬁnal posts. Others fell  in behind



them at once, mostly men, some in heavy ﬂeece workmen’s jackets, some in Mr.



Businessman topcoats and Mr.  Businessman haircuts that  were  beginning  to



lose their ﬁnely barbered edge. Tom guessed that the line would  stretch all  the



way to the end of the parking  lot  by dawn, and that  would still  be at least four



hours before the doors opened.

21
    His  eye was caught by  a woman with   a baby hanging  off the  front  of her.



They were a couple of zigzags over. Tom wondered how desperate you had to be



to come out in  the  middle  of a cold, damp  night  like  this one with   an infant.



The kiddo  was in  one of those papoose carriers. The woman was talking   to a



burly  man  with   a sleeping  bag  slung  over his  shoulder,  and the  baby  was



peering from   one to  the  other,  like  the  world’s  smallest  tennis fan.  Sort  of



comical.



    “Want   a little  warm-up,  Tommy?” Todd  had taken a pint  of Bell’s from  his



pack and was holding it out.



    Tom  almost said no, remembering Linda’s parting  shot—Don’t you come home



with booze on your breath, mister—and then took the bottle. It was cold out here,



and a short one wouldn’t hurt.  He felt  the whiskey go down, heating  his throat



and belly.



    Rinse  your   mouth  before  you  hit   any  of  the  job   booths,  he  reminded



himself. Guys who smell of whiskey don’t  get hired for anything.



    When   Todd offered him  another  nip—this   was around two  o’clock—Tom



refused. But when he offered again at three, Tom took the bottle.  Checking the



level, he  guessed the Toddster  had been  fortifying   himself  against  the  cold



quite liberally.



    Well,   what the  hell, Tom  thought,  and bit  off quite  a bit  more than  a nip;



this one was a solid mouthful.



    “Atta-baby,”   Todd said, sounding the teensiest bit slurry. “Go  with  your bad



self.”



    Job  hunters  continued  to  arrive,  their  cars nosing  up  from  Marlborough



Street through the thickening  fog. The line  was well past the posts now, and no



longer zigzagging.  Tom  had believed he understood the  economic difﬁculties



currently besetting  the country—hadn’t  he lost  a job himself, a very good job?



—but  as the cars kept coming  and the line  kept  growing  (he could no  longer



see where it ended), he began to get a new and frightening  perspective. Maybe



difﬁculties wasn’t the right word. Maybe the right  word was calamity.



    To  his  right,   in  the  maze of  posts and  tape leading  to  the  doors  of the



darkened auditorium,  the  baby began to cry. Tom  looked around and  saw the

22
man with   the  sleeping  bag holding   the  sides of  the  papoose carrier so  the



woman (God,  Tom thought,   she doesn’t look  like  she’s out  of her  teens yet)



could pull  the kid out.



    “What   the fuck’s zat?” Todd asked, sounding slurrier than ever.



    “A  kid,”   Tom said. “Woman with  a kid. Girl   with  a kid.”



    Todd  peered. “Christ on a pony,” he said. “I  call that  pretty irra  . . . irry  .  . .



you know, not responsible.”



    “Are   you drunk?”   Linda  disliked  Todd,  she didn’t  see his good  side, and



right  now Tom wasn’t sure he saw it, either.



    “L’il   bit.  I’ll   be ﬁne  by  the time  the  doors open. Got  some breath  mints,



too.”



    Tom  thought  of asking  the Toddster if  he’d also brought  some Visine—his



eyes were looking   mighty    red—and  decided  he didn’t    want  to  have  that



discussion just now. He turned his attention  back to where the woman with  the



crying  baby had  been. At  ﬁrst  he  thought  they  were  gone. Then  he looked



lower and saw her sliding  into  the burly  man’s sleeping bag with   the baby on



her chest. The burly  man was holding  the mouth  of the bag open for  her. The



infant was still  bawling his or  her head off.



    “Can’t  you shut that  kid up?”  a man called.



    “Someone ought to call  Social Services,” a woman added.



    Tom  thought  of Tina  at that  age, imagined  her out on  this cold  and foggy



predawn morning,  and restrained an urge  to tell  the  man and woman to  shut



up . . . or better yet,  lend a hand somehow. After all, they were in this together,



weren’t they? The whole screwed-up, bad-luck bunch of them.



    The  crying softened, stopped.



    “She’s  probably    feeding   im,”   Todd   said.   He   squeezed  his  chest   to



demonstrate.



    “Yeah.”



    “Tommy?”



    “What?”



    “You  know Ellen  lost her job, right?”

23
    “Jesus, no. I  didn’t  know that.”   Pretending he didn’t   see the fear in Todd’s



face. Or the glimmering  of moisture  in his eyes. Possibly from the booze or the



cold. Possibly not.



    “They   said they’d  call her  back when things   get better,  but  they  said the



same thing to me, and I’ve been out of work  going  on half a year now. I cashed



my insurance. That’s gone. And  you know  what we got  left  in  the bank? Five



hundred dollars. You  know how  long ﬁve  hundred dollars  lasts when a loaf of



bread at Kroger’s costs a buck?”



    “Not   long.”



    “You’re  fucking  A it  doesn’t. I have to get something here. Have to.”



    “You  will.  We both  will.”



    Todd  lifted   his chin  at  the burly   man, who  now  appeared to be standing



guard over the sleeping bag, so no one would  accidentally  step on the woman



and baby inside. “Think  they’re married?”



    Tom  hadn’t considered it. Now  he did. “Probably.”



    “Then   they both  must  be out  of  work.  Otherwise,  one of em  would  have



stayed home with the kid.”



    “Maybe,”   Tom said,  “they  think   showing  up with   the  baby will   improve



their chances.”



    Todd  brightened.  “The  pity  card!  Not  a bad  idea!” He  held  out  the pint.



“Want a nip?”



    He  took a small one, thinking,  If  I don’t  drink  it,  Todd will.




                                                            •••




Tom was awakened from a whiskey-assisted doze by an exuberant shout: “Life



is  discovered on  other   planets!”  This   sally  was followed   by  laughter   and



applause.



    He  looked around and saw daylight. Thin  and fog-draped, but daylight,  just



the same. Beyond the bank  of auditorium   doors, a fellow  in  gray fatigues—a



man with a job, lucky  fellow—was  pushing a mop-bucket across the lobby.



    “Whuddup?”   Todd asked.

24
    “Nothing,”    Tom said. “Just a janitor.”



    Todd  peered in  the direction  of  Marlborough  Street. “Jesus, and still   they



come.”



    “Yeah,”  Tom said. Thinking,  And  if I’d  listened to Linda,  we’d be at the end



of a line that  stretches halfway to Cleveland. That  was a good thought,  a little



vindication  was always good, but  he wished  he’d said no  to Todd’s pint.   His



mouth tasted like kitty   litter.  Not  that he’d ever actually eaten any, but—



    Someone a couple of  zigzags over—not far  from  the sleeping  bag—asked,



“Is that a Benz? It looks like  a Benz.”



    Tom  saw a long  shape at  the head of  the entrance drive  leading  up  from



Marlborough, its  yellow fog-lamps blazing.  It  wasn’t moving; it  just sat there.



    “What’s  he think  he’s doing?” Todd asked.



    The  driver  of  the  car immediately   behind  must  have wondered the  same



thing,  because he laid on  his horn—a  long,  pissed-off blat  that  made people



stir  and snort  and look  around.  For a  moment  the  car with  the  yellow  fog-



lamps stayed where it  was. Then it   shot forward.  Not  to  the left,  toward  the



now full-to-overﬂowing   parking  lot,  but  directly  at  the people penned within



the maze of tapes and posts.



    “Hey!”   someone shouted.



    The  crowd  swayed backward  in  a tidal   motion.  Tom  was shoved against



Todd, who went down  on his ass. Tom fought for balance, almost found it,  and



then  the  man in   front  of  him—yelling,    no,  screaming—drove his butt  into



Tom’s crotch  and one  ﬂailing   elbow  into  his  chest.  Tom fell   on  top  of  his



buddy, heard the bottle of Bell’s shatter somewhere between them, and smelled



the sharp reek of the remaining whiskey as it ran across the pavement.



    Great,  now I’ll  smell like  a barroom on Saturday night.



    He  struggled to  his feet in time  to see the car—it  was a Mercedes, all right,



a big sedan as gray as this foggy morning—plowing   into  the  crowd, spinning



bodies out of its way as it  came, describing a drunken arc. Blood dripped  from



the grille.  A woman  went skidding  and rolling  across the hood with  her hands



out  and  her  shoes gone. She  slapped at  the   glass, grabbed  at  one  of  the



windshield  wipers,  missed, and  tumbled   off  to  one side.  Yellow  DO  NOT

25
CROSS tapes snapped. A post clanged against the side of the big sedan, which



did not  slow  its roll   in the  slightest.  Tom saw the  front  wheels pass over the



sleeping bag and the  burly  man,  who had been crouched protectively   over it



with  one hand raised.



    Now  it  was coming right  at him.



    “Todd!”  he shouted. “Todd, get up!”



    He   grabbed  at   Todd’s hands,  got   one  of  them,   and  pulled.   Someone



slammed into  him   and he was driven   back to  his  knees. He could  hear the



rogue car’s motor, revving  full-out.   Very  close now. He  tried  to  crawl, and  a



foot clobbered him in  the temple. He saw stars.



    “Tom?”  Todd  was behind him   now. How  had that  happened? “Tom, what



the fuck?”



    A  body landed on top  of him,  and then something else was on top of him, a



huge weight   that  pressed down, threatening   to  turn  him   to  jelly.  His  hips



snapped. They sounded like dry turkey bones. Then the weight  was gone. Pain



with  its own kind  of weight  rushed in to replace it.



    Tom  tried to  raise his head and managed to get it off the pavement just long



enough to  see taillights  dwindling   into   the fog.  He  saw glittering   shards of



glass from  the busted  pint.   He  saw Todd  sprawled on  his back  with   blood



coming out  of his head and pooling  on the  pavement. Crimson tire-tracks  ran



away into the foggy half-light.



    He  thought,  Linda was right.  I should have stayed home.



    He  thought,  I’m  going to die, and maybe that’s for the best. Because, unlike



Todd Paine, I never got around to cashing in my insurance.



    He  thought,  Although  I probably  would have, in time.



    Then,  blackness.




                                                            •••




When Tom  Saubers woke up in the hospital  forty-eight  hours later,  Linda was



sitting  beside him. She was holding his  hand. He asked her if he was going  to



live. She smiled, squeezed his hand, and said you bet your patootie.

26
    “Am   I paralyzed? Tell me the truth.”



    “No,  honey, but you’ve got a lot  of broken bones.”



    “What   about Todd?”



    She looked away, biting  her lips. “He’s  in a coma, but they  think  he’s going



to come out of it eventually. They can tell  by his brainwaves, or something.”



    “There  was a car. I couldn’t get out of the way.”



    “I  know.  You weren’t the only one. It  was some madman. He got away with



it, at least so far.”



    Tom  could have cared less about the man  driving  the  Mercedes-Benz. Not



paralyzed was good, but—



    “How   bad did I get it?  No bullshit—be   honest.”



    She met his eyes but couldn’t hold  them. Once more looking  at the get-well



cards on his bureau, she said, “You . . . well. It’s  going  to be awhile before you



can walk again.”



    “How   long?”



    She raised his  hand, which   was badly scraped, and kissed it.   “They  don’t



know.”



    Tom  Saubers closed his eyes and began to cry. Linda listened to that awhile,



and when  she couldn’t   stand it   anymore, she  leaned forward  and  began to



punch the button  on the morphine  pump.  She kept doing it  until  the  machine



stopped giving. By then  he was asleep.

27
                                                         1978









Morris grabbed a blanket  from  the top shelf of  the bedroom closet and used it



to cover Rothstein,  who now sprawled askew in  the easy chair with  the top  of



his head  gone. The  brains  that  had  conceived Jimmy   Gold,  Jimmy’s  sister



Emma,  and   Jimmy’s  self-involved,   semi-alcoholic   parents—so  much   like



Morris’s  own—were  now  drying   on  the  wallpaper.  Morris   wasn’t  shocked,



exactly, but he was certainly amazed. He had expected some blood, and a hole



between the eyes, but not this gaudy expectoration of gristle and bone. It  was a



failure of imagination,  he supposed, the reason why he could read the giants of



modern American  literature—read   them  and appreciate them—but    never be



one.



    Freddy  Dow   came out  of  the  study  with   a loaded  duffel  bag  over  each



shoulder. Curtis followed,  head down  and carrying  nothing  at all.  All  at  once



he sped up, hooked around  Freddy, and bolted  into  the  kitchen.  The door  to



the backyard banged against the  side of  the house as the wind  took  it.  Then



came the sound of retching.



    “He’s   feelin  kinda   sick,”  Freddy  said.  He   had  a talent   for  stating   the



obvious.



    “You  all right?”  Morris  asked.



    “Yuh.”    Freddy  went  out  through   the  front   door  without   looking   back,



pausing to  pick  up  the  crowbar  leaning  against the  porch  glider.  They  had



come prepared to break in, but  the front  door had been unlocked. The kitchen



door, as well.   Rothstein   had put   all  his  conﬁdence in   the  Gardall  safe, it



seemed. Talk about failures of the imagination.



    Morris   went  into  the  study,  looked at  Rothstein’s  neat desk  and covered



typewriter.  Looked  at  the  pictures  on  the  wall.  Both   ex-wives hung  there,

28
laughing  and young  and beautiful  in   their  ﬁfties  clothes and hairdos.  It  was



sort of  interesting  that  Rothstein  would   keep those discarded women  where



they  could  look  at  him  while   he  was writing,   but   Morris  had  no  time  to



consider this,  or  to  investigate  the  contents  of  the  writer’s  desk,  which  he



would dearly have loved to  do. But  was such investigation even necessary? He



had  the  notebooks,  after   all.  He   had  the   contents  of  the   writer’s   mind.



Everything he’d written  since he stopped publishing eighteen years ago.



    Freddy  had taken  the stacks of  cash envelopes in the ﬁrst  load  (of course;



cash was what Freddy  and Curtis  understood), but  there  were still   plenty  of



notebooks  on  the   shelves of   the   safe. They   were  Moleskines,   the  kind



Hemingway   had   used,  the   kind   Morris    had  dreamed  of   while   in    the



reformatory, where he had also dreamed of becoming  a writer  himself.  But  in



Riverview Youth  Detention  he had  been rationed to  ﬁve sheets of pulpy  Blue



Horse paper each week, hardly  enough to  begin  writing   the Great  American



Novel. Begging  for  more did  no  good. The one time  he’d  offered Elkins,  the



commissary trustee, a  blowjob  for  a dozen extra  sheets, Elkins had  punched



him in  the face. Sort of funny,  when you considered all the non-consensual sex



he had been forced to participate in  during  his nine-month   stretch, usually on



his knees and on more than one occasion with his own dirty undershorts stuffed



in his mouth.



    He   didn’t   hold  his  mother   entirely responsible  for  those rapes,  but  she



deserved her share of the blame. Anita   Bellamy, the  famous history  professor



whose book on Henry Clay Frick  had been nominated for a Pulitzer. So famous



that she presumed to  know  all  about modern  American literature,   as well. It



was an argument  about  the  Gold  trilogy   that  had  sent him   out  one night,



furious and determined to get  drunk. Which   he did, although  he was underage



and looked it.



    Drinking    did  not agree with  Morris.  He  did  things when  he was drinking



that he couldn’t  remember later, and they  were never good things. That  night



it   had   been   breaking   and   entering,    vandalism,   and   ﬁghting     with    a



neighborhood rent-a-cop  who  tried   to  hold  him   until   the  regular  cops got



there.

29
    That  was almost  six  years ago, but the  memory  was still  fresh.  It  had all



been so  stupid.  Stealing  a  car,  joyriding   across town,   then  abandoning  it



(perhaps after pissing all  over  the dashboard) was one thing.  Not   smart, but



with  a little   luck,  you  could walk  away from  that  sort  of deal. But  breaking



into  a place in Sugar Heights?  Double  stupid.  He had wanted  nothing in that



house (at  least nothing   he  could  remember  later).  And  when  he  did  want



something? When he offered up his mouth  for a few lousy sheets of Blue Horse



paper? Punched in  the face. So he’d  laughed, because that  was what  Jimmy



Gold would  have done (at least before Jimmy grew up and sold out for what he



called the Golden Buck),  and what happened next? Punched in the  face again,



even harder. It was the mufﬂed crack of his nose breaking that  had started him



crying.



    Jimmy  never would have cried.




                                                            •••




He was still   looking   greedily at  the  Moleskines when  Freddy Dow  returned



with  the other two duffel  bags. He also had a scuffed leather carryall. “This was



in the pantry.  Along  with  like  a billion  cans of beans and tuna ﬁsh. Go ﬁgure,



huh? Weird guy. Maybe he was waiting  for the  Acropolipse. Come on, Morrie,



put it  in gear. Someone might have heard that shot.”



    “There  aren’t any neighbors. Nearest farm is two miles away. Relax.”



    “Jails’re  full  of guys who were relaxed. We need to get out of here.”



    Morris   began  gathering   up   handfuls  of  notebooks,  but   couldn’t   resist



looking  in  one,  just  to  make sure.  Rothstein  had been  a weird  guy,  and  it



wasn’t out  of the realm  of possibility   that  he had stacked his safe with  blank



books, thinking  he might  write  something in them  eventually.



    But  no.



    This   one, at  least, was loaded  with   Rothstein’s small,  neat  handwriting,



every page ﬁlled, top to bottom  and side to side, the margins as thin as threads.




       —wasn’t sure why it mattered to him and why he couldn’t sleep as the empty boxcar of this late freight bore


   him on through rural oblivion toward Kansas City and the sleeping country beyond, the full belly of America

30
    resting beneath its customary comforter of night, yet Jimmy’s thoughts persisted in turning back to—




     Freddy  thumped   him  on  the shoulder,  and  not  gently.  “Get  your  nose out  of



that  thing    and pack   up.  We  already  got   one puking    his  guts  out   and  pretty



much  useless.”



     Morris   dropped   the  notebook   into   one of  the  duffels   and  grabbed  another



double  handful    without    a  word,   his   thoughts   brilliant     with    possibility.    He



forgot  about  the mess under  the  blanket  in  the  living   room,  forgot  about  Curtis



Rogers  puking    his  guts  in   the  roses  or  zinnias  or   petunias  or   whatever  was



growing   out  back.   Jimmy   Gold!   Headed  west,  in   a boxcar!  Rothstein    hadn’t



been done with   him,  after  all!



     “These’re   full,”    he  told   Freddy.  “Take   them   out.   I’ll   put   the   rest  in   the



valise.”



     “That   what  you call  that  kind   of bag?”



     “I  think   so, yeah.”  He  knew  so. “Go  on. Almost   done here.”



     Freddy   shouldered   the   duffels    by  their    straps,   but   lingered    a  moment



longer. “Are   you sure  about these things?   Because Rothstein  said—”



     “He   was a hoarder  trying    to  save his  hoard.  He  would   have said  anything.



Go on.”



     Freddy  went.  Morris   loaded  the  last batch  of  Moleskines   into  the  valise and



backed out  of the  closet. Curtis   was standing  by  Rothstein’s   desk. He  had taken



off  his  balaclava;  they   all   had.  His   face was  paper-pale   and  there  were  dark



shock circles  around  his eyes.



     “You  didn’t   have  to  kill   him.  You  weren’t   supposed to. It wasn’t  in  the plan.



Why’d   you do  that?”



     Because he  made  me feel  stupid.   Because  he cursed  my  mother   and  that’s



my  job.   Because he  called   me  a kid.   Because  he  needed  to  be  punished   for



turning   Jimmy   Gold  into   one of  them. Mostly  because nobody  with   his  kind  of



talent  has a right    to  hide  it  from   the world.   Only   Curtis   wouldn’t    understand



that.



     “Because it’ll    make  the  notebooks  worth   more  when  we sell  them.”   Which



wouldn’t    be   until     he’d   read   every   word    in    them,    but    Curtis    wouldn’t

31
understand the need to do that,  and didn’t  need to  know. Nor  did  Freddy. He



tried  to sound  patient  and reasonable. “We now  have all  the John  Rothstein



output  there’s ever going to  be. That  makes the unpublished  stuff  even more



valuable. You see that, don’t you?”



    Curtis  scratched one pale cheek. “Well . . . I guess . . . yeah.”



    “Also,   he can never claim  they’re  forgeries when they  turn  up.  Which   he



would have done, just out of  spite. I’ve read a lot about him,  Curtis,  just about



everything, and he was one spiteful motherfucker.”



    “Well   . . .”



    Morrie  restrained himself from  saying That’s an extremely deep subject for a



mind  as shallow as yours. He held  out  the valise instead. “Take  it.  And  keep



your gloves on until we’re in  the car.”



    “You  should have talked it over with  us, Morrie.  We’re your partners.”



    Curtis  started out, then turned  back. “I  got a question.”



    “What   is it?”



    “Do  you know  if New  Hampshire has the death penalty?”




                                                            •••




They took  secondary roads across the narrow chimney of New Hampshire and



into   Vermont.   Freddy   drove   the   Chevy   Biscayne,  which   was  old    and



unremarkable. Morris   rode shotgun  with   a Rand  McNally   open on  his  lap,



thumbing   on  the  dome light   from   time  to  time   to  make  sure they  didn’t



wander off their pre-planned route. He  didn’t  need to remind Freddy to keep to



the speed limit. This  wasn’t Freddy Dow’s ﬁrst rodeo.



    Curtis   lay  in  the  backseat, and soon they  heard the  sound  of his  snores.



Morris considered him  lucky;  he seemed to have puked out  his horror. Morris



thought  it  might   be awhile before he himself  got  another good night’s  sleep.



He kept  seeing the brains dribbling   down the  wallpaper. It  wasn’t the  killing



that  stayed on his  mind,  it  was the  spilled  talent.  A  lifetime   of honing   and



shaping torn apart in  less than a second. All those stories, all those images, and



what came out looked like so much oatmeal. What was the point?

32
    “So  you really think   we’ll  be able to  sell those little   books of his?”  Freddy



asked. He was back to that. “For real money, I mean?”



    “Yes.”



    “And  get  away with it?”



    “Yes, Freddy, I’m  sure.”



    Freddy Dow  was quiet for so long that  Morris thought  the  issue was settled.



Then  he  spoke to   the  subject  again.  Two  words.   Dry  and  toneless.  “I’m



doubtful.”



    Later  on, once more incarcerated—not in Youth  Detention  this time,  either



—Morris  would think,  That’s when I  decided to kill  them.



    But   sometimes  at  night,   when  he  couldn’t  sleep,  his  asshole slick  and



burning  from  one of  a dozen soap-assisted shower-room buggeries, he would



admit  that  wasn’t  the  truth.   He’d  known  all   along. They  were  dumb,  and



career criminals. Sooner or later (probably sooner) one of them would be caught



for something else, and there would be the temptation to  trade what they knew



about this night  for a lighter  sentence or no sentence at all.



    I  just  knew they had to  go, he would  think  on those cellblock  nights  when



the full   belly  of America  rested beneath its  customary comforter  of  night.  It



was inevitable.




                                                            •••




In  upstate New  York,  with   dawn  not  yet  come but  beginning   to  show the



horizon’s dark outline  behind them,  they turned  west on Route 92,  a highway



that roughly  paralleled I-90  as far as Illinois, where it turned  south and petered



out in the industrial   city of Rockford.  The road was still mostly  deserted at this



hour, although  they could  hear (and sometimes see) heavy truck trafﬁc on  the



interstate to their  left.



    They  passed a sign  reading  REST  AREA  2  MI.,   and Morris   thought   of



Macbeth. If it  were to be done, then  ’twere well  it   were done quickly.  Not  an



exact quote, maybe, but close enough for government work.



    “Pull   in there,” he told  Freddy. “I need to drain the dragon.”

33
    “They  probably  got vending  machines, too,” said the puker in  the backseat.



Curtis was sitting  up  now, his hair  crazy around his head. “I  could get behind



some of those peanut butter crackers.”



    Morris  knew he’d have to let  it go if  there were other cars in the rest area. I-



90 had sucked away most of the through trafﬁc that  used to travel on this road,



but  once daybreak arrived, there would   be lots of  local trafﬁc,  pooting   along



from one Hicksville  to the next.



    For  now  the  rest  area was deserted, at  least in   part  because of the  sign



reading OVERNIGHT    RVS PROHIBITED.    They  parked and got  out.  Birds



chirruped in  the  trees, discussing the night  just  past and plans for  the day. A



few leaves—in this part of the world  they were just beginning  to  turn—drifted



down and scuttered across the lot.



    Curtis   went  to   inspect  the  vending  machines while   Morris   and Freddy



walked side by side to the men’s half of the  restroom facility. Morris  didn’t  feel



particularly  nervous. Maybe what  they said was true,  after the  ﬁrst one it  got



easier.



    He  held  the  door for  Freddy with   one hand  and took  the pistol   from  his



jacket  pocket  with   the  other.  Freddy said  thanks  without   looking   around.



Morris  let the  door swing  shut  before raising the  gun.  He placed the  muzzle



less than an inch from  the  back of Freddy Dow’s  head and pulled the  trigger.



The gunshot was a ﬂat  loud bang  in the  tiled  room,  but anyone who  heard it



from a distance would  think  it   was a motorcycle backﬁring  on I-90.  What  he



worried about was Curtis.



    He  needn’t  have. Curtis  was still   standing in   the snack alcove, beneath a



wooden eave and a rustic sign reading ROADSIDE OASIS. In one hand he had



a package of peanut butter crackers.



    “Did    you  hear that?”  he  asked Morris.   Then,  seeing the  gun,  sounding



honestly puzzled: “What’s that  for?”



    “You,”  Morris  said, and shot him in  the chest.



    Curtis   went  down,  but—this   was a shock—did   not  die.  He  didn’t  seem



even close to dying. He squirmed on the pavement. A fallen leaf cartwheeled in



front  of  his nose. Blood  began  to  seep out from  beneath  him.  He  was still

34
clutching  his crackers. He  looked up,  his oily  black  hair hanging  in  his  eyes.



Beyond the screening trees, a truck went past on Route 92, droning east.



    Morris   didn’t  want  to  shoot Curtis  again,  out  here a gunshot  didn’t  have



that hollow  backﬁre sound, and besides, someone might pull  in  at any second.



“If  it   were to  be done, then  ’twere  well  it  were  done quickly,”   he said, and



dropped to one knee.



    “You  shot me,”  Curtis  said, sounding breathless and amazed. “You fucking



shot me, Morrie!”



    Thinking   how  much he hated that nickname—he’d  hated it  all his life,  and



even teachers, who should have known better, used it—he reversed the gun and



began to hammer Curtis’s skull  with  the butt.   Three hard blows accomplished



very little.   It  was only a .38,  after all,  and not heavy enough to  do more than



minor  damage. Blood began  to seep through  Curtis’s  hair  and run  down  his



stubbly  cheeks. He  was groaning,  staring  up  at  Morris  with   desperate blue



eyes. He waved one hand weakly.



    “Stop  it, Morrie!  Stop it,  that hurts!”



    Shit.  Shit, shit,  shit.



    Morris   slid  the  gun  back into  his  pocket.  The  butt  was now  slimy  with



blood and  hair. He  went  to the  Biscayne, wiping  his  hand on  his jacket.  He



opened the  driver’s  door,  saw the  empty  ignition,    and  said fuck  under  his



breath. Whispering  it like  a prayer.



    On  92, a couple of cars went by, then a brown UPS truck.



    He  trotted  back to the men’s room, opened the door, knelt down, and began



to go through  Freddy’s pockets. He found the car keys in the left  front.  He got



to his feet and hurried back to  the snack alcoves, sure a car or truck would have



pulled  in by  now, the  trafﬁc  was getting  heavier all  the time,  somebody would



have to piss out his or  her morning  coffee, and he would have to kill   that one,



too, and possibly  the one after  that.  An  image of  linked  paper dolls  came to



mind.



    No  one yet, though.



    He  got  into  the Biscayne, legally  purchased but now bearing  stolen Maine



license plates. Curtis  Rogers  was slithering   a slow  course down  the cement

35
walkway toward the toilets,  pulling  with  his hands and pushing feebly with  his



feet and leaving  a snail-trail   of blood  behind.  It  was impossible  to  know  for



sure, but Morris  thought  he might  be trying  to reach the pay telephone on the



wall between the mens’ and the ladies’.



    This  wasn’t the  way it  was supposed to go, he thought,  starting  the  car. It



was spur-of-the-moment  stupid,  and he  was probably going  to  be caught.  It



made him think   of what  Rothstein  had said at the end. What  are you, anyway,



twenty-two? Twenty-three? What do you know about life, let alone literature?



    “I  know  I’m  no sellout,” he said. “I know  that much.”



    He  put   the  Biscayne in  drive  and rolled  slowly  forward  toward  the  man



eeling his way up the cement walkway. He  wanted to get out  of here, his brain



was yammering at him to get out of here, but  this had to  be done carefully and



with  no more mess than was absolutely necessary.



    Curtis  looked  around, his eyes wide and horriﬁed  behind the  jungle foliage



of his  dirty   hair.  He  raised  one hand  in  a  feeble stop gesture, then  Morris



couldn’t see him anymore because the hood was in the way. He steered carefully



and continued  creeping  forward.  The  front  of  the  car  bumped  up  over the



curbing. The pine tree air freshener on the rearview mirror  swung and bobbed.



    There was nothing  . . .  and nothing  . . . and then  the car bumped up again.



There  was a  mufﬂed   pop, the  sound  of  a  small  pumpkin    exploding  in   a



microwave oven.



    Morris  cut  the wheel to the left  and there was another bump as the Biscayne



went back into  the parking  area. He looked in the mirror  and saw that Curtis’s



head was gone.



    Well,   no. Not  exactly. It was there, but  all spread out. Mooshed. No  loss of



talent in that mess, Morrie thought.



    He  drove  toward  the exit,  and  when he was sure the  road was empty,  he



sped up. He would need to stop and examine the front of  the car, especially the



tire that  had run over Curtis’s  head, but he wanted to get  twenty  miles farther



down the road ﬁrst. Twenty at least.



    “I  see a car wash in my future,”  he said. This struck  him  funny  (inordinately



funny, and there was a word neither Freddy nor Curtis would  have understood),

36
and he laughed long and loud. He  kept exactly to  the speed limit.  He watched



the odometer turn  the  miles, and even at  ﬁfty-ﬁve,  each revolution  seemed to



take ﬁve minutes.  He was sure the tire  had left  a blood-trail   going  out of  the



exit, but  that would  be gone now. Long gone. Still, it  was time to turn  off onto



the  secondary roads again, maybe  even the  tertiary   ones. The  smart  thing



would be to stop  and throw all  the notebooks—the cash, too—into  the woods.



But he would not  do that. Never would  he do that.



    Fifty-ﬁfty   odds, he told  himself. Maybe better.  After all,  no one saw the car.



Not in  New Hampshire  and not at that rest area.



    He  came to an abandoned restaurant, pulled into the side lot,  and examined



the Biscayne’s front end and right  front  tire.  He  thought  things  looked pretty



good, all  in  all,  but  there was some blood on  the front  bumper.  He  pulled  a



handful of  weeds and wiped it  off. He  got back in  and drove on west. He  was



prepared for roadblocks, but there were none.



    Over  the Pennsylvania state line, in  Gowanda, he found a coin-op car wash.



The brushes brushed, the jets  rinsed, and  the car came out  spanking clean—



underside as well as topside.



    Morris  drove west, headed for the ﬁlthy   little   city residents called the Gem



of the  Great Lakes. He  had to  sit  tight   for awhile,  and he  had to  see an old



friend. Also,  home was the place where, when you go  there, they have to take



you in—the   gospel according  to Robert  Frost—and  that  was especially true



when there was no one to bitch about the return  of the prodigal son. With   dear



old  Dad  in  the   wind  for   years now  and  dear old   Mom  spending  the  fall



semester at  Princeton  guest-lecturing   on  the  robber  barons,  the  house on



Sycamore Street would be empty.  Not  much  of a house for  a fancy-schmancy



teacher—not to mention  a writer  once nominated for  the Pulitzer—but   blame



dear old Dad for that.  Besides, Morris had never minded living   there; that  had



been Mother’s resentment, not his.



    Morris  listened  to the news, but  there was nothing about  the murder of  the



novelist who, according to  that Time cover story, had been “a voice shouting at



the children  of  the silent  ﬁfties  to  wake up and  raise their  own voices.” This



radio silence was good news, but not  unexpected; according to Morris’s source

37
in the  reformatory, Rothstein’s  housekeeper only came in  once a week. There



was also a  handyman,  but  he  only  came  when called.  Morris   and  his  late



partners had picked  their  time  accordingly, which  meant he could  reasonably



hope the body might not  be discovered for another six days.



    That  afternoon,  in  rural  Ohio,  he passed an antiques barn and made a U-



turn. After  a bit  of browsing,  he bought a used trunk for  twenty dollars.  It was



old, but looked sturdy.  Morris considered it a steal.

38
                                                         2010









Pete Saubers’s parents had lots of arguments now. Tina called them the  arkie-



barkies. Pete thought   she had something  there,  because that was what  they



sounded like  when  they  got  going:  ark-ark-ark,   bark-bark-bark.   Sometimes



Pete wanted to go to the head of the stairs and scream down at them to quit  it,



just quit  it.  You’re scaring the kids, he wanted to yell. There are kids in this house,



kids, did you two stupes forget that?



    Pete  was home because Honor  Roll  students  with  nothing   but  afternoon



study hall  and  activity  period  after lunch  were  allowed to  cut  out  early. His



door was open and he heard his father go thumping  rapidly  across the kitchen



on his crutches as soon as his mother’s car pulled  into  the driveway. Pete was



pretty  sure today’s festivities  would  start  with  his  dad saying  Gosh, she was



home  early.   Mom   would   say  he   could   never   seem to    remember  that



Wednesdays were now her early days. Dad would reply that he still wasn’t used



to living   in  this  part  of the  city, saying  it  like  they’d  been forced to relocate



into  deepest  darkest  Lowtown   instead  of  just   the  Tree  Streets section  of



Northﬁeld.  Once the  preliminaries were taken  care of, they could get  down to



the real arking and barking.



    Pete  wasn’t crazy about the  North   Side himself, but  it   wasn’t terrible, and



even at  thirteen   he  seemed to   understand  the  economic  realities  of  their



situation   better   than    his   father.  Maybe   because  he  wasn’t   swallowing



OxyContin pills  four  times a day like his father.



    They  were here  because Grace Johnson Middle School, where  her mother



used to   teach,  had  been closed  as part   of  the   city  council’s   cost-cutting



initiative.  Many  of the GJ  teachers were now unemployed. Linda, at least, had



been hired  as a combination   librarian  and  study  hall  monitor  at  Northﬁeld

39
Elementary. She got out early on Wednesdays because the library closed at noon



that  day. All   the  school libraries  did.  It   was another cost-cutting   initiative.



Pete’s dad railed at this, pointing out  that the council  members hadn’t cut their



salaries, and calling them a bunch of goddam Tea Party hypocrites.



    Pete  didn’t   know  about  that.   What   he knew  was  that  these  days Tom



Saubers railed at everything.




                                                            •••




The Ford Focus, their  only  car now, pulled  up in  the  driveway and Mom  slid



out, dragging  her old scuffed briefcase. She skirted the patch of ice that always



formed in  the shady spot under the front  porch  downspout. It  had been Tina’s



turn to  salt that down,  but she had forgotten, as usual. Mom climbed  the steps



slowly, her shoulders low. Pete hated to  see her walk that  way, as if she had a



sack of bricks on her back. Dad’s crutches, meanwhile, thumped a double-time



rhythm  into the living   room.



    The  front  door  opened. Pete waited. Hoped  for  something nice  like  Hiya,



honey, how was your morning?



    As if.



    He  didn’t  exactly want to eavesdrop on the arkie-barkies, but  the house was



small and it  was practically impossible  not to  overhear . . . unless he left,  that



is, a strategic  retreat he made more and  more frequently  this  winter.  And  he



sometimes felt that, as the older kid,  he had a responsibility to listen. Mr. Jacoby



liked to  say in history class that knowledge was power, and Pete supposed that



was why  he felt  compelled  to  monitor   his parents’  escalating war  of words.



Because each arkie-barkie stretched the fabric of the marriage thinner, and one



of these days it would tear wide open. Best to be prepared.



    Only  prepared for what? Divorce? That  seemed the most likely outcome. In



some ways things might be better  if they did  split  up—Pete felt  this more and



more strongly, although  he had not yet articulated  it  as a conscious thought—



but what  exactly would  a divorce  mean in  (another of Mr.  Jacoby’s faves) real



world terms? Who would stay and who would  go? If  his dad went,  how would

40
he get along without   a car when  he could hardly  walk?  For that  matter, how



could either of them afford to go? They were broke already.



    At  least Tina wasn’t here for today’s spirited  exchange of parental views; she



was still  in  school, and probably  wouldn’t  be  home directly  after. Maybe  not



until  dinner.  She had ﬁnally   made a friend,  a bucktoothed   girl  named Ellen



Briggs, who  lived on the  corner of Sycamore and Elm. Pete thought  Ellen had



the brains  of  a hamster, but  at  least Tina  wasn’t  always moping  around  the



house, missing  her friends  in  the  old  neighborhood,  and  sometimes crying.



Pete hated it when Tina cried.



    Meanwhile,   silence your  cell phones and  turn  off  your  pagers, folks.  The



lights  are going down  and this  afternoon’s installment  of We’re in Deep Shit is



about to begin.



    TOM:   “Hey, you’re home early.”



    LINDA   (wearily):  “Tom, it’s—”



    TOM:   “Wednesday, right. Early day at the library.”



    LINDA:   “You’ve been smoking in  the house again. I can smell it.”



    TOM   (getting   his sulk  on):  “Just  one. In  the  kitchen.  With   the  window



open. There’s ice on the  back steps, and I  didn’t  want  to  risk a  tumble.  Pete



forgot to salt them  again.”



    PETE   (aside to  the  audience): “As   he should  know,   since he  made the



schedule of chores, it’s actually Tina’s week to salt. Those OxyContins he takes



aren’t just pain pills,  they’re stupid pills.”



    LINDA:    “I  can still  smell  it,  and you  know the  lease speciﬁcally prohibits



—”



    TOM:   “All  right,  okay, I get it.  Next  time  I’ll  go outside and risk falling  off



my crutches.”



    LINDA:   “It’s  not  just the lease, Tommy. The secondary smoke is bad for the



kids. We’ve discussed that.”



    TOM:   “And  discussed it, and discussed it . . .”



    LINDA   (now  wading into  even deeper water): “Also, how much does a pack



of cigarettes cost these days? Four-ﬁfty? Five dollars?”



    TOM:   “I smoke a pack a week, for Christ’s sake!”

41
    LINDA    (overrunning  his  defenses with an arithmetic   Panzer assault): “At



ﬁve a pack,  that’s over  twenty  dollars  a month.  And  it   all  comes out of  my



salary, because it’s the only one—”



    TOM:   “Oh, here we go—”



    LINDA:   “—we’ve  got now.”



    TOM:   “You never get tired of rubbing  that  in, do you? Probably think  I  got



run over on purpose. So I could laze around the house.”



    LINDA   (after a long pause): “Is there any wine left? Because I could use half



a glass.”



    PETE  (aside): “Say there is, Dad. Say there is.”



    TOM:   “It’s   gone.  Maybe you’d  like   me  to  crutch  my  way  down  to  the



Zoney’s and get another bottle. Of  course you’d have to give me an advance on



my allowance.”



    LINDA    (not crying,  but  sounding  on the  verge): “You act as though  what



happened to you is my fault.”



    TOM   (shouting): “It’s  nobody’s fault, and that’s what drives me crazy! Don’t



you get that? They never even caught the guy who did it!”



    At   this  point  Pete decided he’d  had enough. It   was a stupid  play. Maybe



they didn’t   see that, but  he  did.  He  closed his lit   book.  He  would  read the



assigned story—something   by  a  guy   named  John  Rothstein—that    night.



Right  now he had to get out and breathe some uncontentious air.



    LINDA   (quiet):  “At  least you didn’t  die.”



    TOM   (going totally  soap opera now): “Sometimes I think it  would  be better



if I had. Look at me—hooked  through the bag on Oxy, and still  in  pain because



it doesn’t work  for shit anymore unless I take enough to half-kill   me. Living  on



my wife’s  salary—which  is a thousand  less than it  used to  be, thanks  to  the



fucking Tea-Partiers—”



    LINDA:   “Watch  your lang—”



    TOM:   “House? Gone. Motorized  wheelchair? Gone.  Savings? Almost used



up. And now I  can’t even have a fucking cigarette!”



    LINDA:   “If  you think   whining  will  solve anything, be my guest, but—”

42
    TOM   (roaring): “Is  whining  what  you call it?  I  call it  reality. You  want me



to drop my pants so you can get a good look at what’s left of my legs?”



    Pete ﬂoated downstairs in his stocking  feet. The living  room was right  there



at the bottom,  but  they didn’t   see him; they were face-to-face and busy acting



in  a dipshit   play  no  one would  ever  pay to  see. His  father  hulking   on  his



crutches, his eyes red and his cheeks scruffy with beard, his mother holding her



purse in front  of her breasts like a shield and biting   her lips. It  was awful,  and



the worst part? He loved them.



    His  father  had neglected to mention  the Emergency Fund, started a month



after the  City   Center  Massacre by the  town’s  one  remaining  newspaper, in



cooperation with  the three local  TV  stations. Brian  Williams  had even done a



story about it  on NBC Nightly  News—how this tough little   city  took care of its



own when disaster struck,  all  those caring hearts, all  those helping  hands, all



that blah-blah-blah,   and now a word  from  our sponsor. The Emergency Fund



made everybody feel good for like  six days. What  the media  didn’t  talk  about



was how little   the fund  had actually  raised, even with  the  charity  walks, and



the  charity  bike   rides,  and  a concert  by  an  American Idol  runner-up.   The



Emergency Fund  was  thin   because times were  hard  for  everyone. And,   of



course, what was raised had to be divided among so many. The Saubers family



got a check for twelve hundred  dollars, then one for ﬁve  hundred, then one for



two.  Last  month’s   check,  marked  FINAL    INSTALLMENT,    came  to   ﬁfty



dollars.



    Big  whoop.




                                                            •••




Pete slipped into the  kitchen, grabbed his boots and jacket, and went  out. The



ﬁrst thing  he noticed was that there wasn’t any ice on the back stoop; his father



had been totally lying  about that.  The day was too warm for ice, at  least in the



sun. Spring  was still   six weeks away, but  the  current  thaw  had gone  on for



almost a week, and the only snow left in  the backyard was a few crusty patches



under the trees. Pete crossed to the fence and let himself out through the gate.

43
    One  advantage to   living   in  the  Tree Streets  of  the  North   Side was the



undeveloped land behind  Sycamore. It  was easily as big  as a city  block,  ﬁve



tangled acres of undergrowth  and scrubby  trees running  downhill  to  a frozen



stream. Pete’s dad said the land had been that way for a long time  and was apt



to  stay that  way  even longer,  due  to  some endless legal  wrangle  over who



owned it  and what could  be built  on it.  “In  the  end, no one wins these things



but the lawyers,” he told  Pete. “Remember that.”



    In   Pete’s opinion,  kids  who  wanted  a little   mental   health vacation  from



their parents also won.



    A   path  ran  through   the  winter-barren   trees on  a  meandering  diagonal,



eventually coming  out  at  the Birch   Street Rec, a longtime   Northﬁeld   youth



center whose days were now numbered. Big kids  hung  out on and around  the



path  in  warm   weather—smoking  cigarettes,  smoking  dope,  drinking    beer,



probably laying   their  girlfriends—but    not  at this  time  of  year. No  big  kids



equaled no hassle.



    Sometimes Pete took his sister along  the path if  his mother  and father were



seriously into it,  as was more and more often the case. When they arrived at the



Rec, they’d  shoot baskets or watch  videos or  play  checkers. He didn’t   know



where he could take her once the Rec closed. There was no place else except for



Zoney’s, the convenience store. On his own,  he mostly  just  went as far as the



creek, splooshing stones into  it  if   it  was ﬂowing,  bouncing  them  off  the  ice



when it was frozen. Seeing if he could make a hole and enjoying the quiet.



    The  arkie-barkies were bad  enough, but  his worst  fear was that  his dad—



now always  a little   high   on the  Oxy  pills—might     someday actually  take a



swing at his mother.  That would  almost certainly  tear the thin-stretched  cloth



of the marriage. And  if  it  didn’t? If  she put up  with  being hit?  That  would be



even worse.



    Never  happen, Pete told himself. Dad never would.



    But  if  he did?




                                                            •••

44
Ice still  covered the stream this afternoon, but  it looked  rotten, and there were



big  yellow  patches in  it,   as if  some giant  had  stopped to  take  a leak.  Pete



wouldn’t  dare walk on it.   He wouldn’t  drown  or anything  if  the  ice gave way,



the water was only  ankle deep, but  he  had no wish  to  get home and  have to



explain why his  pants and socks were wet. He sat on a fallen  log, tossed a few



stones (the small  ones bounced  and  rolled,  the  big  ones went   through  the



yellow patches), then just looked at the sky for  awhile. Big  ﬂuffy  clouds ﬂoated



along up  there,  the kind   that  looked  more like   spring  than winter,   moving



from west to  east. There was one that looked like  an old woman  with  a hump



on her  back  (or maybe  it   was a packsack); there  was a  rabbit;  there  was a



dragon; there was one that looked like a—



    A  soft, crumbling   thump  on his  left distracted  him.  He turned  and saw an



overhanging piece of the embankment,  loosened by a week’s worth of melting



snow, had given  way,  exposing the  roots  of a  tree that   was already leaning



precariously. The space created by the fall looked like a cave, and unless he was



mistaken—he supposed it  might   be just  a  shadow—there was something  in



there.



    Pete walked  to the  tree, grabbed one of its leaﬂess branches, and bent for a



better look. There was something there, all right,   and it looked pretty  big.  The



end of a box, maybe?



    He  worked his way down  the bank, creating makeshift  steps by digging the



heels of his boots into the muddy earth. Once he was below the site of the little



landspill,  he  squatted.  He  saw cracked black  leather  and metal   strips  with



rivets in  them.  There was a handle the  size of a saddle-stirrup  on the  end. It



was a trunk. Someone had buried a trunk here.



    Excited  now  as well as curious,  Pete grabbed the handle  and yanked. The



trunk  didn’t  budge.  It  was socked in  good and tight.   Pete gave another tug,



but just  for form’s sake. He wasn’t going to get it  out. Not  without  tools.



    He  hunkered with  his hands dangling between his thighs, as his father often



used to do before his hunkering  days came to an end. Just staring at the trunk



jutting   out   of  the  black,   root-snarled  earth.  It   was  probably  crazy  to  be



thinking  of Treasure Island (also “The Gold Bug,” a story they’d read in English

45
the year before), but he was thinking  of it.  And  was it crazy? Was it really? As



well  as  telling   them   that  knowledge   was power,  Mr.   Jacoby stressed the



importance  of  logical   thinking.    Wasn’t   it   logical   to  think    that   someone



wouldn’t   bury  a  trunk   in  the  woods  unless there  was  something  valuable



inside?



    It   had  been there for  awhile,  too.  You  could  tell  just  looking   at  it.  The



leather was cracked, and gray in places instead of black. Pete had an idea that if



he pulled  on the handle  with  all  his might   and kept pulling,   it  might   break.



The metal binding-strips  were dull  and lacy with rust.



    He  came to  a decision  and pelted  back up  the  path to  the  house. He  let



himself in  through  the gate, went to  the kitchen  door, listened. There were no



voices and the TV was off. His father had probably  gone into the bedroom (the



one on the  ﬁrst  ﬂoor,  Mom  and Dad  had  to  sleep there even though  it   was



small, because Dad couldn’t  climb  stairs very  well  now) to  take  a nap. Mom



might  have gone in  with   him,  they  sometimes made up  that  way, but  more



likely  she was in the laundry  room  that doubled  as her study, working  on her



résumé and applying for  jobs online.  His  dad might   have given up  (and Pete



had to admit  he had his reasons), but his mom  hadn’t. She wanted to  go back



to teaching full-time,   and not just for the money.



    There  was a little  detached garage, but his  mom never put  the  Focus in it



unless there was going  to  be a  snowstorm. It   was full  of  stuff  from  the  old



house that they had no room for in  this  smaller rented place. His dad’s toolbox



was in there  (Tom had listed  the  tools on  craigslist or  something,  but  hadn’t



been able to get what  he considered a fair price  for them),  and some of Tina’s



and his old toys, and the tub  of salt with   its scoop, and a few lawn-and-garden



implements leaning  against the back  wall.  Pete selected a spade and ran back



down the  path, holding  it  in  front  of  him  like  a soldier with  his  riﬂe  at high



port.



    He  eased his way almost  all  the way  down to  the  stream, using the  steps



he’d made,  and went  to  work   on  the little    landslide  that  had  revealed the



trunk.  He shoveled as much of the  fallen earth  as he could back into  the hole

46
under the tree. He wasn’t able to  ﬁll  it  all the  way to the gnarled  roots, but he



was able to cover the end of the trunk, which was all he wanted.



    For now.




                                                            •••




There was some arking and barking  at  dinner, not  too much,  and Tina  didn’t



seem to  mind,  but   she came into  Pete’s room  just   as he was  ﬁnishing  his



homework. She was wearing her footy pajamas and dragging Mrs.  Beasley, her



last and most important   comfort-doll.  It  was as if she had returned  to the  age



of ﬁve.



    “Can  I get in  your bed for awhile, Petie? I had a bad dream.”



    He  considered making  her  go back, then  decided (thoughts  of  the  buried



trunk  ﬂickering  in his  mind) that  to do so might  be bad luck.  It  would also be



mean, considering the dark hollows under her pretty eyes.



    “Yeah,  okay, for awhile. But  we’re not  going to  make a practice of it.”   One



of their mom’s favorite phrases.



    Tina  scooted across the bed  until   she was against the  wall—her   sleeping



position of  choice, as if she planned to  spend the night.  Pete closed his Earth



Science book, sat down beside her, and winced.



    “Doll   warning,  Teens. Mrs. Beasley’s head is halfway up my butt.”



    “I’ll   scrunch her down by my feet. There. Is that  better?”



    “What   if she smothers?”



    “She doesn’t breathe, stupid.  She’s just a doll and Ellen  says pretty soon I’ll



get tired of her.”



    “Ellen’s  a doofus.”



    “She’s  my  friend.”   Pete realized  with   some amusement that   this  wasn’t



exactly disagreeing. “But she’s probably right. People grow up.”



    “Not   you.  You’ll  always be my  little   sister. And  don’t  go to  sleep. You’re



going back to your room in  like ﬁve minutes.”



    “Ten.”



    “Six.”

47
    She considered. “Okay.”



    From  downstairs came a mufﬂed groan, followed  by the thump  of  crutches.



Pete tracked the  sound into  the  kitchen,  where Dad would  sit  down,  light   a



cigarette, and blow the  smoke out the back door. This would  cause the furnace



to run, and what the  furnace burned, according to their mother, was not oil  but



dollar bills.



    “Are  they gonna get divorced, do you think?”



    Pete was doubly shocked: ﬁrst by  the question, then by the  adult matter-of-



factness of it.  He  started to  say No,  course not,  then thought   how  much he



disliked movies where adults lied to children,  which  was like all movies.



    “I  don’t  know. Not  tonight,  anyway. The courts are closed.”



    She giggled.  That  was probably good.  He waited  for her  to say something



else.  She  didn’t.    Pete’s  thoughts    turned   to   the    trunk    buried   in    the



embankment, beneath that  tree.  He  had managed to  keep those thoughts  at



arm’s length while he did  his homework, but .  . .



    No,  I didn’t.  Those thoughts were there all the time.



    “Teens? You better not go to sleep.”



    “I’m   not . . .”  But damn close, from the sound.



    “What   would  you do if you found  a treasure? A buried treasure chest full of



jewels and gold doubloons?”



    “What   are doubloons?”



    “Coins  from olden days.”



    “I’d    give  it   to   Daddy  and  Mommy.   So  they  wouldn’t    ﬁght   anymore.



Wouldn’t  you?”



    “Yes,”  Pete said. “Now go back to your own bed, before I have to carry you.”




                                                            •••




Under his insurance plan, Tom Saubers only qualiﬁed for  therapy twice a week



now. A special van came for him  every Monday and Friday at  nine o’clock and



brought  him  back at four  in  the afternoon,  after hydrotherapy  and a meeting



where people with  long-term   injuries  and chronic  pain sat around  in  a circle

48
and talked about their  problems. All  of which  meant that the house was empty



for seven hours on those days.



    On  Thursday  night,   Pete went  to  bed complaining   of a  sore throat.  The



next morning  he woke up saying it was still  sore, and now he thought he had a



fever, too.



    “You’re  hot, all  right,”  Linda  said after putting  the inside  of her wrist to  his



brow.  Pete certainly   hoped so,  after  holding   his  face two   inches from   his



bedside lamp  before going   downstairs. “If   you’re  not  better  tomorrow,   you



probably should see the doctor.”



    “Good   idea!”  Tom  exclaimed  from   his  side of  the  table,   where he  was



pushing around some scrambled eggs. He looked like he hadn’t slept at  all. “A



specialist, maybe! Just let me call  Shorty the Chauffeur. Tina’s got  dibs on the



Rolls for  her  tennis lesson at  the country  club,  but  I  think   the  Town Car  is



available.”



    Tina  giggled.  Linda  gave Tom  a hard look,  but  before she could  respond,



Pete said he didn’t feel all  that bad, a day at home would  probably ﬁx  him  up.



If that  didn’t,  the weekend would.



    “I  suppose.” She sighed. “Do you want something to eat?”



    Pete did,  but  thought  it  unwise  to say so, since he was supposed to have a



sore throat. He  cupped  his hand  in  front  of his  mouth  and  created a cough.



“Maybe just some juice. Then  I guess I’ll  go upstairs and try  to get some more



sleep.”




                                                            •••




Tina left   the  house ﬁrst,  bopping  down  to   the corner  where she  and Ellen



would discuss whatever weirdo stuff nine-year-olds discussed while waiting  for



the schoolbus. Then  Mom  for her  school, in  the  Focus. Last of all  Dad,  who



made his way down the walk  on his crutches to the  waiting  van. Pete watched



him  go  from  his bedroom  window,  thinking    that  his  father seemed smaller



now. The hair sticking  out around his Groundhogs cap had started to turn gray.

49
    When   the van was gone, Pete  threw on  some clothes, grabbed one of  the



reusable grocery shopping bags Mom kept  in  the pantry,  and went out  to  the



garage. From his  father’s toolbox  he selected a hammer and chisel,  which  he



dumped into  the bag. He  grabbed the spade, started out, then  came back and



took the crowbar as well. He had never been a Boy Scout, but believed in being



prepared.




                                                            •••




The morning  was cold enough for him  to  see his breath, but by  the time  Pete



dug enough of the  trunk  free to  feel he had a chance of pulling  it  out,  the air



had warmed up to well  above freezing and he was sweating under his coat. He



draped it over a low  branch and peered around to make sure he was still  alone



here by the stream (he had done this several times). Reassured, he got some dirt



and rubbed his palms with  it, like  a batter getting  ready to hit.  He grasped the



handle at the end of the  trunk,  reminding  himself  to  be ready if it  broke. The



last thing  he wanted to do was tumble  down the  embankment ass over teapot.



If he fell into  the stream, he really might  get sick.



    Probably  nothing  in  there  but  a bunch  of moldy  old  clothes, anyway .  . .



except why would  anyone bury  a trunk  ﬁlled  with  old  clothes? Why  not  just



burn them, or take them  to the Goodwill?



    Only  one way to ﬁnd out.



    Pete took  a deep breath, locked it down  in his  chest, and pulled. The trunk



stayed put, and the old handle creaked warningly, but Pete was encouraged. He



found he could  now shift  the  trunk  from  side to  side a little.   This made him



think  of Dad tying  a thread around one of Tina’s baby teeth and giving  a brisk



yank when it wouldn’t  come out on its own.



    He  dropped  to  his  knees (reminding  himself   he would  do  well  to  either



wash these jeans later on or bury them  deep in his  closet) and peered into the



hole. He saw a root had closed around the rear of the trunk like a grasping arm.



He grabbed the  spade, choked up on the  handle, and chopped at it.  The  root



was thick   and he  had to   rest several times,  but   ﬁnally  he  cut  all  the  way

50
through. He  laid the  spade aside and grabbed the handle again. The trunk was



looser now, almost ready to  come out.  He glanced at  his watch.  Quarter past



ten. He thought   of Mom  calling  home on her break to  see how he was doing.



Not  a big  problem,  when he  didn’t  answer she’d just  think  he  was sleeping,



but  he reminded himself  to  check the  answering machine when he  got back.



He grabbed the  spade and began to dig  around the  trunk,  loosening  the dirt



and cutting  a few smaller roots. Then he took hold of the handle again.



    “This  time,  you mother,”  he told it.  “This  time for sure.”



    He  pulled.   The trunk   slid  forward  so suddenly  and easily  that  he would



have fallen over if his feet hadn’t been braced far apart. Now it  was leaning out



of the  hole,  its  top  covered with  sprays and clods  of dirt.   He  could  see the



latches on  the  front,   old-fashioned  ones,  like   the  latches on   a workman’s



lunchbox.  Also  a  big  lock.  He  grabbed  the  handle  again  and this   time  it



snapped. “Fuck a duck,”   Pete said, looking  at  his  hands. They were  red and



throbbing.



    Well,  in  for a penny, in  for a pound (another of Mom’s favorite  sayings). He



gripped  the sides of  the  trunk  in  a  clumsy bearhug  and rocked back  on his



heels. This time it  came all the way out  of its  hidey-hole and into  the sunlight



for the  ﬁrst  time  in  what  had to  be years, a damp and dirty   relic  with  rusty



ﬁttings.  It  looked to  be two  and a half feet  long and at  least a foot and a half



deep. Maybe more. Pete hefted the end and guessed it might weigh as much as



sixty pounds, half  his own  weight,  but  it  was impossible to tell   how much  of



that  was the contents  and how  much  the trunk   itself.  In  any  case, it wasn’t



doubloons; if the  trunk  had been ﬁlled  with  gold,  he wouldn’t  have been able



to pull  it out  at all, let  alone lift it.



    He  snapped the  latches up,  creating little   showers of  dirt,  and  then  bent



close to the lock, prepared to bust it off with  the  hammer and chisel. Then, if it



still  wouldn’t   open—and  it   probably  wouldn’t—he’d    use the  crowbar. But



ﬁrst . . . you never knew until  you tried  . . .



    He  grasped the  lid   and it   came up  in  a squall  of  dirty   hinges. Later  he



would  surmise  that  someone had  bought   this  trunk   secondhand, probably



getting  a good deal because the key was lost, but  for  now he  only stared. He

51
was unaware of the blister on one palm,  or the ache in  his back and thighs,  or



the  sweat trickling    down  his  dirt-streaked  face. He   wasn’t thinking    of  his



mother, his father, or his sister. He  wasn’t thinking  of  the arkie-barkies, either,



at least not then.



    The  trunk   had been  lined  with   clear plastic  to  protect  against moisture.



Beneath it he could see piles of what looked like notebooks. He used the side of



his palm as a windshield  wiper and cleared a crescent of ﬁne droplets from the



plastic. They  were notebooks, all right,   nice ones with  what almost  had to be



real leather covers. It looked like  a hundred at least. But  that  wasn’t all. There



were also envelopes like the  ones his mom  brought  home when  she cashed a



check. Pete pulled  away the plastic  and stared into  the  half-ﬁlled  trunk.   The



envelopes had GRANITE  STATE BANK   and “Your Hometown Friend!” printed



on them. Later he would notice  certain differences between these envelopes and



the ones his mom got at Corn  Bank and Trust—no  email address, and nothing



about using your  ATM  card for withdrawals—but   for now  he only stared. His



heart was beating so hard he saw black dots pulsing in front  of his eyes, and he



wondered if he was going to faint.



    Bullshit   you are, only girls do that.



    Maybe,  but  he felt  decidedly  woozy, and realized part  of the  problem  was



that since opening  the trunk   he had forgotten  to  breathe. He  inhaled deeply,



whooshed it out,  and inhaled again.  All  the way down  to  his toes, it  felt  like.



His head cleared, but his heart was whamming  harder than ever and his hands



were shaking.



    Those bank envelopes will  be empty. You know that,  don’t you? People ﬁnd



buried money in books and movies, but not in  real life.



    Only  they didn’t  look empty. They looked stuffed.



    Pete  started to  reach for  one, then gasped when  he heard rustling   on the



other  side of  the  stream.  He  whirled   around  and  saw two  squirrels   there,



probably thinking   the weeklong thaw meant spring  had arrived, making merry



in the dead leaves. They raced up a tree, tails twitching.



    Pete turned  back to  the trunk  and grabbed one of the  bank envelopes. The



ﬂap wasn’t sealed. He ﬂipped  it  up with  a ﬁnger  that  felt  numb, even though

52
the temperature  now  had  to  be riding   right   around  forty.  He  squeezed the



envelope open and looked inside.



    Money.



    Twenties and ﬁfties.



    “Holy   Jesus God Christ in heaven,” Pete Saubers whispered.



    He  pulled  out  the  sheaf of bills  and  tried  to  count, but  at  ﬁrst  his hands



were shaking too badly and  he dropped some. They ﬂuttered  in the  grass, and



before he scrambled them  up,  his overheated brain  assured him that  Ulysses



Grant had actually winked  at him from  one of the bills.



    He  counted. Four  hundred dollars. Four  hundred in  this  one envelope, and



there were dozens of them.



    He  stuffed  the bills  back into  the  envelope—not an easy job, because now



his hands were shaking worse than Grampa Fred’s in the last year or two of his



life. He  ﬂipped  the envelope into the  trunk  and looked around,  eyes wide and



bulging.  Trafﬁc sounds that  had always seemed faint and far and unimportant



in this  overgrown  stretch of ground  now  sounded close and threatening. This



was not Treasure Island; this was a city of over a million  people, many now out



of work, and they would  love to have what was in this trunk.



    Think,   Pete Saubers told  himself. Think,   for God’s sake. This  is  the most



important  thing  that’s ever happened to you, maybe the most important   thing



that ever will  happen to you, so think hard and think  right.



    What  came to mind  ﬁrst  was Tina, snuggled up next to  the wall in  his bed.



What would you do if you found a treasure? he had asked.



    Give it  to Daddy and Mommy, she had replied.



    But  suppose Mom wanted to give it  back?



    It   was  an important   question.  Dad  never  would—Pete   knew  that—but



Mom  was different.   She had  strong  ideas about  what   was right   and  what



wasn’t. If  he showed them this  trunk  and what was inside  it,  it  might  lead to



the worst arkie-barkie about money ever.



    “Besides, give it  back to who?” Pete whispered. “The bank?”



    That  was ridiculous.

53
    Or  was it?  Suppose the money  really was pirate  treasure, only  from  bank



robbers instead  of  buccaneers? But then   why  was it   in  envelopes, like   for



withdrawals? And what  about all those black notebooks?



    He  could  consider such things  later, but  not  now; what  he had to  do now



was act. He looked at  his watch  and saw it  was already quarter to  eleven. He



still  had time, but  he had to use it.



    “Use  it  or lose it,”  he whispered, and began tossing the Granite  State Bank



cash envelopes into the cloth grocery bag that held the  hammer and chisel. He



placed the bag on top  of  the embankment  and covered it  with  his jacket.  He



crammed the plastic wrap back into  the trunk,   closed the lid, and muscled the



trunk  back into   the hole.  He paused to  wipe  his forehead, which  was greasy



with  dirt  and sweat, then  seized the spade and began to shovel like a maniac.



He got the trunk   covered—mostly—then  seized the bag and his jacket and ran



back along the  path toward  home. He  would  hide the  bag in  the back  of his



closet, that  would  do to  start  with,   and see if  there was a message from his



mother on  the answering machine.  If  everything  was okay on the  Mom front



(and if Dad hadn’t  come home early from therapy—that  would be horrible),  he



could whip   back to  the  stream and do  a better  job  of concealing  the trunk.



Later he might  check out the notebooks, but  as he made his way home on that



sunny February morning, his only  thought about  them was that there might  be



more money envelopes mixed in with them. Or  lying  beneath them.



    He  thought,  I’ll  have to take a shower. And clean the dirt out of the bathtub



after, so she doesn’t ask what I  was doing outside  when I  was supposed to be



sick. I have to be really careful, and I can’t tell anyone. No one at all.



    In  the shower, he had an idea.

54
                                                         1978









Home is the place that  when you go there, they  have to take you in,  but when



Morris  arrived   at  the  house  on  Sycamore Street,  there  were  no  lights   to



brighten  the  evening gloom  and  no  one to  welcome him  at  the  door. Why



would there be? His mother was in New  Jersey, lecturing about how a bunch of



nineteenth-century  businessmen had  tried  to  steal  America.  Lecturing  grad



students who  would  probably  go on  to  steal everything  they  could lay  their



hands on as they chased the Golden Buck. Some people would undoubtedly say



that Morris  had chased a few Golden Bucks of his own in New Hampshire, but



that wasn’t so. He hadn’t gone there for money.



    He  wanted the Biscayne in the garage and out of sight.  Hell,  he wanted the



Biscayne gone, but that   would  have to   wait.  His   ﬁrst  priority    was Pauline



Muller.   Most  of  the   people on   Sycamore Street were  so  wedded  to  their



televisions once prime time  started  that they  wouldn’t  have noticed  a UFO if



one landed on their  lawn,  but  that  wasn’t true  of  Mrs. Muller;   the Bellamys’



next-door neighbor had raised snooping to a ﬁne art. So he went there ﬁrst.



    “Why,   look who it  is!”  she cried when she opened the door . . . just as if she



hadn’t  been peering  out  her  kitchen  window   when  Morris   pulled  into   the



driveway. “Morrie Bellamy!  Big  as life and twice as handsome!”



    Morris  produced his best aw-shucks smile. “How you doin,  Mrs. Muller?”



    She gave him  a hug  which  Morris  could  have done without   but  dutifully



returned. Then she turned  her head, setting her wattles in  motion,  and yelled,



“Bert! Bertie! It’s Morrie  Bellamy!”



    From  the living  room came a triple grunt  that might   have been how ya doin.



    “Come  in,  Morrie!  Come in!  I’ll  put  on  coffee! And guess what?” She gave



her unnaturally  black  eyebrows a horrifyingly  ﬂirtatious   wiggle.  “There’s Sara

55
Lee poundcake!”



    “Sounds delicious, but  I just  got back from  Boston. Drove straight  through.



I’m  pretty   beat. Just  didn’t   want  you  to  see lights  next  door  and  call  the



police.”



    She gave a monkey-shriek of laughter. “You’re  so thoughtful! But you always



were. How’s your mom, Morrie?”



    “Fine.”



    He  had no idea. Since his stint  in reform  school at seventeen and his failure



to  make a  go of  City   College  at twenty-one,   relations  between Morris   and



Anita  Bellamy  amounted  to  the occasional telephone call.  These were frosty



but  civil.  After   one ﬁnal  argument  the  night   of his  arrest for  breaking  and



entering and assorted other goodies, they had basically given up on each other.



    “You’ve  really put  on some muscle,” Mrs. Muller   said. “The girls  must love



that. You used to be such a scrawny thing.”



    “Been building   houses—”



    “Building   houses! You! Holy gosh! Bertie! Morris has been building houses!”



    This  produced a few more grunts from the living  room.



    “But   then the work  dried up, so I came back here. Mom said I was welcome



to use the place unless she managed to rent it, but I probably won’t stay long.”



    How  right  that turned  out to be.



    “Come  in the living  room,  Morrie, and say hello to Bert.”



    “I  better  take a rain check.” To forestall further  importuning,   he called, “Yo,



Bert!”



    Another   grunt,  unintelligible    over the  laugh  track  accompanying Welcome



Back, Kotter.



    “Tomorrow,  then,”  Mrs. Muller  said, her eyebrows once more waggling. She



looked like   she was doing  a Groucho  imitation.    “I’ll   save the poundcake.  I



might  even whip some cream.”



    “Great,”  Morris  said. It  wasn’t likely Mrs.  Muller  would die of a heart attack



before tomorrow, but  it  was possible; as another great poet said, hope springs



eternal in the human breast.

56
                                                            •••




The keys to  house and garage were where they’d always been, hanging under



the eave to  the  right  of  the  stoop. Morris  garaged the  Biscayne and  set the



trunk  from  the antiques barn on  the concrete. He itched  to  get at that  fourth



Jimmy  Gold  novel  right  away, but  the  notebooks were  all  jumbled  up,  and



besides, his eyes would cross before he read a single page of  Rothstein’s tiny



handwriting;  he really was bushed.



    Tomorrow,  he promised himself. After  I  talk  to Andy, get  some idea of how



he wants to handle this, I’ll  put them  in order and start reading.



    He  pushed the trunk  under his  father’s old worktable  and covered it with  a



swatch of plastic  he found in  the  corner. Then he went  inside and  toured the



old homestead. It  looked  pretty  much  the same, which  was lousy. There was



nothing in  the fridge  except a jar of pickles and a box of baking soda, but there



were a few  Hungry   Man  dinners  in  the  freezer. He  stuck  one in  the  oven,



turned the dial to  350, then climbed  the stairs to his old bedroom.



    I   did  it,   he thought.   I  made it.   I’m  sitting    on eighteen  years’ worth  of



unpublished John Rothstein manuscripts.



    He  was too tired   to feel exultation,   or even much pleasure. He  almost fell



asleep in the shower, and again  over some really crappy  meatloaf and instant



potatoes. He shoveled it  in,  though,  then trudged  back up  the stairs. He  was



asleep forty seconds after his head hit the pillow, and didn’t  wake up until  nine



twenty the following   morning.




                                                            •••




Well rested and with  a bar of sunlight pouring  across his childhood bed, Morris



did  feel exultation,   and  he  couldn’t   wait  to   share it.   Which   meant  Andy



Halliday.



    He  found khakis  and a nice madras shirt in his  closet, slicked back his hair,



and peeked brieﬂy  into  the  garage to make  sure all was well  there.  He  gave



Mrs. Muller  (once more looking out  through  the curtains) what he hoped was a



jaunty  wave  as  he  headed down   the  street  to   the   bus  stop.  He   arrived

57
downtown  just  before ten, walked  a block,  and peered down  Ellis  Avenue to



the  Happy  Cup,  where  the  outside  tables  sat  under  pink   umbrellas.  Sure



enough, Andy  was  on his  coffee break.  Better  yet,  his  back was  turned,  so



Morris could approach undetected.



    “Booga-booga!” he cried,   grabbing   the  shoulder  of  Andy’s  old   corduroy



sportcoat.



    His   old  friend—really   his only  friend   in  this  benighted  joke  of  a city—



jumped and wheeled around. His coffee overturned and spilled. Morris  stepped



back. He had meant to startle Andy, but  not that much.



    “Hey,  sor—”



    “What   did  you do?” Andy  asked in a low, grinding   whisper. His  eyes were



blazing behind  his glasses—hornrims Morris  had always thought  of  as sort of



an affectation. “What  the fuck did  you do?”



    This  was not the  welcome Morris had anticipated.  He  sat down. “What  we



talked about.”  He studied  Andy’s face and saw none of the amused intellectual



superiority his  friend usually  affected. Andy looked  scared. Of Morris? Maybe.



For himself? Almost certainly.



    “I  shouldn’t  be seen with y—”



    Morris   was carrying  a  brown  paper  bag he’d  grabbed  from  the  kitchen.



From it  he  took  one of Rothstein’s  notebooks and put  it  on  the  table, being



careful to avoid  the puddle  of spilled  coffee. “A  sample. One of a great many.



At  least a hundred and ﬁfty.  I  haven’t had a chance to do a count  yet, but  it’s



the total jackpot.”



    “Put   that  away!”  Andy  was still  whispering   like  a character in  a bad  spy



movie. His  eyes shifted  from  side to  side, always returning  to  the  notebook.



“Rothstein’s murder  is on the front  page of the New York Times and all over the



TV, you idiot!”



    This  news came as a shock. It was supposed to be at least three days before



anyone found the writer’s body, maybe as long as six. Andy’s reaction was even



more of a shock. He looked like a cornered rat.



    Morris   ﬂashed what he  hoped was a fair  approximation  of  Andy’s  I’m-so-



smart-I-bore-myself  smile.  “Calm  down.  In  this  part  of  town  there  are kids

58
carrying   notebooks   everywhere.”   He   pointed    across  the   street   toward



Government Square. “There goes one now.”



    “Not   Moleskines, though!  Jesus! The housekeeper knew the kind Rothstein



used to  write  in,  and  the paper  says the safe in  his  bedroom was open  and



empty! Put .  . . it .  . . away!”



    Morrie  pushed it  toward Andy  instead, still  being careful to avoid the coffee



stain.  He  was growing   increasingly  irritated   with   Andy—PO’d,    as Jimmy



Gold would  have said—but  he also felt a perverse sort of pleasure at watching



the man  cringe in  his  seat, as if  the notebook  were a vial  ﬁlled   with  plague



germs.



    “Go  on,  have a look. This  one’s mostly poetry. I  was paging  through  it  on



the bus—”



    “On  the bus? Are you insane?”



    “—and   it’s not  very good,”  Morris  went  on as if  he hadn’t  heard, “but  it’s



his, all  right.   A holograph  manuscript.  Extremely  valuable. We  talked  about



that. Several times. We talked about how—”



    “Put  it  away!”



    Morris  didn’t  like  to admit  that  Andy’s paranoia was catching, but it  sort of



was. He returned the notebook  to the bag  and looked at his old  friend  (his one



friend)  sulkily.   “It’s  not  like   I  was  suggesting we  have a  sidewalk  sale, or



anything.”



    “Where   are the  rest?”  And  before  Morris  could  answer: “Never  mind.   I



don’t want to  know. Don’t  you understand how hot  those things are? How hot



you are?”



    “I’m   not  hot,”  Morris  said, but he was, at  least in the  physical sense; all at



once his cheeks and the nape of his neck were burning.  Andy  was acting as if



he’d shit his pants instead of  pulling  off the  crime of the  century. “No  one can



connect me to Rothstein, and I know it’ll  be awhile before we can sell them to a



private collector. I’m  not stupid.”



    “Sell  them to a col—  Morrie, do you hear yourself?”



    Morris  crossed his arms and stared at his friend. The man who used to be his



friend,  at  least. “You   act as if   we  never talked  about  this.   As if   we  never

59
planned it.”



    “We  didn’t  plan anything! It  was a story we were telling ourselves, I thought



you understood that!”



    What   Morris  understood was Andy  Halliday   would  tell  the police  exactly



that if  he, Morris,   were caught. And  Andy  expected him to be caught. For the



ﬁrst time  Morris  realized consciously that Andy was no intellectual  giant  eager



to  join  him   in  an  existential  act  of  outlawry   but  just   another  nebbish.  A



bookstore clerk only a few years older than Morris himself.



    Don’t  give me your dumbass literary criticism, Rothstein had said to Morris in



the last two minutes of his life.  You’re a common thief, my friend.



    His  temples began to throb.



    “I   should  have known  better.  All   your  big  talk   about  private  collectors,



movie stars and Saudi princes and I don’t  know who-all.  Just a lot  of big  talk.



You’re nothing but  a blowhard.”



    That  was a hit,   a palpable hit.  Morris  saw it  and  was glad, just  as he had



been when he had managed to stick it to his mother  once or twice in their  ﬁnal



argument.



    Andy  leaned forward,  cheeks ﬂushed, but before he could speak, a waitress



appeared with a wad of napkins. “Let  me get that  spill,”  she said, and wiped it



up. She was young,  a  natural  ash-blonde, pretty  in   a pale way,  maybe even



beautiful. She smiled at Andy.  He returned a pained grimace, at the  same time



drawing away from her as he had from the Moleskine notebook.



    He’s  a  homo,  Morris  thought   wonderingly.   He’s a  goddam  homo.  How



come I didn’t  know that? How  come I never saw? He might as well be wearing



a sign.



    Well,   there were a lot of things  about Andy  he’d never seen, weren’t there?



Morris thought   of something  one of the guys on the  housing job  liked  to say:



All  pistol and no bullets.



    With   the waitress gone, taking  her toxic  atmosphere of girl with   her, Andy



leaned forward again. “Those collectors  are out there,”  he said. “They  pile  up



paintings,  sculpture, ﬁrst  editions  . .  . there’s an oilman  in  Texas who’s got a



collection of early wax-cylinder  recordings worth a million   dollars, and another

60
one who’s got  a complete run  of  every western, science ﬁction,  and shudder-



pulp  magazine published between  1910  and 1955.  Do  you think   all  of  that



stuff was legitimately  bought  and sold? The fuck  it  was. Collectors are insane,



the worst  of them  don’t  care if the  things  they  covet were stolen or  not,  and



they most assuredly do not want to share with the rest of the world.”



    Morris   had  heard  this  screed before,  and  his  face must  have  shown it,



because Andy  leaned  even farther   forward.  Now   their   noses were  almost



touching.  Morris  could  smell  English  Leather, and wondered if  that   was the



preferred aftershave of homos. Like a secret sign, or something.



    “But   do you think  any of those guys would listen to me?”



    Morris  Bellamy, who  was now seeing Andy Halliday  with  new eyes, said he



guessed not.



    Andy  pooched out his  lower lip.  “They  will  someday, though. Yeah. Once I



get my own shop and build up  a clientele. But that’ll  take years.”



    “We  talked about waiting  ﬁve.”



    “Five?”  Andy  barked a laugh and drew back to his side of the table again. “I



might  be able to open my shop in ﬁve years—I’ve got my eye on a little place in



Lacemaker Lane, there’s  a  fabric  store  there  now  but   it   doesn’t do   much



business—but it  takes longer than that to  ﬁnd big-money  clients and establish



trust.”



    Lots of buts,  Morris thought,  but  there were no buts before.



    “How   long?”



    “Why   don’t  you try  me on those notebooks around the turn  of the  twenty-



ﬁrst  century, if  you  still   have them? Even if   I  did have a  call list   of private



collectors  right   now,  today,  not   even  the  nuttiest    of  them   would   touch



anything so hot.”



    Morris   stared at him,  at  ﬁrst  unable to  speak. At  last he said,  “You never



said anything like  that when we were planning—”



    Andy   clapped  his  hands to  the  sides  of  his  head and  clutched  it.   “We



planned nothing! And  don’t  you  try  to  lay  this  off on  me!  Don’t  you  ever! I



know you, Morrie.  You didn’t  steal them  to sell them,  at least not until  you’ve



read them. Then I  suppose you might  be willing   to  give some of them  to the

61
world, if  the price was right.  Basically, though,  you’re just batshit-crazy  on the



subject of John Rothstein.”



    “Don’t   call me that.”  His temples were throbbing  worse than ever.



    “I   will   if  it’s  the  truth,   and  it  is.  You’re  batshit-crazy  on the  subject  of



Jimmy Gold,  too. He’s why you went to  jail.”



    “I   went to jail  because of my mother. She might  as well have locked me up



herself.”



    “Whatever.  It’s water under the bridge.  This is now. Unless you’re lucky, the



police are going to  be paying you a visit  very soon, and they’ll  probably  arrive



with  a search warrant. If  you have those notebooks when they  knock  on your



door, your goose will be cooked.”



    “Why   would  they  come to me? Nobody  saw us, and my partners  . . .”  He



winked. “Let’s just  say that dead men tell no tales.”



    “You  . . . what? Killed  them? Killed  them,  too?” Andy’s face was a picture of



dawning horror.



    Morris   knew  he shouldn’t  have  said that,  but—funny   how  that   but kept



coming around—Andy  was just being such an asshole.



    “What’s   the name of  the town  that  Rothstein  lived  in?”  Andy’s  eyes were



shifting  around  again, as if  he expected the  cops to  be closing  in  even now,



guns drawn. “Talbot Corners, right?”



    “Yes,  but  it’s  mostly  farms. What   they  call the  Corners is  nothing  but   a



diner, a grocery store, and a gas station where two state roads cross.”



    “How   many times were you there?”



    “Maybe   ﬁve.”  It  had  actually  been closer to  a  dozen, between 1976  and



1978. Alone at ﬁrst,  then with  either Freddy or Curtis  or both.



    “Ever  ask questions about the  town’s most famous resident while  you  were



there?”



    “Sure,  once or twice.  So what? Probably  everybody who ever stops at  that



diner asks about—”



    “No,   that’s where you’re wrong. Most out-of-towners  don’t give a shit  about



John Rothstein.  If  they’ve got questions, it’s  about when  deer season starts or



what kind  of ﬁsh they  could catch in  the local lake.  You don’t think   the locals

62
will  remember you when the police ask if there have been any strangers curious



about the  guy   who  wrote  The Runner? Curious strangers  who  made repeat



visits? Plus you have a record, Morrie!”



    “Juvenile.  It’s sealed.”



    “Something  as big  as this,  the seal might   not hold.  And  what  about your



partners? Did either of them have records?”



    Morris  said nothing.



    “You   don’t  know  who  saw you,  and  you  don’t  know  who  your  partners



might  have bragged to about the big  robbery they  were going to  pull  off. The



police could  nail you  today, you idiot.  If  they do  and you bring  my  name up,



I’ll  deny we  ever talked about  this.  But  I’ll   give you  some advice. Get rid  of



that.” He  was pointing   to the  brown  paper bag. “That  and all  the  rest of the



notebooks. Hide them  somewhere. Bury them!  If  you do that,  maybe you  can



talk  your way out  of it,   if push  comes to shove. Always supposing you didn’t



leave ﬁngerprints, or something.”



    We  didn’t,   Morris  thought.  I  wasn’t stupid.  And   I’m  not  a cowardly big-



talking  homo, either.



    “Maybe  we can revisit  this,”  Andy  said, “but  it  will   be much later  on, and



only if  they don’t grab  you.” He  got up. “In  the  meantime, stay clear of me, or



I’ll  call the police myself.”



    He  walked away fast with his head down, not looking  back.



    Morris   sat there. The  pretty  waitress returned to  ask if  she could  get him



anything. Morris  shook his head. When she left, he picked up the  bag with the



notebook inside it and walked away himself. In  the opposite direction.




                                                            •••




He knew what  the pathetic  fallacy was, of course—nature echoing the feelings



of human  beings—and understood it   to be the  cheap, mood-creating trick   of



second-rate writers, but  that  day it   seemed to be true.  The morning’s  bright



sunlight  had both mirrored and ampliﬁed  his feeling of exultation,  but  by noon

63
the sun was only a dim circle behind a blear of clouds, and by three o’clock that



afternoon, as his worries multiplied,  the day grew dark and it began to drizzle.



    He  drove the Biscayne out to the mall  near the airport,  constantly watching



for police  cars. When one came roaring  up  behind him  on  Airline   Boulevard



with  its blues ﬂashing, his  stomach froze and his heart seemed to climb all the



way into his mouth.  When it  sped by without  slowing,  he felt no relief.



    He  found a news broadcast on BAM-100.  The  lead story was about a peace



conference between Sadat and Begin  at  Camp David  (Yeah,  like  that’ll   ever



happen,  Morris   thought   distractedly),   but   the  second  one  concerned the



murder of noted American writer  John Rothstein.  Police were saying it was the



work of  “a gang of  thieves,” and  that a number  of  leads were being followed.



That was probably just PR bullshit.



    Or  maybe not.



    Morris  didn’t  think   he could be tracked down  as a result of interviews with



the half-deaf old codgers who hung out at the Yummy  Diner in  Talbot Corners,



no matter what Andy  thought,  but  there was something else that troubled him



far more.  He,  Freddy, and Curtis  had  all  worked  for Donahue  Construction,



which was building  homes in both Danvers and North  Beverly. There were two



different  work crews, and for  most  of Morris’s  sixteen months, spent carrying



boards and nailing   studs, he  had been  in  Danvers while  Curtis   and Freddy



toiled at  the other site, ﬁve  miles away. Yet for awhile they  had worked on the



same crew, and even after they were split up, they usually managed to eat lunch



together.



    Plenty  of people knew this.



    He  parked the Biscayne with  about a thousand others at the JC Penney end



of the mall,  wiped down  every surface he had touched, and left the keys in the



ignition.   He  walked away  fast, turning   up  his  collar and  yanking  down  his



Indians  cap.  At   the  mall’s  main   entrance, he  waited   on  a  bench until    a



Northﬁeld  bus  came, and dropped his ﬁfty   cents into the  box. The  rain grew



heavier and the ride  back was slow, but  he didn’t   mind.  It  gave him  time  to



think.

64
    Andy   was cowardly and  full  of  himself,  but  he had  been right  about  one



thing.  Morris  had to hide  the notebooks, and he had to do  so immediately, no



matter  how much  he  wanted to  read  them,  starting  with   that  undiscovered



Jimmy Gold  novel. If the  cops did come and he didn’t have the notebooks, they



could do nothing  . . . right?  All  they’d have would be suspicion.



    Right?




                                                            •••




There was no one  peeking through   the curtains  next  door, which  saved him



another conversation with  Mrs. Muller,   and perhaps having to explain  that  he



had sold his car. The  rain had become a downpour, and  that was good.  There



would be no  one rambling  around in  the undeveloped land between Sycamore



and Birch. Especially after dark.



    He   pulled  everything   out  of  the  secondhand trunk,   resisting  an  almost



overpowering urge to  look into  the notebooks. He  couldn’t  do that,  no matter



how much he wanted  to, because once he started, he wouldn’t be able to stop.



Later, he thought. Must  postpone your gratiﬁcations,  Morrie. Good advice, but



spoken in  his mother’s  voice, and  that  started his  head throbbing   again. At



least he wouldn’t   have to postpone his  gratiﬁcations  for  long;  if  three  weeks



went by with  no visits from  the police—a month  at most—he would  be able to



relax and begin his researches.



    He  lined  the trunk   with  plastic  to make  sure the contents would  stay dry,



and put   the  notebooks, including   the  one  he’d  taken  to  show  Andy,  back



inside.  He   dumped  the   money  envelopes  on  top.   He   closed the   trunk,



considered, and opened it again. He pawed the plastic  aside and took a couple



of hundred dollars from  one of the  bank envelopes. Surely no cop would think



that an excessive amount, even if he were searched. He could tell  them  it  was



his severance pay, or something.



    The  sound of  the  rain  on the  garage roof was not  soothing.  To  Morris  it



sounded like skeletal  tapping  ﬁngers, and made his  headache worse. He froze



every time  a car went  by, waiting   for headlights  and pulsing   blue strobes to

65
splash up  the driveway.  Fuck  Andy  Halliday   for  putting   all  these pointless



worries in my head, he thought. Fuck  him and the homo horse he rode in on.



    Only  the  worries might  not  be pointless. As afternoon wound down  toward



twilight,   the  idea  that  the  cops could  put  Curtis  and  Freddy together  with



Morris  Bellamy  seemed more and more  likely.  That  fucking   rest area! Why



hadn’t he dragged the bodies into  the woods, at  least? Not that  it  would  have



slowed the cops down  much  once someone pulled in,  saw all  the  blood, and



called 911. The cops would have dogs . . .



    “Besides,” he told  the trunk,  “I  was in a hurry. Wasn’t I?”



    His  father’s hand  dolly  was still  standing in  the  corner, along with  a rusty



pick  and two  rusty  shovels. Morris  tipped  the trunk   endwise onto  the dolly,



secured the straps, and peered out of the garage window. Still  too much  light.



Now  that  he was so close to  getting  rid   of the  notebooks and the  money—



Temporarily, he soothed himself, this  is just  a temporary measure—he became



more and more sure that the cops would be here soon. Suppose Mrs. Muller had



reported him as acting suspicious? It didn’t  seem likely, she was thicker than an



oak plank, but who really  knew?



    He  forced himself  to  stuff  down  another frozen dinner,  thinking   it  might



soothe his head. It made the headache worse, instead. He looked in his mother’s



medicine cabinet for aspirin  or Advil,  and found .  . . nothing.  Fuck you, Mom,



he thought. Really. Sincerely. Fuck . . . you.



    He  saw her smile. Thin as a hook, that smile.



    It   was  still   light   at  seven o’clock—goddam  daylight   saving  time,  what



genius thought that up?—but  the  windows next door were still  dark.  That was



good, but Morris  knew the Mullers  might  be back at any time.  Besides, he was



too nervous to wait  any longer. He rooted  around in  the front  hall closet until



he found a poncho.



    He  used the garage’s rear door and yanked the  dolly  across the back lawn.



The grass was wet, the ground underneath spongy, and it was hard going.  The



path he had  used so many times  as a kid—usually  going  to  the  Birch  Street



Rec—was sheltered by  overhanging  trees,  and  he was able  to  make  better

66
progress. By the time  he got to  the little   stream that  ﬂowed diagonally  across



this block-sized square of waste ground, full dark had arrived.



    He  had brought  a ﬂashlight  and used it  in  brief  winks to  pick  out a likely



location on the  embankment of the  stream, a safe distance from the path. The



dirt  was soft, and it was easy digging until he got to  the tangle of roots from an



overhanging tree. He  thought  about  trying  a different  spot,  but  the hole was



almost big enough for the trunk   already, and he was damned if he was going to



start all  over again, especially when this  was just  a temporary precaution.  He



laid the ﬂashlight  in  the hole,  propping  it  on a rock so the beam shone on the



roots, and chopped through them with  the pick.



    He  slid  the  trunk  into   the hole  and shoveled the dirt   back around  it  and



over it quickly.  He ﬁnished  by tamping  it  down with  the ﬂat  of the shovel. He



thought  it would  be okay. The bank wasn’t particularly  grassy, so the bald spot



wouldn’t  stand  out.  The  important  thing   was that  it   was out  of  the  house,



right?



    Right?



    He  felt  no relief  as he dragged the dolly back along  the path. Nothing   was



working  out  the way it   was supposed to, nothing.  It  was as if malignant  fate



had come  between him   and the  notebooks,  just  as fate  had  come between



Romeo and Juliet.  That  comparison seemed both ludicrous  and perfectly apt.



He was a lover. Goddam Rothstein had jilted  him with  The Runner Slows Down,



but that  didn’t  change the fact.



    His  love was true.




                                                            •••




When he got  back to  the house, he went immediately  to  the shower, as a boy



named Pete Saubers would do  many years later  in  this  very same bathroom,



after visiting  that  very same embankment and overhanging tree. Morris  stayed



in until  his  ﬁngers were pruney and the hot water was gone, then dried off  and



dressed in fresh clothes from his bedroom closet. They looked childish  and out



of fashion to him, but  they still  ﬁt  (more or less). He put his dirt-smeared  jeans

67
and sweatshirt  in  the  washer, an act  that  would   also be  replicated by  Pete



Saubers years later.



    Morris  turned  on the TV,  sat in his  father’s old easy chair—his mother said



she kept it  as a reminder,  should she ever be tempted  into  stupidity   again—



and saw the usual helping  of ad-driven  inanity.  He  thought  that  any of those



ads (jumping   laxative  bottles,  primping    moms, singing   hamburgers)  could



have been written   by Jimmy   Gold,  and that   made his  headache worse than



ever. He decided to  go down  to Zoney’s and  get some Anacin.  Maybe even a



beer or two. Beer wouldn’t  hurt.  It  was the hard stuff  that  caused trouble, and



he’d learned his lesson on that score.



    He  did get the  Anacin, but the  idea of drinking  beer in a house full of books



he didn’t  want  to read and TV   he didn’t  want  to watch  made him  feel worse



than ever. Especially when the  stuff  he did  want to  read was so maddeningly



close. Morris rarely  drank in  bars, but  all  at once he felt  that  if  he didn’t  get



out and ﬁnd  some company and hear some fast music, he would go completely



insane. Somewhere out in this rainy  night,  he was sure there was a young lady



who wanted to dance.



    He  paid for his  aspirin and asked the young guy at the  register, almost idly,



if there was a bar with live music that  he could get to on the bus.



    The  young guy said there was.

68
                                                         2010









When Linda  Saubers got home that  Friday afternoon at  three thirty,  Pete was



sitting  at  the kitchen  table  drinking   a cup  of cocoa. His  hair was still   damp



from the shower. She hung her coat on one of the hooks by  the back door, and



placed the inside of her wrist  against his forehead again. “Cool as a cucumber,”



she pronounced. “Do you feel better?”



    “Yeah,”   he  said.  “When    Tina  came  home,  I   made  her  peanut  butter



crackers.”



    “You’re  a good brother. Where is she now?”



    “Ellen’s,  where else?”



    Linda  rolled her eyes and Pete laughed.



    “Mother  of  Mercy, is that the dryer I hear?”



    “Yeah.  There were a bunch of clothes in  the basket, so I  washed em. Don’t



worry, I followed the  directions on the door, and they came out okay.”



    She bent down and kissed his temple. “Aren’t  you the little  do-bee?”



    “I  try,”  Pete said. He closed his right hand to hide the blister  on his palm.




                                                            •••




The ﬁrst  envelope came on a snow-showery Thursday  not quite  a  week later.



The address—Mr. Thomas Saubers, 23 Sycamore Street—was typed. Stuck on



the upper-right-hand   corner was a forty-four-cent  stamp featuring  the Year of



The Tiger.  There  was no  return   address on the  upper  left.   Tom—the  only



member of Clan Saubers home at midday—tore  it  open in  the hall,  expecting



either some sort of  come-on or  another past due notice.  God knew  there had



been plenty of those lately. But it  wasn’t a come-on, and it wasn’t a past due.

69
    It  was money.



    The  rest of the mail—catalogues for expensive stuff they couldn’t  afford and



advertising  circulars   addressed to   OCCUPANT—fell     from   his  hand   and



ﬂuttered  around  his  feet,  unnoticed.  In   a low  voice,  almost  a  growl,  Tom



Saubers said, “What the fuck is this?”




                                                            •••




When Linda  came home, the money  was sitting  in  the middle  of  the kitchen



table. Tom  was seated before the neat little   pile  with  his  chin  resting on  his



folded hands. He looked like a general considering a battle plan.



    “What’s  that?”  Linda asked.



    “Five  hundred dollars.”  He  continued to  look at  the bills—eight   ﬁfties  and



ﬁve twenties. “It  came in the mail.”



    “From  who?”



    “I  don’t  know.”



    She dropped  her briefcase, came to  the  table, and  picked  up the  stack of



currency. She counted  it,   then   looked  at  him   with   wide  eyes. “My    God,



Tommy! What  did the  letter say?”



    “There  was no letter. Just the money.”



    “But   who would—”



    “I  don’t  know, Lin. But  I know  one thing.”



    “What?”



    “We  can sure use it.”




                                                            •••




“Holy  shit,”   Pete said when  they told   him.  He  had stayed late  at school for



intramural  volleyball, and didn’t  come in until  almost dinnertime.



    “Don’t   be vulgar,”  Linda said, sounding  distracted. The money  was still  on



the kitchen table.



    “How   much?” And when his father told  him:  “Who  sent it?”

70
    “That’s  a good question,”  Tom  said. “Now  for  Double  Jeopardy, where the



scores can really change.” It  was the ﬁrst  joke Pete had  heard him  make in  a



very long time.



    Tina  came in.   “Daddy’s got  a  fairy  godmother,  that’s what  I  think.   Hey,



Dad, Mom! Look at  my ﬁngernails! Ellen  got sparkle polish, and she shared.”



    “Excellent  look for  you, my little   punkin,”  Tom said.



    First  a joke,  then a compliment.   Those things  were all it  took  to  convince



Pete that he  had done the right   thing.  Totally  the right   thing.  They  couldn’t



exactly send it back,  could they? Not  without   a return  address, they couldn’t.



And  by  the  way,  when  was the  last  time   Dad  had  called  Teens his  little



punkin?



    Linda  gave her son a piercing look. “You don’t know anything  about this, do



you?”



    “Uh-uh,   but can I have some?”



    “Dream   on,”  she said, and  turned  to  her husband,  hands on hips.  “Tom,



someone’s obviously made a mistake.”



    Tom  considered this, and when he spoke, there was no arking  and barking.



His voice was calm. “That doesn’t seem likely.” He  pushed the envelope toward



her, tapping his name and address.



    “Yes, but—”



    “But   me no buts, Lin. We owe the oil  company, and before we pay them, we



have to pay down your MasterCard. Or you’re going to lose it.”



    “Yes, but—”



    “Lose the  credit card, lose your credit  rating.”  Still  not  arking  and barking.



Calm  and reasonable. Persuasive. To Pete  it   was as if   his  father  had  been



suffering from  a high  fever that  had just broken.  He  even smiled. Smiled and



touched her hand.  “It  so happens that  for now,  your credit  rating  is  the only



one we’ve got, so we  have to protect  it.  Besides, Tina could  be right.   Maybe



I’ve got a fairy godmother.”



    No,  Pete thought.  A fairy godson is what you’ve got.



    Tina  said, “Oh, wait!  I know  where it really came from.”

71
    They  turned  to  her. Pete felt  suddenly  warm  all over.  She couldn’t know,



could  she? How could  she? Only  he’d  said  that  stupid   thing   about buried



treasure, and—



    “Where,  hon?” Linda  asked.



    “The  Emergency Fund thingy.  It  must have got some more money, and now



they’re spreading it out.”



    Pete let  out a soundless breath of air, only realizing as it passed his lips that



he had been holding it.



    Tom  rufﬂed   her hair.  “They   wouldn’t   send cash, punkin.   They’d  send a



check. Also a bunch of forms to sign.”



    Pete went to  the stove. “I’m making  more cocoa. Does anyone want some?”



    Turned  out they all did.




                                                            •••




The envelopes kept coming.



    The  price of postage went  up, but  the amount  never changed. An extra six



thousand dollars per  annum, give  or take.  Not  a huge  sum, but  tax-free  and



just enough to keep the Saubers family from drowning in  debt.



    The  children were forbidden to  tell anyone.



    “Tina   will  never be able  to keep it  to  herself,”  Linda told  Tom  one night.



“You know  that,  don’t  you? She’ll tell  her  idiot  friend,  and Ellen  Briggs  will



broadcast it to everyone she knows.”



    But   Tina  kept  the secret, partly   because her brother, whom  she idolized,



told her she would  never be allowed in his room  again if she spilled the  beans,



and mostly because she remembered the arkie-barkies.



    Pete  stowed the  cash envelopes in the  cobweb-festooned hollow  behind  a



loose baseboard in his  closet. Once every  four weeks or  so, he  took  out  ﬁve



hundred dollars and  put it   in his  backpack along with  an addressed envelope,



one of several dozen he had prepared at school on  a computer  in  the school’s



Business Ed room. He  did  the  envelopes after intramurals  one late afternoon



when the room was empty.

72
    He   used a variety   of  city  mailboxes  to  send them  on  their   way  to  Mr.



Thomas Saubers of  23  Sycamore Street, going  about  this   family-sustaining



charity with  the  craft of a master criminal.  He  was always afraid that his mom



would  discover what he  was up to,  object  (probably strenuously),  and things



would go back to the way they had been. Things weren’t perfect now, there was



still  the occasional arkie-barkie, but  he supposed things weren’t perfect in  any



family outside those old TV  sitcoms on Nick  at Nite.



    They  could   watch  Nick   at  Nite,   and Cartoon  Network,   and  MTV,  and



everything else, because, ladies and gentlemen, the cable was back.



    In  May, another good thing   happened: Dad got a part-time  job  with  a new



real estate company, as something called a “pre-sell  investigator.”  Pete didn’t



know what  that  was, and didn’t  give Shit  One. Dad  could do  it  on his phone



and the home computer, it brought  in a little   money, and those were the things



that mattered.



    Two  other things  mattered  in  the months  after  the money started  coming



in. Dad’s legs were getting  better,  that  was one thing. In  June of  2010 (when



the perpetrator of  the so-called City  Center Massacre was ﬁnally caught), Tom



began walking   without   his  crutches  some of  the  time,   and  he also  began



stepping down on the pink  pills.  The other thing  was more difﬁcult  to  explain,



but Pete knew it  was there. So did Tina. Dad and Mom felt  . . . well  . . . blessed,



and now when they  argued they looked  guilty  as well  as mad, as if they  were



shitting  on  the  mysterious good  fortune  that  had befallen  them.  Often  they



would stop  and talk  about other things  before the shit  got  deep. Often it  was



the money they  talked about,  and who could  be sending it.  These discussions



came to nothing, and that was good.



    I  will  not  be caught, Pete told himself. I must  not, and I will   not.




                                                            •••




One day in August of that  year, Dad and Mom took Tina and Ellen to  a petting



zoo called Happydale Farm. This  was the opportunity  Pete had been patiently

73
waiting  for, and  as soon as they were gone, he went  back to  the stream with



two suitcases.



    After    making   sure the   coast was  clear,  he  dug  the   trunk   out   of  the



embankment again and  loaded the  notebooks into  the suitcases. He reburied



the trunk  and then went  back to the house with  his booty. In the  upstairs hall,



he pulled down  the ladder and carried the  suitcases up to the attic. This  was a



small, low  space, chilly  in   winter  and stiﬂing   in  summer.  The family   rarely



used it; their  extra  stuff was still   stored in  the garage. The few relics  up here



were probably left  over  from one of  the  previous families  that  had owned 23



Sycamore. There was a dirty   baby carriage listing   on  one wheel,  a standing



lamp  with    tropical   birds   on  the   shade, old   issues of   Redbook and Good



Housekeeping tied up with twine,  a  pile  of  moldy  blankets  that  smelled  like



yuck.



    Pete piled  the  notebooks in  the farthest corner  and covered them with  the



blankets, but  ﬁrst  he grabbed one at random,  sat under one of the  attic’s two



hanging lightbulbs,   and  opened it.  The writing   was cursive and  quite  small,



but  carefully  made and  easy to  read. There  were no  cross-outs, which  Pete



thought   remarkable.  Although    he  was  looking    at  the   ﬁrst   page  of  the



notebook, the small circled number  at the top was 482, making  him think   that



this was continued  not  just  from one of  the other  notebooks, but  from  half a



dozen. Half a dozen, at least.





                                                       Chapter 27




              The back room of the Drover was the same as it had been ﬁve years



       before; the same smell of ancient beer mingled with the stink of the stockyards



       and the tang of diesel from the trucking depots that fronted this half of



       Nebraska’s great emptiness. Stew Logan looked the same, too. Here was the



       same white apron, the same suspiciously black hair, even the same parrots-and-



       macaws necktie strangling his rosy neck.

74
              “Why,  it’s Jimmy Gold, as I live and breathe,” he said, and smiled in



       his old dislikeable way that said we don’t care for each other, but let’s pretend.



       “Have you come to pay me what you owe, then?”



              “I  have,” Jimmy said, and touched his back pocket where the pistol



       rested. It felt small and ﬁnal, a thing capable—if used correctly, and with



       courage—of paying all debts.



              “Then step in,” Logan said. “Have a drink. You look dusty.”



              “I  am,” Jimmy said, “and along with a drink I could use





    A  horn  honked on the street. Pete jumped  and looked around guiltily,   as if



he had been whacking off instead of  reading. What  if  they’d  come home early



because that doofus  Ellen  had  gotten  carsick,  or  something? What   if   they



found him up  here with the notebooks? Everything could fall  apart.



    He  shoved the one he had been reading under the old  blankets (phew, they



stank) and crawled back to the  trapdoor, sparing a glance for the suitcases. No



time for them.  Going down  the ladder, the change in temperature from boiling



hot to  August-normal  made him   shiver. Pete folded the  ladder and shoved it



up, wincing  at the screek and bang the trapdoor made when it snapped shut on



its rusty spring.



    He  went into  his bedroom and peered out at the driveway.



    Nobody  there. False alarm.



    Thank  God.



    He  returned  to  the attic  and retrieved  the suitcases. He put  them  back in



the downstairs closet, took  a shower (once more remembering to  clean up the



tub afterwards), then dressed in clean clothes and lay down on his bed.



    He  thought,  It’s  a novel. With  that  many pages, it’s pretty much  got to  be.



And there  might  be more  than one, because no single novel’s long enough to



ﬁll  all those books. Not even the Bible would  ﬁll  all those books.

75
    Also   .  .  .   it  was  interesting.   He  wouldn’t    mind  hunting    through   the



notebooks and ﬁnding  the  one where it   started. Seeing if  it  really  was good.



Because you couldn’t tell   if  a novel was good  from  just  a single  page, could



you?



    Pete closed his eyes and began to drift napward. Ordinarily   he wasn’t much



of a day-sleeper, but  it  had  been a busy morning,   the house was empty  and



quiet,  and he decided  to let  himself  go.  Why  not?  Everything  was right,   at



least right now, and that was his doing. He  deserved a nap.



    That  name, though—Jimmy  Gold.



    Pete  could  swear he’d heard it   before. In  class, maybe? Mrs.  Swidrowski



giving  them background  on one of the authors they were reading? Maybe. She



liked to do that.



    Maybe I’ll   google it later on, Pete thought.  I could  do that. I could  . . .



    He  slept.

76
                                                         1978









Morris  sat on  a steel  bunk  with   his throbbing   head  lowered and  his hands



dangling  between his orange-clad thighs, breathing  in  a poison atmosphere of



piss, puke, and disinfectant.  His  stomach was a lead ball  that seemed to have



expanded until  it  ﬁlled  him  from  crotch  to Adam’s  apple. His  eyes pulsed in



their  sockets. His  mouth  tasted like  a dumpster.  His  gut  ached and his  face



hurt.  His  sinuses were stuffed. Somewhere a hoarse and despairing voice was



chanting, “I  need a lover that won’t  drive me cray-zee, I need a lover that won’t



drive me cray-zee, I need a lover that won’t drive me cray-zee . . .”



    “Shut  up!”  someone shouted. “You’re drivin me crazy, asshole!”



    A  pause. Then:



    “I  need a lover that won’t drive  me cray-zee!”



    The  lead  in  Morris’s  belly   liqueﬁed  and  gurgled.  He  slid   off  the  bunk,



landed on his knees (provoking a fresh bolt of agony in  his head), and hung his



gaping mouth over the functional  steel toilet.  For a moment there was nothing.



Then  everything  clenched  and he  ejected  what  looked  like  two   gallons  of



yellow  toothpaste. For  a moment  the  pain  in  his  head was so huge  that  he



thought  it  would simply  explode, and in  that moment  Morris  hoped it  would.



Anything  to end the pain.



    Instead  of dying,  he threw  up  again. A  pint  instead  of a gallon  this  time,



but it  burned. The next one was a dry  heave. Wait,  not  completely dry;  thick



strings of mucus hung from  his lips like  cobwebs, swinging back and forth.  He



had to brush them away.



    “Somebody’s feelin it!” a voice shouted.



    Shouts and cackles of laughter  greeted this sally. To Morris  it  sounded as if



he were locked up  in  a zoo, and he  supposed he was, only this  was the kind

77
where the cages held humans. The orange jumpsuit he was wearing proved it.



    How  had he gotten here?



    He  couldn’t  remember, any more than he could remember how  he’d gotten



into the  house he’d trashed in Sugar Heights. What  he could remember was his



own house, on Sycamore Street. And the trunk,   of course. Burying  the  trunk.



There had been money in his  pocket, two  hundred dollars of  John Rothstein’s



money, and he had gone down to  Zoney’s to get  a couple of beers because his



head ached and he was feeling lonely. He had talked to the clerk, he was pretty



sure of  that,  but  he  couldn’t  remember  what  they  had  discussed. Baseball?



Probably not.  He  had  a Groundhogs cap,  but  that  was as far as his  interest



went. After  that,  almost nothing.   All  he could  be sure of was that  something



had gone horribly   wrong.  When  you  woke  up wearing  an orange  jumpsuit,



that was an easy deduction to make.



    He   crawled back  to  the  bunk,  pulled  himself   up,  drew his  knees to  his



chest, and clasped his hands around them. It was cold in  the cell. He  began to



shiver.



    I  might  have asked that clerk  what his favorite  bar was. One I could  get to



on the bus. And  I  went there, didn’t   I? Went  there and got drunk.  In  spite of



all I know  about what it  does to me. Not  just a little  loaded, either—standing-



up, falling-down  shitfaced drunk.



    Oh   yes, undoubtedly,  in   spite  of  all  he  knew.  Which   was bad,  but   he



couldn’t remember  the crazy things  afterwards, and that  was worse. After  the



third  drink  (sometimes only second), he fell down a dark hole and didn’t climb



back out  until  he  woke up  hung over but sober. Blackout  drinking   was what



they called it. And  in  those blackouts, he almost always got up to . . . well,  call



it hijinks.   Hijinks   was how he’d ended up in  Riverview Youth  Detention,  and



doubtless how he’d ended up here. Wherever here was.



    Hijinks.



    Fucking  hijinks.



    Morris   hoped  it  had  been a  good  old-fashioned bar  ﬁght   and  not  more



breaking and entering.  Not  a repeat of  his Sugar Heights  adventure, in  other



words. Because he was well past his teenage years now and it wouldn’t  be the

78
reformatory this  time,  no  sir. Still,   he would  do the  time  if  he had  done the



crime. Just as long as the crime had nothing to  do with  the murder of a certain



genius American writer,  please God. If  it  did,  he would  not  be breathing free



air again for a long time.  Maybe never. Because it wasn’t just Rothstein, was it?



And now a memory did  arise: Curtis Rogers asking if  New Hampshire  had the



death penalty.



    Morris  lay  on the bunk,  shivering, thinking,   That  can’t be why I’m  here. It



can’t.



    Can it?



    He  had to admit  that  it  was possible, and not just because the police might



have put him together with   the dead men in the rest area. He could see himself



in  a bar or  a stripjoint   somewhere, Morris  Bellamy,  the college  dropout  and



self-proclaimed American lit   scholar, tossing back bourbon and having an out-



of-body   experience.  Someone starts   talking    about   the   murder   of   John



Rothstein, the  great writer,  the reclusive American genius, and Morris Bellamy



—drunk  off  his  tits  and full   of  that  huge anger he  usually kept  locked  in  a



cage, that black beast with the yellow eyes—turning  to the  speaker and saying,



He didn’t  look much like  a genius when I blew his head off.



    “I   would  never,” he whispered. His  head was aching  worse than ever, and



there was something wrong on the  left side of his  face, too. It burned. “I would



never.”



    Only   how did  he know  that? When  he  drank, any day  was Anything  Can



Happen Day. The black beast came out. As a teenager the beast had rampaged



through that  house in Sugar Heights, tearing  the motherfucker pretty  much  to



shreds, and when the cops responded to the  silent  alarm he had fought  them



until  one belted him  unconscious with  his nightstick,   and when they searched



him they  found a shitload  of jewelry in  his pockets, much  of it  of the costume



variety but  some, carelessly left out of madame’s safe, extraordinarily valuable,



and howdy-do,  off  we go  to Riverview,  where  we will   get our  tender  young



buttsky reamed and make exciting new friends.



    He   thought,   The  person who  put   on  a shit-show   like  that   is  perfectly



capable of boasting while  drunk  about  murdering  Jimmy   Gold’s creator, and

79
you know it.



    Although   it  could have been the cops, too. If they had ID’d him and put  out



an APB. That was just as likely.



    “I  need a lover who won’t drive me cray-zee!”



    “Shut  up!”  This time  it  was Morris himself,  and he tried to yell  it,  but what



came out was nothing   but  a puke-clotted  croak. Oh,  his  head hurt.  And  his



face, yow. He ran a hand up his  left  cheek and stared stupidly  at the  ﬂakes of



dried blood  in  his  palm.  He  explored again and  felt  scratches there, at least



three of  them.  Fingernail  scratches, and deep. What  does that  tell  us, class?



Well, ordinarily—although    there are exceptions to every rule—men punch and



women scratch. The ladies do  it  with  their  nails  because more often than not



they have nice long ones to scratch with.



    Did  I  try to  slap the make on some twist, and she refused me with her nails?



    Morris   tried   to   remember  and  couldn’t.  He   remembered  the  rain,  the



poncho, and the ﬂashlight  shining  on the  roots. He remembered the  pick. He



sort of remembered wanting to hear fast loud music  and talking  to the  clerk at



Zoney’s Go-Mart. After  that? Just darkness.



    He  thought,   Maybe it  was the car. That  damn Biscayne. Maybe somebody



saw it coming out  of the rest area on Route 92 with the front  end all bloody  on



the right,   and maybe I  left  something in  the  glove compartment.  Something



with  my name on it.



    But   that  didn’t  seem likely.  Freddy had purchased the Chevy  from a  half-



drunk bar-bitch  in  a Lynn taproom,  paying with  money the  three of them  had



pooled. She had signed over the pink  to  Harold  Fineman, which  happened to



be the name  of Jimmy  Gold’s  best friend  in  The Runner. She had never seen



Morris  Bellamy, who  knew  enough to  stay out  of sight  while  that  particular



deal went   down.  Besides,  Morris   had  done everything   but   soap PLEASE



STEAL ME on the windshield  when he left it  at the mall.  No, the  Biscayne was



now sitting  in  a vacant lot somewhere, either in Lowtown or  down by the lake,



stripped to the axles.



    So how did  I  wind  up here? Back to  that, like  a rat  running  on a wheel. If



some woman marked  my  face with  her  nails,  did  I  haul  off  on her?  Maybe

80
break her jaw?



    That  rang  a faint  bell  behind  the blackout  curtains.  If  it  were so, then  he



was probably   going  to   be charged  with   assault,  and  he  might   go  up  to



Waynesville for  it;   a ride  in   the big   green bus  with  the  wire  mesh  on the



windows. Waynesville would  be bad, but  he could do  a few years for assault if



he had to. Assault was not murder.



    Please don’t let it  be Rothstein,  he thought.  I’ve  got a lot  of reading  to do,



it’s stashed away all  safe and waiting.   The  beauty part  is  I’ve got  money  to



support  myself  with   while  I   do  it,   more than   twenty  thousand  dollars  in



unmarked twenties  and ﬁfties.  That  will   last quite  awhile,  if  I  live  small. So



please don’t let it be murder.



    “I  need a lover who won’t drive me cray-zee!”



    “One  more time,  motherfucker!”  someone shouted. “One more time and I’ll



pull your  asshole right out through your  mouth!”



    Morris  closed his eyes.




                                                            •••




Although  he  was feeling  better by  noon,  he refused the  slop that  passed for



lunch: noodles ﬂoating  in  what appeared to be blood sauce. Then, around two



o’clock, a quartet  of guards came down the aisle between the cells.  One had a



clipboard and was shouting names.



    “Bellamy!  Holloway!  McGiver!  Riley!  Roosevelt! Titgarden! Step forward!”



    “That’s  Teagarden, sir,” said the large black man in the box next to Morris’s.



    “I  don’t  give a shit  if it’s  John Q. Motherfucker.  If  you want to  talk  to your



court-appointed, step forward. If  you don’t, sit  there and stack more time.”



    The  half  dozen named prisoners stepped forward.  They were the  last ones



left,  at   least  in  this   corridor.   The  others  brought   in   the   previous  night



(mercifully  including   the fellow  who  had been butchering  John Mellencamp)



had either been released or taken to court  for  the morning  arraignment.  They



were the small fry. Afternoon arraignments, Morris  knew, were for more serious

81
shit. He  had been arraigned in the afternoon after his little   adventure in  Sugar



Heights. Judge Bukowski,  that cunt.



    Morris  prayed to  a God he did not  believe in as the door of his  holding  cell



snapped back. Assault, God, okay? Simple, not  ag. Just  not murder.  God,  let



them know  nothing  about what went  down in New  Hampshire,  or at a certain



rest area in upstate New York, okay? That okay with you?



    “Step  out,  boys,”  the  guard  with   the  clipboard  said.  “Step  out  and face



right.  Arm’s length  from the upstanding  American in  front of you. No  wedgies



and no reach-arounds. Don’t fuck with us and we will  return  the favor.”




                                                            •••




They went down  in an elevator big  enough to hold a small  herd of cattle, then



along another corridor,  and then—God  knew  why, they  were wearing sandals



and the jumpsuits  had no pockets—through a metal  detector. Beyond that was



a visitor’s room  with  eight  walled  booths like  library  carrels. The  guard with



the clipboard   directed  Morris  to  number  3.  Morris   sat down  and  faced his



court-appointed  through   Plexiglas  that  had  been smeared often  and  wiped



seldom. The  guy  on the  freedom  side was a nerd  with   a bad  haircut  and a



dandruff problem.  He  had a coldsore below one nostril  and a scuffed briefcase



sitting  on his lap. He looked like  he might  be all of nineteen.



    This  is what I  get, Morris thought.  Oh  Jesus, this is what I get.



    The  lawyer pointed  to the phone on  the wall  of Morris’s booth,  and opened



his briefcase. From  it  he removed  a single  sheet of paper  and the  inevitable



yellow legal  pad. Once these were on the  counter in  front  of  him,  he put  his



briefcase on the  ﬂoor  and  picked  up  his  own  phone.  He  spoke not   in  the



tentative tenor of your  usual adolescent, but in a conﬁdent, husky baritone that



seemed far too big for  the chicken  chest lurking   behind the  purple  rag of his



tie.



    “You’re  in  deep shit, Mr.”—he  looked  at the sheet lying  on top  of his legal



pad—“Bellamy. You must  prepare for a very long stay in the state penitentiary,



I think.  Unless you have something to trade, that is.”

82
    Morris  thought,  He’s talking  about trading  the notebooks.



    Coldness went marching  up his arms like  the feet of evil  fairies. If  they had



him  for Rothstein,  they  had him  for Curtis  and  Freddy. That meant  life with



no possibility   of parole. He  would  never be  able to retrieve  the  trunk,  never



ﬁnd out Jimmy  Gold’s ultimate  fate.



    “Speak,” the  lawyer said, as if talking to a dog.



    “Then  tell  me who I’m  speaking to.”



    “Elmer   Cafferty, temporarily  at  your  service. You’re going  to be  arraigned



in .  . .”  He  looked  at his watch,  a Timex  even cheaper than his suit.  “Thirty



minutes. Judge Bukowski is very prompt.”



    A   bolt  of  pain  that  had  nothing  to  do  with   his  hangover went  through



Morris’s head. “No! Not  her! It  can’t be! That bitch  came over on the Ark!”



    Cafferty   smiled.  “I  deduce  you’ve had  doings  with   the  Great  Bukowski



before.”



    “Check  your ﬁle,”  Morris  said dully. Although  it  probably  wasn’t there. The



Sugar Heights thing  would be under seal, as he had told Andy.



    Fucking  Andy  Halliday. This  is more his fault than  mine.



    “Homo.”



    Cafferty  frowned. “What did  you say?”



    “Nothing.   Go on.”



    “My  ﬁle consists of last night’s arrest report. The  good news is that your fate



will  be in  some other judge’s hands when you come to  trial.  The better  news,



for me, at  least, is that  by  that  point,  someone else will  be representing you.



My  wife  and I  are  moving  to  Denver  and you,  Mr.  Bellamy,  will   be just   a



memory.”



    Denver  or hell,  it  made no difference to Morris.  “Tell  me what I’m  charged



with.”



    “You  don’t remember?”



    “I  was in a blackout.”



    “Is  that so.”



    “It   actually is,” Morris  said.

83
    Maybe  he could trade the notebooks, although it  hurt  him  to  even consider



it.  But  even if he made the offer—or  if  Cafferty  made it—would   a prosecutor



grasp the  importance  of  what  was in   them? It   didn’t   seem likely.  Lawyers



weren’t scholars. A prosecutor’s idea of great literature would  probably  be Erle



Stanley Gardner. Even if  the notebooks—all  those beautiful  Moleskines—did



matter to  the  state’s legal rep, what  would  he, Morris,  gain  by turning   them



over? One life sentence instead of three? Whoopee-ding.



    I  can’t, no matter what.  I won’t.



    Andy  Halliday   might  have been an English Leather–wearing homo, but  he



had been right about Morris’s  motivation.  Curtis  and Freddy had been in it  for



cash; when Morris  assured them  the old  guy  might   have squirreled  away as



much as a hundred thousand, they had believed him.  Rothstein’s  writings?  To



those two bumblefucks,  the value of  Rothstein’s output  since 1960  was just a



misty maybe, like  a lost goldmine.  It  was Morris who cared about the writing.



If things  had gone differently, he would have offered to trade Curtis and Freddy



his share of the money for the written  words, and he was sure they would  have



taken him  up  on it.   If  he gave that  up now—especially  when  the notebooks



contained the continuation of the  Jimmy Gold  saga—it would  all have been for



nothing.



    Cafferty  rapped his phone on the Plexi, then put  it  back to his ear. “Cafferty



to Bellamy, Cafferty to Bellamy, come in, Bellamy.”



    “Sorry. I  was thinking.”



    “A  little   late for  that, wouldn’t  you say? Try to stick  with  me, if  you please.



You’ll be arraigned on three counts. Your  mission, should you choose to accept



it,  is to  plead not guilty   to  each in turn.  Later, when you  go to  trial,  you can



change to guilty,  should it  prove to your  advantage to do so. Don’t even think



about bail, because Bukowski doesn’t laugh; she cackles like Witch Hazel.”



    Morris  thought,   This  is a case of worst fears realized. Rothstein, Dow,  and



Rogers. Three counts of Murder One.



    “Mr.  Bellamy? Our  time  is ﬂeeting, and I’m  losing patience.”



    The  phone sagged away from  his ear and  Morris  brought  it  back  with  an



effort. Nothing    mattered now,  and still   the lawyer  with  the  guileless Richie

84
Cunningham  face and  the  weird   middle-aged  baritone  voice  kept   pouring



words into his ear, and at some point they began to make sense.



    “They’ll   work  up  the ladder,  Mr.  Bellamy, from  ﬁrst  to  worst. Count  one,



resisting arrest.  For arraignment  purposes, you  plead not  guilty.   Count  two,



aggravated assault—not just the  woman, you also got  one good one in on  the



ﬁrst-responding  cop before he cuffed you.  You plead not  guilty.   Count three,



aggravated rape. They may add attempted murder later, but  right  now it’s  just



rape . . . if rape can be called just anything, I suppose. You plead—”



    “Wait   a minute,”   Morris  said. He  touched the  scratches on his cheek, and



what he felt was . . . hope. “I raped somebody?”



    “Indeed   you  did,”  Cafferty  said,  sounding  pleased. Probably  because his



client ﬁnally  seemed to be following   him.  “After  Miss Cora Ann  Hooper .  . .”



He took  a sheet of paper from his briefcase and consulted it. “This  was shortly



after she left the diner where she works as a waitress. She was heading for a bus



stop on Lower Marlborough.  Says you tackled her and pulled  her into  an alley



next to  Shooter’s Tavern, where  you  had spent  several hours imbibing    Jack



Daniel’s before kicking the  jukebox and being asked to leave. Miss Hooper had



a battery-powered Police Alert in  her purse and managed to trigger it.  She also



scratched your  face. You  broke  her  nose, held   her down,   choked  her, and



proceeded to insert your Johns Hopkins into  her Sarah Lawrence. When Ofﬁcer



Philip  Ellenton hauled you off, you were still  matriculating.”



    “Rape. Why  would  I . . .”



    Stupid  question.  Why  had he spent three long  hours tearing up  that  home



in Sugar Heights, just  taking a short break to piss on the Aubusson carpet?



    “I  have no idea,” Cafferty said. “Rape is foreign to my way of life.”



    And  mine,  Morris  thought.  Ordinarily.  But  I was drinking   Jack and got up



to hijinks.



    “How   long will  they give  me?”



    “The   prosecution will   ask for  life.  If   you plead  guilty   at trial   and  throw



yourself on the mercy of the court, you might  only get  twenty-ﬁve years.”




                                                            •••

85
Morris pleaded guilty  at trial.  He  said he regretted what he’d done. He blamed



the booze. He threw himself on the mercy of the court.



    And  got life.

86
                                                 2013–2014









By the time  he was a high school sophomore, Pete Saubers had already ﬁgured



out the  next step: a good  college in  New  England where literature  instead  of



cleanliness was next to godliness. He began investigating online and collecting



brochures. Emerson  or  BC  seemed the  most  likely   candidates, but   Brown



might  not be out of reach. His  mother and father told  him not  to get his  hopes



up,  but  Pete  didn’t   buy   that.  He   felt  that   if  you   didn’t   have hopes and



ambitions when you were a teenager, you’d be pretty much fucked later on.



    About   majoring  in English  there was no question.  Some of this surety  had



to do with  John Rothstein  and the Jimmy  Gold novels; so far as Pete knew, he



was the only  person in  the  world  who  had read the  ﬁnal  two,  and they  had



changed his life.



    Howard  Ricker, his sophomore English teacher, had also been life-changing,



even though   many  kids  made  fun  of  him,   calling   him  Ricky   the  Hippie



because of   the   ﬂower-power  shirts    and  bellbottoms    he  favored.   (Pete’s



girlfriend,   Gloria  Moore, called  him  Pastor Ricky,  because he had a habit  of



waving his hands above his head when he got excited.) Hardly  anyone cut Mr.



Ricker’s classes, though. He was entertaining, he was enthusiastic, and—unlike



many of the  teachers—he seemed to genuinely like  the kids,  whom  he called



“my  young ladies and  gentlemen.”  They rolled  their  eyes at his  retro  clothes



and his screechy laugh . . . but  the clothes had a certain funky  cachet, and the



screechy laugh was so amiably weird it made you want to laugh along.



    On   the  ﬁrst  day  of  sophomore  English,  he  blew  in   like  a  cool  breeze,



welcomed them,  and then  printed  something  on the  board that  Pete Saubers



never forgot:

87
                                                 This   is   stupid!





    “What   do  you make  of this,   ladies and gentlemen?”  he asked. “What   on



earth can it mean?”



    The  class was silent.



    “I’ll    tell  you, then.  It  happens to  be the most  common criticism   made by



young ladies and gentlemen  such as yourselves, doomed to a course where we



begin  with   excerpts from  Beowulf  and end  with   Raymond  Carver.  Among



teachers, such survey courses are sometimes called GTTG: Gallop Through the



Glories.”



    He  screeched cheerfully, also waggling   his  hands at shoulder  height  in  a



yowza-yowza gesture. Most of the kids laughed along, Pete among them.



    “Class  verdict  on  Jonathan  Swift’s  ‘A  Modest  Proposal’? This   is stupid!



‘Young Goodman Brown,’  by Nathaniel  Hawthorne?  This is stupid!  ‘Mending



Wall,’  by Robert  Frost? This is  moderately stupid!  The required  excerpt from



Moby-Dick? This is extremely stupid!”



    More  laughter. None  of them had read Moby-Dick, but  they all knew  it  was



hard and boring. Stupid, in  other words.



    “And   sometimes!”  Mr.  Ricker  exclaimed, raising  one  ﬁnger  and pointing



dramatically at the words on the  blackboard. “Sometimes, my young ladies and



gentlemen, the criticism is spot-on. I stand here with my  bare face hanging out



and admit  it.   I  am  required  to  teach certain  antiquities  I  would   rather  not



teach. I  see the  loss of  enthusiasm in   your  eyes, and my  soul  groans. Yes!



Groans! But  I  soldier  on,  because I know  that  much  of  what  I  teach  is not



stupid. Even some of the antiquities to  which you feel you cannot relate now or



ever will,  have deep resonance that will eventually reveal itself. Shall I  tell  you



how you judge the not-stupid from the is-stupid? Shall I impart this great secret?



Since we have forty minutes left in  this class and as yet no grist to grind  in  the



mill  of our combined intellects,  I believe I will.”



    He  leaned forward and propped his hands on the desk, his tie swinging  like



a pendulum.  Pete felt  that  Mr.   Ricker  was looking  directly   at him,   as if  he

88
knew—or  at least intuited—the    tremendous secret Pete was keeping under a



pile of  blankets in  the attic  of  his house. Something far  more important   than



money.



    “At    some  point   in   this   course,  perhaps  even  tonight,   you   will    read



something difﬁcult,   something you only  partially  understand, and your verdict



will  be this is stupid. Will   I  argue when you advance that opinion  in  class the



next day? Why  would  I  do such a  useless thing? My time  with   you is  short,



only  thirty-four   weeks of  classes, and I will   not  waste  it  arguing  about  the



merits of this  short  story or that  poem. Why  would  I,  when all  such opinions



are subjective, and no ﬁnal resolution can ever be reached?”



    Some  of the  kids—Gloria    was one of  them—now   looked  lost,  but  Pete



understood exactly what Mr.  Ricker, aka Ricky  the Hippie,  was talking  about,



because since starting the notebooks, he had  read dozens of critical  essays on



John Rothstein.   Many  of them   judged  Rothstein  to  be  one of  the  greatest



American  writers  of  the  twentieth   century,  right   up  there with   Fitzgerald,



Hemingway, Faulkner,  and Roth.  There were others—a  minority,  but  a vocal



one—who asserted that his work  was second-rate and hollow. Pete had read a



piece in Salon where the writer had called Rothstein “king  of the wisecrack and



the patron saint of fools.”



    “Time   is the answer,” Mr.  Ricker  said on the  ﬁrst  day of Pete’s sophomore



year. He  strode  back and  forth,   antique  bellbottoms   swishing,  occasionally



waving his  arms. “Yes! Time mercilessly  culls away the is-stupid from  the not-



stupid. It  is  a  natural,  Darwinian   process. It  is  why   the  novels of  Graham



Greene are available  in   every good  bookstore,  and  the  novels  of  Somerset



Maugham are not—those novels still exist, of course, but you must order them,



and you would  only do that  if  you knew about  them. Most  modern readers do



not. Raise your  hand if  you  have ever heard of  Somerset Maugham. And  I’ll



spell that for you.”



    No  hands went up.



    Mr.   Ricker  nodded. Rather  grimly,  it   seemed to Pete. “Time  has decreed



that Mr. Greene is not-stupid while Mr. Maugham is . . . well,  not exactly stupid



but forgettable.  He wrote some very ﬁne novels, in my  opinion—The Moon and

89
Sixpence is remarkable, my young ladies and gentlemen, remarkable—and he also



wrote  a great  deal  of  excellent short  ﬁction,   but   none is  included  in   your



textbook.



    “Shall   I  weep over  this?  Shall  I  rage, and  shake my  ﬁsts,  and  proclaim



injustice? No. I  will  not.  Such culling is a natural process. It will  occur for you,



young ladies and gentlemen, although I  will  be in  your rearview mirror  by  the



time  it  happens. Shall I  tell  you how it  happens? You will   read something—



perhaps ‘Dulce et  Decorum  Est,’  by  Wilfred   Owen. Shall  we use that  as an



example? Why not?”



    Then,  in  a  deeper voice that  sent chills  up  Pete’s back and tightened   his



throat, Mr.  Ricker  cried: “  ‘Bent double,  like  old beggars under sacks, Knock-



kneed, coughing like  hags, we cursed through  sludge . .  . ’  And so on. Cetra-



cetra. Some of you will say, This is stupid. Will I break my promise not  to argue



the point,  even though  I consider Mr.  Owen’s poems the greatest to come out



of World   War  I?  No!   It’s  just  my  opinion,   you  see, and opinions  are  like



assholes: everybody has one.”



    They  all roared at that, young ladies and gentlemen alike.



    Mr.   Ricker  drew  himself  up.  “I  may  give  some of  you detentions  if  you



disrupt  my class, I have no problem  with  imposing  discipline,  but  never will I



disrespect your opinion. And yet! And  yet!”



    Up  went the ﬁnger.



    “Time   will  pass! Tempus will fugit!  Owen’s poem may fall  away from  your



mind, in  which  case your verdict of is-stupid will have turned out  to be correct.



For you, at least. But  for some of you it  will  recur. And  recur. And recur. Each



time it  does, the steady march of your maturity  will  deepen its resonance. Each



time that  poem steals back into your mind,  it  will  seem a little  less stupid and



a little   more vital.  A  little   more  important.  Until   it   shines, young ladies and



gentlemen. Until   it  shines. Thus endeth my opening day peroration,  and I ask



you  to   turn   to   page sixteen   in   that  most   excellent  tome   Language and



Literature.”




                                                            •••

90
One of  the  stories  Mr.  Ricker  assigned that   year was “The   Rocking-Horse



Winner,”  by  D.  H.  Lawrence, and sure enough,  many of  Mr.  Ricker’s young



ladies and gentlemen  (including   Gloria   Moore, of  whom  Pete  was growing



tired, in  spite of her really  excellent breasts) considered it stupid. Pete did not,



in  large  part  because events in  his  life   had already  caused him  to  mature



beyond his  years. As 2013  gave way  to  2014—the   year of the  famed  Polar



Vortex,  when  furnaces  all   over  the  upper   Midwest   went  into    maximum



overdrive, burning  money  by the  bale—that  story recurred to  him  often,  and



its resonance continued to deepen. And recur.



    The  family in  it  seemed to have everything, but they didn’t;  there was never



quite enough, and the hero of the story, a young boy named Paul, always heard



the  house whispering,  “There   must  be  more  money!  There must   be more



money!” Pete Sau bers guessed that there were kids who considered that stupid.



They were the lucky ones who had never been forced to listen to nightly   arkie-



barkies about which bills  to pay. Or the price of cigarettes.



    The  young protagonist  in the  Lawrence story discovered a supernatural way



to make  money. By riding   his toy  rocking-horse  to  the make-believe land  of



luck, Paul could  pick horse-race winners in the real world.  He made thousands



of dollars, and still the  house whispered, “There must be more money!”



    After   one ﬁnal  epic  ride  on  the rocking-horse—and   one ﬁnal  big-money



pick—Paul  dropped dead of a brain hemorrhage or something. Pete didn’t have



so much  as a  headache after ﬁnding   the  buried  trunk,   but  it   was still   his



rocking-horse, wasn’t it?  Yes. His  very  own rocking-horse.  But  by  2013,  the



year he  met  Mr.  Ricker,  the  rocking-horse  was  slowing  down.  The  trunk-



money had almost run out.



    It   had  gotten  his  parents  through   a rough   and scary  patch  when their



marriage might   otherwise have  crashed and burned;  this  Pete knew, and  he



never once regretted playing guardian angel. In the  words of that old  song, the



trunk-money  had formed a bridge over troubled  waters, and things were better



—much—on the  other  side. The  worst  of  the  recession was over. Mom  was



teaching full-time   again,  her salary three thousand  a year better  than before.



Dad now  ran his  own  small business, not  real estate, exactly, but  something

91
called real estate search. He  had several agencies in  the city   as clients. Pete



didn’t  completely   understand how  it   worked,  but   he knew  it   was actually



making some money, and might  make more in  the years ahead, if the housing



market continued  to  trend  upward.  He  was agenting  a few properties  of  his



own, too. Best of all, he was drug-free and walking well.  The crutches had been



in the  closet for over a year, and he only used his cane on rainy  or snowy days



when his bones and joints ached. All good. Great, in fact.



    And  yet, as Mr. Ricker said at least once in every class. And yet!



    There was Tina to  think  about, that  was one very large and yet. Many of her



friends  from   the  old   neighborhood  on  the   West  Side,  including   Barbara



Robinson, whom  Tina  had  idolized,  were  going  to  Chapel Ridge,  a  private



school that had  an excellent record when  it  came to sending  kids on  to good



colleges. Mom had told Tina that  she and Dad didn’t  see how they could afford



to send her  there  directly  from  middle   school. Maybe she could  attend  as a



sophomore, if their ﬁnances continued to improve.



    “But   I won’t know  anybody by then,” Tina had said, starting to cry.



    “You’ll   know  Barbara Robinson,”  Mom  said, and  Pete (listening  from  the



next room) could tell  from the sound of her voice that Mom  was on the verge of



tears herself. “Hilda and Betsy, too.”



    But   Teens had been a little  younger  than those girls,  and  Pete knew only



Barbs had been a real  friend  to his  sister back  in  the West  Side days. Hilda



Carver and Betsy DeWitt   probably  didn’t  even remember her. Neither  would



Barbara, in another year or two. Their  mother didn’t  seem to remember what a



big  deal high  school was, and how  quickly  you  forgot  your little-kid    friends



once you got there.



    Tina’s  response summed up  these thoughts   with   admirable  succinctness.



“Yeah, but they won’t know  me.”



    “Tina—”



    “You  have that  money!” Tina cried. “That  mystery money  that  comes every



month! Why  can’t I  have some for Chapel Ridge?”



    “Because we’re still catching up  from the bad time,  honey.”



    To this  Tina could say nothing, because it was true.

92
    His  own  college plans were another and yet. Pete knew that  to some of his



friends, maybe most of them, college seemed as far away as the outer planets of



the solar system.  But  if  he wanted  a good  one (Brown, his  mind  whispered,



English Lit at Brown), that meant making early applications when he was a ﬁrst-



semester senior. The applications  themselves cost money, as did  the summer



class he needed to pick up if he wanted to score at least a 670 on the math part



of the SATs. He had a part-time job at the Garner Street Library, but  thirty-ﬁve



bucks a week didn’t go far.



    Dad’s business had grown enough to make a downtown ofﬁce desirable, that



was and yet number three. Just a low-rent   place on an upper  ﬂoor, and being



close to the action  would  pay dividends,  but  it  would  mean laying  out  more



money, and Pete knew—even though  no  one said it  out  loud—that  Dad  was



counting  on the  mystery cash to  carry him  through   the critical  period.  They



had all come to  depend on the mystery  cash, and only Pete knew it  would  be



gone before the end of ’14.



    And  yeah, okay, he had spent  some on himself. Not   a huge amount—that



would  have raised  questions—but  a  hundred  here and  a  hundred  there.  A



blazer and a pair of  loafers for the  class trip to  Washington.  A  few CDs. And



books. He had become a fool for books since reading the notebooks and falling



in    love    with     John   Rothstein.     He    began   with     Rothstein’s    Jewish



contemporaries, like Philip  Roth, Saul Bellow, and Irwin  Shaw (he thought The



Young Lions was fucking awesome, and couldn’t   understand why  it   wasn’t a



classic), and spread out  from  there. He  always bought   paperbacks, but even



those were twelve  or  ﬁfteen  dollars apiece these days, unless you  could  ﬁnd



them used.



    “The  Rocking-Horse  Winner”   had resonance, all right,   bigtime  resonance,



because Pete could hear his own house whispering There must be more money . . .



and all  too  soon there  would  be  less. But  money  wasn’t  all  the  trunk   had



contained, was it?



    That  was another and yet. One Pete Saubers thought about more and more as



time passed.

93
                                                            •••




For his end-of-year research paper in Mr. Ricker’s Gallop Through  the Glories,



Pete did  a  sixteen-page analysis of  the   Jimmy  Gold   trilogy,   quoting  from



various reviews and  adding  in  stuff   from  the  few  interviews  Rothstein  had



given before retreating  to  his farm  in  New  Hampshire  and going  completely



dark. He ﬁnished by talking   about Rothstein’s tour of the German death camps



as a reporter for  the  New York Herald—this  four  years before publishing   the



ﬁrst Jimmy  Gold book.



    “I   believe that  was the most important   event of Mr.  Rothstein’s  life,”  Pete



wrote. “Surely the  most important   event of his life  as a writer. Jimmy’s  search



for meaning always goes back to what  Mr.  Rothstein saw in  those camps, and



it’s why, when  Jimmy tries  to live  the  life of  an ordinary American  citizen,  he



always feels hollow. For me,  this is  best expressed when he throws an ashtray



through  the  TV  in  The  Runner Slows Down. He does it  during   a CBS news



special about the Holocaust.”



    When   Mr.  Ricker  returned their  papers, a big  A+   was scrawled on Pete’s



cover, which  was a  computer-scanned photo  of  Rothstein  as  a young  man,



sitting   in  Sardi’s with   Ernest  Hemingway.  Below  the  A+,   Mr.   Ricker  had



written  See me after class.



    When  the  other kids  were gone, Mr.  Ricker  looked  at Pete so ﬁxedly  that



Pete was momentarily  scared his favorite  teacher was going to  accuse him of



plagiarism. Then  Mr.  Ricker smiled.  “That  is the  best student paper I’ve  read



in my  twenty-eight   years of teaching. Because it was the most  conﬁdent, and



the most deeply felt.”



    Pete’s face heated with pleasure. “Thanks. Really. Thanks a lot.”



    “I’d   argue with  your conclusion,  though,”  Mr.  Ricker said, leaning  back in



his chair and lacing his  ﬁngers together behind his  neck. “The characterization



of Jimmy  as ‘a noble American hero, like  Huck  Finn,’  is not  supported by the



concluding  book  of  the  trilogy.  Yes, he  throws  an  ashtray at  the  television



screen, but it’s not  an act of  heroism. The CBS logo  is an eye, you know,  and



Jimmy’s act is  a ritual   blinding  of  his  inner eye, the  one that  sees the truth.

94
That’s not  my  insight;   it’s an  almost direct   quote from  an  essay called ‘The



Runner Turns  Away,’  by John  Crowe Ransom.  Leslie Fiedler  says much the



same in Love and Death in the American Novel.”



    “But—”



    “I’m   not trying   to debunk you, Pete; I’m  just  saying you need to follow  the



evidence of any  book wherever it leads, and that   means not  omitting   crucial



developments that  run counter  to  your  thesis. What  does Jimmy  do  after he



throws the ashtray through  the  TV, and after  his wife  delivers her classic line,



‘You bastard, how will  the kids watch Mickey  Mouse now?’”



    “He  goes out and buys another TV set, but—”



    “Not   just any TV  set, but the ﬁrst color TV set on the block. And then?”



    “He   creates  the  big   successful ad  campaign  for   Duzzy-Doo  household



cleaner. But—”



    Mr.  Ricker  raised his  eyebrows, waiting  for  the  but.  And  how could  Pete



tell  him  that  a  year later, Jimmy   steals into  the agency late  one night   with



matches and a can  of kerosene? That  Rothstein  foreshadows all the  protests



about Vietnam  and civil  rights  by having  Jimmy  start a ﬁre  that pretty  much



destroys the building  known as the Temple of Advertising?  That  he hitchhikes



out  of New   York  City  without   a  look  back,  leaving his  family   behind  and



striking  out  for the  territory,  just  like  Huck  and Jim?  He couldn’t  say any of



that, because it was the story told  in The Runner Goes West, a novel that existed



only  in  seventeen closely written   notebooks that   had lain  buried   in  an old



trunk  for over thirty  years.



    “Go   ahead and  but   me  your   buts,”   Mr.  Ricker   said  equably.  “There’s



nothing  I like  better  than a good book discussion with  someone who can hold



up his end of the  argument. I  imagine you’ve already missed your bus, but  I’ll



be more than  happy to  give  you a ride  home.”  He  tapped the  cover sheet of



Pete’s paper, Johnny R. and Ernie H., those twin  titans of  American literature,



with  oversized martini glasses raised in a toast. “Unsupported conclusion aside



—which  I put  down to a touching  desire to see light at the end of an extremely



dark ﬁnal  novel—this   is extraordinary  work.  Just extraordinary.  So go for  it.



But me your buts.”

95
    “But   nothing, I  guess,” Pete said. “You could be right.”



    Only  Mr.  Ricker wasn’t. Any  doubt about  Jimmy Gold’s capacity to  sell out



that remained at the end of The Runner Goes West was swept away in the last and



longest novel of the series, The Runner Raises the Flag. It was the best book Pete



had ever read. Also the saddest.



    “In  your  paper you don’t go into how Rothstein  died.”



    “No.”



    “May  I ask why not?”



    “Because it didn’t  ﬁt  the  theme, I guess. And it  would  have made the paper



too long.  Also  . .  . well  .  .  . it  was such a bummer  for  him  to  die  that  way,



getting killed   in a stupid burglary.”



    “He  shouldn’t  have kept cash in the house,” Mr. Ricker  said mildly,  “but  he



did, and  a lot  of people knew  it.  Don’t  judge him   too harshly for  that.  Many



writers have been stupid and improvident  about money. Charles Dickens found



himself  supporting   a family   of  slackers,  including   his  own  father.  Samuel



Clemens was all but bankrupted  by bad real estate transactions. Arthur  Conan



Doyle lost thousands of dollars  to fake mediums  and spent thousands more on



fake photos of  fairies. At  least  Rothstein’s major  work  was done. Unless you



believe, as some people do—”



    Pete  looked at  his watch.  “Um,   Mr.  Ricker? I  can still   catch my  bus  if  I



hurry.”



    Mr.  Ricker  did  that  funny  yowza-yowza thing  with  his  hands. “Go,  by all



means go. I just  wanted to  thank you  for such a wonderful  piece of work  . .  .



and to offer a friendly  caution: when you approach this  kind  of thing  next year



—and  in  college—don’t   let  your  good  nature  cloud  your  critical   eye. The



critical eye should always be cold and clear.”



    “I  won’t,”  Pete said, and hurried out.



    The  last thing  he wanted to discuss with Mr.  Ricker was the possibility  that



the  thieves  who   had  taken  John  Rothstein’s   life   had  stolen  a  bunch   of



unpublished  manuscripts as well  as money, and  maybe destroyed them  after



deciding they  had no  value. Once  or twice  Pete had played  with  the  idea of



turning  the notebooks over to the police, even though that would  almost surely

96
mean his parents would  ﬁnd  out  where the mystery  money had been coming



from.  The notebooks were, after  all,  evidence of a crime  as well  as a literary



treasure. But it  was an old crime,  ancient history.  Better to  leave well enough



alone.



    Right?




                                                            •••




The bus had  already gone, of course, and that  meant a  two-mile  walk  home.



Pete didn’t mind.   He was still  glowing  from  Mr.  Ricker’s praise, and he had a



lot  to  think  about.  Rothstein’s  unpublished  works, mostly.  The  short stories



were uneven, he thought,  only a few of  them really  good, and the  poems he’d



tried to  write  were, in  Pete’s humble opinion,  pretty  lame. But  those last two



Jimmy  Gold  novels were .  .  . well,   gold.  Judging  by  the evidence scattered



through them,  Pete guessed the last one, where Jimmy raises a burning ﬂag at



a Washington peace rally, had been ﬁnished  around 1973,  because Nixon was



still  president when  the story  ended. That Rothstein  had never published  the



ﬁnal Gold  books (plus  yet another  novel, this  one about the  Civil  War)  blew



Pete’s mind. They were so good!



    Pete took  only  one Moleskine at a time  down from  the attic,  reading  them



with  his  door closed and  an ear cocked for  unexpected company when  there



were other members of his  family  in  the house. He always kept  another book



handy, and  if  he heard  approaching footsteps,  he would   slide  the notebook



under his mattress and pick  up the spare. The only time  he’d been caught was



by Tina, who had the unfortunate habit  of walking  around in her sock feet.



    “What’s  that?”  she’d asked from the doorway.



    “None   of your  beeswax,” he had replied,  slipping   the notebook  under his



pillow. “And  if  you say anything to Mom  or Dad, you’re in trouble  with  me.”



    “Is  it  porno?”



    “No!”     Although   Mr.   Rothstein    could  write    some  pretty   racy  scenes,



especially for  an old  guy.  For instance the  one where  Jimmy  and  these two



hippie chicks—

97
    “Then  why don’t  you want me to see it?”



    “Because it’s private.”



    Her  eyes lit up. “Is  it yours? Are you writing   a book?”



    “Maybe.  So what if I am?”



    “I  think   that’s cool! What’s it  about?”



    “Bugs  having sex on the moon.”



    She giggled.  “I  thought  you said it  wasn’t porno. Can I  read it when  you’re



done?”



    “We’ll   see. Just keep your trap shut, okay?”



    She had agreed, and one thing   you could  say for Teens, she rarely broke a



promise. That  had been two  years ago, and Pete was sure she’d forgotten  all



about it.



    Billy   Webber  came rolling   up  on  a gleaming  ten-speed. “Hey,   Saubers!”



Like almost  everyone else (Mr. Ricker  was an exception), Billy   pronounced it



Sobbers instead of SOW-bers, but what the hell. It  was sort of  a dipshit   name



however you said it. “What  you doin this  summer?”



    “Working   at the Garner Street libe.”



    “Still?”



    “I  talked  em into twenty  hours a week.”



    “Fuck,  man, you’re too young to be a wage-slave!”



    “I    don’t  mind,”    Pete said,  which   was  the  truth.    The  libe   meant  free



computer-time,   among  the   other  perks,   with   no   one  looking   over  your



shoulder. “What about you?”



    “Goin   to  our summer  place up  in  Maine. China  Lake. Many  cute girls  in



bikinis,  man, and the ones from Massachusetts know what to do.”



    Then  maybe they can show you, Pete thought  snidely, but  when Billy   held



out his palm,  Pete slapped him ﬁve and watched him  go with  mild   envy. Ten-



speed bike under  his ass; expensive Nike  kicks on  his  feet; summer place  in



Maine. It  seemed that some people had already caught up from  the  bad time.



Or maybe the bad time  had missed them completely.  Not  so with  the Saubers



family. They were doing okay, but—

98
    There must  be more money, the house had whispered in the Lawrence story.



There must be more money. And honey, that was resonance.



    Could  the  notebooks be turned  into  money? Was there a way? Pete didn’t



even like to  think  about  giving  them  up, but  at the  same time he recognized



how wrong  it  was to  keep them  hidden  away in  the  attic.  Rothstein’s work,



especially the  last  two  Jimmy  Gold   books, deserved to  be  shared with  the



world.  They would  remake Rothstein’s  reputation,  Pete was sure of that,  but



his rep still  wasn’t  that bad,  and besides, it wasn’t the  important  part.  People



would  like  them,  that  was the  important   part.  Love them, if  they  were  like



Pete.



    Only,  handwritten  manuscripts weren’t like  untraceable twenties and ﬁfties.



Pete would  be caught, and  he might   go to  jail.  He  wasn’t sure exactly what



crime he could be charged with—not   receiving stolen property, surely, because



he hadn’t  received it,  only  found  it—but   he  was positive  that  trying  to  sell



what wasn’t  yours had  to be  some kind of crime.  Donating  the  notebooks to



Rothstein’s alma mater seemed like  a possible answer, only he’d have to do  it



anonymously, or it   would  all  come out  and  his  parents would  discover that



their  son had  been supporting   them  with   a murdered  man’s  stolen money.



Besides, for an anonymous donation you got zilch.




                                                            •••




Although  he hadn’t  written  about  Rothstein’s murder  in  his term  paper, Pete



had read all about it, mostly  in the computer  room at the library. He  knew that



Rothstein had  been shot “execution-style.”  He  knew  that the  cops had found



enough different   tracks in   the dooryard  to  believe  two,  three,  or  even four



people had been involved, and that,  based on the size of those tracks, all  were



probably men. They also thought that  two of the men had been killed  at a New



York rest area not long after.



    Margaret  Brennan, the author’s ﬁrst wife,  had been interviewed in  Paris not



long after the killing.   “Everyone talked about him  in that  provincial little   town



where he lived,” she said. “What  else did they have to talk  about? Cows? Some

99
farmer’s new manure spreader? To the provincials,  John was a big  deal. They



had the erroneous idea that  writers   make as much  as corporate bankers, and



believed he had hundreds of thousands of dollars stashed away on that rundown



farm  of  his.   Someone from  out   of  town   heard  the  loose  talk,   that’s  all.



Closemouthed Yankees, my Irish fanny! I blame the locals as much as the thugs



who did it.”



    When   asked  about  the  possibility    that   Rothstein  had  squirreled   away



manuscripts as  well  as cash, Peggy  Brennan had  given  what  the  interview



called “a cigarette-raspy chuckle.”



    “More  rumors,  darling.  Johnny  pulled  back from  the world  for  one reason



and one reason only. He was burned out and too proud to admit it.”



    Lot  you knew, Pete thought.  He probably  divorced you because he got tired



of that cigarette-raspy chuckle.



    There was plenty of speculation in  the newspaper and magazine articles Pete



had read,  but  he  himself  liked   what  Mr.  Ricker  called  “the   Occam’s razor



principle.”   According   to  that,   the  simplest  and  most   obvious answer  was



usually the right  one. Three men had broken in, and one of them had killed  his



partners so he could keep all  the  swag for himself.  Pete had no  idea why the



guy had come to  this  city  afterwards, or  why he’d  buried  the trunk,   but  one



thing  he was sure of: the surviving  robber  was never going to  come back and



get it.



    Pete’s math skills weren’t  the strongest—it  was why he needed that summer



course to  bone  up—but   you  didn’t   have to   be an  Einstein  to   run  simple



numbers and  assess certain possibilities.   If   the  surviving   robber  had  been



thirty-ﬁve  in  1978,  which  seemed like a fair  estimate to  Pete, he would  have



been sixty-seven in 2010, when Pete found the trunk,  and around seventy now.



Seventy was ancient. If he turned  up looking  for  his loot,  he’d probably  do so



on a walker.



    Pete smiled as he turned onto Sycamore Street.



    He  thought  there were three possibilities  for  why the  surviving  robber had



never come  back  for  his  trunk,   all   equally  likely.   One,  he  was  in  prison



somewhere for some other crime. Two, he was dead. Three was a combination

100
of one and two: he had died  in prison.  Whichever  it  was, Pete didn’t think   he



had to  worry  about  the  guy. The  notebooks, though,   were a different   story.



About  them  he had plenty  of  worries. Sitting   on  them was like  sitting   on  a



bunch of beautiful stolen paintings  you could never sell.



    Or  a crate ﬁlled with  dynamite.




                                                            •••




In September of 2013—almost   exactly thirty-ﬁve   years from the  date of John



Rothstein’s murder—Pete tucked  the last of the trunk-money  into  an envelope



addressed to his father. The ﬁnal  installment  amounted  to three  hundred and



forty dollars. And  because he felt that hope which could never be realized was a



cruel thing,  he added a one-line note:




                        This is the last of it.  I  am sorry there’s not  more.




    He  took  a city  bus to Birch  Hill   Mall,  where there was a mailbox  between



Discount Electronix  and  the yogurt  place. He  looked around, making  sure he



wasn’t observed, and kissed the envelope. Then he slipped it  through   the slot



and walked away. He did it Jimmy  Gold–style:  without  looking  back.




                                                            •••




A week  or two  after  New  Year’s, Pete was in the  kitchen,  making  himself  a



peanut butter  and  jelly  sandwich,  when  he overheard his  parents talking   to



Tina in the living   room. It  was about Chapel Ridge.



    “I  thought  maybe we could afford it,” his dad was saying. “If  I gave you false



hope, I’m just as sorry as can be, Teens.”



    “It’s  because the mystery money stopped coming,” Tina said. “Right?”



    Mom   said, “Partly   but  not  entirely.  Dad  tried  for  a  bank loan,  but  they



wouldn’t   give   it   to  him.    They  went   over  his   business records  and  did



something—”

101
    “A   two-year  proﬁt   projection,”   Dad  said. Some of  the  old  post-accident



bitterness crept  into  his  voice. “Lots  of  compliments,  because those are free.



They said they might   be able to make the loan  in 2016,  if  the business grows



by ﬁve  percent. In  the meantime,  this  goddam Polar  Vortex thing   . .  .  we’re



way over your mom’s budget  on heating expenses. Everyone is, from Maine to



Minnesota. I know that’s no consolation, but  there it is.”



    “Honey,  we’re so, so sorry,” Mom said.



    Pete expected Tina to  explode into  a full-ﬂedged  tantrum—there   were lots



more of those as she approached the big  thirteen—but   it   didn’t  happen. She



said she understood,  and that   Chapel Ridge   was probably  a snooty  school,



anyway. Then she came out to the kitchen and asked Pete if he would make her



a sandwich, because his looked good.  He  did,  and they  went into   the living



room, and all four of  them watched TV  together and had some laughs over The



Big Bang Theory.



    Later that  night,  though,  he heard Tina crying behind the closed door of her



room. It  made him  feel awful.  He  went into  his  own room,  pulled  one of the



Moleskines out from  under his  mattress, and began rereading The Runner Goes



West.




                                                            •••




He was taking Mrs.  Davis’s creative writing  course that semester, and although



he got As on his  stories, he knew by February that  he was never going to be a



ﬁction-writer.  Although   he was good with  words, a thing   he didn’t  need Mrs.



Davis to  tell  him  (although  she often did),  he just didn’t   possess that kind of



creative spark. His  chief interest  was in reading ﬁction,  then trying   to analyze



what he had read, ﬁtting  it  into  a larger pattern. He  had gotten a taste for this



kind  of detective  work  while  writing   his  paper on Rothstein.   At  the  Garner



Street Library  he  hunted  out  one  of  the  books Mr.  Ricker   had mentioned,



Fiedler’s Love and Death in the American Novel, and liked  it  so much  that  he



bought  his own  copy in  order  to highlight    certain passages and write in  the



margins. He  wanted to  major  in  English  more than  ever, and teach like   Mr.

102
Ricker (except maybe  at a university   instead of in  high  school), and  at some



point write  a book  like Mr.  Fiedler’s, getting  into  the faces of more traditional



critics  and questioning  the established way  those traditional  critics  looked  at



things.



    And  yet!



    There  had to  be  more money. Mr.  Feldman,  the  guidance counselor, told



him  that  getting  a full-boat   scholarship to  an Ivy  League school was “rather



unlikely,”  and Pete knew  even that was an exaggeration. He  was just  another



whitebread high  school kid from  a so-so Midwestern school, a kid with  a part-



time  library  job  and  a few  unglamorous extracurriculars  like  newspaper and



yearbook. Even if he did manage to catch a boat, there was Tina to think about.



She was basically trudging  through   her days, getting  mostly  Bs  and Cs, and



seemed more interested in makeup and shoes and pop music than school these



days. She needed a change, a clean break. He  was wise enough,  even at not



quite seventeen, to know  that Chapel Ridge  might  not  ﬁx  his little   sister . .  .



but then again, it  might.  Especially since she wasn’t broken. At least not yet.



    I  need a plan, he thought,  only that  wasn’t precisely what he needed. What



he needed was a story, and although he was never going to  be a great ﬁction-



writer  like Mr.  Rothstein  or Mr.  Lawrence, he was able to plot. That  was what



he had to do now. Only  every plot  stood on an idea, and on that  score he kept



coming up empty.




                                                            •••




He had begun  to spend a lot  of time  at  Water Street Books,  where the coffee



was cheap and even new paperbacks were thirty  percent off.  He went  by  one



afternoon in March,  on his  way to  his after-school job at  the library,  thinking



he might  pick  up  something by  Joseph Conrad. In one of  his few  interviews,



Rothstein  had called Conrad  “the  ﬁrst  great writer   of the  twentieth   century,



even though his best work was written before 1900.”



    Outside  the  bookstore,  a long  table  had been set up  beneath an  awning.



SPRING CLEANING,    the sign said. EVERYTHING    ON  THIS  TABLE  70%

103
OFF! And   below  it:  WHO    KNOWS   WHAT    BURIED   TREASURE  YOU



WILL  FIND!  This  line was ﬂanked by big yellow  smiley-faces, to show it was a



joke, but Pete didn’t  think  it  was funny.



    He  ﬁnally  had an idea.



    A  week later, he stayed after school to talk to Mr. Ricker.




                                                            •••




“Great to  see you, Pete.” Mr.  Ricker was wearing  a paisley shirt  with  billowy



sleeves today, along with a psychedelic tie. Pete thought  the combination  said



quite a lot about  why the love-and-peace generation had collapsed. “Mrs. Davis



says great things about you.”



    “She’s cool,”   Pete said. “I’m    learning  a lot.”   Actually   he  wasn’t, and  he



didn’t think   anyone else in her class was, either. She was nice enough, and quite



often had interesting things  to  say, but Pete was coming to the conclusion that



creative writing  couldn’t really  be taught, only learned.



    “What   can I do for you?”



    “Remember   when  you  were  talking   about  how  valuable  a  handwritten



Shakespeare manuscript would be?”



    Mr.  Ricker  grinned. “I  always talk about that  during  a midweek class, when



things  get dozy. There’s nothing   like  a little   avarice to  perk  kids  up.  Why?



Have you found a folio, Malvolio?”



    Pete  smiled  politely.  “No,   but   when we  were visiting   my   uncle Phil   in



Cleveland during   February vacation,  I  went  out   to  his  garage and found  a



whole bunch  of old  books. Most of  them  were about Tom  Swift.  He was this



kid inventor.”



    “I   remember Tom and his friend  Ned Newton  well,”   Mr. Ricker  said. “Tom



Swift and His Motor Cycle, Tom Swift and His Wizard Camera . . . when I was a



kid myself, we used to joke about Tom Swift and His Electric Grandmother.”



    Pete renewed his  polite  smile. “There  were also a dozen or so about  a girl



detective named Trixie Belden, and another one named Nancy Drew.”

104
    “I  believe I see where you’re going with this, and I hate to disappoint you,


but I  must. Tom Swift, Nancy Drew, the Hardy Boys, Trixie Belden . . . all


interesting relics of a bygone age, and a wonderful yardstick to judge how


much what is called ‘YA ﬁction’ has changed in the last eighty years or so, but


those books have little or no monetary value, even when found in excellent


condition.”


    “I  know,” Pete said. “I checked it out later on Fine Books. That’s a blog. But


while I was looking those books over, Uncle Phil came out to the garage and


said he had something else that might interest me even more. Because I’d told


him I  was into John Rothstein. It was a signed hardback of The Runner. Not


dedicated, just a ﬂat signature. Uncle Phil said some guy named Al gave it to


him because he owed my uncle ten dollars from a poker game. Uncle Phil said


he’d had it for almost ﬁfty years. I looked at the copyright page, and it’s a ﬁrst


edition.”


    Mr. Ricker had been rocked back in his chair, but now he sat down with a


bang. “Whoa! You probably know that Rothstein didn’t sign many autographs,


right?”


    “Yeah,” Pete said. “He called it ‘defacing a perfectly good book.’”


    “Uh-huh,  he was like Raymond Chandler that way. And you know signed


volumes are worth more when it’s just the signature? Sans dedication?”


    “Yes. It says so on Fine Books.”


    “A  signed ﬁrst of Rothstein’s most famous book probably would be worth


money.” Mr. Ricker considered. “On second thought, strike the probably. What


kind of condition is it in?”


    “Good,”  Pete said promptly. “Some foxing on the  inside cover and title


page, is all.”


    “You have been reading up on this stuff.”


    “More since my uncle showed me the Rothstein.”


    “I  don’t suppose you’re in possession of this fabulous book, are you?”


    I’ve got something a lot better, Pete thought. If you only knew.


    Sometimes he felt the weight of that knowledge, and never more than today,


telling these lies.

105
    Necessary lies, he reminded himself.



    “I  don’t,  but  my uncle said he’d give it  to me, if  I wanted  it. I  said I needed



to think  about it,  because he doesn’t . . . you know . . .”



    “He  doesn’t have any idea of how much it might  really be worth?”



    “Yeah. But  then I  started wondering . . .”



    “What?”



    Pete dug  into his  back pocket, took out  a folded sheet of paper, and handed



it to  Mr. Ricker.  “I  went looking  on the  Internet  for book dealers here in town



that buy  and sell ﬁrst editions,  and I found  these three. I know  you’re sort of a



book collector yourself—”



    “Not   much,  I   can’t afford  serious collecting  on  my  salary, but  I’ve  got  a



signed Theodore Roethke  that   I  intend  to  hand  down  to  my  children.  The



Waking. Very  ﬁne poems.  Also  a Vonnegut,  but   that’s  not  worth  so much;



unlike Rothstein,  Father Kurt  signed everything.”



    “Anyway,  I  wondered if   you knew  any of these, and  if  you do,  which  one



might  be the best. If  I decided to  let him  give me the  book . .  . and then, you



know, sell it.”



    Mr.  Ricker unfolded  the sheet, glanced at it, then looked at Pete again. That



gaze, both keen and sympathetic, made Pete feel uneasy. This might have been



a bad idea, he  really  wasn’t much good at  ﬁction,  but   he was in  it  now  and



would have to plow through  somehow.



    “As  it  happens, I know all  of them.  But jeez, kiddo,  I  also know how much



Rothstein means to  you, and not  just  from  your paper last  year. Annie Davis



says you bring him   up often  in  Creative Writing.   Claims  the Gold  trilogy   is



your Bible.”



    Pete supposed this  was true, but  he  hadn’t realized how  blabby  he’d been



until  now. He  resolved to stop talking   about Rothstein  so much.  It  might  be



dangerous. People might think  back and remember, if—



    If.



    “It’s   good to  have literary  heroes, Pete, especially if  you  plan to  major  in



English  when you  get to  college.  Rothstein  is yours—at  least for  now—and

106
that book could be the beginning  of your own library.  Are you sure you want to



sell it?”



    Pete  could  answer this  question with   fair  honesty, even though  it   wasn’t



really a signed book he was talking about. “Pretty  sure, yeah. Things have been



a little  tough at home—”



    “I  know  what happened to your  father at City  Center, and I’m  sorry as hell.



At least they caught the psycho before he could do any more damage.”



    “Dad’s  better  now, and both  he and my  mom  are working  again, only  I’m



probably going to  need money for college, see . . .”



    “I  understand.”



    “But   that’s not the  biggest thing,  at least not now. My  sister wants to go to



Chapel Ridge, and  my parents told  her  she couldn’t, at  least not this  coming



year. They can’t quite  swing  it.  Close, but  no  cigar. And  I  think  she needs a



place like that. She’s kind of, I don’t  know, lagging.”



    Mr.  Ricker, who had undoubtedly  known lots  of students who were lagging,



nodded gravely.



    “But   if  Tina could get  in with   a bunch of strivers—especially this  one girl,



Barbara Robinson, she used to know from  when we  lived on  the West Side—



things might  turn  around.”



    “It’s  good of you to think   of her future, Pete. Noble, even.”



    Pete had never thought of himself  as noble. The idea made him blink.



    Perhaps seeing his embarrassment, Mr.  Ricker  turned  his attention   to the



list  again. “Okay. Grissom  Books would  have been your best bet when  Teddy



Grissom was still   alive,  but  his  son runs  the  shop now,  and he’s a  bit  of  a



tightwad.  Honest,  but close with  a buck.  He’d  say it’s the times,  but  it’s also



his nature.”



    “Okay  . . .”



    “I   assume you’ve checked on the Net to  ﬁnd  out how  much a signed  ﬁrst-



edition Runner in good condition is valued at?”



    “Yeah. Two or three thousand. Not  enough for a year at Chapel Ridge, but a



start. What  my dad calls earnest money.”

107
    Mr.  Ricker nodded. “That  sounds about right.  Teddy Junior would  start you



at eight  hundred. You might   get him  up to  a grand, but  if  you kept  pushing,



he’d get his back up  and tell  you to take a hike.  This next  one, Buy the Book,



is  Buddy  Franklin’s   shop. He’s  also  okay—by  which   I  mean  honest—but



Buddy doesn’t have much interest in  twentieth-century   ﬁction.  His big  deal is



selling old  maps and seventeenth-century atlases to rich guys in  Branson Park



and Sugar Heights. But if  you could talk  Buddy into  valuing  the book, then go



to Teddy Junior at Grissom, you might  get  twelve hundred. I’m  not saying you



would, I’m  just saying it’s possible.”



    “What   about Andrew Halliday  Rare Editions?”



    Mr.   Ricker frowned.  “I’d   steer clear of Halliday.   He’s got  a little   shop on



Lacemaker Lane, in that walking  mall  off Lower Main  Street. Not  much wider



than an Amtrak  car, but  damn near a block  long. Seems to do quite  well,  but



there’s an odor  about  him.   I’ve  heard it   said  he’s not  too  picky  about  the



provenance of certain items. Do you know what that is?”



    “The  line of ownership.”



    “Right.   Ending  with  a piece of paper that  says you legally own what you’re



trying  to  sell. The  only thing   I  know  for sure is  that about  ﬁfteen  years ago,



Halliday  sold a proof copy of James Agee’s Let Us Now Praise Famous Men, and



it  turned  out to  have been stolen from  the  estate of Brooke Astor.  She was a



rich  old biddy   from  New  York  with  a  larcenous business manager. Halliday



showed a receipt, and his story of how he came by the book was credible, so the



investigation was dropped. But  receipts can be forged, you know. I’d steer clear



of him.”



    “Thanks,  Mr.  Ricker,”  Pete said, thinking   that  if  he went  ahead with this,



Andrew Halliday   Rare Editions would  be his  ﬁrst stop.  But  he would have to



be very, very careful, and if  Mr.  Halliday  wouldn’t   do a cash deal, that would



mean no deal. Plus,  under  no  circumstances could  he know  Pete’s name. A



disguise might be in  order, although it  wouldn’t  do to go overboard on that.



    “You’re  welcome, Pete, but if I  said I felt good about this,  I’d be lying.”



    Pete could relate. He didn’t  feel so good about it himself.

108
                                                            •••




He was still   mulling   his options  a month  later,  and had  almost come to  the



conclusion that  trying   to sell  even one of the  notebooks would  be  too much



risk for too  little  reward. If  it  went to  a private collector—like  the  ones he had



sometimes read about, who bought valuable paintings  to  hang in secret rooms



where only they could look at  them—it  would  be okay. But he couldn’t be sure



that  would  happen. He  was leaning  more and  more to  the  idea of  donating



them anonymously, maybe mailing  them  to the New  York  University  Library.



The curator of a place like that  would  understand the value of them, no doubt.



But doing  that  would  be a little   more public  than  Pete liked  to  think  about,



not at all like  dropping  the letters with  the money inside them into  anonymous



streetcorner mailboxes. What if someone remembered him at the post ofﬁce?



    Then,  on a rainy  night  in late  April  of  2014, Tina  came to his room again.



Mrs. Beasley was long  gone, and the  footy  pajamas had been replaced by an



oversized Cleveland Browns football  jersey, but to  Pete she looked very much



like  the worried  girl  who  had asked, during  the  Era of  Bad Feelings, if  their



mother and  father were going  to  get  divorced. Her  hair  was in  pigtails,   and



with  her face cleansed of the little makeup Mom  let her wear (Pete had an idea



she put on fresh layers when  she got to  school), she looked closer to ten  than



going on thirteen.  He thought,  Teens is almost a teen. It was hard to believe.



    “Can  I come in for a minute?”



    “Sure.”



    He  was lying  on  his bed,  reading a novel  by Philip   Roth  called When She



Was Good. Tina sat on his desk chair, pulling   her jersey nightshirt   down over



her shins  and  blowing  a  few  errant  hairs  from  her  forehead, where a  faint



scattering of acne had appeared.



    “Something  on your mind?”  Pete asked.



    “Um   . . . yeah.” But she didn’t  go on.



    He  wrinkled  his nose at her. “Go on, spill it.  Some boy you’ve been crushing



on told you to buzz off?”



    “You  sent that money,” she said. “Didn’t  you?”

109
    Pete stared at her, ﬂabbergasted. He tried to speak and couldn’t. He  tried to



persuade himself she hadn’t said what she’d said, and couldn’t do that, either.



    She nodded as if he had admitted it. “Yeah, you did.  It’s all over your face.”



    “It   didn’t  come from me, Teens, you just took me by surprise. Where would



I get money like  that?”



    “I   don’t  know,  but  I  remember the  night   you asked me  what  I’d  do if   I



found a buried treasure.”



    “I  did?”  Thinking,   You were half-asleep. You can’t remember that.



    “Doubloons,  you  said. Coins from olden  days. I said I’d  give it  to  Dad and



Mom  so they wouldn’t   ﬁght  anymore,  and that’s just  what  you  did.  Only  it



wasn’t pirate treasure, it was regular money.”



    Pete  put  his  book  aside. “Don’t   you  go  telling   them   that.  They  might



actually believe you.”



    She looked at him  solemnly. “I  never would.  But I  need to ask you . . . is  it



really all gone?”



    “The   note in  the  last  envelope said it  was,”  Pete replied  cautiously, “and



there hasn’t been any more since, so I guess so.”



    She sighed. “Yeah. What I  ﬁgured. But  I had to ask.” She got up to go.



    “Tina?”



    “What?”



    “I’m   really sorry about Chapel Ridge and all. I wish  the money wasn’t gone.”



    She sat down again. “I’ll   keep your secret if  you keep one Mom and I  have.



Okay?”



    “Okay.”



    “Last  November she took me to Chap—that’s what  the girls  call it—for  one



of their  tour  days. She didn’t want  Dad to  know, because she thought he’d be



mad, but back then she thought  they maybe could afford it, especially if I  got a



need scholarship. Do you know what that is?”



    Pete nodded.



    “Only   the  money  hadn’t  stopped coming  then,  and  it  was before all   the



snow and weird  cold weather  in December and  January. We saw some of the



classrooms, and the science labs. There’s like a jillion  computers. We  also saw

110
the gym,  which  is humongous,  and the showers. They have private  changing



booths, too,  not  just  cattle stalls  like  at  Northﬁeld.   At  least they  do for  the



girls. Guess who my tour group had for a guide?”



    “Barbara Robinson?”



    She smiled. “It   was great to see her again.” Then the smile faded. “She said



hello and  gave me a  hug  and asked how  everyone was, but  I  could  tell  she



hardly remembered me. Why  would  she, right?  Did  you know  her and  Hilda



and Betsy and a couple of other girls  from back then  were at the ’Round  Here



concert? The one the guy who ran over Dad tried to blow up?”



    “Yeah.”  Pete also knew  that  Barbara Robinson’s big  brother  had played  a



part in saving Barbara and Barbara’s friends and maybe thousands of others. He



had gotten a medal or  a key to  the city,  or something.  That was real heroism,



not sneaking around and mailing stolen money to your  parents.



    “Did   you know I  was invited to go with  them  that night?”



    “What?  No!”



    Tina  nodded.  “I   said I  couldn’t   because I was sick,  but  I   wasn’t. It   was



because Mom said they couldn’t afford to buy  me a ticket.  We moved a couple



of months later.”



    “Jesus, how about that, huh?”



    “Yeah, I  missed all the excitement.”



    “So how was the school tour?”



    “Good,  but  not great, or  anything. I’ll   be ﬁne at Northﬁeld.   Hey, once they



ﬁnd out I’m  your sister, they’ll  probably give me a free ride, Honor Roll  Boy.”



    Pete  suddenly felt  sad, almost  like  crying.   It  was the  sweetness that had



always been part of Tina’s nature combined with that ugly  scatter of pimples on



her forehead. He wondered if she got  teased about those. If she didn’t yet,  she



would.



    He  held  out  his  arms. “C’mere.”  She did,  and  he gave her  a strong  hug.



Then  he  held  her  by  the   shoulders and  looked  at   her  sternly.  “But   that



money . . . it wasn’t me.”



    “Uh-huh,   okay. So was that  notebook you  were reading  stuck in  with   the



money? I bet  it  was.”  She giggled.  “You looked  so guilty   that  night  when  I

111
walked in on you.”



    He  rolled his eyes. “Go to bed, short stuff.”



    “Okay.”   At   the  door  she  turned  back.  “I   liked   those  private  changing



booths, though. And  something else. Want to know? You’ll  think  it’s weird.”



    “Go  ahead, lay it on me.”



    “The  kids  wear uniforms.   For the  girls  it’s  gray skirts  with  white   blouses



and white  kneesocks. There are also sweaters, if you want. Some gray like the



skirts and some this pretty dark red—hunter  red they call it,  Barbara said.”



    “Uniforms,”   Pete said, bemused. “You like the idea of uniforms.”



    “Knew   you’d  think  it   was weird.  Because boys don’t know  how girls  are.



Girls can be mean if you’re  wearing the wrong  clothes, or even if you wear the



right   ones too  much.  You  can wear  different   blouses, or  your  sneakers on



Tuesdays and Thursdays, you can do different things with your  hair, but  pretty



soon they—the mean girls—ﬁgure   out  you’ve only  got three  jumpers and six



good school skirts.  Then  they  say stuff.  But   when everyone wears the  same



thing  every day . . . except maybe the sweater’s a different color . . .”  She blew



back those few errant strands again. “Boys don’t have the same problem.”



    “I  actually  do get it,”  Pete said.



    “Anyway,  Mom’s going  to  teach me how to make my  own clothes, then I’ll



have more. Simplicity, Butterick.  Also, I’ve  got friends. Plenty  of them.”



    “Ellen,  for  instance.”



    “Ellen’s  okay.”



    And  headed for a rewarding  job as a waitress or a drive-thru  girl  after high



school, Pete thought but did  not say. If she doesn’t get pregnant at sixteen, that



is.



    “I  just  wanted to tell  you not to worry. If  you were.”



    “I  wasn’t,”  Pete said. “I  know you’ll  be ﬁne. And  it  wasn’t me who sent the



money. Honest.”



    She gave  him  a  smile,  both  sad and  complicit,   that  made her  look  like



anything but  a little  girl.  “Okay. Gotcha.”



    She left, closing the door gently  behind her.

112
    Pete  lay  awake for  a long  time  that   night.   Not  long  after,  he made  the



biggest mistake of his life.

113
                                                 1979–2014









Morris  Randolph  Bellamy  was sentenced to  life  in  prison  on  January 11th,



1979, and for  a brief  time  things  went  fast before they went  slow. And  slow.



And slow. His  intake at Waynesville State Prison was completed by six PM the



day of his sentencing. His cellmate, a convicted murderer  named Roy Allgood,



raped him for the ﬁrst  time forty-ﬁve  minutes after lights-out.



    “Hold   still   and don’t  you  shit  on my  cock, young  man,”  he whispered in



Morris’s ear. “If  you do that,  I’ll   cut your  nose. You’ll look  like  a pig  been bit



by a allygator.”



    Morris,   who had  been raped before, held  still,  biting   his  forearm to  keep



from  screaming. He  thought  of  Jimmy   Gold,  as Jimmy  had been  before he



started chasing the  Golden Buck.  When  he had  still  been an authentic  hero.



He thought  of Harold  Fineman,  Jimmy’s high  school friend (Morris  had never



had a high school friend himself),  saying that  all good things  must end, which



implied  the converse was also true: bad things must end, too.



    This  particular  bad thing  went  on for a long  time, and while  it  did,  Morris



repeated Jimmy’s mantra from The Runner over and over in his mind: Shit don’t



mean shit, shit don’t mean shit, shit don’t mean shit. It helped.



    A  little.



    In  the weeks that followed, he was ass-raped by Allgood on some nights and



mouth-raped on others. On  the whole, he preferred taking  it  up the ass, where



there were no  tastebuds. Either  way, he thought   that  Cora Ann  Hooper,  the



woman he had so foolishly attacked while  in  a blackout,  was getting what  she



would probably  have considered perfect justice. On the  other hand, she’d only



had to endure an unwanted invader once.

114
    There  was a  clothing   factory attached  to  Waynesville.  The  factory  made



jeans and the kind  of shirts  workmen  wore. On  his ﬁfth  day in  the  dyehouse,



one of Allgood’s friends  took him  by  the wrist,  led Morris  around the  number



three blue-vat, and told  him  to unbuckle  his pants. “You just  hold still   and let



me do  the  rest,”  he said.  When  he  was ﬁnished,  he said,  “I  ain’t  a  fag, or



anything, but  I  got to get  along, same as anyone. Tell anyone I’m a fag and I’ll



fuckin kill   you.”



    “I   won’t,”   Morris  said.  Shit  don’t  mean shit,  he  told  himself.   Shit  don’t



mean shit.




                                                            •••




One day  in  mid-March  of  1979,  a Hell’s   Angel  type  with  tattooed  slabs of



muscle strolled up  to Morris  in  the exercise yard. “Can you write?”  this fellow



said with  an unmistakable  Deep-South accent—kin  you raht? “I  hear you can



write.”



    “Yes,  I can write,”   Morris  said. He  saw Allgood  approach, notice who  was



walking  beside Morris, and sheer off toward the basketball court  at the far  end



of the yard.



    “I’m   Warren Duckworth.  Most folks  call me Duck.”



    “I’m   Morris Bel—”



    “I  know  who you are. Write purty  well,  do you?”



    “Yes.”   Morris  spoke  with   no  hesitation  or  false modesty.  The  way  Roy



Allgood had suddenly found another place to be wasn’t lost on him.



    “Could  you  write  a letter to  my wife,  if I  sort of tell  you what  to say? Only



put it  in, like,  better words?”



    “I  could  do that, and I will,   but I’ve got  a little  problem.”



    “I   know what  your problem  is,”  his new acquaintance said. “You  write  my



wife  a letter  that’ll   make  her happy, maybe  stop her  divorce  talk,  you  ain’t



gonna have no more trouble with that  skinny bitchboy  in your house.”



    I’m  the skinny bitchboy  in  my house, Morris thought,  but  he felt the tiniest



glimmer  of hope. “Sir, I’m  going to  write  your wife the prettiest  letter  she ever

115
got in her life.”



    Looking  at Duckworth’s  huge arms, he thought  of something he’d seen on a



nature  program.  There   was a  kind   of   bird   that   lived  in   the   mouths  of



crocodiles, granted survival on a day-to-day basis by pecking bits of food out of



the reptiles’ jaws. Morris  thought  that kind  of  bird probably  had a pretty good



deal.



    “I’d   need some paper.” Thinking  of the reformatory,  where ﬁve lousy sheets



of Blue Horse was all  you ever got, paper with   big spots of pulp  ﬂoating  in  it



like pre-cancerous moles.



    “I’ll   get  you paper. All  you want.  You just  write  that letter,  and at the  end



say ever’ word came from my mouth and you just wrote it  down.”



    “Okay,  tell me what  would make her most happy to hear.”



    Duck  considered, then brightened. “That  she throws a ﬁne fuck?”



    “She’ll  know  that  already.” It  was Morris’s turn  to  consider. “What  part  of



her does she say she’d change, if she could?”



    Duck’s  frown deepened. “I dunno, she always says her ass is too big. But you



can’t say that, it’ll  make things worse instead of better.”



    “No,   what  I’ll   write  is  how  much  you love  to  put  your  hands on  it  and



squeeze it.”



    Duck  was smiling  now. “Better watch out  or I’ll  be rapin you myself.”



    “What’s  her favorite dress? Does she have one?”



    “Yeah,  a green one. It’s  silk.  Her  ma gave it  to  her last  year, just before I



went up.  She wears that one when we go out dancin.”  He  looked down at  the



ground. “She better not be dancin now, but she might  be. I know that.  Maybe I



can’t write much more than my  own fuckin  name, but I ain’t  no stupe.”



    “I  could  write how much  you like to  squeeze her bottom when she’s wearing



that green dress, how’s that? I could say thinking of that  gets you hot.”



    Duck   looked  at   Morris  with   an  expression that   was utterly    foreign  to



Morris’s Waynesville experience. It was respect. “Say, that’s not bad.”



    Morris   was still  working  on it.   Sex wasn’t all women  thought  about when



they thought  about men; sex wasn’t romance. “What color is her hair?”

116
    “Well,   right  now  I don’t  know. She’s what you call a brownette  when there



ain’t no dye in it.”



    Brown  didn’t  sing,  at  least not  to  Morris,  but  there  were ways you could



skate around stuff  like  that.  It  occurred to  him  that  this  was very much  like



selling  a product   in  an ad  agency, and pushed  the  idea away. Survival  was



survival. He  said, “I’ll   write  how much  you like  to  see the sun shining in  her



hair, especially in the morning.”



    Duck   didn’t   reply.  He   was staring   at  Morris  with    his  bushy  eyebrows



furrowed together.



    “What?  No  good?”



    Duck  seized Morris’s arm,  and for one terrible  moment  Morris  was sure he



was going to break it  like  a dead branch. HATE  was tattooed on the ﬁngers of



the big  man’s knuckles. Duck breathed, “It’s  like  poitry.  I’ll  get  you the paper



tomorrow. There’s lots in the liberry.”



    That  night,  when Morris  returned to the  cellblock after a three-to-nine  shift



spent blue-dying,  his  house was empty. Rolf  Venziano, in  the  next  cell, told



Morris  that   Roy  Allgood  had  been  taken  to  the  inﬁrmary.  When   Allgood



returned the next day, both his  eyes were black and his nose had been splinted.



He looked at Morris  from his bunk,  then rolled over and faced the wall.



    Warren  Duckworth  was Morris’s  ﬁrst client.  Over  the next thirty-six   years,



he had many.




                                                            •••




Sometimes when he couldn’t  sleep, lying  on his  back in  his cell  (by the  early



’90s he had  a single,  complete  with  a shelf  of  well-thumbed  books),  Morris



would soothe himself by  remembering his discovery of Jimmy  Gold.  That  had



been a shaft  of  bright   sunlight   in  the   confused and angry  darkness of  his



adolescence.



    By  then  his  parents had been ﬁghting   all  the  time,  and although  he  had



grown to heartily  dislike both  of them, his mother  had the better armor against



the world,   and so he  adopted her  sarcastic curl of  a smile  and  the  superior,

117
debunking  attitude  that   went  with  it.   Except for  English,  where  he got  As



(when he wanted to),  he was a straight-C   student. This  drove Anita   Bellamy



into  report-card-waving   frenzies. He  had  no friends  but   plenty  of  enemies.



Three times  he  suffered beatings. Two  were administered  by  boys who  just



didn’t  like his general attitude,  but  one boy had a more speciﬁc issue. This was



a hulking  senior football  player named Pete Womack,  who didn’t   care for the



way Morris was checking out his girlfriend  one lunch period  in the cafeteria.



    “What   are you looking at, rat-face?” Womack enquired, as the tables around



Morris’s solitary position  grew silent.



    “Her,”   Morris said. He was frightened,  and when clearheaded, fright usually



imposed at least a modicum of restraint on his  behavior, but he had never been



able to resist an audience.



    “Well,   you  want  to  quit   it,”   Womack  said, rather  lamely.  Giving  him   a



chance. Perhaps Pete Womack was aware that he was six-two and two-twenty,



while the  skinny, red-lipped  piece of freshman shit sitting  by himself  was ﬁve-



seven and maybe a hundred and forty  soaking  wet. He  might   also have been



aware that  those  watching—including    his   clearly  embarrassed girlfriend—



would take note of this disparity.



    “If   she doesn’t want to be looked  at,” Morris  said, “why  does she dress like



that?”



    Morris   considered this a  compliment  (of  the left-handed  variety, granted),



but Womack felt  differently.  He ran around the table, ﬁsts raised. Morris got in



a single punch, but  it  was a good one, blacking Womack’s eye. Of course after



that he got  his shit  handed to him,  and  most righteously,  but that  one punch



was a revelation. He would ﬁght. It was good to know.



    Both   boys were  suspended, and that   night   Morris  got   a twenty-minute



lecture on passive resistance from his mother, along  with  the  acid observation



that ﬁghting in cafeteria was generally not the sort of extracurricular activity  the



ﬁner colleges looked for on the applications of prospective enrollees.



    Behind  her, his  father raised his martini   glass and dropped him  a wink.  It



suggested that, even though George Bellamy mostly  resided beneath his wife’s



thumb  and thin   smile,  he would  also ﬁght  under  certain circumstances. But

118
running   was still    dear old   dad’s default   position,   and  during   the  second



semester of Morris’s freshman year at Northﬁeld,  Georgie-Porgie ran right   out



of the marriage,  pausing only  to clean out  what was left  in  the Bellamy  bank



account. The investments  of which  he  had boasted either  didn’t  exist  or had



gone tits-up.   Anita   Bellamy  was left  with   a  stack of  bills   and a  rebellious



fourteen-year-old son.



    Only    two  assets remained  following    her  husband’s  departure  to   parts



unknown. One  was the framed Pulitzer  nomination  for that  book  of hers. The



other was the house where Morris had grown up, situated in the nicer section of



the North  Side. It  was mortgage-free because she had steadfastly refused to co-



sign  the  bank papers  her husband  brought  home,  for  once  immune  to  his



rhapsodizing about  an investment  opportunity   that  was absolutely  not to  be



missed. She sold it after he was gone, and they moved to Sycamore Street.



    “A   comedown,”  she admitted  to  Morris   during  the  summer  between his



freshman and sophomore years, “but  the ﬁnancial  reservoir will   reﬁll.  And  at



least the  neighborhood   is  white.”   She paused, replaying   that  remark,   and



added, “Not that  I’m  prejudiced.”



    “No,  Ma,”  Morris  said. “Who’d  ever believe that?”



    Ordinarily   she hated being called Ma, and said so, but on  that day she kept



still,  which made it  a good day. It was always a good day when he got in a poke



at her. There were so few opportunities.



    During    the   early  seventies, book   reports  were   still   a  requirement   in



sophomore English  at Northﬁeld.   The  students were  given  a mimeographed



list of approved books to choose from. Most looked like dreck to Morris,  and, as



usual, he wasn’t shy about saying so. “Look!” he cried from his spot in  the back



row. “Forty ﬂavors of American oatmeal!”



    Some of  the  kids  laughed. He  could  make  them  laugh,  and although  he



couldn’t make them  like him,  that  was absolutely okay. They were dead-enders



headed for dead-end marriages and dead-end jobs. They would raise dead-end



kids and dandle dead-end grandkids  before coming to  their  own dead ends in



dead-end hospitals and nursing  homes, rocketing   off into   darkness believing



they had lived the American  Dream and Jesus would meet them at the gates of

119
heaven with the Welcome Wagon. Morris  was meant for better  things. He  just



didn’t know  what they were.



    Miss  Todd—then  about the  age Morris  would  be when he and his  cohorts



broke  into   John  Rothstein’s  house—asked him   to  stay  after  class. Morris



lounged splay-legged at his desk as the other kids went out,  expecting Todd to



write  him  a detention slip.  It  would  not  be his ﬁrst  for mouthing   off in  class,



but it  would  be his ﬁrst in an English  class, and he was sort of sorry about that.



A vague thought  occurred to him  in  his father’s voice—You’re burning too many



bridges, Morrie—and was gone like a wisp of steam.



    Instead  of giving   him  a detention,  Miss Todd  (not  exactly fair  of face but



with  a holy-shit  body)  reached into her  bulging  book-bag  and brought  out  a



paperback with   a red  cover. Sketched  on it   in   yellow  was a  boy  lounging



against a brick   wall  and smoking  a  cigarette. Above  him  was  the title:   The



Runner.



    “You  never miss a chance to be a smartass, do you?” Miss Todd  asked. She



sat on the  desk next  to  him.  Her  skirt   was short, her  thighs  long,  her  hose



shimmery.



    Morris  said nothing.



    “In   this case, I saw it coming.  Which  is why  I brought  this  book today. It’s



a good-news bad-news thing,  my know-it-all   friend.  You  don’t get  detention,



but you  don’t get to  choose, either. You get to read this  and only this.  It’s  not



on the  schoolboard’s Approved List,  and I  suppose I could  get in  trouble  for



giving  it   to  you,  but  I’m   counting   on your  better   nature, which   I  like   to



believe is in there somewhere, minuscule though it may be.”



    Morris  glanced at the book,  then looked over it  at Miss Todd’s legs, making



no attempt to disguise his interest.



    She saw the direction of his gaze and smiled. For a moment Morris glimpsed



a whole future  for them,  most of it  spent in  bed. He  had heard of such things



actually happening. Yummy teacher seeks teenage boy for extracurricular lessons in sex



education.



    This   fantasy balloon  lasted perhaps two  seconds. She popped it  with   her



smile still  in  place. “You and Jimmy Gold  will  get  along. He’s a sarcastic, self-

120
hating little   shit.  A  lot  like you.”  She stood up. Her  skirt  fell  back into  place



two inches above her knees. “Good luck  with  your  book report.  And  the next



time  you  peek up  a  woman’s skirt,   you  might   remember  something  Mark



Twain said: ‘Any idler  in need of a haircut can look.’”



    Morris  slunk  from the classroom with his face burning,  for once not just put



in his  place but rammed  into  it  and hammered ﬂat.  He had an urge  to chuck



the paperback down a sewer drain as soon as he got off the bus on the corner of



Sycamore and Elm, but held on to it.  Not  because he was afraid of detention or



suspension, though. How  could she do anything to him  when  the book  wasn’t



on the Approved  List? He  held  on to  it  because of the boy on the  cover. The



boy looking through  a drift  of cigarette smoke with  a kind of weary insolence.



    He’s a sarcastic, self-hating little shit. A lot like you.



    His   mother  wasn’t home,  and  wouldn’t  be  back until   after  ten.  She was



teaching adult  education classes at City College  to make extra  money. Morris



knew she loathed  those classes, believing they were far  beneath her skill   set,



and that was just ﬁne with  him. Sit  on it, Ma,  he thought. Sit on it  and spin.



    The  freezer was stocked with   TV  dinners.  He  picked  one at  random and



shoved it  in  the oven, thinking    he’d read until   it  was done. After   supper he



might  go  upstairs, grab  one of  his  father’s Playboys from under  the bed  (my



inheritance from the old man, he sometimes thought), and choke the chicken for



awhile.



    He  neglected to  set the stove timer,  and it  was the  stench of burning  beef



stew that  roused him from  the  book a full   ninety  minutes  later. He  had read



the ﬁrst hundred  pages, no longer in this  shitty  little  postwar  tract home deep



in the  Tree Streets but  wandering  the streets of New  York  City  with   Jimmy



Gold. Like  a boy in  a dream, Morris went  to the  kitchen,  donned oven gloves,



removed the congealed mass from  the oven, tossed it  in  the  trash,  and went



back to The Runner.



    I’ll   have to  read it  again, he thought.  He  felt  as if  he might  be running   a



mild  fever. And with  a marker. There’s so much to underline and remember. So



much.

121
    For  readers, one of life’s most electrifying discoveries is that they are readers



—not just  capable of doing it (which  Morris  already knew), but in  love with  it.



Hopelessly. Head over heels. The ﬁrst  book  that does that  is never forgotten,



and each page seems to bring a fresh revelation, one that burns and exalts: Yes!



That’s how it is! Yes! I saw that, too! And,  of course, That’s what I think!  That’s



what I FEEL!



    Morris  wrote  a ten-page book report on The Runner. It came back from Miss



Todd with  an A+ and a single comment: I knew you’d dig it.



    He  wanted to tell  her it  wasn’t digging;  it was loving.  True loving. And true



love would never die.



    The Runner Sees Action was every bit as good as The Runner, only instead of



being a  stranger in   New  York  City,  Jimmy   was now  a stranger  in  Europe,



ﬁghting  his  way across Germany, watching his friends  die, and ﬁnally  staring



with   a  blankness beyond   horror  through   the   barbed  wire  at   one  of  the



concentration camps. The wandering, skeletal survivors conﬁrmed what Jimmy had



suspected for years, Rothstein wrote. It was all a mistake.



    Using   a stencil  kit,   Morris  copied  this  line  in   Roman Gothic   print   and



thumbtacked it   to the door  of his room,  the one that  would  later be occupied



by a boy named Peter Saubers.



    His   mother saw it  hanging  there, smiled  her sarcastic curl  of a smile,  and



said nothing.  At   least not  then. Their   argument over  the Gold  trilogy   came



two years later, after  she had raced through the  books herself. That  argument



resulted in   Morris   getting   drunk;  getting   drunk   resulted  in   breaking  and



entering  and   common  assault;  these  crimes  resulted   in   nine   months  at



Riverview Youth Detention  Center.



    But   before all  that  came The Runner Slows Down, which Morris read  with



increasing horror.  Jimmy   got   married  to  a  nice  girl.   Jimmy  got   a job   in



advertising. Jimmy  began putting  on weight.  Jimmy’s  wife got  pregnant with



the ﬁrst  of  three little    Golds, and  they moved  to  the suburbs.  Jimmy  made



friends  there.  He   and  his   wife  threw   backyard  barbecue  parties.  Jimmy



presided over the  grill   wearing an  apron that  said  THE  CHEF  IS  ALWAYS



RIGHT.  Jimmy  cheated on his  wife,  and his wife  cheated right  back. Jimmy

122
took Alka-Seltzer for his  acid indigestion and something called Miltown   for his



hangovers. Most of all, Jimmy pursued the Golden Buck.



    Morris   read these terrible   developments with  ever  increasing dismay  and



growing rage. He supposed he felt the way his mother had when she discovered



that her  husband, whom she had believed  comfortably  under her thumb,   had



been cleaning out all the accounts even as he ran hither and yon, eagerly doing



her bidding  and never once raising a hand to slap that  sarcastic curl of a smile



off her overeducated face.



    Morris  kept  hoping  that  Jimmy  would  wake up. That  he would  remember



who he was—who he had  been, at least—and trash the  stupid and  empty life



he was leading.  Instead  of that,   The Runner Slows Down ended with  Jimmy



celebrating his most  successful ad campaign ever—Duzzy-Doo, for God’s sake



—and crowing Just wait until  next year!



    In   the detention   center, Morris  had been  required to  see a shrink  once a



week. The  shrink’s  name was Curtis  Larsen. The  boys  called him   Curd  the



Turd. Curd  the  Turd  always ended their  sessions by asking  Morris  the  same



question: “Whose fault  is it that  you’re in here, Morris?”



    Most  boys, even the cataclysmically  stupid  ones, knew the right   answer to



that question.  Morris  did,  too,  but  refused to give  it.  “My  mother’s,”  he said



each time the question was asked.



    At  their  ﬁnal session, shortly before the end of Morris’s term, Curd  the Turd



folded his  hands on his  desk and  looked at  Morris  for  a long  space of silent



seconds. Morris knew Curd the Turd  was waiting  for him  to  drop his eyes. He



refused to do it.



    “In   my game,” Curd  the Turd ﬁnally  said, “there’s a term for  your response.



It’s called blame avoidance. Will you be back in here if  you continue to practice



blame avoidance? Almost certainly not.  You’ll  be eighteen in a few months,  so



the next  time  you hit   the jackpot—and  there  will  be a  next time—you’ll    be



tried  as an adult.  Unless,  that  is, you  make a  change. So, for  the last  time:



whose fault is it that  you’re in here?”



    “My   mother’s,”  Morris   said with   no  hesitation.  Because it  wasn’t  blame



avoidance, it was the truth. The logic  was inarguable.

123
    Between ﬁfteen  and seventeen, Morris read the ﬁrst  two  books of the Gold



trilogy   obsessively, underlining  and annotating.   He  reread The Runner Slows



Down only once, and had to force himself to ﬁnish.  Every time he picked it  up,



a ball of  lead formed in  his gut,  because he knew what  was going to  happen.



His resentment of Jimmy  Gold’s creator grew. For Rothstein  to destroy Jimmy



like  that!  To not even allow  him  to  go out  in a blaze of  glory, but  to  live! To



compromise, and  cut   corners, and  believe that   sleeping  with   the  Amway-



selling slut down  the street meant he was still a rebel!



    Morris  thought   of writing   Rothstein  a letter, asking—no,  demanding—that



he explain himself, but  he knew from  the Time cover story that the sonofabitch



didn’t even read his fan mail, let alone answer it.



    As  Ricky the  Hippie  would  suggest to Pete Saubers years later, most young



men and women  who fall  in  love  with  the  works  of a particular  writer—the



Vonneguts,  the  Hesses, the  Brautigans  and  Tolkiens—eventually   ﬁnd  new



idols. Disenchanted  as he was with  The Runner Slows Down, this might   have



happened to Morris.  Before it  could, there  came the argument with   the bitch



who was determined  to spoil  his life  since she could  no longer get  her hooks



into the  man who had spoiled  hers. Anita  Bellamy, with  her framed near-miss



Pulitzer  and her sprayed dome of  dyed blond  hair  and her  sarcastic curl of  a



smile.



    During   her February vacation  in  1973, she raced through  all  three Jimmy



Gold novels in a single day. And  they were his copies, his private copies, ﬁlched



from his  bedroom shelf.  They littered   the  coffee table when he  came in, The



Runner Sees Action soaking up a condensation ring from her wineglass. For one



of the few times in his adolescent life, Morris  was speechless.



    Anita  wasn’t. “You’ve  been talking about these for well  over a year now, so I



ﬁnally decided I  had to see what all the excitement  was about.” She sipped her



wine. “And   since I  had  the week  off,  I  read them.  I  thought   it  would  take



longer than a day, but there’s really not much content here, is there?”



    “You  . . .” He  choked for a moment. Then: “You went  in my room!”



    “You’ve  never raised an  objection  when I  go  in  to  change your sheets, or



when I   return  your  clothes,  all  clean and  folded.  Perhaps you  thought  the

124
Laundry Fairy did those little  chores?”



    “Those  books are mine! They were on my special shelf! You had no right  to



take them!”



    “I’ll    be  happy to  put   them  back.  And  don’t  worry,  I  didn’t   disturb   the



magazines under your bed. I know boys need . . . amusement.”



    He   stepped  forward  on   legs  that  felt   like   stilts   and  gathered  up  the



paperbacks with hands that  felt  like  hooks. The back cover of  The Runner Sees



Action was soaking from her  goddam glass, and he thought,  If  one volume  of



the trilogy  had to get wet, why  couldn’t it  have been The Runner Slows Down?



    “I’ll    admit   they’re interesting   artifacts.”  She  had begun  speaking  in  her



judicious  lecture-hall   voice.  “If   nothing    else, they  show  the   growth   of  a



marginally talented  writer. The ﬁrst  two are painfully  jejune, of course, the way



Tom Sawyer is jejune when compared to  Huckleberry Finn, but the  last  one—



although no Huck Finn—does show growth.”



    “The  last one sucks!” Morris shouted.



    “You  needn’t raise your voice, Morris. You needn’t roar. You can defend your



position without   doing that.”  And  here was that smile he hated, so thin and so



sharp. “We’re having a discussion.”



    “I  don’t  want to have a fucking discussion!”



    “But   we should have one!” Anita cried, smiling. “Since I’ve spent my  day—I



won’t  say wasted my day—trying   to  understand my  self-centered and  rather



pretentiously  intellectual   son, who  is  currently   carrying  a C  average in  his



classes.”



    She waited for him  to  respond. He didn’t.  There were traps everywhere. She



could run rings around him  when she wanted to, and right now  she wanted to.



    “I   notice that  the ﬁrst  two  volumes are tattered, almost falling   out of their



bindings, nearly read to death. There are copious underlinings  and notes, some



of which show the budding—I   won’t  say ﬂowering, it can’t really be called that,



can it,  at  least not  yet—of   an acute  critical  mind.   But  the  third   one looks



almost new, and there are no underlinings at all. You  don’t like  what happened



to  him,  do  you?  You don’t   care for  your  Jimmy   once he—and,  by  logical



transference, the author—grew up.”

125
    “He  sold out!”  Morris’s  ﬁsts were clenched. His face was hot and throbbing,



as it  had  been after  Womack   tuned  up  on  him   that  day  in  the  caff  with



everyone watching.  But  Morris  had  gotten  in  that  one good  punch,  and he



wanted to  get one in  now.  He  needed to. “Rothstein  let  him  sell out!  If  you



can’t see that, you’re stupid!”



    “No,”   she said. The smile was gone now. She leaned forward, set her glass on



the coffee table, looking  at him  steadily all  the while.  “That’s  the core of your



misunderstanding.  A  good  novelist  does not  lead  his characters, he  follows



them.  A  good novelist  does not  create events, he watches them  happen and



then writes  down what  he sees. A good novelist  realizes he is a secretary, not



God.”



    “That   wasn’t Jimmy’s character! Fucking Rothstein  changed him!  He made



Jimmy into  a joke! He made him into  . . . into  everyone!”



    Morris   hated how  weak that   sounded, and he hated  that  his  mother  had



baited him  into defending  a position that  didn’t  need defending, that was self-



evident to anyone with half  a brain and any feelings at all.



    “Morris.”    Very softly.  “Once I  wanted  to  be the  female version of  Jimmy,



just as you want  to be Jimmy  now.  Jimmy  Gold,  or someone like him,  is  the



island  of  exile  where  most  teenagers go  to  wait   until   childhood   becomes



adulthood.  What  you  need to  see—what  Rothstein  ﬁnally   saw, although  it



took him  three books to do it—is   that most  of us become everyone. I certainly



did.”  She looked  around.  “Why   else would  we  be living    here on  Sycamore



Street?”



    “Because you were stupid and let my father rob us blind!”



    She  winced  at  that  (a  hit,  a  palpable hit,  Morris  exulted),   but  then  the



sarcastic curl resurfaced. Like a piece of paper charring in  an ashtray. “I admit



there’s an element of truth in  what you  say, although you’re unkind to  task me



with  it. But  have you asked yourself why he robbed us blind?”



    Morris  was silent.



    “Because he refused to grow up. Your  father is a potbellied  Peter Pan who’s



found some girl half his age to play Tinker  Bell in  bed.”

126
    “Put   my books back or throw  them  in  the trash,”  Morris  said in a voice he



barely recognized. To his horror, it  sounded like his father’s voice. “I  don’t care



which. I’m  getting  out of here, and I’m not  coming back.”



    “Oh,   I  think  you  will,”   she said, and she was right  about that,  but  it  was



almost a year before he did,  and by then  she no longer knew  him.  If  she ever



had. “And you should read this third  one a few more times, I think.”



    She had to raise her voice to say the rest, because he was plunging down the



hall, in  the  grip  of emotions so strong  he was almost blind.  “Find   some pity!



Mr. Rothstein  did, and it’s the last book’s saving grace!”



    The  slam of the front door cut her off.



    Morris  stalked to  the sidewalk with  his head down, and when he reached it,



he began to run.  There was a strip  mall  with  a liquor  store in  it  three  blocks



away. When he got  there, he sat on the  bike  rack outside Hobby  Terriﬁc  and



waited. The  ﬁrst two  guys he  spoke to refused his request (the  second with a



smile Morris  longed  to  punch off  his face), but  the  third  was wearing  thrift-



shop clothes and walking   with   a pronounced list   to port.   He agreed to  buy



Morris a pint  for two  dollars, or a quart for ﬁve. Morris  opted for the quart,  and



began drinking   it  beside the  stream running   through  the  undeveloped land



between Sycamore and Birch Streets. By then the sun was going down. He had



no memory of  making  his way to  Sugar Heights in  the  boosted car, but there



was no doubt  that  once he  was there, he’d  gotten  into  what  Curd  the  Turd



liked to call  a mega jackpot.



    Whose fault is it that you’re in here?



    He  supposed a little   of the  blame could  go to  the  wino  who’d  bought  an



underage kid a quart of  whiskey, but  mostly it  was his mother’s fault,  and one



good thing  had come of it:  when  he was sentenced, there had been no sign of



that sarcastic curl of a smile. He had ﬁnally wiped  it off her face.




                                                            •••




During  prison lockdowns (there was at least one a month), Morris would  lie on



his bunk  with   his hands crossed behind his  head and think  about  the  fourth

127
Jimmy Gold  novel, wondering  if it  contained the redemption  he had so longed



for after closing  The Runner Slows Down. Was it possible Jimmy had regained



his old hopes and dreams? His old ﬁre? If only he’d had two  more days with it!



Even one!



    Although   he doubted  if even John Rothstein  could have made a thing  like



that  believable.  Based on  Morris’s  own  observations (his  parents  being  his



prime  exemplars), when the  ﬁre went  out,  it  usually  went  out  for good.  Yet



some people did change. He remembered once bringing  up that  possibility   to



Andy   Halliday,   while   they   were  having   one   of  their    many  lunch-hour



discussions. This was at the  Happy  Cup,  just  down  the street  from  Grissom



Books, where Andy  worked,  and not  long after  Morris  had left  City  College,



deciding what passed for higher education there was fucking pointless.



    “Nixon    changed,”   Morris   said.  “The   old   Commie-hater   opened  trade



relations  with   China.  And   Lyndon  Johnson  pushed  the  Civil   Rights   Bill



through  Congress. If  an old  racist  hyena like  him  could  change his  spots, I



suppose anything is possible.”



    “Politicians.”    Andy  sniffed,  as at  a bad  smell. He  was  a skinny,  crewcut



fellow only  a few years older than Morris.  “They change out of expediency, not



idealism.  Ordinary  people  don’t  even do  that.  They  can’t.  If  they  refuse to



behave, they’re punished. Then,  after punishment,  they  say okay, yes sir, and



get  with   the  program  like   the  good  little    drones they  are.  Look  at  what



happened to the Vietnam War protestors. Most of them  are now living  middle-



class lives. Fat, happy, and voting  Republican.  Those who refused to  knuckle



under are in jail. Or  on the run, like  Katherine Ann  Power.”



    “How   can you call Jimmy Gold  ordinary?” Morris cried.



    Andy  had given  him  a patronizing  look. “Oh,  please. His entire  story is an



epic journey  out   of exceptionalism.  The  purpose  of  American  culture  is  to



create a norm, Morris. That  means that extraordinary  people must  be leveled,



and it  happens to Jimmy.  He  ends up  working  in  advertising, for God’s sake,



and what  greater agent  of the  norm  is  there in   this  fucked-up  country? It’s



Rothstein’s main  point.”  He  shook his head. “If  you’re  looking  for  optimism,



buy a Harlequin Romance.”

128
    Morris   thought   Andy  was basically  arguing  for  the sake of  argument.  A



zealot’s eyes burned behind   his nerdy  hornrims,   but  even  then  Morris  was



getting  the man’s measure. His zeal was for books as objects, not for the stories



and ideas inside them.



    They  had  lunch  together  two  or three  times  a week, usually  at  the Cup,



sometimes across the street  from  Grissom’s  on the  benches in  Government



Square. It   was  during    one  of  these  lunches  that   Andrew   Halliday    ﬁrst



mentioned the  persistent rumor  that  John  Rothstein  had continued  to write,



but that  his will  speciﬁed all the work be burned upon his death.



    “No!”    Morris  had  cried,  genuinely  wounded.  “That  could  never  happen.



Could it?”



    Andy  shrugged.  “If  it’s in  the  will,  anything  he’s written  since he dropped



out of sight is as good as ashes.”



    “You’re  just making  it  up.”



    “The  stuff  about  the will   might  just  be a rumor,  I  grant you  that,  but  it’s



well accepted in bookstore circles that Rothstein never stopped writing.”



    “Bookstore  circles,” Morris  had said doubtfully.



    “We   have our   own  grapevine,  Morris.  Rothstein’s  housekeeper does his



shopping, okay? Not just  groceries, either. Once every month or six weeks, she



goes into White  River Books in Berlin,  which  is the closest town of any size, to



pick up books he’s ordered by phone. She’s told the people who work there that



he writes every day  from  six in  the  morning  until   two  in the  afternoon. The



owner told   some other  dealers at  the  Boston  Book  Fair, and  the  word  got



around.”



    “Holy   shit,”  Morris had breathed. This conversation had taken place in June



of 1976.  Rothstein’s last published  story, “The  Perfect Banana Pie,” had  been



published  in  1960.  If  what  Andy   was saying  was true,  it  meant  that  John



Rothstein  had been  piling   up  fresh ﬁction   for  sixteen years. At   even eight



hundred words  a day, that  added up to  .  . .  Morris  couldn’t  begin  to  do the



math in his head, but it  was a lot.



    “Holy   shit is right,”   Andy said.



    “If  he really wants all  that burned when he dies, he’s crazy!”

129
    “Most   writers  are.” Andy   had leaned forward,  smiling,  as if  what  he said



next  were a  joke.  Maybe it   was. To  him,   at  least. “Here’s  what  I  think—



someone should mount a rescue mission. Maybe you, Morris.   After  all, you’re



his number one fan.”



    “Not   me,” Morris  said, “not after what  he did to Jimmy  Gold.”



    “Cool  it,  guy. You can’t blame a man for following his  muse.”



    “Sure I  can.”



    “Then   steal em,”  Andy   said, still   smiling.   “Call   it  theft   as a protest  on



behalf of English literature.  Bring  em to me. I’ll  sit on em awhile,  then sell em.



If they’re  not  senile gibberish, they  might  fetch  as much as a million   dollars.



I’ll  split  with  you. Fifty-ﬁfty,  even-Steven.”



    “They’d  catch us.”



    “Don’t   think  so,” Andy Halliday  had replied.  “There are ways.”



    “How   long would  you have to wait before you could sell them?”



    “A   few  years,” Andy  had  replied,  waving  his  hand as if   he were talking



about a couple of hours. “Five, maybe.”



    A  month  later, heartily sick of living   on Sycamore Street and haunted by the



idea of all  those manuscripts,  Morris  packed his  beat-up Volvo  and  drove to



Boston, where  he  got  hired   by  a contractor   building   a  couple  of  housing



developments out in the burbs.  The work had nearly killed   him at  ﬁrst, but  he



had muscled  up   a  little   (not   that   he was  ever  going  to   look  like   Duck



Duckworth),  and after that  he’d done okay. He  even made a couple of friends:



Freddy Dow and Curtis Rogers.



    Once   he  called   Andy.   “Could   you   really   sell  unpublished    Rothstein



manuscripts?”



    “No  doubt,”   Andy Halliday  said. “Not  right   away, as I believe I said, but so



what? We’re young. He’s not. Time would  be on our side.”



    Yes, and that  would include  time  to read everything  Rothstein  had written



since “The   Perfect  Banana Pie.”   Proﬁt—even   half  a  million    dollars—was



incidental.  I  am not  a mercenary, Morris told   himself. I  am  not interested  in



the Golden Buck.  That shit  don’t  mean shit. Give me  enough to live  on—sort



of like a grant—and  I’ll  be happy.

130
    I  am a scholar.



    On  the weekends, he began driving up  to Talbot Corners, New  Hampshire.



In 1977, he began taking  Curtis and Freddy with  him.  Gradually, a plan began



to take shape. A simple one, the best kind. Your basic smash-and-grab.




                                                            •••




Philosophers have debated the meaning of  life for  centuries, rarely  coming to



the same conclusion. Morris  studied  the subject  himself  over the  years of his



incarceration, but his inquiries  were practical rather than cosmic. He wanted to



know the meaning  of life in  a legal sense. What he found was pretty schizo. In



some states, life meant  exactly that.  You  were supposedly in  until   you died,



with  no possibility  of parole. In some states, parole was considered after as little



as two years. In others, it was ﬁve, seven, ten, or ﬁfteen. In  Nevada, parole was



granted (or not) based on a complicated point system.



    By  the year 2001, the average life sentence of a man in the American prison



system was thirty years and four months.



    In  the  state where Morris  was stacking  time,  lawmakers had  created their



own  arcane deﬁnition   of  life,  one  based on  demographics.  In  1979,   when



Morris  was convicted, the average American male lived  to  the  age of seventy.



Morris  was twenty-three  at the  time,  therefore he  could consider  his debt  to



society paid in forty-seven years.



    Unless, that  is, he were granted parole.



    He  became eligible the ﬁrst time  in 1990.  Cora Ann Hooper appeared at the



hearing. She was wearing a neat blue suit. Her graying hair  was pulled back in



a bun  so  tight   it   screeched. She held  a large  black  purse  in  her  lap.  She



recounted how Morris  Bellamy  had grabbed her as she passed the alley beside



Shooter’s Tavern and told her of his intention   to “rip  off  a piece.” She told the



ﬁve-member Parole Board how he had punched her and broken her  nose when



she managed to trigger the  Police Alert  device she kept in  her purse. She told



the board about the  reek of alcohol on  his breath and how  he had gouged her



stomach with  his nails  when he ripped  off her underwear. She told  them how

131
Morris  was “still   choking  me  and hurting   me with   his  organ”  when Ofﬁcer



Ellenton arrived and pulled  him  off. She told the board that  she had attempted



suicide in  1980,  and  was still  under  the  care of  a psychiatrist.  She told  the



board that  she was better since accepting  Jesus Christ as her personal savior,



but  she still  had nightmares.  No,  she told  the board,  she had never married.



The thought  of sex gave her panic attacks.



    Parole was not granted. Several reasons were given on the green sheet passed



to him  through  the  bars that  evening, but  the  one at the  top was clearly  the



PB’s major consideration: Victim states she is still suffering.



    Bitch.



    Hooper  appeared again in  1995,  and again in  2000.  In  ’95,  she wore the



same blue suit. In  the millennium   year—by then  she had gained at least forty



pounds—she wore a brown one. In  2005,  the suit  was gray, and a large white



cross hung on the  growing  shelf of  her bosom. She held what  appeared to be



the same large black purse in her lap at each appearance. Presumably her Police



Alert was inside. Maybe a can of Mace, as well. She was not summoned to these



hearings; she volunteered.



    And  told  her story.



    Parole was not  granted. Major  reason given on the green sheet: Victim states



she is still suffering.



    Shit  don’t mean shit, Morris  told  himself. Shit don’t  mean shit.



    Maybe not,  but God, he wished he’d killed her.




                                                            •••




By the  time   of his  third   turndown,   Morris’s work   as a writer   was much  in



demand—he was, in the  small world  of  Waynesville, a bestselling  author. He



wrote love letters  to wives and  girlfriends.  He  wrote letters  to the  children  of



inmates, a few of which conﬁrmed the  reality of  Santa Claus in touching prose.



He wrote job applications  for prisoners whose release dates were coming up. He



wrote themes for prisoners taking online college courses or working to get their



GEDs. He  was no jailhouse lawyer, but  he did  write  letters to  real lawyers on

132
behalf of inmates from time  to time,  cogently explaining  each case at hand and



laying out  the basis for appeal. In  some cases lawyers were impressed by these



letters, and—mindful   of the  money to  be made from  wrongful  imprisonment



suits that   were successful—came on  board. As  DNA    became of overriding



importance in  the  appeals process, he wrote often to  Barry  Scheck and Peter



Neufeld, the  founders of the Innocence Project. One of those letters ultimately



led  to  the  release of an  auto  mechanic  and part-time   thief   named Charles



Roberson, who had been in Waynesville  for twenty-seven  years. Roberson got



his freedom;  Morris  got   Roberson’s eternal gratitude   and nothing   else .  .  .



unless you counted his own growing reputation, and that  was far from nothing.



It had been a long time since he had been raped.



    In  2004,  Morris wrote  his best letter ever, laboring over four  drafts to get it



exactly right.   This  letter  was to Cora Ann   Hooper. In  it  he  told  her that  he



lived with  terrible  remorse for what he had done, and promised that  if  he were



granted parole, he would  spend the rest of  his life  atoning  for  his one violent



act, committed during  an alcohol-induced blackout.



    “I  attend  AA  meetings four times a week here,” he wrote, “and now sponsor



half a dozen recovering alcoholics and drug addicts. I would continue this  work



on the outside, at  the St. Patrick’s  Halfway  House on the  North  Side. I  had a



spiritual  awakening, Ms. Hooper, and have allowed Jesus into my life. You will



understand how  important   this   is,  because I  know  you  have also accepted



Christ as your Savior. ‘Forgive us our  trespasses,’ He said, ‘as we forgive those



who trespass against us.’ Won’t  you please forgive my  trespass against you? I



am no longer  the  man who  hurt  you  so badly  that  night.   I  have had a soul



conversion. I pray that you respond to my letter.”



    Ten days later, his  prayer for a response was answered. There was no return



address on the envelope, but C.A. Hooper had been printed neatly on the  back



ﬂap. Morris didn’t   need to tear it open; some screw in the front  ofﬁce, assigned



the duty  of checking inmate  mail,  had already taken care of that.  Inside was a



single sheet of deckle-edged stationery. In the upper right  corner and the lower



left, ﬂuffy  kittens  played  with  gray balls of  twine.  There was no salutation.  A



single line had been printed halfway down the page:

133
    I  hope you rot in there.



    The  bitch   appeared at  his  hearing  the  following   year, legs  now  clad in



support  hose, ankles  slopping   over her  sensible  shoes. She was  like  some



overweight,  vengeful swallow  returning   to  the  prison  version of  Capistrano.



She once more told her story, and parole was once more not granted. Morris had



been a model  prisoner, and now  there  was just  a single  reason given on  the



inmate green sheet: Victim states she is still suffering.



    Morris  assured himself that shit did  not mean shit and went back to his  cell.



Not  exactly a penthouse apartment,  just  six by  eight,  but  at least there  were



books. Books were escape. Books were freedom. He lay on his cot,  imagining



how pleasant it would  be to have ﬁfteen minutes alone with  Cora Ann Hooper,



and a power nailer.



    Morris   was by then working   in  the library,  which  was a wonderful  change



for the better. The  guards didn’t  much care how he spent his paltry  budget, so



it  was no problem  to  subscribe to  The American Bibliographer’s Newsletter. He



also got  a number  of  catalogues from rare  book dealers around  the  country,



which were free. Books by John  Rothstein came up for  sale frequently, offered



at ever  steeper prices. Morris   found  himself  rooting   for  this  the  way  some



prisoners rooted for  sports teams. The value of  most writers  went  down  after



they died,  but  a fortunate  few trended upward.  Rothstein  had become one of



those. Once in awhile  a signed Rothstein  showed up in  one of the catalogues.



In  the 2007  edition   of Bauman’s Christmas  catalogue, a copy  of The Runner



signed to Harper Lee—a so-called association copy—went for $17,000.



    Morris    also  kept   an  eye  on  the   city   newspaper  during   his   years  of



incarceration, and then,  as the twenty-ﬁrst   century  wrought  its  technological



changes, various city  websites. The land  between Sycamore Street and Birch



Street was still   mired  in   that  unending  legal  suit,  which  was  just  the  way



Morris  liked  it.  He  would  get  out  eventually, and his  trunk  would  be  there,



with  the  roots  of that  overhanging  tree  wrapped ﬁrmly   around  it.  That  the



worth of  those notebooks must by  now be astronomical mattered  less and less



to him.

134
    Once  he had been young,  and he supposed he would  have enjoyed all  the



things young men chased after when their legs were strong and their balls were



tight:  travel  and women,  cars and women,  big  homes like  the ones in  Sugar



Heights and  women. Now  he rarely even dreamed of such things, and the last



woman with  whom he’d had sex remained largely instrumental in  keeping him



locked up. The irony  wasn’t lost  on him.  But  that was okay. The things  of the



world  fell  by  the  wayside, you  lost  your  speed and your  eyesight  and your



fucking  Electric  Boogaloo, but  literature  was eternal,  and that  was what  was



waiting  for him:  a lost  geography as yet seen by no eye but its  creator’s. If he



didn’t  get to  see that geography himself  until   he was seventy, so be it. There



was the money, too—all those cash envelopes. Not a fortune by any means, but



a nice little  nest egg.



    I  have something to live for, he told  himself. How  many men in here can say



that, especially once their thighs  go ﬂabby and their  cocks only stand up when



they need to pee?



    Morris   wrote  several times to  Andy  Halliday,  who  now  did have his  own



shop—Morris knew  that from  American Bibliographer’s Newsletter. He also knew



that his old  pal had gotten  into  trouble at least once, for trying   to sell a stolen



copy of  James Agee’s most  famous book,  but   had skated.  Too bad.  Morris



would   have   dearly   loved   to    welcome   that   cologne-wearing   homo    to



Waynesville. There were plenty  of bad boys here who would  have been all too



willing   to  put  a hurt   on him  for  Morrie   Bellamy. Just  a daydream, though.



Even if Andy  had been convicted, it  probably  would  have been just a ﬁne. At



worst, he would  have gotten  sent to  the  country  club  at the  west end of  the



state, where the white-collar thieves went.



    None  of Morris’s letters to Andy  were answered.



    In  2010,  his personal swallow once more returned to  Capistrano, wearing a



black suit  again, as if  dressed for her own  funeral. Which   will  be  soon if she



doesn’t lose some weight,   Morris  thought   nastily.  Cora Ann  Hooper’s  jowls



now hung down at the sides of her neck in ﬂeshy ﬂapjacks, her eyes were all but



buried in  pouches of fat, her skin was sallow. She had replaced the black purse



with   a blue   one, but   everything  else  was the  same.  Bad  dreams! Endless

135
therapy! Life  ruined  thanks to  the  horrible  beast who sprang out  of the  alley



that night!  So on and so forth, blah-blah-blah.



    Aren’t  you  over that  lousy rape yet? Morris  thought.  Aren’t  you ever going



to move on?



    Morris   went back to  his  cell thinking   Shit  don’t  mean shit.  It  don’t  mean



fucking shit.



    That  was the year he turned ﬁfty-ﬁve.




                                                            •••




One day  in  March of  2014,  a turnkey   came to  get Morris   from  the  library,



where he was sitting  behind  the main  desk, reading American Pastoral for the



third  time.  (It   was by far  Philip   Roth’s best book,  in  Morris’s  opinion.)  The



turnkey told  him  he was wanted in Admin.



    “What   for?”  Morris  asked, getting up.  Trips  to Admin   were not ordinarily



good  news.  Usually  it    was cops  wanting   you  to   roll   on   somebody, and



threatening you with  all kinds  of dark shit if  you refused to cooperate.



    “PB  hearing.”



    “No,”   Morris   said. “It’s  a mistake.  The board  doesn’t hear me again  until



next year.”



    “I   only do  what  they tell  me,”  the turnkey   said. “If  you don’t  want  me to



give you a mark,  ﬁnd  somebody to take the desk and get  the lead out  of your



ass.”



    The  Parole Board—now three men and three women—was convened in the



conference room. Philip  Downs,  the Board’s legal counsel, made lucky  seven.



He read a letter  from  Cora Ann  Hooper.  It  was an amazing letter.  The  bitch



had cancer. That was good news, but  what  followed was even better. She was



dropping  all objections  to Morris  Bellamy’s parole.  She said she was sorry she



had waited so long.  Downs  then read a letter   from the  Midwest  Culture  and



Arts  Center, locally  known  as the  MAC.   They had  hired  many  Waynesville



parolees over the years, and were willing  to take Morris  Bellamy  on as a part-

136
time  ﬁle   clerk  and   computer  operator  starting   in   May,  should  parole  be



granted.



    “In   light  of your  clean record over the past thirty-ﬁve  years, and in  light  of



Ms. Hooper’s letter,” Downs said, “I  felt  that putting   the subject of your parole



before the board a year early was the right thing  to  do. Ms. Hooper informs  us



that she doesn’t have much time, and I’m  sure she’d like to  get closure on this



matter.” He turned  to them.  “How  say you, ladies and gentlemen?”



    Morris  already knew how  the ladies and gentlemen would  say; otherwise he



never would  have been brought  here. The vote  was 6–0  in  favor of  granting



him parole.



    “How   do you feel about that, Morris?”  Downs asked.



    Morris,  ordinarily  good with  words, was too stunned to say anything, but he



didn’t have to. He burst  into tears.



    Two  months  later,  after the  obligatory   pre-release counseling and shortly



before his job at the  MAC  was scheduled to begin, he walked through  Gate A



and back into  the free world.  In  his  pocket were his  earnings from thirty-ﬁve



years in the dyehouse, the  furniture workshop, and the library.  It  amounted to



twenty-seven hundred dollars and change.



    The  Rothstein notebooks were ﬁnally within  reach.

137
PART 2:  OLD  PALS

138
                                                              1





Kermit  William   Hodges—plain  old  Bill,   to his friends—drives  along  Airport



Road with  the  windows  rolled  down and  the radio  turned  up,  singing  along



with  Dylan’s “It  Takes a Lot to  Laugh, It  Takes a Train to Cry.”  He’s sixty-six,



no spring  chicken, but  he  looks pretty  good  for a  heart attack  survivor. He’s



lost forty  pounds since the vapor-lock,  and has quit  eating the  junk  food that



was killing  him a little   with  each mouthful.



    Do  you  want  to live  to  see seventy-ﬁve? the cardiologist  asked him.  This



was at his ﬁrst full   checkup, a couple of weeks after the pacemaker went in.  If



you do, give up the pork rinds  and doughnuts. Make friends with  salads.



    As  advice  goes, it’s  not  up  there with   love  thy  neighbor  as  thyself,  but



Hodges has taken it  to heart.  There’s a salad in a white paper bag on  the seat



beside him. He’ll  have plenty of time  to eat it,  with  Dasani to wash it  down, if



Oliver  Madden’s plane is on time.  And  if  Madden comes at all. Holly   Gibney



has assured him that  Madden is  already on the  way—she got  his  ﬂight  plan



from a computer  site called AirTracker—but   it’s  always possible that Madden



will  smell  something  downwind  and  head in another  direction.  He  has been



out there  doing  dirt   for  quite  some time  now, and  guys like  that  have very



educated sniffers.



    Hodges passes the feeder road to the main terminals and short-term parking



and  continues   on,   following    the   signs   that   read  AIR    FREIGHT     and



SIGNATURE  AIR  and THOMAS  ZANE   AVIATION.   He  turns in at this  last.



It’s  an independent  ﬁxed-based operator,  huddled—almost   literally—in    the



shadow of the  much  bigger  Signature  Air   FBO  next door.  There  are weeds



sprouting  from  the cracked asphalt  of the  little   parking  lot,  which   is empty



except for the front row.  That has been reserved for a dozen or so rental cars. In



the middle  of the economies and mid-sizes, and hulking above them, is a black



Lincoln  Navigator  with   smoked glass windows. Hodges  takes this  as a good

139
sign. His  man  does like to go in  style,  a common  trait  among dirtbags.  And



although  his  man  may  wear thousand-dollar  suits,  he  is  still   very  much  a



dirtbag.



    Hodges  bypasses the parking lot  and  pulls  into  the turnaround   out front,



stopping in front  of a sign reading LOADING   AND   UNLOADING    ONLY.



    Hodges hopes to be loading.



    He  checks his watch. Quarter to eleven. He thinks  of his mother saying You



must always arrive early on important  occasions, Billy, and the  memory makes



him  smile. He  takes his  iPhone off  his belt  and  calls the  ofﬁce. It  rings  just



once.



    “Finders  Keepers,” Holly  says. She always says the name of the company, no



matter who’s calling; it’s  one of her little  tics. She has many little tics. “Are  you



there, Bill? Are  you at the airport? Are you?”



    Little   tics  aside, this  Holly   Gibney  is very  different  from  the one he  ﬁrst



met  four  years ago, when she came  to  town  for  her aunt’s  funeral,  and the



changes are all for the better. Although   she’s sneaking the occasional cigarette



again; he has smelled them on her breath.



    “I’m   here,” he says. “Tell me I’m gonna get lucky.”



    “Luck   has nothing   to  do  with   it,”   she says. “AirTracker   is  a very  good



website. You might   like  to  know  that  there  are currently  six  thousand, four



hundred and twelve ﬂights  in U.S. airspace. Isn’t that interesting?”



    “Totally  fascinating.  Is Madden’s ETA still  eleven thirty?”



    “Eleven  thirty-seven,  to  be exact. You left  your skim  milk   on your  desk. I



put it   back in  the fridge.  Skim  milk   goes over very rapidly  on hot  days, you



know.  Even  in  an  air-conditioned   environment,   which  this   is.  Now.”   She



nagged Hodges into  the  air-conditioning.   Holly  is  a very good  nagger, when



she puts her mind to it.



    “Chug-a-lug,   Holly,”  he says. “I have a Dasani.”



    “No,   thank you,  I’m  drinking  my  Diet  Coke. Barbara Robinson called. She



wanted to  talk  to you.  She was all serious. I  told  her she could call  you  later



this afternoon. Or  you’d call her.”  Uncertainty  creeps into her voice. “Was that



all right?  I thought  you’d want your  phone available for the time being.”

140
    “That’s  ﬁne, Holly.  Did  she say what she was all serious about?”



    “No.”



    “Call  her back and tell her I’ll   be in touch as soon as this is wrapped up.”



    “You’ll   be careful, won’t you?”



    “I   always am.”  Although  Holly   knows  that’s not  exactly  true; he  damned



near got   himself,   Barbara’s brother,   Jerome,  and  Holly   herself  blown   to



kingdom  come four years ago . . .  and Holly’s  cousin was blown up,  although



that  came earlier. Hodges, who  had been more  than halfway  to  in  love with



Janey Patterson, still mourns her. And still  blames himself. These days he takes



care of himself  for himself,   but  he also does it   because he believes it’s what



Janey would have wanted.



    He  tells  Holly   to hold  the  fort  and returns  his iPhone to  the  place on his



belt  where  he  used  to   carry  his  Glock   before  he  became a  Det-Ret.   In



retirement he always used to forget his cell, but  those days are gone. What he’s



doing these days isn’t quite  the  same as carrying a badge, but it’s  not bad.  In



fact, it’s  pretty  good. Most  of the  ﬁsh Finders Keepers nets are minnows,  but



today’s is a blueﬁn  tuna, and Hodges  is stoked. He’s looking   at a big  payday,



but that’s not  the main  thing.  He’s engaged, that’s the main thing. Nailing  bad



boys like Oliver  Madden is what he was made to do, and he intends to keep on



doing it  until   he no longer can. With   luck,  that might   be eight or  nine years,



and he intends to treasure every day. He believes Janey would have wanted that



for him, too.



    Yeah, he can hear her say, wrinkling  her nose at him  in that  funny  way she



had.



    Barbara Robinson was also nearly killed four years ago; she was at the fateful



concert with  her mother  and  a bunch of  friends. Barbs was a cheerful,  happy



kid then  and is a cheerful, happy teenager now—he sees her when he takes the



occasional meal at the  Robinson home,  but  he does that  less often now  that



Jerome is away at school. Or  maybe Jerome’s back for the  summer. He’ll  ask



Barbara when he talks to  her. Hodges hopes she’s not in some kind  of jam.  It



seems unlikely. She’s your basic good kid, the kind  who helps old  ladies across



the street.

141
    Hodges unwraps his  salad, douses it with lo-cal French, and begins to snark



it up.  He’s hungry. It’s good to be hungry. Hunger  is a sign of health.







                                                              2





Morris  Bellamy isn’t  hungry  at all.  A  bagel with  cream cheese is the most he



can manage for lunch, and not much of that. He ate like  a pig when he ﬁrst got



out—Big  Macs, funnel cakes, pizza by the slice, all  the stuff he had longed  for



while in  prison—but  that was before a night of puking  after an ill-advised  visit



to Senor Taco in Lowtown. He never had a problem with  Mexican when he was



young, and  youth  seems like just  hours ago,  but  a night   spent on his  knees



praying to  the porcelain  altar was all  it  took  to  drive home the  truth:  Morris



Bellamy is ﬁfty-nine,   on the doorstep of old age. The best years of his life were



spent  dying   bluejeans,   varnishing   tables  and   chairs  to   be  sold   in   the



Waynesville Outlet  Shop, and writing   letters for  an unending  stream of dead-



end Charlies in prison overalls.



    Now   he’s in   a  world  he  hardly  recognizes, one  where  movies  show on



bloated screens called  IMAX    and everyone on  the   street is  either  wearing



phones in  their  ears or  staring  at  tiny  screens. There are television  cameras



watching inside every shop, it  seems, and the prices of the most ordinary items



—bread, for  instance, ﬁfty   cents a loaf  when  he went  up—are  so high  they



seem surreal. Everything has changed; he feels glare-blind.  He  is way  behind



the curve, and he knows his prison-oriented  brain will   never catch up. Nor  his



body. It’s stiff  when he gets out  of bed  in the  morning,  achy when he goes to



bed at night;   a touch  of  arthritis,  he  supposes. After that  night   of vomiting



(and when he wasn’t doing that, he was shitting  brown water), his appetite just



died.



    For  food,  at  least. He  has thought   of  women—how  could  he  not,  when



they’re everywhere, the young ones barely dressed in the early summer heat?—



but at his  age, he’d have to buy one younger than thirty,  and if  he went to one

142
of the  places where  such  transactions are made,  he would   be  violating   his



parole. If   he were  caught,  he’d  ﬁnd  himself  back  in   Waynesville  with   the



Rothstein  notebooks still   buried  in   that  patch  of  waste ground,  unread  by



anyone except the author himself.



    He  knows they’re still  there, and that  makes it worse. The urge to dig  them



up and have them at last has been a maddening constant, like a snatch of music



(I need a lover that won’t drive me cray-zee) that gets into your head and simply



won’t leave, but so far he has done almost everything  by the book,  waiting  for



his PO  to relax  and let  up a  little.   This was the  gospel according to  Warren



“Duck”  Duckworth,  handed down when Morris  ﬁrst became eligible for parole.



    “You  gotta  be super-careful to start  with,”   Duck  had said. This  was before



Morris’s  ﬁrst  board  hearing  and the  ﬁrst   vengeful  appearance of Cora  Ann



Hooper. “Like  you’re  walking  on  eggs. ’Cause, see, the bastard will  show up



when you least expect it.  You can take that to  the bank. If  you  get the idea to



do something that  might   get you  marked up  on Doubtful   Behavior—that’s  a



category they have—wait until   after your PO makes a surprise visit.  Then you



prob’ly be all right.  Get  me?”



    Morris  did.



    And  Duck  had been right.







                                                              3





After  not even one hundred hours  as a free man (well, semi-free), Morris came



back to the old  apartment building   where he now  lived to  ﬁnd his  PO sitting



on  the  stoop  and  smoking  a  cigarette.  The  grafﬁti-decorated   cement-and-



breezeblock pile, called  Bugshit  Manor  by the  people who lived  there,  was a



state-subsidized ﬁsh  tank  stocked  with  recovering  druggies,  alcoholics,  and



parolees like himself. Morris  had seen his PO just that  noon, and been sent on



his way after  a few routine  questions and a Seeya next week. This was not next



week, this was not even the next day, but here he was.

143
    Ellis  McFarland  was a large black gentleman with  a vast sloping  gut  and a



shining bald head. Tonight  he was dressed in an acre of bluejeans and a Harley-



Davidson tee-shirt,  size XXL.   Beside him  was a battered  old  knapsack. “Yo,



Morrie,”  he said, and patted the cement next to one humongous haunch. “Take



a pew.”



    “Hello,   Mr. McFarland.”



    Morris   sat, heart  beating  so  hard it   was painful.   Please just  a Doubtful



Behavior, he thought,  even though he couldn’t  think   what he’d done that  was



doubtful.  Please don’t send me back, not when I’m so close.



    “Where  you been, homie? You ﬁnish work at four. It’s  now after six.”



    “I   . . . I  stopped and had a sandwich. I  got it  at the  Happy Cup.  I couldn’t



believe the Cup was still  there, but  it  is.”  Babbling.  Not  able to  stop himself,



even though he knew  babbling  was what people did  when they  were high  on



something.



    “Took  you  two hours  to eat a sandwich? Fucker must  have been three feet



long.”



    “No,   it  was just regular. Ham  and cheese. I ate it  on one of the benches in



Government Square, and fed  some of the  crusts to  the pigeons. I  used to  do



that with  a friend of  mine, back in the  day. And I just  . . . you know,  lost track



of the time.”



    All   perfectly true, but  how lame it  sounded!



    “Enjoying   the air,” McFarland suggested. “Digging  the freedom. That  about



the size of it?”



    “Yes.”



    “Well,   you  know what?  I  think  we  ought to  go upstairs  and then  I  think



you ought to drop  a urine. Make sure you haven’t been digging the wrong kind



of freedom.” He  patted the  knapsack. “Got  my little   kit  right   here. If the  pee



don’t turn  blue, I’ll   get out  of your hair  and let you get  on with  your evening.



You don’t have any objection to that plan, do you?”



    “No.”   Morris  was almost giddy with  relief.



    “And   I’ll   watch  while   you  make wee-wee in  the  little    plastic  cup.  Any



objection to that?”

144
    “No.”    Morris   had spent  over  thirty-ﬁve    years pissing  in   front  of  other



people. He was used to it. “No, that’s ﬁne, Mr.  McFarland.”



    McFarland  ﬂipped  his cigarette  into  the gutter,  grabbed his  knapsack, and



stood up. “In that  case, I believe we’ll forgo the test.”



    Morris  gaped.



    McFarland  smiled.  “You’re okay, Morrie.  For now, at  least. So what do you



say?”



    For  a moment  Morris  couldn’t  think   what he  should say. Then it  came to



him. “Thank  you, Mr.  McFarland.”



    McFarland  rufﬂed  the  hair  of  his  charge, a man  twenty   years older than



himself, and said, “Good boy. Seeya next week.”



    Later, in  his room, Morris  replayed that indulgent,   patronizing  good boy over



and over,  looking  at  the  few  cheap  furnishings  and  the  few  books he  was



allowed to bring  with  him  out of purgatory, listening  to  the animal-house yells



and gawps and thumps  of  his fellow  housemates. He wondered if  McFarland



had any idea how much Morris hated him, and supposed McFarland did.



    Good boy. I’ll  be sixty  soon, but I’m Ellis  McFarland’s good boy.



    He  lay on his bed for  awhile, then got  up and paced, thinking  of  the rest of



the advice Duck  had given him:  If  you get the idea to do something that might get



you marked up on Doubtful Behavior, wait until after your PO makes a surprise visit.



Then you prob’ly be all right.



    Morris  came to a decision and yanked his jeans jacket on.  He rode down to



the lobby  in  the piss-smelling  elevator, walked  two blocks  to  the nearest bus



stop, and waited for  one with  NORTHFIELD    in  the destination  window. His



heart was  beating  double-time   again, and  he  couldn’t  help   imagining   Mr.



McFarland somewhere near. McFarland thinking,   Ah,  now that I’ve lulled him,



I’ll  double back. See what that bad boy’s really up to. Unlikely, of course; McFarland



was probably  home  by now,  eating  dinner  with   his  wife  and  three  kids  as



humongous as he was. Still, Morris couldn’t help imagining  it.



    And  if  he should double back and ask where I went? I’d tell him I  wanted to



look at my  old house, that’s all. No  taverns or titty   bars in that  neighborhood,



just a couple of convenience stores, a few hundred houses built after the Korean

145
War,  and  a bunch  of   streets named  after  trees. Nothing    but  over-the-hill



suburbia in  that  part  of Northﬁeld.   Plus  one block-sized patch  of overgrown



land caught in an endless, Dickensian lawsuit.



    He  got off  the bus on Garner Street, near the library  where he had spent so



many hours as a kid.  The libe  had been his  safe haven, because big kids who



might  want  to  beat you  up  avoided it  like   Superman avoids kryptonite.   He



walked nine  blocks to  Sycamore, then actually did  idle  past his  old  house. It



still  looked  pretty  rundown,  all  the houses in  this  part  of town  did,  but  the



lawn had been mowed and the paint looked fairly  new. He looked at the garage



where he had stowed the Biscayne thirty-six years ago, away from Mrs. Muller’s



prying  eyes. He remembered lining  the  secondhand trunk with   plastic so the



notebooks wouldn’t  get damp. A  very good idea, considering  how long  they’d



had to stay in there.



    Lights  were on  inside Number  23;  the people who  lived here—their  name



was Saubers, according to computer research he’d done in the prison library—



were  home.  He   looked   at   the  upstairs   window   on   the   right,   the   one



overlooking the driveway, and wondered who was in his old  room. A  kid,  most



likely, and in  degenerate times like these, one probably a lot more interested in



playing games on his phone than reading books.



    Morris  moved  on, turning   the corner onto  Elm  Street, then walking   up to



Birch.  When he  got to  the Birch  Street Rec (closed for two  years now due to



budget  cuts, a  thing  he  also knew  from  his  computer  research), he glanced



around, saw the  sidewalks  were deserted on both   sides, and hurried  up  the



Rec’s brick ﬂank. Once behind  it,  he broke into  a shambling  jog,  crossing the



outside  basketball  courts—rundown   but   still   used,  by  the  look—and   the



weedy, overgrown baseball ﬁeld.



    The  moon was out, almost full  and bright  enough to  cast his shadow beside



him.  Ahead of him  now was an untidy  tangle  of bushes and runty  trees, their



branches entwined and ﬁghting  for space. Where was the path? He thought he



was in the right  location,  but he wasn’t seeing it. He  began to course back and



forth where the  baseball ﬁeld’s right  ﬁeld  had been, like a dog  trying  to  catch



an elusive  scent. His  heart  was up  to  full   speed again,  his mouth   dry  and

146
coppery. Revisiting   the  old   neighborhood  was one  thing,   but   being  here,



behind the abandoned Rec, was another. This was Doubtful Behavior for sure.



    He  was about to  give up  when he saw a potato  chip  bag ﬂuttering   from a



bush. He swept the  bush aside and bingo, there was the path, although  it  was



just  a ghost  of its  former  self.  Morris  supposed that  made sense. Some kids



probably still  used it, but  the number would  have dropped after the Rec closed.



That was a good thing.   Although,  he reminded  himself,  for most of  the years



he’d been in Waynesville, the  Rec would have been open. Plenty of foot trafﬁc



passing near his buried trunk.



    He  made  his way  up  the path,  moving   slowly, stopping  completely  each



time the  moon dove behind  a cloud  and moving  on again when it   came back



out. After   ﬁve minutes,  he heard the  soft chuckle  of the  stream. So that  was



still  there, too.



    Morris  stepped out  on the bank.  The stream was open to the sky, and with



the moon  now directly   overhead, the water shone like  black  silk.  He  had no



problem  picking  out  the  tree on  the  other bank,  the  one he had  buried  the



trunk  under. The tree had both  grown and tilted   toward the  stream. He could



see a couple of gnarled roots poking out below it and then diving  back into  the



earth, but otherwise it  all looked the same.



    Morris   crossed the stream in  the  old  way, going  from  stone to  stone and



hardly getting  his shoes wet. He looked around once—he knew he was alone, if



there had been anyone else in the area he would have heard them, but  the old



Prison Peek was second nature—and  then  knelt  beneath  the tree.  He  could



hear his breath rasping harshly in  his throat  as he tore at weeds with one hand



and held on to a root for balance with the other.



    He   cleared a small  circular  patch  and then  began  digging,   tossing aside



pebbles and small  stones. He  was in  almost  halfway to  the  elbow  when his



ﬁngertips touched something  hard and smooth. He rested his burning  forehead



against a gnarled elbow of protruding root  and closed his eyes.



    Still  here.



    His  trunk  was still  here.



    Thank  you, God.

147
    It  was enough, at least for the time being. The best he could manage, and ah



God, such a relief. He scooped the dirt back into  the hole and scattered it with



last fall’s dead leaves from  the bank  of the  stream. Soon the weeds would  be



back—weeds grew fast, especially in warm weather—and that  would complete



the job.



    Once upon  a freer time,  he would  have continued up the  path to  Sycamore



Street, because the bus stop was closer when you went that way, but  not  now,



because the backyard where the path came out belonged to the Saubers family.



If   any  of  them   saw  him   there  and   called  911,   he’d  likely   be   back  in



Waynesville  tomorrow,  probably   with   another  ﬁve  years tacked  on   to  his



original sentence, just for good luck.



    He  doubled back to  Birch Street instead, conﬁrmed the  sidewalks were still



empty, and walked  to the  bus stop on  Garner Street. His  legs were tired  and



the hand he’d been digging   with  was scraped and sore, but he felt  a hundred



pounds lighter. Still  there! He  had been sure it would be, but  conﬁrmation was



so sweet.



    Back  at Bugshit  Manor, he washed the dirt  from  his hands, undressed, and



lay down.  The  place was  noisier than  ever, but   not  as noisy as D   Wing  at



Waynesville, especially on nights  like  tonight,   with  the  moon big  in  the sky.



Morris drifted  toward sleep almost at once.



    Now  that  the  trunk  was conﬁrmed, he had to  be careful: that  was his ﬁnal



thought.



    More  careful than ever.







                                                              4





For almost a month  he has been careful; has turned up  for  his day job  on the



dot every morning  and gotten in  early at Bugshit  Manor every night.  The only



person from Waynesville  he’ll  see is Charlie Roberson, who  got out  on DNA

148
with   Morris’s  help,  and  Charlie  doesn’t rate  as a  known  associate, because



Charlie was innocent all along. At  least of the crime he was sent up for.



    Morris’s  boss at the  MAC  is a fat,  self-important   asshole, barely computer



literate  but  probably  making  sixty  grand  a year. Sixty  at least. And   Morris?



Eleven bucks an hour. He’s on food stamps and living in a ninth-ﬂoor  room not



much bigger  than the cell  where he spent the so-called “best years of his life.”



Morris isn’t  positive his ofﬁce carrel is bugged, but he wouldn’t  be surprised. It



seems to him that everything in America is bugged these days.



    It’s  a crappy  life,  and whose fault  is  that? He  told  the  Parole Board  time



after time,  and with  no hesitation,  that  it  was his; he had learned how to play



the blame game from his sessions with Curd the  Turd. Copping  to bad choices



was a necessity. If you didn’t give  them the  old mea culpa you’d never get out,



no matter   what  some cancer-ridden bitch   hoping  to  curry  favor  with   Jesus



might  put in  a letter. Morris  didn’t  need Duck to tell  him  that. He  might  have



been born at night, as the saying went, but it  wasn’t last night.



    But  had it  really been his fault?



    Or  the fault  of that asshole right over yonder?



    Across the street and about four doors down from  the bench where Morris is



sitting  with   the remains of  his unwanted bagel,  an obese baldy comes sailing



out of  Andrew  Halliday  Rare Editions,  where he  has just ﬂipped  the  sign on



the door from  OPEN  to CLOSED. It’s  the third  time  Morris  has observed this



lunchtime  ritual,  because Tuesdays are his afternoon days at the MAC. He’ll go



in  at  one and  busy himself   until   four,  working  to   bring  the  ancient  ﬁling



system up-to-date.  (Morris  is  sure the people  who run  the  place know  a  lot



about art   and music   and drama,  but   they  know  fuckall   about  Mac  Ofﬁce



Manager.) At four,  he’ll  take the crosstown bus back to  his crappy  ninth-ﬂoor



room.



    In  the meantime, he’s here.



    Watching  his old  pal.



    Assuming  this is like  the other two  midday Tuesdays—Morris has no reason



to think  it  won’t  be, his old pal always was a creature of habit—Andy Halliday



will  walk (well,  waddle) down Lacemaker Lane to a café called Jamais Toujours.

149
Stupid fucking   name, means absolutely nothing,  but  sounds pretentious. Oh,



but that  was Andy all over, wasn’t it?



    Morris’s  old pal,  the one with  whom he had discussed Camus and Ginsberg



and John Rothstein during  many coffee breaks and pickup lunches, has put on



at least a hundred pounds, the hornrims  have been replaced by pricey designer



spectacles, his shoes look like they cost more than all  the money Morris  made



in  his thirty-ﬁve   years of  prison  toil,  but  Morris   feels quite  sure his old  pal



hasn’t changed inside.   As the  twig   is  bent  the  bough   is shaped,  that  was



another old saying, and once a pretentious asshole, always a pretentious asshole.



    The  owner of Andrew  Halliday  Rare Editions  is walking  away from  Morris



rather than toward him,  but  Morris  wouldn’t  have been concerned if Andy had



crossed the street and  approached. After  all,  what  would  he see? An elderly



gent with   narrow shoulders and  bags under his  eyes and thinning   gray hair,



wearing an el cheapo sport jacket and even cheaper gray pants, both purchased



at Chapter  Eleven. His  old  pal  would  accompany his  growing  stomach  past



him without   a ﬁrst look, let alone a second.



    I  told  the Parole Board what they wanted to hear, Morris thinks.  I  had to do



that,  but  the  loss of all  those years is  really your  fault,  you  conceited homo



cocksucker. If it had been Rothstein  and my partners I’d been arrested for, that



would  be different.  But   it  wasn’t. I  was never  even questioned about  Mssrs.



Rothstein,  Dow,   and  Rogers.  I   lost  those  years because of   a  forced  and



unpleasant act of  sexual congress I can’t  even remember. And   why  did  that



happen? Well,  it’s  sort  of like   the house that   Jack built.   I  was in  the  alley



instead of the tavern when  the Hooper  bitch  came by. I got  booted out  of the



tavern because I kicked the jukebox. I kicked  the jukebox for  the same reason I



was in the tavern in the ﬁrst place: because I was pissed at you.



    Why  don’t you try me on those notebooks around the turn of the twenty-ﬁrst century,



if you still have them?



    Morris   watches Andy   waddle  away from  him   and  clenches his ﬁsts  and



thinks,  You  were like   a girl   that  day.  The hot   little   virgin   you get  in   the



backseat of your car and she’s all yes, honey, oh yes, oh yes, I love you so much. Until



you get her skirt   up to  her waist, that  is. Then  she clamps her knees together

150
almost hard enough to  break your  wrist  and it’s all  no, oh no, unhand me, what



kind of girl do you think I am?



    You  could  have been a little    more diplomatic,   at  least, Morris  thinks.   A



little  diplomacy  could have saved all those wasted years. But you couldn’t spare



me any, could you? Not so much as an attaboy, that must have taken guts. All I



got was don’t try to lay this off on me.



    His  old pal walks  his expensive shoes into Jamais Toujours, where he will no



doubt have his expanding ass kissed by the maître d’. Morris  looks at his bagel



and thinks  he  should ﬁnish  it—or   at  least use his teeth  to  scrape the cream



cheese into his mouth—but  his stomach is too knotted up  to accept it. He  will



go to the  MAC  instead, and spend the afternoon trying   to impose some order



on their  tits-up,   bass-ackwards digital  ﬁling   system. He  knows he  shouldn’t



come back here  to  Lacemaker Lane—no longer  even a  street but   a kind   of



pricey,  open-air  mall   from   which   vehicles  are  banned—and   knows  he’ll



probably  be on  the  same bench  next  Tuesday. And  the Tuesday after  that.



Unless he’s got the notebooks. That would  break the  spell. No  need to bother



with  his old pal then.



    He  gets up  and tosses the bagel into a nearby trash barrel.  He looks  down



toward Jamais Toujours and whispers, “You suck, old pal. You really suck. And



for two cents—”



    But  no.



    No.



    Only  the  notebooks matter, and if  Charlie Roberson will  help him  out,  he’s



going after them  tomorrow  night.  And  Charlie will  help  him. He  owes Morris



a large favor, and Morris means to call  it  in.  He knows he should  wait  longer,



until  Ellis   McFarland is  absolutely  sure Morris  is  one of  the  good ones and



turns his attention   elsewhere, but the pull  of  the trunk  and what’s inside  it  is



just too  strong.  He’d love  to get  some payback from  the fat  sonof a bitch now



feeding his face with  fancy food, but  revenge isn’t  as important  as that fourth



Jimmy Gold  novel. There might  even be a ﬁfth!  Morris knows that  isn’t  likely,



but it’s  possible. There was a lot  of  writing   in those books, a mighty   lot.  He

151
walks toward the  bus stop, sparing one baleful glance back at Jamais Toujours



and thinking,  You’ll  never know how lucky  you were.



    Old  pal.







                                                              5





Around the time  Morris  Bellamy is chucking  his bagel and heading for the bus



stop, Hodges is ﬁnishing his salad and thinking  he could eat two more just  like



it.  He puts  the Styrofoam box  and plastic spork  back in  the carryout bag  and



tosses it in  the  passenger footwell, reminding  himself  to  dispose of his  litter



later. He likes his  new car, a Prius that has yet to turn  ten thousand miles, and



does his best to keep it  clean and neat. The car was Holly’s pick.  “You’ll   burn



less gas and be kind to the environment,”  she told  him.  The woman who  once



hardly dared to  step out  of  her house now  runs many  aspects of his life.  She



might  let  up on  him  a little   if  she had a boyfriend, but  Hodges knows  that’s



not likely.  He’s as close to a boyfriend as she’s apt to get.



    It’s  a good thing I  love you, Holly,  he thinks, or I’d  have to kill  you.



    He  hears the buzz of  an approaching plane, checks his watch,  and sees it’s



eleven thirty-four.  It  appears that Oliver Madden is going to  be johnny-on-the-



spot,  and that’s   lovely.  Hodges  is  an on-time   man  himself.   He  grabs  his



sportcoat from  the  backseat and gets out.  It  doesn’t  hang just  right   because



there’s heavy stuff in the front pockets.



    A  triangular  overhang juts out  above the entrance doors, and it’s at least ten



degrees cooler in its shade. Hodges takes his new glasses from the jacket’s inner



pocket and  scans the sky to  the  west. The  plane, now  on its  ﬁnal  approach,



swells from   a speck  to  a blotch   to  an  identiﬁable   shape that  matches  the



pictures Holly  has printed out:  a 2008 Beechcraft KingAir  350,  red with  black



piping.  Only  twelve  hundred  hours on  the  clock, and  exactly eight  hundred



and ﬁve landings.  The one he’s about to observe will  be number  eight-oh-six.



Rated selling price, four million   and change.

152
    A  man in  a coverall comes out through the main door. He looks at  Hodges’s



car, then at Hodges. “You can’t park there,” he says.



    “You  don’t look  all that busy today,” Hodges says mildly.



    “Rules  are rules, mister.”



    “I’ll   be gone very shortly.”



    “Shortly  is not  the same as now. The front is for pickups and deliveries. You



need to use the parking lot.”



    The  KingAir   ﬂoats over the end  of the runway, now  only feet from  Mother



Earth. Hodges jerks a thumb  at it.  “Do  you see that plane, sir? The man ﬂying



it is an extremely dirty   dog. A number  of people have been looking for him for



a number of years, and now here he is.”



    The  guy in  the  coverall considers this as the extremely dirty   dog lands the



plane with  nothing  more than a small blue-gray  puff  of rubber. They watch  as



it  disappears behind the Zane Aviation   building.   Then the  man—probably  a



mechanic—turns back to Hodges. “Are  you a cop?”



    “No,”     Hodges  says,  “but    I’m    in   that   neighborhood.    Also,   I   know



presidents.” He  holds out  his  loosely curled  hand, palm  down.  A  ﬁfty-dollar



bill  peeps from between the knuckles.



    The   mechanic  reaches for   it,   then  reconsiders.  “Is   there  going   to   be



trouble?”



    “No,”   Hodges says.



    The   man  in   the  coverall  takes  the  ﬁfty.   “I’m    supposed to  bring   that



Navigator around for  him.  Right  where you’re parked. That’s the only  reason I



gave you grief about it.”



    Now  that  Hodges thinks  of it,  that’s not  a bad idea. “Why  don’t  you go on



and do that?  Pull  it  up behind  my  car, nice and tight.   Then  you might   have



business somewhere else for ﬁfteen minutes or so.”



    “Always   stuff  to  do in  Hangar  A,”  the  man  in  the  coverall agrees. “Hey,



you’re not carrying a gun, are you?”



    “No.”



    “What   about the guy in  the KingAir?”

153
    “He   won’t   have one,  either.”   This  is  almost  certainly   true,  but   in  the



unlikely  event Madden does have one, it will probably be in his carryall. Even if



it’s on  his person, he won’t  have a chance to pull   it,  let  alone use it.  Hodges



hopes he never gets too old for excitement, but he has absolutely no interest in



OK Corral shit.



    Now  he can hear the steady, swelling beat of the KingAir’s  props as it taxies



toward the building.  “Better  bring  that Navigator  around. Then . .  .”



    “Hangar  A,  right.  Good luck.”



    Hodges nods his thanks. “You have a good day, sir.”







                                                              6





Hodges stands to  the  left  of  the  doors,  right  hand  in  his  sportcoat  pocket,



enjoying both the  shade and the balmy summer air. His heart is beating a little



faster than normal, but  that’s  okay. That’s just as it  should be. Oliver  Madden



is the  kind  of  thief  who  robs with  a  computer rather  than  a gun  (Holly   has



discovered the  socially  engaged motherfucker   has eight   different   Facebook



pages, each under  a  different  name),  but   it  doesn’t  do  to  take  things   for



granted.  That’s  a good  way  to   get  hurt.   He  listens  as  Madden  shuts the



KingAir   down   and imagines  him   walking  into   the  terminal   of  this  small,



almost-off-the-radar FBO.  No, not  just walking,  striding. With   a bounce in his



step. Going to  the  desk, where he will  arrange for his  expensive turboprop to



be hangared. And fueled? Probably not  today. He’s got  plans in the  city.  This



week he’s buying casino licenses. Or so he thinks.



    The  Navigator pulls  up, chrome twinkling   in  the sun, smoked gangsta glass



reﬂecting the front  of the building  .  . . and Hodges himself. Whoops! He  sidles



farther to  the left.  The man  in  the coverall gets out,  tips  Hodges a wave, and



heads for Hangar A.



    Hodges waits,  wondering what Barbara might  want,  what a pretty girl  with



lots of  friends might   consider important   enough to  make  her reach out  to  a

154
man old  enough to  be her grandpa.  Whatever she needs, he’ll  do his  best to



supply it.  Why  wouldn’t   he? He loves her almost as much as he loves Jerome



and Holly. The four  of them were in the wars together.



    That’s  for  later,  he tells  himself.  Right   now  Madden’s the  priority.   Keep



your eyes on the prize.



    The  doors open and Oliver Madden walks  out. He’s whistling,   and yes, he’s



got that  Mr.  Successful bounce in his step. He’s at least four inches taller than



Hodges’s not inconsiderable six-two. Broad shoulders in  a summerweight suit,



the shirt  open at the collar, the tie  hanging  loose. Handsome, chiseled features



that fall  somewhere between George Clooney and Michael Douglas. He’s got a



briefcase in his right   hand and an overnight   bag slung over  his left  shoulder.



His haircut’s  the kind  you get in  one of those places where you have to book a



week ahead.



    Hodges  steps forward. He  can’t decide between morning  and afternoon, so



just wishes Madden a good day.



    Madden turns,  smiling.  “The same back to you, sir. Do I know  you?”



    “Not   at  all, Mr.  Madden,”  Hodges says, returning  the smile.  “I’m  here for



the plane.”



    The   smile  withers  a  bit   at  the  corners.  A  frown   line  appears between



Madden’s manicured brows. “I beg your pardon?”



    “The  plane,” Hodges says. “Three-ﬁfty  Beech KingAir?  Seating for ten? Tail



number   November-one-one-four-Delta-Kilo?    Actually    belongs  to   Dwight



Cramm, of El Paso, Texas?”



    The  smile  stays on, but  boy, it’s  struggling.   “You’ve mistaken  me, friend.



My  name’s Mallon,  not   Madden. James Mallon.   As  for  the  plane, mine’s  a



King,  all right,   but the  tail  is N426LL,  and it  belongs to no one but  little   old



me. You probably want Signature Air,  next door.”



    Hodges  nods as if  Madden might   be right.   Then  he takes out  his phone,



reaching crossdraw so he can keep his right hand in  his  pocket. “Why   don’t I



just put  through  a call to  Mr. Cramm? Clear this  up. I  believe you were at his



ranch just   last  week? Gave  him   a bank   check for   two  hundred  thousand



dollars? Drawn on First of Reno?”

155
    “I  don’t  know what you’re talking  about.”  Smile all gone.



    “Well,   you know what? He  knows you. As James Mallon rather than  Oliver



Madden, but  when  I  faxed him  a photo  six-pack, he  had no trouble   circling



you.”



    Madden’s  face is  entirely   expressionless now,  and Hodges  sees he’s not



handsome at all. Or  ugly,  for  that matter.  He’s nobody, extra  tall  or not,  and



that’s how  he’s gotten  by as long  as he  has, pulling   one scam after another,



taking  in  even a wily   old coyote  like  Dwight   Cramm.  He’s nobody, and that



makes Hodges think  of Brady  Hartsﬁeld,  who  almost blew  up an auditorium



ﬁlled with  kids  not so long ago. A chill  goes up his back.



    “Are   you police?”  Madden asks. He  looks  Hodges up  and down.  “I  don’t



think  so, you’re too old. But if  you are, let me see your ID.”



    Hodges  repeats what he told  the  guy  in  the coverall:  “Not  exactly  police,



but in  the neighborhood.”



    “Then  good luck  to you,  Mr. In  The Neighborhood.  I’ve got  appointments,



and I’m running  a bit  late.”



    He  starts toward the Navigator,  not running  but moving  fast.



    “You   were actually  right   on time,”   Hodges  says amiably, falling   in  step.



Keeping  up  with   him  would  have  been hard  after  his retirement   from  the



police. Back then  he was living  on Slim  Jims and  taco chips, and would  have



been wheezing after the ﬁrst dozen steps. Now he does three miles a day, either



walking or  on the treadmill.



    “Leave me alone,” Madden says, “or I’ll call  the real police.”



    “Just  a few words,”  Hodges says, thinking,  Damn,  I sound like  a Jehovah’s



Witness.  Madden is  rounding   the  Navigator’s  rear  end.  His  overnight   bag



swings back and forth like a pendulum.



    “No  words,”  Madden says. “You’re a nut.”



    “You   know   what  they  say,”  Hodges  replies  as Madden  reaches for  the



driver’s-side door. “Sometimes you feel like a nut, sometimes you don’t.”



    Madden  opens the door. This  is really  working  out  well,  Hodges thinks  as



he pulls his Happy Slapper from his coat pocket. The Slapper is a knotted sock.



Below the knot,  the sock’s foot is loaded with  ball bearings. Hodges swings it,

156
connecting with   Oliver  Madden’s left  temple.  It’s a  Goldilocks  blow, not  too



hard, not too soft, just right.



    Madden  staggers and drops his  briefcase. His  knees bend but  don’t  quite



buckle. Hodges seizes him above the elbow  in  the strong  come-along grip  he



perfected as a member of this  city’s MPD  and  helps Madden into  the  driver’s



seat of the Navigator.   The man’s eyes have the ﬂoaty  look  of a  ﬁghter  who’s



been tagged hard and can only hope for  the round  to end before his opponent



follows up and puts him  down for good.



    “Upsa-daisy,”   Hodges  says,  and  when  Madden’s  ass is   on  the   leather



upholstery of  the  bucket  seat, he bends and lifts   in  the trailing   left  leg.  He



takes his  handcuffs  from  the  left   pocket  of  his  sportcoat  and has  Madden



tethered to the steering wheel in  a trice. The  Navigator’s keys, on a big yellow



Hertz fob,  are in one of the  cupholders. Hodges takes them, slams the driver’s



door, grabs the fallen briefcase, and walks briskly around to the  passenger side.



Before getting in,  he tosses the keys onto the grass verge near the sign reading



LOADING   AND   UNLOADING     ONLY.   A  good idea,  because Madden has



recovered enough to be punching  the SUV’s start  button  over and over again.



Each time he does it, the dashboard ﬂashes KEY NOT DETECTED.



    Hodges  slams the passenger door and regards Madden cheerfully. “Here we



are, Oliver. Snug as two bugs in a rug.”



    “You  can’t  do this,”   Madden says. He  sounds pretty  good for  a man  who



should  still   have  cartoon  birdies   ﬂying   in   circles  around  his  head.  “You



assaulted me. I can press charges. Where’s my briefcase?”



    Hodges holds it  up. “Safe and sound. I picked it  up for you.”



    Madden reaches with his uncuffed hand. “Give  it to  me.”



    Hodges  puts it  in  the footwell   and steps on it.  “For the  time  being, it’s  in



protective custody.”



    “What    do  you   want,  asshole?” The   growl   is  in   stark  contrast  to   the



expensive suit and haircut.



    “Come  on, Oliver, I  didn’t  hit you that  hard. The plane. Cramm’s plane.”



    “He  sold it  to me. I have a bill  of sale.”



    “As  James Mallon.”

157
    “That’s  my name. I had it  changed legally four years ago.”



    “Oliver,   you  and  legal  aren’t even  kissing  cousins. But  that’s  beside the



point. Your check bounced higher than Iowa corn in  August.”



    “That’s  impossible.” He  yanks his cuffed wrist. “Get  this off me!”



    “We   can discuss the cuff  after we  discuss the check. Man,  that  was slick.



First of Reno is  a real bank, and when Cramm  called to verify  your check, the



Caller  ID   said First   of  Reno  was what   he was  calling.   He  got  the   usual



automated answering service, welcome to First  of Reno where the customer is



king,  blah-de-blah,  and when he pushed the  right   number, he got  somebody



claiming  to  be an accounts manager. I’m  thinking   that   was your brother-in-



law, Peter Jamieson, who was arrested early this morning in Fields, Virginia.”



    Madden  blinks  and recoils, as if  Hodges has suddenly thrust  a hand at  his



face. Jamieson really is Madden’s brother-in-law, but he hasn’t been arrested. At



least not to Hodges’s knowledge.



    “Calling   himself Fred Dawlings,  Jamieson assured Mr. Cramm that you had



over twelve million   dollars  in  First  of Reno in  several different  accounts. I’m



sure he was convincing, but  the Caller  ID  thing  was the clincher.  It’s  a ﬁddle



accomplished with  a  highly  illegal   computer  program.  My  assistant is good



with  computers, and she ﬁgured that  part out.  The use of that alone could  get



you sixteen to  twenty  months in  a Club  Fed. But  there’s so much more.  Five



years ago, you and  Jamieson hacked your  way into   the  General Accounting



Ofﬁce and managed to steal almost four million  dollars.”



    “You’re  insane.”



    “For  most people, four  million  split  two  ways would be enough. But  you’re



not one to  rest on  your laurels. You’re  just  a big  old thrill-seeker,  aren’t  you,



Oliver?”



    “I’m   not talking  to you. You assaulted me and you’re going to jail for  it.”



    “Give  me your wallet.”



    Madden stares at him, wide-eyed, genuinely shocked. As if he himself  hasn’t



lifted  the  wallets and  bank accounts of God  knows  how many  people. Don’t



like it  when the shoe’s on the other foot, do you? Hodges thinks. Isn’t  that  just



tough titty.

158
    He  holds out his hand. “Give  it.”



    “Fuck  you.”



    Hodges  shows Madden his  Happy  Slapper. The loaded toe hangs down,  a



sinister teardrop. “Give   it,  asshole, or I’ll  darken your  world  and take it.   The



choice is yours.”



    Madden  looks into Hodges’s eyes to see if he means it. Then he reaches into



his  suitcoat’s inner   pocket—slowly,  reluctantly—and    brings  out  a  bulging



wallet.



    “Wow,”   Hodges says. “Is that ostrich?”



    “As  a matter of fact, it  is.”



    Hodges  understands that  Madden wants him  to  reach for  it.  He  thinks  of



telling   Madden  to  lay   it   on  the  console between  the  seats, then   doesn’t.



Madden, it  seems, is a slow  learner in  need of a refresher course on who’s in



charge here. So he  reaches for the  wallet,  and  Madden grabs  his  hand in  a



powerful,  knuckle-grinding   grip,   and Hodges  whacks the  back  of Madden’s



hand with the  Slapper. The knuckle-grinding  stops at once.



    “Ow!  Ow!  Shit!”



    Madden’s  got  his  hand to  his  mouth.   Above it,   his  incredulous eyes are



welling  tears of pain.



    “One  must not  grasp what one cannot hold,”  Hodges says. He picks up the



wallet, wondering  brieﬂy  if  the ostrich  is an endangered species. Not that this



moke would give a shit, one way or the other.



    He  turns to the moke in  question.



    “That   was your second courtesy-tap, and two is all I ever give. This  is not a



police-and-suspect situation. You  make another move on me and  I’ll  beat you



like a rented mule, chained to the wheel or not. Do  you understand?”



    “Yes.”  The word comes through lips still  tightened  with  pain.



    “You’re  wanted by the FBI for  the GAO  thing.  Do you know that?”



    A  long pause while Madden eyes the Slapper. Then he says yes again.



    “You’re  wanted  in California  for  stealing a Rolls-Royce  Silver Wraith,   and



in Arizona  for stealing half  a million   dollars’ worth  of construction  equipment



which you then resold in Mexico.  Do you also know those things?”

159
    “Are  you wearing a wire?”



    “No.”



    Madden  decides to take  Hodges’s word for  it.  “Okay,  yes. Although   I  got



pennies on the dollar for those front-end  loaders and bulldozers. It was a damn



swindle.”



    “If   anyone would   know  a swindle  when  it   walks  up  and says howdy,  it



would be you.”



    Hodges  opens the   wallet.  There’s hardly   any cash  inside,  maybe eighty



bucks total,  but  Madden doesn’t need cash; he’s got at least two  dozen credit



cards in  at  least six  different  names. Hodges  looks  at  Madden with   honest



curiosity. “How  do you keep them all straight?”



    Madden doesn’t reply.



    With   that same curiosity, Hodges says: “Are you never ashamed?”



    Still   looking  straight  ahead, Madden says: “That  old  bastard in  El Paso is



worth a hundred and ﬁfty  million   dollars. He made most of it  selling worthless



oil leases. All right,   I ﬂew  off with  his  plane. Left him  nothing  but  his Cessna



172 and his Lear 35. Poor baby.”



    Hodges  thinks,  If this  guy had a moral  compass, it would always point  due



south. Talking is no use . . . but when was it ever?



    He  hunts through  the  wallet  and ﬁnds a bill  of particulars  in  the matter  of



the KingAir:   two  hundred  thousand down,  the rest held  in  escrow at First of



Reno, to  be paid  after  a satisfactory test  ﬂight.   The  paper is  worthless in  a



practical sense—the plane  was bought  under  a false name, with   nonexistent



money—but  Hodges isn’t always practical,  and he’s not too old  to count  coup



and take scalps.



    “Did   you  lock it   up or  leave the key  at the  desk so they could  do it  after



they put it  in the  hangar?”



    “At   the desk.”



    “Okay,    good.”   Hodges   regards  Madden   earnestly.   “Here   comes  the



important  part of our little   talk,  Oliver, so listen closely. I was hired to ﬁnd  the



plane and take possession of it. That’s all,  end of story. I’m  not  FBI,  MPD,  or



even a private dick.  My   sources are good, though, and  I know  you’re  on the

160
verge of making  a deal to buy a controlling   interest  in a couple of  casinos out



on the lake, one on Grande Belle Coeur Island  and one on P’tit  Grand Coeur.”



He taps the briefcase with  his foot.  “I’m  sure the  paperwork is in  here, as I’m



sure that if you want to  remain a free man, it’s never going to be signed.”



    “Oh  now wait  a minute!”



    “Shut   your hole.  There’s a ticket  in   the James Mallon  name at  the  Delta



terminal.  It’s  one-way to  Los  Angeles. Leaves in—”   he looked  at  his watch



—“in  about ninety  minutes.  Which  gives you just  time enough to  go through



all  the  security shit.   Be on  that  plane  or  you’ll  be  in  jail  tonight.   Do   you



understand?”



    “I  can’t—”



    “Do  you understand?”



    Madden—who   is  also Mallon,   Morton,   Mason, Dillon,    Callen, and  God



knows how  many others—thinks   over his  options,  decides he has none, and



gives a sullen nod.



    “Great!  I’ll   unlock you  now, take my cuffs, and exit  your vehicle. If  you try



making a move on me while I  do either, I’ll  knock  you into next  week. Are you



clear on that?”



    “Yes.”



    “Your  car key’s on  the grass. Big  yellow Hertz  fob,  can’t miss it.   For now,



both hands on the wheel. Ten and two, just like Dad taught  you.”



    Madden puts  both hands on the wheel. Hodges unlocks the cuffs, slips them



back in his left pocket, and exits the Navigator.  Madden doesn’t move.



    “You  have a good day, now,” Hodges says, and shuts the door.







                                                              7





He  gets into  his  Prius,  drives  to  the end  of  the  Zane Aviation   turnaround,



parks, and  watches Madden  grub  the  Navigator’s  key  out  of  the  grass. He



waves as Madden drives past him.  Madden doesn’t  wave back, which  doesn’t

161
even come close to breaking  Hodges’s heart. He  follows  the Navigator  along



the airport  feeder road, not quite tailgating   but  close. When Madden turns off



toward the main terminals,  Hodges ﬂashes a so-long with his lights.



    Half  a mile  farther up,  he pulls into  the lot  of Midwest  Airmotive   and calls



Pete Huntley,  his  old  partner.  He  gets a civil   enough “Hey,  Billy,   how  you



doin,”  but nothing   you’d call  effusive. Since Hodges went his own  way in the



matter of the so-called Mercedes Killer (and barely escaped serious legal trouble



as a result), his relationship with  Pete has frosted over. Maybe this will  thaw it



out a bit.  Certainly  he feels no remorse about lying  to  the moke  now heading



for the Delta terminal;  if  ever there was a guy who deserved a heaping spoonful



of his own medicine, it’s Oliver  Madden.



    “How   would you like  to bag an extremely tasty turkey, Pete?”



    “How   tasty?” Still  cool, but on the interested side of cool now.



    “FBI   Ten Most  Wanted,  that  tasty enough? He’s currently   checking in  at



Delta, scheduled to leave for LA  on Flight   One-nineteen at one forty-ﬁve  PM.



Going  under James Mallon,  but  his  real name is  Oliver  Madden.  He stole  a



bunch of money  from the  Feds ﬁve years ago as Oliver Mason, and you know



how Uncle  Sam feels about getting  his  pocket picked.”  He  adds a few of  the



more colorful details on Madden’s resume.



    “You  know he’s at Delta how?”



    “Because I bought  the  ticket.  I’m  leaving the  airport  now. I just  repo’d his



plane. Which  was not  his  plane, because he made the down  payment with   a



rubber check. Holly  will   call Zane Aviation   and give them  all the  details. She



loves that part of the job.”



    A  long moment  of silence. Then: “Aren’t you ever going to  retire, Billy?”



    That  sort of hurts. “You  could say thanks. It wouldn’t  kill  you.”



    Pete sighs. “I’ll   call airport  security, then get on out  there myself.” A  pause.



Then: “Thank  you. Kermit.”



    Hodges  grins. It’s  not  much, but  it  might   be a start in  repairing  what  has



been, if  not  broken,  then  badly  sprained. “Thank   Holly.  She’s the  one who



tracked him  down.  She’s still jumpy  with   people she doesn’t know, but  when



she’s on the computer, she kills.”

162
    “I’ll   be sure to do that.”



    “And   say hi  to Izzy.”  Isabelle Jaynes has been Pete’s partner since Hodges



pulled  the  pin.  She’s one dynamite  redhead, and  plenty  smart.  It  occurs  to



Hodges, almost  as a shock, that  soon enough  she’ll  be working   with  a  new



partner; Pete himself will  be retiring  ere long.



    “I’ll   pass that on, too. Want  to give me this  guy’s description for the  airport



security guys?”



    “He’s   hard to   miss. Six  and  a half  feet  tall,   light   brown  suit,   probably



looking a little  woozy just  about now.”



    “You  clocked him?”



    “I  soothed him.”



    Pete laughs. It’s  good to  hear him do  that. Hodges  ends the call and heads



back to  the  city,  well   on the  way  to  being  twenty  thousand  dollars  richer,



courtesy of  a crusty  old  Texan  named Dwight   Cramm.   He’ll   call  and give



Cramm the good news after he ﬁnds out what the Barbster wants.







                                                              8





Drew  Halliday  (Drew  is  what  he prefers to  be  called now,  among his  small



circle of friends) eats eggs Benedict at his usual corner table in Jamais Toujours.



He ingests slowly, pacing himself, although  he could gobble everything  in four



large gulps, then  pick  up the  plate and lick   the tasty  yellow sauce like a  dog



licking  its  bowl. He  has no close relatives, his lovelife has been in the rearview



mirror  for  over ﬁfteen years now, and—face it—his   small circle  of friends  are



really no more  than acquaintances. The only  things  he cares about these days



are books and food.



    Well,  no.



    These days there’s a third thing.



    John Rothstein’s notebooks have made a reappearance in his life.

163
    The  waiter,  a young  fellow  in  a white  shirt   and tight   black  pants, glides



over. Longish dark  blond  hair, clean and tied  back at  the  nape so his elegant



cheekbones show. Drew has been in a little  theater group for  thirty   years now



(funny how time  glides away . . . only not really),  and he thinks William   would



make a perfectly  adequate Romeo, always assuming he  could act.  And  good



waiters always can, a little.



    “Will    there be anything else, Mr. Halliday?”



    Yes! he  thinks.  Two  more of  these, followed  by  two  crème brûlées and  a



strawberry shortcake!



    “Another  cup of  coffee, I think.”



    William    smiles, exposing teeth  that have received nothing  but  the  best of



dental care. “I’ll  be back with it  in two  shakes of a lamb’s tail.”



    Drew  pushes his plate  away regretfully,  leaving the  last smear of yolk  and



hollandaise behind.  He takes out  his  appointment  book.  It’s  a Moleskine,  of



course, the pocket-sized one. He pages past four  months’ worth  of  jottings—



addresses, reminders to  self, prices  of  books  he’s ordered  or  will   order  for



various clients. Near the  end, on a blank page all  its own,  are two names. The



ﬁrst is James Hawkins. He  wonders if it’s  a coincidence or if  the boy picked  it



deliberately. Do boys still  read Robert Louis Stevenson these days? Drew tends



to think  this  one did; after all,  he claims to be a lit  major, and Jim  Hawkins  is



the hero-narrator of Treasure Island.



    The  name written below James Hawkins is Peter Saubers.







                                                              9





Saubers—aka Hawkins—came into the  shop for the  ﬁrst time  two  weeks ago,



hiding  behind  a ridiculous  adolescent moustache that hadn’t  had a chance to



grow  out  much.  He  was wearing  black  hornrims  like   the  ones Drew  (then



Andy) affected back in  the  days when Jimmy  Carter was president. Teenagers



did not  as a rule come into  the  shop, and that  was ﬁne with  Drew;  he might

164
still  be attracted  to  the occasional young male—William    the  Waiter  being a



case in point—but   teens tended to  be careless with valuable books,  handling



them roughly,  reshelving them  upside down,  even dropping  them.  Also, they



had a regrettable tendency to shoplift.



    This  one looked as if he would turn  and sprint for  the door if Drew  so much



as said boo. He was wearing  a City  College jacket,  although  the day was too



warm for  it.  Drew,  who’d  read his share of Sherlock Holmes,  put  it   together



with  the  moustache and studious  hornrims  and deduced that  here was a  lad



attempting  to look  older, as if he were trying to get  into one of the dance clubs



downtown instead of a bookshop specializing in rare volumes.



    You  want  me  to  take you  for  at  least twenty-one,  Drew  thought,   but  if



you’re a day past seventeen, I’ll eat my  hat.  You’re not here to  browse, either,



are you? I believe you are a young man on a mission.



    Under  his arm,  the boy carried  a large book and a manila envelope. Drew’s



ﬁrst thought   was that  the kid   wanted an appraisal on  some moldy old  thing



he’d found in  the attic,  but as Mr. Moustache drew hesitantly  closer, Drew saw



a purple sticker he recognized at once on the spine of the book.



    Drew’s  ﬁrst  impulse was to  say Hello,  son, but  he quashed it.  Let  the kid



have his college-boy disguise. What harm?



    “Good  afternoon, sir. May I help you?”



    For  a moment  young Mr.  Moustache said nothing.   The dark  brown  of his



new facial hair was in  stark contrast  to the  pallor of  his cheeks. Drew realized



he was deciding whether to  stay or mutter  Guess not and get the hell out. One



word would  probably  be enough  to  turn  him  around,  but  Drew  suffered the



not  unusual antiquarian  disease of curiosity.  So he favored  the  boy with   his



most pleasant wouldn’t-hurt-a-ﬂy  smile, folded his  hands, and kept silent.



    “Well   . . .” the boy said at length.  “Maybe.”



    Drew  raised his eyebrows.



    “You  buy rarities as well as sell them, right? That’s what  your website says.”



    “I   do.  If  I  feel  I  can sell  them  at a  proﬁt,  that   is. It’s  the  nature  of the



business.”

165
    The  boy gathered his  courage—Drew could  almost see him doing  it—and



stepped all the way up to the  desk, where the circular glow of  an old-fashioned



Anglepoise lamp spotlighted  a semi-organized clutter of paperwork. Drew  held



out his hand. “Andrew  Halliday.”



    The  boy shook it  brieﬂy  and then  withdrew,  as if fearful  of being  grabbed.



“I’m  James Hawkins.”



    “Pleased to meet you.”



    “Uh-huh.    I   think   .  .  .   I  have  something  you  might    be interested   in.



Something a collector might  pay a lot for. If it  was the right  collector.”



    “Not    the  book   you’re  carrying,  is   it?”   Drew  could   see the  title   now:



Dispatches from Olympus. The subtitle wasn’t on the spine, but Drew had owned



a copy for many years and knew it well: Letters from 20 Great American Writers in



Their Own Hand.



    “Gosh,   no. Not   this  one.”  James Hawkins   gave a small,  nervous  laugh.



“This is just  for comparison.”



    “Very  well, say on.”



    For  a moment  “James Hawkins”   seemed unsure how to  do that.  Then  he



tucked  his manila  envelope more  ﬁrmly   under  his  arm and  began to  hurry



through  the   glossy pages  of  Dispatches from Olympus, passing a note  from



Faulkner scolding   an Oxford,   Mississippi,  feed company  about  a misplaced



order, a gushy letter from  Eudora Welty  to Ernest Hemingway,  a scrawl about



who knew   what  from  Sherwood Anderson,  and  a grocery  list  Robert   Penn



Warren had  decorated with  a  doodle of  two  dancing  penguins, one of  them



smoking a cigarette.



    At  last he found  what he wanted, set the book on the  desk, and turned it  to



face Drew. “Here,” he said. “Look at this.”



    Drew’s  heart  jumped   as he  read the  heading:  John Rothstein to Flannery



O’Connor. The carefully photographed  note  had been written   on  lined  paper



tattered  down  the  lefthand  side  where  it   had been  torn  from   a dimestore



notebook. Rothstein’s  small,  neat handwriting,    very unlike   the  scrawl of  so



many writers, was unmistakable.

166
                                                                                               February 19,  1953



     My  dear Flannery O’Connor,



          I   am in  receipt of  your wonderful  novel, Wise   Blood,   which you  have so



     kindly  inscribed to me. I can say wonderful because I purchased a copy as soon as



     it  came out, and read it  immediately. I am  delighted to have a signed copy, as I



     am sure you are delighted to have the royalty accruing from one more sold volume!



     I  enjoyed the entire motley cast of characters, especially Hazel Motes and Enoch



     Emery, a   zookeeper I’m sure my own  Jimmy  Gold   would  have  enjoyed and



     befriended. You have been called a “connoisseur of grotesqueries,” Miss O’Connor,



     yet what  the critics  miss—probably because they have none themselves—is your



     lunatic   sense of humor, which  takes no prisoners. I   know  you are  physically



     unwell, but  I hope you will persevere in your work in spite of that. It is important



     work!  Thanking  you again,



                                                                                                       John Rothstein



          PS: I  still  laugh about the Famous Chicken!!!





     Drew  scanned the  letter   longer  than  necessary, to calm  himself,   then  looked



up   at  the   boy   calling     himself    James  Hawkins.    “Do    you   understand    the



reference to the  Famous Chicken?  I’ll   explain,  if  you  like.  It’s  a good example  of



what  Rothstein  called  her  lunatic  sense of humor.”



     “I  looked  it  up.  When  Miss  O’Connor   was six or  seven, she had—or  claimed



she had—a   chicken  that   walked   backwards.  Some  newsreel  people  came  and



ﬁlmed  it,   and the  chicken  was  in  the movies.   She said it  was the  high   point   of



her life,  and everything   afterwards   was an anticlimax.”



     “Exactly   right.   Now   that  we’ve covered  the  Famous Chicken,   what  can I  do



for you?”



     The  boy  took   a deep  breath  and  opened  the  clasp on  his  manila   envelope.



From   inside   he  took    a  photocopy   and   laid   it   beside   Rothstein’s    letter   in



Dispatches from Olympus. Drew Halliday’s  face remained  placidly   interested   as he



looked  from   one to   the  other,  but   beneath  the  desk,  his  ﬁngers   interlaced   so



tightly   that   his closely  clipped   nails  dug  into  the  backs  of his  hands.  He knew

167
what he was looking at immediately.  The squiggles on the tails of the ys, the bs



that always stood by themselves, the hs that stood high  and the gs that dipped



low. The  question now  was how much  “James Hawkins”   knew. Maybe not  a



lot, but  almost certainly  more than a little.   Otherwise he would  not  be hiding



behind  a new  moustache and specs looking   suspiciously like   the clear-glass



kind that  could be purchased in a drugstore or costume shop.



    At  the top  of the page, circled, was the number 44. Below it  was a fragment



of poetry.





       Suicide is circular, or so I think;



       you may have your own opinion.



       In the meantime, meditate on this.





       A plaza just after sunrise,



       You could say in Mexico.



       Or Guatemala, if you like.



       Anyplace where the rooms still come



       with wooden ceiling fans.





       In any case it’s blanco up to the blue sky



       except for the ragged mops of palms and



       rosa where the boy outside the café



       is washing cobbles, half asleep.



       On the corner, waiting for the ﬁrst





    It  ended there. Drew looked up at the  boy.



    “It   goes on about the ﬁrst  bus of the  day,” James Hawkins said. “The  kind



that runs on wires. A trolebus, he calls it. It’s Spanish for trolley. The wife of the



man narrating  the  poem,  or maybe  it’s  his girlfriend,    is sitting   dead in  the



corner of the room. She shot herself. He’s just found her.”

168
    “It    doesn’t  strike   me   as  deathless poesy,”  Drew   said.  In   his   current



gobsmacked state, it was all he could  think of  to say. Regardless of its quality,



the poem was the  ﬁrst  new work  by  John Rothstein  to  appear in  over half a



century. No one had seen it but the  author, this boy, and Drew  himself. Unless



Morris Bellamy  had happened to glimpse  it,  which  seemed unlikely given  the



great number of notebooks he claimed to have stolen.



    The  great number.



    My  God, the great number  of notebooks.



    “No,   it’s sure not  Wilfred  Owen  or T. S. Eliot,   but I  don’t  think  that’s  the



point. Do  you?”



    Drew  was suddenly aware that “James Hawkins”  was watching him  closely.



And seeing what? Probably too much. Drew  was used to playing them  close to



the vest—you had to in a business where lowballing the seller was as important



as highballing potential  buyers—but  this was like the Titanic  suddenly ﬂoating



to the surface of the Atlantic Ocean, dinged-up  and rusty, but there.



    Okay, then,  admit it.



    “No,   probably  not.”  The  photocopy and  the letter  to  O’Connor  were still



side by side, and Drew  couldn’t  help moving  his  pudgy ﬁnger  back and forth



between points of comparison. “If it’s a forgery, it’s a damned good one.”



    “It’s  not.”  No lack  of conﬁdence there.



    “Where  did  you get it?”



    The   boy  then  launched  into   a  bullshit    story  Drew  barely   listened  to,



something about how his uncle Phil  in  Cleveland had died and willed  his book



collection to young  James, and there had been six Moleskine notebooks packed



in with   the paperbacks and Book  of the  Month  Club  volumes, and  it  turned



out, hidey-ho,  that these six notebooks, ﬁlled  with  all  sorts of interesting  stuff



—mostly  poetry, along with  some essays and a few fragmentary short stories—



were the work of John Rothstein.



    “How   did you know  it was Rothstein?”



    “I  recognized his style, even in the  poems,” Hawkins said. It  was a question



he had prepared for, obviously. “I’m  majoring  in  American Lit  at  CC, and I’ve



read most of his stuff. But  there’s more. For instance, this one is about Mexico,

169
and Rothstein spent six months wandering  around there after he got out of  the



service.”



    “Along    with   a dozen  other  American  writers   of  note,  including   Ernest



Hemingway and the mysterious B. Traven.”



    “Yeah,  but   look   at  this.”   The  boy  drew   a second  photocopy  from  his



envelope. Drew told  himself not  to reach for it  greedily  . .  . and reached for it



greedily. He was behaving as though he’d  been in this  business for three years



instead of over thirty,  but  who could blame  him? This  was big. This  was huge.



The difﬁculty  was that “James Hawkins”  seemed to know it was.



    Ah,   but  he doesn’t  know  what  I  know,  which  includes  where they  came



from. Unless  Morrie  is using  him  as a cat’s paw, and how likely   is that  with



Morrie rotting   in Waynesville State Prison?



    The  writing   on the second photocopy was clearly from  the same hand, but



not as neat. There had been no scratch-outs and marginal notes on the fragment



of poetry, but there were plenty here.



    “I   think  he might   have written  it  while  he was drunk,”   the boy  said. “He



drank a  lot,  you  know, then  quit.   Cold  turkey.  Read it.  You’ll   see what it’s



about.”



    The  circled  number  at the  top  of this  page was 77. The  writing   below  it



started in mid-sentence.





    never anticipated. While good reviews are always sweet desserts in the short term,



    one ﬁnds they lead to indigestion—insomnia, nightmares, even problems taking



    that  ever-more-important afternoon shit—in the long term. And the stupiddity is



    even more remarkable in the good notices than in the bad ones. To see Jimmy Gold



    as some sort of benchmark, a HERO, even, is like calling someone like Billy the



    Kid   (or Charles Starkweather, his closest 20th century avatar) an American



    icon. Jimmy is as Jimmy is, even as I am or you are; he is modeled not on Huck



    Finn  but Etienne Lantier, the greatest character in 19th century ﬁction! If I have



    withdrawn  from the public eye, it is because that eye is infected and there is no



    reason to put more materiel before it. As Jimmy himself would say, “Shit don’t

170
    It   ended there, but  Drew knew  what came next,  and he was sure Hawkins



did,  too. It  was Jimmy’s  famous motto,  still   sometimes seen on tee-shirts all



these years later.



    “He  misspelled stupidity.” It  was all Drew could think  of to  say.



    “Uh-huh,   and material. Real mistakes, not cleaned up by  some copyeditor.”



The boy’s eyes glowed. It was a glow Drew had seen often, but  never in one so



young. “It’s  alive,  that’s what  I  think.   Alive  and breathing.  You  see what he



says about Étienne Lantier?  That’s the  main  character of Germinal, by  Émile



Zola. And it’s  new! Do you get  it? It’s a new insight  into  a character everybody



knows, and from the author himself!  I  bet some collectors would pay big bucks



for the original  of this, and all the  rest of the stuff I have.”



    “You  say there are six notebooks in your possession?”



    “Uh-huh.”



    Six.  Not  a  hundred or  more. If  six  was all  the kid   had, then  he certainly



wasn’t acting on  Bellamy’s behalf, unless Morris  had for  some reason split his



haul up. Drew couldn’t  see his old pal doing that.



    “They’re  the  medium-sized ones, eighty pages in each. That’s four hundred



and eighty   pages. A  lot  of  white   space—with  poems there  always is—but



they’re not  all poems. There  are those short stories, too. One  is about  Jimmy



Gold as a kid.”



    But  here was a question: did he, Drew, really believe there were only six? Was



it possible the boy  was holding back the good stuff?  And if  so, was he holding



back because he wanted to sell the rest later, or because he didn’t want to sell it



at all?  To Drew,  the glow  in  his  eyes suggested the latter,  although  the boy



might  not yet know it  consciously.



    “Sir?  Mr. Halliday?”



    “Sorry. Just getting  used to the idea that  this really might  be new Rothstein



material.”



    “It   is,” the boy said. There was no doubt in his voice. “So how much?”



    “How   much  would I  pay?” Drew  thought  son would be okay  now, because



they were about to  get  down to  the dickering.   “Son, I’m  not  exactly made of

171
money. Nor am I  completely convinced these aren’t forgeries. A  hoax. I’d have



to see the real items.”



    Drew  could  see Hawkins  biting   his lip   behind  the nascent moustache. “I



wasn’t  talking   about   how   much  you’d  pay,  I   was  talking   about   private



collectors. You  must  know   some who  are  willing   to   spend big  money  for



special items.”



    “I   know  a couple, yes.”  He  knew a  dozen. “But  I  wouldn’t   even write  to



them on the basis of two photocopied pages. As for getting authentication  from



a handwriting   expert .  . .  that  might  be dicey. Rothstein  was murdered,  you



know, which makes these stolen property.”



    “Not   if  he gave them to  someone before he was killed,”  the boy  countered



swiftly,  and Drew  had to  remind  himself  again that  the kid  had  prepared for



this encounter. But  I  have experience on my side, he thought.  Experience and



craft.



    “Son, there’s no way to prove that’s what happened.”



    “There’s no way to prove it  wasn’t, either.”



    So: impasse.



    Suddenly the  boy grabbed the two photocopies and jammed them back into



the manila envelope.



    “Wait   a minute,”  Drew said, alarmed. “Whoa. Hold  on.”



    “No,   I think   it  was a mistake coming  here. There’s a place in Kansas City,



Jarrett’s Fine  Firsts  and  Rare  Editions.   They’re  one of   the  biggest  in   the



country. I’ll  try  there.”



    “If   you can hold off a week, I’ll  make some calls,” Drew said. “But  you have



to leave the photocopies.”



    The  boy hovered, unsure. At last he said, “How much  could you get, do you



think?”



    “For   almost  ﬁve  hundred  pages of  unpublished—hell,   unseen—Rothstein



material? The  buyer  would  probably  want  at  least  a computer  handwriting



analysis, there are a couple of good programs that  do that,  but  assuming that



proved out,  perhaps .  .  .”  He  calculated the  lowest possible  ﬁgure  he could



throw out  without  sounding absurd. “Perhaps ﬁfty thousand dollars.”

172
    James Hawkins  either  accepted this, or seemed to. “And  what  would  your



commission be?”



    Drew  laughed politely.  “Son . . . James . . . no dealer would take a commission



on a deal  like  this  one. Not   when  the creator—known   as the proprietor,   in



legalese—was murdered and the material  might  have been stolen. We’d  split



right  down the middle.”



    “No.”   The boy  said it  at once. He might   not yet  be able to grow  the biker



moustache he saw in his dreams, but he had balls  as well as smarts. “Seventy-



thirty.  My favor.”



    Drew  could  give  in  on  this,  get maybe  a quarter  of a million    for  the six



notebooks and give  the boy  seventy percent of  ﬁfty   K,  but  wouldn’t   “James



Hawkins”  expect him  to  dicker, at least a little?   Wouldn’t  he be suspicious if



he didn’t?



    “Sixty-forty.   My last offer, and of course contingent on ﬁnding  a buyer. That



would  be thirty    thousand dollars  for  something  you  found  crammed into   a



cardboard box along with  old copies of Jaws and The Bridges of Madison County.



Not a bad return, I’d  say.”



    The  boy shifted from foot  to foot, saying nothing  but clearly conﬂicted.



    Drew  reverted to the wouldn’t-hurt-a-ﬂy   smile.  “Leave the photocopies with



me. Come back  in  a week  and I’ll   tell  you  how  we stand.  And  here’s some



advice—stay away from Jarrett’s place. The man will pick your pockets.”



    “I’d   want cash.”



    Drew  thought,  Don’t  we all.



    “You’re  getting  way ahead of yourself, son.”



    The  boy  came  to  a decision  and  put  the  manila  envelope down   on the



cluttered desk. “Okay. I’ll  come back.”



    Drew  thought,  I’m  sure you will.  And I  believe my bargaining position  will



be much stronger when you do.



    He  held  out his  hand. The boy  shook it  again, as brieﬂy as he could while



still  being polite.  As  if he were afraid  of leaving ﬁngerprints.   Which  in  a way



he had already done.

173
    Drew  sat  where he was until   “Hawkins”   went  out,  then dropped  into  his



ofﬁce chair (it  gave out a resigned groan) and woke up his sleeping Macintosh.



There were two  security cameras mounted above the front  door, one pointing



each way along  Lacemaker Lane. He  watched  the  kid  turn   the  corner onto



Crossway Avenue and disappear from sight.



    The  purple sticker  on the spine of Dispatches from Olympus, that was the key.



It  marked the  volume as a library  book,  and Drew  knew  every branch in  the



city.  Purple  meant  a reference volume  from  the  Garner  Street  Library,  and



reference volumes  weren’t  supposed to   circulate.   If   the  kid   had  tried   to



smuggle it   out  under his  City   College jacket,  the  security  gate would  have



buzzed when he went through, because that purple sticker was also an antitheft



device. Which   led  to  another Holmesian  deduction,  once  you added  in  the



kid’s obvious book-smarts.



    Drew  went  to the Garner Street Library’s website,  where all sorts of choices



were displayed: SUMMER HOURS,  KIDS  & TEENS, UPCOMING    EVENTS,



CLASSIC FILM SERIES, and, last but far from least: MEET OUR  STAFF.



    Drew  Halliday   clicked  on  this  and needed to  click  no  farther, at  least to



begin with.   Above the  thumbnail   bios was a photo  of the  staff, roughly   two



dozen in all,  gathered on the library   lawn. The  statue of Horace Garner, open



book in  hand, loomed  behind them.  They  were all  smiles, including   his boy,



sans moustache  and  bogus   spectacles. Second row,   third    from   the   left.



According  to  the  bio,  young Mr.   Peter Saubers was a student  at Northﬁeld



High,   currently  working   part-time.   He  hoped  to  major  in  English,  with   a



minor in  Library Science.



    Drew  continued his  researches, aided by the fairly unusual surname. He was



sweating lightly,  and why  not? Six notebooks already seemed like a pittance, a



tease. All of them—some containing  a fourth  Jimmy  Gold novel,  if his  psycho



friend  had been right   all  those years ago—might   be worth  as much  as ﬁfty



million   dollars, if   they were  broken up  and  sold to  different  collectors.  The



fourth Jimmy  Gold  alone might  fetch twenty.  And with  Morrie  Bellamy  safely



tucked  away in  prison,  all  that  stood  in  his  way was  one teenage boy  who



couldn’t even grow a proper moustache.

174
                                                             10





William   the Waiter  returns with   Drew’s check, and Drew  tucks his American



Express card into  the  leather folder.  It  will   not  be  refused, he’s conﬁdent of



that. He’s less sure about the other two cards, but he keeps the Amex relatively



clean, because it’s the one he uses in business transactions.



    Business hasn’t been so good over the last few years, although God knew  it



should have been. It  should  have been terriﬁc,   especially between 2008  and



2012, when  the American  economy fell  into  a sinkhole  and couldn’t  seem to



climb  back out. In  such times the value of precious commodities—real  things,



as opposed to computer boops and bytes on the  New York  Stock Exchange—



always went up. Gold and diamonds, yes, but also art, antiques, and rare books.



Fucking Michael  Jarrett  in KC  is  now driving  a Porsche. Drew  has seen it on



his Facebook page.



    His  thoughts  turn  to his second meeting with  Peter Saubers. He wishes the



kid hadn’t  found out  about the third  mortgage;  that had been a turning  point.



Maybe the turning point.



    Drew’s ﬁnancial  woes go back to that damned James Agee book, Let Us Now



Praise Famous Men. Gorgeous copy, mint condition, signed by Agee and Walker



Evans, the man  who’d  taken  the  photographs.  How  was Drew  supposed to



know it  had been stolen?



    All   right,   he probably did  know,  certainly all  the  red ﬂags were there  and



ﬂying  briskly, and  he should have steered clear, but the seller had had no idea



of the  volume’s actual worth,  and Drew  had  let down  his guard  a little.   Not



enough to get ﬁned or thrown  in  jail, and thank  Christ  for that, but  the results



have been long-term. Ever since 1999 he’s carried a certain aroma with him  to



every convention, symposium, and book auction. Reputable  dealers and buyers



tend to give him  a miss, unless—here is the irony—they’ve got  something just



a teensy bit sketchy they’d like to  turn  over for a quick proﬁt.  Sometimes when



he can’t sleep, Drew thinks,  They are pushing me to  the dark side. It’s  not my



fault. Really, I’m  the victim  here.

175
    All   of which makes Peter Saubers even more important.



    William    comes back with the leather  folder, face solemn. Drew doesn’t like



that. Maybe the card has been refused after all. Then his favorite waiter  smiles,



and Drew releases the breath he’s been holding in a soft sigh.



    “Thanks,  Mr. Halliday.  Always great to  see you.”



    “Likewise,  William.   Likewise, I’m  sure.” He  signs with  a ﬂourish and slides



his Amex—a bit  bowed but not  broken—back into  his wallet.



    On   the  street, walking   toward  his  shop  (the  thought  that   he might   be



waddling  never crosses his mind), his thoughts  turn  to  the boy’s second visit,



which went fairly  well,  but not  nearly as well as Drew had hoped and expected.



At their  ﬁrst  meeting, the boy had been so uneasy that Drew worried he might



be tempted to  destroy the  priceless trove of manuscript  he’d stumbled  across.



But  the glow  in  his  eyes had argued against that,  especially when  he talked



about that second photocopy, with its drunken  ramblings about the critics.



    It’s alive, Saubers had said. That’s what I think.



    And  can the  boy kill  it?  Drew  asks himself as he enters his shop and turns



the sign from CLOSED to  OPEN.  I don’t think   so. Any more than he could let



the authorities take all that  treasure away, despite his threats.



    Tomorrow  is  Friday. The  boy  has promised to  come in  immediately   after



school so  they  can  conclude  their   business. The  boy   thinks   it   will   be  a



negotiating  session. He thinks he’s still  holding  some cards. Perhaps he is . . .



but Drew’s are higher.



    The  light    on  his  answering machine  is  blinking.    It’s  probably  someone



wanting to  sell him insurance or an extended warranty on his little  car (the idea



of Jarrett  driving   a Porsche around Kansas City   pinches momentarily  at  his



ego), but you can never tell until   you check. Millions  are within   his reach, but



until  they are actually in his grasp, it’s business as usual.



    Drew  goes to see who called while he was having his  lunch, and recognizes



Saubers’s voice from the ﬁrst word.



    His  ﬁsts clench as he listens.

176
                                                             11





When the  artist  formerly  known as Hawkins  came in on the  Friday following



his ﬁrst visit,  the moustache was a triﬂe fuller  but his  step was just as tentative



—a shy animal  approaching  a bit  of  tasty bait.  By  then  Drew  had learned a



great deal about him and his  family. And  about the notebook  pages, those too.



Three  different  computer   apps  had  conﬁrmed  that   the  letter   to  Flannery



O’Connor and the writing   on the photocopies were the work  of the same man.



Two of  these apps compared  handwriting.   The  third—not    entirely  reliable,



given the  small  size of the  scanned-in samples—pointed  out certain  stylistic



similarities,  most of  which  the boy  had already seen. These results were tools



laid by for the time  when Drew would  approach prospective buyers. He himself



had no doubts, having  seen one of the notebooks with  his own  eyes thirty-six



years ago, on a table outside the Happy Cup.



    “Hello,”   Drew  said. This time he didn’t  offer to shake hands.



    “Hi.”



    “You  didn’t  bring  the notebooks.”



    “I  need a number from you ﬁrst.  You said you’d make some calls.”



    Drew  had made none. It was still  far too early for  that. “If  you  recall, I gave



you a number. I said your end would come to thirty thousand dollars.”



    The  boy shook his  head. “That’s not  enough. And  sixty-forty  isn’t  enough,



either. It would  have to be seventy-thirty. I’m  not stupid.  I know  what I have.”



    “I   know things,  too.  Your real name is Peter Saubers. You don’t go to  City



College; you go  to Northﬁeld   High   and work  part-time   at the  Garner Street



Library.”



    The  boy’s eyes widened. His   mouth  fell  open. He  actually  swayed on his



feet, and for a moment Drew thought  he might  faint.



    “How—”



    “The  book you  brought.  Dispatches from Olympus. I recognized the Reference



Room security sticker. After  that  it  was easy. I even know where you live—on



Sycamore Street.” Which made perfect, even divine  sense. Morris Bellamy had

177
lived  on Sycamore Street, in  the  same house. Drew  had  never been there—



because Morris  didn’t   want  him   to   meet  his  vampire  of  a  mother,  Drew



suspected—but city records proved it.  Had  the notebooks been hidden behind



a wall  in  the basement, or buried  beneath the  ﬂoor  of the  garage? Drew was



betting it  was one or the other.



    He  leaned forward as far forward as his paunch would allow and engaged the



boy’s dismayed eyes.



    “Here’s  some more.  Your  father was  seriously injured  in   the City   Center



Massacre back in ’09. He  was there because he became unemployed after the



downturn  in  ’08.  There was a  feature story  in  the Sunday paper  a couple of



years ago, about how some of the people who survived were doing.  I looked it



up, and it  made for interesting  reading.  Your family  moved to  the North  Side



after your father got hurt,  which must  have been a considerable comedown, but



you Sauberses landed on your feet. A nip here and a tuck  there with  just  your



mom working,   but  plenty   of people  did  worse. American  success story. Get



knocked down? Arise, brush  yourself off, and get  back in  the race! Except the



story never really said how your family managed that. Did  it?”



    The  boy wet his lips,  tried to  speak, couldn’t, cleared his throat, tried again.



“I’m  leaving. Coming here was a big mistake.”



    He  turned away from the desk.



    “Peter,  if you walk  out that  door, I can just  about guarantee you’ll be in  jail



by tonight.  What  a shame that would be, with your  whole life ahead of you.”



    Saubers turned back, eyes wide, mouth open and trembling.



    “I  researched the Rothstein killing,   too. The police believed that the  thieves



who murdered him  only took the  notebooks because they were in his safe along



with  his money. According to the theory, they broke in  for what thieves usually



break in for,  which is  cash. Plenty of people in  the town  where he lived  knew



the old guy kept  cash in the house, maybe a lot of it. Those stories circulated in



Talbot Corners for years. Finally the wrong  someones decided to ﬁnd out if the



stories were true. And they were, weren’t they?”



    Saubers returned to the desk. Slowly. Step by step.

178
    “You  found  his  stolen notebooks,  but  you also found  some stolen  money,



that’s what I  think.   Enough to  keep your family  solvent  until  your  dad could



get back on his  feet again. Literally   on his feet,  because the story said he was



busted up quite badly. Do your  folks know, Peter? Are they in  on it? Did  Mom



and Dad send you here to sell the notebooks now that the money’s gone?”



    Most  of this  was guesswork—if Morris  had said anything about money that



day outside the Happy Cup, Drew couldn’t  remember it—but   he observed each



of his guesses hit home like hard punches to the face and midsection. Drew felt



any detective’s delight in seeing he had followed a true trail.



    “I   don’t  know  what  you’re  talking  about.”   The boy  sounded more  like  a



phone answering machine than a human being.



    “And   as for  there  only  being  six notebooks,  that  really  doesn’t compute.



Rothstein went  dark in  1960,  after publishing   his last short  story in  The New



Yorker. He was murdered in  1978.  Hard  to  believe he  only ﬁlled   six eighty-



page notebooks in eighteen years. I bet there were more. A lot more.”



    “You  can’t  prove anything.”   Still   in  that  same robotic monotone.  Saubers



was teetering; two or three more punches and he’d fall. It was rather thrilling.



    “What    would  the  police  ﬁnd  if   they  came to  your  house with   a  search



warrant, my young friend?”



    Instead  of  falling,   Saubers pulled  himself   together.  If  it   hadn’t  been  so



annoying,  it  would   have been admirable.  “What   about  you,  Mr.   Halliday?



You’ve already been in trouble once about selling what wasn’t yours to sell.”



    Okay, that  was a hit . . . but  only a glancing blow. Drew  nodded cheerfully.



    “It’s  why  you came to me,  isn’t it?  You found  out about  the Agee business



and thought I  might  help you do something  illegal.  Only  my hands were clean



then and they’re  clean now.”  He spread them  to demonstrate.  “I’d  say I  took



some time to make sure that what you were trying  to sell was the real deal, and



once I was, I did my civic duty  and called the police.”



    “But   that’s not true! It’s  not and you know it!”



    Welcome  to the  real world,  Peter, Drew thought.  He  said nothing,  just  let



the kid explore the box he was in.

179
    “I  could burn them.” Saubers seemed to be speaking to himself rather than



Drew, trying the idea on for size. “I could go h . . . to where they are, and just



burn them.”



    “How  many are there? Eighty? A  hundred and twenty? A  hundred and



forty? They’d ﬁnd residue, son. The ashes. Even if they didn’t,  I  have the



photocopied pages. They’d start asking questions about just how your family



did manage to get through the big recession as well as it did, especially with



your father’s injuries and all the medical bills. I think a competent accountant



might ﬁnd that your family’s outlay extended its income by quite a bit.”



    Drew had no idea if this was true, but the kid didn’t, either. He was close to



panic now, and that was good. Panicked people never thought clearly.



    “There’s no proof.” Saubers could hardly talk above a whisper. “The money



is gone.”



    “I’m  sure it is, or you wouldn’t be here. But the ﬁnancial trail remains. And



who will follow it  besides the police? The IRS! Who knows, Peter, maybe your



mother and dad can also go to jail, for tax evasion. That would leave your sister



—Tina, I believe?—all alone, but perhaps she has a kind old auntie she can live



with until  your folks get out.”



    “What  do you want?”



    “Don’t be dense. I want the notebooks. All of them.”



    “If  I give them to you, what do I get?”



    “The knowledge that you’re free and clear. Which, given your situation, is



priceless.”



    “Are you serious?”


    “Son—”



    “Don’t call me that!” The boy clenched his ﬁsts.



    “Peter, think it through. If  you refuse to turn the notebooks over to me, I’m



going to turn you over to the police. But once you hand them over, my hold on



you vanishes, because I have received stolen property. You’ll be safe.”



    While  he spoke, Drew’s right index ﬁnger  hovered near the silent alarm



button beneath his desk. Pushing it was the last thing in the world he wanted



to do, but he didn’t  like those clenched ﬁsts. In his panic, it might occur to

180
Saubers that there was one  other way  to  shut Drew  Halliday’s   mouth.  They



were currently  being recorded on  security video,  but  the boy might   not  have



realized that.



    “And   you walk  away with hundreds and thousands of dollars,”  Saubers said



bitterly.  “Maybe even millions.”



    “You   got your  family   through  a  tough  time,”  Drew  said.  He  thought  of



adding why be greedy, but under the circumstances, that might sound a little . . .



off. “I  think  you should be content with  that.”



    The  boy’s face offered a wordless reply: Easy for you to say.



    “I  need time to  think.”



    Drew  nodded, but  not in  agreement. “I  understand how you feel, but  no. If



you walk out  of here now, I can promise a police car waiting  for you  when you



get home.”



    “And  you lose your big  payday.”



    Drew  shrugged. “It   wouldn’t  be the ﬁrst.”  Although   never one of this  size,



that was true.



    “My  dad’s in real estate, did you know that?”



    The  sudden change in  direction  put  Drew  off his  stride  a bit.  “Yes, I  saw



that when I  was doing my  research. Has his own little  business now, and good



for him.  Although  I have an idea that John Rothstein’s money might  have paid



for some of the start-up costs.”



    “I   asked him  to research all the  bookstores in town,”   Saubers said. “I told



him I  was doing a paper on how e-books are impacting  traditional   bookstores.



This was before I even came to see you, while I was still making up my  mind if



I should take the chance. He found out you took  a third  mortgage on this place



last year, and  said you  only  got  it   because of the  location.  Lacemaker Lane



being pretty upscale and all.”



    “I  don’t  think  that has anything to  do with  the subject under discus—”



    “You’re    right,   we   went   through    a  really   bad  time,    and  you   know



something? That  gives a person a nose for people who are in  trouble.  Even if



you’re a kid.  Maybe  especially if  you’re a kid.   I  think  you’re  pretty  strapped



yourself.”

181
    Drew  raised the ﬁnger that had been poised near the silent alarm button and



pointed it  at Saubers. “Don’t fuck with  me, kid.”



    Saubers’s color   had  come  back  in   big   hectic  patches,  and  Drew   saw



something he didn’t   like  and certainly  hadn’t intended:  he had made the  boy



angry.



    “I   know you’re trying   to rush me into  this,  and it’s not  going to  work. Yes,



okay, I’ve got his notebooks. There’s a hundred and sixty-ﬁve.  Not  all  of them



are full, but  most of  them are. And  guess what? It was never the Gold trilogy,



it  was the Gold  cycle. There are two more novels, both in the  notebooks. First



drafts, yeah, but pretty clean.”



    The  boy  was talking   faster and  faster, ﬁguring  out  everything   Drew  had



hoped he would be too frightened to see even as he was speaking.



    “They’re  hidden away, but I  guess you’re right, if  you call the  police, they’ll



ﬁnd  them. Only   my  parents never knew, and  I  think   the police  will   believe



that.  As  for  me .  .  .  I’m  still   a  minor.”  He   even smiled  a little,   as if   just



realizing this.  “They won’t  do much to  me, since I never stole the notebooks or



the money in the ﬁrst  place. I wasn’t even born. You’ll  come out clean, but you



also won’t have anything  to show for  it.  When  the bank takes this  place—my



dad says they will,  sooner or later—and  there’s an Au  Bon Pain  here instead,



I’ll  come in and eat a croissant in your honor.”



    “That’s  quite a speech,” Drew said.



    “Well,   it’s over. I’m leaving.”



    “I  warn you, you’re being  very foolish.”



    “I  told  you, I need time  to think.”



    “How   long?”



    “A   week. You  need to think,   too,  Mr.  Halliday.  Maybe  we can still   work



something out.”



    “I   hope so, son.” Drew used the word  deliberately. “Because if we can’t, I’ll



make that call. I am not  blufﬁng.”



    The  boy’s bravado collapsed. His  eyes ﬁlled  with   tears. Before they  could



fall, he turned and walked out.

182
                                                             12





Now comes this voicemail,  which Drew  listens to  with  fury  but also with  fear,



because the  boy  sounds  so  cold  and  composed  on  top   and  so  desperate



underneath.



    “I   can’t come tomorrow  like I  said I  would.  I completely  forgot  the junior-



senior retreat for  class ofﬁcers, and I  got  elected vice  president of  the  senior



class next year. I   know  that  sounds like   an excuse, but  it’s   not.  I  guess it



entirely  slipped my  mind,  what  with   you threatening  to  send me to  jail  and



all.”



    Erase this right  away, Drew thinks, his ﬁngernails  biting  into  his palms.



    “It’s  at  River Bend  resort, up in  Victor  County. We  leave on a bus at eight



tomorrow  morning—it’s    a teacher in-service  day, so  there’s no  school—and



come back Sunday night.  Twenty of  us. I  thought  about begging  off,  but  my



parents are already  worried  about  me.  My  sister, too.  If   I  skip  the  retreat,



they’ll  know something’s wrong.  I  think  my  mom thinks  I  might  have gotten



some girl pregnant.”



    The  boy voices a brief,  semi-hysterical laugh.  Drew  thinks  there’s nothing



more terrifying    than  boys of  seventeen. You  have absolutely  no  idea  what



they’ll do.



    “I’ll   come on Monday afternoon instead,” Saubers resumes. “If you wait that



long, maybe we can work something out.  A compromise. I’ve got  an idea. And



if you think  I’m  just  shining  you on about the retreat, call the  resort and check



the reservation. Northﬁeld   High   School Student  Government. Maybe  I’ll   see



you on Monday. If not, not.  Goodb—”



    That’s  where the message-time—extra-long, for clients who  call after-hours,



usually from the West Coast—ﬁnally  runs out. Beep.



    Drew  sits down  in his  chair (ignoring  its  despairing squeal, as always), and



stares at the answering machine for  nearly a full   minute.  He  feels no need to



call the River  Bend Resort .  . . which  is, amusingly  enough, only  six or  seven



miles upriver  from  the  penitentiary  where the original   notebook thief  is  now

183
serving a life   sentence. Drew is sure Saubers was telling  the  truth  about  the



retreat, because it’s so easy to check. About his reasons for not ditching  it  he’s



far less sure. Maybe Saubers has decided to call Drew’s bluff about bringing the



police into  it.   Except it’s  not  a bluff.  He  has no intention   of  letting  Saubers



have what Drew  can’t have himself.  One way  or another, the  little   bastard is



going to give those notebooks up.



    I’ll   wait   until   Monday  afternoon, Drew  thinks.   I  can afford  to  wait  that



long, but  then this  situation  is going  to be resolved, one way or the other. I’ve



already given him too much rope.



    He  reﬂects that the Saubers boy and his old friend Morris Bellamy, although



at opposite ends of the age-spectrum, are very much alike when it comes to the



Rothstein  notebooks. They lust  for  what’s inside them. It’s  why  the  boy only



wanted to sell him  six, and probably  the six he judged  least interesting. Drew,



on the other  hand, cares little  about John Rothstein.  He  read The Runner, but



only because Morrie was bonkers on  the subject. He  never bothered with   the



other two, or the book of short stories.



    That’s  your Achilles’  heel, son, Drew  thinks.  That collector’s lust.  While   I,



on the other hand, only care about money, and money simpliﬁes everything.  So



go ahead. Enjoy your weekend of pretend politics.  When you  come back, we’ll



play some hardball.



    Drew  leans over his paunch and erases the message.







                                                             13





Hodges gets a good whiff of  himself on his  way back into  the city  and decides



to divert  to his house long enough for a veggie burger and a quick shower. Also



a change of clothes. Harper Road isn’t much  out  of his way, and he’ll  be more



comfortable  in  a  pair   of  jeans. Jeans are  one  of  the  major   perks  of  self-



employment, as far as he’s concerned.

184
    Pete Huntley   calls as he’s heading out  the door,  to inform   his old  partner



that Oliver  Madden is in  custody. Hodges congratulates Pete on the collar and



has just settled behind the wheel of his Prius  when his phone rings again. This



time it’s Holly.



    “Where  are you, Bill?”



    Hodges looks at  his watch and sees it’s somehow gotten all the way to three



ﬁfteen. How the time  ﬂies when you’re having fun,  he thinks.



    “My  house. Just leaving for the ofﬁce.”



    “What   are you doing there?”



    “Stopped for  a shower. Didn’t want  to offend your delicate olfactories. And I



didn’t forget  about Barbara. I’ll call  as soon as I—”



    “You  won’t  have to. She’s here. With a little   chum named Tina. They  came



in a taxi.”



    “A  taxi?”  Ordinarily,  kids  don’t even think of taxis. Maybe whatever Barbara



wants to discuss is a little more serious than he believed.



    “Yes.  I  put  them   in  your  ofﬁce.”  Holly   lowers her  voice. “Barbara’s  just



worried, but  the  other one acts scared to death. I  think   she’s in some kind  of



jam. You should get here as soon as you can, Bill.”



    “Roger  that.”



    “Please hurry.  You know  I’m  not good  with  strong emotions.  I’m  working



on that with  my therapist,  but right  now I’m  just  not.”



    “On  my  way. There in twenty.”



    “Should  I go across the street and get them Cokes?”



    “I   don’t  know.”  The light   at  the bottom   of the  hill   turns  yellow. Hodges



puts on speed and scoots through it. “Use your judgment.”



    “But   I have so little,”   Holly   mourns, and before he can reply, she tells him



again to hurry and hangs up.







                                                             14

185
While  Bill  Hodges was explaining the  facts of life to  the dazed Oliver Madden



and Drew  Halliday  was settling  in  to  his eggs Benedict,  Pete Saubers was in



the nurse’s ofﬁce at Northﬁeld  High,  pleading a migraine  headache and asking



to  be  dismissed from   afternoon classes. The  nurse wrote   the  slip  with   no



hesitation,  because Pete is one of the  good  ones: Honor  Roll,  lots  of  school



activities  (although  no  sports),  near-perfect attendance.  Also,  he looked like



someone suffering a migraine.  His  face was far too pale,  and there were dark



circles under his eyes. She asked if he needed a ride home.



    “No,”   Pete said, “I’ll  take the bus.”



    She offered him Advil—it’s   all  she’s allowed to dispense for headaches—but



he shook his head, telling  her  he had special pills  for migraines.  He forgot  to



bring one that  day, but said he’d take one as soon as he got home. He felt okay



about this  story, because he really did  have a headache. Just not the  physical



kind.  His   headache was Andrew  Halliday,   and  one of  his  mother’s  Zomig



tablets (she’s the migraine sufferer in the family) wouldn’t  cure it.



    Pete knew he had to take care of that himself.







                                                             15





He has no intention  of taking  the bus. The next  one won’t be along for  half an



hour, and he can be  on Sycamore Street in ﬁfteen  minutes  if  he runs, and  he



will,  because this Thursday afternoon is all he has. His mother and father are at



work and won’t  be home until  at least four. Tina won’t  be home at all. She says



she has been invited to  spend a couple of  nights  with  her  old  friend Barbara



Robinson on  Teaberry Lane, but Pete thinks   she might  actually  have invited



herself. If   so,  it   probably   means his  sister  hasn’t  given   up  her  hopes  of



attending  Chapel Ridge.  Pete thinks  he might   still  be  able to  help her  with



that, but  only if  this afternoon goes perfectly. That’s a very big if, but  he has to



do something. If he doesn’t, he’ll go crazy.

186
    He’s   lost  weight    since  foolishly   making   the   acquaintance of   Andrew



Halliday,  the acne of his  early teens is  enjoying  a return  engagement, and of



course there are those dark circles under his eyes. He’s been sleeping badly, and



what sleep he’s managed has been haunted  by bad  dreams. After  awakening



from these—often  curled in  a fetal  position,  pajamas damp with  sweat—Pete



has lain awake, trying to think  his way out of  the trap he’s in.



    He  genuinely  forgot  the  class ofﬁcers’ retreat, and when Mrs.  Gibson,  the



chaperone, reminded him  of  it   yesterday, it  shocked his brain  into   a higher



gear. That was after period ﬁve French, and before he got  to his calculus class,



only two  doors down, he has the rough  outline  of a plan in  his head. It  partly



depends on an old red wagon, and even more on a certain set of keys.



    Once out  of sight of the  school, Pete calls Andrew Halliday Rare Editions,  a



number  he  wishes he  did  not  have  on  speed dial.  He   gets the  answering



machine, which at  least saves him another arkie-barkie. The message he leaves



is a long one, and the machine cuts him off as he’s ﬁnishing, but that’s okay.



    If  he can get those notebooks out of the house, the police will   ﬁnd nothing,



search warrant or no search warrant. He’s conﬁdent his parents will  keep quiet



about the mystery money, as they have all along. As Pete slips his cell back into



the pocket of his chinos, a phrase from freshman Latin pops into his head. It’s a



scary one in any language, but it ﬁts this situation  perfectly.



    Alea iacta est.



    The  die is cast.







                                                             16





Before going into his  house, Pete ducks into the garage to make sure Tina’s old



Kettler  wagon is still   there. A lot  of  their stuff  went  in the  yard sale they had



before moving from  their old  house, but Teens had made such a fuss about the



Kettler,  with   its  old-fashioned wooden  sides, that  their  mother  relented.  At



ﬁrst Pete doesn’t see it and gets worried. Then he spots it in the corner and lets

187
out a sigh  of relief.  He  remembers Teens trundling  back and  forth  across the



lawn with   all  her stuffed  toys  packed into  it  (Mrs.  Beasley holding  pride  of



place, of course), telling them  that they  were going on a nik-nik   in the  woods,



with  devil-ham   samwitches and  ginger-snap tooties  for  children   who  could



behave. Those had  been  good  days,  before the   lunatic  driving    the  stolen



Mercedes had changed everything.



    No  more nik-niks  after that.



    Pete lets  himself into  the  house and goes directly to  his father’s tiny  home



ofﬁce. His  heart is pounding  furiously,  because this is the  crux of  the matter.



Things might   go wrong  even if  he ﬁnds the  keys he needs, but if  he doesn’t,



this will  be over before it gets started. He has no Plan B.



    Although    Tom  Saubers’s business mostly centers on  real  estate search—



ﬁnding likely   properties that are for sale or might come up for sale, and passing



these prospects on  to  small  companies  and  independent  operators—he has



begun creeping back into  primary  sales again, albeit in  a small  way, and only



here on the North Side. That  didn’t  amount to much  in 2012, but  over the last



couple of years, he’s bagged several decent commissions, and has an exclusive



on a  dozen properties  in  the  Tree Streets neighborhood.  One  of  these—the



irony  wasn’t  lost  on  any  of  them—is   49   Elm  Street,  the  house  that  had



belonged to  Deborah  Hartsﬁeld  and  her  son, Brady,  the  so-called Mercedes



Killer.



    “I   may  be awhile  selling   that  one,”  Dad  said one  night  at  dinner,  then



actually laughed.



    A  corkboard is mounted  on the wall to  the left  of his father’s computer. The



keys to the  various properties  he’s currently  agenting  are thumbtacked  to  it,



each on its own ring. Pete scans the board anxiously, sees what he wants—what



he needs—and punches the air  with   a ﬁst.   The  label on  this   keyring  reads



BIRCH  STREET REC.



    “Unlikely    I   can move  a brick   elephant  like   that,”  Tom  Saubers said  at



another family  dinner,  “but  if  I  do, we can kiss this  place goodbye and move



back to the Land of the Hot  Tub and BMW.”  Which  is what he always calls the



West Side.

188
    Pete shoves the keys to  the Rec into  his  pocket along with   his cell  phone,



then  pelts  upstairs  and  gets  the   suitcases he  used when   he  brought   the



notebooks to the house. This time he wants them for short-term  transport only.



He  climbs  the   pull-down   ladder  to   the  attic   and loads  in   the  notebooks



(treating them  with  care even in his  haste). He lugs the  suitcases down to the



second ﬂoor  one by  one,  unloads  the  notebooks onto   his  bed,  returns  the



suitcases to his parents’  closet, and  then  races downstairs, all the way to  the



cellar. He’s  sweating freely  from  his  exertions  and probably  smells  like  the



monkey house at the zoo, but  there will   be no time  to  shower until   later. He



ought to  change his shirt, though.  He has a Key Club polo  that will   be perfect



for what comes next. Key Club is always doing community  service shit.



    His  mother  keeps a good supply  of empty  cartons in the  cellar. Pete grabs



two of  the bigger  ones and goes back upstairs, ﬁrst detouring  into  his father’s



ofﬁce again to grab a Sharpie.



    Remember to  put  that back when  you return the  keys, he cautions himself.



Remember to put everything back.



    He  packs the  notebooks into  the cartons—all  but  the six  he still   hopes to



sell to Andrew Halliday—and   folds down the lids.  He uses the Sharpie to print



KITCHEN     SUPPLIES   on each, in big  capital letters. He  looks at his watch.



Doing  okay for time  . .  . as long as Halliday  doesn’t listen to  his message and



blow the  whistle  on him,  that  is. Pete doesn’t believe that’s likely,  but  it  isn’t



out  of  the  question,   either.  This  is  unknown   territory.   Before  leaving  his



bedroom, he hides the six  remaining notebooks behind  the loose baseboard in



his closet. There’s just enough  room, and if  all  goes well, they  won’t  be there



long.



    He  carries the cartons out to the garage and puts them in  Tina’s old wagon.



He starts down the driveway, remembers he forgot to change into the Key Club



polo shirt, and pelts back up  the stairs again. As he’s pulling it  over his head, a



cold realization  hits  him:  he left  the notebooks sitting   in  the  driveway. They



are worth a huge  amount of  money, and there they are, out  in  broad daylight



where anyone could come along and take them.

189
    Idiot!   he scolds himself. Idiot, idiot,  fucking  idiot!



    Pete sprints  back downstairs, the new shirt  already sweat-stuck to his back.



The wagon is  there, of  course it is,  who would  bother  stealing  boxes marked



kitchen supplies? Duh!  But  it  was still  a stupid thing   to do, some people will



steal anything that’s not  nailed down, and it  raises a valid question: how many



other stupid things  is he doing?



    He  thinks,   I  never should have gotten  into   this,  I  should have called  the



police and turned in the money and the notebooks as soon as I found them.



    But   because he has the uncomfortable habit  of  being honest  with  himself



(most of the time,  at  least), he knows that if  he had it  all  to do  over again, he



would probably  do  most of  it  the same way, because his parents had been on



the verge of  breaking up,  and he loved  them  too much  not  to  at least try  to



prevent that.



    And  it  worked, he thinks.  The bonehead move was not quitting  while  I was



ahead.



    But.



    Too late now.







                                                             17





His ﬁrst  idea had been to put the notebooks back in the buried  trunk,  but Pete



rejected that  almost immediately.  If  the  police  came with  the  search warrant



Halliday  had threatened, where might  they try  next  when they didn’t  ﬁnd  the



notebooks in the house? All  they’d have to do was go into  the kitchen  and see



that undeveloped land beyond the backyard. The  perfect spot. If  they followed



the path and saw a patch of  freshly turned  ground by  the stream, it  would  be



ballgame over. No, this way is better.



    Scarier, though.



    He  pulls Tina’s old  wagon down the sidewalk and turns  left onto Elm.  John



Tighe, who lives  on the corner of Sycamore and Elm, is  out mowing  his lawn.

190
His son Bill   is tossing a Frisbee to the family   dog. It  sails over the dog’s head



and lands in the wagon, coming to rest between the two boxes.



    “Hum    it!”   Billy   Tighe  shouts,  cutting   across the lawn.   His  brown  hair



bounces. “Hum it  hard!”



    Pete  does so,  but  waves Billy   off  when  he  goes to  throw   him   another.



Someone honks at him when he turns onto Birch, and Pete almost jumps out of



his skin,  but  it’s  only  Andrea Kellogg,   the woman  who does Linda  Saubers’s



hair once a month.  Pete gives her a thumbs-up  and what  he hopes is a sunny



grin. At  least she doesn’t want to play Frisbee, he thinks.



    And  here is  the Rec, a three-story  brick  box with   a sign out  front  reading



FOR SALE and CALL  THOMAS   SAUBERS REAL  ESTATE, followed  by  his



dad’s cell number. The ﬁrst-ﬂoor  windows have been blocked with  plywood  to



keep kids  from  breaking   them,  but  otherwise  it  still   looks  pretty   good. A



couple of tags on the bricks,  sure, but the Rec was prime  tagger territory  even



when it was open. The lawn in  front is mowed. That’s Dad’s doing,  Pete thinks



with  some pride. He  probably hired  some kid  to do  it.  I would’ve  done it  for



free, if he’d asked.



    He  parks the  wagon at  the foot  of  the steps, lugs  the cartons up  one at  a



time,  and is pulling   the  keys out of  his pocket  when a beat-up  Datsun  pulls



over. It’s Mr.   Evans, who used to  coach Little  League when  there was still   a



league on this side of  town. Pete played  for him  when Mr.  Evans coached the



Zoney’s Go-Mart Zebras.



    “Hey,  Centerﬁeld!”  He’s leaned over to roll down the passenger window.



    Shit,  Pete thinks. Shit-shit-shit.



    “Hi,   Coach Evans.”



    “What’re   you doing? They opening the Rec up again?”



    “I   don’t think   so.” Pete has prepared a story for this eventuality,  but hoped



he wouldn’t have to use it.  “It’s some kind  of political  thing  next  week. League



of Women Voters? Maybe a debate? I don’t know for sure.”



    It’s  at  least plausible, because this is an election  year with  primaries just  a



couple of weeks away and municipal issues up the wazoo.

191
    “Plenty   to  argue about,  that’s for  sure.”  Mr.  Evans—overweight, friendly,



never much of a strategist but  big on team  spirit  and always happy to pass out



sodas after games and practices—is  wearing his  old  Zoney  Zebras cap, now



faded and lapped with sweat-stains. “Need a little help?”



    Oh  please no. Please.



    “Nah,  I  got it.”



    “Hey,  I’m   happy to  lend  a hand.”  Pete’s old  coach turns  off the  Datsun’s



engine and begins horsing his bulk across the seat, ready to jump out.



    “Really,  Coach, I’m  okay. If you  help me, I’ll   be done too soon and have to



go back to class.”



    Mr.  Evans laughs and slides back under the wheel. “I get that.”  He  keys the



engine and the  Datsun farts  blue smoke. “But   you be sure and lock  up  tight



once you’re done, y’hear?”



    “Right,”    Pete says. The keys to the Rec slip through  his sweaty ﬁngers and



he bends to pick them up. When  he straightens, Mr. Evans is pulling away.



    Thank  you,  God. And  please don’t let  him  call up  my dad  to congratulate



him on his civic-minded  son.



    The  ﬁrst  key Pete tries  won’t  ﬁt  the lock.  The second one does, but won’t



turn. He  wiggles it  back and forth  as sweat streams down his face and trickles,



stinging,  into  his  left  eye. No joy.  He’s thinking   he may  have to unbury  the



trunk  after all—which  will  mean going back to  the garage for tools—when the



balky old lock  ﬁnally decides to cooperate. He pushes open the door, carries the



cartons  inside,  then   goes back   for  the   wagon.  He   doesn’t  want   anyone



wondering what it’s  doing sitting  there at the foot  of the steps.



    The  Rec’s big rooms have been almost completely cleaned out, which makes



them seem even bigger.  It’s  hot  inside with   no air-conditioning,    and the  air



tastes stale and dusty. With   the windows  blocked  up, it’s  also gloomy. Pete’s



footfalls echo as he carries the cartons through  the big  main  room where kids



used to  play  boardgames and  watch  TV,  then   into  the  kitchen.   The  door



leading down to the basement is also locked, but the key he tried  ﬁrst out front



opens it,  and at  least the  power is  still   on. A  good  thing,   because he never



thought to  bring  a ﬂashlight.

192
    He   carries the  ﬁrst  carton downstairs  and  sees something delightful:   the



basement is loaded with   crap. Dozens of  card tables  are stacked against one



wall, at least a hundred folding  chairs are leaning in rows against another, there



are old stereo components and outdated video game consoles, and, best of all,



dozens of cartons pretty much  like  his.  He looks  in  a few and sees old sports



trophies, framed photos  of intramural   teams from the  eighties and nineties,  a



set of beat-to-shit catcher’s gear, a jumble of LEGOs. Good God, there are even



a few marked  KITCHEN!    Pete puts  his cartons with   these, where they  look



right  at home.



    Best  I can do,  he thinks.  And  if  I  can just get  out  of here without   anyone



coming in to  ask me what the hell I’m  up to, I  think  it  will  be good enough.



    He  locks the basement, then returns to  the main door, listening  to  the echo



of his  footfalls  and  remembering  all  the times  he  brought  Tina  here so she



wouldn’t have to listen  to their parents argue. So neither of them would.



    He  peeps out  at Birch  Street, sees it’s empty,  and lugs  Tina’s wagon back



down the steps. He  returns to  the main  door, locks it,  then heads back home,



making  sure to wave again to  Mr.  Tighe. Waving  is  easier this time;  he even



gives Billy   Tighe a  couple of Frisbee throws.  The  dog steals the  second one,



making  them  all  laugh.  With   the  notebooks stored  in  the  basement of  the



abandoned Rec, hidden  among all  those legitimate   cartons, laughing  is  also



easy. Pete feels ﬁfty pounds lighter.



    Maybe a hundred.







                                                             18





When Hodges lets himself  into  the outer ofﬁce of the tiny  suite on the  seventh



ﬂoor of  the  Turner  Building   on  lower  Marlborough   Street, Holly   is  pacing



worry-circles with  a Bic  jutting  from  her mouth.  She stops when she sees him.



“At  last!”

193
    “Holly,   we  spoke on the phone  just  ﬁfteen minutes  ago.” He  gently  takes



the pen from her mouth and observes the bite marks incised on the cap.



    “It   seems much longer. They’re in there. I’m pretty  sure Barbara’s friend has



been crying. Her  eyes were all red when  I brought  them  the  Cokes. Go, Bill.



Go go go.”



    He  won’t try  to  touch Holly,  not when she’s like this. She’d jump  out of her



skin. Still,  she’s so much better than  when he ﬁrst met  her. Under  the patient



tutelage of Tanya Robinson, Jerome and Barbara’s mother, she’s even developed



something approximating  clothes sense.



    “I   will,”   he says, “but I  wouldn’t  mind   a head start. Do  you have any idea



what it’s about?”  There are many possibilities,  because good kids aren’t always



good kids. It  could be minor  shoplifting  or weed. Maybe school bullying,  or an



uncle with   Roman hands and Russian ﬁngers.  At  least he can be  sure (fairly



sure, nothing is impossible) that Barbara’s friend hasn’t murdered anyone.



    “It’s  about  Tina’s brother. Tina, that’s Barbara’s friend’s name, did I  tell  you



that?” Holly   misses his nod; she’s looking longingly  at the pen. Denied  it,  she



goes to work on her lower lip. “Tina  thinks  her brother stole some money.”



    “How   old is the brother?”



    “In  high  school. That’s all I know. May  I have my pen back?”



    “No.  Go  outside and smoke a cigarette.”



    “I   don’t do  that anymore.”  Her  eyes shift up and to  the left,  a tell  Hodges



saw many times in  his life  as a cop. Oliver Madden  even did it  once or twice,



come to think  of it, and when it  came to lying, Madden was a pro. “I qui—”



    “Just  one. It’ll  calm you down. Did  you get them  anything to  eat?”



    “I  didn’t  think  of  it. I’m  sor—”



    “No,   that’s okay. Go back across the street and get some snacks. NutraBars,



or something.”



    “NutraBars  are dog treats, Bill.”



    Patiently,  he says, “Energy bars, then. Healthy stuff. No chocolate.”



    “Okay.”



    She leaves in a swirl of skirts and low  heels. Hodges takes a deep breath and



goes into his ofﬁce.

194
                                                             19





The girls  are on the couch. Barbara is black  and her friend  Tina  is white.  His



ﬁrst amused thought  is salt and pepper in  matching  shakers. Only the shakers



don’t  quite   match.   Yes,  they  are  wearing   their   hair  in   almost   identical



ponytails. Yes, they are wearing similar sneakers, whatever happens to be the in



thing  for tweenage girls this year. And yes, each of them is holding  a magazine



from his  coffee table: Pursuit, the skip-tracing   trade, hardly  the usual  reading



material for young girls,  but  that’s okay, because it’s pretty clear that neither of



them is actually reading.



    Barbara is  wearing her  school uniform  and looks  relatively  composed. The



other one is wearing black  slacks and a blue tee with  a butterﬂy  appliquéd  on



the front. Her  face is pale, and her red-rimmed eyes look at him with  a mixture



of hope and terror that’s hard on the heart.



    Barbara jumps  up and gives him  a hug, where once she would have dapped



him, knuckles  to knuckles, and called it  good.  “Hi,  Bill.   It’s great to  see you.”



How adult  she sounds, and how tall she’s grown. Can she be fourteen yet? Is it



possible?



    “Good  to  see you, too, Barbs. How’s  Jerome? Is he going  to be  home this



summer?” Jerome is  a Harvard  man these days, and  his alter  ego—the  jive-



talking   Tyrone Feelgood  Delight—seems  to  have  been retired.   Back  when



Jerome was in high  school and doing  chores for Hodges, Tyrone used to  be a



regular visitor.  Hodges  doesn’t miss him   much,  Tyrone was always sort  of a



juvenile persona, but he misses Jerome.



    Barbara wrinkles  her nose. “Came back for a week, and now he’s gone again.



He’s taking  his  girlfriend,   she’s from  Pennsylvania somewhere, to  a cotillion.



Does that sound racist to you? It does to me.”



    Hodges is not  going there. “Introduce  me to your friend,  why don’t  you?”



    “This   is  Tina. She used to  live  on  Hanover Street,  just  around the  block



from us. She wants to go to Chapel Ridge  with  me next year. Tina, this  is Bill



Hodges. He can help you.”

195
    Hodges  gives a little   bow  in  order to  hold  out his  hand to  the  white  girl



still  sitting   on the couch. She cringes back at  ﬁrst, then  shakes it timidly.   As



she lets go, she begins to cry. “I shouldn’t have come. Pete is going to be so mad



at me.”



    Ah,  shit,  Hodges thinks.  He grabs a handful  of tissues from the box  on the



desk, but before he can give  them to  Tina,  Barbara takes them and wipes the



girl’s eyes. Then she sits down on the couch again and hugs her.



    “Tina,”   Barbara  says, and rather  sternly,  “you  came to   me and  said you



wanted help. This is help.”  Hodges is amazed at how much she sounds like her



mother. “All  you have to do is tell  him what  you told me.”



    Barbara turns her attention  on Hodges.



    “And   you can’t  tell  my  folks, Bill.   Neither  can Holly.   If  you tell  my  dad,



he’ll tell  Tina’s dad. Then her brother really will  be in trouble.”



    “Let’s  put   that  aside for  now.”  Hodges  works  his  swivel  chair  out  from



behind  the  desk—it’s  a tight   ﬁt,   but  he  manages. He doesn’t  want  a desk



between himself  and Barbara’s frightened  friend;   he’d look  too  much  like   a



school principal.  He sits  down, clasps his hands between his  knees, and gives



Tina a smile. “Let’s start with  your full  name.”



    “Tina  Annette  Saubers.”



    Saubers. That tinkles a faint  bell. Some old case? Maybe.



    “What’s  troubling   you, Tina?”



    “My   brother stole some money.” Whispering it.  Eyes welling  again. “Maybe



a lot  of  money. And  he can’t  give  it  back,  because it’s gone. I  told  Barbara



because I knew her brother helped stop the  crazy guy who  hurt  our dad when



the crazy guy tried  to blow  up a concert at the MAC.  I  thought  maybe Jerome



could help  me, because he got a special medal for bravery and all.  He  was on



TV.”



    “Yes,”  Hodges  says. Holly  should  have been on TV,  too—she was just  as



brave, and  they  sure wanted  her—but  during   that  phase of  her  life,  Holly



Gibney  would   have  swallowed  drain-cleaner  rather   than  step  in   front   of



television cameras and answer questions.

196
    “Only   Barbs  said  Jerome was in  Pennsylvania  and I   should talk   to  you



instead, because you used to  be a policeman.”   She looks at  him  with   huge,



welling  eyes.



    Saubers, Hodges  muses. Yeah, okay.  He  can’t  remember  the  man’s ﬁrst



name, but  the  last one  is hard  to  forget,  and he  knows why  that  little    bell



tinkled.  Saubers was one of those badly hurt   at City  Center, when  Hartsﬁeld



plowed into the job  fair hopefuls.



    “At   ﬁrst I  was going to talk  to you  on my own,”  Barbara adds. “That’s what



me and Tina  agreed on. Kind   of, you  know, feel  you out  and see if you’d  be



willing  to  help. But  then Teens came to my school today and she was all upset



—”



    “Because he’s worse now!” Tina bursts  out.  “I  don’t  know  what  happened,



but since he  grew that  stupid  moustache, he’s worse! He talks in his  sleep—I



hear him—and he’s losing weight  and he’s got pimples again, which  in Health



class the teacher says can be from stress, and . . . and . . . I think sometimes he



cries.” She looks amazed at this, as if  she can’t quite  get her  head around the



idea of her big brother crying.  “What  if  he kills  himself? That’s what I’m  really



scared of, because teen suicide is a big problem!”



    More  fun facts from Health  class, Hodges thinks. Not that  it  isn’t true.



    “She’s not making  it up,”  Barbara says. “It’s an amazing story.”



    “Then  let’s hear it,”  Hodges says. “From the beginning.”



    Tina  takes a deep breath and begins.







                                                             20





If asked, Hodges would  have said he doubted that  a thirteen-year-old’s tale  of



woe could surprise,  let alone amaze him,  but  he’s amazed, all right.   Fucking



astounded. And he believes every word; it’s too crazy to be a fantasy.



    By  the time  Tina  has ﬁnished, she’s calmed down considerably. Hodges has



seen this before.  Confession may or  may  not  be  good for  the  soul,  but  it’s

197
undoubtedly soothing to  the nerves.



    He  opens the  door to  the  outer  ofﬁce and sees Holly  sitting   at  her desk,



playing computer  solitaire.  Beside her is a bag ﬁlled  with  enough energy bars



to feed the four of  them during  a zombie siege. “Come in  here, Hols,” he says.



“I need you. And bring  those.”



    Holly   steps in  tentatively,  checks Tina Saubers out, and seems relieved by



what she sees. Each of the girls takes an energy bar, which seems to relieve her



even more. Hodges takes one himself. The salad he had for lunch seems to have



gone down the hatch a month ago, and the veggie burger  hasn’t really stuck to



his ribs, either. Sometimes he still  dreams of going to Mickey  D’s and ordering



everything on the menu.



    “This   is good,”  Barbara says, munching. “I  got  raspberry. What’d  you get,



Teens?”



    “Lemon,”   she says. “It  is good.  Thank  you, Mr.   Hodges. Thank  you,  Ms.



Holly.”



    “Barb,”  Holly   says, “where does your mom think you are now?”



    “Movies,”   Barbara says. “Frozen again, the sing-along version. It plays every



afternoon at Cinema Seven. It’s been there like  for-ev-er.” She rolls her eyes at



Tina, who rolls hers in complicity.   “Mom  said we could take the bus home, but



we have to be back by six at the very latest. Tina’s staying over.”



    That  gives us  a little  time,  Hodges  thinks.  “Tina,  I  want you  to tell   it  all



again, so Holly can hear. She’s my assistant, and she’s smart. Plus, she can keep



a secret.”



    Tina  goes through it  again, and in  more detail now that  she’s calmer. Holly



listens closely, her Asperger’s-like  tics mostly  disappearing  as they always do



when she’s fully  engaged. All  that   remains are her restlessly moving  ﬁngers,



tapping her thighs  as if she’s working at an invisible keyboard.



    When  Tina has come to the end, Holly  asks, “The money started coming  in



February of 2010?”



    “February   or  March,”   Tina   says. “I   remember,  because our  folks   were



ﬁghting  a lot  then.  Daddy lost  his job,  see . . . and his legs were all  hurt  . .  .

198
and  Mom  used  to   yell  at  him   about   smoking,  how   much  his   cigarettes



cost . . .”



    “I   hate  yelling,”    Holly   says matter-of-factly.   “It   makes  me  sick  in  my



stomach.”



    Tina  gives her a grateful look.



    “The  conversation about the  doubloons,” Hodges puts  in. “Was  that before



or after the money-train started to roll?”



    “Before.  But not long before.” She gives the answer with no hesitation.



    “And  it  was ﬁve hundred every month,” Holly   says.



    “Sometimes  the time   was a little   shorter than  that,  like  three  weeks, and



sometimes it  was a little   longer. When  it   was more than  a month,  my  folks



would think   it  was over. Once I  think  it  was like  six  weeks, and I remember



Daddy saying to Mom, ‘Well,  it  was good while it  lasted.’”



    “When   was that?”  Holly’s  leaning  forward,  eyes bright,  ﬁngers  no longer



tapping. Hodges loves it when she’s like this.



    “Mmm    .  .  .”  Tina  frowns.  “Around   my  birthday,  for  sure.  When  I  was



twelve. Pete wasn’t there  for my  party.  It  was spring vacation,  and his friend



Rory invited   him  to  go  to Disney  World   with  their   family.  That  was a bad



birthday, because I was so jealous he got to go and I . . .”



    She stops, looking  ﬁrst  at  Barbara, then  at Hodges, ﬁnally   at Holly,  upon



whom she seems to have imprinted as Mama Duck. “That’s why it was late that



time! Isn’t  it? Because he was in Florida!”



    Holly   glances at Hodges with  just  the slightest smile  edging her  lips, then



returns her attention to  Tina. “Probably. Always twenties and ﬁfties?”



    “Yes. I  saw it lots of times.”



    “And  it  ran out when?”



    “Last  September. Around   the time   school started.  There was a  note  that



time. It  said something like,  ‘This is the last of it,  I’m  sorry there isn’t more.’”



    “And   how long after that  was it when you told  your brother  you thought  he



was the one sending the money?”



    “Not   very long.  And  he never exactly admitted  it,  but  I  know  it  was him.



And  maybe this  is all  my  fault  because I kept  talking   to  him  about  Chapel

199
Ridge . .  . and he said he wished the money  wasn’t all gone so I  could go .  . .



and maybe he did something stupid and now he’s sorry, and it’s too l-l-late!”



    She starts crying  again. Barbara enfolds her and  makes comforting  sounds.



Holly’s  ﬁnger-tapping  resumes, but she shows no other signs of  distress; she’s



lost in  her  thoughts.  Hodges can almost  see the wheels turning.   He  has his



own questions, but for the  time being,  he’s more than willing  to let  Holly  take



the lead.



    When  Tina’s weeping is down to  snifﬂes, Holly  says, “You said you came in



one night  and he had  a notebook he acted guilty   about.  He put  it   under his



pillow.”



    “That’s  right.”



    “Was  that near the end of the money?”



    “I  think   so, yeah.”



    “Was  it one of his school notebooks?”



    “No.   It  was black,  and looked expensive. Also, it   had an elastic strap that



went around the outside.”



    “Jerome has notebooks like  that,”  Barbara said. “They’re made of moleskin.



May I have another energy bar?”



    “Knock   yourself out,”  Hodges  tells her. He  grabs a pad from  his desk and



jots Moleskine. Then, returning  his  attention  to  Tina: “Could   it  have been an



accounts book?”



    Tina  frowns in  the  act of peeling  the wrapper  from her  own energy bar. “I



don’t get you.”



    “It’s  possible he was keeping  a record of how much  he’d paid  out and how



much was left.”



    “Maybe,  but it  looked more like  a fancy diary.”



    Holly   is looking  at Hodges. He tips her a nod: Continue.



    “This  is all  good, Tina. You’re a terriﬁc witness. Don’t  you think  so, Bill?”



    He  nods.



    “So, okay. When did  he grow his moustache?”



    “Last  month.  Or maybe it  was the end of April.  Mom  and Daddy  both told



him it   was silly, Daddy said he looked  like  a drugstore cowboy, whatever that

200
is, but  he wouldn’t  shave it off.  I thought  it  was just  something he was going



through.”  She turns to  Barbara. “You know,  like  when we were little   and you



tried to cut  your hair yourself to look  like Hannah Montana’s.”



    Barbara  grimaces. “Please  don’t  talk   about  that.”   And  to  Hodges:  “My



mother hit  the roof.”



    “And  since then, he’s been upset,” Holly says. “Since the moustache.”



    “Not   so much  at ﬁrst,  although  I could  tell  he was nervous even then. It’s



really only  been the  last couple of  weeks that  he’s been scared. And now I’m



scared! Really scared!”



    Hodges checks to see if Holly  has more. She gives him a look that  says Over



to you.



    “Tina,  I’m  willing   to look  into this,  but  it has to begin with   talking  to your



brother. You know that,  right?”



    “Yes,”  she whispers. She carefully  places her second energy bar, with  only



one bite gone, on the arm of the sofa. “Oh my God, he’ll  be so mad at me.”



    “You  might  be surprised,”  Holly  says. “He might   be relieved that  someone



ﬁnally forced the issue.”



    Holly,  Hodges knows, is the voice of experience in this regard.



    “Do  you think  so?” Tina asks. Her voice is small.



    “Yes.”  Holly  gives a brisk nod.



    “Okay,  but you can’t this  weekend. He’s going up to River  Bend Resort. It’s



a thing for  class ofﬁcers, and he got elected vice president next year. If he’s still



in school next year, that is.” Tina puts the  palm of her hand to her forehead in a



gesture of distress so adult that it ﬁlls  Hodges with  pity. “If  he isn’t  in jail  next



year. For robbery.”



    Holly    looks  as distressed as  Hodges feels,  but   she’s not  a toucher   and



Barbara is too horriﬁed  by this  idea to be motherly.  It’s up  to him.  He reaches



over and takes Tina’s small hands in his big ones.



    “I  don’t  think  that’s going  to happen. But  I  do think Pete might  need some



help. When does he come back to the city?”



    “S-Sunday night.”



    “Suppose I were to meet him  after school on Monday. Would that work?”

201
    “I   guess so.” Tina looks utterly  drained. “He  mostly  rides the  bus, but  you



could probably catch him when he leaves.”



    “Are  you going to be all right  this  weekend, Tina?”



    “I’ll    make sure  she is,”  Barbara says, and plants  a  smack on  her friend’s



cheek. Tina responds with a wan smile.



    “What’s   next  for  you  two?”  Hodges  asks. “It’s  probably  too  late  for  the



movie.”



    “We’ll   go to my  house,” Barbara decides. “Tell my mom we decided to  skip



it. That’s not  exactly lying, is it?”



    “No,”   Hodges agrees. “Do you have enough for another taxi?”



    “I  can drive you if  you don’t,”  Holly  offers.



    “We’ll   take  the bus,”  Barbara says. “We both  have passes. We only took a



taxi here because we were in a hurry. Weren’t we, Tina?”



    “Yes.”  She looks at Hodges, then back to Holly.  “I’m  so worried about  him,



but you can’t tell  our folks, at least not yet. Do you promise?”



    Hodges promises for both  of them.  He can’t see the harm in it,  if  the boy is



going to be out of the  city over the weekend with  a bunch of his classmates. He



asks Holly  if  she’ll go  down with   the girls  and make sure they  get on  to the



West Side bus okay.



    She agrees. And makes them take the leftover energy bars. There are at least



a dozen.







                                                             21





When  Holly  comes back, she’s got her  iPad. “Mission  accomplished. They’re



off to Teaberry Lane on the Number Four.”



    “How   did the Saubers girl seem?”



    “Much  better.  She and Barbara were practicing some dance step they learned



on TV while  we waited for the bus. They tried  to get me to do it  with  them.”



    “And  did  you?”

202
    “No.  Homegirl   don’t dance.”



    She doesn’t  smile  when she says this,  but  she still   might   be joking.   He



knows she sometimes does these days, but  it’s  always hard  to  tell.  Much   of



Holly  Gibney  is still  a mystery  to Hodges, and he guesses that will  always be



the case.



    “Will    Barb’s mom  get  the  story  out  of them,  do  you think?   She’s pretty



perceptive, and a  weekend can be a  long  time  when you’re  sitting   on a  big



secret.”



    “Maybe,  but I  don’t think   so,” Holly  says. “Tina was a lot more relaxed once



she got it off her chest.”



    Hodges smiles. “If  she was dancing at the bus stop, I guess she was. So what



do you think,  Holly?”



    “About   which part?”



    “Let’s start  with  the money.”



    She taps at her iPad, brushing absently at her hair to  keep it out  of her eyes.



“It  started coming  in February of 2010,  and stopped in September of last year.



That’s forty-four  months. If the brother—”



    “Pete.”



    “If   Pete sent his parents ﬁve hundred dollars a month over that  period, that



comes to twenty-two thousand dollars. Give  or take. Not  exactly a fortune, but



—”



    “But   a  mighty   lot   for  a kid,”   Hodges  ﬁnishes.  “Especially  if  he  started



sending it when he was Tina’s age.”



    They  look at  each other. That she will  sometimes meet his gaze like this is,



in a way, the  most extraordinary  part of  her change from  the terriﬁed  woman



she was when he  ﬁrst  met  her. After   a silence of  perhaps ﬁve seconds, they



speak at the same time.



    “So—”  “How  did—”



    “You  ﬁrst,”  Hodges says, laughing.



    Without    looking  at him  (it’s  a thing  she can only  do in  short bursts,  even



when she’s absorbed by some problem), Holly says, “That  conversation he had

203
with  Tina about buried treasure—gold and jewels and doubloons. I think  that’s



important.  I don’t  think  he stole that money. I think  he found it.”



    “Must   have.  Very  few  thirteen-year-olds  pull  bank  jobs,  no  matter   how



desperate they are. But where does a kid stumble across that kind of loot?”



    “I  don’t  know. I can craft a computer search with a timeline  and get a dump



of cash robberies, I suppose. We can be pretty sure it happened before 2010, if



he found the money in  February of that year. Twenty-two  thousand dollars is a



large enough haul  to have been reported in  the  papers, but  what’s the search



protocol? What are the parameters? How far back should I go? Five years? Ten?



I bet an info  dump  going back to  just oh-ﬁve  would be pretty  big,  because I’d



need to search the whole tristate area. Don’t you think so?”



    “You’d   only get  a partial  catch  even if  you searched the whole  Midwest.”



Hodges is  thinking    of  Oliver   Madden,  who  probably   conned hundreds  of



people and dozens of organizations during  the course of his  career. He was an



expert when it came to creating false bank accounts, but Hodges is betting that



Ollie  didn’t  put  much trust  in  banks when it  came to his  own money. No,  he



would have wanted a cushy cash reserve.



    “Why   only partial?”



    “You’re   thinking    about  banks,  check-cashing  joints,   fast  credit  outﬁts.



Maybe the dog  track or  the concession take from a Groundhogs  game. But  it



might  not  have been public  money. The  thief  or thieves could  have knocked



over a high-stakes poker game or  ripped off  a meth  dealer over on Edgemont



Avenue in Hillbilly    Heaven. For all we know, the  cash could have come from a



home invasion in Atlanta  or San Diego or anyplace in between. Cash from that



kind of theft  might  not even have been reported.”



    “Especially  if  it  was never reported to  Internal  Revenue in the  ﬁrst  place,”



Holly  says. “Right right  right.  So where does that leave us?”



    “Needing   to  talk  to Peter Saubers, and frankly,  I can’t  wait.  I  thought  I’d



seen it all, but I’ve never seen anything like this.”



    “You   could  talk  to   him  tonight.   He’s  not  going   on his  class trip   until



tomorrow. I took  Tina’s phone number. I could call her and get her brother’s.”

204
    “No,   let’s let him  have his weekend. Hell,  he’s probably left already. Maybe



it  will   calm  him   down,  give  him   time  to   think.   And  let   Tina  have hers.



Monday afternoon will  be soon enough.”



    “What   about the black  notebook she saw? The Moleskine? Any ideas about



that?”



    “Probably  has nothing at all  to do with  the money. Could be his 50 Shades of



Fun fantasy journal about the girl  who sits behind him  in homeroom.”



    Holly   makes a hmph sound to show what  she thinks  of that  and  begins to



pace. “You know what bugs me? The lag.”



    “The  lag?”



    “The  money stopped coming last September, along with a note that said he’s



sorry there isn’t  more. But  as far as we know, Peter didn’t  start  getting  weird



until  April   or  May  of this  year. For seven months  he’s ﬁne, then  he grows a



moustache and starts exhibiting   symptoms  of anxiety.  What  happened? Any



ideas on that?”



    One  possibility  stands out.  “He  decided he wanted more money, maybe so



his sister could go to Barbara’s school. He thought he knew a way to get it,  but



something went wrong.”



    “Yes!  That’s what  I  think,   too!”  She crosses her arms over her breasts and



cups her elbows, a self-comforting gesture Hodges has seen often. “I wish Tina



had seen what was in that notebook, though. The Moleskine notebook.”



    “Is  that a hunch, or are you following  some chain of logic I don’t  see?”



    “I’d   like  to  know  why  he was so anxious for  her not  to  see it,  that’s all.”



Having  successfully evaded Hodges’s question,  she heads for  the door.  “I’m



going to build  a computer search on robberies between 2001 and 2009. I know



it’s a longshot, but it’s  a place to start. What are you going to do?”



    “Go  home.  Think  this  over. Tomorrow I’m   repo’ing cars and looking  for  a



bail-jumper  named  Dejohn  Frasier, who is  almost  certainly  staying  with  his



stepmom or ex-wife. Also, I’ll  watch the Indians  and possibly go to a movie.”



    Holly   lights  up. “Can I go to  the movies with you?”



    “If  you like.”



    “Can  I pick?”

205
    “Only   if you  promise not to drag  me to some idiotic  romantic comedy with



Jennifer Aniston.”



    “Jennifer  Aniston  is a very ﬁne  actress and a badly underrated comedienne.



Did you know  she was in the original Leprechaun movie, back in 1993?”



    “Holly,    you’re a  font  of  information,   but  you’re  dodging   the  issue here.



Promise me no rom-com, or I go on my own.”



    “I’m   sure we can ﬁnd something mutually   agreeable,” Holly says, not quite



meeting his eyes. “Will  Tina’s brother  be all right?  You don’t  think  he’d really



try to kill   himself, do you?”



    “Not   based on his actions. He put himself  way out on a limb  for  his family.



Guys like  that, ones with  empathy, usually aren’t  suicidal. Holly,  does it  seem



strange to you that  the little   girl  ﬁgured out  Peter was behind the money, and



their parents don’t seem to have a clue?”



    The  light  in  Holly’s  eyes goes out, and for a moment  she looks very much



like the  Holly  of  old, the  one who spent most of  her adolescence in her room,



the kind of neurotic  isolate the Japanese call hikikomori.



    “Parents can be very stupid,”  she says, and goes out.



    Well,  Hodges thinks,  yours certainly were, I think   we can agree on that.



    He  goes to the window,  clasps his hands behind his back, and  stares out at



lower  Marlborough,   where the  afternoon  rush  hour  trafﬁc   is  building.   He



wonders if   Holly   has  considered the   second plausible  source of   the  boy’s



anxiety: that the mokes who hid  the money have come back and found it gone.



    And  have somehow found out who took it.







                                                             22





Statewide Motorcycle &  Small Engine  Repair isn’t  statewide or even citywide;



it’s a ramshackle zoning mistake made of  rusty corrugated metal  on the South



Side, a stone’s throw  from  the minor   league stadium  where the Groundhogs



play. Out front  there’s a line of cycles for sale under plastic pennants ﬂuttering

206
lackadaisically from  a sagging length   of cable. Most  of  the bikes  look  pretty



sketchy to Morris.  A  fat guy  in  a leather vest is sitting  against the  side of the



building,  swabbing road rash with  a handful of Kleenex. He looks up at  Morris



and says nothing. Morris   says nothing right   back. He  had to  walk  here from



Edgemont Avenue, over a mile in  the hot morning  sun, because the buses only



come out this far when the Hogs are playing.



    He  goes into  the garage and there’s Charlie  Roberson, sitting  on  a grease-



smeared car seat in front of a half-disassembled Harley. He doesn’t see Morris at



ﬁrst; he’s holding  the Harley’s battery  up  and studying  it.  Morris,  meanwhile,



studies him. Roberson is still  a muscular ﬁreplug  of a man, although  he has to



be over seventy, bald on top with  a graying  fringe.  He’s wearing a cut-off  tee,



and Morris   can read  a fading   prison  tattoo  on  one of  his  biceps:  WHITE



POWER 4EVER.



    One of my  success stories, Morris thinks, and smiles.



    Roberson was doing  life  in Waynesville  for  bludgeoning  a rich old  lady  to



death on  Wieland   Avenue  in  Branson  Park.  She supposedly woke  up   and



caught  him   creeping  her   house.  He  also  raped  her,  possibly   before  the



bludgeoning,  perhaps after, as she lay dying  on the  ﬂoor of  her upstairs  hall.



The case was a  slam-dunk.  Roberson  had been  seen in  the  area on several



occasions leading up to the robbery, he had been photographed by the security



camera outside the  rich  old  lady’s  gate a day  prior  to  the  break-in,   he had



discussed the possibility    of  creeping that   particular   crib  and  robbing   that



particular  lady  with  several of  his  lowlife  friends  (all  given  ample reason to



testify by  the prosecution, having  legal woes of their  own),  and he had a long



record of robbery and  assault. Jury said guilty;  judge  said life  without   parole;



Roberson swapped motorcycle  repair  for  stitching   bluejeans and  varnishing



furniture.



    “I  done plenty, but  I  didn’t  do that,”  he told Morris  time  and time  again. “I



woulda, I had the fuckin  security code, but someone else beat me to the punch.



I know  who it  was, too,  because there was only one guy I told  those numbers



to. He was one of the ones who fuckin testiﬁed against me, and if I  ever get out



of here, that man is gonna die. Trust me.”

207
    Morris  neither  believed nor disbelieved him—his  ﬁrst  two years in the Ville



had shown  him  that   it  was  ﬁlled  with   men  claiming   to  be as innocent  as



morning  dew—but  when Charlie asked him to  write Barry  Scheck, Morris was



willing.  It  was what he did, his real job.



    Turned  out  the  robber-bludgeoner-rapist  had left   semen in the  old  lady’s



underpants, the  underpants were still   in  one of the  city’s  cavernous evidence



rooms, and the  lawyer  the  Innocence Project sent  out  to  investigate Charlie



Roberson’s case found them. DNA  testing unavailable  at the time  of  Charlie’s



conviction showed the jizz wasn’t his. The  lawyer hired an investigator to  track



down several of the prosecution’s witnesses. One of them, dying of liver cancer,



not only recanted his testimony  but copped to the crime,  perhaps in hopes that



doing so would earn him a pass through the pearly gates.



    “Hey,  Charlie,”  Morris says. “Guess who.”



    Roberson turns, squints, gets to his feet. “Morrie?  Is that  Morrie Bellamy?”



    “In  the  ﬂesh.”



    “Well,   I’ll  be fucked.”



    Probably  not,  Morris thinks,   but when  Roberson puts the battery  down on



the seat of the  Harley  and comes forward with   his arms outstretched,  Morris



submits to  the  obligatory  back-pounding  bro-hug.  Even gives  it  back to  the



best of his ability.  The amount  of muscle beneath Roberson’s ﬁlthy tee-shirt  is



mildly  alarming.



    Roberson  pulls  back,  showing  his few  remaining   teeth  in  a grin.   “Jesus



Christ! Parole?”



    “Parole.”



    “Old   lady took her foot off your  neck?”



    “She did.”



    “God-dam,  that’s  great!  Come  on  in  the  ofﬁce  and  have a  drink!   I  got



bourbon.”



    Morris  shakes his head. “Thanks,  but booze doesn’t agree with  my system.



Also, the man might  come around anytime and ask me to drop a urine. I  called



in sick at work  this morning,  that’s risky enough.”



    “Who’s  your PO?”

208
    “McFarland.”



    “Big   buck nigger, isn’t he?”



    “He’s  black, yes.”



    “Ah,   he ain’t the  worst, but  they  watch you close to begin  with,  no doubt.



Come on in the ofﬁce, anyway, I’ll drink  yours. Hey, did you hear Duck died?”



    Morris   has indeed heard this,  got  the news shortly  before his  parole came



through.  Duck  Duckworth,  his  ﬁrst  protector, the  one who stopped the  rapes



by Morris’s  cellie  and his  cellie’s friends.  Morris  felt  no  special grief.  People



came; people went; shit didn’t mean shit.



    Roberson shakes his head as he takes a bottle from the  top shelf of  a metal



cabinet ﬁlled   with  tools  and  spare parts. “It   was some kind   of brain  thing.



Well,  you  know  what  they  say—in the  midst   of fuckin   life  we’re in  fuckin



death.” He pours bourbon  into a cup with  WORLD’S   BEST HUGGER  on the



side, and lifts  it.  “Here’s to  ole Ducky.”  He drinks,  smacks his lips,  and raises



the cup  again. “And   here’s to you.  Morrie  Bellamy,  out  on  the street  again,



rollin  and trollin.   What  they  got you  doin? Some kind  of paperwork’d be my



guess.”



    Morris   tells  him   about  his  job  at  the  MAC,   and  makes chitchat   while



Roberson helps  himself  to  another  knock  of  bourbon.   Morris  doesn’t  envy



Charlie his freedom to drink,   he lost too many years of his life  thanks to  high-



tension booze, but  he feels Roberson will  be more  amenable to his  request if



he’s a little high.



    When  he judges the time  is right,  he says, “You told me to  come to you if I



ever got out and needed a favor.”



    “True,  true  .  .  . but  I  never thought   you’d  get out.  Not   with  that  Jesus-



jumper you nailed  ridin  you like  a motherfuckin  pony.”  Roberson chortles and



pours himself a fresh shot.



    “I  need you to loan me a car, Charlie. Short-term. Not  even twelve hours.”



    “When?”



    “Tonight.   Well  .  . .  this evening.  Tonight’s when  I need it.  I  can return  it



later on.”

209
    Roberson has stopped  laughing.  “That’s  a bigger  risk  than  takin  a drink,



Morrie.”



    “Not   for you; you’re out, free and clear.”



    “No,   not  for  me,  I’d  just   get a  slap on  the  wrist.  But   drivin   without   a



license is  a big   parole violation.   You  might   go  back inside.  Don’t   get  me



wrong, I’m   willin   to  help  you out,  just  want  to  be sure you  understand the



stakes.”



    “I  understand them.”



    Roberson tops up his glass and sips it as he considers. Morris wouldn’t want



to be the owner  of the bike  Charlie is  going to  be putting   back together once



their little   palaver is done.



    At  last  Roberson says, “You be okay with a truck  instead of a car? One I’m



thinking  of  is a small panel job. And  it’s an automatic.  Says ‘Jones Flowers’ on



the side, but you can hardly read it anymore. It’s out back. I’ll   show it to you, if



you want.”



    Morris  wants, and one look makes him  decide the little  black panel truck  is



a gift  from  God .  . .  assuming it  runs all  right.   Roberson assures him that it



does, even though it’s on its second trip around the clock.



    “I  shut  up shop early on Fridays. Around three. I  could put  in some gas and



leave the keys under the right front tire.”



    “That’s  perfect,” Morris  says. He can go in to the MAC,  tell  his fat fuck  of a



boss that he had a stomach bug but it passed, work until  four like  a good little



ofﬁce drone, then come back  out here. “Listen,  the  Groundhogs play  tonight,



don’t they?”



    “Yeah,  they  got  the  Dayton   Dragons. Why?   You  hankerin  to  take  in  a



game? Because I could be up for that.”



    “Another   time,   maybe.  What   I’m  thinking    is  I  could  return   the  truck



around ten, park it  in the same place, then take a stadium bus back into town.”



    “Same  old  Morrie,”   Roberson  says, and  taps his  temple.   His  eyes have



become noticeably bloodshot. “You are one thinking cat.”



    “Remember  to put  the  keys under the tire.”  The  last thing  Morris  needs is



for Roberson to get shitfaced on cheap bourbon and forget.

210
    “I  will.   Owe you a lot, buddy. Owe you the motherfuckin  world.”



    This   sentiment  necessitates another bro-hug,  redolent of  sweat, bourbon,



and cheap aftershave. Roberson squeezes so tightly that Morris ﬁnds it hard  to



breathe, but at last he’s released. He accompanies Charlie back into the garage,



thinking  that  tonight—in   twelve  hours, maybe less—the Rothstein notebooks



will  once more be in his possession. With such an intoxicating prospect as that,



who needs bourbon?



    “You   mind  me  asking why  you’re  working   here, Charlie?  I  thought  you



were going to get a boatload of cash from the state for false imprisonment.”



    “Aw,  man,  they threatened to  bring  up  a bunch  of old  charges.” Roberson



resumes his seat in front  of  the Harley  he’s been working   on. He  picks  up a



wrench and taps  it  against the  grease-smeared leg of his pants. “Including    a



bad one in Missouri, could have put me away down there for the rest of my life.



Three-strikes rule or some shit. So we kinda worked out a trade.”



    He  regards Morris with  his  bloodshot eyes, and in spite of his meaty  biceps



(it’s clear he never lost the prison workout habit),  Morris  can see he’s really old,



and will  soon be unhealthy, as well. If he isn’t already.



    “They  fuck you  in the end, buddy. Right  up  the ass. Rock the boat and they



fuck you even harder. So you take what you can get. This is what I got,  and it’s



enough for me.”



    “Shit  don’t  mean shit,” Morris  says.



    Roberson  bellows  laughter.  “What   you  always said!  And  it’s   the  fuckin



truth!”



    “Just  don’t forget to  leave the keys.”



    “I’ll    leave em.” Roberson levels a grease-blackened ﬁnger at  Morris.  “And



don’t get caught. Listen to your  daddy.”



    I  won’t get caught,  Morris thinks.  I’ve waited  too long.



    “One  other thing?”



    Roberson waits for it.



    “I   don’t  suppose I could get  a gun.”  Morris  sees the look on  Charlie’s face



and adds hastily, “Not to use, just as insurance.”

211
    Roberson shakes his head. “No  gun.  I’d  get  a lot  more than  a slap on the



wrist for that.”



    “I’d   never say it came from you.”



    The  bloodshot  eyes regard Morris  shrewdly. “Can  I  be honest? You’re too



jail-bit  for  guns. Probably shoot yourself in the nutsack. The truck,  okay. I owe



you that. But  if you want a gun, ﬁnd  it  somewhere else.”







                                                             23





At  three  o’clock  that   Friday  afternoon,  Morris   comes within   a  whisker  of



trashing twelve million   dollars’ worth  of modern art.



    Well,  no, not  really, but he does come close to erasing the records of that art,



which include  the  provenance and the background info  on a dozen rich  MAC



donors. He’s spent weeks creating a new search protocol that  covers all of  the



Arts Center’s acquisitions since the beginning  of the twenty-ﬁrst   century. That



protocol  is a work   of art  in  itself,  and  this  afternoon,  instead of  sliding  the



biggest of  the  subﬁles into   the master  ﬁle,  he has moused it   into  the  trash



along with  a lot  of other  dreck he needs to get rid  of.  The MAC’s  lumbering,



outdated computer  system is overloaded with  useless shit, including   a ton  of



stuff  that’s  no   longer  even  in   the  building.    Said  ton  got   moved  to   the



Metropolitan  Museum of Art   in New  York  back in ’05.  Morris  is on the verge



of emptying  the  trash to  make room for  more dreck,  his ﬁnger  is actually  on



the trigger,  when he realizes he’s about to send a very valuable live ﬁle to  data



heaven.



    For  a moment he’s back in  Waynesville, trying  to  hide contraband before a



rumored cell  inspection, maybe nothing  more dangerous than a snack-pack of



Keebler cookies but enough to  get him  marked down if  the screw is in  a pissy



mood. He looks at  his ﬁnger, hovering  less than an eighth of an inch  over that



damned delete button,  and pulls his  hand back to  his chest, where he can feel



his heart thumping  fast and hard. What in  God’s name was he thinking?

212
    His  fat  fuck  of a boss chooses that moment to  poke his  head into Morris’s



closet-sized workspace. The cubicles where the other ofﬁce drones spend their



days are papered with   pictures  of  boyfriends,  girlfriends,   families,  even the



fucking  family  dog,  but  Morris  has put   up nothing   but  a postcard  of Paris,



which he has always wanted to visit. Like that’s ever going to happen.



    “Everything   all right,  Morris?”  the fat fuck  asks.



    “Fine,”   Morris  says, praying  that  his  boss won’t  come in  and look  at  his



screen. Although  he  probably  wouldn’t   know  what  he was  looking  at.  The



obese bastard can send emails, he even seems to have a vague grasp of what



Google is for, but beyond that  he’s lost. Yet he’s living out  in  the suburbs with



the wife  and  kiddies  instead of  in  Bugshit   Manor, where  the  crazies yell at



invisible enemies in the middle  of the night.



    “Good  to hear. Carry on.”



    Morris  thinks,  Carry your fat ass on out of here.



    The  fat fuck  does, probably headed down to the canteen to feed his fat fuck



face. When he’s gone, Morris   clicks on  the  trash icon,  grabs what  he almost



deleted, and moves it back into the master ﬁle. This  isn’t much of an operation,



but when it’s ﬁnished he blows out  his breath like a man who has just defused a



bomb.



    Where  was your head? he scolds himself. What were you thinking?



    Rhetorical  questions. He was thinking   about the Rothstein  notebooks, now



so close. Also about  the  little   panel truck,   and how  scary it’s  going  to  feel,



driving  again after all those years inside. All  he needs is one fender-bender . . .



one cop who thinks he looks suspicious . . .



    I  have to keep it together a little  longer, Morris  thinks.  I have to.



    But  his  brain feels overloaded, running  in  the red  zone. He thinks  he’ll  be



all  right   once the  notebooks are actually  in  his  possession (also the money,



although that’s far  less important). Get  those puppies hidden away at the back



of the closet in his  room on the ninth  ﬂoor  of Bugshit  Manor and he can relax,



but right   now the stress is killing   him.  It’s also being  in a changed world  and



working  an actual job and  having a boss who doesn’t wear a gray uniform  but

213
still  has to be kowtowed  to.  On top  of all  that,  there’s the stress of having  to



drive an unregistered vehicle without  a license tonight.



    He  thinks,  By  ten PM,  things  will  be better. In  the  meantime, strap down



and tighten up.  Shit don’t mean shit.



    “Right,”     Morris  whispers,  and  wipes  a  prickle   of  sweat from   the  skin



between his mouth and nose.







                                                             24





At  four o’clock  he saves his work, closes out the  apps he’s been running,  and



shuts down. He  walks  into  the MAC’s  plush  lobby  and standing  there like  a



bad dream made  real, feet apart  and hands clasped behind  his  back, is  Ellis



McFarland.  His  PO   is  studying   an Edward   Hopper  painting   like   the  art



aﬁcionado he surely isn’t.



    Without    turning  (Morris  realizes the man  must have seen his reﬂection in



the  glass covering  the  painting,    but  it’s   still   eerie), McFarland  says, “Yo,



Morrie. How  you doin, homie?”



    He  knows,  Morris   thinks.  Not   just  about  the panel  truck,  either.  About



everything.



    Not   true,  and he knows it  isn’t,  but  the  part that’s  still  in  jail  and always



will  be  assures him it  is  true.  To McFarland,  Morris  Bellamy’s  forehead is a



pane of glass. Everything inside, every turning   wheel and overheated whirling



cog, is visible to him.



    “I’m   all right,  Mr.  McFarland.”



    Today  McFarland is  wearing a  plaid  sportcoat approximately  the  size of a



living  room  rug.  He looks  Morris  up and  down, and when  his eyes return  to



Morris’s face, it’s all Morris can do to hold them.



    “You   don’t  look all  right.   You’re pale,  and you  got  those dark  whack-off



circles under your eyes. Been using something you hadn’t  oughtta  been using,



Morrie?”

214
    “No,  sir.”



    “Doing   something you hadn’t oughtta  be doing?”



    “No.”   Thinking   of the  panel truck  with  JONES FLOWERS  still  visible  on



the side, waiting  for  him  on the  South Side. The keys probably  already under



the tire.



    “No  what?”



    “No,  sir.”



    “Uh-huh.   Maybe  it’s  the ﬂu.  Because, frankly speaking,  you look  like  ten



pounds of shit in a ﬁve-pound bag.”



    “I   almost  made a  mistake,”  Morris   says. “It  could  have been  rectiﬁed—



probably—but   it  would  have meant  bringing   in  an outside  I-T  guy,  maybe



even shutting down the main  server. I would have been in trouble.”



    “Welcome  to the workaday world,”  McFarland says, with zero sympathy.



    “Well,   it’s different  for me!”  Morris  bursts out, and oh God,  it’s such a relief



to burst  out, and to  do it  about  something safe. “If  anyone should know  that,



it’s you!  Someone else who did that  would  just get  a reprimand,  but  not  me.



And if  they ﬁred me—for  a lapse in attention, not anything  I  did on purpose—



I’d end up back inside.”



    “Maybe,”  McFarland says, turning  back to the picture.  It shows a man and a



woman sitting   in  a  room  and apparently  working   hard not  to  look  at  each



other. “Maybe not.”



    “My   boss  doesn’t like   me,”  Morris   says. He  knows  he  sounds like  he’s



whining,  probably he is whining.  “I  know  four times  as much as he does about



how the computer  system in this  place works, and it  pisses him off. He’d  love



to see me gone.”



    “You  sound  a weensy bit  paranoid,”  McFarland  says. His hands are again



clasped above his truly awesome buttocks, and all  at  once Morris understands



why McFarland is here. McFarland followed  him  to the motorcycle  shop where



Charlie Roberson works and  has decided he’s up to something.  Morris  knows



this isn’t so. He knows it  is.



    “What   are they doing,  anyway, letting a guy  like  me screw with their  ﬁles?



A parolee? If I do the wrong  thing,  and I almost  did, I  could cost them a lot  of

215
money.”



    “What   did  you think  you’d  be doing on  the outside?” McFarland says, still



examining  the  Hopper  painting,  which   is called  Apartment 16-A.  He  seems



fascinated by it,  but  Morris  isn’t  fooled. McFarland  is watching  his  reﬂection



again. Judging him.  “You’re too old  and too soft to shift cartons in a warehouse



or work on a gardening crew.”



    He  turns around.



    “It’s  called mainstreaming,  Morris, and I  didn’t  make the policy. If you want



to wah-wah-wah about it,  ﬁnd somebody who gives a shit.”



    “Sorry,”  Morris says.



    “Sorry  what?”



    “Sorry, Mr.  McFarland.”



    “Thank  you, Morris,  that’s better. Now  let’s step into the men’s room, where



you will   pee in the  little   cup and  prove to me  that  your paranoia isn’t  drug-



induced.”



    The  last stragglers of the ofﬁce staff are leaving. Several glance at Morris and



the big black  man in the loud  sportcoat, then quickly  glance away. Morris feels



an urge to shout That’s right, he’s my parole ofﬁcer, get a good look!



    He   follows   McFarland   into   the   men’s,  which    is  empty,   thank   God.



McFarland leans against the wall, arms crossed on his chest, watching as Morris



unlimbers  his  elderly   thingamajig   and  produces a  urine  sample.  When   it



doesn’t turn  blue  after thirty   seconds, McFarland hands the little   plastic  cup



back to Morris. “Congratulations.  Dump  that,  homie.”



    Morris  does. McFarland is washing his hands methodically, lathering  all  the



way to his wrists.



    “I  don’t  have AIDS, you  know. If  that’s what you’re worried  about. I  had to



take the test before they let me out.”



    McFarland  carefully dries his big hands. He studies himself in  the mirror  for



a moment (maybe wishing   he had some hair  to comb),  then turns  to  Morris.



“You may be substance-free, but I really don’t like the way you look,  Morrie.”



    Morris  keeps silent.

216
    “Let  me tell  you something  eighteen years in this job  has taught me. There



are two types of parolees, and two only: wolves and lambs. You’re too old to be



a wolf,   but   I’m   not  entirely   sure  you’re  hip   to  that.   You  may  not  have



internalized it, as the shrinks say. I don’t know what wolﬁsh shit you might  have



on your  mind,   maybe it’s  nothing   more  than  stealing paper  clips  from  the



supply room, but  whatever it  is, you  need to forget about it.  You’re too  old to



howl and much too old to run.”



    Having   imparted  this  bit  of  wisdom, he  leaves. Morris heads for the  door



himself, but  his legs turn  to rubber before he can get there. He wheels around,



grasps a washbasin to keep from  falling,   and blunders  into  one of  the stalls.



There he sits down  and lowers his head until   it  almost touches his knees. He



closes his eyes and takes  long  deep breaths. When   the  roaring  in  his  head



subsides, he gets up and leaves.



    He’ll   still  be  here, Morris  thinks.  Staring at  that  damned picture  with  his



hands clasped behind his back.



    But   this  time  the  lobby  is  empty  save for the  security  guard,  who gives



Morris a suspicious look as he passes.







                                                             25





The  Hogs-Dragons   game  doesn’t  start   until    seven,  but   the  buses  with



BASEBALL GAME  2NITE   in  their  destination windows  start running  at ﬁve.



Morris takes one to  the park,  then walks back  to Statewide Motorcycle,  aware



of each car that passes and cursing himself for losing his shit in the men’s room



after  McFarland departed. If he’d gotten  out sooner, maybe he could have seen



what the sonofabitch was driving.  But  he didn’t,  and now any one of these cars



might  be McFarland’s. The PO would be easy enough to spot, given the size of



him,  but Morris  doesn’t dare look  at any of the  passing cars too closely. There



are two reasons for this. First, he’d look  guilty,  wouldn’t  he? Yes indeed, like a



man who’s got wolﬁsh shit on his mind  and has to keep checking his perimeter.

217
Second, he might  see McFarland  even if  McFarland  isn’t  there,  because he’s



edging ever closer to  a nervous breakdown. It   isn’t  surprising,  either. A  man



could only stand so much stress.



    What  are you, twenty-two? Rothstein had asked him. Twenty-three?



    That  was a good guess by an observant man. Morris had been twenty-three.



Now  he’s on the  cusp of  sixty,  and the  years between have disappeared like



smoke in  a breeze. He has heard people say sixty  is the  new forty,  but  that’s



bullshit.   When  you’ve  spent  most  of  your  life  in   prison,  sixty  is  the  new



seventy-ﬁve. Or eighty. Too old to be a wolf, according to McFarland.



    Well,  we’ll  see about that, won’t we?



    He   turns  into  the  yard  of  Statewide Motorcycle—the   shades pulled,  the



bikes that were out  front this  morning  locked away—and expects to hear a car



door slam behind him  the moment  he transgresses private property. Expects to



hear McFarland saying Yo, homie, what you doing in there?



    But   the only  sound  is the  trafﬁc  passing on the  way to  the  stadium,  and



when he gets around to the back lot, the invisible  band that’s been constricting



his chest eases a little. There’s a high wall  of corrugated metal cutting   off this



patch of yard from  the rest of the  world, and walls  comfort Morris.  He  doesn’t



like  that,  knows  it   isn’t  natural,  but   there it   is.  A  man  is  the  sum  of his



experiences.



    He  goes to the panel truck—small,   dusty, blessedly nondescript—and feels



beneath the right   front  tire.  The  keys are there.  He  gets in,  and is  gratiﬁed



when the engine starts on the ﬁrst crank. The radio comes on in a blare of rock.



Morris snaps it off.



    “I  can do this,”  he says, ﬁrst adjusting the seat and then gripping  the wheel.



“I can do this.”



    And,   it  turns  out,   he can. It’s  like   riding   a bike.  The  only  hard  part  is



turning  against the stream of trafﬁc headed for the stadium, and even that isn’t



too bad;  after a  minute’s  wait,  one of  the  BASEBALL  GAME  2NITE   buses



stops, and the driver  waves for Morris  to go.  The northbound  lanes are nearly



empty, and  he’s able to  avoid  downtown  by  using  the  new city   bypass. He



almost enjoys driving   again. Would enjoy it,   if  not for  the  nagging  suspicion

218
that McFarland is  tailing  him.  Not  busting  him  yet, though;  he won’t  do that



until  he sees what his old pal—his homie—is up to.



    Morris   stops at the  Bellows Avenue  Mall  and goes into  Home  Depot.  He



strolls around beneath the glaring  ﬂuorescents, taking his time;  he can’t do his



business until after dark,  and in  June the evening light  lasts until   eight thirty



or nine. In  the gardening section he buys a spade and also a hatchet, in case he



has to chop some roots—that   tree overhanging  the bank  looks like  it   might



have his trunk   in a  pretty  tight   grip.  In  the  aisle marked CLEARANCE,   he



grabs a pair of  Tuff Tote  duffels, on sale for  twenty  bucks each. He stows his



purchases in the back of the truck and heads around to the driver’s door.



    “Hey!”   From behind him.



    Morris   freezes, listening    to  the   approaching  footsteps  and  waiting   for



McFarland to grab his shoulder.



    “Do  you know  if there’s a supermarket in this mall?”



    The  voice  is  young.  And   white.  Morris   discovers he  can breathe  again.



“Safeway,” he says, without turning.  He has no idea if  there’s a supermarket in



the mall or not.



    “Oh.  Okay. Thanks.”



    Morris  gets into  the truck and starts the engine. I can do this, he thinks.



    I  can and I will.







                                                             26





Morris  cruises slowly  through   the  Northﬁeld   tree  streets that  were  his  old



stomping  grounds—not  that  he ever did  much  stomping;  usually  he had his



nose in a book. It’s still too  early, so he parks on Elm for awhile. There’s a dusty



old map  in  the glove  compartment,  and he pretends to  read it.  After  twenty



minutes or so, he drives over to Maple and does the same thing. Then down  to



the local Zoney’s Go-Mart, where he bought  snacks as a kid. Also cigarettes for



his father.  That  was back in   the day  when a  pack cost  forty  cents and kids

219
buying  smokes for their  parents was taken for granted.  He  gets a Slushie and



makes it last.  Then he moves onto Palm  Street and goes back to pretend map



reading. The shadows are lengthening, but oh so slowly.



    Should have brought  a book, he thinks, then thinks  No—a  man with  a map



looks okay, somehow, but a man reading a book in an old truck would probably



look like a potential  child  molester.



    Is  that  paranoid or  smart? He can no  longer tell.   All  he knows  for sure is



that the notebooks are close now. They’re pinging like a sonar blip.



    Little   by  little,   the long  light   of  this  June evening mellows  to  dusk. The



kids who’ve been playing  on sidewalks and front  lawns go inside to  watch TV



or play video games or spend an educational evening texting various misspelled



messages and dumbass emoticons to their friends.



    Conﬁdent    that   McFarland    is   nowhere   near  (although    not   completely



conﬁdent), Morris  keys the  panel truck’s engine  and drives slowly  to  his ﬁnal



destination: the Birch  Street Rec, where he used to go when the  Garner Street



branch of the library   was closed. Skinny, bookish, with  a regrettable  tendency



to  run  his  mouth,  he  rarely got   picked  for  the  outdoor  games, and almost



always got yelled at  on the  few occasions when he did: hey butterﬁngers,  hey



dumbo,  hey  fumblebutt.   Because of  his  red  lips,   he earned  the  nickname



Revlon. When he went  to the Rec, he mostly stayed indoors, reading or maybe



putting  together a jigsaw puzzle. Now  the city  has shut the old brick  building



down and put it  up for sale in the wake of municipal  budget cuts.



    A  few  boys toss up a  few ﬁnal  baskets on the weedy courts  out  back, but



there are no longer outside lights  and  they beat feet when it’s  too dark  to see,



yelling  and dribbling   and shooting passes back and forth. When they’re  gone,



Morris  starts  the  truck   and pulls   into  the  driveway  running   alongside  the



building.   He does it  without   turning   on  his headlights,  and the  little   black



truck is  exactly the right  color  for this  kind  of work.  He snuggles it  up to  the



rear of  the  building,   where a  faded sign  still   reads RESERVED  FOR  REC



DEPT.  VEHICLES.  He  kills   the  engine, gets  out,  and  smells the  June  air,



redolent of grass and clover. He can hear crickets, and the drone of trafﬁc on the



city bypass, but otherwise the newly fallen night  is his.

220
    Fuck  you, Mr. McFarland, he thinks.  Fuck you very much.



    He   gets his  tools  and  Tuff  Totes from  the  back  of  the  truck   and starts



toward the  tangle  of unimproved  ground  beyond  the baseball ﬁeld  where he



dropped so many easy pop ﬂies. Then an idea strikes him and he turns back. He



braces a palm on the old brick, still  warm from  the heat of the day, slides down



to a crouch, and pulls  some weeds so he can peer through one of the basement



windows. These haven’t been boarded up. The moon has just risen, orange and



full.  It  lends enough light  for  him  to see folding chairs, card tables, and heaps



of boxes.



    Morris  has planned on bringing   the notebooks back to his room  in Bugshit



Manor, but that’s risky;  Mr.  McFarland can search his room anytime he pleases,



it’s part  of the deal. The Rec is a lot  closer to where the  notebooks are buried,



and the basement, where all sorts of useless bric-a-brac has already been stored,



would be the perfect hiding  place. It might   be possible to rathole most of them



here, only taking  a few at a time  back to his  room, where he could read them.



Morris is skinny  enough to ﬁt  through this  window, although  he might  have to



wriggle  a bit, and how  hard could it  be to  bust the thumb-lock   he sees on the



inside of the window and pry  it up? A  screwdriver would probably do the trick.



He doesn’t have one, but there are plenty at Home Depot.  He even saw a small



display of tools when he was in Zoney’s.



    He   leans closer to  the  dirty  window,   studying  it.   He  knows to  look   for



alarm tapes (the state penitentiary is a very educational place when it  comes to



breaking and  entering),  but  he doesn’t see any. Only  suppose the alarm  uses



contact points,  instead?  He  wouldn’t  see those, and  he might   not  hear  the



alarm, either. Some of them are silent.



    Morris  looks a little   longer, then reluctantly  gets to his  feet. It  doesn’t seem



likely  to him  that  an old  building  like  this  one is alarmed—the valuable stuff



has no doubt  been moved elsewhere long  ago—but  he doesn’t dare  take the



chance.



    Better  to stick  with  the original  plan.



    He   grabs  his  tools   and  his  duffel   bags and   once more  starts   for  the



overgrown waste ground,  careful to  skirt   the ballﬁeld.   He’s not  going  there,

221
uh-uh, no way. The moon will   help him  once he’s in the undergrowth,  but out



in the open, the world  looks like a brightly  lighted  stage.



    The  potato chip  bag that  helped him  last time  is gone, and it  takes awhile



to ﬁnd  the path  again. Morris  beats back and forth  through   the undergrowth



beyond  right    ﬁeld   (the   site   of   several  childhood    humiliations),    ﬁnally



rediscovers it, and sets off. When  he hears the faint  chuckle of  the stream, he



has to restrain himself from breaking into  a run.



    Times  have been hard, he thinks.   There could  be people sleeping in  here,



homeless people. If one of them sees me—



    If  one of them sees him, he’ll use the hatchet. No  hesitation. Mr.  McFarland



may think  he’s too old to be a wolf,  but  what his parole ofﬁcer doesn’t know  is



that  Morris  has already killed   three people,  and driving   a car  isn’t  the only



thing  that’s like riding  a bike.







                                                             27





The trees are runty, choking each other in their  struggle  for space and sun, but



they are tall enough to ﬁlter  the moonlight.  Two or three times Morris  loses the



path and blunders around, trying  to ﬁnd it  again. This actually  pleases him. He



has the sound of the stream to guide him  if he really  does lose his way, and the



path’s faintness conﬁrms that fewer kids use it now than back in his day. Morris



just hopes he’s not walking through poison ivy.



    The  sound of  the stream  is very  close when he ﬁnds  the path  for  the last



time,  and less than ﬁve minutes  later, he’s standing  on the bank  opposite the



landmark tree. He  stops there for a bit in  the moon-dappled shade, looking for



any sign of human habitation:  blankets, a sleeping bag, a shopping cart, a piece



of plastic draped over branches to create a makeshift tent. There’s nothing. Just



the water purling  along in  its stony bed, and the tree tilting   over the far side of



the stream. The tree that has faithfully  guarded his treasure all these years.



    “Good  old tree,” Morris  whispers, and steps his way across the stream.

222
    He  kneels  and puts  aside the  tools and  the  duffel  bags for  a moment  of



meditation.  “Here I  am,” he whispers, and places his palms on the ground, as if



feeling for a heartbeat.



    And   it  seems that  he does feel one. It’s the  heartbeat of  John Rothstein’s



genius. The old  man turned  Jimmy  Gold into  a sellout  joke, but  who can say



Rothstein didn’t  redeem Jimmy  during  his years of solitary composition? If  he



did  that   .  .  .  if   .  .  .  then  everything   Morris  has  gone  through  has  been



worthwhile.



    “Here  I am, Jimmy.  Here I ﬁnally  am.”



    He  grabs the  spade and begins digging.  It  doesn’t take  long to  get  to the



trunk  again, but  the roots have embraced it,  all right,   and it’s almost  an hour



before Morris can chop through  enough of  them to  pull  it  out.  It’s  been years



since he did hard manual labor, and he’s exhausted. He thinks of all the cons he



knew—Charlie  Roberson, for example—who  worked out  constantly, and  how



he sneered at them for  what  he considered obsessive-compulsive behavior (in



his mind,  at least; never on  his face). He’s not sneering now. His  thighs  ache,



his back aches, and worst of all, his head is throbbing  like an infected tooth.  A



little  breeze has sprung up, which cools the sweat sliming  his  skin, but  it  also



causes the branches to sway, creating moving  shadows that make him   afraid.



They make him  think  of  McFarland again. McFarland  making  his way up the



path,  moving  with   the  eerie quiet   some big  men,  soldiers  and ex-athletes,



mostly, are able to manage.



    When   he’s got  his  breath  and  his  heartbeat  has slowed  a little,    Morris



reaches for the handle at the end of the trunk  and ﬁnds it’s no longer there. He



leans forward   on  his  splayed  palms,  peering  into   the  hole,   wishing   he’d



remembered to bring a ﬂashlight.



    The  handle is still there, only  it’s hanging in  two pieces.



    That’s not  right,  Morris  thinks. Is it?



    He  casts his mind  back across all those years, trying  to remember if  either



trunk  handle was broken.  He  doesn’t think   so. In  fact, he’s almost sure. But



then he remembers tipping  the trunk  endwise in the garage, and exhales a sigh



of relief strong enough to puff  out his cheeks. It must have broken when he put

223
the trunk   on the  dolly.  Or  maybe while  he was bumping   and thumping   his



way along the path  to  this very  location. He  had dug  the hole in  a hurry  and



muscled the trunk  in as fast as he could. Wanting to get out  of there and much



too busy to  notice a little   thing  like  a broken handle. That  was it.  Had to  be.



After all,  the trunk  hadn’t been new when he bought it.



    He  grasps the sides, and the trunk slides out of its hole so easily that Morris



overbalances and ﬂops on his back. He lies there, staring up at the bright  bowl



of the moon, and tries  to tell  himself  nothing  is wrong. Only  he knows better.



He might  be able to talk  himself  out of  the broken handle, but  not out  of this



new thing.



    The  trunk  is too light.



    Morris  scrambles back to a sitting  position with  smears of dirt now  sticking



to his  damp skin.  He  brushes his  hair off  his  forehead with  a shaking  hand,



leaving a fresh streak.



    The  trunk  is too light.



    He  reaches for it, then draws back.



    I  can’t,  he thinks.  I  can’t.  If  I  open it  and  the notebooks aren’t  there, I’ll



just . . . snap.



    But  why  would anyone take a bunch of notebooks? The money, yes, but the



notebooks? There wasn’t even any space left to write in most of them;  in most,



Rothstein had used it all.



    What   if   someone took  the  money  and then   burned the notebooks? Not



understanding their  incalculable value, just  wanting  to  get rid  of something  a



thief might  see as evidence?



    “No,”   Morris  whispers. “No  one would do  that. They’re  still  in there.  They



have to be.”



    But  the trunk  is too light.



    He  stares at it, a small exhumed cofﬁn tilted   on the bank in  the moonlight.



Behind it  is the hole, gaping like  a mouth that  has just vomited  something up.



Morris reaches for the trunk again, hesitates, then lunges forward and snaps the



latches up, praying to a God he knows cares nothing for the likes of him.



    He  looks in.

224
    The  trunk  is not  quite empty.  The plastic he lined  it  with  is still   there. He



pulls it   out  in a  crackling  cloud, hoping  that  a few  of the  notebooks are left



underneath—two or three, or  oh please God even just one—but there are just a



few small trickles of dirt  caught in  the corners.



    Morris   puts his  ﬁlthy  hands to  his face—once young,  now deeply  lined—



and begins to cry in the moonlight.







                                                             28





He promised to  return the  truck  by ten, but  it’s after  midnight  when  he parks



it  behind Statewide  Motorcycle and  puts the  keys back under the  right   front



tire.  He  doesn’t  bother  with   the  tools  or  the   empty  Tuff  Totes  that  were



supposed to be full; let Charlie Roberson have them if he wants them.



    The  lights  of the minor  league ﬁeld four blocks over have been turned off an



hour  ago. The  stadium  buses have stopped  running,   but  the  bars—in  this



neighborhood there  are a lot  of them—are  roaring  away with  live  bands and



jukebox music,  their  doors  open, men  and women  in  Groundhogs tee-shirts



and caps standing out on the sidewalks, smoking  cigarettes and drinking  from



plastic cups.  Morris  plods  past them  without   looking,   ignoring   a couple  of



friendly yells  from inebriated baseball fans, high on beer and a home team win,



asking him if  he wants a drink. Soon the bars are behind him.



    He  has stopped obsessing about McFarland,  and the  thought   of the  three



mile walk  back to Bugshit Manor  never crosses his mind. He doesn’t care about



his aching legs, either. It’s as if they  belong to someone else. He feels as empty



as that old  trunk  in  the  moonlight.   Everything  he’s lived  for during   the last



thirty-six  years has been swept away like a shack in a ﬂood.



    He  comes to Government Square, and that’s where his legs ﬁnally  give out.



He doesn’t  so much  sit  on one  of the  benches as collapse there. He  glances



around dully   at the  empty  expanse of concrete, realizing  that   he’d probably



look mighty  suspicious to any cops passing in a squad car. He’s not supposed to

225
be out  this late  anyway (like  a teenager, he has a curfew), but what  does that



matter? Shit  don’t  mean shit.  Let them  send him  back to  Waynesville.  Why



not? At least there he won’t have to deal with  his fat fuck boss anymore. Or pee



while Ellis  McFarland watches.



    Across  the   street  is  the  Happy   Cup,  where  he  had  so  many  pleasant



conversations about books with   Andrew  Halliday.  Not   to  mention  their  last



conversation, which was far from pleasant. Stay clear of me, Andy had said. That



was how the last conversation had ended.



    Morris’s  brains, which  have been idling   in  neutral,  suddenly engage again



and the dazed look in his eyes begins to clear. Stay clear of me or I’ll call the police



myself, Andy had said . . . but  that wasn’t all  he said that  day. His old  pal had



also given him some advice.



    Hide them somewhere. Bury them.



    Had  Andy Halliday   really said that, or was it only  his imagination?



    “He   said it,”   Morris   whispers. He  looks  at his  hands and  sees they have



rolled themselves into  grimy  ﬁsts.  “He  said it,  all  right.   Hide  them,  he said.



Bury them.” Which  leads to certain questions.



    Like  who was the only person who knew he had the Rothstein notebooks?



    Like  who  was the  only person who  had actually  seen one of the Rothstein



notebooks?



    Like  who knew where he had lived in the old  days?



    And—here   was a big  one—who  knew  about  that  stretch  of undeveloped



land, an overgrown couple of  acres caught in an endless lawsuit and used only



by kids cutting  across to the Birch Street Rec?



    The  answer to all these questions is the same.



    Maybe we can revisit this in ten years, his old pal had said. Maybe in twenty.



    Well,   it  had been a fuck of a lot  longer than ten  or twenty, hadn’t  it? Time



had gone  slip-sliding    away. Enough  for  his   old  pal  to   meditate  on  those



valuable notebooks, which had never turned up—not  when Morris was arrested



for rape and not later on, when the house was sold.



    Had  his  old pal  at some point  decided to  visit  Morris’s old  neighborhood?



Perhaps to stroll any number  of times along the  path between Sycamore Street

226
and Birch? Had he perhaps made those strolls with  a metal detector, hoping  it



would sense the trunk’s metal ﬁttings  and start to beep?



    Did  Morris  even mention the trunk that day?



    Maybe  not, but  what  else could it  be? What else made sense? Even a large



strongbox would  be too small. Paper or canvas bags would have rotted. Morris



wonders how  many  holes Andy  had  to  dig  before he  ﬁnally   hit  paydirt.   A



dozen? Four dozen? Four dozen was a lot, but back in the seventies, Andy had



been fairly trim,   not a waddling  fat fuck  like  he was now. And the motivation



would have been there. Or maybe he didn’t have to dig  any holes at all. Maybe



there had been a spring ﬂood or something, and the bank had eroded enough to



reveal the trunk in  its cradle of roots. Wasn’t that possible?



    Morris   gets up  and  walks  on, now  thinking    about  McFarland again  and



occasionally glancing around to make sure he isn’t there. It  matters again now,



because now he has something to live  for  again. A  goal. It’s  possible that  his



old pal  has sold the notebooks, selling is  his business as sure as it was Jimmy



Gold’s in The Runner Slows Down, but it’s just as possible that he’s still  sitting



on some or all of them. There’s only one sure way to ﬁnd out, and only one way



to ﬁnd out  if the old  wolf still  has some teeth. He has to pay his homie a visit.



    His  old pal.

227
PART 3:   PETER  AND  THE  WOLF

228
                                                              1





It’s Saturday afternoon  in  the  city, and  Hodges is  at  the movies  with  Holly.



They engage in  a  lively  negotiation   while  looking   at  the  showtimes in  the



lobby  of  the  AMC  City   Center  7.  His  suggestion  of The  Purge: Anarchy is



rejected as too  scary. Holly   enjoys scary  movies, she says, but   only  on  her



computer, where she can pause the ﬁlm and walk  around for  a few minutes to



release the tension. Her counter-suggestion of The Fault in Our Stars is rejected



by Hodges, who says it will  be too sentimental.  What  he actually means is too



emotional. A  story about someone dying young  will  make him  think   of Janey



Patterson, who left the world  in  an explosion meant to kill  him.  They settle on



22 Jump Street, a comedy with   Jonah Hill   and  Channing  Tatum.  It’s  pretty



good. They  laugh  a lot  and share a big   tub  of popcorn,  but  Hodges’s mind



keeps returning   to  Tina’s  story   about  the  money  that   helped  her  parents



through  the bad years. Where in  God’s name could Peter Saubers have gotten



his hands on over twenty thousand dollars?



    As  the credits  are rolling,   Holly  puts  her hand  over Hodges’s, and he is a



little  alarmed to see tears standing in her eyes. He asks her what’s wrong.



    “Nothing.    It’s just  nice to have someone to go to the movies with.  I’m  glad



you’re my friend, Bill.”



    Hodges  is more  than touched.  “And  I’m   glad you’re  mine.  What  are you



going to do with  the rest of your Saturday?”



    “Tonight   I’m   going  to  order  in  Chinese and  binge  on Orange Is the New



Black,”  she  says. “But   this   afternoon  I’m   going   online   to   look  at   more



robberies. I’ve already got quite a list.”



    “Do  any of them look  likely  to you?”



    She shakes her head. “I’m going to  keep looking, but  I  think  it’s something



else, although  I  don’t  have any  idea what  it  could  be.  Do  you think   Tina’s



brother will  tell  you?”

229
    At   ﬁrst he doesn’t answer. They’re making  their way  up the aisle, and soon



they’ll be away from this  oasis of make-believe and back in the real world.



    “Bill?   Earth to Bill?”



    “I  certainly  hope so,” he says at last. “For his own sake. Because money from



nowhere almost always spells trouble.”






                                                              2





Tina and  Barbara and Barbara’s mother spend that  Saturday afternoon  in  the



Robinson  kitchen,   making    popcorn  balls,   an  operation   both   messy and



hilarious. They are having a blast, and for the  ﬁrst time  since she came to visit,



Tina doesn’t  seem troubled.  Tanya Robinson  thinks  that’s  good. She doesn’t



know what  the deal is  with  Tina,  but  a dozen little  things—like   the  way the



girl  jumps  when  a draft  slams an upstairs  door  shut, or  the  suspicious I’ve-



been-crying  redness of her  eyes—tells Tanya  that  something  is  wrong.  She



doesn’t know if that  something is big  or little,   but one thing  she’s sure of: Tina



Saubers can use a little hilarity in her life just  about now.



    They  are ﬁnishing up—and  threatening  each other with  syrup-sticky  hands



—when  an amused voice says, “Look at  all  these womenfolk  dashing around



the kitchen. I  do declare.”



    Barbara whirls,  sees her brother leaning in the kitchen doorway, and screams



“Jerome!” She runs to him and leaps. He  catches her, whirls her around  twice,



and sets her down.



    “I  thought  you were going to  a cotillion!”



    Jerome smiles. “Alas,  my tux  went back to  the rental place unworn.  After a



full  and fair  exchange of views, Priscilla  and I  have agreed to break up.  It’s a



long story, and not  very interesting.  Anyway, I  decided to drive  home and get



some of my ma’s cooking.”



    “Don’t   call  me Ma,”  Tanya says. “It’s vulgar.”  But  she also looks  mightily



pleased to see Jerome.

230
    He  turns to  Tina and gives a small bow. “Pleased to meet you, little  ma’am.



Any friend  of Barbara’s, and so forth.”



    “I’m   Tina.”



    She manages to say this in a tone of voice that’s almost normal, but doing so



isn’t  easy. Jerome is  tall,   Jerome is  broad-shouldered,  Jerome is  extremely



handsome, and Tina Saubers falls in love with  him  immediately. Soon she will



be calculating  how  old  she’ll  need to  be  before he might   look  upon  her  as



something more than a little   ma’am in an oversized apron, her hands all sticky



from making  popcorn balls. For  the time  being, however, she’s too stunned by



his beauty to  run  the numbers.  And  later that  evening,  it  doesn’t take much



urging  from Barbara for  Tina to  tell  him  everything. Although   it’s not  always



easy for her to keep her place in the story, with his dark eyes on her.






                                                              3





Pete’s Saturday afternoon isn’t nearly as good. In fact, it’s fairly shitty.



    At  two  o’clock, class ofﬁcers and ofﬁcers-elect from three high schools crowd



into  the  River  Bend Resort’s largest conference room  to  listen  as one of the



state’s two  U.S.  senators gives a long   and boring   talk  titled   “High    School



Governance: Your  Introduction   to  Politics   and  Service.” This   fellow,  who’s



wearing a three-piece suit  and sporting  a luxuriant,  swept-back head of white



hair (what  Pete thinks   of as “soap opera villain   hair”),  seems ready to go  on



until  dinnertime.  Possibly longer. His  thesis seems to be something about how



they are the NEXT  GENERATION,    and being class ofﬁcers will prepare them



to deal with   pollution,   global  warming,  diminishing   resources, and, perhaps,



ﬁrst contact  with   aliens from  Proxima Centauri.  Each minute   of this  endless



Saturday afternoon dies a slow and miserable death as he drones on.



    Pete couldn’t  care less about assuming the mantle of student  vice president



at Northﬁeld  High  this  coming September. As far as he’s concerned, September



might  as well   be out  there  on  Proxima  Centauri  with  the  aliens.  The only

231
future  that  matters is  this  coming  Monday afternoon,  when he will   confront



Andrew Halliday,  a man he now wishes most heartily that he had never met.



    But  I  can work  my way out  of this,  he thinks.  If  I  can hold my  nerve, that



is. And keep in mind  what  Jimmy Gold’s elderly  aunt says in The Runner Raises



the Flag.



    Pete has decided he’ll begin his  conversation with Halliday   by quoting  that



line: They say half a loaf is better than none, Jimmy, but in a world of want, even a



single slice is better than none.



    Pete knows what Halliday  wants, and will  offer more than  a single slice, but



not half  a loaf, and certainly not  the whole  thing.  That  is simply  not going  to



happen. With  the  notebooks safely hidden away in  the basement of the Birch



Street Rec, he can afford to negotiate, and if Halliday  wants anything at all  out



of this, he’ll  have to negotiate, too.



    No  more ultimatums.



    I’ll   give you three dozen notebooks, Pete imagines saying. They contain poems,



essays, and nine complete short stories. I’m even going to split ﬁfty-ﬁfty, just to be done



with you.



    He  has to insist  on getting  money, although  with  no way  of verifying  how



much Halliday   actually receives from his  buyer or  buyers, Pete supposes he’ll



be cheated  out  of  his  fair   share, and  cheated badly.  But   that’s  okay. The



important  thing   is  making  sure  Halliday   knows he’s serious.  That  he’s not



going  to be,  in  Jimmy  Gold’s  pungent  phrase, anyone’s birthday fuck.  Even



more important  is not letting  Halliday  see how scared he is.



    How  terriﬁed.



    The  senator winds  up  with   a few  ringing   phrases about how  the VITAL



WORK    of   the   NEXT     GENERATION     begins   in   AMERICA’S    HIGH



SCHOOLS, and how  they, the chosen few, must  carry forward  THE  TORCH



OF DEMOCRACY.   The applause is enthusiastic, possibly  because the lecture



is ﬁnally  over and they get  to leave. Pete wants desperately to get out  of here,



go for a long walk,  and check his plan a few more times,  looking  for loopholes



and stumbling  blocks.

232
    Only   they don’t  get  to leave. The  high  school principal  who  has arranged



this afternoon’s endless chat with greatness steps forward to announce that the



senator has agreed to stay another hour and answer their  questions. “I’m   sure



you have lots,” she says, and the hands of the butt-lickers   and grade-grubbers



—there seem to be plenty of both in  attendance—shoot up immediately.



    Pete thinks,  This shit  don’t mean shit.



    He  looks at  the door, calculates his chances of slipping  through  it  without



being noticed, and settles back into  his seat. A week from  now, all this  will  be



over, he tells himself.



    The  thought brings  him  some comfort.






                                                              4





A certain recent parolee wakes up as Hodges and Holly are leaving their movie



and Tina is falling  in  love with  Barbara’s brother. Morris has slept all  morning



and part of the  afternoon following  a wakeful,  fretful  night,  only  dropping  off



as the ﬁrst  light  of  that  Saturday morning  began to creep into  his  room. His



dreams have been worse than bad. In  the  one that  woke him,  he  opened the



trunk  to  ﬁnd  it  full  of  black widow  spiders, thousands of them,  all  entwined



and gorged with  poison  and pulsing  in  the moonlight.   They  came streaming



out, pouring  over his hands and clittering up his  arms.



    Morris  gasps and chokes his way back into the real world, hugging  his chest



so tightly  he can barely breathe.



    He  swings his  legs out of bed  and sits there with  his  head down, the same



way he  sat on  the  toilet   after  McFarland  exited  the  MAC  men’s  room  the



previous  afternoon.   It’s   the   not   knowing    that’s   killing    him,    and   that



uncertainty cannot be laid to rest too soon.



    Andy  must have taken them, he thinks.  Nothing  else makes sense. And you



better still  have them, pal. God help you if  you don’t.

233
    He  puts on a fresh pair of jeans and takes a crosstown bus over to the South



Side, because he’s decided he wants at least one of his tools, after all. He’ll also



take back the Tuff Totes. Because you had to think positive.



    Charlie  Roberson is  once more seated in  front  of the  Harley,  now so torn



down it  hardly  looks like  a motorcycle at all.  He doesn’t seem terribly  pleased



at this  reappearance of the man who helped get him  out  of jail.  “How’d   it  go



last night? Did  you do what you needed to do?”



    “Everything’s   ﬁne,” Morris   says, and offers a smile that  feels too wide  and



loose to be convincing. “Four-oh.”



    Roberson  doesn’t smile  back. “As  long  as ﬁve-o isn’t  involved.  You  don’t



look so great, Morrie.”



    “Well,   you know.  Things rarely  get taken care of all  at once. I’ve got  a few



more details to iron out.”



    “If  you need the truck  again—”



    “No,  no. I  left a couple of things in  it,  is all. Okay if  I grab them?”



    “It’s  nothing  that’s going  to come back on me later, is it?”



    “Absolutely   not. Just a couple of bags.”



    And  the hatchet, but  he neglects to mention that.  He could buy a knife,  but



there’s something scary about a  hatchet. Morris  drops  it  into  one of  the Tuff



Totes, tells Charlie so long, and heads back to the bus stop.  The hatchet slides



back and forth in the bag with  each swing of his arms.



    Don’t make me use it, he will tell Andy. I don’t want to hurt you.



    But  of  course part of him  does want to use it. Part of him  does want to hurt



his old  pal. Because—notebooks aside—he’s owed a payback, and payback’s a



bitch.






                                                              5





Lacemaker Lane and the  walking  mall   of which   it  is  a part  is  busy on  this



Saturday afternoon. There are hundreds of shops with cutie-poo names like Deb

234
and Buckle  and Forever 21. There’s also one called  Lids, which  sells nothing



but hats. Morris  stops in  there and buys a Groundhogs cap with  an extra-long



brim.  A  little   closer to  Andrew   Halliday  Rare  Editions,  he stops  again and



purchases a pair of shades at a Sunglass Hut kiosk.



    Just  as he spots the  sign  of his  old  pal’s business establishment,  with  its



scrolled gold leaf lettering,   a dismaying  thought  occurs to him:  what  if  Andy



closes early on Saturday? All the  other  shops seem to be open, but  some rare



bookstores keep lazy hours, and wouldn’t that be just his luck?



    But   when  he  walks  past,  swinging   the  totes  (clunk and  bump goes the



hatchet), secure behind his new shades, he sees the OPEN sign hanging in the



door. He sees something else, as well: cameras peeking left and right along the



sidewalk. There are probably more inside, too, but  that’s okay; Morris has done



decades of postgraduate work with thieves.



    He  idles up  the street, looking  in the  window  of a bakery and scanning the



wares of a souvenir vendor’s cart (although Morris  can’t imagine who’d  want a



souvenir of this  dirty   little   lakefront  city).  He  even pauses to watch  a mime



who juggles  colored balls  and then  pretends to  climb  invisible  stairs.  Morris



tosses a couple of quarters into the mime’s hat. For good luck, he tells  himself.



Pop music   pours  down  from  streetcorner  loudspeakers. There’s  a smell   of



chocolate in the air.



    He   walks  back.  He   sees a couple  of   young  men  come  out  of   Andy’s



bookshop and head off down the sidewalk.  This time  Morris  pauses to look in



the display window,  where three books are open on stands beneath pinspots: To



Kill  a Mockingbird, The Catcher in the Rye, and—surely it’s an omen—The Runner



Sees Action. The shop beyond the window is narrow and high- ceilinged. He sees



no other customers, but he does see his old pal, the one and only Andy Halliday,



sitting  at the desk halfway down, reading a paperback.



    Morris   pretends to tie  his  shoe and unzips the  Tuff  Tote with  the  hatchet



inside. Then  he  stands and,  with   no  hesitation,  opens the  door  of  Andrew



Halliday  Rare Editions.



    His   old  pal looks  up  from  his  book and  scopes the sunglasses, the long-



brimmed  cap, the  tote bags. He  frowns,  but  only a  little,   because everyone in

235
this area is carrying bags, and the day is warm  and bright.  Morris  sees caution



but no signs of real alarm, which is good.



    “Would   you  mind  putting   your bags under  the coatrack?” Andy  asks. He



smiles. “Store policy.”



    “Not    at  all,”   Morris   says. He   puts  the   Tuff  Totes  down,  removes  his



sunglasses, folds the bows, and slides them into his shirt pocket. Then he takes



off his new hat  and runs a hand through  the  short scruff of  his white  hair. He



thinks, See? Just an elderly geezer who’s come in to get out of the hot  sun and



do a little   browsing.  Nothing   to  worry  about  here. “Whew!   It’s  hot  outside



today.” He puts his cap back on.



    “Yes, and they  say tomorrow’s going to be even hotter. Can I  help you with



something special?”



    “Just  browsing.  Although   .  . .  I  have been looking  for  a rather  rare book



called The Executioners. It’s by a mystery novelist named John D. MacDonald.”



MacDonald’s books were very popular in the prison library.



    “Know    him   well!”   Andy   says jovially.   “Wrote   all  those  Travis  McGee



stories. The ones with  colors in the  titles.  Paperback writer  for the most  part,



wasn’t he? I don’t deal in paperbacks, as a rule; very few of collectible quality.”



    What   about notebooks? Morris  thinks.  Moleskines,  to be  speciﬁc. Do you



deal in those, you fat, thieving fuck?



    “The Executioners was published in hardcover,” he says, examining a shelf of



books near the door. He wants to stay close to the door for the time being. And



the bag with  the hatchet in  it.  “It  was the basis of a movie called Cape Fear. I’d



buy a  copy of  that,  if  you happened to  have one in  mint   condition.  What   I



believe you people call very ﬁne as new. And if the price was right, of course.”



    Andy  looks engaged now, and why not? He has a ﬁsh on the line. “I’m sure I



don’t have it in  stock, but  I could  check BookFinder for you. That’s a database.



If it’s  listed, and a MacDonald  hardcover probably is, especially if  it  was made



into a ﬁlm  . .  . and if it’s  a ﬁrst edition  . .  . I could  probably have it  for you by



Tuesday. Wednesday at the latest. Would you like me to look?”



    “I  would,”  Morris  says. “But the price has to be right.”

236
    “Naturally,   naturally.”  Andy’s chuckle is as fat as his gut. He lowers his eyes



to  the  screen of his  laptop.   As soon  as he does  this,  Morris  ﬂips   the  sign



hanging in  the  door from  OPEN  to  CLOSED. He  bends down and  takes the



hatchet from the open duffel  bag. He moves up the narrow central aisle with  it



held  beside his  leg.  He   doesn’t hurry.  He   doesn’t have  to  hurry.  Andy   is



clicking  away at his laptop and absorbed by whatever he’s seeing on the screen.



    “Found  it!”   his old  pal exclaims. “James Graham has one, very ﬁne as new,



for just three hundred dol—”



    He  ceases speaking as the blade of the hatchet ﬂoats ﬁrst into his peripheral



vision, then front  and center. He looks up, his face slack with shock.



    “I  want  your hands where I can see them,” Morris says. “There’s probably an



alarm button  in the kneehole of your desk. If  you want to keep all your  ﬁngers,



don’t reach for it.”



    “What   do you want? Why  are you—”



    “Don’t   recognize me, do you?”  Morris  doesn’t know whether  to be amused



by this or infuriated.  “Not  even right  up close and personal.”



    “No,  I  . . . I  . . .”



    “Not   surprising,  I  guess. It’s been a long time since the Happy  Cup, hasn’t



it?”



    Halliday    stares  into    Morris’s   lined   and   haggard   face  with    dreadful



fascination. Morris thinks,  He’s like a bird  looking  at a snake. This is a pleasant



thought, and makes him smile.



    “Oh  my  God,” Andy  says. His face has gone the color of old cheese. “It can’t



be you. You’re in jail.”



    Morris   shakes his  head,  still   smiling.    “There’s probably   a  database for



parolees as well as rare books, but I’m guessing you never checked it. Good for



me, not so good for you.”



    One  of  Andy’s  hands is  creeping  away from  the  keyboard  of his  laptop.



Morris wiggles the  hatchet.



    “Don’t    do that,   Andy.  I  want  to   see your hands  on  either  side of  your



computer, palms down. Don’t  try  to  hit  the button  with  your  knee, either. I’ll

237
know  if   you  try,  and  the  consequences for you  will    be unpleasant  in   the



extreme.”



    “What   do you want?”



    The  question  makes  him  angry,  but  his  smile  widens.  “As  if   you  don’t



know.”



    “I   don’t,  Morrie,   my  God!”  Andy’s  mouth   is lying   but   his eyes tell   the



truth,  the whole truth,  and nothing  but the truth.



    “Let’s go in  your ofﬁce. I’m  sure you have one back there.”



    “No!”



    Morris   wiggles  the  hatchet again.  “You  can come  out  of this   whole  and



intact,  or  with  some of  your  ﬁngers lying   on  the desk.  Believe me  on this,



Andy. I’m  not the man you knew.”



    Andy  gets up,  his eyes never leaving Morris’s face, but Morris  isn’t sure his



old pal  is actually  seeing him  anymore. He  sways as if to invisible   music, on



the verge of passing out. If  he does that, he won’t  be able to  answer questions



until  he comes around. Also, Morris would  have to drag him to  the ofﬁce. He’s



not sure he can do that; if Andy  doesn’t tip the scales at three hundred, he’s got



to be pushing it.



    “Take  a deep breath,”  he  says. “Calm down.  All   I  want  is a few  answers.



Then I’m gone.”



    “You  promise?” Andy’s lower  lip  is pushed out, shining  with  spit. He  looks



like a fat little  boy who’s in  dutch with  his father.



    “Yes. Now  breathe.”



    Andy  breathes.



    “Again.”



    Andy’s  massive chest rises, straining the buttons of his shirt,  then lowers. A



bit of his color  comes back.



    “Ofﬁce.  Now. Do  it.”



    Andy  turns  and lumbers to  the back of the  store, weaving his way between



boxes and stacks of books with the  ﬁnicky  grace some fat men possess. Morris



follows. His  anger is growing. It’s  something about the girlish   ﬂex and sway of



Andy’s buttocks, clad in gray gabardine trousers, that fuels it.

238
    There’s a keypad beside the door. Andy  punches in four numbers—9118—



and a green light ﬂashes. As he enters, Morris reads his mind right through  the



back of his bald head.



    “You’re  not  quick  enough to slam the  door on me.  If you  try, you’re  going



to lose something that can’t be replaced. Count on it.”



    Andy’s  shoulders, which  have risen as he tenses to make just this  attempt,



slump again. He steps in. Morris follows  and closes the door.



    The  ofﬁce is  small, lined  with   stuffed  bookshelves, lit  by hanging  globes.



On the  ﬂoor is  a Turkish  rug. The  desk in  here is much  nicer—mahogany or



teak or some other expensive wood. On it is a lamp with  a shade that looks like



real Tiffany glass. To the left  of the door  is a sideboard with  four heavy crystal



decanters on it. Morris doesn’t know about the two  containing  clear liquid,  but



he bets the others hold  scotch and bourbon.  The good  stuff, too,  if  he knows



his old pal. For toasting big  sales, no doubt.



    Morris  remembers the only  kinds  of booze available in the  joint,  prunejack



and raisinjack,  and  even though  he only   imbibed  on  rare occasions like  his



birthday (and John Rothstein’s, which  he always marked with a single jolt),  his



anger grows. Good booze to drink and good food to gobble—that’s  what Andy



Halliday  had while  Morris  was dyeing  bluejeans, inhaling  varnish fumes, and



living  in a cell not  much bigger than  a cofﬁn. He was in the joint  for rape, true



enough, but   he never  would  have been  in  that  alley,  in  a  furious  drunken



blackout,  if  this  man  had  not  denied him   and sent  him  packing.   Morris, I



shouldn’t even be seen with you. That’s what he said that day. And then called him



batshit-crazy.



    “Luxy  accommodations, my friend.”



    Andy  looks around  as if noting  the luxy  accommodations for the ﬁrst  time.



“It  looks that  way,” he admits, “but  appearances can be deceiving, Morrie. The



truth  is, I’m  next door to broke. This  place never came back from the recession,



and from certain . . . allegations. You have to believe that.”



    Morris  rarely  thinks  about the money  envelopes Curtis Rogers found along



with  the  notebooks in  Rothstein’s safe that  night,  but  he  thinks  about them



now. His  old pal  got the  cash as well as the notebooks. For all  Morris  knows,

239
that money  paid for  the desk, and  the rug,  and the  fancy crystal decanters of



booze.



    At  this,  the balloon  of rage ﬁnally  bursts and Morris  slings the hatchet in  a



low sideways arc, his cap tumbling   from  his head. The  hatchet bites  through



gray gabardine and buries  itself  in  the bloated  buttock  beneath with  a chump



sound. Andy screams and stumbles forward.  He breaks his fall  on the  edge of



his desk with  his forearms, then goes to his  knees. Blood pours through  a six-



inch slit  in his  pants. He claps a hand over it and more blood runs  through his



ﬁngers. He  falls  on his  side, then  rolls  over on the  Turkish  rug.  With   some



satisfaction, Morris thinks,  You’ll  never get that stain out, homie.



    Andy  squalls, “You said you wouldn’t  hurt  me!”



    Morris  considers this and shakes his head. “I don’t believe I ever said that in



so many words, although  I  suppose I  might  have implied   it.”  He  stares into



Andy’s contorted  face with  serious sincerity. “Think   of  it  as DIY  liposuction.



And  you can still   come out  of  this  alive. All   you have to  do  is give  me the



notebooks. Where are they?”



    This  time  Andy  doesn’t pretend not to  know  what Morris  is talking   about,



not with   his ass on ﬁre and blood  seeping out from  beneath one hip.  “I  don’t



have them!”



    Morris   drops to  one knee, careful  to  avoid the  growing  pool  of  blood.  “I



don’t believe you.  They’re gone, nothing  left  but  the  trunk  they  were in, and



nobody knew I  had them  but  you. So I’m  going  to  ask you again, and if  you



don’t want to  get a close look at your own guts and whatever you ate for lunch,



you should be careful how you answer. Where are the notebooks?”



    “A   kid  found them!  It  wasn’t me, it  was a kid!  He  lives in your  old house,



Morrie! He  must have found them buried in  the basement, or something!”



    Morris   stares into  his  old  pal’s face. He’s  looking  for  a  lie,  but  he’s also



trying  to cope with this  sudden rearrangement of what he thought he knew. It’s



like a hard left turn  in  a car doing sixty.



    “Please, Morrie, please! His name is Peter Saubers!”



    It’s  the convincer, because Morris knows the name of the  family  now living



in  the house where he  grew up.  Besides, a man  with  a  deep gash in  his ass

240
could hardly make up such speciﬁcs on the spur of the moment.



    “How   do you know that?”



    “Because he’s trying to sell them to me! Morrie, I need a doctor! I’m bleeding



like a stuck pig!”



    You are a pig, Morris  thinks.  But  don’t  worry, old pal,  pretty  soon you’ll be



out of your misery. I’m  going  to send you to that  big bookstore in  the sky. But



not yet, because Morris sees a bright ray of hope.



    He’s trying, Andy said, not He tried.



    “Tell  me everything,”  Morris  says. “Then I’ll  leave. You’ll have to call for  an



ambulance yourself, but I’m sure you can manage that.”



    “How   do I know you’re telling   the truth?”



    “Because if  the kid   has the notebooks, I  have no more  interest in  you.  Of



course, you have to promise not  to  tell  them  who  hurt  you. It  was a masked



man, wasn’t it? Probably a drug addict. He  wanted money, right?”



    Andy  nods eagerly.



    “It   had nothing to  do with  the notebooks, right?”



    “No,  nothing!   You think  I want my  name involved with  this?”



    “I   suppose not. But  if  you  tried  making  up  some story—and  if  my name



was in that story—I’d  have to come back.”



    “I   won’t,  Morrie,   I  won’t!”   Next   comes a declaration  as childish  as that



pushed-out, spit-shiny lower  lip: “Honest  injun!”



    “Then  tell  me everything.”



    Andy   does. Saubers’s ﬁrst visit, with   photocopies from  the  notebooks and



Dispatches from Olympus for comparison. Andy’s identiﬁcation of the boy calling



himself James Hawkins, using no  more than the library  sticker  on the spine of



Dispatches. The boy’s second visit, when Andy turned the  screws on him.  The



voicemail about  the weekend class-ofﬁcer trip  to  River  Bend  Resort, and the



promise to come in Monday afternoon, just two  days from now.



    “What   time on Monday?”



    “He  . . .  he didn’t say. After school, I’d assume. He goes to Northﬁeld High.



Morrie, I’m  still  bleeding.”

241
    “Yes,”  Morris  says absently. “I guess you are.” He’s thinking   furiously.  The



boy claims  to   have all  the  notebooks.  He  might   be  lying   about that,   but



probably not.  The number of  them that  he quoted to  Andy  sounds right.  And



he’s read them. This ignites a spark of poison jealousy in Morris Bellamy’s head



and lights  a  ﬁre that  quickly   spreads to his  heart. The  Saubers boy has read



what was  meant for  Morris  and  Morris  alone. This  is  a grave  injustice,  and



must be addressed.



    He  leans closer to Andy and says, “Are you gay? You are, aren’t you?”



    Andy’s  eyes ﬂutter.  “Am  I  .  .  . what  does that  matter?  Morrie,  I  need an



ambulance!”



    “Do  you have a partner?”



    His   old  pal  is  hurt,   but   not  stupid.   He  can  see what  such a  question



portends. “Yes!”



    No,  Morris  thinks,  and swings the hatchet: chump.



    Andy  screams and begins to writhe on  the bloody rug.  Morris  swings again



and Andy  screams again. Lucky  the room’s lined  with   books, Morris   thinks.



Books make good insulation.



    “Hold   still,  damn you,”  he says, but Andy doesn’t. It takes four blows in all.



The last one comes down above the bridge of Andy’s nose, splitting both  of his



eyes like grapes, and at last  the writhing    stops. Morris  pulls  the hatchet  free



with  a low squall of steel on bone and drops it  on the rug  beside one of Andy’s



outstretched hands. “There,” he says. “All ﬁnished.”



    The  rug is sodden with  blood. The  front of  the desk is beaded with it.  So is



one of the  walls,  and Morris  himself.  The  inner  ofﬁce is your  basic abbatoir.



This  doesn’t upset  Morris   much;  he’s pretty   calm.  It’s  probably   shock, he



thinks, but  so what if it  is? He needs to be calm. Upset people forget things.



    There  are two  doors behind  the  desk. One  opens on his  old  pal’s private



bathroom,  the  other  on  a closet.  There are  plenty  of  clothes  in  the  closet,



including  two  suits that  look  expensive. They’re of no use to  Morris,  though.



He’d ﬂoat in  them.



    He  wishes the bathroom  had a shower, but if  wishes were horses, et cetera,



et cetera. He’ll  make do  with  the  basin. As he strips  off  his bloody  shirt  and

242
washes up, he tries to replay everything he touched since entering the shop. He



doesn’t believe there’s much. He will  have to remember to wipe  down the sign



hanging in  the  front  door, though.  Also  the doorknobs  of the  closet and this



bathroom.



    He  dries off  and goes back into  the  ofﬁce, dropping  the  towel and  bloody



shirt by the  body. His jeans are also spattered, a problem that’s easily solved by



what he ﬁnds on a shelf in the closet: at least two dozen tee-shirts, neatly folded



with  tissue  paper between  them.  He  ﬁnds  an XL   that  will   cover  his  jeans



halfway down  his thighs,   where the  worst of  the spotting   is, and  unfolds it.



ANDREW   HALLIDAY   RARE  EDITIONS   is printed  on the front,  along with



the shop’s telephone number, website address, and an image of an open book.



Morris  thinks,  He  probably  gives these away to  big-money  customers. Who



take them, say thank you, and never wear them.



    He   starts  to  put  the  tee-shirt   on,  decides he  really  doesn’t want   to  be



walking  around  wearing  the location  of  his  latest  murder  on his  chest, and



turns it   inside-out.  The lettering   shows through  a little,   but  not  enough  for



anyone to read it, and the book could be any rectangular object.



    His  Dockers are a problem, though.  The tops are splattered with  blood  and



the soles are smeared with it. Morris studies his old  pal’s feet, nods judiciously,



and returns to  the closet. Andy’s waist  size may be almost twice  Morris’s,  but



their  shoe sizes look approximately the  same. He selects a pair  of loafers and



tries them  on. They pinch  a little,   and may leave a blister or two,  but  blisters



are a small price to pay for  what he has learned, and the long-delayed revenge



he has exacted.



    Also,  they’re damned ﬁne-looking  shoes.



    He   adds his  own  footwear  to  the   pile  of  gooey stuff   on  the  rug,  then



examines his cap. Not so much as a single spot. Good luck there. He puts it  on



and circles the ofﬁce, wiping  the surfaces he knows he touched and the ones he



might  have touched.



    He  kneels by  the  body one last  time  and searches the pockets, aware that



he’s getting  blood on  his hands again and  will  have to  wash them again.  Oh



well, so it goes.

243
    That’s  Vonnegut,  not  Rothstein,  he  thinks,  and laughs.  Literary  allusions



always please him.



    Andy’s  keys  are in  a front   pocket, his  wallet  tucked  against  the  buttock



Morris didn’t  split  with   the hatchet. More good  luck. Not  much  in the  way of



cash, less than thirty   dollars, but   a penny saved is a  penny et  cetera. Morris



tucks the bills  away along with  the  keys. Then he re-washes his hands and re-



wipes the faucet handles.



    Before leaving Andy’s sanctum sanctorum, he regards the hatchet. The blade



is smeared with gore  and hair. The rubber  handle clearly  bears his palmprint.



He should  probably take  it  along in  one of  the Tuff  Totes with   his shirt  and



shoes, but some  intuition—too deep for words but very powerful—tells   him  to



leave it, at least for the time being.



    Morris   picks   it  up,   wipes  the  blade  and  the  handle  to  get  rid   of  the



ﬁngerprints,  then sets it  gently  down on the  fancy desk. Like a warning.  Or  a



calling card.



    “Who   says I’m not a wolf,  Mr. McFarland?” he asks the empty ofﬁce. “Who



says?”



    Then  he leaves, using the blood-streaked towel to turn the knob.






                                                              6





In the  shop again, Morris deposits the bloody  stuff in  one of the bags and zips



it closed. Then he sits down to investigate Andy’s laptop.



    It’s  a Mac,  much nicer  than the  one in  the prison  library  but  basically the



same. Since it’s still  wide  awake, there’s no need to waste time  hunting   for a



password. There are lots  of business ﬁles on  the  screen, plus an app  marked



SECURITY  in   the  bar  at  the  bottom.  He’ll    want  to  investigate  that,  and



closely, but ﬁrst  he opens a ﬁle  marked JAMES  HAWKINS,    and yes, here is



the information   he wants: Peter Saubers’s address (which he knows), and also



Peter Saubers’s cell phone number, presumably gleaned from the voicemail his

244
old pal  mentioned.  His  father  is Thomas.  His  mother  is Linda.  His  sister  is



Tina.  There’s  even a  picture   of  young   Mr.  Saubers, aka  James Hawkins,



standing with   a bunch  of librarians  from  the  Garner Street branch,  a branch



Morris  knows well.  Below this  information—which    may come in  handy, who



knows,  who  knows—is  a  John  Rothstein  bibliography,   which   Morris  only



glances at; he knows Rothstein’s work by heart.



    Except  for the stuff  young Mr.  Saubers is sitting  on, of course. The stuff he



stole from its rightful   owner.



    There’s a notepad by the computer.  Morris  jots down the  boy’s cell number



and sticks  it   in  his  pocket.  Next   he opens  the  security  app and  clicks  on



CAMERAS.  Six views appear. Two show  Lacemaker Lane in all  its  consumer



glory. Two look  down  on the shop’s narrow interior.  The  ﬁfth  shows this  very



desk, with   Morris   sitting   behind  it   in  his  new  tee-shirt.   The  sixth  shows



Andy’s inner  ofﬁce, and the  body sprawled on the  Turkish  rug.  In black-and-



white, the splashes and splatters of blood look like ink.



    Morris  clicks  on this image, and it  ﬁlls  the screen. Arrow buttons  appear on



the bottom.  He  clicks  the double  arrow for  rewind,  waits, then  hits  play. He



watches, engrossed, as he murders his old pal all over again. Fascinating. Not a



home movie  he  wants  anyone to  see, however,  which  means the  laptop   is



coming with  him.



    He  unplugs  the various cords, including   the one leading  from  a shiny box



stamped VIGILANT   SECURITY   SYSTEMS. The cameras feed directly to the



laptop’s hard drive, and so there are no automatically made DVDs.  That makes



sense. A system like that  would be a little   too pricey  for a small  business like



Andrew Halliday   Rare Editions. But  one of the  cords he unplugged went  to a



disc-burner add-on, so his old pal  could have made DVDs from  stored security



footage if he had desired.



    Morris   hunts methodically   through  the  desk, looking  for  them.  There are



ﬁve drawers  in  all.   He  ﬁnds  nothing   of  interest  in   the  ﬁrst  four,  but   the



kneehole is locked. Morris ﬁnds this  suggestive. He sorts through  Andy’s keys,



selects the smallest, unlocks the drawer, and strikes paydirt. He  has no interest



in the  six or  eight  graphic  photos of his  old pal  fellating  a squat  young man

245
with  a lot  of  tattoos, but  there’s also a gun.  It’s  a prissy, overdecorated P238



SIG Sauer, red and black,  with  gold-inlaid   ﬂowers scrolling  down  the  barrel.



Morris  drops the clip  and sees it’s full.  There’s even one in the  pipe. He  puts



the clip  back in  and lays the gun  on the  desk—something  else to take along.



He searches deep into the drawer and ﬁnds an unmarked white envelope at the



very back,  the ﬂap  tucked  under  rather  than  sealed. He opens it,   expecting



more dirty  pix,  and is  delighted  to ﬁnd  money instead—at  least ﬁve hundred



dollars. His luck  is still  running.  He puts the envelope next to the SIG.



    There’s nothing  else, and he’s about decided that if  there are DVDs, Andy’s



locked them in  a safe somewhere. Yet Lady Luck is not quite done with Morris



Bellamy. When  he gets up, his shoulder bumps  an overloaded shelf to the left



of the desk. A bunch of old  books go tumbling  to the ﬂoor, and behind  them is



a slim stack of plastic DVD  cases bound together with rubber bands.



    “How   do you do,” Morris  says softly. “How do you do.”



    He  sits  back  down  and goes through  them  rapidly,   like  a man  shufﬂing



cards. Andy  has written  a name on  each in  black Sharpie. Only   the last  one



means anything to  him,  and it’s  the one he  was looking  for. “HAWKINS”     is



printed on the shiny  surface.



    He’s  had  plenty   of  breaks this   afternoon  (possibly  to  make  up  for   the



horrible disappointment  he suffered last night), but  there’s no point in  pushing



things. Morris  takes the computer, the gun, the  envelope with the money in  it,



and the HAWKINS    disc to  the front  of  the store. He  tucks them  into  one of



his totes, ignoring  the  people passing back and forth in  front.  If  you look  like



you belong  in  a place, most  people think   you do.  He  exits with   a conﬁdent



step, and locks the  door behind  him.  The  CLOSED sign  swings brieﬂy,  then



settles. Morris  pulls  down  the  long  visor  of  his  Groundhogs cap  and walks



away.



    He  makes one more stop before returning to  Bugshit  Manor, at a computer



café called Bytes ’N  Bites.  For  twelve of  Andy  Halliday’s  dollars,  he gets an



overpriced cup of  shitty  coffee and twenty  minutes  in  a carrel, at a computer



equipped with  a DVD  player. It  takes less than ﬁve minutes to be sure of what



he has: his old pal talking  to  a boy who appears to be wearing fake glasses and

246
his father’s  moustache. In  the  ﬁrst  clip,   Saubers has a book  that  has to   be



Dispatches from Olympus and an envelope containing several sheets of paper that



have to be the  photocopies Andy  mentioned.  In  the second clip,  Saubers and



Andy appear to be arguing. There’s no sound in either of these black-and-white



mini-movies,  which  is ﬁne.  The boy  could be saying  anything.  In  the second



one, the  argument one,  he could  even be saying  The  next time   I  come, I’ll



bring my  hatchet, you fat fuck.



    As  he leaves Bytes ’N Bites, Morris is smiling.   The man behind the counter



smiles back and says, “I guess you had a good time.”



    “Yes,”  says the man who has spent well over two-thirds  of his life  in prison.



“But  your coffee sucks, nerdboy. I ought to pour it on your fucking  head.”



    The  smile dies  on the counterman’s face. A  lot  of the  people who come in



here are crackpots. With those folks,  it’s best to  just keep quiet  and hope they



never come back.






                                                              7





Hodges told  Holly   he intended to  spend at least part  of his  weekend crashed



out in his  La-Z-Boy watching  baseball, and on Sunday afternoon he does watch



the ﬁrst three innings  of the Indians  game, but then a certain restlessness takes



hold  and he  decides to  pay a call.  Not   on  an old  pal,  but  certainly   an old



acquaintance. After each of  these visits he  tells himself  Okay,  that’s the  end,



this is pointless. He means it, too.  Then—four  weeks later, or eight, maybe ten



—he’ll  take the  ride  again. Something nags him  into  it.   Besides, the Indians



are already down to the Rangers by ﬁve, and it’s only the third inning.



    He  zaps off the  television, pulls  on an  old Police  Athletic  League tee-shirt



(in his  heavyset days he used to steer clear of tees, but  now  he likes  the way



they fall straight,  with  hardly  any belly-swell above the waist of his pants), and



locks up  the house. Trafﬁc  is light   on Sunday, and twenty  minutes  later  he’s



sliding  his Prius  into  a slot on  the third   deck of the  visitors’  parking  garage,

247
adjacent to the  vast and ever metastasizing concrete sprawl of  John M.  Kiner



Hospital. As he walks to  the parking garage elevator, he sends up a prayer as he



almost always does, thanking  God  that  he’s here as a visitor  rather than  as a



paying customer.  All  too  aware, even as he says this  very proper  thank-you,



that most  people become customers sooner or later, here or at one of the city’s



four other  ﬁne and not-so-ﬁne sickbays. No  one rides for  free, and in the  end,



even the most  seaworthy ship  goes down,  blub-blub-blub.    The only  way  to



balance that off, in Hodges’s opinion, is to make the most of every day aﬂoat.



    But  if  that’s true, what is he doing here?



    The  thought  recalls to mind  a snatch of poetry,  heard or read long ago and



lodged in his  brain by virtue  of its  simple rhyme:  Oh do not ask what is it, let us



go and make our visit.






                                                              8





It’s easy to  get lost  in  any big   city  hospital,  but  Hodges has made this  trip



plenty  of times,  and these days he’s more apt  to  give directions  than  ask for



them. The garage elevator takes him down to  a covered walkway; the walkway



takes him to  a lobby the size of a train  terminal;  the Corridor  A  elevator takes



him  up to  the  third  ﬂoor;  a skyway takes him   across Kiner Boulevard  to his



ﬁnal  destination,   where   the  walls   are  painted  a   soothing  pink    and  the



atmosphere is hushed. The sign above the reception desk reads:




           WELCOME TO LAKES REGION TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY CLINIC


          NO CELL PHONES OR TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICES ALLOWED


                           HELP US MAINTAIN A QUIET ENVIRONMENT


                                 WE APPRECIATE YOUR COOPERATION




    Hodges  goes to the desk, where his  visitor’s  badge is already waiting.  The



head nurse knows him; after four years, they are almost old friends.

248
    “How’s  your family,  Becky?”



    She says they are ﬁne.



    “Son’s broken arm mending?”



    She says it is.  The cast is off  and he’ll  be out of  the sling  in  another week,



two at most.



    “That’s  ﬁne. Is my boy in  his room or physical therapy?”



    She says he’s in his room.



    Hodges  ambles down  the hall  toward  Room  217,  where a certain  patient



resides at state expense. Before Hodges gets  there, he meets  the orderly  the



nurses call Library Al. He’s in  his sixties, and—as usual—he’s pushing a trolley



cart packed with paperbacks and newspapers. These days there’s a new addition



to his  little   arsenal of diversions:  a small  plastic tub   ﬁlled  with  handheld  e-



readers.



    “Hey,  Al,”  Hodges says. “How you doin?”



    Although   Al  is ordinarily  garrulous, this afternoon he seems half asleep, and



there are purple  circles under  his  eyes. Somebody had a hard night,   Hodges



thinks with   amusement. He knows the symptoms, having  had a few hard ones



himself. He  thinks  of  snapping his  ﬁngers in  front  of Al’s  eyes, sort of like  a



stage hypnotist, then  decides that would  be mean. Let  the man suffer the  tail



end of his hangover in  peace. If it’s this  bad in the  afternoon, Hodges hates to



think  of what it  must have been like this morning.



    But   Al   comes  to  and  smiles  before  Hodges  can  pass by.  “Hey   there,



Detective! Haven’t seen your face in the place for awhile.”



    “It’s  just  plain old mister  these days, Al. You feeling okay?”



    “Sure.  Just  thinking    about .  .  .”   Al  shrugs.  “Jeez, I   dunno  what  I  was



thinking  about.”  He laughs. “Getting  old  is no job for sissies.”



    “You’re  not  old,”  Hodges  says. “Somebody forgot to  give  you the  news—



sixty’s the new forty.”



    Al  snorts. “Ain’t   that a crock of you-know-what.”



    Hodges  couldn’t agree more. He points  to the  cart. “Don’t  suppose my boy



ever asks for a book, does he?”

249
    Al   gives another  snort.  “Hartsﬁeld?  He  couldn’t   read a  Berenstain Bears



book these days.” He taps his  forehead gravely. “Nothing   left  but  oatmeal up



top. Although  sometimes he does hold out his hand for one of these.” He picks



up a Zappit   e-reader. It’s a bright   girly   pink.  “These jobbies  have games on



em.”



    “He  plays games?” Hodges is astounded.



    “Oh  God  no. His  motor  control  is shot. But  if  I turn  on  one of the demos,



like Barbie  Fashion Walk or  Fishin’ Hole,  he stares at it  for hours. The demos



do the same thing over and over, but does he know that?”



    “I’m   guessing not.”



    “Good   guess. I  think  he  likes  the  noises, too—the  beeps and boops and



goinks. I come back two hours later, the reader’s layin on his bed or windowsill,



screen dark, battery ﬂat  as a pancake. But  what the  hell,  that  don’t  hurt  em,



three hours on  the charger  and they’re  ready to go  again. He don’t   recharge,



though. Probably a good thing.”  Al  wrinkles  his nose, as at a bad smell.



    Maybe, maybe not,  Hodges thinks.  As long as he’s not better, he’s here, in a



nice hospital room. Not  much  of a view, but there’s air-conditioning,  color  TV,



and every now  and then  a bright   pink  Zappit   to  stare at. If   he was compos



mentis—able to assist in his own defense, as the law has it—he’d have to stand



trial  for  a  dozen offenses, including  nine  counts  of  murder. Ten,  if  the  DA



decided to add in  the asshole’s mother, who died of  poisoning. Then  it  would



be Waynesville State Prison for the rest of his life.



    No  air-conditioning   there.



    “Take it  easy, Al. You look tired.”



    “Nah,  I’m  ﬁne, Detective Hutchinson.  Enjoy  your visit.”



    Al   rolls   on,  and  Hodges  looks  after  him,  brow   furrowed.  Hutchinson?



Where the  hell  did  that  come from? Hodges  has been coming here for  years



now, and Al  knows  his name perfectly  well.  Or  did.  Jesus, he hopes the guy



isn’t suffering from  early-onset dementia.



    For  the ﬁrst  four  months or  so, there were two  guards on the door  of 217.



Then one. Now  there are none, because guarding Brady is a waste of time and



money. There’s not much danger of escape when the perp can’t even make it to

250
the bathroom by himself.  Each year there’s talk of transferring him to a cheaper



institution   upstate, and each year the prosecutor  reminds all  and sundry  that



this  gentleman, brain-damaged  or  not,  is technically  still   awaiting  trial.   It’s



easy to keep him here because the clinic foots a large portion  of  the bills.  The



neurological team—especially Dr.  Felix  Babineau, the Head of  Department—



ﬁnds Brady Hartsﬁeld an extremely interesting  case.



    This  afternoon he sits by  the window,  dressed in jeans and a checked shirt.



His hair  is long  and needs cutting,  but  it’s  been washed and shines golden in



the sunlight.   Hair  some girl  would   love to  run  her ﬁngers  through,  Hodges



thinks. If  she didn’t know  what a monster he was.



    “Hello,   Brady.”



    Hartsﬁeld   doesn’t stir.  He’s looking  out  the  window, yes, but  is  he seeing



the brick  wall of the  parking garage, which is his  only view? Does he know it’s



Hodges in the room with  him? Does he know anybody is in the room with him?



These are questions to which a whole team  of neuro guys would  like  answers.



So would Hodges, who sits on the end of the  bed, thinking  Was a monster? Or



still  is?



    “Long  time  no see, as the landlocked sailor said to the chorus girl.”



    Hartsﬁeld  makes no reply.



    “I   know,  that’s an  oldie.  I  got  hundreds, ask  my  daughter. How   are you



feeling?”



    Hartsﬁeld   makes no reply. His  hands are in his  lap, the  long white  ﬁngers



loosely clasped.



    In   April   of  2009,   Brady  Hartsﬁeld  stole  a  Mercedes-Benz belonging  to



Holly’s aunt, and deliberately  drove at high speed into a crowd of job-seekers at



City  Center. He  killed  eight  and  seriously injured  twelve,  including   Thomas



Saubers, father of Peter and Tina. He got away with it, too. Hartsﬁeld’s  mistake



was to write Hodges, by then retired,  a taunting letter.



    The   following   year, Brady   killed   Holly’s   cousin,  a woman  with   whom



Hodges had been falling   in love.  Fittingly,   it  was Holly   herself who  stopped



Brady Hartsﬁeld’s clock,  almost literally   bashing his brains out  with  Hodges’s

251
own Happy  Slapper before Hartsﬁeld could  detonate a bomb that  would  have



killed  thousands of kids at a pop concert.



    The  ﬁrst  blow from  the  Slapper had fractured Hartsﬁeld’s skull,  but  it  was



the second one that did what was considered to be irreparable damage. He was



admitted  to the  Traumatic Brain  Injury  Clinic   in a deep coma from  which  he



was unlikely  to ever emerge. So said Dr. Babineau. But  on a dark  and stormy



night  in November  of 2011, Hartsﬁeld  opened his eyes and spoke to the nurse



changing  his   IV   bag.   (When   considering  that   moment,   Hodges   always



imagines Dr. Frankenstein screaming, “It’s  alive! It’s  alive!”)  Hartsﬁeld  said he



had a headache, and asked for his mother. When Dr. Babineau was fetched, and



asked his  patient  to  follow   his  ﬁnger  to  check  his  extraocular movements,



Hartsﬁeld was able to do so.



    Over  the  thirty   months  since then, Brady  Hartsﬁeld  has spoken on  many



occasions (although never to  Hodges). Mostly   he asks for his  mother.  When



he’s told she is dead, he sometimes nods as if he understands . . . but then a day



or a week later, he’ll repeat the request. He is able to follow simple instructions



in the  PT center, and can sort of  walk again, although  it’s  actually more of  an



orderly-assisted shamble. On good  days he’s able to feed himself,  but  cannot



dress himself.  He  is classed as a semicatatonic.  Mostly  he  sits in  his  room,



either looking  out the  window  at the parking  garage, or at a picture of  ﬂowers



on the wall of his room.



    But   there have been certain  peculiar  occurrences around Brady Hartsﬁeld



over the last year or so, and as a result he has become something of a legend in



the Brain Injury  Clinic.   There are rumors and speculations. Dr. Babineau scoffs



at these, and refuses to talk about them . . . but  some of the orderlies and other



nurses will,   and a  certain retired   police  detective has proved  to  be  an avid



listener over the years.



    Hodges  leans forward,  hands  dangling  between  his  knees, and smiles  at



Hartsﬁeld.



    “Are  you faking,  Brady?”



    Brady  makes no reply.

252
    “Why   bother? You’re going to be locked up for the  rest of your life, one way



or the other.”



    Brady  makes no reply,  but  one hand rises slowly  from  his  lap. He  almost



pokes himself in the  eye, then gets what he was aiming  for and brushes a lock



of hair from his forehead.



    “Want  to  ask about your mother?”



    Brady  makes no reply.



    “She’s dead. Rotting in  her cofﬁn. You fed her a bunch of gopher poison. She



must have died hard. Did she die hard? Were you there? Did you watch?”



    No  reply.



    “Are  you in  there, Brady? Knock, knock. Hello?”



    No  reply.



    “I  think   you are. I hope you are. Hey, tell you  something. I used to be a big



drinker. And  do you know what I  remember best about those days?”



    Nothing.



    “The  hangovers. Struggling to  get out of bed with  my  head pounding like  a



hammer on an anvil. Pissing the  morning  quart and wondering  what I  did  the



night  before. Sometimes not even knowing how  I  got home. Checking  my car



for dents. It  was like  being lost  inside my  own fucking  mind,   looking  for the



door so I  could  get out  of  there and  not  ﬁnding  it  until   maybe noon,  when



things would  ﬁnally start  going back to normal.”



    This  makes him think  brieﬂy  of Library Al.



    “I   hope that’s  where you  are right   now, Brady.  Wandering  around  inside



your half-busted brain  and looking  for a way out.  Only  for you there isn’t  one.



For you the hangover just goes on and on. Is that how it is? Man, I hope so.”



    His  hands hurt. He  looks down at them and sees his ﬁngernails digging into



his palms.  He  lets up  and  watches the  white  crescents there ﬁll   in  red. He



refreshes his smile. “Just  sayin, buddy.  Just sayin. You  want  to  say anything



back?”



    Hartsﬁeld  says nothing back.



    Hodges  stands up. “That’s all  right.  You sit  right  there by  the window  and



try  to ﬁnd  that  way out.  The  one that  isn’t  there. While   you do that,  I’ll   go

253
outside and breathe some fresh air. It’s a beautiful day.”



    On  the  table between  the chair  and the  bed is a  photograph Hodges  ﬁrst



saw in the house on Elm Street where Hartsﬁeld  lived with  his  mother. This  is



a smaller version,  in  a plain  silver  frame. It  shows Brady  and his  mom  on a



beach somewhere, arms around each other,  cheeks pressed together, looking



more like  boyfriend  and girlfriend   than  mother and  son. As Hodges turns  to



go, the picture falls over with  a toneless clack sound.



    He  looks at it,  looks at Hartsﬁeld, then  looks back at the facedown picture.



    “Brady?”



    No  answer. There never is. Not to him, anyway.



    “Brady,  did you do that?”



    Nothing.   Brady  is staring down  at his  lap, where his ﬁngers are once more



loosely entwined.



    “Some of the  nurses say . . .” Hodges doesn’t ﬁnish the thought.  He sets the



picture back up on its little   stand. “If  you did it,  do it  again.”



    Nothing   from  Hartsﬁeld,  and nothing  from  the picture.  Mother  and son in



happier days. Deborah Ann Hartsﬁeld and her honeyboy.



    “All   right,  Brady. Seeya later, alligator. Leaving the scene, jellybean.”



    He  does so, closing the door behind him. As he does, Brady Hartsﬁeld looks



up brieﬂy. And smiles.



    On  the table, the picture  falls over again.



    Clack.






                                                              9





Ellen Bran  (known as Bran Stoker by  students who have taken the  Northﬁeld



High  English  Department’s Fantasy and Horror  class) is standing by  the door



of a schoolbus parked in the River  Bend Resort reception area. Her  cell phone



is in her hand. It’s four PM  on Sunday afternoon, and she is about to call 911 to



report  a   missing  student.   That’s   when  Peter  Saubers comes  around  the

254
restaurant side of the building,  running   so fast that his hair ﬂies back from  his



forehead.



    Ellen  is unfailingly   correct with  her students, always staying on the  teacher



side of the line and never trying to  buddy up, but  on this one occasion she casts



propriety  aside and enfolds Pete in  a hug  so strong and frantic  that  it   nearly



stops his breath. From the bus, where the other NHS  class ofﬁcers and ofﬁcers-



to-be are waiting, there comes a sarcastic smatter of applause.



    Ellen  lets up  on the  hug, grabs his  shoulders, and does another thing she’s



never done to a student  before: gives him  a  good shaking. “Where   were you?



You missed all three morning seminars, you missed lunch, I was on the verge of



calling the police!”



    “I’m   sorry,  Ms. Bran.  I  was  sick to  my  stomach.  I  thought  the  fresh  air



would help me.”



    Ms.  Bran—chaperone and adviser on this weekend trip  because she teaches



American Politics  as well as American History—decides she believes him. Not



just because Pete is one of her best students and has never caused her trouble



before, but because the boy looks sick.



    “Well   . .  . you should have informed  me,” she says. “I thought  you’d  taken



it  into  your  head to  hitchhike   back to  town,  or  something.  If  anything  had



happened  to   you,  I’d    be  blamed.   Don’t   you   realize  you   kids   are  my



responsibility when we’re on a class trip?”



    “I  lost  track of the time.  I was vomiting,  and I didn’t  want  to do it  inside. It



must have been something I ate. Or one of those twenty-four-hour bugs.”



    It   wasn’t anything  he ate and he doesn’t have a bug, but the vomiting   part



is  true  enough.  It’s   nerves. Unadulterated   fright,   to   be  more  exact.  He’s



terriﬁed about  facing Andrew  Halliday  tomorrow.  It  could go right,   he knows



there’s a chance for it to go right, but  it will   be like threading a moving  needle.



If it   goes wrong, he’ll  be in  trouble  with  his  parents and in  trouble  with  the



police. College scholarships, need-based or otherwise? Forget them. He might



even go to jail.  So he has spent the day wandering the paths that crisscross the



thirty  acres of resort property, going  over the  coming confrontation  again and

255
again. What  he will   say; what  Halliday  will   say; what  he will   say in  return.



And yes, he lost track of time.



    Pete wishes he had never seen that fucking trunk.



    He  thinks,  But  I  was only trying  to  do the right  thing.   Goddammit,  that’s



all I was trying  to do!



    Ellen  sees the tears standing in the boy’s eyes, and notices for the ﬁrst time



—perhaps because he’s shaved off that silly singles-bar moustache—how  thin



his face has become. Really just half a step from gaunt. She drops her cell back



into  her purse and comes out  with  a packet of  tissues. “Wipe  your  face,” she



says.



    A  voice from the bus calls out, “Hey  Saubers! D’ja get any?”



    “Shut  up, Jeremy,” Ellen says without turning.   Then, to Pete: “I  should give



you a week’s detention  for  this  little    stunt,  but  I’m   going  to  cut  you some



slack.”



    Indeed she is, because a week’s detention would necessitate an oral report to



NHS  Assistant  Principal  Waters,  who  is  also School Disciplinarian.   Waters



would  inquire   into  her  own   actions, and  want  to   know  why  she  had not



sounded the alarm earlier, especially if she were forced to admit that she hadn’t



actually seen Pete Saubers since dinner in the restaurant the  night  before. He



had been out of her sight and supervision for  nearly a full day, and that  was far



too long for a school-mandated trip.



    “Thank  you, Ms. Bran.”



    “Do  you think  you’re done throwing  up?”



    “Yes. There’s nothing left.”



    “Then  get on the bus and let’s go home.”



    There’s more  sarcastic applause as Pete comes up the steps and makes his



way down the aisle. He  tries to  smile, as if everything  is okay. All  he wants  is



to get back to  Sycamore Street and hide in his  room, waiting  for  tomorrow  so



he can get this nightmare over with.

256
                                                             10





When  Hodges gets home from  the  hospital,  a good-looking  young  man in  a



Harvard  tee-shirt  is  sitting   on his  stoop,  reading  a thick   paperback with   a



bunch of ﬁghting  Greeks or Romans on the cover. Sitting beside him is an Irish



setter wearing  the  sort of  happy-go-lucky  grin   that  seems to be  the default



expression of dogs  raised in   friendly  homes.  Both  man  and  dog  rise when



Hodges pulls into  the little  lean-to that  serves as his garage.



    The  young  man meets him   halfway across the lawn,  one ﬁsted hand  held



out.   Hodges   bumps   knuckles   with    him,   thus   acknowledging    Jerome’s



blackness, then shakes his hand, thereby acknowledging his own WASPiness.



    Jerome stands back, holding Hodges’s forearms and giving him  a once-over.



“Look at you!”  he exclaims. “Skinny as ever was!”



    “I  walk,”  Hodges says. “And I bought  a treadmill  for rainy days.”



    “Excellent!  You’ll  live forever!”



    “I  wish,”  Hodges says, and bends down. The dog extends a paw and Hodges



shakes it. “How you doing,  Odell?”



    Odell  woofs, which presumably means he’s doing ﬁne.



    “Come  on in,” Hodges says. “I have Cokes. Unless you’d prefer a beer.”



    “Coke’s  ﬁne.  I  bet  Odell  would  appreciate  some water. We  walked  over.



Odell doesn’t walk as fast as he used to.”



    “His   bowl’s still  under the sink.”



    They  go  in  and toast each other with   icy  glasses of Coca-Cola. Odell laps



water, then stretches out in his accustomed place beside the TV. Hodges was an



obsessive television watcher during the ﬁrst months  of his retirement,  but now



the box rarely goes on except for Scott Pelley on The CBS Evening News, or the



occasional Indians game.



    “How’s  the pacemaker, Bill?”



    “I   don’t   even know   it’s  there.  Which   is   just  the  way  I   like   it.  What



happened to the big country  club  dance you were going to in  Pittsburgh  with



what’s-her-name?”

257
    “That  didn’t   work out.  As far as my parents are concerned, what’s-her-name



and I  discovered that   we are not   compatible  in  terms  of  our  academic and



personal interests.”



    Hodges  raises his eyebrows. “Sounds a tad lawyerly for a philosophy  major



with  a minor in ancient cultures.”



    Jerome sips his Coke, sprawls his long  legs out, and grins.  “Truth?  What’s-



her-name—aka Priscilla—was using me  to tweak the  jealous-bone of her high



school boyfriend. And  it  worked.  Told me how  sorry she was to get me  down



there on false pretenses, hopes we can still   be friends,  so on and so forth.   A



little  embarrassing, but probably  all  for the best.”  He pauses. “She still has all



her Barbies and Bratz on  a shelf in her  room, and I  must  admit  that  gave me



pause. I guess I wouldn’t  mind  too much if my  folks found  out I  was the stick



she stirred her pot of love-soup with,  but if  you tell  the Barbster, I’ll  never hear



the end of it.”



    “Mum’s  the word,”  Hodges says. “So what now? Back to Massachusetts?”



    “Nope,   I’m  here for  the summer.  Got  a job  down on  the  docks swinging



containers.”



    “That  is not  work for a Harvard man, Jerome.”



    “It   is for  this one. I  got my  heavy equipment license last winter,  the  pay is



excellent, and  Harvard  ain’t  cheap, even with   a partial   scholarship.”  Tyrone



Feelgood Delight  makes a mercifully   brief  guest appearance. “Dis here black



boy goan tote dat barge an’ lift  dat bale, Massa Hodges!” Then back to Jerome,



just like   that.  “Who’s  mowing  your  lawn? It  looks  pretty  good. Not   Jerome



Robinson quality, but  pretty good.”



    “Kid   from  the end  of the block,”  Hodges  says. “Is this just  a courtesy call,



or . . . ?”



    “Barbara and her friend  Tina told  me one hell of a story,” Jerome says. “Tina



was reluctant to spill  it  at ﬁrst,  but Barbs talked  her into it.  She’s good at stuff



like  that.  Listen,  you know  Tina’s father  was hurt  in   the City   Center thing,



right?”



    “Yes.”

258
    “If   her big  brother  was really the  one sending cash to keep the  fam aﬂoat,



good for him  .  . .  but  where did  it  come from? I  can’t ﬁgure  that  one out no



matter how hard I try.”



    “Nor   can I.”



    “Tina  says you’re going to ask him.”



    “After   school tomorrow, is the plan.”



    “Is  Holly  involved?”



    “To  an extent. She’s doing background.”



    “Cool!”   Jerome grins big. “How   about I come with  you  tomorrow? Get the



band back together, man! Play all the hits!”



    Hodges considers. “I  don’t know,  Jerome. One guy—a golden oldie like  me



—might  not  upset young Mr.  Saubers too much. Two guys, though, especially



when one of them’s a badass black dude who stands six-four—”



    “Fifteen   rounds  and I’m   still   pretty!”   Jerome proclaims,  waving   clasped



hands over his head. Odell  lays back his ears. “Still   pretty!  That  bad ole bear



Sonny Liston never touched me! I  ﬂoat  like  a butterﬂy,  I sting  like  a . .  .”  He



assesses Hodges’s patient expression. “Okay,  sorry, sometimes  I  get  carried



away. Where are you going to wait for him?”



    “Out    front   was the  plan.   You  know,  where  the  kids   actually  exit   the



building?”



    “Not   all of them  come out that way, and he might not, especially if  Tina lets



on she talked to  you.” He  sees Hodges about to speak and raises a hand. “She



says she won’t, but  big  brothers know  little   sisters, you can take that  from  a



guy who’s got one. If  he knows somebody wants to ask him questions, he’s apt



to go out  the back and cut  across the football ﬁeld to  Westﬁeld Street. I  could



park there, give you a call if I  see him.”



    “Do  you know  what he looks like?”



    “Uh-huh,   Tina  had a picture  in  her  wallet.  Let me  be a part  of this,  Bill.



Barbie likes that chick.  I liked  her too. And it  took  guts for her to come to you,



even with my sister snapping the whip.”



    “I  know.”

259
    “Also,  I’m  curious as hell. Tina says the money started coming when her bro



was only  thirteen.  A  kid  that  young  with   access to that  much  money .  . .”



Jerome shakes his head. “I’m not surprised he’s in trouble.”



    “Me  either. I  guess if you want to be in, you’re in.”



    “My  man!”



    This  cry necessitates another ﬁst-bump.



    “You  went  to  Northﬁeld,   Jerome. Is there any other  way he could  go out,



besides the front and Westﬁeld Street?”



    Jerome thinks  it  over. “If he went  down to the  basement, there’s a door that



takes you out to one side, where the smoking area used to be, back in the day. I



guess he could go across that, then cut through   the auditorium  and  come out



on Garner Street.”



    “I  could  put Holly  there,”  Hodges says thoughtfully.



    “Excellent   idea!”  Jerome cries.  “Gettin   the  band  back together!   What  I



said!”



    “But   no approach if you see him,” Hodges says. “Just call. I get to approach.



I’ll  tell Holly   the same thing. Not  that she’d be likely  to.”



    “As  long as we get to hear the story.”



    “If   I get  it,  you’ll  get it,”   Hodges says, hoping he has not just  made a rash



promise. “Come  by  my  ofﬁce in  the  Turner  Building   around two,  and  we’ll



move out around two ﬁfteen. Be in position  by two  forty-ﬁve.”



    “You’re  sure Holly  will  be okay with this?”



    “Yes. She’s ﬁne with watching. It’s  confrontation that  gives her problems.”



    “Not   always.”



    “No,”   Hodges says, “not always.”



    They  are  both  thinking   of  one  confrontation—at   the  MAC,  with   Brady



Hartsﬁeld—that  Holly   handled just ﬁne.



    Jerome glances at his watch. “I have to go. Promised I’d take the Barbster to



the mall. She wants a Swatch.” He rolls his eyes.



    Hodges grins.  “I  love your sis, Jerome.”



    Jerome grins back. “Actually,  so do I. Come on, Odell. Let’s shufﬂe.”

260
    Odell  rises and heads for the door. Jerome grasps the knob, then turns back.



His grin  is gone. “Have you been where I think  you’ve been?”



    “Probably.”



    “Does Holly   know you visit  him?”



    “No.  And  you’re not to  tell her. She’d ﬁnd it  vastly upsetting.”



    “Yes. She would. How  is he?”



    “The  same. Although  . . .”  Hodges is thinking   of  how the picture  fell  over.



That clack sound.



    “Although   what?”



    “Nothing.    He’s the  same. Do  me one favor,  okay? Tell  Barbara to  get  in



touch if  Tina  calls and  says her brother  found out  the  girls  talked  to  me on



Friday.”



    “Will    do. See you tomorrow.”



    Jerome leaves. Hodges turns on the TV,  and is delighted  to  see the Indians



are still on. They’ve tied it  up. The game is going into  extra innings.






                                                             11





Holly  spends Sunday evening in her apartment, trying   to watch  The Godfather



Part II   on her  computer.  Usually  this  would  be  a very  pleasant occupation,



because she considers it one of the two or three best movies ever made, right up



there with  Citizen Kane and Paths of Glory, but tonight she keeps pausing it so



she can pace worry-circles around the living   room of her  apartment. There’s a



lot  of room  to  pace. This apartment  isn’t  as glitzy  as the  lakeside condo she



lived  in   for  awhile  when   she ﬁrst   moved  to  the  city,   but  it’s   in  a  good



neighborhood and plenty  big.  She can afford the rent;  under  the terms of  her



cousin Janey’s will,  Holly  inherited   half a million    dollars. Less after taxes, of



course, but still  a very nice nest egg. And, thanks to  her job with  Bill   Hodges,



she can afford to let the nest egg grow.



    As she paces, she mutters some of her favorite lines from the movie.

261
    “I  don’t  have to wipe everyone out, just my enemies.



    “How   do you say banana daiquiri?



    “Your  country ain’t  your blood, remember that.”



    And,  of course, the one everyone remembers: “I know it was you, Fredo. You



broke my heart.”



    If  she was watching another movie, she would be incanting a different  set of



quotes. It  is a form  of  self-hypnosis that  she has practiced ever since she saw



The Sound of Music at the age of seven. (Favorite line from that one: “I  wonder



what grass tastes like.”)



    She’s really thinking    about the  Moleskine  notebook Tina’s  brother was so



quick  to  hide  under his  pillow.   Bill   believes it  has nothing   to  do  with  the



money Pete was sending his parents, but Holly isn’t so sure.



    She has kept journals for most of her life, listing  all  the movies she’s seen, all



the books she’s read, the people she’s talked to, the times she gets up, the times



she goes to   bed.  Also  her  bowel   movements,  which  are  coded  (after  all,



someone may see her journals after she’s dead) as WP, which  stands for Went



Potty. She knows this is OCD  behavior—she and  her therapist  have discussed



how obsessive listing  is really  just  another form  of magical  thinking—but    it



doesn’t hurt anyone, and if she prefers to keep her lists in Moleskine notebooks,



whose business  is  that   besides  her  own?  The   point   is,   she knows from



Moleskines, and therefore  knows they’re  not  cheap. Two-ﬁfty   will   get you  a



spiral-bound notebook in Walgreens, but  a Moleskine with  the same number of



pages goes for ten bucks. Why would  a kid  want such an expensive notebook,



especially when he came from a cash-strapped family?



    “Doesn’t  make  sense,” Holly  says. Then,  as if  just  following  this  train   of



thought:  “Leave the gun. Take the cannoli.” That’s from  the original  Godfather,



but it’s still  a good line. One of the best.



    Send the money. Keep the notebook.



    An  expensive notebook that got shoved under the pillow when the little sister



appeared unexpectedly in the room. The more Holly   thinks  about it,  the more



she thinks there might  be something there.

262
    She restarts the  movie  but  can’t follow   its well-worn   and well-loved  path



with  this  notebook stuff  rolling  around  in her  head, so Holly  does something



almost unheard of,  at least before bedtime:  she turns  her computer  off. Then



she resumes pacing, hands locked together at the small of her back.



    Send the money. Keep the notebook.



    “And  the  lag!” she exclaims to the empty room. “Don’t  forget that!”



    Yes. The seven months of quiet  time  between when the money ran out  and



when the  Saubers boy started to get  his underpants all  in  a twist.   Because it



took him  seven months to think  up a way to get more money? Holly thinks yes.



Holly  thinks  he got  an idea, but  it  wasn’t a good idea. It was an idea that  got



him in  trouble.



    “What   gets people in trouble when it’s about money?” Holly   asks the empty



room, pacing faster than ever. “Stealing does. So does blackmail.”



    Was that  it?  Did  Pete Saubers try to blackmail  somebody about something



in the  Moleskine notebook? Something  about the stolen  money, maybe? Only



how  could  Pete blackmail   someone about  that  money  when  he must   have



stolen it himself?



    Holly   goes to  the telephone, reaches for it,   then pulls  her  hand back. For



almost a  minute  she just   stands there,  gnawing  her  lips.  She’s not used  to



taking  the initiative   in things.  Maybe she should call Bill   ﬁrst,  and ask him if



it’s okay?



    “Bill    doesn’t think  the  notebook’s important,  though,”   she tells her living



room. “I  think  different. And  I can think  different  if I  want to.”



    She snatches her cell from the coffee table and calls Tina Saubers before she



can lose her nerve.



    “Hello?”   Tina asks cautiously. Almost whispering. “Who’s  this?”



    “Holly    Gibney. You  didn’t  see my  number come  up because it’s unlisted.



I’m  very careful about my  number, although  I’ll  be happy  to give it   to you, if



you want.  We can talk  anytime,  because we’re friends and that’s what friends



do. Is your brother back home from his weekend?”



    “Yes. He  came in around six,  while we were ﬁnishing  up  dinner. Mom  said



there was  still   plenty  of  pot  roast  and  potatoes, she’d heat  them  up  if   he

263
wanted, but he said they stopped at Denny’s on the way back. Then he went up



to his room.  He didn’t   even want any strawberry shortcake, and he loves that.



I’m really worried  about him,  Ms. Holly.”



    “You  can just  call  me Holly,  Tina.”   She hates Ms., thinks  it  sounds like  a



mosquito buzzing around your head.



    “Okay.”



    “Did   he say anything to you?”



    “Just  hi,”  Tina says in a small voice.



    “And   you   didn’t   tell  him   about  coming   to  the  ofﬁce  with   Barbara on



Friday?”



    “God,  no!”



    “Where  is he now?”



    “Still   in his room.  Listening to the  Black Keys. I hate the Black Keys.”



    “Yes,  me too.”   Holly   has no idea  who  the  Black Keys  are, although   she



could name the entire  cast of Fargo. (Best line  in that  one, delivered  by Steve



Buscemi: “Smoke a fuckin peace pipe.”)



    “Tina,  does Pete have a special friend he might  have talked to about  what’s



bothering him?”



    Tina  thinks  it  over. Holly  takes the opportunity   to snatch a Nicorette  from



the open pack beside her computer and pop it into her mouth.



    “I   don’t  think  so,”  Tina says at last. “I   guess he has friends at school, he’s



pretty  popular,  but  his  only   close friend  was Bob  Pearson, from  down  the



block? And they moved to Denver last year.”



    “What   about a girlfriend?”



    “He  used to spend a lot of  time with   Gloria Moore,  but they  broke up after



Christmas. Pete said she didn’t like to read, and he could never get tight  with  a



girl  who didn’t  like  books.”  Wistfully,   Tina adds: “I  liked  Gloria.  She showed



me how to do my eyes.”



    “Girls   don’t  need  eye makeup until   they’re  in  their   thirties,”   Holly   says



authoritatively,  although  she has never actually worn  any herself. Her  mother



says only sluts wear eye makeup.



    “Really?”  Tina sounds astonished.

264
    “What   about teachers? Did he have a favorite teacher he might  have talked



to?” Holly  doubts  if an older brother  would  have talked to his kid  sister about



favorite teachers, or if  the kid  sister would  have paid  any attention  even if he



did. She asks because it’s the only other thing she can think of.



    But  Holly  doesn’t even hesitate. “Ricky the Hippie,”   she says, and giggles.



    Holly   stops in mid-pace. “Who?”



    “Mr.   Ricker, that’s his real name. Pete said some of the kids call  him Ricky



the Hippie  because he wears these old-time ﬂower-power shirts  and ties.  Pete



had him  when he was a freshman. Or  maybe a sophomore. I  can’t remember.



He said  Mr.  Ricker  knew what  good  books were all  about.  Ms. .  .  . I  mean



Holly, is Mr.  Hodges still  going to  talk to Pete tomorrow?”



    “Yes. Don’t  worry about that.”



    But  Tina is plenty  worried. She sounds on the verge of tears, in fact, and this



makes Holly’s  stomach contract  into   a tight   little   ball.  “Oh   boy. I  hope  he



doesn’t hate me.”



    “He   won’t,”  Holly   says. She’s chewing her Nicorette  at  warp  speed. “Bill



will  ﬁnd  out  what’s wrong  and  ﬁx  it.  Then  your brother  will   love you  more



than ever.”



    “Do  you promise?”



    “Yes! Ouch!”



    “What’s  wrong?”



    “Nothing.”     She wipes her  mouth   and looks  at  a smear  of blood   on her



ﬁngers. “I   bit  my  lip.  I   have to go,  Tina.  Will   you  call  me if  you  think   of



anyone he might have talked to about the money?”



    “There’s no one,” Tina says forlornly, and starts to cry.



    “Well   . . . okay.” And  because something else seems required: “Don’t bother



with  eye makeup. Your eyes are very pretty as they are. Goodbye.”



    She ends the call without  waiting   for Tina to  say anything else and resumes



pacing. She spits the  wad of  Nicorette  into  the  wastebasket by her desk  and



blots her lip  with  a tissue, but the bleeding has already stopped.



    No  close friends and no steady girl. No names except for that one teacher.

265
    Holly   sits down and powers up her computer  again. She opens Firefox, goes



to the  Northﬁeld  High   website, clicks  OUR  FACULTY,  and there is Howard



Ricker, wearing  a  ﬂower-patterned shirt   with  billowy   sleeves, just  like  Tina



said. Also a very ridiculous  tie. Is it  really  so impossible that Pete Saubers said



something  to  his  favorite   English  teacher, especially  if   it  had  to   do  with



whatever he was writing (or reading) in a Moleskine notebook?



    A   few   clicks  and  she  has Howard   Ricker’s   telephone  number  on  her



computer  screen. It’s  still    early, but   she can’t  bring   herself  to  cold-call   a



complete stranger. Phoning Tina was hard enough, and that call ended in tears.



    I’ll    tell  Bill   tomorrow,  she  decides. He  can call  Ricky   the  Hippie   if  he



thinks it’s  worth doing.



    She goes back to her voluminous movie folder  and is soon once more lost in



The Godfather Part II.






                                                             12





Morris visits  another computer café that Sunday night,  and does his own quick



bit  of  research. When  he’s found  what  he wants,  he ﬁshes out  the  piece of



notepaper with   Peter  Saubers’s cell number   on  it,  and  jots   down  Andrew



Halliday’s address. Coleridge Street is on the  West Side. In  the seventies, that



was a middle-class and mostly white enclave where all the houses tried to  look



a little   more expensive than they  actually  were, and  as a result all  ended up



looking pretty  much the same.



    A  quick  visit  to  several local real estate sites shows Morris that things  over



there haven’t  changed much,  although  an upscale shopping  center  has been



added: Valley Plaza. Andy’s car may still  be  parked at his house out  there. Of



course it might   be in  a space behind his  shop, Morris  never checked (Christ,



you can’t check everything, he thinks), but that seems unlikely. Why  would you



put up  with  the  hassle of driving three  miles into  the city  every morning  and



three miles back every night, in  rush-hour trafﬁc,  when you could buy a thirty-

266
day bus-pass for ten dollars, or a six-month’s pass for ﬁfty? Morris  has the keys



to his  old pal’s house, although  he’d never try  using  them;  the house is  a lot



more likely to  be alarmed than the Birch Street Rec.



    But  he also has the keys to Andy’s car, and a car might come in handy.



    He  walks back to Bugshit  Manor, convinced that McFarland will   be waiting



for him  there, and  not content  just  to make Morris  pee in  the little   cup.  No,



not this time.  This time  he’ll  also want to toss his room, and when he does he’ll



ﬁnd  the Tuff  Tote  with  the  stolen  computer  and the  bloody  shirt  and shoes



inside. Not  to mention the  envelope of money he took from his old pal’s desk.



    I’d  kill   him,  thinks  Morris—who  is  now (in his  own mind,  at least) Morris



the Wolf.



    Only   he couldn’t   use the  gun,  plenty  of  people in  Bugshit  Manor  know



what a gunshot sounds like,  even a polite ka-pow from a little   faggot  gun like



his old pal’s P238, and he left  the hatchet  in Andy’s  ofﬁce. That might   not do



the job even if  he did have it.  McFarland is big  like  Andy, but  not all  puddly-



fat like Andy.  McFarland looks strong.



    That’s  okay, Morris tells  himself.  That shit  don’t  mean shit. Because an old



wolf is a crafty wolf,  and that’s what I have to be now: crafty.



    McFarland  isn’t  waiting  on the  stoop, but before Morris  can breathe a sigh



of relief,  he becomes convinced that his  PO will   be waiting  for  him  upstairs.



Not  in  the  hall,  either. He’s probably  got  a passkey that  lets him  into   every



room in this  fucked-up, piss-smelling place.



    Try  me, he thinks. You just  try me, you sonofabitch.



    But  the  door is locked, the  room is empty, and it  doesn’t look  like it’s  been



searched, although he supposes if McFarland did it carefully . . . craftily—



    But  then  Morris calls himself  an idiot.  If  McFarland had searched his room,



he would  have been waiting  with   a couple of cops, and  the cops would  have



handcuffs.



    Nevertheless, he snatches open the closet door to  make sure the Tuff  Totes



are where he left  them. They  are. He  takes out the  money and counts  it.  Six



hundred and forty dollars.  Not  great, not even close to what was in Rothstein’s

267
safe, but not bad. He  puts it  back, zips  the bag shut, then  sits on his  bed and



holds up his hands. They are shaking.



    I  have to get that  stuff  out of here, he thinks,  and I  have to do it  tomorrow



morning. But  get it  out to  where?



    Morris  lies down on his bed and looks up at the ceiling,  thinking.   At  last he



falls asleep.






                                                             13





Monday  dawns clear  and  warm,  the  thermometer   in  front   of  City   Center



reading seventy before the sun is even fully  over the horizon.  School is still  in



session and will be  for the  next two  weeks, but  today is  going to  be the  ﬁrst



real sizzler of the summer, the kind  of day that makes people wipe the backs of



their necks and squint at the sun and talk about global  warming.



    When  Hodges  gets to his  ofﬁce at eight  thirty,   Holly  is already there.  She



tells him  about her conversation with  Tina  last night,  and  asks if Hodges will



talk  to Howard  Ricker,  aka Ricky  the Hippie,   if  he can’t get  the story of  the



money from Pete himself. Hodges agrees to this, and tells Holly   that was good



thinking   (she glows at this), but  privately  believes talking  to  Ricker  won’t be



necessary. If he can’t crack a seventeen-year-old kid—one who’s probably dying



to tell   someone what’s been weighing him   down—he  needs to quit  working



and move to Florida, home of so many retired cops.



    He  asks Holly   if  she’ll  watch for  the  Saubers boy on Garner  Street when



school lets out this  afternoon. She agrees, as long as she doesn’t have to talk to



him herself.



    “You  won’t,”  Hodges assures her. “If you see him, all  you need to do  is call



me. I’ll  come around the block and cut him off.  Have we got pix of him?”



    “I’ve  downloaded half  a dozen to my computer. Five from  the yearbook and



one from  the   Garner Street  Library,  where  he  works  as a student   aide, or



something. Come and look.”

268
    The  best photo—a portrait  shot in which  Pete Saubers is wearing a tie and a



dark   sportcoat—identiﬁes    him     as  CLASS   OF    ’15   STUDENT     VICE



PRESIDENT.  He’s dark-haired and good-looking.   The resemblance to his kid



sister isn’t  striking,  but  it’s  there, all  right.   Intelligent   blue  eyes look levelly



out at Hodges. In them  is the faintest glint  of humor.



    “Can  you email these to Jerome?”



    “Already  done.”  Holly  smiles, and Hodges thinks—as he always does—that



she should do it more often. When  she smiles, Holly  is almost beautiful.  With



a little  mascara around her eyes, she probably would be. “Gee, it’ll  be good to



see Jerome again.”



    “What   have I got this morning,  Holly?  Anything?”



    “Court  at ten  o’clock. The assault thing.”



    “Oh,   right.  The  guy who  tuned up  on his  brother-in-law.  Belson the  Bald



Beater.”



    “It’s  not  nice to call people names,” Holly says.



    This  is  probably true,  but  court  is always an annoyance, and having to  go



there today is  particularly  trying,   even though  it  will   probably take  no more



than an hour, unless Judge Wiggins has slowed down since Hodges was on the



cops. Pete Huntley   used to  call  Brenda Wiggins   FedEx, because she always



delivered on time.



    The  Bald Beater is James Belson, whose picture should probably be next to



white trash in  the  dictionary.  He’s a  resident of  the  city’s Edgemont  Avenue



district,  sometimes referred to as Hillbilly   Heaven. As part of his contract with



one of  the  city’s  car dealerships,  Hodges was  hired  to  repo  Belson’s Acura



MDX,   on  which  Belson had  ceased making payments  some months  before.



When  Hodges  arrived   at  Belson’s ramshackle  house, Belson  wasn’t  there.



Neither  was the car. Mrs. Belson—a lady  who looked rode hard  and put away



still  damp—told   him  the  Acura  had been stolen by  her  brother  Howie.  She



gave him the address, which was also in Hillbilly  Heaven.



    “I   got no  love for  Howie,”  she told  Hodges, “but   you might   ought to  get



over before Jimmy kills  him.  When  Jimmy’s mad, he don’t  believe in talk.  He



goes right to beatin.”

269
    When  Hodges arrived, James Belson was indeed beating on Howie. He was



doing this  work  with  a rake-handle, his bald head gleaming  with  sweat in the



sunlight.  Belson’s brother-in-law  was lying  in  his weedy driveway  by the  rear



bumper of  the Acura,  kicking  ineffectually  at  Belson and trying   to shield  his



bleeding  face and broken  nose  with  his  hands.  Hodges stepped  up  behind



Belson and soothed him with   the Happy  Slapper. The Acura was back on  the



car dealership’s lot by noon, and Belson the Bald Beater was now up on assault.



    “His   lawyer is going  to try  to make you  look like  the bad guy,”  Holly  says.



“He’s going to  ask how you subdued Mr. Belson. You need to be ready for that,



Bill.”



    “Oh,   for  goodness sake,” Hodges says. “I  thumped  him  one to  keep  him



from   killing    his   brother-in-law,   that’s   all.   Applied   acceptable  force  and



practiced restraint.”



    “But   you used a weapon to  do it.  A  sock loaded with   ball  bearings, to be



exact.”



    “True,  but  Belson doesn’t know  that.  His  back was turned.  And  the  other



guy was semiconscious at best.”



    “Okay  . .  .” But  she looks worried and her teeth are working  at the spot she



nipped while  talking  to Tina.  “I  just don’t  want you to  get in trouble.  Promise



me you’ll keep your temper and not shout, or wave your arms, or—”



    “Holly.”    He   takes her  by  the  shoulders.  Gently.  “Go   outside.  Smoke a



cigarette. Chillax.  All  will  be well in  court this  morning  and with  Pete Saubers



this afternoon.”



    She looks up at him,  wide-eyed. “Do you promise?”



    “Yes.”



    “All    right.    I’ll    just   smoke half   a  cigarette.”   She  heads for   the  door,



rummaging in  her bag. “We’re going  to have such a busy day.”



    “I  suppose we are. One other thing before you go.”



    She turns back, questioning.



    “You  should smile more often. You’re beautiful  when you smile.”



    Holly   blushes all the  way to her hairline  and hurries out.  But  she’s smiling



again, and that makes Hodges happy.

270
                                                             14





Morris is  also having a busy day, and busy is good. As  long as he’s in motion,



the doubts and fears don’t have a chance to creep in. It  helps that  he woke up



absolutely sure of one thing: this  is the day he becomes a wolf for real. He’s all



done patching   up  the  Culture   and Arts   Center’s outdated  computer   ﬁling



system so his fat fuck of  a boss can look good to his boss, and he’s done being



Ellis McFarland’s pet lamb, too. No  more baa-ing yes sir and no sir and three bags



full sir each time McFarland  shows up. Parole is ﬁnished. As soon as he has the



Rothstein notebooks, he’s getting  the hell  out  of this  pisspot of a city.  He has



no interest  in  going  north  to  Canada, but that  leaves the whole  lower  forty-



eight. He  thinks  maybe he’ll  opt  for New  England.  Who  knows, maybe even



New  Hampshire.   Reading  the  notebooks  there,  near  the  same  mountains



Rothstein  must  have  looked  at  while   he  was writing—that     had  a certain



novelistic roundness, didn’t  it? Yes, and that was the great thing  about  novels:



that roundness. The way things always balanced out in the end. He should have



known  Rothstein  couldn’t  leave Jimmy  working   for  that  fucking  ad  agency,



because there was no roundness in that,  just  a big  old  scoop of ugly. Maybe,



deep down in his heart, Morris had known it.  Maybe it  was what kept him  sane



all those years.



    He’s never felt saner in his life.



    When   he doesn’t  show up  for  work  this  morning,   his  fat fuck   boss will



probably call McFarland. That,  at least, is what he’s supposed to do in the event



of an unexplained absence. So Morris has to disappear. Duck  under the  radar.



Go dark.



    Fine.



    Terriﬁc,  in fact.



    At  eight  this  morning,  he takes the Main Street bus, rides all the way to  its



turnaround point  where Lower Main  ends, and then strolls down to  Lacemaker



Lane. Morris has put  on his  only  sportcoat and his only  tie,  and they’re  good



enough for him  to not look  out of  place here, even though it’s too early for any

271
of the fancy-schmancy stores to have opened. He turns down the alley between



Andrew  Halliday    Rare  Editions   and  the  shop  next   door,  La  Bella   Flora



Children’s  Boutique.  There  are three  parking  spaces in  the  small  courtyard



behind  the buildings,   two  for  the  clothing   shop and  one for  the  bookshop.



There’s a Volvo in one of the La Bella Flora spots. The other one is empty. So is



the space reserved for Andrew Halliday.



    Also  ﬁne.



    Morris   leaves the courtyard as briskly  as he came, pauses for a comforting



look at  the CLOSED sign  hanging  inside the  bookshop door, and then strolls



back to Lower Main,  where he catches an uptown bus.  Two changes later, he’s



stepping off in  front  of the Valley Plaza Shopping Center, just two  blocks from



the late Andrew Halliday’s  home.



    He  walks briskly  again, no strolling  now. As if  he knows where he is, where



he’s going, and has every right  to be  here. Coleridge Street is nearly deserted,



which doesn’t surprise him.  It’s quarter past nine  (his fat fuck  of a boss will by



now be  looking   at  Morris’s  unoccupied desk  and fuming).   The  kids  are  in



school; the workadaddies and workamommies  are off  busting  heavies to keep



up with   their  credit  card  debt;  most delivery  and  service people won’t  start



cruising the  neighborhood until   ten. The  only  better time  would  be the  dozy



hours of mid-afternoon,  and he can’t afford to wait  that  long. Too many places



to go,  too many  things  to  do. This  is  Morris  Bellamy’s big  day. His   life  has



taken a long, long detour, but  he’s almost back on the mainline.






                                                             15





Tina starts feeling  sick  around the  time  Morris  is  strolling  up  the  late Drew



Halliday’s driveway  and seeing his old  pal’s car parked inside his garage. Tina



hardly slept at  all last night   because she’s so worried about how Pete will take



the news that  she ratted  him  out.  Her breakfast  is sitting   in  her belly  like  a



lump,  and all   at once, while   Mrs.  Sloan is performing   “Annabel  Lee”  (Mrs.

272
Sloan never just reads), that  lump  of  undigested  food starts  to  crawl  up  her



throat and toward the exit.



    She raises her hand. It  seems to weigh at least ten pounds, but  she holds it



up until  Mrs. Sloan raises her eyes. “Yes, Tina, what is it?”



    She sounds annoyed, but Tina doesn’t care. She’s beyond caring. “I feel sick.



I need to go to the girls’.”



    “Then  go, by all  means, but hurry back.”



    Tina  scuttles  from  the room.  Some of the  girls  are giggling—at    thirteen,



unscheduled bathroom visits  are always amusing—but   Tina  is too  concerned



with  that  rising  lump  to  feel embarrassed. Once in the hall  she breaks into a



run, heading for the bathroom  halfway down the hall  as fast as she can, but the



lump  is faster  and she doubles over before she can get  there and  vomits  her



breakfast all over her sneakers.



    Mr.  Haggerty, the  school’s head janitor, is just coming up the stairs. He  sees



her stagger backward from the  steaming puddle  of whoopsie and trots  toward



her, his toolbelt jingling.



    “Hey,  girl,  you okay?”



    Tina  gropes for the wall with  an arm that  feels made of plastic. The world is



swimming.  Part of that  is because she has vomited hard enough to bring  tears



to her eyes, but not all. She wishes with all her heart that she hadn’t let Barbara



persuade her into talking  to  Mr.  Hodges, that  she had left Pete alone to work



out whatever was wrong. What if  he never speaks to her again?



    “I’m   ﬁne,” she says. “I’m sorry I made a m—”



    But   the  swimming   gets worse  before she can ﬁnish.   She doesn’t exactly



faint,  but the  world  pulls  away from her, becomes something she’s looking  at



through a smudged window  rather than  something she’s actually in. She slides



down the  wall,  amazed by  the sight  of  her own  knees, clad in   green tights,



coming up  to meet her. That  is when  Mr.  Haggerty  scoops her up and carries



her downstairs to the school nurse’s ofﬁce.

273
                                                             16





Andy’s little   green Subaru is perfect, as far as Morris is concerned—not apt  to



attract a ﬁrst  glance, let  alone a second. There are only thousands just like  it.



He backs down  the driveway  and sets off for  the  North  Side, keeping  an eye



out for cops and obeying every speed limit.



    At   ﬁrst  it’s  almost  a  replay of  Friday  night.   He  stops once  more at  the



Bellows Avenue Mall  and once more visits  Home Depot.  He goes to the  tools



section, where he picks out a screwdriver with  a long  blade and a chisel. Then



he drives   on  to  the   square brick   hulk   that   used  to  be  the  Birch   Street



Recreation Center and once more parks in the space marked RESERVED FOR



REC DEPT. VEHICLES.



    It’s  a good spot in which  to do dirty  business. There’s a loading dock on one



side and  a  high   hedge on  the   other.  He’s  visible  only   from  behind—the



baseball ﬁeld  and crumbling   basketball  courts—but   with   school in   session,



those areas are deserted.  Morris  goes to   the  basement window   he  noticed



before, squats, and rams the blade of his screwdriver into  the crack at the  top.



It  goes in easily, because the wood is rotten.  He  uses the chisel to  widen  the



crack. The glass rattles in its  frame but  doesn’t break, because the putty is old



and there’s plenty of give. The possibility  that this  hulk of a building   has alarm



protection is looking  slimmer  all the time.



    Morris  swaps the chisel for the screwdriver again. He chivvies it through  the



gap he’s made, catches the thumb-lock, and pushes. He looks around  to make



sure he’s still unobserved—it’s  a good spot, yes, but  breaking and entering  in



broad  daylight   is  still   a  scary proposition—and    sees nothing  but   a  crow



perched on a telephone pole. He inserts the chisel at the bottom of the window,



beating it  in as deep as it will go with  the  heel of his hand, then bears down on



it.  For a moment there’s nothing.  Then  the window  slides up  with  a squall of



wood and a shower of dirt.  Bingo.  He wipes sweat from his  face as he peers in



at the stored chairs, card tables, and boxes of junk, verifying that it  will  be easy



to slide in and drop to  the ﬂoor.

274
    But   not quite   yet. Not   while  there’s the slightest  possibility   that  a silent



alarm is lighting  up somewhere.



    Morris  takes his tools back to the little  green Subaru, and drives away.






                                                             17





Linda Saubers is  monitoring   the  mid-morning   activity   period  at  Northﬁeld



Elementary School when Peggy Moran comes in and tells her that her daughter



has been taken sick at Dorton Middle, some three miles away.



    “She’s  in   the   nurse’s  ofﬁce,”   Peggy  says,  keeping   her  voice   low.   “I



understand she vomited and then sort of passed out for a few minutes.”



    “Oh  my  God,”  Linda  says. “She looked pale at breakfast, but when I  asked



her if she was okay, she said she was.”



    “That’s   the   way   they  are,”   Peggy  says, rolling    her   eyes. “It’s    either



melodrama or I’m ﬁne, Mom, get a life. Go get her and take her home. I’ll  cover



this, and Mr. Jablonski has already called a sub.”



    “You’re  a saint.” Linda  is gathering up her books and putting   them into  her



briefcase.



    “It’s  probably  a stomach thing,”  Peggy says, sliding  into the  seat Linda has



just vacated. “I   guess you could take  her to  the nearest Doc  in  the Box,  but



why bother spending thirty  bucks? That stuff’s going  around.”



    “I  know,”  Linda says . . . but she wonders.



    She and  Tom have been slowly  but  surely  digging  themselves out  of  two



pits: a money pit  and a marriage pit.  The  year after Tom’s accident, they came



perilously close to breaking  up. Then  the mystery cash started coming,  a kind



of miracle,  and things  started to  turn  around.  They  aren’t all  the way  out  of



either hole even yet, but Linda has come to believe they will get out.



    With   their  parents focused on brute  survival  (and Tom, of  course, had the



additional challenge of recovering from his injuries),  the kids  have spent far too



much time   ﬂying  on  autopilot.  It’s  only  now,  when she feels she ﬁnally   has

275
room  to  breathe  and  time   to   look   around  her,  that  Linda   clearly  senses



something not right  with  Pete and Tina. They’re good kids,  smart kids, and she



doesn’t think  either  of  them  has gotten  caught in  the  usual teenage traps—



drink,   drugs,  shoplifting,   sex—but   there’s something, and she supposes she



knows what it  is. She has an idea Tom does, too.



    God  sent  manna from  heaven when the  Israelites were starving,  but   cash



drops from  more prosaic sources: banks, friends, an inheritance, relatives who



are in a position to help out.  The mystery money didn’t  come from any of those



sources. Certainly not from  relatives. Back in  2010, all  their  kinfolk  were just



as strapped as Tom and Linda  themselves. Only kids  are relatives,  too, aren’t



they? It’s easy to overlook that because they’re so close, but they are. It’s absurd



to think   the  cash came from Tina,  who’d  only been nine  years old when  the



envelopes started arriving,   and  who  couldn’t   have  kept  a  secret like   that,



anyway.



    Pete, though  .  . .  he’s the closemouthed one. Linda remembers her mother



saying when Pete was only ﬁve, “That one’s got a lock on his lips.”



    Only  where could a kid of  thirteen have come by that kind  of money?



    As  she  drives  to  Dorton   Middle  to   pick  up  her  ailing   daughter,  Linda



thinks, We  never asked any questions, not really, because we were afraid to. No



one who didn’t  go through those terrible  months after Tommy’s accident could



get that, and I’m  not  going to  apologize for it.  We had reasons to be cowardly.



Plenty  of  them.   The  two   biggest   were living    right   under   our  roof,  and



counting  on  us to  support  them.   But  it’s  time  to   ask who  was supporting



whom. If  it  was Pete, if Tina  found out  and that’s what’s troubling  her, I  need



to stop being a coward. I need to open my eyes.



    I  need some answers.






                                                             18





Mid-morning.

276
    Hodges is in  court, and on best behavior. Holly  would be proud. He answers



the questions posed by the Bald  Beater’s attorney with  crisp succinctness. The



attorney gives him   plenty  of opportunity   to  be argumentative,  and  although



this was a trap Hodges sometimes fell into  during  his detective days, he avoids



it now.



    Linda  Saubers is driving her  pale, silent daughter  home from school, where



she will give Tina a glass of ginger ale to settle her stomach and then put her to



bed. She is ﬁnally ready to ask Tina what  she knows about the mystery money,



but not  until  the  girl  feels better. The afternoon will   be time  enough, and she



should make Pete a part of that conversation when he gets home from school. It



will  be just the three of them,  and probably that’s best. Tom and a group of his



real estate clients are touring an ofﬁce complex,  recently vacated by IBM,  ﬁfty



miles north  of the  city, and won’t  be back until   seven. Even later, if they  stop



for dinner on the return  trip.



    Pete is in  period  three Advanced Physics, and although his eyes are trained



on Mr.  Norton,   who  is rhapsodizing  about  the Higgs   boson and the  CERN



Large Hadron  Collider  in  Switzerland,  the  mind   behind those  eyes is much



closer to  home. He  is  going  over his  script  for  this  afternoon’s meeting  yet



again, and reminding   himself  that  just  because he has a script doesn’t mean



Halliday  will  follow  it.  Halliday  has been in this business a long time, and he’s



probably been skirting   the edges of the law  for much  of it.  Pete is just  a kid,



and it  absolutely will  not  do to  forget that.  He  must be careful, and  allow for



his inexperience. He must think  before he speaks, every time.



    Above all,  he must be brave.



    He  tells  Halliday:  Half   a loaf is better  than  none, but  in a  world  of want,



even a single slice is better than none. I’m  offering  you three dozen slices. You



need to think about that.



    He  tells  Halliday:   I’m  not  going  to  be anyone’s birthday fuck,  you  better



think  about that, too.



    He  tells  Halliday:  If  you  think  I’m  blufﬁng,   go on and try  me.  But  if  you



do, we both wind up  with  nothing.

277
    He  thinks,  If I  can hold my nerve, I can get out  of this. And  I will   hold it.  I



will.  I have to.



    Morris   Bellamy  parks the  stolen  Subaru two  blocks  from  Bugshit  Manor



and walks back. He lingers  in the  doorway of a secondhand store to make sure



Ellis  McFarland isn’t  in  the  vicinity,   then  scurries to  the miserable  building



and plods up the nine ﬂights  of stairs. Both elevators are busted today, which is



par for the course. He scrambles random clothes into one of the Tuff  Totes and



then leaves his crappy  room for  the  last time.  All   the  way down  to  the ﬁrst



corner his back feels hot,  his neck as stiff  as an ironing  board. He  carries one



Tuff Tote in  each hand, and they seem to weigh  a hundred pounds apiece. He



keeps waiting  for  McFarland  to  call  his  name.  To step  out  from  beneath a



shadowed awning and  ask him  why  he’s not  at  work.  To ask  him  where he



thinks he’s going. To ask him what  he’s got in those bags. And then to tell  him



he’s going back to prison: Do  not pass Go, do not collect  two hundred  dollars.



Morris doesn’t relax until  Bugshit  Manor is out of sight  for good.



    Tom  Saubers is walking   his  little   pack  of real  estate agents through   the



empty IBM  facility,  pointing  out  the various features and encouraging them to



take pictures. They’re all  excited by the possibilities.  Come the end of the  day,



his surgically repaired legs and hips will   ache like all the  devils of hell,  but for



the time   being,  he’s feeling  ﬁne.  This  abandoned ofﬁce  and  manufacturing



complex could be a big deal for him. Life  is ﬁnally turning   around.



    Jerome has popped into Hodges’s ofﬁce to surprise Holly,  who  squeals with



joy when she sees him, then with apprehension when he seizes her by the waist



and swings her around as he likes to  do with  his  little   sister. They talk  for an



hour or more,  catching up,  and she gives him  her views on the  Saubers affair.



She’s happy when Jerome takes  her concerns about  the  Moleskine notebook



seriously, and happier still to ﬁnd  out he has seen 22 Jump Street. They drop the



subject of Pete Saubers and discuss the movie at great length, comparing  it  to



others in   Jonah Hill’s   ﬁlmography.   Then  they  move  on  to  a discussion  of



various computer apps.



    Andrew   Halliday   is  the only   one not  occupied.  First  editions  no  longer



matter to him,  nor do young waiters in  tight  black pants. Oil  and water are the

278
same as wind and  air to  him  now.  He’s sleeping  the big  sleep in  a  patch of



congealed blood, drawing ﬂies.






                                                             19





Eleven o’clock. It’s eighty  degrees in the city,  and the radio  says the mercury’s



apt to  touch  ninety  before subsiding.  Got to  be  global  warming,  people tell



each other.



    Morris   cruises past the  Birch  Street Rec twice,  and  is happy  (though  not



really surprised) to  see it’s as deserted as ever, just an empty brick box baking



under the  sun.  No  police;  no security  cars. Even  the  crow has departed  for



cooler environs. He circles the block, noting  that  there’s now a trim  little   Ford



Focus parked in the driveway of his old house. Mr. or Mrs. Saubers has knocked



off early. Hell,  maybe both  of them.  It’s  nothing  to  Morris.  He heads back to



the Rec and this  time  turns  in,  going  around to  the rear of  the building   and



parking in  what he’s now begun to think  of as his spot.



    He’s  conﬁdent  that  he’s unobserved, but  it’s  still   a  good idea  to  do this



quickly. He carries his bags to the window he’s forced up and drops them to the



basement ﬂoor, where they  land  with  a  ﬂat  clap and twin   puffs  of dust.  He



takes a quick  look  around,  then  slides feet ﬁrst  through   the  window  on his



stomach.



    A  wave of dizziness runs through his head as he takes his ﬁrst deep breath of



the cool, musty  air. He staggers a little,  and puts  his arms out for  balance. It’s



the heat, he thinks. You’ve been too busy to realize it, but  you’re dripping  with



sweat. Also, you ate no breakfast.



    Both  true,  but the main  thing  is simpler  and self-evident: he’s not as young



as he used to be, and it’s been years since the physical exertions of the dyehouse.



He’s got to pace himself. Over by the furnace are a couple of good-sized cartons



with  KITCHEN     SUPPLIES   printed  on the sides. Morris sits down on one of



these until his heartbeat slows and the dizziness passes. Then he unzips the tote

279
with  Andy’s  little   automatic  inside, tucks  the  gun  into  the waistband  of  his



pants at the small of his back, and blouses his shirt over it.  He takes a hundred



dollars of Andy’s money, just in  case he runs into any unforeseen expenses, and



leaves the rest for later.  He’ll  be back  here this  evening, may even spend the



night.   It   sort  of  depends on  the   kid   who  stole  his  notebooks,  and  what



measures Morris needs to employ in order to get them back.



    Whatever  it  takes, cocksucker, he thinks. Whatever it takes.



    Right   now  it’s time  to  move on.  As a younger man,  he could  have pulled



himself out of  that basement window easily, but  not now. He drags over one of



the KITCHEN      SUPPLIES    cartons—it’s surprisingly   heavy, probably some



old  busted appliance  inside—and  uses it  as a  step. Five  minutes  later,  he’s



headed for Andrew Halliday  Rare Editions, where he will   park his old pal’s car



in  his old  pal’s space and then spend the  rest of  the  day soaking up  the  air-



conditioning  and waiting  for the young notebook thief  to arrive.



    James Hawkins indeed, he thinks.






                                                             20





Quarter past two.



    Hodges,  Holly,   and  Jerome are on  the  move,  headed for  their  positions



around Northﬁeld  High:   Hodges out  front,  Jerome on the corner of Westﬁeld



Street, Holly   beyond the  high  school’s auditorium,   on  Garner Street. When



they are in position, they’ll  let  Hodges know.



    In   the  bookshop  on  Lacemaker Lane,  Morris   adjusts  his  tie,  turns   the



hanging sign from  CLOSED to  OPEN,  and unlocks the door. He  goes back to



the desk and sits down.  If a customer should  come in to  browse—not terribly



likely  at such a slack time of the day, but possible—he will  be happy to help. If



there’s a  customer  here  when   the  kid   arrives,  he’ll   think    of  something.



Improvise. His  heart is  beating hard,  but his  hands are steady. The shakes are



gone. I am a wolf, he tells himself. I’ll  bite  if  I have to.

280
    Pete  is in   his creative  writing   class. The text   is Strunk  and  White’s  The



Elements of Style, and today they are discussing the famous Rule 13: Omit needless



words. They have been assigned Hemingway’s short story “The Killers,”  and it



has provoked a lively class discussion. Many words are spoken on the subject of



how Hemingway   omits  needless words.  Pete barely  hears any of  them.  He



keeps looking   at   the  clock,   where  the  hands  march   steadily  toward   his



appointment with  Andrew  Halliday.  And he keeps going over his script.



    At   twenty-ﬁve  past two,  his phone vibrates against his  leg. He  slips it  out



and looks at the screen.




   Mom: Come right home after school, we need to talk.




    His  stomach cramps and his heart  kicks into  a higher  gear. It  might  be no



more than some chore that needs doing, but  Pete doesn’t believe it.  We need to



talk is Momspeak for  Houston, we have a problem. It could be the money, and in



fact that seems likely  to him,  because problems come in bunches. If it  is, then



Tina let the cat out of the  bag.



    All   right.  If  that’s how it  is,  all right.  He  will  go  home, and they will  talk,



but   he  needs  to  resolve  the   Halliday    business ﬁrst.   His    parents  aren’t



responsible for the jam he’s in,  and he won’t make them responsible. He won’t



blame himself,  either. He  did  what he  had to do.  If  Halliday  refuses to cut  a



deal, if he calls the police in  spite of the reasons Pete can give him not to, then



the  less his   parents know,   the  better.   He  doesn’t  want   them  charged  as



accessories, or something.



    He  thinks  about switching  his phone off and decides not to. If she texts him



again—or if  Tina does—it’s  better to  know. He  looks up at the  clock and sees



it’s twenty to  three. Soon the bell will  ring, and he’ll  leave school.



    Pete wonders if he’ll  ever be back.






                                                             21

281
Hodges parks  his  Prius  ﬁfty   feet  or  so down  from  the   high  school’s main



entrance. He’s on a yellow curb,  but  he has an old POLICE  CALL  card in  his



glove compartment,  which he saves for just such parking  problems. He  places



it  on  the dashboard. When   the bell   rings,  he gets out   of the  car and  leans



against the hood with   his arms folded,  watching  the bank of  doors. Engraved



above the entrance is  the  school’s motto:  EDUCATION    IS THE   LAMP  OF



LIFE. Hodges has his phone in one hand, ready to either make or receive a call,



depending on who comes out or doesn’t.



    The   wait  isn’t   long,  because Pete Saubers is  among  the  ﬁrst   group  of



students to burst  into the  June day and come hurrying  down the  wide granite



steps. Most of the kids are with  friends. The Saubers boy is alone. Not the only



one ﬂying  solo, of course, but there’s a set look  to his  face, as if he’s living  in



the future  instead of the  here and now. Hodges’s eyes are as good as they ever



were, and he thinks that could be the face of a soldier going into battle.



    Or  maybe he’s just worried about ﬁnals.



    Instead of  heading toward the  yellow buses parked beside the school on the



left,  he turns right,   toward  where Hodges is  parked. Hodges ambles to  meet



him,  speed-dialing Holly  as he goes. “I’ve got  him.  Tell  Jerome.” He cuts the



call without  waiting  for her to answer.



    The  boy  angles to go  around Hodges  on the  street side.  Hodges steps in



front of him.  “Hey, Pete, got a minute?”



    The  kid’s eyes snap front and center. He’s good-looking,  but  his  face is too



thin  and  his  forehead is  spotted  with   acne. His  lips  are  pressed so tightly



together that his  mouth is almost  gone. “Who  are you?” he asks. Not Yes sir or



Can I help you. Just Who are you. The voice as tight-wired as the face.



    “My  name is Bill  Hodges. I’d  like to  talk to  you.”



    Kids   are passing them, chattering,   elbowing,  laughing,  shooting  the shit,



adjusting  backpacks. A  few  glance at  Pete and  the  man  with  the  thinning



white  hair, but  none show any interest.  They have places to go  and things  to



do.



    “About   what?”

282
    “In   my car would  be better. So we can have some privacy.” He points at the



Prius.



    The  boy repeats, “About what?” He doesn’t move.



    “Here’s  the  deal, Pete. Your  sister Tina  is friends  with  Barbara Robinson.



I’ve known  the  Robinson family   for years, and Barb  persuaded Tina to  come



and talk to me. She’s very worried about you.”



    “Why?”



    “If   you’re asking why  Barb suggested me, it’s because I used to be a police



detective.”



    Alarm  ﬂashes in the boy’s eyes.



    “If   you’re asking why  Tina’s worried, that’s something  we’d really be better



off not discussing on the street.”



    Just  like  that  the look  of alarm  is gone and the boy’s face is expressionless



again. It’s the face of a good poker player. Hodges has questioned suspects who



are able to  wipe their   faces like that,  and  they  are usually the  ones who are



toughest to crack. If they crack at all.



    “I  don’t  know what Tina  said to you, but she’s got nothing to worry  about.”



    “If   what she told  me is true,  she might.”  Hodges gives Pete his best smile.



“Come on, Pete. I’m not going  to kidnap  you. Swear to God.”



    Pete nods reluctantly.  When  they  reach the Prius, the  kid  stops dead. He’s



reading the yellow card on the dashboard. “Used to be a police detective, or still



are?”



    “Used  to be,” Hodges says. “That card . . . call it  a souvenir. Comes in handy



sometimes. I’ve  been off  the  force and  collecting  my  pension  for ﬁve  years.



Please get in so we can talk.  I’m  here as a friend.  If  we stand out  here much



longer, I’m going  to melt.”



    “And  if  I don’t?”



    Hodges shrugs. “Then  you’re off.”



    “Okay,  but  only  for a minute,”   Pete says. “I have to  walk home  today so I



can stop at the drugstore  for my  father. He takes this  stuff,  Vioxx. Because he



got hurt  a few years ago.”



    Hodges nods. “I  know. City  Center. That was my case.”

283
    “Yeah?”



    “Yeah.”



    Pete  opens the  passenger door and gets  into  the  Prius.  He  doesn’t seem



nervous about  being  in  a  strange man’s  car. Careful  and  cautious, but   not



nervous. Hodges,  who  has done  roughly  ten  thousand  suspect and  witness



interviews  over  the  years, is  pretty   sure  the  boy  has  come to   a decision,



although he  can’t tell  if  it’s to  spill  what’s on  his mind  or  keep it  to  himself.



Either way, it won’t  take long to ﬁnd  out.



    He  goes around and gets in  behind  the wheel. Pete is  okay with  that,  but



when Hodges starts the engine, he tenses up and grabs the doorhandle.



    “Relax.  I  only  want the  air-conditioning.   It’s damn  hot,  in case you didn’t



notice. Especially for so early in the year. Probably global warm—”



    “Let’s  get this over with  so I can pick up  my dad’s scrip and go home. What



did my  sister tell you? You know she’s only thirteen,  right? I  love her to death,



but  Mom  calls her  Tina  the  Drama Queen-a.”  And  then,  as if  this  explains



everything, “She and her friend Ellen never miss Pretty Little Liars.”



    Okay,  so the initial  decision is  not to  talk.  Not  all that  surprising.  The job



now is to change his mind.



    “Tell  me about the cash that came in the mail, Pete.”



    No  tensing  up;  no uh-oh look  ﬂashing across the kid’s  face. He knew  that



was it, Hodges thinks. He  knew as soon as his sister’s name came up. He might



even have had advance warning.  Tina  could have had  a change of  heart and



texted him.



    “You  mean the mystery money,” Pete says. “That’s what we call it.”



    “Yeah. That’s what I  mean.”



    “It   started coming  four years ago, give or take.  I was about the  age Tina is



now. There’d be an envelope addressed to my dad every month or so. Never any



letter with  it,  just the money.”



    “Five  hundred dollars.”



    “Once  or  twice it   might  have been a little   less or a little   more,  I  guess. I



wasn’t always there when it came, and after the ﬁrst couple of  times, Mom  and



Dad didn’t  talk about it  very much.”

284
    “Like talking about it might  jinx it?”


    “Yeah, like  that.  And at  some point, Teens got the idea I  was the  one


sending it. Like as if. Back then I didn’t even get an allowance.”


    “If  you didn’t do it, who did?”


    “I  don’t know.”


    It  seems he will stop there, but then he goes on. Hodges listens peacefully,


hoping  Pete will   say  too  much.  The  boy  is  obviously  intelligent,   but


sometimes even the intelligent ones say too much. If you let them.


    “You know how every Christmas they have stories on the news about some


guy giving out hundred-dollar bills in Walmart or wherever?”


    “Sure.”


    “I  think it  was that type of deal. Some rich guy decided to play Secret Santa


with one of the people who got hurt that day at City Center, and he picked my


dad’s name out of a hat.” He turns to face Hodges for the ﬁrst time since they


got in the car, eyes wide and earnest and totally untrustworthy. “For all I know,


he’s sending money to some of the others, too. Probably the ones who got hurt


the worst, and couldn’t work.”


    Hodges thinks, That’s good, kiddo. It actually makes a degree of sense.


    “Giving   out  a  thousand dollars to  ten  or  twenty  random shoppers at


Christmas is one thing. Giving well over twenty grand to one family over four


years is something else. If you add in other families, you’d be talking about a


small fortune.”


    “He  could be a hedge fund dude,” Pete says. “You know, one of those guys


who got rich while everyone else was getting poor and felt guilty about it.”


    He’s not looking at Hodges anymore, now he’s looking straight out of the


windshield. There’s an aroma coming off him, or so it seems to Hodges; not


sweat but fatalism. Again he thinks  of soldiers preparing to go into  battle,


knowing the chances are at least ﬁfty-ﬁfty that they’ll be killed or wounded.


    “Listen to me, Pete. I don’t care about the money.”


    “I  didn’t send it!”


    Hodges pushes on. It’s the thing he was always best at. “It was a windfall,


and you used it to help your folks out of a tough spot. That’s not a bad thing,

285
it’s an admirable thing.”



    “Lots  of people might  not think  so,” Pete says. “If it was true, that  is.”



    “You’re  wrong  about  that.  Most  people  would think  so.  And  I’ll   tell  you



something you  can take as a hundred  percent dead-red certainty,  because it’s



based on forty   years of experience as a  cop.  No  prosecutor in   this  city,  no



prosecutor in the whole  country, would try  bringing  charges against a kid who



found some money and used it to help  his family  after his dad ﬁrst  lost his job



and then got  his legs crushed by  a lunatic.  The press would  crucify  a man or



woman who tried to  prosecute that shit.”



    Pete is  silent,  but  his throat  is  working,  as if  he’s holding  back a sob. He



wants to tell,  but  something is  holding  him  back. Not  the money, but  related



to  the money.  Has to  be.  Hodges is  curious  about  where the  cash in  those



monthly  envelopes came from—anyone would  be—but   he’s far more curious



about what’s going on with  this kid  now.



    “You  sent them the money—”



    “For  the last time,  I didn’t!”



    “—and   that   went  smooth  as silk,   but  then  you  got  into   some kind   of



jackpot. Tell  me what it  is, Pete. Let me help you ﬁx  it.  Let me help you make



it right.”



    For  a moment  the  boy trembles  on the  brink  of  revelation. Then  his  eyes



shift  to   his  left.   Hodges  follows   them  and  sees the  card  he  put   on  the



dashboard. It’s  yellow,  the  color  of  caution.   The  color  of  danger. POLICE



CALL. He  wishes to Christ he’d left  it  in  the glove compartment  and parked a



hundred yards  farther  down  the  street. Jesus Christ,  he  walks every  day. A



hundred yards would have been easy.



    “There’s  nothing  wrong,”  Pete says. He now  speaks as mechanically as the



computer-generated voice  that  comes out   of  Hodges’s dashboard GPS,  but



there’s a pulse beating in  his temples  and his hands are clasped tightly  in  his



lap and there’s sweat on his face in spite of the air-conditioning.   “I  didn’t  send



the money. I have to get my dad’s pills.”



    “Pete,   listen.   Even  if   I   was  still    a  cop,   this   conversation  would   be



inadmissible in  court. You’re  a minor, and there’s no responsible adult  present

286
to counsel you. In  addition  I never gave you the words—the  Miranda warning



—”



    Hodges  sees the boy’s face slam shut like a bank vault door. All  it  took was



two words: Miranda warning.



    “I   appreciate your concern,”  Pete says in that  same polite  robot voice.  He



opens the car door. “But there’s nothing wrong. Really.”



    “There  is, though,”   Hodges says. He takes one of his cards from  his breast



pocket  and  holds  it   out.   “Take  this.   Call  me  if   you  change  your  mind.



Whatever it  is, I can hel—”



    The  door closes. Hodges watches Pete Saubers walk swiftly  away, puts the



card back in his  pocket, and thinks,  Fuck  me, I  blew it.  Six  years ago, maybe



even two, I would have had him.



    But  blaming  his  age is too easy. A deeper part of him,  more analytical  and



less emotional, knows he was never really close. Thinking  he might  have been



was an illusion.  Pete has geared himself up  for  battle  so completely that  he’s



psychologically incapable of standing down.



    The  kid  reaches City  Drug,  takes his  father’s prescription  out  of his  back



pocket, and goes inside. Hodges speed-dials Jerome.



    “Bill!   How  did  it go?”



    “Not   so good. You know City Drug?”



    “Sure.”



    “He’s  getting  a  scrip ﬁlled  there.  Haul  ass around the block  as fast as you



can. He told  me he’s going  home, and maybe he is,  but if  he’s not,  I want  to



know where he does go. Do you think you  can tail him?  He knows  my car. He



won’t know yours.”



    “No  prob.  I’m on my  way.”



    Less than three minutes  later Jerome is coming  around the  corner. He nips



into a space just vacated by a mom  picking  up a couple of  kids that  look  way



too shrimpy  to be in  high  school. Hodges pulls out,  gives Jerome a wave, and



heads for Holly’s position on Garner Street, punching in  her number as he goes.



They can wait for Jerome’s report together.

287
                                                             22





Pete’s father does take Vioxx, has ever since he ﬁnally  kicked  the OxyContin,



but he currently  has plenty. The folded sheet of paper Pete takes from his back



pocket and  glances at before going  into   City  Drug  is  a stern  note  from  the



assistant principal reminding   juniors  that Junior  Skip  Day is a myth,  and  the



ofﬁce will  examine all absences that day with particular care.



    Pete  doesn’t brandish  the  note; Bill   Hodges  may be  retired,  but  he  sure



didn’t  seem retarded. No, Pete just looks at it  for a moment,  as if making  sure



he has the right  thing,   and goes inside. He  walks  rapidly  to the  prescription



counter at the back, where Mr. Pelkey throws him  a friendly salute.



    “Yo,  Pete. What can I get you today?”



    “Nothing,    Mr. Pelkey, we’re all  ﬁne, but  there are a couple of kids after me



because I wouldn’t  let  them  copy  some answers from our  take-home history



test. I wondered if you could help  me.”



    Mr.   Pelkey  frowns  and starts  for  the  swing-gate.  He  likes  Pete,  who  is



always cheerful  even though  his  family   has gone through   incredibly   tough



times. “Point  them out to  me. I’ll  tell  them to get lost.”



    “No,   I  can handle it,   but  tomorrow.  After  they  have a chance to cool off.



Just, you know, if I  could slip out the  back . . .”



    Mr.   Pelkey drops  a conspiratorial  wink  that   says he was a kid  once, too.



“Sure. Come through the gate.”



    He  leads Pete  between shelves ﬁlled  with   salves and pills,  then  into   the



little   ofﬁce at  the  back.  Here  is  a door  with   a  big  red  sign  on it   reading



ALARM  WILL   SOUND.  Mr.  Pelkey shields the  code box next to  it  with  one



hand and punches in some numbers with the other. There’s a buzz.



    “Out   you go,” he tells Pete.



    Pete thanks him,  nips  out onto  the loading  dock behind the  drugstore, and



jumps down to  the cracked cement. An alley takes him  to Frederick Street. He



looks both  ways for  the ex-detective’s Prius,  doesn’t see it, and  breaks into  a



run. It  takes him twenty  minutes  to reach Lower Main Street, and although  he

288
never spots the blue  Prius, he makes a couple of  sudden diversions along the



way, just  to be  safe. He’s just  turning  onto  Lacemaker Lane when his  phone



vibrates again. This time the text  is from his sister.




   Tina: Did u talk 2 Mr. Hodges? Hope u did. Mom knows. I didn’t tell she KNEW. Please


   don’t be mad at me. 




    As  if  I  could,  Pete thinks.  Were they  two  years closer in age, maybe they



could have gotten  that sibling   rivalry  thing  going,  but  maybe not  even then.



Sometimes he gets irritated with  her, but  really mad has never happened, even



when she’s being a brat.



    The  truth  about  the money is out,  but  maybe he can say money was all he



found, and  hide the  fact that  he  tried  to  sell a murdered  man’s most private



property  just  so his  sister could  go  to  a school where  she wouldn’t  have  to



shower in a pack. And  where her dumb  friend  Ellen would  be in  the rearview



mirror.



    He   knows his  chances of getting   out  of  this  clean  are slim  approaching



none, but at some point—maybe this very afternoon, watching  the hands of the



clock move steadily  toward  the hour  of  three—that  has become of secondary



importance. What  he really wants is to  send the notebooks, especially the ones



containing  the  last  two  Jimmy   Gold  novels, to   NYU.   Or  maybe  The New



Yorker, since they published almost all of Rothstein’s short stories in  the ﬁfties.



And stick  it  to  Andrew  Halliday.  Yes, and hard. All  the  way up.  No way  can



Halliday  be allowed to sell any of Rothstein’s  later work  to some rich crackpot



collector who  will   keep it  in  a climate-controlled   secret room along with   his



Renoirs or Picassos or his precious ﬁfteenth-century Bible.



    When   he was a kid,   Pete saw the  notebooks only  as buried  treasure. His



treasure. He knows  better  now, and not  just  because he’s fallen in  love with



John  Rothstein’s  nasty,  funny,  and   sometimes  wildly   moving   prose.  The



notebooks were never  just  his.  They  were never  just  Rothstein’s,  either,  no



matter  what  he  might   have thought,   hidden  away  in  his  New  Hampshire



farmhouse. They  deserve to be  seen and read by  everyone. Maybe the  little

289
landslide that   exposed the trunk   on  that  winter   day had  been nothing   but



happenstance, but Pete doesn’t believe it.  He  believes that,  like  the  blood of



Abel,  the notebooks cried  out  from  the ground.  If  that  makes him  a dipshit



romantic, so be it. Some shit does mean shit.



    Halfway   down   Lacemaker Lane,  he  spots  the  bookshop’s  old-fashioned



scrolled  sign.  It’s  like   something  you   might   see outside  an  English   pub,



although  this   one  reads  Andrew   Halliday   Rare   Editions   instead  of  The



Plowman’s Rest, or  whatever. Looking  at it,   Pete’s last doubts disappear like



smoke.



    He  thinks,  John  Rothstein is  not  your birthday  fuck,  either,  Mr. Halliday.



Not  now  and  never was. You  get  none of  the  notebooks.  Bupkes, honey, as



Jimmy  Gold would  say. If you  go to  the police,  I’ll  tell  them  everything,  and



after that business you went through  with  the James Agee book, we’ll see who



they believe.



    A  weight—invisible    but  very heavy—slips  from  his shoulders. Something



in his heart seems to have come back into true for the ﬁrst time  in  a long time.



Pete starts for Halliday’s at a fast walk, unaware that his ﬁsts are clenched.






                                                             23





At  a few minutes  past three—around  the  time  Pete is getting   into  Hodges’s



Prius—a customer  does come into the  bookshop. He’s a  pudgy  fellow  whose



thick  glasses and gray-ﬂecked goatee do not disguise his resemblance to Elmer



Fudd.



    “Can  I  help you?”  Morris  asks, although  what ﬁrst  occurs to  him  is Ehhh,



what’s up, Doc?



    “I  don’t  know,” Elmer  says dubiously. “Where is Drew?”



    “There  was sort  of a family   emergency in Michigan.”   Morris  knows  Andy



came from Michigan, so that’s okay, but he’ll  have to be cagey about the family

290
angle; if  Andy  ever talked  about  relatives, Morris  has forgotten.  “I’m   an old



friend. He asked if I’d  mind the  store this afternoon.”



    Elmer  considers this.  Morris’s  left  hand,  meanwhile, creeps around to  the



small of his  back and touches the reassuring shape of the little   automatic. He



doesn’t want to shoot this  guy, doesn’t want to risk  the noise, but  he will  if  he



has to. There’s plenty of room for Elmer back there in Andy’s private ofﬁce.



    “He   was holding  a book  for  me, on  which  I  have made a deposit. A  ﬁrst



edition of They Shoot Horses, Don’t They? It’s by—”



    “Horace  McCoy,” Morris  ﬁnishes for him.  The books on the shelf to  the left



of  the  desk—the  ones the   security  DVDs   were  hiding   behind—had   slips



sticking   out  of  them,   and since  entering   the  bookstore  today, Morris   has



examined them all.  They’re  customer orders, and the  McCoy is  among them.



“Fine copy, signed. Flat signature, no dedication. Some foxing on the spine.”



    Elmer  smiles. “That’s the one.”



    Morris   takes it  down from  the  shelf, sneaking a  glance at his  watch as he



does. 3:13. Northﬁeld  High   classes end at three, which means the boy should



be here by three-thirty at the  latest.



    He   pulls  the  slip  and  sees Irving Yankovic, $750. He  hands the  book  to



Elmer with  a smile. “I   remember this one especially. Andy—I  guess he prefers



Drew these days—told me he’s only going to charge you ﬁve hundred. He got a



better deal on it than he expected, and wanted to pass the savings along.”



    Any   suspicion  Elmer   might   have  felt   at  ﬁnding   a  stranger  in   Drew’s



customary spot  evaporates at the  prospect  of  saving two   hundred  and ﬁfty



dollars. He  takes  out  his checkbook.  “So .  .  .  with  the  deposit,  that  comes



to . . .”



    Morris   waves a magnanimous  hand.  “He  neglected  to  tell   me  what  the



deposit was. Just deduct it. I’m sure he trusts you.”



    “After   all these years, he certainly ought  to.”  Elmer bends over the counter



and begins writing  the  check. He does this with  excruciating  slowness. Morris



checks the clock. 3:16. “Have you read They Shoot Horses?”



    “No,”   Morris  says. “I missed that one.”

291
    What  will   he do if the kid  comes in while this pretentious  goateed asshole is



still  dithering  over his checkbook? He won’t be able to tell  Saubers that Andy’s



in  back, not   after he’s  told  Elmer  Fudd  he’s in  Michigan.   Sweat begins  to



trickle  out of his hairline  and down his cheeks. He can feel it. He used to sweat



like that  in prison, while  he was waiting to be raped.



    “Marvelous  book,”  Elmer  says, pausing with  his  pen poised over the  half-



written  check. “Marvelous  noir, and a piece of  social commentary to  rival  The



Grapes of Wrath.” He pauses, thinking   instead of  writing,   and now  it’s  3:18.



“Well  .  .  . perhaps not  Grapes, that might   be going  too  far, but  it   certainly



rivals In Dubious Battle, which is more of a socialist tract than a novel, don’t you



agree?”



    Morris  says he does. His hands feel numb. If he has to pull out the  gun, he’s



apt to drop  it.  Or shoot himself  straight  down the crack of his ass. This makes



him yawp a sudden laugh, a startling sound in this  narrow, book-lined space.



    Elmer  looks up, frowning.  “Something  funny? About Steinbeck, perhaps?”



    “Absolutely   not,”  Morris says. “It’s . . . I  have a medical condition.” He  runs



a hand down one damp cheek. “It  makes me sweat, and then I start laughing.”



The look  on Elmer  Fudd’s face makes him  laugh  again. He  wonders if  Andy



and Elmer  ever  had sex,  and the  thought   of  that  bouncing,   slapping  ﬂesh



makes him laugh  some more. “I’m   sorry, Mr.  Yankovic. It’s  not  you. And  by



the way  . .  .  are you related  to the  noted  popular-music  humorist  Weird  Al



Yankovic?”



    “No,   not at  all.”  Yankovic scribbles his signature  in a hurry,  rips the  check



loose from   his  checkbook,  and  passes it  to   Morris,   who  is  grinning    and



thinking   that  this  is a scene John Rothstein  could  have written.   During  the



exchange, Yankovic takes care that their ﬁngers should not touch.



    “Sorry  about the laughing,”  Morris  says, laughing harder. He’s remembering



that they used to call  the noted popular-musical humorist  Weird  Al  Yank-My-



Dick.  “I  really  can’t  control  it.”   The clock  now  reads 3:21, and  even that  is



funny.



    “I   understand.” Elmer is  backing away with  the book  clutched to his  chest.



“Thank you.”

292
    He   hurries toward  the  door.  Morris  calls  after  him,  “Make  sure  you tell



Andy I  gave you the discount. When you see him.”



    This  makes Morris laugh  harder than ever, because that’s a good one. When



you see him! Get it?



    When   the  ﬁt  ﬁnally   passes, it’s 3:25,  and for  the  ﬁrst  time   it  occurs to



Morris  that  maybe he hurried  Mr.  Irving   “Elmer  Fudd”  Yankovic  out  for no



reason at all. Maybe the boy has changed his mind. Maybe he’s not coming, and



there’s nothing funny about that.



    Well,  Morris  thinks,  if  he doesn’t show up here, I’ll just  have to pay a house



call. Then the joke will  be on him.  Won’t  it?






                                                             24





Twenty to four.



    There’s no need to park  on a yellow curb now;  the parents who clogged the



area around the  high  school earlier,  waiting   to  pick  up  their  kids,   have all



departed.  The  buses are  gone,  too.  Hodges,   Holly,   and  Jerome are  in   a



Mercedes sedan that once belonged to Holly’s  cousin Olivia.   It  was used as a



murder weapon at City  Center, but  none of  them is  thinking   about that  now.



They have other things in mind,  chieﬂy Thomas Saubers’s son.



    “The  kid   may be in  trouble,  but  you  have to admit  he’s a quick  thinker,”



Jerome says. After  ten minutes  parked  down  the  street from  City   Drug,  he



went inside and ascertained that the boy he was tasked to follow  had departed.



“A pro couldn’t  have done much better.”



    “True,”  Hodges says. The boy has turned into  a challenge, certainly more of



a challenge than the  airplane-stealing Mr.  Madden. Hodges  hasn’t questioned



the pharmacist  himself and  doesn’t need to. Pete’s been getting  prescriptions



ﬁlled there  for years, he knows the pharmacist and the pharmacist knows him.



The kid made up some bullshit  story, the pharmacist let him  use the back door,

293
and pop  goes the weasel. They never covered Frederick  Street, because there



seemed to be no need.



    “Now   what?” Jerome asks.



    “I   think  we should  go over to  the Saubers house. We had a slim chance of



keeping his parents out of this, per Tina’s request, but I think   that just  went by



the boards.”



    “They   must  already have  some idea it   was him,”   Jerome says. “I   mean,



they’re his folks.”



    Hodges  thinks  of saying There are none so blind as those who will not see, and



shrugs instead.



    Holly   has contributed  nothing  to  the discussion so far, has just  sat behind



the wheel of her big boat of  a car, arms crossed over her bosom, ﬁngers tapping



lightly   at  her shoulders. Now   she turns  to  Hodges, who  is  sprawled in  the



backseat. “Did you ask Peter about the notebook?”



    “I  never got  a chance,” Hodges says. Holly’s got a bee in her hat about that



notebook, and he should have asked, just to satisfy her, but the truth is, it never



even crossed his mind. “He decided to go, and boogied. Wouldn’t even take my



card.”



    Holly   points  to  the  school. “I  think   we  should talk   to Ricky   the Hippie



before we leave.” And  when neither  of them  replies: “Peter’s house will still  be



there, you know. It’s not going  to ﬂy away, or anything.”



    “Guess it  wouldn’t  hurt,”  Jerome says.



    Hodges  sighs. “And  tell  him  what, exactly? That  one of his students found



or  stole a  stack  of  money and  doled  it   out  to  his  parents  like  a  monthly



allowance? The parents should ﬁnd that out  before some teacher who probably



doesn’t know  jack-shit  about  anything.   And  Pete should  be  the one  to  tell



them. It’ll   let his sister off the hook, for one thing.”



    “But   if  he’s in some kind of  jam he doesn’t want  them to  know about,  and



he still  wanted to talk  to  someone . . . you know, an adult  . . .”  Jerome is four



years older than  he  was when he  helped Hodges  with   the  Brady Hartsﬁeld



mess, old  enough to  vote  and  buy  legal  liquor,  but   still   young  enough to



remember how it  is to be seventeen and suddenly realize you’ve gotten in over

294
your head with  something. When  that happens, you want to  talk  to somebody



who’s been around the block a few times.



    “Jerome’s right,”   Holly   says. She turns back to  Hodges. “Let’s  talk  to  the



teacher and ﬁnd out if  Pete asked for advice about anything. If  he asks why we



want to know—”



    “Of  course he’ll want to know  why,” Hodges says, “and I  can’t exactly claim



conﬁdentiality. I’m  not  a lawyer.”



    “Or  a priest,”  Jerome adds, not helpfully.



    “You  can tell him  we’re friends of the family,”  Holly  says ﬁrmly. “And  that’s



true.” She opens her door.



    “You  have a hunch about this,” Hodges says. “Am I right?”



    “Yes,”  she says. “It’s a Holly-hunch. Now come on.”






                                                             25





As  they   are  walking    up   the  wide   front    steps  and  beneath  the   motto



EDUCATION   IS  THE  LAMP   OF  LIFE,  the door  of  Andrew  Halliday  Rare



Editions  opens again and Pete Saubers steps inside. He starts down the  main



aisle, then stops, frowning.  The man behind  the desk isn’t Mr.  Halliday.  He is



in most ways the exact opposite of Mr. Halliday, pale instead of ﬂorid (except for



his lips, which  are weirdly  red), white-haired  instead of bald,  and thin  instead



of fat. Almost  gaunt. Jesus. Pete expected his script to go out the  window, but



not this fast.



    “Where’s  Mr. Halliday?  I had an appointment  to see him.”



    The  stranger smiles. “Yes, of course, although he didn’t give  me your name.



He just  said a young man. He’s waiting  for  you in his  ofﬁce at the back of  the



shop.” This is actually true.  In a way. “Just knock and go in.”



    Pete  relaxes a little.   It  makes sense that  Halliday  wouldn’t   want  to  have



such a crucial meeting out here, where anybody looking  for a secondhand copy



of To Kill  a Mockingbird could walk  in and interrupt   them.  He’s being careful,

295
thinking   ahead. If Pete doesn’t do the same, his slim  chance of coming out  of



this okay will  go out the window.



    “Thanks,”   he says, and walks between tall bookcases toward the back of the



shop.



    As  soon as he goes by the desk, Morris rises and goes quickly and quietly to



the front of the shop. He ﬂips  the sign in the  door from OPEN  to CLOSED.



    Then  he turns the bolt.






                                                             26





The secretary in the main  ofﬁce of Northﬁeld   High  looks curiously  at the  trio



of after-school visitors,   but  asks no questions.  Perhaps she assumes they are



family members come to plead the case of some failing student. Whatever they



are, it’s Howie Ricker’s problem, not  hers.



    She checks a magnetic board covered with  multicolored  tags and says, “He



should still  be  in his  homeroom. That’s  three-oh-nine, on  the third   ﬂoor, but



please peek through the window and make sure he’s not with a student. He has



conferences today until   four, and  with   school ending  in   a couple  of  weeks,



plenty of  kids stop  by to  ask for help  on their  ﬁnal  papers. Or plead for extra



time.”



    Hodges  thanks  her and  they  go  up the  stairs,  their  heels echoing.  From



somewhere below,  a quartet   of  musicians  is  playing   “Greensleeves.” From



somewhere above, a hearty male voice cries jovially, “You suck, Malone!”



    Room  309 is halfway down  the third-ﬂoor  corridor,  and Mr. Ricker,  dressed



in an eye-burning  paisley shirt  with   the collar  unbuttoned  and the  tie pulled



down, is talking  to a girl  who is  gesturing dramatically  with  her hands. Ricker



glances up, sees he has visitors, then returns his attention to the girl.



    The  visitors stand against the  wall, where posters advertise summer classes,



summer workshops,  summer  holiday   destinations,  an end-of-year  dance. A



couple of girls  come bopping down  the hall,  both  wearing softball  jerseys and

296
caps. One is tossing  a catcher’s mitt   from  hand to  hand,  playing  hot  potato



with  it.



    Holly’s  phone goes off, playing an ominous handful of notes from the “Jaws”



theme. Without   slowing,  one  of the  girls  says, “You’re gonna  need a bigger



boat,” and they both laugh.



    Holly   looks at her phone, then puts it  away. “A text from Tina,”  she says.



    Hodges raises his eyebrows.



    “Her  mother  knows about the money. Her father  will  too, as soon as he gets



home from work.”  She nods toward the closed door of Mr.  Ricker’s room.  “No



reason to hold back now.”






                                                             27





The ﬁrst thing   Pete becomes aware of when he opens the door to the darkened



inner ofﬁce  is the  billowing   stench. It’s  both  metallic  and  organic, like  steel



shavings mixed  with   spoiled  cabbage. The  next  thing   is  the  sound, a  low



buzzing. Flies, he  thinks,  and although  he can’t see what’s in there, the  smell



and the  sound come together  in  his mind   with  a thud   like  a heavy piece of



furniture  falling  over. He turns to ﬂee.



    The  clerk  with   the red  lips  is standing  there beneath  one of the  hanging



globes that light  the back of  the store, and in his hand is a strangely jolly  gun,



red and  black  with  inlaid   gold  curlicues.  Pete’s ﬁrst thought   is  Looks fake.



They never look fake in the movies.



    “Keep  your head, Peter,” the clerk  says. “Don’t do anything  foolish  and you



won’t get hurt.  This is just  a discussion.”



    Pete’s second thought is You’re lying. I  can see it in your eyes.



    “Turn   around, take a step forward,  and turn  on the  light.  The  switch  is to



the left of the door. Then  go in, but  don’t try  to slam the door, unless you want



a bullet in  the back.”

297
    Pete  steps forward.  Everything  inside  him   from  the  chest on  down  feels



loose and in  motion.  He  hopes he won’t  piss his pants  like  a baby. Probably



that  wouldn’t  be  such a big  deal—surely  he wouldn’t   be the  ﬁrst  person to



spray his Jockeys when a gun is pointed at him—but it  seems like a big deal. He



fumbles with   his  left  hand, ﬁnds  the  switch,  and ﬂips  it.  When   he sees the



thing  lying   on the  sodden carpet, he tries  to  scream, but the  muscles in  his



diaphragm aren’t  working  and all  that  comes out  is a watery  moan. Flies are



buzzing and  lighting   on  what  remains of  Mr.  Halliday’s  face. Which   is  not



much.



    “I   know,”  the  clerk  says sympathetically. “Not   very  pretty,  is  he? Object



lessons rarely are. He pissed me off, Pete. Do you want to piss me off?”



    “No,”   Pete says in a high,  wavering  voice. It  sounds more like  Tina’s than



his own. “I  don’t.”



    “Then  you  have learned your lesson. Go  on in.  Move very  slowly, but  feel



free to avoid the mess.”



    Pete steps in  on legs he can barely feel, edging  to  his left  along one of the



bookcases, trying to  keep his  loafers on the  part  of the  rug  that  hasn’t been



soaked. There isn’t much. His  initial   panic has been replaced by a glassy sheet



of terror.  He  keeps thinking   of those red  lips.  Keeps imagining   the big  bad



wolf telling  Red Riding  Hood,  The better to kiss you with, my dear.



    I  have to think,  he tells  himself. I  have to, or I’m  going to  die in this  room.



Probably I will  anyway, but if  I can’t think,  it’s  for sure.



    He   keeps  skirting    the   blotch   of   blackish-purple   until    a   cherrywood



sideboard blocks  his  path,  and  there  he  stops.  To go  farther   would  mean



stepping onto  the bloody part  of the  rug, and it   might  still  be wet  enough to



squelch. On the sideboard are crystal decanters of booze and a number of squat



glasses. On the desk he sees a hatchet, its blade throwing  back a reﬂection  of



the overhead light. That  is surely the weapon the man with  the red lips used to



kill  Mr. Halliday,  and Pete supposes it should scare him even more, but instead



the sight of it  clears his mind like  a hard slap.



    The  door clicks shut behind  him.  The clerk who probably  isn’t a clerk  leans



against it, pointing   the jolly  little  gun  at Pete. “All  right,”   he says, and smiles.

298
“Now  we can talk.”



    “Wh-Wh—”     He clears his throat, tries again, this  time sounds a little  more



like himself.  “What? Talk  about what?”



    “Don’t   be disingenuous. The notebooks. The ones you stole.”



    It  all  comes together in Pete’s mind. His mouth  falls open.



    The  clerk  who  isn’t  a clerk  smiles. “Ah.   The penny  drops, I  see. Tell  me



where they are, and you might get out of this  alive.”



    Pete doesn’t think  so.



    He  thinks  he already knows too much for that.






                                                             28





When  the  girl   emerges from  Mr.  Ricker’s  homeroom, she’s smiling,   so her



conference must have gone all right.   She even twiddles  her ﬁngers in  a little



wave—perhaps to all three of them,  more likely  just to  Jerome—as she hurries



off down the hall.



    Mr.  Ricker,  who has accompanied her to the door, looks  at Hodges and his



associates. “Can I help you, lady and gentlemen?”



    “Not   likely,”  Hodges says, “but worth a try. May we come in?”



    “Of  course.”



    They  sit   at  desks in  the  ﬁrst  row  like   attentive  students.  Ricker  plants



himself on the edge of his desk, an informality  he eschewed when talking to his



young conferee. “I’m pretty  sure you’re not parents, so what’s up?”



    “It’s  about one of your students,” Hodges says. “A boy named Peter Saubers.



We think  he may be in trouble.”



    Ricker  frowns. “Pete? That doesn’t seem likely. He’s one of the best students



I’ve ever had.  Demonstrates a genuine love  of literature,   especially American



literature.  Honor  Roll  every quarter. What   kind  of trouble  do  you think   he’s



in?”



    “That’s  the thing—we  don’t  know. I asked, but he stonewalled me.”

299
    Ricker’s frown  deepens. “That doesn’t sound like the Pete Saubers I know.”



    “It   has to do with  some money he seems to have come into a few years back.



I’d like  to ﬁll  you in  on what we know. It  won’t take long.”



    “Please say it has nothing to do with  drugs.”



    “It   doesn’t.”



    Ricker  looks relieved. “Good.  Seen too much of that, and the smart kids  are



just as much at risk as the dumb ones. More, in some cases. Tell me. I’ll help if



I can.”



    Hodges  starts with  the  money that  began arriving  at the  Saubers house in



what was, almost literally, the family’s  darkest hour. He tells Ricker  about how,



seven months after the monthly deliveries of mystery cash ceased, Pete began to



seem stressed and unhappy. He ﬁnishes with Tina’s conviction that her brother



tried  to get  some more money, maybe from the  same source the mystery cash



came from, and is in his current jam as a result.



    “He   grew a moustache,” Ricker  muses when Hodges has ﬁnished. “He’s in



Mrs. Davis’s Creative Writing    course now, but  I saw him  in  the  hall  one day



and joshed him about it.”



    “How   did he take the joshing?” Jerome asks.



    “Not   sure he even heard me. He seemed to be on another planet. But that’s



not uncommon with  teenagers, as I’m sure you know. Especially when summer



vacation’s right around the corner.”



    Holly   asks, “Did he ever mention a notebook to you? A Moleskine?”



    Ricker  considers it while Holly   looks at him hopefully.



    “No,”   he says at last. “I don’t think  so.”



    She deﬂates.



    “Did   he come to  you about  anything?” Hodges asks. “Anything   at all  that



was troubling  him, no matter  how minor? I  raised a daughter, and I know they



sometimes talk about their problems in  code. Probably you know that, too.”



    Ricker  smiles. “The famous friend-who.”



    “Beg  pardon?”



    “As  in ‘I  have a friend who might  have gotten his girlfriend   pregnant.’ Or ‘I



have a friend who knows who spray-painted anti-gay slogans on the wall in  the

300
boys’ locker  room.’  After  a  couple of  years on the  job,  every teacher knows



about the famous friend-who.”



    Jerome asks, “Did Pete Saubers have a friend-who?”



    “Not   that I  can recall. I’m very sorry. I’d help you if  I could.”



    Holly   asks, in a small and not very hopeful  voice, “Never a friend  who kept



a secret diary or maybe found some valuable information in a notebook?”



    Ricker  shakes his head. “No.  I’m  really sorry. Jesus, I hate to think   of Pete



in  trouble.  He  wrote  one  of the  ﬁnest  term  papers I’ve  ever gotten   from  a



student. It  was about the Jimmy Gold trilogy.”



    “John  Rothstein,”  Jerome says, smiling. “I  used to have a tee-shirt that said



—”



    “Don’t   tell me,”  Ricker says. “Shit don’t mean shit.”



    “Actually,   no.  It  was the  one about  not  being  anyone’s birthday  . .  .  uh,



present.”



    “Ah,”   Ricker says, smiling. “That  one.”



    Hodges  gets up.  “I’m   more of  a Michael  Connelly  man.  Thanks for  your



time.”  He holds  out his hand.  Ricker shakes it. Jerome is also getting  up, but



Holly  remains seated.



    “John  Rothstein,”  she says. “He wrote that  book about the kid  who  got fed



up with  his parents and ran away to New York City, right?”



    “That   was the  ﬁrst  novel  in  the  Gold   trilogy,  yes. Pete  was crazy about



Rothstein. Probably  still  is. He  may discover new heroes in college, but  when



he was in  my  class, he thought   Rothstein  walked  on  water. Have  you  read



him?”



    “I   never have,” Holly  says, also getting  up. “But   I’m  a big  movie fan, so I



always go to  a website  called Deadline.  To read the  latest  Hollywood  news?



They had an article about how all  these producers wanted to make a movie out



of The Runner. Only no matter how much  money they offered, he told  them to



go to hell.”



    “That     sounds  like    Rothstein,    all    right,”     Ricker    says.  “A    famous



curmudgeon. Hated  the  movies. Claimed  they were art  for  idiots.  Sneered at



the word cinema. Wrote an essay about it, I think.”

301
    Holly   has brightened. “Then he got  murdered and there was no will and they



still  can’t make a movie because of all the legal problems.”



    “Holly,   we ought  to go,”  Hodges says. He wants to get  over to the Saubers



home. Wherever Pete is now, he’ll turn up there eventually.



    “Okay   . .  . I  guess . .  .”  She sighs. Although  in  her  late forties,  and even



with  the  mood-levelers  she takes, Holly    still  spends too  much  time   on  an



emotional rollercoaster. Now  the  light  in  her  eyes is going out  and she looks



terribly  downcast. Hodges feels bad for her, wants to tell her that,  even though



not many hunches pan out,  you shouldn’t  stop playing  them.  Because the few



that do  pan out are pure gold.  Not  exactly a pearl of  wisdom, but  later, when



he has a private moment with her, he’ll pass it on. Try to ease the sting a little.



    “Thank  you for  your time,  Mr. Ricker.”  Hodges opens the door. Faintly, like



music heard in a dream, comes the sound of “Greensleeves.”



    “Oh  my  gosh,” Ricker says. “Hold the phone.”



    They  turn back to him.



    “Pete  did come to  me about  something, and  not so long  ago. But  I  see so



many students . . .”



    Hodges nods understandingly.



    “And   it wasn’t a big  deal, no adolescent Sturm und Drang, it  was actually a



very pleasant conversation. It only came to mind now because it was about that



book you mentioned, Ms.  Gibney. The Runner.” He smiles a little.  “Pete didn’t



have a friend-who, though. He had an uncle-who.”



    Hodges feels a spark of something bright  and hot, like  a lit  fuse. “What  was



it about Pete’s uncle that made him worth  discussing?”



    “Pete  said the uncle had a signed ﬁrst edition of The Runner. He offered it to



Pete because Pete was a Rothstein fan—that was the  story, anyway. Pete told



me he was interested in selling it.  I asked him  if he was sure he wanted to part



with  a book signed by his  literary  idol,  and he said he was considering it  very



seriously. He was hoping to help  send his sister to one of the private  schools, I



can’t remember which one—”



    “Chapel  Ridge,” Holly   says. The light in her eyes has returned.



    “I  think   that’s right.”

302
    Hodges  walks slowly back  to the desk. “Tell  me .  . . us . . .  everything  you



remember about that conversation.”



    “That’s   really  all,  except for  one thing   that  kind   of  nudged my  bullshit



meter. He said his uncle  won the book  in a poker game. I  remember thinking



that’s the kind  of thing  that happens in novels or movies, but rarely in  real life.



But of course, sometimes life does imitate art.”



    Hodges  frames the obvious  question, but  Jerome gets there  ﬁrst.  “Did   he



ask you about booksellers?”



    “Yes,  that’s really why  he came to  me. He  had a short list  of  local dealers,



probably gleaned from the  Internet.  I steered him  away from one of them.  Bit



of a shady reputation there.”



    Jerome  looks at  Holly.  Holly   looks  at  Hodges. Hodges  looks at  Howard



Ricker and asks the obvious follow-up question. He’s locked in  now, the fuse in



his head burning brightly.



    “What’s  this  shady book dealer’s name?”






                                                             29





Pete sees only one chance to go on living. As long as the man with the  red lips



and pasty  complexion  doesn’t know  where  the  Rothstein  notebooks are,  he



won’t pull  the trigger  of the gun, which  is looking  less jolly all the time.



    “You’re  Mr.  Halliday’s  partner, aren’t  you?” he says, not exactly looking   at



the corpse—it’s too  awful—but   lifting   his chin  in  that  direction.  “In  cahoots



with  him.”



    Red Lips  utters a brief chuckle, then  does something that shocks Peter, who



believed until  that moment he was beyond shock. He spits on the body.



    “He  was never my partner. Although   he had his chance, once upon a time.



Long before you were  even a twinkle  in  your  father’s eye, Peter. And while   I



ﬁnd your  attempt  at a diversion  admirable,  I must  insist  that  we keep to  the

303
subject at hand. Where are the notebooks? In your house? Which used to be my



house, by the way. Isn’t that an interesting co-inky-dink?”



    Here  is another shock. “Your—”



    “More  ancient history. Never mind.  Is that  where they are?”



    “No.  They  were for awhile, but I  moved them.”



    “And  should  I believe that? I think  not.”



    “Because of him.”  Pete again lifts  his  chin toward  the body. “I   tried to  sell



him some of the notebooks, and he threatened to tell  the police. I  had to move



them.”



    Red  Lips considers this,  then gives a nod.  “All   right,  I  can see that. It  ﬁts



with  what he told me. So where did you put  them? Out  with  it,  Peter. Fess up.



We’ll  both feel  better, especially you. If  ’twere to  be done, ’twere well  it  were



done quickly. Macbeth, act one.”



    Pete  does not fess up. To fess up  is to  die. This  is  the man  who stole  the



notebooks in   the  ﬁrst  place,  he knows  that   now.  Stole the  notebooks  and



murdered John Rothstein   over thirty   years ago. And  now he’s murdered  Mr.



Halliday. Will   he scruple at adding Pete Saubers to his list?



    Red  Lips  has no trouble  reading  his mind.   “I  don’t  have to  kill   you, you



know. Not  right   away, at least. I  can put  a bullet  in  your  leg. If  that  doesn’t



loosen your lips, I’ll  put one in your  balls. With  those gone, a young fellow like



you wouldn’t have much to live  for, anyway. Would he?”



    Pushed into  a ﬁnal  corner, Pete has nothing  left  but  the  burning,  helpless



outrage only  adolescents can feel. “You killed  him!  You killed  John Rothstein!”



Tears are welling in his  eyes; they run down his cheeks in warm  trickles. “The



best writer  of  the twentieth   century and  you broke  into  his house and killed



him! For money! Just for money!”



    “Not  for money!”  Red Lips shouts back. “He sold out!”



    He  takes a step forward, the muzzle of the gun dipping  slightly.



    “He  sent Jimmy  Gold to hell  and called it advertising!  And by  the way, who



are you to be high and mighty? You tried  to sell the notebooks yourself! I  don’t



want  to  sell   them.  Maybe  once,  when  I  was  young  and  stupid,   but   not



anymore. I want  to read them.  They’re mine.  I want  to run  my  hand over the

304
ink and feel the  words he set down in  his own hand.  Thinking  about  that was



all that kept  me sane for thirty-six years!”



    He  takes another step forward.



    “Yes,  and what about  the money in  the  trunk?  Did  you take  that, too? Of



course you did! You’re the thief, not me! You!”



    In  that  moment  Pete is too furious  to  think  about escape, because this last



accusation, unfair though it  may be, is all  too true. He  simply  grabs one of the



liquor  decanters and ﬁres it at  his tormentor  as hard as he can. Red Lips isn’t



expecting it.  He  ﬂinches, turning   slightly   to the  right  as he does so, and the



bottle strikes him  in the  shoulder. The glass stopper comes out when it hits the



carpet. The sharp and  stinging  odor  of whiskey  joins the  smell  of old  blood.



The ﬂies buzz in an agitated cloud, their meal interrupted.



    Pete  grabs another decanter and  lunges at  Red  Lips with   it  raised like   a



cudgel, the gun  forgotten.  He trips  over Halliday’s  sprawled legs, goes to one



knee, and when Red  Lips shoots—the  sound in  the closed room  is like  a ﬂat



handclap—the bullet  goes over his head almost  close enough to part  his hair.



Pete hears it: zzzzz. He  throws  the second decanter and this  one strikes  Red



Lips just  below  the mouth,  drawing   blood. He  cries out,  staggers backward,



hits the wall.



    The  last two decanters are behind him now, and there is no time to turn  and



grab another. Pete pushes to his  feet and snatches the hatchet from  the desk,



not by  the rubberized handle  but by  the head. He  feels the sting  as the blade



cuts into  his  palm,  but  it’s  distant,  pain  felt  by somebody living   in  another



country. Red Lips has held on to the gun, and is bringing   it  around for another



shot. Pete can’t  exactly think,   but  a  deeper part  of his  mind,  perhaps never



called upon  until  today,  understands that if   he were closer, he could  grapple



with  Red Lips and get  the gun away from  him.  Easily. He’s younger, stronger.



But  the desk is between them,  so he throws  the hatchet, instead.  It  whirls  at



Red Lips end over end, like a tomahawk.



    Red  Lips  screams and cringes away from it,   raising  the hand  holding  the



gun to protect  his face. The blunt side of the hatchet’s head strikes his forearm.



The gun ﬂies up,  strikes one of the bookcases, and clatters to the ﬂoor. There’s

305
another handclap as it discharges. Pete doesn’t know where this  second bullet



goes, but it’s not into  him, and that’s all he cares about.



    Red Lips  crawls for the gun with  his  ﬁne white hair  hanging in  his eyes and



blood  dripping    from  his   chin.  He’s   eerily  fast,  somehow  lizardlike.   Pete



calculates, still without  thinking,   and sees that if he races Red Lips to the gun,



he’ll  lose. It  will   be close, but  he will.   There’s a chance he might  be able to



grab the man’s arm before he can turn the gun to ﬁre, but not a good one.



    He  bolts for the door instead.



    “Come  back, you shit!” Red Lips shouts. “We’re  not done!”



    Coherent thought  makes a brief reappearance. Oh yes we are, Pete thinks.



    He  rakes the door  open and goes through  hunched over. He  slams it  shut



behind him  with   a hard ﬂing  of  his left  hand and  sprints for  the front  of  the



shop, toward  Lacemaker Lane and  the blessed lives  of  other  people. There’s



another gunshot—mufﬂed—and   Pete hunches further,  but  there’s no  impact



and no pain.



    He  pulls at  the front  door. It  doesn’t open. He casts a wild glance back over



his  shoulder  and sees Red  Lips  shamble  out  of  Halliday’s   ofﬁce,  his  chin



wreathed in  a blood goatee. He’s got  the  gun and  he’s trying  to  aim it.   Pete



paws at the thumb-lock  with  ﬁngers that  have no feeling, manages to grasp it,



and twists. A  moment  later he’s on the sunny  sidewalk. No  one looks at him;



no one is even in  the immediate  vicinity.   On this  hot  weekday afternoon, the



Lacemaker Lane walking mall is as close to deserted as it ever gets.



    Pete runs blindly,  with  no idea of where he’s going.






                                                             30





It’s Hodges behind  the wheel of Holly’s  Mercedes. He obeys the trafﬁc  signals



and doesn’t weave wildly from lane to  lane, but he makes the best time he can.



He  isn’t  a bit   surprised that  this  run   from  the  North   Side to  the  Halliday

306
bookshop on Lacemaker Lane brings back memories of  a much wilder  ride  in



this same car. It had been Jerome at the wheel that night.



    “How   sure are you that  Tina’s brother  went to  this  Halliday  guy?”  Jerome



asks. He’s in the back this afternoon.



    “He   did,”   Holly   says without   looking  up  from  her  iPad,  which  she has



taken from  the  Benz’s capacious glove compartment.  “I   know  he did,  and  I



think  I know  why. It wasn’t any signed book, either.” She taps at the screen and



mutters, “Come on come on come on. Load, you bugger!”



    “What    are you   looking   for,  Hollyberry?”   Jerome  asks, leaning  forward



between the seats.



    She turns to glare at him.  “Don’t  call me that,  you know I hate that.”



    “Sorry, sorry.” Jerome rolls his eyes.



    “Tell  you  in a minute,”   she says. “I’ve almost got it.  I  just wish  I had some



WiFi  instead of this buggery cell connection. It’s so slow and poopy.”



    Hodges  laughs. He  can’t help  it.  This  time  Holly  turns  her glare  on him,



punching away at the screen even as she does so.



    Hodges  climbs   a ramp  and  merges onto  the  Crosstown  Connector. “It’s



starting to ﬁt  together,”  he tells Jerome. “Assuming the book Pete talked about



to Ricker was actually a writer’s  notebook—the one Tina saw. The one Pete was



so anxious to hide under his pillow.”



    “Oh,  it  was,”  Holly  says without  looking  up from  her iPad. “Holly   Gibney



says that’s a big ten-four.”   She punches something else in, swipes the  screen,



and gives a cry of frustration that  makes both of her companions jump. “Oooh,



these goddam pop-up ads make me so fracking crazy!”



    “Calm  down,”  Hodges tells her.



    She ignores him. “You  wait. You wait  and see.”



    “The   money and  the  notebook  were a  package deal,”  Jerome says. “The



Saubers kid found them together. That’s what you think,  right?”



    “Yeah,”  Hodges says.



    “And    whatever was  in  the  notebook   was worth   more  money. Except  a



reputable rare book dealer wouldn’t touch it  with  a ten-foot po—”

307
    “GOT  IT!”   Holly  screams, making them both  jump. The  Mercedes swerves.



The guy  in   the next  lane  honks irritably    and makes an  unmistakable  hand



gesture.



    “Got  what?”  Jerome asks.



    “Not   what, Jerome, who! John Fracking Rothstein! Murdered in 1978! At least



three men broke into his farmhouse—in  New Hampshire,  this was—and killed



him.  They  also broke  into  his  safe. Listen to  this.  It’s  from   the Manchester



Union Leader, three days after he was killed.”



    As she reads, Hodges exits the Crosstown onto Lower Main.



    “‘There  is  growing  certainty  that  the robbers were after more  than money.



“They may also have taken a number of notebooks containing  various writings



Mr.  Rothstein   did   after  retiring    from  public    life,”   a  source close  to  the



investigation  said. The source went on to  speculate that the notebooks, whose



existence was conﬁrmed late yesterday by John Rothstein’s housekeeper, might



be worth a great deal on the black market.’”



    Holly’s   eyes are blazing. She is having  one of those divine  passages where



she has forgotten herself entirely.



    “The  robbers hid it,”  she says.



    “Hid   the money,” Jerome says. “The twenty thousand.”



    “And  the  notebooks. Pete found  at  least some of them,  maybe even all  of



them. He  used the money to  help his  folks. He  didn’t  get  in trouble  until   he



tried selling  the notebooks to  help his  sister. Halliday  knows. By now  he may



even have them. Hurry up, Bill.  Hurry  up  hurry up hurry  up!”






                                                             31





Morris lurches to  the front  of the store, heart pounding,  temples thudding.  He



drops Andy’s gun into  his sportcoat pocket, snatches up a book from one of the



display tables, opens it,  and slams it  against his chin  to  stanch the blood.  He



could have wiped it   with  the sleeve of his coat,  almost did,  but  he’s thinking

308
again now  and knows better.  He’ll   have to  go out  in  public,   and he doesn’t



want to  do that  smeared with blood.  The boy had some on his  pants, though,



and that’s good. That’s ﬁne, in fact.



    I’m  thinking   again, and the  boy better  be thinking,  too.  If  he is, I can still



rescue this situation.



    He   opens the  shop door  and  looks  both  ways.  No  sign  of  Saubers. He



expected nothing else. Teenagers are fast. They’re like cockroaches that way.



    Morris  scrabbles in his  pocket for  the scrap of paper with  Pete’s cell phone



number on it,  and suffers a moment of raw panic  when he can’t ﬁnd it.  At  last



his ﬁngers touch something scrunched far down in one corner and he breathes a



sigh of relief. His  heart is pounding,  pounding,  and he slams one hand against



his bony chest.



    Don’t  you give up  on me now, he thinks. Don’t you dare.



    He  uses the shop’s landline to  call  Saubers, because that also ﬁts the story



he’s constructing in his mind.  Morris thinks  it’s a good story. He doubts if  John



Rothstein could have told a better one.






                                                             32





When Pete comes fully  back to himself,  he’s in a place Morris  Bellamy knows



well: Government  Square, across from the Happy Cup Café. He sits on a bench



to catch his breath, looking  anxiously back the  way he’s come. He sees no sign



of Red  Lips,  and this  doesn’t surprise  him.  Pete is  also thinking   again,  and



knows the man  who tried  to  kill   him  would  attract  attention  on the street.  I



got him  pretty good, Pete thinks  grimly. Red Lips is now  Bloody Chin.



    Good so far, but what  now?



    As  if  in answer, his cell  phone vibrates. Pete pulls  it  out of  his pocket  and



looks at the  number displayed. He  recognizes the last four  digits,  8877,  from



when he called  Halliday  and left  a  message about the weekend trip  to  River



Bend Resort. It  has to be Red Lips; it sure can’t be Mr.  Halliday.  This thought

309
is so awful  it   makes him  laugh,  although  the  sound that  comes out  sounds



more like a sob.



    His  ﬁrst  impulse is to not  answer. What changes his mind is something Red



Lips said: Your house used to be my house. Isn’t that an interesting co-inky-dink?



    His   mother’s text  instructed  him   to come  home right   after school. Tina’s



text said their  mother knew about  the money. So they’re together at the house,



waiting  for  him.   Pete doesn’t want  to  alarm  them  unnecessarily—especially



when he’s the cause for alarm—but he needs to know what this incoming call is



about, especially since Dad isn’t around to protect  the two  of them if  the crazy



guy should turn   up on Sycamore Street. Dad’s in Victor  County,  doing  one of



his show-and-tells.



    I’ll   call the police, Pete thinks.  When I  tell him  that, he’ll  head for the hills.



He’ll   have to.  This  thought   brings  some  marginal  comfort,  and  he  pushes



ACCEPT.



    “Hello,   Peter,” Red Lips says.



    “I   don’t  need  to  talk   to  you,”  Peter  says. “You  better  run,  because I’m



calling the cops.”



    “I’m   glad  I  reached you  before you  did  something  so foolish.  You  won’t



believe this, but I’m  telling  you as a friend.”



    “You’re  right,”  Pete says. “I don’t believe it.  You tried to kill   me.”



    “Here’s something  else you won’t believe: I’m glad I  didn’t.  Because then I’d



never ﬁnd out where you hid the Rothstein  notebooks.”



    “You  never  will,”   Pete says, and adds, “I’m   telling  you  as a friend.”   He’s



feeling a little  steadier now. Red Lips isn’t chasing him,  and he isn’t on his way



to Sycamore Street, either.  He’s  hiding  in  the  bookshop  and talking   on  the



landline.



    “That’s  what you think  now, because you haven’t considered the long view. I



have. Here’s the situation: You went to Andy  to sell  the notebooks. He tried  to



blackmail you instead, so you killed  him.”



    Pete says nothing. He can’t. He’s ﬂabbergasted.



    “Peter?  Are you  there? If you  don’t  want to  spend a year in the  Riverview



Youth Detention   Center followed  by twenty   or so in  Waynesville,  you better

310
be. I’ve been in  both,  and I can tell  you  they’re no  place for young men  with



virgin  bottoms. College would be much better, don’t  you think?”



    “I  wasn’t even in the city  last weekend,” Pete says. “I was at a school retreat.



I can prove it.”



    Red  Lips doesn’t hesitate. “Then  you did  it  before you left.  Or  possibly on



Sunday night,  after you got  back. The police  are going to  ﬁnd  your voicemail



—I  was sure to save it. There’s also DVD security footage of you arguing  with



him. I  took the discs, but I’ll   be sure the police get them if we can’t come to an



agreement. Then there’s the ﬁngerprints. They’ll  ﬁnd  yours on the doorknob of



his inner  ofﬁce. Better  still,  they’ll   ﬁnd them  on the  murder  weapon. I think



you’re in a box, even if you can account for every minute  of your time  this past



weekend.”



    Pete realizes with dismay that  he can’t even do that. He missed everything on



Sunday. He remembers Ms. Bran—alias Bran Stoker—standing  by the door  of



the bus just  twenty-four  hours ago, cell  phone in  hand, ready to  call 911  and



report a missing student.



    I’m  sorry, he told her. I was sick to my stomach. I thought the fresh air would help



me. I was vomiting.



    He  can see her in court,  all  too clearly, saying that  yes, Peter did look  sick



that afternoon. And  he can hear the prosecuting  attorney telling   the jury  that



any teenage boy probably would look sick after chopping an elderly book dealer



into kindling   with  a hatchet.



    Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, I submit to you that Pete Sau bers hitchhiked back



to the city that Sunday morning because he had an appointment with Mr. Halliday,



who thought Mr. Saubers had ﬁnally decided to give in to his blackmail demands. Only



Mr. Saubers had no intention of giving in.



    It’s  a nightmare, Pete thinks. Like  dealing with  Halliday  all  over again, only



a thousand times worse.



    “Peter? Are you there?”



    “No   one would  believe it.  Not  for  a second. Not  once they ﬁnd  out about



you.”



    “And  who  am I, exactly?”

311
    The  wolf, Pete thinks.  You’re the big bad wolf.



    People  must   have seen him   that   Sunday, wandering  around  the   resort



acreage. Plenty of people, because he’d mostly stuck to the paths. Some would



surely remember him and come forward. But,  as Red Lips said, that left  before



the trip   and  after. Especially  Sunday night,   when he’d  gone  straight  to  his



room and closed the  door. On CSI  and Criminal  Minds, police  scientists were



always able to ﬁgure  out  the exact time  of  a murdered person’s death, but  in



real life, who knew? Not  Pete. And if  the police had a good suspect, one whose



prints   were  on   the   murder   weapon,  the   time   of   death  might    become



negotiable.



    But  I  had to throw the hatchet at him!  he thinks.  It was all I  had!



    Believing   that   things   can  get  no   worse,  Pete looks   down  and  sees a



bloodstain on his knee.



    Mr.  Halliday’s  blood.



    “I   can ﬁx this,”  Red Lips  says smoothly, “and if we come to terms,  I will.   I



can wipe your ﬁngerprints.  I  can erase the voicemail. I can destroy the security



DVDs. All  you have to do is tell  me where the notebooks are.”



    “Like  I  should trust you!”



    “You  should.”  Low.  Coaxing and reasonable. “Think  about  it,  Peter. With



you out  of the  picture,  Andy’s  murder  looks like  an attempted  robbery  gone



wrong.  The work  of  some random  crackhead or meth  freak.  That’s good  for



both of us. With   you in  the picture,  the existence of the notebooks comes out.



Why would  I want  that?”



    You  won’t   care, Pete  thinks.   You won’t   have to,   because you won’t  be



anywhere near here when Halliday is discovered dead in his ofﬁce. You said you



were in   Waynesville,  and  that   makes  you  an  ex-con,  and  you  knew  Mr.



Halliday. Put  those together, and you’d be a suspect, too. Your ﬁngerprints  are



in there as well as mine, and I don’t think   you can wipe them all up.  What you



can do—if  I  let  you—is   take the  notebooks and  go. And   once you’re gone,



what’s to keep you from sending the police those security DVDs,  just for  spite?



To get  back at  me for  hitting    you with   that  liquor  bottle   and then  getting



away? If I agree to what you’re saying . . .

312
    He  ﬁnishes the  thought  aloud.  “I’ll   only  look worse. No  matter  what  you



say.”



    “I  assure you that’s not true.”



    He  sounds like a lawyer, one of the sleazy ones with fancy hair who advertise



on the cable channels late at night.  Pete’s outrage returns and straightens him



on the bench like an electric shock.



    “Fuck  you. You’re never getting those notebooks.”



    He  ends the call.  The phone buzzes in  his hand almost  immediately,  same



number, Red Lips  calling  back. Pete hits  DECLINE   and turns  the phone off.



Right  now he needs to think harder and smarter than ever in his life.



    Mom  and Tina,  they’re the  most important   thing.  He  has to talk  to Mom,



tell  her that  she and Teens have to get  out  of the  house right  away. Go to  a



motel, or something. They have to—



    No,  not Mom.  It’s his sister he has to talk to, at least to begin with.



    He  didn’t  take  that Mr.  Hodges’s card, but  Tina must  know how  to get  in



touch with  him.  If  that  doesn’t work, he’ll  have to call  the police and take  his



chances. He will not put  his family at  risk, no matter what.



    Pete speed-dials his sister.






                                                             33





“Hello? Peter? Hello? Hello?”



    Nothing.   The thieving   sonofabitch has hung up. Morris’s ﬁrst  impulse is to



rip the  desk phone out of the wall  and throw it  at  one of the bookcases, but he



restrains himself at the last moment. This is no time  to lose himself in  a rage.



    So what now? What  next? Is Saubers going to call the  police despite all the



evidence stacked against him?



    Morris  can’t allow  himself to  believe that, because if he does, the notebooks



will  be lost to  him. And  consider this:  Would the  boy take such an irrevocable

313
step without  talking  to his parents ﬁrst? Without  asking  their advice? Without



warning them?



    I  have to  move fast, Morris  thinks,  and aloud,  as he wipes his ﬁngerprints



off the phone: “If  ’twere to be done, best it be done quickly.”



    And   ’twere best he  wash his face and  leave by the  back door.  He  doesn’t



believe the   gunshots  were  heard on  the   street—the  inner   ofﬁce  must  be



damned near soundproof, lined with books as it is—but  he doesn’t want to take



the risk.



    He  scrubs away the blood goatee in Halliday’s bathroom, careful to leave the



red-stained washcloth  in   the  sink  where the  police   will   ﬁnd  it   when  they



eventually turn  up. With  that  done, he follows a narrow aisle to a door with  an



EXIT  sign above it  and boxes of books stacked in front  of it.  He moves them,



thinking  how stupid  to block  the ﬁre exit that  way. Stupid and shortsighted.



    That   could  be  my   old  pal’s  epitaph,  Morris   thinks.   Here  lies  Andrew



Halliday, a fat, stupid,  shortsighted homo. He will   not be missed.



    The  heat of late afternoon whacks him  like  a hammer, and he staggers. His



head is thumping   from  being hit   with  that  goddam decanter, but  the  brains



inside are in high  gear. He gets in the Subaru, where it’s even hotter, and turns



the  air-conditioning   to  max  as  soon as he  starts  the  engine.  He  examines



himself  in  the rearview  mirror.  There’s an  ugly  purple  bruise  surrounding  a



crescent-shaped cut on  his chin,   but  the  bleeding  has stopped,  and on  the



whole he doesn’t look  too  bad. He  wishes he had some aspirin,  but  that  can



wait.



    He  backs out of Andy’s space and threads his way down the alley leading to



Grant Street. Grant  is  more downmarket  than Lacemaker Lane with  its  fancy



shops, but at least cars are allowed there.



    As  Morris   stops at the  mouth   of the  alley,  Hodges and  his two   partners



arrive on the other side of the building   and stand looking  at the CLOSED sign



hanging in  the door  of Andrew  Halliday  Rare Editions.  A  break in  the Grant



Street trafﬁc comes just as Hodges is trying   the bookshop door  and ﬁnding  it



unlocked.  Morris    makes  a  quick    left   and  heads  toward   the   Crosstown



Connector. With rush hour  only getting  started, he can be on the North Side in

314
ﬁfteen minutes.  Maybe  twelve.  He needs to  keep Saubers from going  to  the



police, assuming he hasn’t already, and there’s one sure way to do that.



    All   he has to do is beat the notebook thief to his little  sister.






                                                             34





Behind the  Saubers house, near the fence that separates the family’s backyard



from  the  undeveloped land,  there’s a rusty  old  swing   set that  Tom  Saubers



keeps meaning to take down,  now that  both  of his  children are too  old for  it.



This  afternoon Tina  is  sitting   on the  glider,  rocking  slowly  back  and forth.



Divergent is open  in  her  lap,  but  she  hasn’t turned   a page  in  the  last  ﬁve



minutes.  Mom  has promised  to  watch  the  movie  with   her as  soon as she’s



ﬁnished the book,  but  today Tina  doesn’t want to  read about teenagers in the



ruins  of Chicago.  Today that  seems awful  instead of  romantic.  Still   moving



slowly back and forth, she closes both the book and her eyes.



    God,  she prays, please don’t let Pete be in really bad trouble.  And  don’t let



him  hate me. I’ll  die  if  he hates me, so please let him understand why  I  told.



Please.



    God  gets right   back to  her. God  says Pete won’t blame her  because Mom



ﬁgured it  out  on her own, but  Tina’s not sure she believes Him. She opens the



book again but  still  can’t read. The  day seems to hang suspended, waiting for



something awful to happen.



    The  cell phone she got for her eleventh birthday  is upstairs in  her bedroom.



It’s just  a cheapie, not the  iPhone with   all the  bells and  whistles she desired,



but  it’s  her  most   prized  possession and she’s rarely  without   it.   Only   this



afternoon she is. She left it in her room and went out  to the backyard as soon as



she texted Pete. She had to send that  text,  she couldn’t  just  let  him  walk  in



unprepared, but  she can’t bear  the thought   of  an angry, accusatory callback.



She’ll have to face him in a little  while,  that can’t be avoided, but  Mom will   be



with  her then. Mom will   tell him  it  wasn’t Tina’s fault, and he’ll believe her.

315
    Probably.



    Now  the cell  begins to vibrate and jiggle  on her desk. She’s got a cool Snow



Patrol ringtone,  but—sick  to her stomach and worried about Pete—Tina  never



thought  to   switch  it   from  the  mandated  school setting   when  she and  her



mother  got  home,  so Linda  Saubers doesn’t hear  it  downstairs.  The  screen



lights  up  with  her  brother’s picture.  Eventually,  the  phone falls  silent.  After



thirty  seconds or so, it starts vibrating   again. And  a third  time.  Then  it  quits



for good.



    Pete’s picture disappears from the screen.






                                                             35





In Government Square, Pete stares at his phone incredulously. For the ﬁrst time



in his memory, Teens has failed to answer her cell while school is not in session.



    Mom,   then .  . .  or maybe not.  Not   quite  yet. She’ll  want to  ask a billion



questions, and time is tight.



    Also  (although he won’t quite  admit  this to himself),  he doesn’t want to talk



to her until  he absolutely has to.



    He  uses Google to  troll  for  Mr.  Hodges’s number.  He ﬁnds  nine  William



Hodgeses here in the city, but the one he wants has got to be K.  William,   who



has a  company  called  Finders  Keepers.  Pete  calls  and  gets an  answering



machine. At  the  end of the  message—which seems to last at least an hour—



Holly  says, “If you need immediate assistance, you may dial 555-1890.”



    Pete  once more  debates calling  his  mother,  then  decides to  go with   the



number the recording  has given him ﬁrst.  What  convinces him are two words:



immediate assistance.






                                                             36

316
“Oough,”  Holly  says as they approach the empty service desk in the middle  of



Andrew Halliday’s  narrow shop. “What’s that  smell?”



    “Blood,”   Hodges replies. It’s also decaying meat, but  he doesn’t want to say



that. “You stay here, both of you.”



    “Are  you carrying a weapon?” Jerome asks.



    “I’ve  got the  Slapper.”



    “That’s  all?”



    Hodges shrugs.



    “Then  I’m  coming with  you.”



    “Me  too,”  Holly   says, and grabs a substantial  book called Wild  Plants and



Flowering Herbs of North America. She holds it as if she means to swat a stinging



bug.



    “No,”   Hodges says patiently, “you’re  going  to stay right  here. Both  of you.



And race to see which one can dial nine-one-one ﬁrst, if I yell for you to do so.”



    “Bill—”    Jerome begins.



    “Don’t   argue with  me, Jerome, and don’t  waste time. I’ve  got an idea time



might  be rather short.”



    “A  hunch?” Holly   asks.



    “Maybe  a little  more.”



    Hodges takes the Happy  Slapper from his coat pocket (these days he’s rarely



without  it,   although  he seldom carries his old  service weapon), and grasps it



above the  knot.   He  advances quickly  and  quietly   to  the  door  of  what   he



assumes is Andrew  Halliday’s  private  ofﬁce.  It’s  standing  slightly   ajar.  The



Slapper’s loaded end swings from his right hand. He stands slightly  to  one side



of the  door and  knocks with   his  left.  Because this seems to be  one of  those



moments when  the  strict  truth   is dispensable, he  calls, “It’s   the police,  Mr.



Halliday.”



    There’s  no  answer. He   knocks  again,  louder,  and  when  there’s still    no



answer, he pushes the door open. The smell is instantly stronger:  blood, decay,



and spilled booze. Something else, too. Spent gunpowder,  an aroma he knows



well. Flies are buzzing somnolently. The lights  are on, seeming to spotlight  the



body on the ﬂoor.

317
    “Oh  Christ,  his head’s half off!” Jerome cries. He’s so close that Hodges jerks



in surprise, bringing  the  Slapper up and then lowering it  again. My  pacemaker



just went  into  overdrive, he  thinks.  He turns  and both  of  them are crowding



up right  behind him.  Jerome has a hand over his mouth. His eyes are bulging.



    Holly,   on the  other  hand, looks  calm. She’s got Wild  Plants and  Flowering



Herbs of North America clasped against her chest and appears to be assessing the



bleeding mess on  the rug.  To  Jerome she says, “Don’t  hurl.  This  is  a crime



scene.”



    “I’m    not  going   to   hurl.”   The  words  are  mufﬂed,   thanks  to   the  hand



clutching  his lower face.



    “Neither   one of  you minds  worth  a tinker’s  dam,” Hodges  says. “If I  were



your teacher, I’d send you both to the  ofﬁce. I’m going  in. You  two stand right



where you are.”



    He  takes two  steps in. Jerome and Holly  immediately   follow, side by  side.



The fucking Bobbsey Twins, Hodges thinks.



    “Did   Tina’s brother do this?” Jerome asks. “Jesus Christ, Bill, did he?”



    “If   he did,  it  wasn’t today. That  blood’s almost dry.  And  there’s the ﬂies. I



don’t see any maggots yet, but—”



    Jerome makes a gagging noise.



    “Jerome, don’t,” Holly   says in a forbidding  voice. Then,  to Hodges: “I  see a



little  ax. Hatchet. Whatever  you call it.  That’s what did it.”



    Hodges  doesn’t reply. He’s assessing the scene. He thinks that Halliday—if



it   is  Halliday—has   been  dead at   least  twenty-four   hours,   maybe longer.



Probably longer. But something  has happened in here since, because the smell



of spilled liquor  and gunpowder is fresh and strong.



    “Is  that a bullet  hole, Bill?”  Jerome asks. He’s pointing at a bookshelf to the



left of the  door, near a small cherrywood table. There’s a small round hole  in a



copy of Catch-22. Hodges goes to it,  looks more closely, and thinks,  That’s got



to  hurt  the  resale price.  Then  he  looks at  the  table.  There  are two  crystal



decanters on it, probably Waterford.  The table is slightly   dusty, and he can see



the shapes where two others stood. He looks across the room, beyond the desk,



and yep, there they are, lying on the ﬂoor.

318
    “Sure it’s  a bullet hole,” Holly   says. “I can smell the gunpowder.”



    “There  was a ﬁght,”  Jerome says, then points to the corpse without  looking



at it. “But  he sure wasn’t part of it.”



    “No,”   Hodges says, “not him. And  the combatants have since departed.”



    “Was  one of them Peter Saubers?”



    Hodges  sighs  heavily.  “Almost   for  sure.  I  think    he came  here after  he



ditched us at the drugstore.”



    “Somebody took  Mr.  Halliday’s  computer,”  Holly   says. “His DVD   hookup



is still  there beside the cash register, and the wireless mouse—also a little  box



with  a few thumb  drives  in it—but    the computer  is gone. I  saw a big empty



space on the desk out there. It was probably a laptop.”



    “What   now?” Jerome asks.



    “We  call the  police.” Hodges doesn’t want to  do it,  senses that Pete Saubers



is in bad trouble  and calling the cops may only make it  worse, at least to begin



with,  but  he played the  Lone Ranger in  the Mercedes Killer  case, and almost



got a few thousand kids killed.



    He  takes out his cell,  but  before he can turn it  on, it  lights  up and rings  in



his hand.



    “Peter,”  Holly  says. Her eyes are shining and she speaks with utter certainty.



“Bet  you six  thousand dollars. Now  he wants to  talk.  Don’t   just  stand there,



Bill,  answer your fracking phone.”



    He  does.



    “I   need help,” Pete Saubers says rapidly. “Please, Mr. Hodges, I really need



help.”



    “Just  a sec. I’m going to put  you on speaker so my associates can hear.”



    “Associates?” Pete sounds more alarmed than ever. “What associates?”



    “Holly   Gibney.  Your sister knows her. And  Jerome Robinson. He’s Barbara



Robinson’s older brother.”



    “Oh.   I  guess . . .  I  guess that’s okay.” And,   as if to  himself:  “How   much



worse can it get?”



    “Peter,  we’re in Andrew  Halliday’s  shop. There’s a dead man in his ofﬁce. I



assume it’s   Halliday,    and  I    assume you   know   about   it.    Would   those

319
assumptions be correct?”



    There’s a moment  of  silence. If  not  for  the faint  sound  of trafﬁc  wherever



Pete is, Hodges might  have thought he’d broken the connection.  Then the boy



starts talking again, the words spilling   out in a waterfall.



    “He  was there when I got  there. The man with  the red lips.  He told  me Mr.



Halliday  was in the back,  so I went into  his  ofﬁce, and he followed me and he



had a  gun  and  he  tried   to  kill    me  when  I  wouldn’t   tell   him   where  the



notebooks were. I wouldn’t because . . . because he doesn’t deserve to have them



and besides he was going to kill  me anyway, I could tell  just  by looking  in  his



eyes. He . . . I . . .”



    “You  threw the decanters at him, didn’t  you?”



    “Yes! The bottles!  And  he shot at me! He missed, but it  was so close I heard



it  go by. I ran  and got away, but then  he called me and said they’d blame  me,



the police  would,  because I threw a  hatchet at  him,  too .  . .  did  you  see the



hatchet?”



    “Yes,”  Hodges says. “I’m looking at it  right  now.”



    “And   . .  . and  my ﬁngerprints,   see . . .  they’re on it   because I threw it  at



him  .  . .  and he  has some video discs of  me and  Mr.  Halliday  arguing  .  .  .



because he was trying to blackmail me! Halliday, I  mean, not the man with  the



red lips, only now he’s trying to blackmail  me, too!”



    “This   red-lips   man  has  the  store  security  video?”  Holly    asks, bending



toward the phone. “Is that  what you mean?”



    “Yes! He  said the police will   arrest me and they will   because I didn’t  go to



any of the  Sunday meetings at River  Bend, and  he also has a voicemail and I



don’t know what to do!”



    “Where  are you, Peter?” Hodges asks. “Where are you right now?”



    There’s  another   pause, and  Hodges  knows   exactly  what   Pete’s doing:



checking for landmarks. He  may have lived in the city  his whole life,  but  right



now he’s so freaked he doesn’t know east from west.



    “Government   Square,”  he says at  last.  “Across  from  this  restaurant,  the



Happy Cup?”



    “Do  you see the man who shot at you?”

320
    “N-No.  I  ran, and I  don’t think  he could chase me very far on foot. He’s


kind of old, and you can’t drive a car on Lacemaker Lane.”


    “Stay there,” Hodges says. “We’ll come and get you.”


    “Please don’t call the police,” Peter says. “It’ll kill my folks, after everything


else that’s happened to them. I’ll give you the notebooks. I never should have


kept them, and I  never should have tried to sell any of them. I should have


stopped with the money.” His voice is blurring now as he breaks down. “My


parents . . . they were in such trouble. About everything. I only wanted to help!”


    “I’m  sure that’s true, but I have to call the police. If you didn’t kill Halliday,


the evidence will show that. You’ll be ﬁne. I’ll pick you up and we’ll go to your


house. Will your parents be there?”


    “Dad’s on a business thing, but my mom and sister will  be.” Pete has to


hitch in a breath before going on. “I’ll go to jail, won’t I? They’ll never believe


me about the man with the red lips. They’ll think I made him up.”


    “All  you have to do is tell the truth,”   Holly says. “Bill won’t  let anything


bad happen to you.” She grabs his hand and squeezes it ﬁercely. “Will you?”


    Hodges repeats, “If you didn’t kill him, you’ll be ﬁne.”


    “I  didn’t! Swear to God!”


    “This other man did. The one with the red lips.”


    “Yes. He killed John Rothstein, too. He said Rothstein sold out.”


    Hodges has a million questions, but this isn’t the time.


    “Listen  to  me,  Pete. Very  carefully. Stay where you  are. We’ll   be at


Government Square in ﬁfteen minutes.”


    “If  you let me drive,” Jerome says, “we can be there in ten.”


    Hodges ignores this. “The four of us will go to your house. You’ll tell the


whole story to me, my associates, and your mother. She may want to call your


father and discuss getting you legal representation. Then we’re going to call the


police. It’s the best I can do.”


    And  better than  I  should do, he thinks, eyeing the mangled corpse and


thinking about how close he came to going to jail himself four years ago. For


the same kind of thing, too: Lone Ranger shit. But surely another half hour or

321
forty-ﬁve  minutes  can’t  hurt.   And  what  the  boy  said about  his  parents hit



home. Hodges was at City Center that day. He saw the aftermath.



    “A-All    right.  Come as fast as you can.”



    “Yes.”  He breaks the connection.



    “What   do we do about our ﬁngerprints?” Holly  asks.



    “Leave them,”  Hodges  says. “Let’s go get that  kid.  I  can’t wait  to  hear his



story.” He tosses Jerome the Mercedes key.



    “Thanks,  Massa Hodges!” Tyrone Feelgood screeches. “Dis here black boy is



one safe drivuh! I is goan get’chall safe to yo destin—”



    “Shut  up, Jerome.”



    Hodges and Holly  say it together.






                                                             37





Pete takes a deep, trembling   breath  and closes his cell  phone. Everything   is



going around  in his  head like some nightmare  amusement park ride,  and he’s



sure he sounded like   an idiot.   Or  a  murderer  scared of getting   caught  and



making  up  any wild   tale. He  forgot  to  tell   Mr.  Hodges that  Red  Lips once



lived  in  Pete’s own  house, and he  should  have done that.   He  thinks  about



calling Hodges back, but  why  bother when he and those other two are coming



to pick him  up?



    The  guy won’t  go the house, anyway, Pete tells himself. He can’t. He has to



stay invisible.



    But   he might,   just  the  same. If  he thinks  I  was lying   about moving   the



notebooks somewhere else, he really might. Because he’s crazy. A total whack-



job.



    He  tries  Tina’s phone  again and gets  nothing  but  her  message: “Hey, it’s



Teens, sorry I missed you, do your thing.” Beeep.



    All   right,  then.



    Mom.

322
    But   before he can  call her,  he sees a bus coming,  and  in  the  destination



window, like  a gift  from  heaven, are the words NORTH   SIDE. Pete suddenly



decides he’s not going to  sit  here and wait  for  Mr.  Hodges. The bus  will  get



him  there sooner, and he wants to  go home  now. He’ll  call  Mr.  Hodges once



he’s on board and  tell  him  to  meet  him  at the  house, but  ﬁrst  he’ll  call  his



mother and tell her to  lock all the doors.



    The  bus is almost empty,  but he makes his way to  the back, just  the same.



And he doesn’t have to call his mother,  after all; his phone rings  in his  hand as



he sits  down.  MOM,     the  screen says. He  takes a deep  breath  and pushes



ACCEPT. She’s talking before he can even say hello.



    “Where  are you, Peter?” Peter instead of Pete. Not a good start. “I  expected



you home an hour ago.”



    “I’m   coming,”  he says. “I’m on the bus.”



    “Let’s stick  to the truth,  shall  we? The bus has come and gone. I saw it.”



    “Not    the schoolbus,  the North   Side  bus. I  had  to  .  .  .”  What?  Run  an



errand? That’s so ludicrous he could laugh.  Except this  is no laughing  matter.



Far from  it.  “There  was something I  had  to do.  Is Tina  there? She didn’t  go



down to Ellen’s, or something?”



    “She’s in the backyard, reading her book.”



    The   bus is  picking    its  way  past  some road  construction,  moving   with



agonizing slowness.



    “Mom,   listen to me. You—”



    “No,  you listen  to me. Did you send that money?”



    He  closes his eyes.



    “Did   you? A simple yes or no will  sufﬁce. We can go into the details later.”



    Eyes still  closed, he says: “Yes. It was me. But—”



    “Where  did  it  come from?”



    “That’s   a long  story,  and right   now  it  doesn’t  matter.  The  money doesn’t



matter. There’s a guy—”



    “What    do  you  mean, it   doesn’t  matter?  That   was over  twenty thousand



dollars!”

323
    He  stiﬂes an urge to say Did you just ﬁgure that out?



    The  bus continues  lumbering  its  laborious  way through   the construction.



Sweat is rolling  down  Pete’s face. He can see the smear of blood on his knee,



dark brown  instead of red, but  still  as loud as a shout. Guilty!   it  yells. Guilty,



guilty!



    “Mom,   please shut up and listen to me.”



    Shocked silence  on  the other  end  of  the  line.  Not   since the  days of  his



toddler tantrums  has he told his mother to shut up.



    “There’s  a guy, and he’s dangerous.” He could  tell  her  just how dangerous,



but  he wants her  on alert,  not  in  hysterics.  “I  don’t  think   he’ll  come to  the



house, but he might.  You should get  Tina inside and lock  the doors. Just for a



few minutes, then I’ll  be there. Some other people, too. People who can help.”



    At  least I hope so, he thinks.



    God,  I hope so.






                                                             38





Morris Bellamy  turns  onto Sycamore Street. He’s aware that his life  is  rapidly



narrowing  to a point.  All   he has is a few hundred  stolen dollars,  a stolen car,



and the need to get  his hands on Rothstein’s notebooks. Oh,  he has one other



thing,  too: a short-term  hideout  where he can go, and read, and ﬁnd out  what



happened to Jimmy Gold  after the Duzzy-Doo campaign put  him  at the top  of



the advertising  dungheap with  a double ﬁstful  of  those Golden Bucks. Morris



understands this is a crazy goal, so he must be a crazy person, but it’s all he has,



and it’s enough.



    There’s his old house, which is now the  notebook thief’s house. With  a little



red car in the driveway.



    “Crazy   don’t  mean shit,”   Morris   Bellamy  says. “Crazy  don’t   mean shit.



Nothing means shit.”



    Words  to live by.

324
                                                             39





“Bill,”   Jerome says. “I hate to say it, but I think  our bird  has ﬂown.”



    Hodges looks  up from  his thoughts as Jerome guides the Mercedes through



Government Square. There  are quite  a  few people  sitting   on the  benches—



reading newspapers, chatting  and  drinking   coffee, feeding the  pigeons—but



there are no teenagers of either sex.



    “I   don’t see him at any of the  tables on the café side, either,” Holly   reports.



“Maybe he went inside for a cup of coffee?”



    “Right   now, coffee would  be the last thing   on his mind,”   Hodges says. He



pounds a ﬁst on his thigh.



    “North   Side and South Side buses run through  here every ﬁfteen minutes,”



Jerome says. “If I were in his  shoes, sitting and waiting  around for  someone to



come and pick me up would be torture.  I’d want to  be doing something.”



    That’s when Hodges’s phone rings.



    “A  bus came along and I  decided not to wait,”   Pete says. He sounds calmer



now. “I’ll    be home  when  you  get there.  I  just   got  off  the  phone with   my



mother. She and Tina are okay.”



    Hodges doesn’t like  the sound of this. “Why  wouldn’t  they be, Peter?”



    “Because the guy with  the  red lips knows where we live.  He said he used to



live there. I forgot  to tell  you.”



    Hodges checks where they are. “How long to  Sycamore Street, Jerome?”



    “Be  there in  twenty.  Maybe less. If I’d  known  the  kid  was going to  grab a



bus, I would’ve taken the Crosstown.”



    “Mr.  Hodges?” Pete.



    “I’m   here.”



    “He’d   be stupid   to  go to  my  house, anyway. If   he does that,  I  won’t  be



framed anymore.”



    He’s got  a point. “Did  you tell  them to  lock up and stay inside?”



    “Yes.”



    “And  did  you give your mom  his description?”

325
    “Yes.”



    Hodges  knows that if  he calls the cops, Mr. Red Lips  will  be gone with  the



wind, leaving  Pete to depend on the forensic  evidence to get him off the hook.



And they can probably beat the cops, anyway.



    “Tell  him  to call the guy,”  Holly  says. She leans toward Hodges and bellows,



“Call and say you changed your mind and will give him the notebooks!”



    “Pete, did  you hear that?”



    “Yeah,  but I  can’t. I  don’t even know  if  he has a phone. He called me from



the one in the  bookshop. We didn’t,  you  know, exactly have time  to exchange



info.”



    “How   poopy is that?” Holly  asks no one in particular.



    “All   right.   Call  me the  minute  you  get home and  verify  that everything’s



okay. If I don’t hear from you, I’ll   have to call for the police.”



    “I’m   sure they’re f—”



    But  this  is where they came in.  Hodges closes his phone and leans forward.



“Punch it,  Jerome.”



    “As  soon as I  can.” He  gestures at the  trafﬁc,  three lanes going  each way,



chrome twinkling   in the sunshine. “Once we get past the rotary  up there, we’ll



be gone like Enron.”



    Twenty   minutes,   Hodges  thinks.   Twenty   minutes  at   most.  What   can



happen in twenty minutes?



    The  answer, he knows from bitter  experience, is quite a lot.  Life and death.



Right  now  all  he  can do is  hope  those twenty  minutes  don’t  come  back to



haunt him.






                                                             40





Linda  Saubers came into  her  husband’s little   home  ofﬁce to   wait  for  Pete,



because her husband’s laptop is on the desk and she can play computer solitaire.



She is far too upset to read.

326
    After   talking   to Pete,  she’s more upset than  ever. Afraid,  too,  but  not  of



some sinister  villain   lurking    on  Sycamore Street.  She’s afraid  for  her  son,



because it’s clear he believes in the sinister villain. Things are ﬁnally starting  to



come together. His pallor  and weight  loss . . . the  crazy moustache he tried to



grow .  . . the  return  of his acne and his long  silences . . .  they all  make sense



now. If he’s not having a nervous breakdown, he’s on the verge of one.



    She gets up  and looks out  the window  at her  daughter. Tina’s got  her best



blouse on, the billowy   yellow  one, and no way  should she be wearing it   on a



dirty  old  glider  that  should have been taken down years ago. She has a book,



and it’s open, but she doesn’t seem to be reading. She looks drawn and sad.



    What   a nightmare, Linda  thinks.  First Tom  hurt  so badly he’ll walk  with  a



limp  for the  rest of his  life,  and now our  son seeing monsters in the shadows.



That money wasn’t manna from  heaven, it was acid rain. Maybe  he just has to



come clean. Tell us the whole story about where the money came from. Once he



does that, the healing process can begin.



    In  the  meantime, she’ll do  as he asked: call Tina inside and lock the  house.



It can’t hurt.



    A  board creaks behind her. She turns, expecting  to see her son, but it’s  not



Pete. It’s a man with  pale skin,  thinning  white  hair,  and red lips.  It’s the man



her son described, the sinister  villain,   and her ﬁrst  feeling  isn’t  terror  but  an



absurdly powerful  sense of relief.  Her  son isn’t  having a  nervous breakdown,



after all.



    Then  she sees the gun in the man’s hand, and the  terror comes, bright  and



hot.



    “You  must be Mom,”  the intruder  says. “Strong family resemblance.”



    “Who   are you?” Linda Saubers asks. “What are you doing here?”



    The  intruder—in   the doorway of her husband’s study instead of in  her son’s



mind—glances out  the window, and Linda  has to suppress an urge to say Don’t



look at her.



    “Is  that  your daughter?” Morris  asks. “Hey, she’s pretty. I always liked a girl



in yellow.”



    “What   do you want?” Linda asks.

327
    “What’s   mine,”  Morris says, and shoots her in the  head. Blood ﬂies up  and



spatters red droplets against the glass. It sounds like rain.






                                                             41





Tina hears an alarming bang from the  house and runs for the kitchen  door. It’s



the pressure cooker, she thinks. Mom  forgot  the  damn pressure cooker again.



This has happened once before, while her mother was making preserves. It’s an



old cooker, the kind that  sits on the stove, and Pete spent most of one Saturday



afternoon on a stepladder, scraping dried  strawberry goo off  the ceiling.  Mom



was vacuuming  the  living   room  when  it   happened, which  was  lucky.  Tina



hopes to God she wasn’t in the kitchen this time,  either.



    “Mom?”   She runs inside. There’s nothing on the stove. “Mo—”



    An   arm  grabs her  around the  middle,   hard.  Tina  loses her breath  in  an



explosive whoosh. Her feet  rise from  the ﬂoor,  kicking.  She can feel whiskers



against her cheek. She can smell sweat, sour and hot.



    “Don’t   scream and I  won’t   have to hurt   you,”  the  man says into  her  ear,



making her skin prickle.  “Do  you understand?”



    Tina  manages to nod,  but  her heart is  hammering  and the world  is  going



dark. “Let  me—breathe,” she gasps, and the hold loosens. Her feet go  back to



the ﬂoor. She turns and sees a man with  a pale face and red lips. There’s a cut



on his chin,  it   looks like  a bad  one. The skin  around it   is swollen  and blue-



black.



    “Don’t   scream,”  he repeats, and  raises an admonitory   ﬁnger.  “Do  not  do



that.”  He smiles,  and if  it’s supposed to make her feel better,  it  doesn’t work.



His teeth are yellow. They look more like  fangs than teeth.



    “What   did you do to  my mother?”



    “She’s ﬁne,”  the  man with   the red  lips  says. “Where’s your cell  phone? A



pretty little   girl  like  you must  have a cell phone. Lots of friends to chatter and



text with.  Is it  in your pocket?”

328
    “N-N-No.    Upstairs. In  my room.”



    “Let’s go get  it,”  Morris says. “You’re going to make a call.”






                                                             42





Pete’s stop is Elm Street, two blocks over from the house, and the bus is almost



there. He’s  making  his  way to  the  front   when his  cell  buzzes. His  relief  at



seeing his sister’s smiling  face in  the little   window  is  so great that  his  knees



loosen and he has to grab one of the straphandles.



    “Tina!  I’ll   be there in a—”



    “There’s  a man here!” Tina  is crying  so hard he  can barely understand her.



“He was in the house! He—”



    Then  she’s gone, and he knows  the voice that  replaces hers. He  wishes to



God he didn’t.



    “Hello,   Peter,” Red Lips says. “Are you on your way?”



    He  can’t say anything. His tongue  is stuck to the roof of his mouth.  The bus



pulls  over at the  corner of  Elm  and Breckenridge  Terrace, his stop, but   Pete



only stands there.



    “Don’t   bother  answering that,  and don’t  bother  coming  home, because no



one will be here if you do.”



    “He’s  lying!”  Tina yells. “Mom  is—”



    Then  she howls.



    “Don’t   you hurt her,”  Pete says. The few other riders don’t look around from



their papers or handhelds, because he can’t speak above a whisper. “Don’t you



hurt my  sister.”



    “I   won’t  if she shuts up.  She needs to be quiet. You  need to be quiet,  too,



and listen to  me. But  ﬁrst  you need to answer two questions. Have you  called



the police?”



    “No.”



    “Have  you called anyone?”

329
    “No.”   Pete lies without  hesitation.



    “Good.  Excellent. Now  comes the listening part. Are  you listening?”



    A  large  lady  with  a shopping  bag  is clambering  onto  the  bus, wheezing.



Pete gets off as soon as she’s out of the way, walking like a boy in a dream, the



phone plastered to his ear.



    “I’m   taking  your sister with  me to  a safe place. A place where we can meet,



once you have the notebooks.”



    Pete starts to  tell  him  they don’t  have to do  it  that  way, he’ll just  tell  Red



Lips  where  the  notebooks  are, then   realizes doing  that   would   be  a huge



mistake. Once Red Lips  knows they’re  in  the basement at the Rec, he’ll  have



no reason to keep Tina alive.



    “Are  you there, Peter?”



    “Y-Yes.”



    “You  better be. You just better  be. Get the notebooks. When you have them



—and not  before—call your sister’s cell again. If  you call  for any other  reason,



I’ll  hurt  her.”



    “Is  my mother  all right?”



    “She’s ﬁne,  just  tied   up.  Don’t  worry  about  her, and  don’t  bother  going



home. Just get the notebooks and call me.”



    With   that,  Red Lips is gone. Pete doesn’t have time to tell him  he has to go



home, because he’ll need Tina’s wagon again to haul the cartons. He also needs



to get  his father’s key  to  the Rec. He  returned  it  to  the board  in his  father’s



ofﬁce, and he needs it to get in.






                                                             43





Morris  slips  Tina’s pink   phone  into  his  pocket  and  yanks a  cord  from  her



desktop computer. “Turn around. Hands behind you.”



    “Did   you shoot her?”  Tears are running down  Tina’s cheeks. “Was that the



sound I heard? Did you shoot my moth—”

330
    Morris  slaps her, and hard. Blood ﬂies from Tina’s nose and the corner of her



mouth. Her  eyes widen in shock.



    “You  need to shut your quack and turn around. Hands behind  you.”



    Tina  does it,   sobbing. Morris   ties her  wrists  together at  the  small  of her



back, cinching the knots viciously.



    “Ow!  Ow, mister!  That’s too tight!”



    “Deal  with  it.”  He wonders vaguely how many shots might  be left in his old



pal’s gun. Two will   be enough; one for  the thief  and  one for the  thief’s sister.



“Walk.  Downstairs. Out  the kitchen door. Let’s go. Hup-two-three-four.”



    She looks  back at  him,  her eyes huge and bloodshot  and swimming   with



tears. “Are you going to rape me?”



    “No,”    Morris  says, then  adds  something  that  is  all   the  more  terrifying



because she doesn’t understand it: “I won’t make that mistake again.”






                                                             44





Linda comes to staring at the ceiling.  She knows where she is, Tom’s ofﬁce, but



not what  has happened to her. The right  side of her  head is on ﬁre, and when



she raises a hand to her face, it comes away wet with blood. The last thing   she



can remember is Peggy Moran telling her that Tina  had gotten sick at school.



    Go get her and take her home, Peggy had said. I’ll cover this.



    No,  she remembers something else. Something about the mystery money.



    I  was going  to  talk  to  Pete about it,  she thinks.   Get some answers. I was



playing solitaire on Tom’s computer, just  killing  time  while  I waited for  him to



come home, and then—



    Then,  black.



    Now,  this  terrible   pain  in  her head, like  a constantly  slamming  door.  It’s



even worse than the migraines she sometimes gets. Worse even than childbirth.



She tries to raise her head and manages to do it, but  the world  starts going  in

331
and  out   with   her   heartbeat,  ﬁrst   sucking, then  blooming, each  oscillation



accompanied by such godawful agony . . .



    She looks down and sees the front of her gray dress has changed to a muddy



purple. She thinks,  Oh  God, that’s  a lot  of blood.  Have I  had a stroke? Some



kind of brain  hemorrhage?



    Surely  not,  surely those  only  bleed on  the inside,  but  whatever  it  is,  she



needs help. She needs an ambulance, but  she can’t make her  hand go  to the



phone. It lifts,  trembles, and drops back to the ﬂoor.



    She hears a yelp of pain from  somewhere close, then crying she’d recognize



anywhere, even while dying (which, she suspects, she may be). It’s Tina.



    She manages to prop herself up on one bloody hand, enough to look out  the



window. She sees a man hustling Tina down the back steps into the yard. Tina’s



hands are tied behind her.



    Linda  forgets about  her pain,  forgets about needing  an ambulance. A  man



has broken in, and he’s now abducting her daughter. She needs to stop him. She



needs the police. She tries to get into  the  swivel chair behind  the desk, but  at



ﬁrst she can only paw at  the seat. She does a lunging sit-up and for  a moment



the pain is so intense the world  turns  white, but  she holds on to consciousness



and grabs the  arms  of  the  chair. When   her vision  clears, she  sees the man



opening the back  gate and shoving Tina  through.  Herding her, like  an animal



on its way to the slaughterhouse.



    Bring  her back! Linda screams. Don’t you hurt my baby!



    But  only  in her head. When she tries to get up, the  chair turns and she loses



her grip  on the  arms. The world   darkens. She hears a terrible gagging  sound



before she blacks out, and has time to think, Can that be me?






                                                             45





Things are not golden after the  rotary. Instead of open street, they  see backed-



up trafﬁc  and two orange signs. One says FLAGGER AHEAD.   The other  says

332
ROAD  CONSTRUCTION.   There’s a line of cars waiting  while the ﬂagger lets



downtown  trafﬁc go  through.  After  three minutes  of sitting,   each one feeling



an hour long, Hodges tells Jerome to use the side streets.



    “I   wish I  could, but  we’re blocked in.”  He  jerks a thumb  over his shoulder,



where the line of cars behind them is now backed up almost to the rotary.



    Holly   has been bent over her iPad, whacking away. Now she looks up. “Use



the sidewalk,” she says, then goes back to her magic tablet.



    “There  are mailboxes, Hollyberry,”   Jerome says. “Also a chainlink  fence up



ahead. I don’t think  there’s room.”



    She takes another brief  look. “Yeah there is.  You may scrape a little,  but  it



won’t be the ﬁrst time  for this  car. Go on.”



    “Who   pays the  ﬁne  if  I  get  arrested on a charge of  driving   while  black?



You?”



    Holly   rolls  her  eyes. Jerome turns to  Hodges, who  sighs and nods. “She’s



right.  There’s room. I’ll pay your fucking  ﬁne.”



    Jerome swings right.  The Mercedes clips the fender of the car stopped ahead



of them,   then  bumps up  onto  the  sidewalk.  Here  comes the  ﬁrst  mailbox.



Jerome swings even farther to  the right,   now entirely  off  the street. There’s a



thud  as the  driver’s side  knocks the  mailbox   off  its  post, then  a  drawn-out



squall as the passenger side caresses the chainlink fence. A woman in shorts and



a halter top  is mowing   her lawn.  She shouts at them as the passenger side of



Holly’s  German  U-boat  peels away a sign  reading  NO  TRESPASSING  NO



SOLICITING    NO   DOOR    TO   DOOR    SALESMEN.   She rushes  for   her



driveway, still  shouting.  Then  she just peers, shading her eyes and squinting.



Hodges can see her lips moving.



    “Oh,  goody,” Jerome says. “She’s getting your plate number.”



    “Just  drive,”  Holly  says. “Drive drive  drive.”  And  with  no pause: “Red Lips



is Morris Bellamy. That’s his name.”



    It’s  the  ﬂagger  yelling  at  them  now. The  construction  workers, who  have



been uncovering a sewer pipe running beneath the street, are staring. Some are



laughing.  One of  them  winks  at Jerome and makes a bottle-tipping    gesture.



Then they are past. The Mercedes thumps back down to the street. With  trafﬁc

333
bound  for  the  North    Side bottlenecked   behind  them,   the  street  ahead is



blessedly empty.



    “I   checked the city  tax  records,” Holly   says. “At  the time   John Rothstein



was murdered in  1978,  the  taxes on 23  Sycamore Street were being paid  by



Anita  Elaine Bellamy.  I  did  a Google search for her  name and came up with



over ﬁfty  hits,  she’s sort of a famous academic, but only  one hit  that  matters.



Her son was tried  and convicted of aggravated rape late that  same year. Right



here in the  city. He  got a life  sentence. There’s a picture of him  in  one of the



news stories. Look.” She hands the iPad to Hodges.



    Morris   Bellamy  has been snapped coming down  the steps of  a courthouse



Hodges remembers well, although  it  was replaced by the concrete monstrosity



in  Government   Square ﬁfteen  years ago.  Bellamy   is  ﬂanked  by  a  pair  of



detectives. Hodges  recalls  one  of  them,  Paul  Emerson.  Good  police,  long



retired. He’s wearing  a suit. So is the  other detective, but  that  one has draped



his coat over  Bellamy’s hands to  hide the  handcuffs he’s wearing.  Bellamy  is



also in  a suit,  which  means the picture   was taken either  while  the  trial  was



ongoing, or  just  after the  verdict  was rendered. It’s a  black-and-white  photo,



which  only  makes the contrast  between Bellamy’s pale  complexion and  dark



mouth more striking.  He  almost looks like he’s wearing lipstick.



    “That’s  got  to be him,”  Holly   says. “If you call the  state prison, I’ll  bet  you



six thousand bucks that he’s out.”



    “No  bet,”  Hodges says. “How long to Sycamore Street, Jerome?”



    “Ten  minutes.”



    “Firm   or optimistic?”



    Reluctantly,  Jerome replies, “Well .  . . maybe a tad optimistic.”



    “Just  do the best you can and try not to run  anybody ov—”



    Hodge’s cell rings.  It’s Pete. He sounds out of breath.



    “Have  you called the police, Mr. Hodges?”



    “No.”    Although   they’ll  probably  have the  license plate  of  Holly’s  car  by



now, but  he sees no reason to tell Pete that.  The boy sounds more upset than



ever. Almost crazed.

334
    “You  can’t. No matter  what. He’s got my  sister. He says if he doesn’t get the



notebooks, he’ll kill  her. I’m  going to give them  to him.”



    “Pete, don’t—”



    But  he’s talking to  no one. Pete has broken the connection.






                                                             46





Morris hustles Tina along the path. At  one point  a jutting  branch rips her ﬁlmy



blouse and scratches her arm, bringing blood.



    “Don’t   make me go so fast, mister! I’ll fall  down!”



    Morris  whacks the  back of her  head above her ponytail. “Save your breath,



bitch. Just be grateful I’m  not  making you run.”



    He  holds on to  her shoulders as they cross the stream, balancing her so she



won’t fall  in, and when they reach the point  where the scrub brush and stunted



trees give way to the Rec property, he tells her to stop.



    The  baseball ﬁeld is  deserted, but a few boys are on the  cracked asphalt of



the basketball court.  They’re  stripped  to the  waist, their   shoulders gleaming.



The day is really too hot for outside games, which is why  Morris supposes there



are only a few of them.



    He   unties  Tina’s  hands. She gives  a  little   whimper   of  relief   and starts



rubbing her wrists,  which are crisscrossed with deep red grooves.



    “We’re  going  to  walk  along the  edge of the  trees,” he tells  her. “The  only



time those boys will   be able to get  a good look at  us is when we get  near the



building  and come out of the  shade. If they say hello, or if there’s someone you



know, just wave and smile and keep walking. Do you understand?”



    “Y-Yes.”



    “If   you  scream or  yell   for  help,  I’ll   put  a  bullet   in  your  head.  Do  you



understand that?”



    “Yes. Did you shoot my mother? You did,  didn’t  you?”

335
    “Of   course not, just ﬁred  one into  the ceiling  to  settle her down.  She’s ﬁne



and you will  be, too, if you do as you’re told. Get moving.”



    They  walk  in  the  shade, the uncut  grass of right   ﬁeld whickering   against



Morris’s trousers and Tina’s jeans. The boys are totally  absorbed in their  game



and don’t even look  around, although  if  they had, Tina’s bright   yellow  blouse



would have stood out against the green trees like a warning ﬂag.



    When  they  reach the back of  the Rec, Morris  guides  her past his old  pal’s



Subaru, keeping a close eye on the boys as he does so. Once the brick ﬂank of



the building   hides the  two  of  them  from  the basketball  court,  he ties Tina’s



hands behind her  again. No  sense taking  chances with Birch  Street  so close.



Lots of houses on Birch Street.



    He  sees Tina draw  in  a  deep breath and  grabs her  shoulder. “Don’t   yell,



girlfriend.  Open your mouth  and I’ll  beat it off  you.”



    “Please don’t hurt  me,” Tina whispers. “I’ll   do whatever you want.”



    Morris  nods, satisﬁed. It’s a wise-con response if he ever heard one.



    “See that  basement window? The  one that’s open? Lie  down, turn  over  on



your belly, and drop through.”



    Tina  squats and peers into the shadows. Then she turns her bloody  swollen



face up to him. “It’s  too far! I’ll  fall!”



    Exasperated, Morris kicks  her in  the shoulder. She cries out. He bends over



and places the muzzle of the automatic against her temple.



    “You  said you’d do whatever I  wanted, and that’s what I  want. Get  through



that window  right  now, or I’ll  put  a bullet in  your tiny  brat brain.”



    Morris   wonders if  he means it.  He  decides he does. Little  girls  also don’t



mean shit.



    Weeping,  Tina squirms  through  the window.  She hesitates, half in and half



out, looking  at  Morris with   pleading eyes. He draws his foot  back to kick  her



in the face and help her along. She drops, then yells in spite of Morris’s explicit



instructions not  to.



    “My  ankle!  I think  I  broke my ankle!”



    Morris  doesn’t give a fuck  about her ankle. He takes a quick look  around to



make sure he’s still unobserved, then  slides through  the window  and into   the

336
basement of the Birch  Street Rec,  landing  on the  closed carton he used for  a



step last time. The  thief’s sister must  have landed on it wrong  and tumbled  to



the  ﬂoor. Her   foot  is  twisted  sideways and  already beginning   to  swell.  To



Morris Bellamy, that  doesn’t mean shit, either.






                                                             47





Mr. Hodges  has a thousand questions, but  Pete has no time  to answer any of



them. He  ends the call and sprints down  Sycamore Street to his house. He has



decided getting Tina’s old wagon will  take too  long; he’ll  ﬁgure out some other



way to transport  the notebooks when he gets to the  Rec. All  he really needs is



the key to the building.



    He  runs into  his  father’s ofﬁce to  grab it  and stops cold.  His  mother is  on



the ﬂoor beside the  desk, her blue eyes shining from  a mask of blood.  There’s



more blood on his dad’s open laptop, on the front  of her dress, spattered on the



desk chair and the  window  behind her. Music  is  tinkling   from  the computer,



and even in his distress, he recognizes the tune. She was playing solitaire. Just



playing solitaire and waiting  for  her kid to come home and bothering no one.



    “Mom!”  He  runs to her, crying.



    “My  head,” she says. “Look at my head.”



    He  bends over her, parts bloody clumps of hair, trying  to be gentle, and sees



a trench  running   from  her  temple  to  the  back  of  her  head. At   one point,



halfway along the trench, he can see bleary gray-white. It’s her skull, he thinks.



That’s bad, but at least it’s not her brains, please God no, brains are soft, brains



would be leaking. It’s  just her skull.



    “A  man came,” she says, speaking with great effort. “He . . . took  . . . Tina. I



heard her cry out. You have to . . . oh Jesus Christ, how my head rings.”



    Pete hesitates for one endless second, wavering between his need to help his



mother and  his need to  protect  his sister, to  get  her back.  If  only  this  was a



nightmare, he thinks.  If only  I could wake up.

337
    Mom  ﬁrst.  Mom right  now.



    He   grabs  the  phone  off  his   father’s desk.  “Be   quiet,  Mom.   Don’t   say



anything else, and don’t move.”



    She closes her eyes wearily.  “Did   he come for  the  money? Did   that  man



come for the money you found?”



    “No,   for  what  was with   it,”  Pete  says, and punches in  three numbers  he



learned in grade school.



    “Nine-one-one,”  a woman says. “What is your emergency?”



    “My   mom’s been shot,”  Pete says. “Twenty-three Sycamore Street. Send an



ambulance, right now. She’s bleeding like crazy.”



    “What   is your name, si—”



    Pete hangs up. “Mom,  I have to go. I have to get Tina back.”



    “Don’t   . .  . be hurt.”  She’s slurring  now. Her eyes are still  shut and he sees



with  horror  that  there’s even blood in  her  eyelashes. This is his  fault,  all  his



fault. “Don’t  let  . . . Tina be . . . hur . .  .”



    She falls silent, but  she’s breathing. Oh God, please let her keep breathing.



    Pete takes the key to  the Birch  Street Rec’s front door from  his father’s real



estate properties board.



    “You’ll   be okay, Mom.  The ambulance will   come. Some friends will  come,



too.”



    He  starts for the door, then an idea strikes him and he turns back. “Mom?”



    “Whaa  . . .”



    “Does Dad  still  smoke?”



    Without   opening her eyes, she says, “He thinks . . . I don’t . . . know.”



    Quickly—he   has to be gone before Hodges gets here and tries  to stop him



from doing  what he has to do—Pete begins to search the drawers of his father’s



desk.



    Just in  case, he thinks.



    Just in  case.

338
                                                             48





The back gate is ajar. Pete doesn’t notice. He pelts down the  path. As he nears



the stream,  he passes a scrap of  ﬁlmy   yellow  cloth  hanging  from   a branch



jutting   out  into  the  path.  He  reaches the stream  and turns  to  look,  almost



without   realizing  it,  at  the  spot where  the  trunk  is  buried.  The  trunk   that



caused all this horror.



    When   he  reaches the  stepping-stones at  the  bottom   of  the   bank,  Pete



suddenly stops. His  eyes widen. His  legs go rubbery  and loose. He sits  down



hard, staring at the  foaming, shallow  water that  he has crossed so many times,



often with  his  little  sister babbling   away about whatever interested her at the



time. Mrs. Beasley. SpongeBob. Her friend Ellen. Her favorite lunchbox.



    Her  favorite clothes.



    The  ﬁlmy  yellow blouse with  the  billowing   sleeves, for instance. Mom tells



her she shouldn’t wear it  so often, because it has to be dry-cleaned. Was Teens



wearing it  this  morning   when she left  for  school? That  seems like a century



ago, but he thinks . . .



    He  thinks  she was.



    I’m  taking her to a safe place, Red Lips had said. A place where we can meet, once



you have the notebooks.



    Can it  be?



    Of  course it  can. If Red Lips  grew up  in Pete’s house, he would have spent



time  at the  Rec. All   the kids  in  the  neighborhood spent  time  there, until   it



closed. And he must have known about the path,  because the trunk was buried



less than twenty paces from where it crossed the stream.



    But  he doesn’t know about the notebooks, Pete thinks. Not  yet.



    Unless he found out  since the last call, that is. If so, he will  have taken them



already. He’ll  be gone.  That  would  be okay  if  he’s left  Tina  alive. And  why



wouldn’t  he? What   reason would  he  have to  kill   her  once he  has what  he



wants?

339
    For  revenge, Pete thinks coldly.  To get back at  me. I’m  the thief  who  took



the notebooks, I  hit  him   with  a bottle  and  got  away at the  bookstore, and I



deserve to be punished.



    He  gets up  and staggers as a wave of lightheadedness rushes through him.



When it  passes, he crosses the creek. On the other side, he begins to run again.






                                                             49





The front door of 23  Sycamore is standing open. Hodges is out of the Mercedes



before Jerome has brought it  fully   to a stop.  He  runs inside, one hand  in  his



pocket, gripping   the  Happy   Slapper. He  hears tinkly   music  he knows  well



from hours spent playing computer solitaire.



    He  follows  the sound and ﬁnds a woman sitting—sprawling—beside  a desk



in an alcove that has been set up as an ofﬁce. One side of her face is swollen and



drenched in blood. She looks at him, trying  to focus.



    “Pete,”  she says, and then, “He took Tina.”



    Hodges  kneels and carefully  parts the  woman’s hair. What   he sees is bad,



but nowhere near as bad as it  could  be; this  woman has won the  only lottery



that really  matters.  The bullet   put  a groove six  inches long in  her  scalp, has



actually exposed her skull  in  one place, but  a scalp wound isn’t  going  to  kill



her. She’s lost a lot   of blood,  though,  and  is  suffering  from  both  shock and



concussion. This is no  time  to question  her, but  he has to. Morris  Bellamy  is



laying down a trail  of violence, and Hodges is still at the  wrong end of it.



    “Holly.   Call an ambulance.”



    “Pete  . . . already did,”  Linda  says, and as if her weak voice has conjured it,



they hear a siren. It’s still distant  but approaching fast. “Before . . . he left.”



    “Mrs.  Saubers, did Pete take Tina? Is that what you’re saying?”



    “No.  He. The man.”



    “Did   he have red lips,  Mrs.  Saubers?” Holly asks. “Did   the man who  took



Tina have red lips?”

340
    “Irish   . . . lips,”  she says. “But not .  . . a redhead. White.  He was old. Am  I



going to die?”



    “No,”   Hodges says. “Help  is on  the way. But  you have to  help us. Do  you



know where Peter went?”



    “Out   . . . back. Through the gate. Saw him.”



    Jerome looks out  the window  and sees the gate standing ajar. “What’s back



there?”



    “A  path,”  she says wearily. “The kids used it  . . . to  go to the  Rec. Before it



closed. He took . . . I think  he took the  key.”



    “Pete did?”



    “Yes . . .”  Her  eyes move to a board with a great many keys hung on it. One



hook is empty. The DymoTape beneath it reads BIRCH ST. REC.



    Hodges comes to a decision. “Jerome, you’re with me. Holly,  stay with  Mrs.



Saubers. Get a cold cloth to  put on  the side of her head.” He  draws in  breath.



“But  before you do that, call the police. Ask for my  old partner. Huntley.”



    He  expects an argument, but Holly  just nods and picks up the phone.



    “He  took  his father’s lighter,  too,”  Linda  says. She seems a little more with



it now. “I  don’t know  why he would do that.  And the  can of Ronson’s.”



    Jerome looks a question at Hodges, who says: “It’s lighter ﬂuid.”






                                                             50





Pete keeps to the shade of the trees, just as Morris and Tina  did,  although the



boys who were playing basketball have gone home to dinner  and left the  court



deserted except for a few crows scavenging spilled potato chips. He sees a small



car nestled in the  loading dock.  Hidden  there, actually, and the  vanity  license



plate is enough to cause any doubts Pete might have had to disappear. Red Lips



is here, all right,  and he can’t  have taken Tina in by  the front.  That  door faces



the street, which is apt  to be fairly  busy at this time  of day, and besides, he has



no key.

341
    Pete passes the car, and at the corner of the building,   he drops to his knees



and peers around. One of the basement windows is open. The grass and weeds



that were growing in  front  of it have been beaten down. He hears a man’s voice.



They’re down   there,  all  right.   So are  the  notebooks. The  only   question  is



whether or not Red Lips has found them yet.



    Pete withdraws  and leans against the sunwarmed brick,  wondering what  to



do next. Think,  he tells himself.  You got Tina into  this and you need to get her



out of it,  so think, goddam you!



    Only  he can’t. His mind  is full  of white  noise.



    In  one of his few  interviews, the ever-irritable  John Rothstein  expressed his



disgust with  the where-do-you-get-your-ideas  question. Story ideas came from



nowhere, he proclaimed.  They arrived  without   the polluting    inﬂuence of  the



author’s intellect.  The  idea that  comes to Pete now  also seems to arrive from



nowhere. It’s both  horrible  and horribly   attractive.  It  won’t  work  if  Red Lips



has already discovered the notebooks, but if that is the case, nothing will work.



    Pete gets up and circles the big brick  cube the other way, once more passing



the green car with its  tattletale  license plate. He stops at the front  right  corner



of the abandoned brick box, looking  at  the going-home trafﬁc  on Birch  Street.



It’s like peering through  a window  and into a different  world, one where things



are normal.  He takes  a quick  inventory:  cell  phone,  cigarette lighter,   can of



lighter  ﬂuid.  The  can was in the bottom   desk drawer with  his  father’s Zippo.



The can is only half full,  based on the slosh when he shakes it, but half full will



be more than enough.



    He  goes around the corner, now in  full  view of Birch  Street, trying  to  walk



normally and  hoping that  no one—Mr.  Evans, his old  Little  League coach, for



instance—will  hail him.



    No  one  does. This time  he knows  which  of  the two  keys to  use, and this



time it  turns  easily in the  lock. He  opens the door slowly, steps into the  foyer,



and eases the door closed. It’s musty and brutally  hot  in here. For  Tina’s sake,



he hopes it’s cooler in the basement. How scared she must be, he thinks.



    If   she’s still  alive to  feel  anything,  an evil  voice  whispers back. Red  Lips



could have been standing over her dead body and talking to himself. He’s crazy,

342
and that’s what crazy people do.



    On  Pete’s left, a ﬂight of stairs leads up to the second ﬂoor, which consists of



a single large space running the length  of  the building.   The ofﬁcial  name was



The North   Side Community  Room,  but  the kids  had a different  name for  it,



one Red Lips probably remembers.



    As  Pete sits on the stairs to take off his shoes (he can’t be heard clacking and



echoing across the ﬂoor), he thinks again, I got  her into  this, it’s  my job  to get



her out. Nobody else’s.



    He  calls  his  sister’s cell. From  below  him,  mufﬂed   but  unmistakable,  he



hears Tina’s Snow Patrol ringtone.



    Red  Lips  answers immediately. “Hello,   Peter.”  He sounds calmer  now. In



control. That  could  be good or  bad for  his plan.  Pete can’t tell  which.  “Have



you got the notebooks?”



    “Yes. Is my sister okay?”



    “She’s ﬁne. Where are you?”



    “That’s  pretty  funny,” Pete says . . . and when you think  about it,  it actually



is. “Jimmy  Gold would  like it,  I  bet.”



    “I’m   in no mood for  cryptic humor.  Let us do our business and be done with



each other, shall we? Where are you?”



    “Do  you remember the Saturday Movie Palace?”



    “What   are you—”



    Red Lips  stops. Thinks.



    “Are  you talking   about the Community  Room,  where they used to show all



those corny . . .” He pauses again as the penny drops. “You’re here?”



    “Yes. And  you’re in  the basement. I  saw the car out back. You were maybe



ninety feet  from the  notebooks all  along.”  Even closer than that,  Pete thinks.



“Come and get them.”



    He  ends the call before Red Lips can try to set the terms more to  his liking.



Pete runs for the  kitchen  on tiptoe,  shoes in hand. He  has to get out  of  sight



before Red Lips can climb the stairs from the basement. If he does that, all may



be well. If he doesn’t, he and his sister will probably  die together.

343
    From  downstairs, louder than her ringtone—much louder—he hears Tina cry



out in pain.



    Still   alive, Pete thinks,  and then,  The bastard hurt  her. Only  that’s not  the



truth.



    I  did it.  This  is all my fault.  Mine,  mine, mine.






                                                             51





Morris, sitting   on a box marked KITCHEN     SUPPLIES,    closes Tina’s phone



and at ﬁrst  only  looks at it.   There’s but one question  on the ﬂoor,  really; just



one that needs to be answered. Is the boy telling the truth, or is he lying?



    Morris  thinks  he’s telling  the truth.  They both  grew up on Sycamore Street,



after all,  and  they  both  attended  Saturday movie-shows upstairs,  sitting   on



folding  chairs and eating popcorn sold by the local Girl  Scout troop. It’s logical



to think  they  would  both choose this nearby abandoned building  as a place to



hide, one close to both  the  house they had shared and the  buried  trunk.  The



clincher  is the  sign  Morris  saw out  front,   on his  ﬁrst  reconnaissance: CALL



THOMAS  SAUBERS REAL  ESTATE. If Peter’s father is the selling  agent, the



boy could easily have ﬁlched a key.



    He  seizes Tina by the  arm and drags her across to the  furnace, a huge and



dusty relic crouched in  the corner. She lets out another of those annoying  cries



as she tries to put  weight  on  her swollen  ankle and it  buckles  under her. He



slaps her again.



    “Shut  up,”  he says. “Stop being such a whiny bitch.”



    There  isn’t enough computer  cord to  make sure she stays in one place, but



there’s a cage-light hanging  on the wall  with  several yards of orange electrical



cord looped around it. Morris  doesn’t need the light,  but the cord is a gift  from



God. He didn’t  think  he could be any angrier with  the thief,  but he was wrong.



Jimmy Gold would like it, I bet, the thief had said, and what right  did he have to



reference John Rothstein’s work? Rothstein’s work was his.

344
    “Turn  around.”



    Tina  doesn’t move quickly  enough to  suit  Morris,  who is  still  furious  with



her brother.  He grabs her  shoulders and whirls  her. Tina  doesn’t cry  out this



time,  but  a  groan  escapes her tightly   compressed lips.  Her  beloved yellow



blouse is now smeared with basement dirt.



    He   secures the orange electrical  cord  to  the  computer  cord  binding   her



wrists, then  throws the  cage-light  over one of the  furnace pipes. He pulls  the



cord taut,  eliciting  another groan  from the  girl  as her bound hands are jerked



up almost to her shoulder blades.



    Morris  ties  off the  new cord with  a double  knot,  thinking,   They were here



all along,  and he thinks   that’s funny? If  he wants funny,  I’ll   give him  all  the



funny he can stand. He can die laughing.



    He  bends down,  hands on knees, so he’s eye to eye with  the  thief’s  sister.



“I’m  going  upstairs to  get  my  property, girlfriend.   Also  to kill   your  pain-in-



the-ass brother. Then I’m  going  to  come back down  and kill   you.”  He kisses



the tip  of her nose. “Your life  is over. I want you to  think  about that  while  I’m



gone.”



    He  trots toward the  stairs.






                                                             52





Pete is in  the pantry.  The door is  only  open a crack, but  that’s enough to  see



Red Lips as he goes hustling by, the little red and black gun in  one hand, Tina’s



phone in  the other.  Pete listens  to  the echo of  his footfalls  as they  cross the



empty downstairs rooms, and as soon as they become the thud-thud-thud of feet



climbing  the  stairs to what  was once known as the Saturday Movie Palace, he



pelts for the  stairs to  the basement. He drops his  shoes on the way. He wants



his hands free. He also wants Red Lips to know  exactly where he went. Maybe



it will   slow him down.



    Tina’s eyes widen when she sees him. “Pete! Get me out of here!”

345
    He  goes to her and looks at the tangle of knots—white   cord, orange cord—



that binds  her hands behind  her and also to  the furnace. The  knots are tight,



and he feels a wave of despair as he looks at them. He loosens one of the orange



knots, allowing  her  hands to drop  a little  and taking   some of the pressure off



her shoulders. As  he starts work  on  the  second, his cell  phone vibrates. The



wolf has found nothing  upstairs and is calling  back. Instead of answering, Pete



hurries to the box  below the window.  His  printing  is on  the side: KITCHEN



SUPPLIES.   He can see footprints on top, and knows to whom they  belong.



    “What   are you doing?” Tina says. “Untie me!”



    But  getting  her  free is only part  of the problem.  Getting  her out  is the rest



of it,  and Pete doesn’t  think  there’s enough time  to  do both  before Red  Lips



comes back. He has seen his sister’s ankle, now so swollen it hardly  looks like



an ankle at all.



    Red  Lips is no  longer bothering  with  Tina’s phone. He  yells from  upstairs.



Screams from upstairs. “Where are you, you fucking son of a whore?”



    Two  little    piggies  in  the  basement and  the  big  bad  wolf  upstairs,  Pete



thinks. And  us without  a house made of straw, let alone one made of bricks.



    He  carries the carton Red Lips used as a step to the middle of the room  and



pulls the folded  ﬂaps apart as footfalls race across the kitchen ﬂoor above them,



pounding  hard enough to  make the  old  strips of  insulation  hanging  between



the beams sway a little. Tina’s face is a mask of horror. Pete upends the carton,



pouring out  a ﬂood of Moleskine notebooks.



    “Pete!  What are you doing? He’s coming!”



    Don’t   I know  it,  Pete thinks,  and opens the second carton. As he  adds the



rest of the notebooks to the pile  on the basement ﬂoor, the footfalls above stop.



He’s seen the shoes. Red Lips opens the door to the basement. Being cautious



now. Trying to think   it through.



    “Peter? Are you visiting   with  your sister?”



    “Yes,”  Peter calls back. “I’m visiting  her with  a gun in  my hand.”



    “You  know what?”  the wolf says. “I don’t believe that.”

346
    Pete  unscrews the cap on  the  can of lighter   ﬂuid   and upends it   over the



notebooks, dousing the jackstraw heap of stories, poems, and angry, half-drunk



rants that  often  end in  mid-thought.    Also the  two  novels that  complete  the



story of  a fucked-up  American  named  Jimmy  Gold,  stumbling   through   the



sixties and  looking   for  some kind  of  redemption.   Looking  for—in   his  own



words—some kind of  shit that  means shit. Pete fumbles for the  lighter,  and at



ﬁrst it   slips through   his ﬁngers.  God, he  can see the man’s shadow up there



now. Also the shadow of the gun.



    Tina  is saucer-eyed with terror,  hogtied  with  her nose and lips slathered in



blood. The  bastard beat  her, Pete thinks.  Why   did  he do  that?  She’s only a



little  kid.



    But  he  knows. The sister was a semi-acceptable substitute for  the one Red



Lips really wants to beat.



    “You  better believe it,” Pete says. “It’s a forty-ﬁve,  lots bigger  than yours. It



was in  my  father’s desk. You  better  just  go away. That  would  be  the  smart



thing.”



    Please, God, please.



    But  Pete’s voice wavers on the last  words, rising  to  the uncertain  treble of



the thirteen-year-old   boy who  found  these notebooks in  the  ﬁrst  place.  Red



Lips hears it, laughs, and starts down the stairs. Pete grabs the lighter  again—



tight,  this  time—and   thumbs  up the  top  as Red Lips comes fully  into   view.



Pete ﬂicks the spark wheel, realizing that  he never checked to see if the lighter



had fuel, an oversight  that could  end his life  and that  of his  sister in  the next



ten seconds. But the spark produces a robust yellow ﬂame.



    Peter holds the  lighter  a foot above the pile of notebooks. “You’re right,”   he



says. “No gun. But I  did ﬁnd  this in  his desk.”






                                                             53

347
Hodges and Jerome run across the baseball ﬁeld. Jerome is pulling  ahead, but



Hodges isn’t   too  far  behind.   Jerome stops  at  the  edge  of  the  sorry  little



basketball court  and points  to  a green Subaru parked  near the loading  dock.



Hodges reads the vanity license plate—BOOKS4U—and  nods.



    They  have just  started  moving  again  when  they hear  a furious  yell  from



inside: “Where are you, you fucking son of a whore?”



    That’s  got to  be Bellamy. The fucking   son of a whore is undoubtedly  Peter



Saubers. The boy let  himself  in  with  his  father’s key, which  means the  front



door is open. Hodges points to himself,  then to  the Rec. Jerome nods, but says



in a low voice, “You have no gun.”



    “True  enough, but my  thoughts are pure and my strength is that  of ten.”



    “Huh?”



    “Stay here, Jerome. I mean it.”



    “You  sure?”



    “Yes. You don’t happen to have a knife, do you? Even a pocketknife?”



    “No.  Sorry.”



    “All    right,   then  look  around.  Find   a bottle.   There  must  be some,  kids



probably come back here to drink   beer after dark. Break it  and then  slash you



some tires. If this goes sideways, he’s not using Halliday’s car to get away.”



    Jerome’s face says he doesn’t much care for the possible implications of this



order. He grips Hodges’s arm. “No  kamikaze  runs, Bill,  you hear me? Because



you have nothing to make up for.”



    “I  know.”



    The  truth   is he  knows nothing   of  the kind.   Four years ago, a  woman he



loved died in  an explosion that was meant for him.  There’s not a day that  goes



by when  he doesn’t  think   of Janey, not  a night   when  he doesn’t lie   in  bed



thinking,  If  only I  had been a little quicker. A  little  smarter.



    He  hasn’t been quick enough or smart  enough this time,  either, and telling



himself that  the  situation  developed too quickly  isn’t  going  to  get those kids



out of the potentially  lethal  jam they’re in. All   he knows for sure is that neither



Tina nor her brother  can die on his watch today. He’ll  do whatever he needs to



in order to prevent that  from happening.

348
    He  pats the side of Jerome’s face. “Trust me, kiddo. I’ll do my  part. You just



take care of those tires. You might yank some plug wires while you’re at it.”



    Hodges  starts away, looking  back just  once when  he reaches the corner of



the building.   Jerome is  watching  him   unhappily,  but  this  time  he’s staying



put. Which  is good. The only  thing  worse than Bellamy killing   Peter and Tina



would be if he killed  Jerome.



    He  goes around the corner and runs to the front of the building.



    This  door, like the one at 23 Sycamore Street, is standing open.






                                                             54





Red Lips is staring at the heap of Moleskine notebooks as if hypnotized. At  last



he raises his eyes to Pete. He also raises the gun.



    “Go  ahead,” Pete says. “Do it and see what happens to the notebooks when I



drop the  lighter.  I  only  got  a chance to really  douse the ones on top,  but  by



now it’ll   be trickling   down.  And  they’re old.  They’ll  go  up fast. Then  maybe



the rest of the shit down here.”



    “So  it’s a  Mexican standoff,”  Red Lips  says. “The only  problem  with  that,



Peter—I’m  speaking  from  your  perspective  now—is  that  my   gun  will   last



longer than  your lighter.  What  are you  going to  do when it   burns out?”  He’s



trying  to  sound calm and in  charge, but  his eyes keep ping-ponging  between



the Zippo  and the notebooks. The  covers of the ones on top gleam wetly,  like



sealskin.



    “I’ll    know when  that’s going  to happen,”  Pete says. “The second the ﬂame



starts to go lower, and turns blue instead of yellow, I’ll  drop it.  Then, poof.”



    “You  won’t.”  The  wolf’s upper lip  rises, exposing those yellow teeth.  Those



fangs.



    “Why    not? They’re  just  words.  Compared to  my  sister, they  don’t  mean



shit.”

349
    “Really?”   Red Lips turns  the  gun on  Tina. “Then  douse the  lighter  or  I’ll



kill  her right  in front  of you.”



    Painful   hands squeeze Pete’s heart at the sight  of the  gun pointing   at  his



sister’s midsection, but  he doesn’t close the  Zippo’s cap.  He bends over, very



slowly lowering  it   toward the  pile  of notebooks. “There  are two more  Jimmy



Gold novels in here. Did you know  that?”



    “You’re  lying.”   Red Lips is still  pointing   the gun at  Tina, but  his eyes have



been drawn—helplessly, it seems—back toward the Moleskines again. “There’s



one. It’s about him going  west.”



    “Two,”  Pete says again. “The Runner Goes West is good, but The Runner Raises



the Flag is the best thing he ever wrote. It’s long, too. An  epic. What a shame if



you never get to read it.”



    A  ﬂush  is climbing   up  the  man’s pale cheeks. “How  dare you? How  dare



you bait me? I gave my life for those books! I killed for those books!”



    “I  know,”  Pete says. “And since you’re such a fan, here’s a little treat for you.



In the last book, Jimmy  meets Andrea Stone again. How about that?”



    The  wolf’s eyes widen. “Andrea? He does? How? What happens?”



    Under   such  circumstances the  question  is  beyond  bizarre,  but   it’s  also



sincere. Honest. Pete realizes that  the  ﬁctional  Andrea, Jimmy’s  ﬁrst  love,  is



real to this  man in a way Pete’s sister is not. No human being  is as real to Red



Lips as Jimmy Gold, Andrea  Stone, Mr. Meeker, Pierre Retonne (also known as



The Car Salesman of Doom), and all  the  rest. This  is surely a marker  of true,



deep insanity, but that  must  make Pete crazy, too, because he knows how this



lunatic  feels.  Exactly  how.  He  lit   up  with   the  same excitement,  the  same



amazement, when Jimmy glimpsed Andrea in Grant  Park,  during  the Chicago



riots of  1968.  Tears actually came to  his eyes. Such tears, Pete realizes—yes,



even now, especially now, because their lives hang upon it—mark the core power



of make-believe. It’s  what  caused thousands to weep when  they  learned that



Charles Dickens had died of a stroke. It’s why, for years, a stranger put a rose on



Edgar Allan   Poe’s grave  every January  19th,  Poe’s birthday.   It’s  also what



would make Pete hate this  man even if he wasn’t pointing   a gun at his  sister’s



trembling,  vulnerable midsection.  Red Lips took  the life  of a great writer,  and

350
why? Because Rothstein dared to  follow  a character who  went  in  a direction



Red Lips didn’t  like? Yes, that was it. He  did it  out  of his own core belief: that



the writing  was somehow more important than the writer.



    Slowly  and deliberately, Pete shakes his head. “It’s all in  the notebooks. The



Runner Raises the Flag ﬁlls sixteen of them. You could read it there,  but  you’ll



never hear any of it from me.”



    Pete actually smiles.



    “No  spoilers.”



    “The  notebooks are mine, you bastard! Mine!”



    “They’re  going to  be ashes, if you don’t let my sister go.”



    “Petie,  I can’t even walk!” Tina  wails.



    Pete can’t afford to  look at  her, only at Red Lips. Only  at  the wolf.  “What’s



your name? I think I  deserve to know your name.”



    Red Lips  shrugs, as if it no longer matters. “Morris  Bellamy.”



    “Throw   the gun  away, Mr.  Bellamy. Kick  it   along the  ﬂoor and under  the



furnace. Once you do that,  I’ll   close the lighter.  I’ll   untie  my  sister and we’ll



go. I’ll  give  you plenty  of time  to get  away with  the notebooks. All  I  want  to



do is take Tina home and get help for my mom.”



    “I’m   supposed to trust you?” Red Lips sneers it.



    Pete  lowers the  lighter   farther.  “Trust  me  or  watch  the  notebooks burn.



Make up your mind  fast. I don’t know  the last time my  dad ﬁlled this  thing.”



    Something  catches the corner of Pete’s eye. Something moving on the stairs.



He doesn’t dare look. If  he does, Red Lips will,   too. And  I’ve almost  got him,



Pete thinks.



    This  seems to  be so. Red Lips  starts to  lower  the  gun.  For a moment  he



looks every year of his age, and more. Then  he raises the gun and points  it  at



Tina again.



    “I   won’t kill   her.”  He speaks in the  decisive tone of a general who has just



made a crucial battleﬁeld  decision. “Not   at ﬁrst.  I’ll   just shoot her  in the  leg.



You can listen to  her scream. If  you light   the notebooks on ﬁre  after that,  I’ll



shoot her  in  the other  leg.  Then  in  the  stomach. She’ll  die,  but  she’ll  have



plenty of time  to hate you ﬁrst, if  she doesn’t alre—”

351
    There’s a ﬂat double  clap from Morris’s  left.  It’s Pete’s shoes, landing at the



foot of  the stairs. Morris,  on  a hair trigger,  wheels in  that  direction  and ﬁres.



The gun is small, but  in  the enclosed space of the basement, the report is loud.



Pete gives an involuntary  jerk,  and the lighter   falls from  his  hand. There’s an



explosive whump, and notebooks on top of the  pile suddenly  grow a corona of



ﬁre.



    “No!”   Morris  screams, wheeling away from  Hodges even as Hodges comes



pelting down  the stairs so fast he can barely keep his balance. Morris has a clear



shot at Pete. He  raises the gun to  take it,  but  before he can ﬁre,  Tina swings



forward on her bonds and kicks him  in  the back of the  leg with  her good foot.



The bullet goes between Pete’s neck and shoulder.



    The  notebooks, meanwhile, are burning briskly.



    Hodges closes with Morris  before he can ﬁre again, grabbing at Morris’s gun



hand. Hodges  is  the   heavier of  the  two,   and  in  better   shape, but  Morris



Bellamy  possesses the strength of insanity.  They  waltz  drunkenly  across the



basement, Hodges holding Morris’s right  wrist  so the little  automatic  points at



the ceiling,  Morris  using  his left  hand to  rip  at  Hodges’s face, trying  to claw



out his eyes.



    Peter  races around the notebooks—they  are blazing  now, the  lighter  ﬂuid



that has trickled   deep into the  pile  igniting—and   grapples with   Morris  from



behind. Morris  turns  his head, bares his teeth, and  snaps at him. His  eyes are



rolling  in their  sockets.



    “His   hand! Get his hand!”   Hodges shouts. They  have stumbled  under  the



stairs. Hodges’s face is striped with  blood,  several pieces of his cheek hanging



in strips. “Get  it  before he skins me alive!”



    Pete  grabs Bellamy’s left   hand. Behind  them,  Tina  is  screaming. Hodges



pounds a ﬁst into   Bellamy’s face twice: hard,  pistoning  blows.  That  seems to



ﬁnish him;  his face goes slack and his knees buckle. Tina is still screaming, and



the basement is growing brighter.



    “The roof, Petie! The roof is catching!”



    Morris  is on his  knees, his head hanging, blood gushing from  his chin, lips,



and broken nose. Hodges grabs  his right   wrist  and twists.  There’s a crack as

352
Morris’s wrist breaks, and the little  automatic  clatters to the ﬂoor. Hodges has a



moment to  think   it’s  over before the bastard  rams his free hand  forward and



upward, punching Hodges squarely in the balls and ﬁlling   his belly with  liquid



pain. Morris  scuttles between his  spread legs. Hodges gasps, hands pressed to



his throbbing  crotch.



    “Petie, Petie, the ceiling!”



    Pete thinks  Bellamy  is going  after the gun, but  the man  ignores it  entirely.



His goal is the  notebooks. They are now a bonﬁre, the covers curling back, the



pages browning  and  sending  up  sparks  that  have  ignited   several strips  of



hanging insulation.   The ﬁre  begins spreading above them,  dropping  burning



streamers. One of these lands on Tina’s head, and there’s a stench of frying hair



to go with   the smell  of the  burning  paper and insulation.   She shakes it away



with  a cry of pain.



    Pete runs to  her, punting  the  little  automatic  deep into the  basement as he



goes. He beats at  her  smoldering  hair  and then  begins  struggling   with   the



knots.



    “No!”   Morris  screams, but not at  Pete. He goes to his knees in front  of  the



notebooks like a religious zealot in  front  of a blazing altar.  He reaches into the



ﬂames, trying to  push the pile apart. This  sends fresh clouds of sparks spiraling



upward. “No no no no!”



    Hodges wants to  run to  Peter and his sister, but the best he can manage is a



drunken shamble. The pain  in  his groin  is spreading down his  legs, loosening



the muscles he has worked so hard to build  up.  Nevertheless, he gets to work



on one of the knots  in  the orange electrical cord.  He again wishes for  a knife,



but it  would take a cleaver to cut this stuff.  The shit is thick.



    More  blazing strips  of insulation  fall  around them. Hodges  bats them away



from the girl,  terriﬁed  that  her gauzy blouse will  catch ﬁre. The knot  is letting



go, ﬁnally letting   go, but the girl  is struggling—



    “Stop,  Teens,” Pete says. Sweat is pouring  down his  face. The basement is



getting  hot.  “They’re  slipknots,  you’re pulling   them tight   again, you  have to



stop.”

353
    Morris’s  screams are changing into  howls  of pain.  Hodges  has no time  to



look at  him.  The  loop  he’s pulling  on  abruptly  loosens. He  pulls  Tina  away



from the furnace, her hands still tied  behind her.



    There’s going  to be no exit  by way of the  stairs; the lower ones are burning



and the  upper ones are catching.  The  tables, the  chairs, the  boxes of  stored



paperwork: all on ﬁre. Morris  Bellamy is also on ﬁre. Both his sportcoat and the



shirt  beneath are blazing.  Yet he  continues to  root  his way  into  the  bonﬁre,



trying  to get at any unburned notebooks still  left  at the bottom.  His ﬁngers are



turning   black.  Although    the  pain  must   be  excruciating,   he keeps  going.



Hodges has time   to  think   of  the  fairy  tale  where the  wolf  came down  the



chimney and  landed in   a pot  of  boiling  water.  His  daughter,  Alison,  didn’t



want to hear that one. She said it was too sca—



    “Bill!   Bill!   Over here!”



    Hodges  sees Jerome at one of the  basement windows. Hodges  remembers



saying Neither one of you minds worth a tinker’s dam, and now he’s delighted that



they don’t. Jerome is on his belly, sticking his  arms through and down.



    “Lift   her! Lift  her up! Quick,  before you all cook!”



    It’s  mostly  Pete who  carries Tina across to the basement window,  through



the falling   sparks and burning   scarves of insulation.  One  lands on  the  kid’s



back, and Hodges  swipes it  away. Pete lifts  her. Jerome grabs her  under the



arms and hauls her out,  the plug  of  the computer  cord Morris  used to tie  her



hands trailing and bumping  behind.



    “Now   you,” Hodges gasps.



    Pete  shakes his head. “You  ﬁrst.”   He  looks up  at  Jerome. “You  pull.  I’ll



push.”



    “Okay,”  Jerome says. “Lift your arms, Bill.”



    There’s no time  to argue. Hodges lifts  his arms and feels them grabbed. He



has time to  think,   Feels like wearing  handcuffs, and then  he’s being  hoisted.



It’s slow  at ﬁrst—he’s  a lot  heavier than  the  girl—but   then  two  hands plant



themselves ﬁrmly on his  ass and shove. He rises into clear, clean air—hot, but



cooler than  the  basement—and lands  next  to  Tina  Saubers. Jerome reaches



through again. “Come on, kid!  Move it!”

354
    Pete lifts  his arms, and Jerome seizes his wrists. The basement is ﬁlling with



smoke and Pete begins coughing, almost retching,  as he uses his feet to pedal



his way up the wall.  He  slides through the window,  turns  over, and peers back



into the basement.



    A  charred  scarecrow kneels in there,  digging   into  the  burning  notebooks



with  arms made of ﬁre. Morris’s face is melting. He shrieks and begins hugging



the blazing, dissolving remnants of Rothstein’s work  to his burning  chest.



    “Don’t   look  at  that,   kid,”   Hodges says, putting   a hand  on  his  shoulder.



“Don’t.”



    But  Pete wants to look. Needs to look.



    He  thinks,  That could have been me on ﬁre.



    He  thinks,  No. Because I know the difference. I know what matters.



    He  thinks,  Please God, if you’re there . . . let that be true.






                                                             55





Pete lets Jerome carry Tina as far as the baseball ﬁeld, then  says, “Give her to



me, please.”



    Jerome surveys him—Pete’s  pale,  shocked face, the one  blistered  ear, the



holes charred in his shirt. “You sure?”



    “Yeah.”



    Tina  is already holding  out her arms. She has been quiet since being hauled



from the burning  basement, but when Pete takes her, she puts her arms around



his neck, her face against his shoulder, and begins to cry loudly.



    Holly   comes running  down  the  path.  “Thank  God!”  she says. “There you



are! Where’s Bellamy?”



    “Back  there,  in  the basement,” Hodges  says. “And if  he  isn’t dead yet,  he



wishes he was. Have you got your cell phone? Call the ﬁre department.”



    “Is  our mother okay?” Pete asks.

355
    “I   think  she’s going to  be ﬁne,” Holly   says, pulling  her phone off her  belt.



“The ambulance is  taking  her  to Kiner   Memorial.  She was alert and talking.



The paramedics said her vital signs are good.”



    “Thank   God,”  Pete says. Now he also starts to  cry, the  tears cutting  clean



tracks through  the  smears of soot on his cheeks. “If  she died,  I’d  kill   myself.



Because this is all my fault.”



    “No,”   Hodges says.



    Pete  looks at  him.  Tina  is  looking,  too,  her  arms still   linked  around  her



brother’s neck.



    “You  found the notebooks and the money, didn’t you?”



    “Yes. By accident. They were buried in  a trunk  by the stream.”



    “Anyone   would  have done what  you  did,”   Jerome says. “Isn’t  that  right,



Bill?”



    “Yes,”  Bill  says. “For your family, you do all that  you can. The way you went



after Bellamy when he took Tina.”



    “I   wish  I’d  never found  that  trunk,”   Pete says. What  he  doesn’t say, will



never say, is how much it hurts to know  that  the notebooks are gone. Knowing



that burns  like  ﬁre. He  does understand how Morris  felt,  and  that burns  like



ﬁre, too. “I  wish it  had stayed buried.”



    “Wish   in one hand,”  Hodges says, “spit in  the other. Let’s go. I  need to use



an icepack before the swelling gets too bad.”



    “Swelling  where?” Holly  asks. “You look okay to me.”



    Hodges  puts an arm  around her shoulders. Sometimes Holly   stiffens when



he does this,  but  not  today, so he  kisses her cheek, too.  It  raises a doubtful



smile.



    “Did   he get you where it hurts boys?”



    “Yes. Now  hush.”



    They  walk slowly,  partly  for Hodges’s beneﬁt, partly  for Pete’s. His sister is



getting  heavy, but he doesn’t want to  put  her down. He  wants to carry  her all



the way home.

356
AFTER

357
                                                      PICNIC









On the Friday that  kicks off the Labor Day weekend, a Jeep Wrangler—getting



on in   years but  loved  by  its   owner—pulls   into  the  parking   lot  above  the



McGinnis  Park Little   League ﬁelds and stops next  to a blue  Mercedes that is



also getting on in  years. Jerome Robinson makes his way down the grassy slope



toward a picnic  table where food has already been set out. A paper bag swings



from one of his hands.



    “Yo,  Hollyberry!”



    She  turns.  “How   many  times   have I   told  you  not   to  call  me  that?  A



hundred? A thousand?” But  she’s smiling as she says it, and when he hugs her,



she hugs back. Jerome doesn’t press his luck; he gives one good squeeze, then



asks what’s for lunch.



    “There’s  chicken salad, tuna salad, and coleslaw. I also brought  a roast beef



sandwich. That’s  for   you,  if  you  want   it.  I’m   off   red meat.  It   upsets  my



circadian rhythms.”



    “I’ll   make sure you’re not tempted, then.”



    They  sit down.  Holly  pours Snapple into  Dixie  cups. They toast the  end of



summer  and   then  munch   away,  gabbing   about   movies  and  TV    shows,



temporarily  avoiding   the  reason they’re  here—this  is  goodbye,  at  least for



awhile.



    “Too  bad Bill   couldn’t  come,”  Jerome says as Holly  hands him  a piece of



chocolate cream pie. “Remember  when  we all  got  together  here for  a picnic



after his hearing? To celebrate that judge deciding not to put  him in  jail?”



    “I  remember perfectly well,”  Holly   says. “You wanted to ride the bus.”



    “Because de bus be fo’  free!” Tyrone Feelgood exclaims. “I  takes all  the  fo’



free I kin git,  Miss Holly!”

358
    “You’ve  worn that out,  Jerome.”



    He  sighs. “I sort of have, I guess.”



    “Bill   got  a call from Peter Saubers,” Holly said. “That’s why  he didn’t  come.



He said I was to give  you his best, and that  he’d see you before you went back



to Cambridge. Wipe  your nose. There’s a dab of chocolate on it.”



    Jerome resists the  urge  to  say Chocolate be mah favorite cullah! “Is Pete all



right?”



    “Yes. He  had some good news that he wanted to share with Bill  in person. I



can’t ﬁnish  my pie.  Do you  want the  rest? Unless you don’t  want to  eat after



me. I’m okay with  that,  but I  don’t have a cold, or anything.”



    “I’d   even use your toothbrush,” Jerome says, “but I’m full.”



    “Oough,”    Holly   says. “I’d    never use  another  person’s toothbrush.”   She



collects their paper cups and plates and takes them to a nearby litter barrel.



    “What   time are you leaving tomorrow?”  Jerome asks.



    “The  sun rises at six ﬁfty-ﬁve AM.  I expect to be on the road by seven thirty,



at the latest.”



    Holly   is  driving   to  Cincinnati   to see her  mother. By  herself.  Jerome can



hardly  believe  it.   He’s glad   for  her,  but  he’s  also afraid  for   her.  What  if



something goes wrong and she freaks out?



    “Stop  worrying,”   she says, coming back and sitting  down.  “I’ll  be ﬁne.  All



turnpikes,  no night  driving,   and the forecast is for  clear weather. Also, I  have



my three favorite  movie  soundtracks on CD:  Road to Perdition, The Shawshank



Redemption, and Godfather II. Which   is  the  best,  in   my  opinion,   although



Thomas Newman  is,  on  the  whole,  much  better  than  Nino   Rota.  Thomas



Newman’s music is mysterious.”



    “John  Williams,  Schindler’s List,” Jerome says. “Nothing tops it.”



    “Jerome, I  don’t want to  say you’re full of shit, but  . . . actually, you are.”



    He  laughs, delighted.



    “I   have my cell phone and iPad, both  fully  charged. The Mercedes just had



its full  maintenance check. And really, it’s only four hundred  miles.”



    “Cool.  But  call me if you need to. Me or Bill.”



    “Of  course. When are you leaving for Cambridge?”

359
    “Next   week.”



    “Done  on the docks?”



    “All    done, and glad  of it.  Physical  labor may  be good for  the  body, but  I



don’t feel that it  ennobles the soul.”



    Holly   still   has trouble  meeting the  eyes of even her close friends,  but  she



makes an effort and meets Jerome’s. “Pete’s all right, Tina’s all right,  and their



mother is  back on her  feet. That’s all  good, but  is  Bill  all  right?  Tell  me the



truth.”



    “I   don’t  know  what  you mean.”  Now  it’s  Jerome who ﬁnds  it  difﬁcult   to



maintain eye contact.



    “He’s  too thin,  for one thing.  He’s taken the exercise-and-salads regimen too



far. But that’s not what  I’m really  worried about.”



    “What   is?” But  Jerome knows, and isn’t  surprised she knows, although Bill



thinks he’s kept it  from her. Holly  has her ways.



    She lowers her voice as if afraid of  being overheard, although there’s no one



within  a hundred yards in any direction. “How  often  does he visit him?”



    Jerome doesn’t have to ask who she’s talking about. “I don’t really know.”



    “More  than once a month?”



    “I  think   so, yes.”



    “Once  a week?”



    “Probably  not that  often.” Although   who can say?



    “Why?  He’s . .  .” Holly’s  lips  are trembling.   “Brady Hartsﬁeld  is  next door



to a vegetable!”



    “You  can’t blame yourself for that,  Holly.  You absolutely can’t. You  hit  him



because he was going to blow up a couple of thousand kids.”



    He  tries to touch her hand, but  she snatches it away.



    “I   don’t! I’d  do  it   again! Again   again again!  But  I   hate to  think   of  Bill



obsessing about him. I know from obsession, and it’s not nice!”



    She crosses her arms over her bosom, an old self-comforting gesture that she



has largely given up.



    “I   don’t think   it’s  obsession, exactly.” Jerome speaks cautiously, feeling his



way. “I don’t think  it’s  about the past.”

360
    “What   else can it be? Because that monster has no future!”



    Bill’s   not so sure, Jerome thinks, but would   never say. Holly  is  better, but



she’s still fragile.  And,  as she herself said, she knows from obsession. Besides,



he has no idea what Bill’s  continuing   interest in  Brady means. All  he has is a



feeling. A hunch.



    “Let  it  rest,”  he says. This time when he puts  his hand over hers she allows



it to  stay, and they talk  of other things  for awhile.  Then he looks at his  watch.



“I have to go. I promised to  pick up Barbara and Tina at the roller  rink.”



    “Tina’s  in  love with   you,”  Holly   says matter-of-factly as they  walk  up the



slope to their cars.



    “If   she is, it’ll   pass,” he says. “I’m heading east, and pretty  soon some cute



boy will  appear in her life. She’ll write  his name on her book covers.”



    “I   suppose,” Holly  says. “That’s usually  how it  works,  isn’t it?  I  just  don’t



want you to make fun of her. She’d think you were being mean, and feel sad.”



    “I  won’t,”  Jerome says.



    They  have reached the cars, and once more Holly forces herself to look him



full  in  the face. “I’m  not in  love  with  you, not  the  way she is, but  I  love you



quite a lot,  just  the  same. So take care of yourself, Jerome. Some college boys



do foolish things. Don’t  be one of them.”



    This  time it’s  she who embraces him.



    “Oh,  hey, I almost forgot,”  Jerome says. “I brought you a little  present. It’s a



shirt, although  I don’t think   you’ll  want to wear it when you visit  your mom.”



    He   hands her  his  bag. She takes  out  the  bright   red tee  and  unfolds  it.



Printed on the front,  in black,  it shouts:





                                  SHIT     DON’T      MEAN      SHIT




                                                                                      Jimmy  Gold





    “They  sell them at  the City  College bookstore. I got it  in an XL,  in case you



want to wear it  as a nightshirt.”   He studies her face as she considers the words

361
on the front of the tee. “Of course, you can also return it for something else, if


you don’t like it.”


    “I  like it  very much,” she says, and breaks into a smile. It’s the one Hodges


loves, the one that makes her beautiful. “And I will wear it  when I visit  my


mother. Just to piss her off.”


    Jerome looks so surprised that she laughs.


    “Don’t you ever want to piss your mother off?”


    “From time to time. And Holly . . . I love you, too. You know that, right?”


    “I  do,”  she says, holding the shirt to her chest. “And I’m glad. That shit


means a lot.”

362
                                                      TRUNK









Hodges walks  the path  through  the  undeveloped land  from  the Birch   Street



end, and ﬁnds Pete sitting  on the bank of the  stream with his  knees hugged to



his chest. Nearby, a scrubby tree juts over the water, which is down to  a trickle



after a long, hot  summer. Below the tree, the  hole where the trunk  was buried



has been reexcavated. The trunk itself  is sitting   aslant on the  bank nearby. It



looks old and tired  and rather ominous, a time  traveler from  a year when disco



was still  in   bloom.  A  photographer’s tripod   stands nearby. There  are also a



couple of bags that look like the kind  pros carry when they travel.



    “The  famous trunk,”  Hodges says, sitting down next to  Pete.



    Pete nods. “Yeah. The famous trunk.  The picture  guy and his assistant have



gone to lunch, but  I think   they’ll  be back pretty soon. Didn’t  seem crazy about



any of the  local restaurant choices. They’re from  New  York.”  He shrugs, as if



that explains  everything.  “At  ﬁrst  the  guy wanted  me sitting   on it,   with  my



chin on my  ﬁst. You know,  like  that famous statue. I talked  him  out of  it,  but



it wasn’t easy.”



    “This  is for the  local paper?”



    Pete shakes his head, starting to smile.  “That’s my  good news, Mr. Hodges.



It’s for The New Yorker. They want an article about what happened. Not a little



one, either. They want it  for what  they call ‘the  well,’  which means the middle



of the magazine. A really big piece, maybe the biggest they’ve ever done.”



    “That’s  great!”



    “It   will  be if I  don’t fuck it  up.”



    Hodges studies him  for a moment. “Wait.  You’re going to write it?”



    “Yeah. At  ﬁrst  they wanted to send out one of their writers—George  Packer,



he’s a really  good one—to  interview   me and  write  the  story. It’s  a  big  deal

363
because John Rothstein was one of their ﬁction  stars in  the old  days, right  up



there with John Updike,  Shirley Jackson . . . you know the ones I mean.”



    Hodges doesn’t, but  he nods.



    “Rothstein   was sort of  the  go-to guy  for  teenage angst, and then  middle-



class angst. Sort of like John Cheever. I’m reading Cheever now. Do you  know



his story ‘The Swimmer’?”



    Hodges shakes his head.



    “You  should.  It’s awesome. Anyhow, they want  the  story of the  notebooks.



The whole thing,  from  beginning  to end. This  was after they had three or four



handwriting  analysts check out the photocopies I made, and the fragments.”



    Hodges does know about the fragments. There were enough charred scraps in



the burned-out  basement to validate Pete’s claim that the lost  notebooks really



had been Rothstein’s  work.   Police backtrailing    Morris  Bellamy  had  further



buttressed Pete’s story. Which Hodges never doubted in the ﬁrst place.



    “You  said no to Packer, I take it.”



    “I  said no to  anyone. If the story’s going to get written,   I have to be the one



to do  it.   Not  just  because I  was there, but   because reading John Rothstein



changed my . . .”



    He  stops and shakes his head.



    “No.   I  was going  to say his  work  changed my life,  but  that’s  not  right.  I



don’t think  a teenager has much of a life to  change. I just  turned eighteen last



month. I  guess what I mean is his work changed my heart.”



    Hodges smiles. “I  get that.”



    “The  editor  in charge of the story  said I was too young—better  than  saying



I had  no talent,  right?—so  I  sent him   writing   samples. That helped.  Also, I



stood up to him.  It wasn’t all  that hard. Negotiating   with  a magazine guy from



New York  didn’t   seem like  such a big  deal after  facing Bellamy.  That  was a



negotiation.”



    Pete shrugs.



    “They’ll   edit  it  the way they  want, of course, I’ve read enough to know  the



process, and I’m  okay with   that.  But  if  they  want  to  publish  it,  it’ll   be  my



name over my story.”

364
    “Tough  stance, Pete.”



    He  stares at  the trunk,   for  a moment  looking  much  older  than  eighteen.



“It’s  a  tough  world.   I  found  that   out  after  my  dad  got  run  down  at  City



Center.”



    No  reply seems adequate, so Hodges keeps silent.



    “You  know what  they want most at The New Yorker, right?”



    Hodges  didn’t   spend  almost  thirty   years as a  detective  for  nothing.   “A



summary of the last two  books would  be my guess. Jimmy Gold  and his sister



and all his  friends. Who  did  what to  who, and how, and  when, and how it  all



came out in the wash.”



    “Yeah. And  I’m  the only  one who knows those things.  Which  brings  me to



the apology part.” He  looks at Hodges solemnly.



    “Pete,  no  apology’s necessary. There are no legal charges against you, and



I’m not  bearing even a teensy grudge about anything. Holly  and Jerome aren’t,



either. We’re just glad your mom  and sis are okay.”



    “They  almost  weren’t. If  I  hadn’t stonewalled you  that day in  the  car, then



ducked out through  the drugstore, I bet Bellamy  never would have come to the



house. Tina still has nightmares.”



    “Does she blame you for them?”



    “Actually   . . . no.”



    “Well,   there you  are,” Hodges says. “You  were under the  gun. Literally   as



well as ﬁguratively. Halliday   scared the hell out of you,  and you had no way of



knowing  he was dead when you went to his shop that day. As for Bellamy, you



didn’t even know he was still alive,  let alone out of prison.”



    “That’s   all  true,   but  Halliday   threatening   me  wasn’t  the  only  reason I



wouldn’t  talk to  you. I still   thought  I had a chance to keep the notebooks, see?



That’s why I wouldn’t  talk  to you. And  why I  ran away. I wanted to keep them.



It  wasn’t the  top  thing  on  my  mind,  but  it   was there underneath, all  right.



Those notebooks . . . well . . . and I  have to say this in the piece I  write for  The



New Yorker . . . they cast a spell  over me. I  need to apologize because I really



wasn’t so different from Morris  Bellamy.”

365
    Hodges takes Pete by the shoulders and looks directly  into  his eyes. “If that



were true, you never would have gone to the Rec prepared to burn them.”



    “I  dropped the  lighter  by accident,” Pete says quietly. “The gunshot startled



me. I  think  I  would  have done it   anyway—if  he’d  shot Tina—but   I’ll   never



know for sure.”



    “I  know,”  Hodges says. “And I’m sure enough for both of us.”



    “Yeah?”



    “Yeah. So how much are they paying you for this?”



    “Fifteen  thousand dollars.”



    Hodges whistles.



    “It’s  on acceptance, but they’ll  accept it, all right.  Mr.  Ricker  is helping me,



and it’s  turning  out  pretty  well.  I’ve  already got  the  ﬁrst half  done in  rough



draft. I’m  not  much  at ﬁction,  but  I’m  okay at  stuff like  this.  I  could  make a



career of it someday, maybe.”



    “What   are you going to do with  the money? Put it  in a college fund?”



    He  shakes his head. “I’ll get  to college, one way or another. I’m not  worried



about that.  The money  is for  Chapel Ridge.  Tina’s going  this  year. You can’t



believe how excited she is.”



    “That’s  good,” Hodges says. “That’s really good.”



    They  sit in  silence for a little  while, looking  at the  trunk.  There are footfalls



on the  path, and  men’s voices. The two  guys who  appear are wearing almost



identical plaid  shirts  and jeans that still  show the store creases. Hodges has an



idea they  think   this  is how  everybody dresses in ﬂyover  country.  One  has a



camera around his neck; the other is toting a second light.



    “How   was your  lunch?”   Pete calls as they  teeter  across the creek on  the



stepping-stones.



    “Fine,”   the one with   the camera says. “Denny’s. Moons Over  My  Hammy.



The hash browns alone were a culinary dream. Come on over, Pete. We’ll start



with  a few of you kneeling by the trunk.  I  also want to get a few of you looking



inside.”



    “It’s  empty,”  Pete objects.

366
    The   photographer  taps  himself  between  the  eyes. “People  will   imagine.



They’ll  think,  ‘What  must it  have been like when he opened that trunk  for the



ﬁrst time  and saw all those literary treasures?’ You know?”



    Pete  stands up, brushing  the  seat of  jeans that are  much more  faded and



more natural-looking.  “Want   to stick  around for  the shoot,  Mr. Hodges? Not



every eighteen-year-old gets a full-page  portrait  in  The New Yorker next to an



article he wrote himself.”



    “I’d   love to, Pete, but I have an errand to run.”



    “All   right.  Thanks for coming  out and listening  to me.”



    “Will    you put one other thing  in your story?”



    “What?”



    “That   this  didn’t   start  with   you ﬁnding   the  trunk.”   Hodges  looks  at it,



black and scuffed, a relic  with   scratched ﬁttings  and a moldy  top.  “It  started



with  the man  who put  it   there. And  when you  feel like  blaming  yourself  for



how it went  down, you might  want to  remember that thing  Jimmy  Gold keeps



saying. Shit don’t mean shit.”



    Pete laughs and holds out his hand. “You’re a good guy, Mr. Hodges.”



    Hodges shakes. “Make it Bill.   Now go smile for  the camera.”



    He   pauses  on  the   other   side  of   the   creek  and  looks   back.  At    the



photographer’s direction, Pete is kneeling with   one hand resting on the trunk’s



scuffed top. It is the classic pose of ownership, reminding Hodges of a photo he



once saw of Ernest Hemingway  kneeling next  to  a lion  he bagged. But Pete’s



face holds none of Hemingway’s complacent, smiling,  stupid conﬁdence. Pete’s



face says I never owned this.



    Hold  that  thought,  kiddo,  Hodges thinks as he starts back to his car.



    Hold  that  thought.

367
                                                       CLACK









He told Pete he had an errand to run. That wasn’t precisely true. He could  have



said he had a  case to work,  but  that  isn’t  precisely true,  either.  Although   it



would have been closer.



    Shortly  before  leaving for  his  meeting  with   Pete, he received a  call from



Becky Helmington   at the  Traumatic Brain  Injury  Clinic.   He pays her a small



amount  each month  to  keep him   updated  on Brady  Hartsﬁeld,   the  patient



Hodges calls “my boy.” She also updates him on any strange occurrences on the



ward, and feeds him  the  latest rumors.  Hodges’s rational  mind  insists there’s



nothing   to   these  rumors,   and   certain  strange   occurrences have  rational



explanations, but there’s more to his  mind  than the rational  part on  top. Deep



below that   rational  part  is  an  underground  ocean—there’s one inside  every



head, he believes—where strange creatures swim.



    “How’s  your  son?” he asked Becky. “Hasn’t  fallen  out of  any trees lately, I



hope.”



    “No,  Robby’s ﬁne and dandy. Read today’s paper yet, Mr. Hodges?”



    “Haven’t    even taken   it   out   of  the   bag  yet.”   In  this   new   era, where



everything is at one’s ﬁngertips on the Internet,  some days he never takes it out



of the bag at all. It  just sits there beside his La-Z-Boy like an abandoned child.



    “Check  the Metro section. Page two. Call me back.”



    Five minutes  later he did. “Jesus, Becky.”



    “Exactly  what I  thought.  She was a nice girl.”



    “Will    you be on the ﬂoor today?”



    “No.    I’m  upstate,  at  my   sister’s. We’re  spending  the  weekend.”  Becky



paused. “Actually,  I’ve  been thinking   about transferring  to  ICU   in  the main



hospital when  I get  back. There’s an opening,  and I’m  tired  of Dr.  Babineau.

368
It’s true  what  they say—sometimes the  neuros are crazier than the  patients.”



She paused, then added: “I’d say I’m tired of  Hartsﬁeld,  too, but  that wouldn’t



be exactly right.  The truth   is, I’m  a little   scared of him. The way I  used to be



scared of the local haunted house when I was a girl.”



    “Yeah?”



    “Uh-huh.   I knew  there were no ghosts in there, but on the other hand, what



if there were?”




                                                            •••




Hodges arrives at  the hospital  shortly  after two  PM,  and  on this  pre-holiday



afternoon, the Brain  Injury  Clinic  is  as close to deserted as it ever gets. In the



daytime, at least.



    The  nurse on duty—Norma   Wilmer,  according  to her badge—gives him  a



visitor’s pass. As he clips it  to his  shirt,  Hodges says, just passing the time, “I



understand you had a tragedy on the ward yesterday.”



    “I  can’t talk  about that,”  Nurse Wilmer  says.



    “Were  you on duty?”



    “No.”   She goes back to her paperwork and her monitors.



    That’s okay; he may learn more from Becky, once she gets back and has time



to tap  her sources. If she goes through  with  her plan  to  transfer (in  Hodges’s



mind,  that’s the  best sign yet  that  something real  may be going  on here), he



will  ﬁnd someone else to help him out a little.  Some of the nurses are dedicated



smokers, in spite of all  they know  about the habit,  and these are always happy



to earn butt-money.



    Hodges  ambles down to  Room 217,  aware that his  heart is beating  harder



and faster than normal.  Another  sign that  he has begun to take this  seriously.



The news story in the morning  paper shook him up more than a little.



    He  meets Library   Al  on  the way, pushing  his  little   trolley,  and  gives his



usual greeting: “Hi,  guy. How  you doin?”



    Al  doesn’t reply  at ﬁrst. Doesn’t  even seem to see him. The bruised-looking



circles under  his  eyes are more  prominent  than  ever, and  his  hair—usually

369
neatly  combed—is  in   disarray. Also,   his  damn  badge  is  on  upside-down.



Hodges wonders again if Al is starting  to lose the plot.



    “Everything   all right,  Al?”



    “Sure,”  Al says emptily. “Never  so good as what you don’t see, right?”



    Hodges has no idea how to reply  to this  non sequitur, and Al  has continued



on his way before he can think   of one. Hodges looks  after him,  puzzled, then



moves on.



    Brady  is sitting   in his  usual place by the window,  wearing his  usual outﬁt:



jeans and a checked shirt. Someone has given him  a haircut.  It’s a  bad one, a



real butch job.  Hodges doubts if his  boy cares. It’s not like he’s going out  boot



scootin’ anytime soon.



    “Hello,   Brady. Long  time  no see, as the ship’s chaplain said to  the Mother



Superior.”



    Brady  just looks out the  window, and the same old questions join hands and



play ring-a-rosie in Hodges’s head. Is Brady seeing anything out there? Does he



know he has company? If so, does he know it’s  Hodges? Is he thinking  at  all?



Sometimes he thinks—enough to speak a few simple sentences, anyway—and in



the physio center he’s able to shamble along the seventy feet or so the patients



call  Torture   Avenue,  but   what  does  that   really  mean?  Fish  swim   in   an



aquarium, but that  doesn’t mean they think.



    Hodges thinks,  Never so good as what you don’t see.



    Whatever  that means.



    He  picks  up  the  silver-framed photo  of  Brady  and his  mother  with  their



arms around each other,  smiling  to  beat  the band.  If  the  bastard ever loved



anyone, it was dear old mommy.  Hodges looks to  see if there’s any reaction to



his visitor  having  Deborah Ann’s  picture  in  his hands. There doesn’t seem to



be.



    “She looks hot, Brady. Was she hot? Was she a real hoochie-mama?”



    No  response.



    “I   only  ask because when we  broke  into  your  computer,  we found  some



cheesecake pix of her. You know, negligees, nylons, bras and panties, that kind

370
of thing.  She looked hot to me, dressed like that. To the other cops, too, when I



passed them around.”



    Although   he tells  this  lie  with  his  usual panache, there’s still  no reaction.



Nada.



    “Did   you fuck her, Brady? I bet you wanted to.”



    Was that  the barest twitch  of an eyebrow? The slightest downward jerk  of a



lip?



    Maybe,  but   Hodges knows  it   could  just  be his  imagination,   because he



wants Brady to hear him. Nobody in America  deserves to have more salt rubbed



in more wounds than this murderous motherfucker.



    “Maybe   you killed   her  and  then fucked her.  No  need  to  be polite   then,



right?”



    Nothing.



    Hodges sits in  the visitor’s chair  and puts the picture  back on the table next



to one of  the  Zappit  e-readers Al hands out  to  patients  who want  them.  He



folds his hands and looks at  Brady, who should never have awakened from his



coma but did.



    Well.



    Sort of.



    “Are  you faking,  Brady?”



    He  always asks this  question, and  there has never been any reply.  There’s



none today, either.



    “A  nurse killed  herself on the  ﬂoor last night.  In  one of the bathrooms. Did



you know that? Her  name has been withheld for the  time being,  but the  paper



says she died of excessive bleeding. I’m guessing that means she cut her wrists,



but I’m  not  sure. If  you knew, I  bet it  made you  happy. You always enjoyed a



good suicide, didn’t you?”



    He  waits. Nothing.



    Hodges   leans  forward,   staring   into   Brady’s   blank   face  and  speaking



earnestly. “The thing  is—what   I don’t  understand—is  how she did  that.  The



mirrors  in these bathrooms aren’t  glass, they’re polished metal.  I  suppose she



could have used the mirror  in  her compact, or something,  but  that  seems like

371
pretty  small   shit  for  a  job   like  that.   Kind   of  like   bringing   a  knife   to  a



gunﬁght.”  He sits back. “Hey,  maybe she had a knife. One of those Swiss Army



jobs, you know? In her purse. Did you ever have one of those?”



    Nothing.



    Or  is there? He has a sense, very strong, that behind that blank stare, Brady



is watching him.



    “Brady,  some of the nurses believe you can turn the water on and off in your



bathroom from here. They think  you do it  just to  scare them. Is that true?”



    Nothing.   But  that sense of being watched is strong. Brady did enjoy suicide,



that’s the  thing.  You  could  even say suicide was his  signature. Before Holly



tuned  him  up  with   the  Happy  Slapper,  Brady tried   to  get  Hodges  to  kill



himself. He  didn’t  succeed . . . but  he did  succeed with Olivia  Trelawney, the



woman  whose  Mercedes Holly   Gibney   now   owns  and  plans  to   drive  to



Cincinnati.



    “If   you can, do it now. Come on. Show off a little.  Strut  your stuff. What  do



you say?”



    Nothing.



    Some of  the nurses believe that  being  whopped repeatedly in  the  head on



the night   he  tried  to  blow  up  Mingo   Auditorium    has somehow rearranged



Hartsﬁeld’s brains. That  being  whopped repeatedly gave him  . . .  powers. Dr.



Babineau says that’s ridiculous,   the  hospital  equivalent  of  an urban  legend.



Hodges is sure he’s right, but that sense of being watched is undeniable.



    So is the  feeling that,  somewhere deep inside, Brady Hartsﬁeld  is laughing



at him.



    He  picks up the e-reader, this one bright  blue. On his last visit  to the clinic,



Library Al  said Brady enjoyed the demos. He stares at it for hours, Al said.



    “Like  this  thing,  do you?”



    Nothing.



    “Not   that you can do much with  it,  right?”



    Zero.  Zippo. Zilch.



    Hodges  puts it  down beside the picture  and stands. “Let me  see what I can



ﬁnd out about  the nurse, okay? What I can’t dig  up, my  assistant can. We have

372
our sources. Are you glad  that  nurse is dead? Was she mean to you? Did  she



pinch your nose or twist  your tiny  useless peepee, maybe because you ran down



a friend or relative of hers at City Center?”



    Nothing.



    Nothing.



    Noth—



    Brady’s eyes roll  in  their  sockets. He looks  at Hodges, and  Hodges feels a



moment of  stark, unreasoning terror.  Those eyes are dead on top, but  he sees



something beneath that   looks not  quite  human.  It  makes him  think   of  that



movie about the little   girl  who  was possessed by Pazuzu. Then the eyes return



to  the window   and  Hodges tells  himself  not   to  be an  idiot.   Babineau says



Brady’s come back as far as he’s ever going to, and that’s not very far. He’s your



basic blank slate, and  nothing  is written   on it   but  Hodges’s own feelings for



this man, the most despicable creature he has encountered in all his years of law



enforcement.



    I  want  him to  be in there so I  can hurt him,  Hodges thinks.  That’s all  it  is.



It’ll   turn  out the  nurse’s husband ran off on  her, or she had a drug  habit  and



was going to be ﬁred, or both.



    “All   right,  Brady,” he says. “Gonna put an egg in my shoe and beat it. Make



like a bee and buzz.  But I  have to  say, as one friend to another, that’s a really



shitty haircut.”



    No  response.



    “Seeya later, alligator. After  awhile, crocodile.”



    He   leaves, closing   the  door  gently   behind   him.   If   Brady  is  in   there,



slamming  it   might    give  him   the  pleasure  of  knowing   he’s gotten   under



Hodges’s skin.



    Which,   of course, he has.




                                                            •••




When Hodges is gone, Brady raises his head. Beside the picture of his mother,



the blue  e-reader abruptly  comes to  life.  Animated  ﬁsh  rush hither   and yon

373
while  cheery, bubbly  music  plays.  The  screen switches to  the  Angry   Birds



demo, then to  Barbie Fashion Walk,  then  to Galactic  Warrior.  After  that,  the



screen goes dark again.



    In  the bathroom, the  water in the sink gushes, then stops.



    Brady  looks at the picture  of him  and his mother, smiling  with  their  cheeks



pressed together. Stares at it. Stares at it.



    The  picture falls over.



    Clack.



                                                                                                   July 26,  2014

374
                                        AUTHOR’S      NOTE








You write a book in a room by yourself, that’s just how it’s done. I wrote the


ﬁrst draft  of this  one in Florida, looking  out  at palm trees. I  rewrote it  in


Maine, looking out at pine trees sloping down to a beautiful lake where the


loons converse at sunset. But I wasn’t entirely alone in either place; few writers


are. When I needed help, help was there.


    NAN  GRAHAM   edited the book. SUSAN MOLDOW and ROZ LIPPEL


also work for Scribner, and I couldn’t get along without them. Those women


are invaluable.


    CHUCK  VERRILL  agented the book. He’s been my go-to guy for thirty


years, smart, funny, and fearless. No yes-man he; when my shit’s not right, he


never hesitates to tell me.


    RUSS DORR does research, and he’s gotten better and better at the job as


the years pass. Like a good ﬁrst assist PA in the OR, he’s ready with the next


instrument I need before I even call for it. His contributions to this book are on


almost every page. Literally: Russ gave me the title when I was stumped for


one.


    OWEN  KING   and KELLY BRAFFET, both excellent novelists, read the


ﬁrst draft and sharpened it considerably. Their contributions are also on just


about every page.


    MARSHA  DeFILIPPO and JULIE EUGLEY run my ofﬁce in  Maine, and


keep me tethered to the real world. BARBARA MacINTYRE runs the ofﬁce in


Florida and does the same. SHIRLEY SONDEREGGER is emeritus.


    TABITHA  KING  is my best critic and one true love.


    And  you, CONSTANT  READER. Thank God you’re still  there after all


these years. If you’re having fun, I am, too.

375
                                          About      the     Author





















                                            Photograph © Shane Leonard


Stephen King  is  the author  of  more than  ﬁfty  books,  all of  them  worldwide



bestsellers. His  recent work   includes Revival, Mr.   Mercedes, Doctor Sleep, and



Under the Dome, a major TV series on CBS. His  novel 11/22/63  was named a



top ten  book  of  2011  by The  New York Times Book Review and won the Los



Angeles Times Book Prize  for Mystery/Thriller    as well as the Best  Hardcover



Novel Award from  the International  Thriller   Writers. He  is the recipient of  the



2003  National  Book  Foundation’s  Medal  for  Distinguished  Contribution    to



American Letters.  He lives  in  Bangor, Maine,  with  his  wife,  novelist Tabitha



King.




                                   MEET THE AUTHORS, WATCH VIDEOS AND MORE AT



                                      SimonandSchuster.com



                                     authors.simonandschuster.com/Stephen-King

376
              We   hope    you    enjoyed     reading      this   Scribner      eBook.





Sign up for our newsletter and receive special offers, access to bonus content, and info on the latest


                 new releases and other great eBooks from Scribner and Simon & Schuster.





                                                 CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP





                                               or visit us online to sign up at


                                           eBookNews.SimonandSchuster.com

377
                                                                        SCRIBNER


                                                    An  Imprint  of Simon & Schuster, Inc.


                                                           1230 Avenue of the Americas


                                                                New York,  NY 10020


                                                                SimonandSchuster.com



    This  book is a work of ﬁction. Any references to historical events, real people, or real places are used


 ﬁctitiously. Other  names, characters, places, and events are products of the author’s imagination, and any


             resemblance to actual events or places or persons, living or dead, is entirely coincidental.



                                                     Copyright  ©  2015 by Stephen King



All rights  reserved, including the right to reproduce this book or portions thereof in any form whatsoever.


   For information  address Scribner Subsidiary Rights Department, 1230 Avenue of the Americas, New


                                                                    York, NY  10020.



                                                First  Scribner hardcover edition June 2015



 SCRIBNER and design are registered trademarks of The Gale Group, Inc., used under license by Simon


                                                & Schuster, Inc., the publisher of this work.



For information  about special discounts for bulk purchases, please contact Simon & Schuster Special Sales


                                      at 1-866-506-1949  or business@simonandschuster.com.



 The Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau can bring authors to your live event. For more information or to


 book an event, contact the Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau at 1-866-248-3049 or visit our website at


                                                              www.simonspeakers.com.



                                                        Interior design by Erich Hobbing



                                                       Jacket illustrations by Sam Weber



                                Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available.



                                                             ISBN 978-1-5011-0007-9


                                                       ISBN 978-1-5011-0013-0  (ebook)

