3
                                    	
                         Begin	Reading


                      Table	 of	Contents


                       About	the	Author


                        Copyright	 Page


                                    	


               Thank	 you	for	 buying	 this
              Feiwel	 and	Friends	 ebook.
                                    	
     To	receive	special	offers,	bonus	content,
and	info	on	new	releases	and	other	great	reads,
               sign	up	for	our	 newsletters.
                                    	



                     Or	visit	 us	online	at
        us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup
                                    	
  For	email	 updates	on	the	author,	click	here.

4
	




The	author	and	publisher	have	provided	this	e-book	 to	you	for	 your	personal	use

only.	You	 may	not	 make	this	e-book	 publicly	 available	 in	any	 way.	Copyright

infringement	  is	 against	 the	 law.	 If	 you	 believe	 the	copy	 of	 this	 e-book	 you

are	reading	 infringes	  on	 the	author’s	  copyright,	  please	notify	  the	publisher

at:	us.macmillanusa.com/piracy.

5
	




            For	 Jesse,	who	turns	 every	day	 into	a	 happily	 ever	after.

6
	



                                        BOOK
                                         One

The	young	princess	was	as	beautiful	as	daylight.	 She	was

           more	 beautiful	even	than	the	queen	herself.

7
	




                                                         One







Winter’s	 toes	had	become	ice	cubes.	They	were	as	cold	as	space.	As	cold	as	the

dark	side	of	Luna.	As	cold	as—

     “…	   security	 feeds	  captured	 him	  entering	  the	 AR-Central	   med-clinic’s

sublevels	at	23:00	U.T.C.…”

     Thaumaturge	 Aimery	 Park	 spoke	with	  a	serene,	measured	cadence,	like	 a

ballad.	It	was	easy	to	lose	track	 of	what	 he	was	saying,	easy	to	let	all	 the	words

blur	and	conjoin.	Winter	 curled	her	toes	inside	her	thin-soled	shoes,	afraid	that	if

they	got	any	colder	before	this	trial	was	over,	they	would	 snap	off.

     “…	 was	attempting	to	interfere	with	 one	of	the	shells	currently	stored…”

     Snap	off.	One	by	one.

     “…	 records	indicate	 the	shell	child	 is	the	accused’s	son,	taken	on	29	 July	of

last	year.	He	is	now	fifteen	months	old.”

     Winter	 hid	her	hands	in	the	folds	 of	her	gown.	They	 were	shaking	again.	She

was	always	shaking	these	days.	She	squeezed	her	fingers	to	hold	 them	still	 and

pressed	the	bottoms	of	 her	feet	 into	 the	hard	 floor.	 She	struggled	 to	bring	 the

throne	room	into	focus	before	it	dissolved.

     The	 throne	room,	 in	 the	central	 tower	 of	 the	palace,	had	 the	most	striking

8
view	in	 the	city.	 From	 her	seat,	Winter	 could	see	Artemisia	 Lake	mirroring	  the

white	palace	and	the	city	 reaching	for	the	edge	of	 the	enormous	clear	dome	that

sheltered	them	 from	 the	 outside	elements—or	 lack	 thereof.	 The	 throne	 room

itself	extended	past	the	walls	 of	 the	tower,	so	that	 when	one	passed	beyond	the

edge	of	the	mosaic	floor,	 they	 found	themselves	on	a	ledge	 of	clear	glass.	Like

standing	on	air,	about	to	plummet	into	the	depths	of	the	crater	lake.

     To	Winter’s	 left	 she	could	make	out	the	edges	of	her	stepmother’s	fingernails

as	they	dug	into	the	arm	of	her	throne,	an	imposing	seat	carved	from	white	stone.

Normally	 her	stepmother	was	calm	during	these	proceedings	and	would	listen	to

the	 trials	 without	  a	 hint	  of	 emotion.	  Winter	  was	 used	 to	 seeing	 Levana’s

fingertips	 stroking	 the	 polished	 stone,	not	 throttling	  it.	 But	 tension	 was	 high

since	Levana	and	her	entourage	had	returned	from	Earth,	and	her	stepmother	had

flown	into	 even	more	rages	than	usual	these	past	months.

     Ever	since	that	runaway	 Lunar—that	 cyborg—had	escaped	from	her	Earthen

prison.

     Ever	since	war	had	begun	between	Earth	and	Luna.

     Ever	 since	the	queen’s	betrothed	had	been	kidnapped,	 and	Levana’s	chance

to	be	crowned	empress	had	been	stolen	from	her.

     The	blue	 planet	hung	above	the	 horizon,	cut	 clean	in	half.	 Luna	 was	a	little

more	than	halfway	through	the	long	 night,	and	the	city	of	 Artemisia	 glowed	with

pale	blue	 lampposts	 and	 glowing	  crystal	 windows,	  their	 reflections	  dancing

across	the	lake’s	surface.

     Winter	 missed	the	 sun	and	its	 warmth.	 Their	 artificial	 days	 were	never	the

same.

     “How	 did	 he	know	about	the	shells?”	 Queen	Levana	asked.	“Why	did	 he	not

9
believe	his	son	to	have	been	killed	at	birth?”

     Seated	around	the	room	 in	 four	 tiered	rows	 were	the	 families.	 The	queen’s

court.	The	nobles	of	 Luna,	granted	favor	 with	 Her	Majesty	 for	their	 generations

of	loyalty,	 their	 extraordinary	talents	with	 the	Lunar	 gift,	 or	pure	luck	 at	having

been	born	a	citizen	of	the	great	city	of	Artemisia.

     Then	there	was	 the	man	on	his	 knees	beside	Thaumaturge	Park.	He	had	not

been	born	lucky.

     His	 hands	 were	 together,	 pleading.	 Winter	  wished	 she	 could	 tell	 him	  it

wouldn’t	 matter.	All	 his	begging	 would	be	for	 nothing.	She	thought	there	would

be	comfort	 in	 knowing	 there	was	 nothing	you	 could	 do	to	 avoid	 death.	Those

who	came	before	the	queen	having	already	accepted	their	fate	seemed	to	have	an

easier	time	of	it.

     She	looked	down	at	her	own	hands,	still	 clawed	around	her	gauzy	white	skirt.

Her	 fingers	 had	been	 bitten	 with	 frost.	 It	  was	sort	 of	 pretty.	  Glistening	 and

shimmering	and	cold,	so	very	cold	…

     “Your	 queen	asked	you	a	question,”	said	Aimery.

     Winter	 flinched,	as	if	 he’d	been	yelling	at	her.

     Focus.	She	must	try	to	focus.

     She	lifted	her	head	and	inhaled.

     Aimery	 was	 wearing	white	 now,	 having	replaced	Sybil	 Mira	 as	the	queen’s

head	thaumaturge.	The	gold	embroidery	on	his	coat	shimmered	as	he	circled	 the

captive.

     “I	 am	sorry,	Your	 Majesty,”	 the	man	said.	“My	 family	 and	I	 have	served	you

for	generations.	I’m	 a	 janitor	at	 that	med-clinic	 and	I’d	 heard	rumors	 …	It	 was

none	of	my	business,	so	I	never	cared,	I	never	listened.	But	…	when	my	 son	was

10
born	a	shell…”	He	whimpered.	 “He	is	my	 son.”

     “Did	 you	 not	think,”	 said	Levana,	her	voice	loud	 and	crisp,	“there	might	 be	a

reason	your	queen	has	chosen	to	keep	your	son	and	all	the	other	ungifted	Lunars

separate	from	our	citizens?	That	we	may	 have	a	purpose	that	serves	the	good	of

all	our	people	by	containing	 them	as	we	have?”

     The	 man	 gulped	  hard	 enough	 that	 Winter	  could	 see	 his	 Adam’s	  apple

bobbing.	  “I	   know,	   My	   Queen.	  I	  know	   you	  use	  their	   blood	  for	   …

experimentation.	But	…	 but	you	have	so	many,	and	he’s	only	a	baby,	and…”

     “Not	 only	 is	 his	blood	 valuable	to	 the	success	of	our	political	  alliances,	the

likes	of	which	 I	 cannot	expect	a	janitor	from	 the	outer	sectors	to	understand,	but

he	is	 also	a	 shell,	and	 his	 kind	 have	proven	 themselves	to	 be	dangerous	and

untrustworthy,	 as	you	 will	  recall	 from	 the	assassinations	of	 King	 Marrok	 and

Queen	Jannali	eighteen	 years	ago.	 Yet	 you	 would	 subject	 our	society	 to	 this

threat?”

     The	man’s	 eyes	were	wild	 with	fear.	 “Threat,	My	 Queen?	He	is	a	baby.”	 He

paused.	He	did	 not	look	 outright	  rebellious,	but	 his	 lack	of	 remorse	would	 be

sending	Levana	into	 a	fury	 soon	enough.	“And	  the	others	in	 those	tanks	…	 so

many	of	them,	children.	Innocent	children.”

     The	room	chilled.

     He	knew	 too	much.	 The	shell	infanticide	 had	been	in	 place	since	the	rule	of

Levana’s	sister,	Queen	Channary,	after	a	shell	sneaked	into	the	palace	and	killed

their	parents.	No	one	would	 be	pleased	to	know	their	 babies	had	not	been	killed

at	all,	 but	 instead	locked	 away	 and	used	 as	tiny	 blood-platelet-manufacturing

plants.

     Winter	 blinked,	 imagining	  her	own	 body	as	a	 blood-platelet-manufacturing

11
plant.

     Her	gaze	dropped	again.	The	ice	had	extended	to	her	wrists	now.

     That	would	 not	be	beneficial	for	 the	platelet	conveyor	belts.

     “Does	the	accused	have	a	family?”	asked	the	queen.

     Aimery	 bobbed	his	head.	“Records	indicate	a	daughter,	age	nine.	He	also	has

two	sisters	and	a	nephew.	All	live	in	 Sector	GM-12.”

     “No	 wife?”

     “Dead	five	 months	past	of	regolith	poisoning.”

     The	prisoner	watched	the	queen,	desperation	pooling	around	his	knees.

     The	court	began	to	stir,	 their	vibrant	 clothes	fluttering.	 This	trial	 had	gone	on

too	long.	They	were	growing	 bored.

     Levana	leaned	against	the	back	 of	her	throne.	 “You	 are	hereby	found	 guilty

of	trespassing	and	attempted	theft	against	the	crown.	This	crime	is	punishable	by

immediate	death.”

     The	 man	shuddered,	but	his	 face	remained	pleading.	 It	 always	took	 them	a

few	seconds	to	comprehend	such	a	sentence.

     “Your	  family	   members	 will	  each	 receive	 a	 dozen	 public	  lashings	 as	a

reminder	to	your	sector	that	I	do	not	tolerate	my	decisions	being	questioned.”

     The	man’s	jaw	 slackened.

     “Your	  daughter	will	 be	given	 as	a	gift	 to	one	of	 the	court’s	 families.	 There,

she	will	  be	 taught	 the	 obedience	and	 humility	  one	 can	assume	she	 has	not

learned	beneath	your	tutelage.”

     “No,	 please.	Let	her	live	with	 her	aunts.	She	hasn’t	done	anything!”

     “Aimery,	  you	may	proceed.”

     “Please!”

12
     “Your	 queen	has	spoken,”	said	Thaumaturge	Aimery.	“Her	 word	is	final.”

     Aimery	 drew	 an	obsidian	knife	 from	one	of	 his	bell-shaped	sleeves	and	held

the	handle	toward	the	prisoner,	whose	eyes	had	gone	wide	with	hysteria.

     The	room	 grew	colder.	 Winter’s	 breath	crystallized	 in	 the	air.	She	squeezed

her	arms	tight	against	her	body.

     The	prisoner	took	 the	knife	handle.	His	hand	was	steady.	The	rest	of	him	was

trembling.

     “Please.	My	 little	girl—I’m	   all	she	has.	Please.	My	Queen.	Your	Majesty!”

     He	raised	the	blade	to	his	throat.

     This	 was	 when	Winter	  looked	 away.	When	 she	always	 looked	 away.	 She

watched	her	own	 fingers	 burrow	 into	 her	dress,	her	fingernails	 scraping	 at	the

fabric	until	 she	could	feel	the	sting	on	her	thighs.	She	watched	the	ice	climb	over

her	wrists,	toward	her	elbows.	Where	the	ice	touched,	her	flesh	went	numb.

     She	 imagined	  lashing	 out	  at	 the	 queen	 with	  those	 ice-solid	  fists.	  She

imagined	her	hands	shattering	into	a	thousand	icicle	shards.

     It	 was	at	her	shoulders	now.	Her	neck.

     Even	over	the	popping	and	cracking	of	 the	ice,	she	heard	the	cut	of	flesh.	The

burble	of	blood	and	a	muffled	 gag.	The	hard	slump	of	the	body.

     The	 cold	had	 stolen	into	 her	chest.	 She	squeezed	her	eyes	shut,	reminding

herself	to	be	calm,	 to	breathe.	She	could	 hear	Jacin’s	steady	voice	 in	her	 head,

his	hands	gripping	her	shoulders.	It	isn’t	real,	 Princess.	It’s	only	 an	illusion.

     Usually	 they	helped,	 these	memories	of	him	 coaxing	 her	through	 the	panic.

But	 this	 time	 it	  seemed	to	 prompt	  the	 ice	 on.	 Encompassing	her	 rib	  cage.

Gnawing	into	her	stomach.	Hardening	over	her	heart.

     She	was	freezing	from	the	inside	out.

13
     Listen	to	my	voice.

     Jacin	wasn’t	there.

     Stay	with	me.

     Jacin	was	gone.

     It’s	 all	in	 your	head.

     She	heard	the	 clomping	 of	 the	guards’	 boots	as	they	 approached	the	body.

The	corpse	being	slid	toward	the	ledge.	The	shove	and	the	distant	splash	below.

     The	court	applauded	with	quiet	 politeness.

     Winter	 heard	her	toes	snap	off.	One.	By.	One.

     “Very	  good,”	 said	Queen	Levana.	 “Thaumaturge	 Tavaler,	see	to	 it	that	 the

rest	of	the	sentencing	is	carried	out.”

     The	ice	was	in	her	throat	now,	climbing	 up	her	jaw.	 There	were	tears	freezing

inside	their	ducts.	There	was	saliva	crystallizing	 on	her	tongue.

     She	raised	 her	head	 as	a	servant	 began	washing	 the	blood	 from	  the	tiles.

Aimery,	  rubbing	 his	 knife	  with	  a	cloth,	  met	 Winter’s	  gaze.	His	  smile	 was

searing.	“I	am	afraid	the	princess	has	no	stomach	for	these	proceedings.”

     The	 nobles	 in	 the	 audience	tittered—Winter’s	  disgust	 of	 the	 trials	 was	 a

source	of	merriment	to	most	of	Levana’s	court.

     The	queen	turned,	 but	Winter	 couldn’t	  look	up.	 She	was	a	girl	 made	of	 ice

and	glass.	Her	teeth	were	brittle,	her	lungs	too	easily	shattered.

     “Yes,”	 said	Levana.	 “I	 often	forget	 she’s	here	at	all.	You’re	 about	as	useless

as	a	rag	doll,	aren’t	you,	Winter?”

     The	  audience	 chuckled	 again,	 louder	  now,	  as	 if	  the	 queen	 had	 given

permission	to	mock	 the	young	princess.	But	Winter	 couldn’t	 respond,	not	to	 the

queen,	not	to	the	laughter.	She	kept	her	focus	on	the	thaumaturge,	trying	 to	hide

14
her	panic.

     “Oh,	 no,	she	isn’t	 quite	as	useless	as	that,”	Aimery	 said.	As	Winter	 stared,	a

thin	 crimson	 line	 drew	  itself	 across	 his	 throat,	 blood	 bubbling	 up	 from	  the

wound.	“The	 prettiest	girl	 on	 all	of	 Luna?	She	will	  make	some	member	of	 this

court	a	happy	bride	someday,	I	should	think.”

     “The	 prettiest	girl,	 Aimery?”	  Levana’s	light	 tone	 almost	concealed	the	snarl

beneath.

     Aimery	 slipped	 into	a	 bow.	“Prettiest	 only,	 My	 Queen.	But	no	mortal	 could

compare	with	your	perfection.”

     The	 court	 was	 quick	  to	 agree,	offering	  a	 hundred	 compliments	 at	 once,

though	Winter	still	 felt	the	leering	 gazes	of	more	than	one	noble	attached	to	her.

     Aimery	  took	 a	 step	 toward	 the	 throne	 and	 his	 severed	 head	tipped	 off,

thunking	 against	 the	 marble	 and	 rolling,	  rolling,	  rolling,	  until	  it	 stopped	 at

Winter’s	frozen	 feet.

     Still	 smiling.

     She	whimpered,	but	the	sound	was	buried	beneath	the	snow	in	her	throat.

     It’s	 all	in	 your	head.

     “Silence,”	   said	 Levana,	 once	 she’d	  had	 her	 share	 of	  praise.	 “Are	   we

finished?”

     Finally,	 the	 ice	found	 her	 eyes	and	Winter	 had	no	 choice	but	 to	shut	 them

against	Aimery’s	headless	apparition,	enclosing	herself	in	cold	 and	darkness.

     She	would	  die	 here	and	 not	 complain.	 She	would	  be	buried	 beneath	this

avalanche	of	 lifelessness.	 She	 would	 never	 have	 to	 witness	 another	 murder

again.

     “There	 is	 one	more	 prisoner	 still	 to	 be	tried,	 My	  Queen.”	Aimery’s	  voice

15
echoed	in	the	 cold	 hollowness	of	 Winter’s	 head.	 “Sir	 Jacin	Clay,	 royal	 guard,

pilot,	and	assigned	protector	of	Thaumaturge	Sybil	Mira.”

     Winter	 gasped	and	the	ice	shattered,	a	million	 sharp	glittering	 bits	exploding

across	the	throne	room	 and	skidding	 across	the	floor.	 No	 one	else	heard	them.

No	one	else	noticed.

     Aimery,	 head	very	 much	 attached,	was	watching	 her	again,	as	if	 he’d	 been

waiting	 to	see	her	reaction.	His	 smirk	was	 subtle	as	he	returned	his	attention	 to

the	queen.

     “Ah,	 yes,”	said	Levana.	“Bring	 him	 in.”

16
	




                                                         Two







The	doors	to	 the	throne	 room	 opened,	and	there	he	was,	 trapped	between	two

guards,	his	 wrists	 corded	 behind	 his	 back.	His	  blond	 hair	 was	clumped	 and

matted,	strands	of	 it	clinging	  to	his	 jaw.	 It	 appeared	to	have	been	a	fair	 while

since	he’d	last	showered,	but	Winter	could	detect	no	obvious	signs	of	abuse.

     Her	 stomach	flipped.	  All	 the	 warmth	 the	 ice	had	 sucked	out	 of	 her	 came

rushing	back	to	the	surface	of	her	skin.

     Stay	with	me,	Princess.	Listen	to	my	voice,	Princess.

     He	was	led	to	the	center	of	the	room,	devoid	of	 expression.	Winter	jabbed	her

fingernails	into	 her	palms.

     Jacin	didn’t	 look	at	her.	Not	once.

     “Jacin	 Clay,”	said	Aimery,	 “you	 have	been	charged	with	betraying	the	crown

by	failing	  to	 protect	Thaumaturge	 Mira	 and	 by	failing	  to	 apprehend	a	known

Lunar	fugitive	 despite	 nearly	two	 weeks	spent	in	said	 fugitive’s	 company.	 You

are	a	traitor	 to	 Luna	and	 to	our	 queen.	These	crimes	 are	punishable	by	 death.

What	have	you	to	say	in	your	defense?”

     Winter’s	  heart	thundered	like	 a	drum	 against	her	 ribs.	 She	turned	pleading

eyes	up	to	her	stepmother,	but	Levana	was	not	paying	her	any	attention.

17
     “I	 plead	guilty	to	all	 stated	crimes,”	said	Jacin,	drawing	Winter’s	attention

back,	“except	for	the	accusation	that	I	am	a	traitor.”

     Levana’s	fingernails	fluttered	against	the	arm	of	her	throne.	“Explain.”

     Jacin	stood	as	tall	and	stalwart	as	if	he	were	in	uniform,	as	if	 he	were	on

duty,	not	on	trial.	“As	I’ve	said	before,	I	did	not	apprehend	the	fugitive	while	in

her	company	because	I	was	attempting	to	convince	her	I	could	be	trusted,	in

order	to	gather	information	for	my	queen.”

     “Ah,	yes,	you	were	spying	on	her	and	her	companions,”	said	Levana.	“I	do

recall	that	excuse	from	when	you	were	captured.	I	also	recall	that	you	had	no

pertinent	information	to	give	me,	only	lies.”

     “Not	lies,	My	 Queen,	though	I	will	 admit	I	underestimated	the	cyborg	and

her	abilities.	She	was	disguising	them	from	me.”

     “So	much	for	earning	her	trust.”	There	was	mocking	in	the	queen’s	tone.

     “Knowledge	of	the	cyborg’s	skills	was	not	the	only	information	I	sought,	My

Queen.”

     “I	 suggest	you	stop	playing	with	words.	My	 patience	with	you	is	 already

thin.”

     Winter’s	heart	shriveled.	Not	Jacin.	She	could	not	sit	here	and	watch	them

kill	Jacin.

     She	would	bargain	for	him,	she	decided,	though	the	plan	came	with	a	flaw.

What	did	she	have	to	bargain	with?	Nothing	but	her	own	life,	and	Levana	would

not	accept	that.

     She	could	throw	a	fit.	Go	into	hysterics.	It	would	hardly	be	a	stretch	from	the

truth	at	this	point,	and	it	might	distract	them	for	a	time,	but	it	would	only	delay

the	inevitable.

18
     She	had	felt	helpless	many	times	in	her	life,	but	 never	like	this.

     Only	 one	thing	 to	be	done,	then.	She	would	 throw	 her	own	body	 in	front	 of

the	blade.

     Oh,	Jacin	would	hate	that.

     Ignorant	 of	 Winter’s	  newest	 resolve,	Jacin	 respectfully	  inclined	 his	 head.

“During	 my	time	 with	 Linh	 Cinder,	I	 uncovered	information	 about	a	device	that

can	nullify	  the	effects	of	 the	Lunar	 gift	 when	 connected	to	a	 person’s	nervous

system.”

     This	 caused	a	curious	 squirm	 through	the	 crowd.	 A	 stiffening	 of	 spines,	a

tilting	 forward	of	 shoulders.

     “Impossible,”	  said	Levana.

     “Linh	  Cinder	had	evidence	of	 its	potential.	As	 it	 was	described	to	me,	on	an

Earthen,	the	device	will	 keep	their	 bioelectricity	 from	 being	tampered	with.	 But

on	a	Lunar,	it	 will	 prevent	 them	from	 using	their	gift	 at	 all.	Linh	 Cinder	 herself

had	the	device	installed	when	she	arrived	at	the	Commonwealth	ball.	 Only	when

it	was	destroyed	was	she	able	to	use	her	gift—as	 was	evidenced	with	 your	 own

eyes,	My	Queen.”

     His	words	 carried	an	air	of	impertinence.	Levana’s	knuckles	turned	white.

     “How	 many	of	 these	hypothetical	devices	exist?”

     “To	 my	 knowledge,	 only	 the	broken	 device	installed	 in	 the	cyborg	 herself.

But	 I	 suspect	 there	still	  exist	 patents	 or	 blueprints.	  The	 inventor	 was	 Linh

Cinder’s	adoptive	father.”

     The	 queen’s	grip	 began	to	 relax.	“This	  is	intriguing	  information,	  Sir	 Clay.

But	it	speaks	more	of	a	desperate	attempt	to	save	yourself	than	true	innocence.”

     Jacin	shrugged,	nonchalant.	“If	 my	loyalty	 cannot	be	seen	in	how	I	conducted

19
myself	 with	 the	 enemy,	 obtaining	 this	 information	  and	alerting	 Thaumaturge

Mira	 to	the	plot	 to	 kidnap	Emperor	 Kaito,	 I	 don’t	 know	 what	other	 evidence	I

can	provide	for	you,	My	 Queen.”

     “Yes,	 yes,	the	 anonymous	tip	 Sybil	 received,	 alerting	her	 to	Linh	  Cinder’s

plans.”	Levana	 sighed.	“I	 find	  it	very	 convenient	 that	this	 comm	 you	claim	 to

have	sent	was	seen	by	no	one	other	than	Sybil	herself,	who	is	now	dead.”

     For	the	first	 time,	Jacin	looked	off	 balance	beneath	the	queen’s	glare.	He	still

had	not	looked	at	Winter.

     The	queen	turned	to	 Jerrico	Solis,	her	captain	 of	the	guard.	Like	 so	many	 of

the	queen’s	 guards,	 Jerrico	 made	 Winter	  uncomfortable,	 and	 she	 often	 had

visions	of	 his	 orange-red	hair	 going	 up	in	 flames	 and	the	rest	 of	him	 burning

down	 to	 a	smoldering	  coal.	 “You	  were	 with	 Sybil	  when	 she	ambushed	 the

enemy’s	ship	 that	day,	 yet	 you	said	 before	 that	Sybil	 had	 mentioned	no	 such

comm.	Have	you	anything	to	add?”

     Jerrico	 took	 a	step	forward.	 He	 had	returned	 from	 their	 Earthen	excursion

with	  a	 fair	  share	 of	  bruises,	  but	 they	  had	 begun	  to	 fade.	  “My	   Queen,

Thaumaturge	Mira	seemed	confident	we	would	 find	Linh	 Cinder	on	that	rooftop,

but	 she	did	  not	 mention	 receiving	  any	 outside	 information—anonymous	   or

otherwise.	When	 the	ship	landed,	 it	was	 Thaumaturge	Mira	 who	 ordered	Jacin

Clay	to	be	taken	into	custody.”

     Jacin’s	 eyebrow	twitched.	 “Perhaps	she	was	 still	 upset	that	 I	shot	 her.”	 He

paused,	before	adding,	“While	under	Linh	 Cinder’s	control,	 in	my	defense.”

     “You	 seem	to	have	plenty	to	say	in	your	defense,”	said	Levana.

     Jacin	didn’t	 respond.	It	was	the	calmest	Winter	had	ever	seen	a	prisoner—he,

who	knew	 better	than	anyone	the	horrible	 things	that	happened	on	this	 floor,	 in

20
the	 very	 spot	 where	 he	 stood.	 Levana	 should	 have	 been	 infuriated	  by	 his

audacity,	but	she	seemed	merely	thoughtful.

     “Permission	 to	speak,	My	Queen?”

     The	 crowd	 rustled	 and	 it	 took	 a	 moment	 for	 Winter	 to	 discern	 who	 had

spoken.	It	was	a	guard.	 One	of	 the	silent	ornamentations	of	 the	palace.	Though

she	recognized	him,	she	didn’t	know	his	name.

     Levana	 glowered	 at	him,	 and	 Winter	 imagined	 her	 calculating	 whether	 to

grant	the	 permission	or	 punish	 the	man	 for	 speaking	out	 of	 turn.	 Finally,	 she

said,	“What	is	your	name,	and	why	do	you	dare	interrupt	 these	proceedings?”

     The	guard	stepped	forward,	staring	at	the	wall,	 always	at	the	wall.	 “My	 name

is	Liam	 Kinney,	 My	 Queen.	I	assisted	with	the	retrieval	 of	 Thaumaturge	Mira’s

body.”

     A	 questioning	eyebrow	 to	Jerrico;	a	 confirming	 nod	received.	“Go	 on,”	 said

Levana.

     “Mistress	 Mira	  was	in	 possession	of	a	 portscreen	when	we	 found	 her,	and

though	it	was	broken	 in	the	fall,	 it	 was	still	 submitted	as	evidence	in	the	case	of

her	murder.	I	wonder	if	 anyone	has	attempted	to	retrieve	the	alleged	comm.”

     Levana	 turned	her	 attention	 back	to	 Aimery,	  whose	face	 was	a	 mask	that

Winter	recognized.	The	more	 pleasant	his	expression,	the	more	annoyed	he	was.

“In	 fact,	 we	did	 manage	to	 access	her	recent	communications.	 I	 was	about	 to

bring	forward	 the	evidence.”

     It	 was	 a	lie,	 which	 gave	Winter	  hope.	Aimery	  was	a	 great	liar,	 especially

when	it	was	in	 his	best	interests.	And	he	hated	Jacin.	He	would	not	 want	to	give

up	anything	that	could	help	him.

     Hope.	Frail,	 flimsy,	 pathetic	hope.

21
     Aimery	 gestured	toward	 the	door	and	a	 servant	scurried	forward,	 carrying	 a

shattered	portscreen	and	a	holograph	node	on	a	tray.	“This	 is	 the	portscreen	Sir

Kinney	 mentioned.	Our	 investigation	 has	confirmed	 that	 there	was,	indeed,	an

anonymous	comm	sent	to	Sybil	Mira	that	day.”

     The	servant	turned	on	the	node	and	a	holograph	shimmered	into	the	center	of

the	room—behind	it,	Jacin	faded	away	like	 a	phantom.

     The	holograph	displayed	a	basic	text	comm.

      Linh	   Cinder	   plotting	    to	 kidnap	   EC	 emperor.
      Escape	  planned	   from	  north	   tower	   rooftop,	   sunset.

     So	much	importance	pressed	into	so	few	words.	It	was	just	like	 Jacin.

     Levana	 read	the	 words	 with	 narrowed	 eyes.	“Thank	  you,	 Sir	 Kinney,	 for

bringing	this	to	our	 attention.”	It	 was	telling	that	she	did	not	thank	Aimery.

     The	guard,	Kinney,	 bowed	and	stepped	back	into	position.	His	 gaze	flickered

once	to	Winter,	unreadable,	before	attaching	again	to	the	far	wall.

     Levana	 continued,	“I	  suppose	you	will	  tell	 me,	 Sir	Clay,	 that	 this	 was	the

comm	you	sent.”

     “It	 was.”

     “Have	 you	anything	else	to	add	before	I	make	my	verdict?”

     “Nothing,	 My	 Queen.”

     Levana	leaned	 back	in	 her	throne	 and	the	room	 hushed,	everyone	awaiting

the	queen’s	decision.

     “I	 trust	my	stepdaughter	would	like	 me	to	spare	you.”

     Jacin	didn’t	 react,	but	 Winter	 winced	 at	the	haughtiness	in	her	stepmother’s

tone.	“Please,	 Stepmother,”	  she	whispered,	 the	 words	  clumping	 on	 her	 dry

tongue.	“It’s	 Jacin.	He	is	not	our	enemy.”

22
     “Not	 yours,	perhaps,”	Levana	said.	“But	 you	are	a	naïve,	stupid	girl.”

     “That	 is	not	so.	I	 am	a	factory	 for	blood	 and	platelets,	and	all	my	 machinery

is	freezing	over…”

     The	 court	  burst	 into	  laughter,	 and	 Winter	  recoiled.	 Even	 Levana’s	  lips

twitched,	though	there	was	annoyance	beneath	her	amusement.

     “I	 have	made	my	decision,”	 she	said,	her	booming	 voice	demanding	silence.

“I	have	decided	to	let	the	prisoner	live.”

     Winter	 released	a	cry	of	relief.	She	clapped	a	hand	over	her	mouth,	but	it	was

too	late	to	stifle	the	noise.

     There	were	more	giggles	from	 the	audience.

     “Have	 you	 any	 other	 insights	 to	 add,	Princess?”	 Levana	said	 through	 her

teeth.

     Winter	 gathered	her	 emotions	as	well	 as	she	could.	 “No,	  My	 Queen.	Your

rulings	are	always	wise	and	final,	My	 Queen.”

     “This	 ruling	  is	not	 finished.”	 The	 queen’s	voice	 hardened	as	she	addressed

Jacin	 again.	 “Your	   inability	   to	  kill	  or	  capture	  Linh	  Cinder	  will	   not	 go

unpunished,	as	 your	  incompetence	led	  to	 her	 successful	 kidnapping	 of	  my

betrothed.	For	 this	crime,	 I	 sentence	you	 to	thirty	  self-inflicted	  lashings	to	 be

held	on	the	central	dais,	followed	 by	forty	 hours	of	penance.	Your	sentence	shall

commence	at	tomorrow’s	light-break.”

     Winter	 flinched,	but	 even	this	punishment	could	not	destroy	the	fluttery	 relief

in	her	stomach.	He	was	not	going	to	die.	She	was	not	a	girl	of	ice	and	glass	at	all,

but	a	girl	of	sunshine	and	stardust,	because	Jacin	wasn’t	going	to	die.

     “And,	 Winter…”

     She	jerked	 her	attention	 back	 to	her	 stepmother,	who	 was	eyeing	 her	with

23
disdain.	“If	you	 attempt	to	bring	him	food,	I	 will	 have	his	tongue	removed	in

payment	for	your	kindness.”

     She	shrank	back	into	her	chair,	a	tiny	ray	of	her	sunshine	extinguished.	“Yes,

My	Queen.”

24
	




                                                       Three







Winter	was	awake	hours	before	light	brightened	the	dome’s	 artificial	 sky,	having

hardly	slept.	She	did	 not	go	to	 watch	Jacin	receive	his	lashings,	knowing	 that	 if

he	saw	her,	he	would	have	kept	himself	from	screaming	in	pain.	She	wouldn’t	 do

that	to	him.	Let	him	 scream.	He	was	still	stronger	than	any	of	them.

     She	 dutifully	   nibbled	  at	 the	 cured	 meats	 and	  cheeses	brought	 for	  her

breakfast.	She	allowed	the	servants	to	bathe	her	 and	dress	her	in	pale	pink	 silk.

She	sat	through	an	entire	session	with	Master	 Gertman,	a	third-tier	 thaumaturge

and	her	long-standing	 tutor,	 pretending	 to	 try	 to	 use	her	 gift	 and	apologizing

when	it	  was	 too	 hard,	 when	she	 was	 too	 weak.	 He	 did	 not	 seem	to	 mind.

Anyway,	 he	 spent	most	 of	 their	 sessions	gazing	slack-jawed	 at	 her	face,	 and

Winter	didn’t	 know	 if	 he	would	 be	able	to	tell	 if	 she	really	did	glamour	 him	 for

once.

     The	artificial	  day	had	 come	and	gone;	one	of	 the	maidservants	had	brought

her	a	mug	of	 warmed	milk	 and	cinnamon	 and	turned	down	her	 bed,	and	finally

Winter	was	left	alone.

     Her	heart	pounded	with	anticipation.

     She	slipped	into	 a	pair	of	lightweight	 linen	 pants	and	a	loose	top,	then	pulled

25
on	 her	 night	  robe	 so	 it	  would	 look	  like	  she	 was	 wearing	  her	 bedclothes

underneath.	She	had	thought	of	 this	 all	 day,	the	plan	 taking	 form	 in	her	 mind,

like	tiny	 puzzle	 pieces	snapping	together.	Willful	  determination	 had	stifled	 any

hallucinations.

     She	fluffed	 her	hair	to	look	as	if	she’d	 woken	from	a	deep	slumber,	turned	off

the	lights,	 and	 climbed	 up	onto	 her	bed.	 The	 dangling	 chandelier	clipped	 her

brow	 and	she	 flinched,	 stepping	 back	 and	catching	 her	 balance	on	 the	 thick

mattress.

     Winter	 braced	herself	with	a	breath	full	 of	intentions.

     Counted	to	three.

     And	 screamed.

     She	screamed	like	an	assassin	was	driving	a	knife	into	her	stomach.

     She	screamed	like	a	thousand	birds	were	pecking	at	her	flesh.

     She	screamed	like	the	palace	was	burning	down	around	her.

     The	 guard	stationed	 outside	 her	door	 burst	 inside,	 weapon	drawn.	 Winter

went	 on	 screaming.	Stumbling	  back	 over	 her	 pillows,	 she	 pressed	her	 back

against	the	headboard	and	clawed	at	her	hair.

     “Princess!	What	 is	it?	What’s	wrong?”	 His	 eyes	darted	around	the	dark	room,

searching	for	an	intruder,	a	threat.

     Flailing	 an	 arm	behind	her,	 Winter	 scratched	at	the	wallpaper,	 tearing	off	 a

shred.	It	was	becoming	easier	to	believe	she	was	horrified.	There	were	phantoms

and	murderers	closing	in	around	her.

     “Princess!”	 A	 second	guard	burst	into	 the	room.	He	 flipped	 on	the	light	 and

Winter	ducked	away	from	 it.	“What’s	 going	on?”

     “I	 don’t	 know.”	 The	first	 guard	had	crossed	to	the	other	side	of	the	room	and

26
was	checking	behind	the	window	drapes.

     “Monster!”	  Winter	 shrieked,	bulleting	  the	statement	with	 a	sob.	“I	 woke	 up

and	he	was	standing	over	my	bed—one	of—one	of	the	queen’s	soldiers!”

     The	guards	traded	looks	and	the	silent	message	was	clear,	even	to	Winter.

     Nothing’s	 wrong.	She’s	just	crazy.

     “Your	  Highness—”	  started	 the	 second	guard,	 as	a	 third	  appeared	at	 the

doorway.

     Good.	 There	 were	 only	  three	 guards	regularly	  stationed	 in	 this	  corridor

between	her	bedroom	and	the	main	stairway.

     “He	 went	 that	way!”	  Cowering	behind	 one	arm,	Winter	  pointed	toward	 her

dressing	closet.	“Please.	Please	don’t	let	him	get	away.	Please	find	him!”

     “What’s	 happened?”	asked	the	newcomer.

     “She	thinks	 she	saw	one	of	the	mutant	soldiers,”	grumbled	the	second	guard.

     “He	 was	here,”	 she	screamed,	the	words	 tearing	at	 her	throat.	 “Why	 aren’t

you	protecting	me?	Why	are	you	standing	there?	Go	find	him!”

     The	first	 guard	looked	 annoyed,	as	if	this	charade	had	interrupted	something

more	than	standing	in	the	hallway	and	staring	at	a	wall.	He	holstered	his	gun,	but

said,	with	  authority,	 “Of	  course,	 Princess.	We	 will	  find	  this	 perpetrator	and

ensure	your	safety.”	He	beckoned	the	second	guard	and	the	two	 of	them	stalked

off	toward	the	closet.

     Winter	 turned	 to	the	third	 guard	 and	fell	 into	 a	crouch.	“You	  must	go	 with

them,”	she	urged,	 her	voice	 fluttery	 and	weak.	“He	 is	 a	monster—enormous—

with	 ferocious	teeth	and	 claws	that	 will	 tear	them	 to	shreds.	They	 can’t	 defeat

him	 alone,	and	if	  they	fail—!”	   Her	 words	turned	 into	 a	wail	  of	terror.	 “He’ll

come	for	me,	 and	there	will	 be	no	 one	to	stop	him.	 No	one	will	  save	me!”	 She

27
pulled	at	her	hair,	her	entire	body	quivering.

     “All	  right,	 all	 right.	 Of	course,	Highness.	Just	wait	 here,	and	…	 try	 to	calm

yourself.”	 Looking	 grateful	 to	 leave	the	mad	princess	behind,	 he	took	 off	 after

his	comrades.

     No	 sooner	had	he	disappeared	did	Winter	  slip	off	 the	 bed	and	shrug	out	 of

her	robe,	leaving	it	draped	over	a	chair.

     “The	 closet	is	clear!”	one	of	the	guards	yelled.

     “Keep	 looking!”	 she	yelled	back.	“I	 know	he’s	in	 there!”

     Snatching	up	the	simple	hat	and	shoes	she’d	left	by	the	door,	she	fled.

     Unlike	 her	 personal	guards,	who	 would	 have	 questioned	her	endlessly	 and

insisted	on	escorting	her	into	 the	city,	 the	guards	who	were	 manning	the	towers

outside	the	 palace	hardly	  stirred	 when	 she	asked	for	  the	gate	 to	 be	opened.

Without	 guards	and	fine	dresses,	and	with	 her	bushel	of	hair	 tucked	up	and	 her

face	tucked	down,	she	could	pass	for	a	servant	in	the	shadows.

     As	soon	as	she	was	outside	the	gate,	she	started	to	run.

     There	 were	 aristocrats	milling	   around	the	 tiled	  city	 streets,	laughing	  and

flirting	  in	their	 fine	 clothes	 and	glamours.	 Light	 spilled	 from	  open	doorways,

music	danced	along	the	window	  ledges,	and	everywhere	was	the	smell	 of	 food

and	the	clink	of	glasses	and	shadows	kissing	and	sighing	in	darkened	alleyways.

     It	 was	like	 this	always	in	 the	city.	 The	frivolity,	  the	pleasure.	The	white	 city

of	Artemisia—their	 own	little	 paradise	beneath	the	protective	glass.

     At	 the	center	 of	 it	all	 was	 the	dais,	a	circular	 platform	  where	dramas	were

performed	 and	auctions	 held,	 where	spectacles	of	 illusion	  and	 bawdy	 humor

often	drew	the	families	from	 their	mansions	for	a	night	of	 revelry.

     Public	humiliations	 and	punishments	were	frequently	on	the	docket.

28
     Winter	 was	 panting,	 both	frazzled	 and	giddy	 with	  her	success,	as	the	dais

came	into	 view.	  She	spotted	 him	 and	 the	yearning	 inside	 her	 weakened	her

knees.	She	had	to	slow	to	catch	her	breath.

     He	was	sitting	 with	his	back	to	 the	enormous	sundial	at	the	center	of	the	dais,

an	instrument	as	useless	as	it	was	striking	during	these	long	nights.	Ropes	bound

his	bare	arms	and	his	chin	was	collapsed	against	his	collarbone,	pale	hair	 hiding

his	face.	 As	 Winter	 neared	 him,	 she	could	 see	the	 raised	hash	 marks	of	  the

lashings	across	his	chest	and	abdomen,	scattered	with	dried	blood.	 There	would

be	more	on	his	 back.	His	 hand	would	 be	blistered	from	 gripping	 the	lash.	 Self-

inflicted,	 Levana	  had	proclaimed	  the	 punishment,	 but	 everyone	 knew	 Jacin

would	 be	under	the	 control	 of	 a	thaumaturge.	There	was	 nothing	 self-inflicted

about	it.

     Aimery,	  she	heard,	had	volunteered	 for	 the	task.	He	 had	probably	 relished

every	wound.

     Jacin	raised	his	head	as	she	reached	the	edge	of	the	dais.	Their	eyes	clashed,

and	she	was	staring	at	a	man	who	 had	been	beaten	and	bound	and	mocked	and

tormented	all	day	and	for	a	moment	she	was	sure	he	was	broken.	Another	one	of

the	queen’s	broken	toys.

     But	then	one	side	of	his	mouth	 lifted,	and	the	smile	hit	 his	startling	blue	 eyes,

and	he	was	as	bright	and	welcoming	as	the	rising	sun.

     “Hey,	 Trouble,”	 he	said,	leaning	his	head	back	against	the	dial.

     With	 that,	the	terror	from	 the	past	weeks	slipped	away.	He	was	alive.	He	was

home.	He	was	still	Jacin.

     She	pulled	 herself	 onto	the	 dais.	“Do	 you	 have	any	 idea	how	 worried	 I’ve

been?”	she	said,	crossing	to	him.	“I	 didn’t	 know	 if	 you	were	dead	or	 being	held

29
hostage,	or	if	you’d	 been	eaten	by	one	of	 the	queen’s	soldiers.	It’s	 been	driving

me	mad	not	knowing.”

     He	quirked	an	eyebrow	at	her.

     She	scowled.	“Don’t	 comment	on	that.”

     “I	 wouldn’t	  dare.”	 He	rolled	 his	 shoulders	as	much	as	he	 could	against	his

bindings.	 His	 wounds	gapped	 and	puckered	 with	 the	 movement	and	 his	 face

contorted	in	pain,	but	it	was	brief.

     Pretending	 she	 hadn’t	 noticed,	  Winter	 sat	 cross-legged	 in	 front	  of	 him,

inspecting	 the	wounds.	 Wanting	  to	 touch	 him.	 Terrified	  to	 touch	 him.	  That

much,	at	least,	had	not	changed.	“Does	it	hurt	very	much?”

     “Better	  than	being	 at	 the	bottom	 of	 the	 lake.”	 His	 smile	 turned	 wry,	 lips

chapped.	“They’ll	 move	me	to	a	suspension	tank	tomorrow	night.	 Half	a	day	and

I’ll	 be	good	as	new.”	He	squinted.	“That’s	 assuming	you’re	 not	here	to	bring	 me

food.	I’d	 like	to	keep	my	tongue	where	it	is,	 thank	you.”

     “No	 food.	Just	a	friendly	 face.”

     “Friendly.”	  His	gaze	raked	over	her,	his	relaxed	grin	 still	 in	place.	“That’s	 an

understatement.”

     She	dipped	her	head,	turning	away	to	 hide	the	three	scars	on	her	right	cheek.

For	years,	Winter	had	assumed	that	when	people	stared	at	her,	it	was	because	the

scars	disgusted	them.	A	rare	disfigurement	in	 their	world	 of	perfection.	 But	then

a	maid	 told	 her	they	 weren’t	 disgusted,	 they	were	 in	 awe.	She	said	 the	scars

made	Winter	 interesting	 to	 look	  at	and	 somehow,	 odd	as	 it	 was,	 even	more

beautiful.	Beautiful.	 It	was	a	word	 Winter	had	heard	tossed	around	all	her	life.	 A

beautiful	 child,	  a	  beautiful	  girl,	  a	 beautiful	  young	 lady,	  so	 beautiful,	  too

beautiful	…	 and	the	stares	that	attended	the	word	never	ceased	to	make	her	want

30
to	don	a	veil	like	her	stepmother’s	and	hide	from	 the	whispers.

     Jacin	 was	 the	 one	person	 who	 could	  make	 her	feel	  beautiful	 without	  it

seeming	like	a	bad	thing.	She	couldn’t	 recall	 him	ever	using	the	word,	 or	giving

her	any	compliments,	 for	that	 matter.	They	were	always	 hidden	behind	careless

jokes	that	made	her	heart	pound.

     “Don’t	  tease,”	she	said,	flustered	at	the	 way	he	looked	 at	her,	at	the	way	 he

always	looked	at	her.

     “Wasn’t	 teasing,”	he	said,	all	nonchalance.

     In	response,	Winter	reached	out	and	punched	him	on	the	shoulder.

     He	flinched,	  and	she	gasped,	remembering	his	wounds.	But	 Jacin’s	chuckle

was	warm.	“That’s	 not	a	fair	fight,	 Princess.”

     She	reeled	back	the	budding	apology.	“It’s	 about	time	I	had	the	advantage.”

     He	glanced	past	her,	into	the	streets.	“Where’s	your	guard?”

     “I	 left	him	 behind.	Searching	for	a	monster	in	my	closet.”

     The	sunshine	smile	 hardened	into	 exasperation.	“Princess,	you	 can’t	 go	out

alone.	If	something	happened	to	you—”

     “Who’s	 going	 to	hurt	me	here,	in	the	city?	Everyone	knows	who	I	 am.”

     “It	 just	 takes	one	idiot,	 too	 used	to	getting	 what	he	 wants	and	too	 drunk	to

control	himself.”

     She	flushed	and	clenched	her	jaw.

     Jacin	frowned,	immediately	 regretful.	 “Princess—”

     “I’ll	  run	all	 the	way	back	to	the	palace.	I’ll	 be	fine.”

     He	 sighed,	 and	she	 listed	 her	 head,	wishing	  she’d	 brought	 some	 sort	 of

medicinal	 salve	for	 his	cuts.	 Levana	hadn’t	 said	anything	 about	medicine,	 and

the	sight	of	him	 tied	up	 and	vulnerable—and	shirtless,	even	if	 it	 was	a	bloodied

31
shirtless—was	making	her	fingers	twitch	 in	odd	ways.

     “I	 wanted	 to	be	alone	with	 you,”	  she	said,	focusing	on	 his	face.	“We	 never

get	to	be	alone	anymore.”

     “It’s	  not	 proper	 for	 seventeen-year-old	princesses	to	 be	alone	 with	 young

men	who	have	questionable	intentions.”

     She	laughed.	“And	 what	 about	young	men	who	 she’s	been	best	friends	with

since	before	she	could	walk?”

     He	shook	his	head.	“Those	are	the	worst.”

     She	snorted—an	actual	snort	 of	laughter	 that	served	to	brighten	 Jacin’s	face

again.

     But	 the	humor	was	 bittersweet.	The	truth	 was,	Jacin	touched	her	only	 when

he	was	helping	 her	 through	 a	hallucination.	  Otherwise,	he	 hadn’t	 deliberately

touched	her	in	years.	Not	 since	she	was	fourteen	and	he	was	sixteen,	 and	she’d

tried	to	teach	him	the	Eclipse	Waltz	with	 somewhat	embarrassing	results.

     These	 days,	she	 would	  have	auctioned	 off	  the	 Milky	   Way	 to	 make	 his

intentions	a	little	less	honorable.

     Her	smile	started	to	fizzle.	 “I’ve	 missed	you,”	 she	said.

     His	 gaze	dropped	away	and	he	shifted	in	an	attempt	to	get	more	 comfortable

against	the	 dial.	 Locking	  his	jaw	  so	she	 wouldn’t	  see	how	 much	 every	tiny

movement	pained	him.	“How’s	 your	head?”	he	asked.

     “The	 visions	 come	 and	go,”	  she	said,	 “but	 they	 don’t	 seem	to	 be	 getting

worse.”

     “Have	 you	had	one	today?”

     She	picked	 at	a	small,	 natural	flaw	 in	 the	linen	 of	 her	pants,	thinking	 back.

“No,	not	 since	the	trials	yesterday.	I	turned	into	 a	girl	of	 icicles,	and	Aimery	 lost

32
his	head.	Literally.”

     “Wouldn’t	  mind	if	 that	last	one	came	true.”

     She	shushed	him.

     “I	 mean	it.	I	don’t	 like	 how	he	looks	at	you.”

     Winter	 glanced	 over	 her	shoulder,	 but	the	 courtyards	surrounding	 the	 dais

were	empty.	 Only	 the	distant	 bustle	 of	 music	and	 laughter	reminded	 her	they

were	in	a	metropolis	at	all.

     “You’re	  back	 on	Luna	 now,”	  she	said.	“You	  have	to	 be	careful	 what	 you

say.”

     “You’re	  giving	me	advice	on	how	to	be	covert?”

     “Jacin—”

     “There	 are	three	cameras	on	this	square.	Two	 on	the	lampposts	behind	 you,

one	embedded	in	 the	 oak	tree	 behind	 the	sundial.	 None	 of	 them	have	 audio.

Unless	she’s	hiring	lip-readers	now?”

     Winter	 glared.	“How	 can	you	know	for	 sure?”

     “Surveillance	 was	one	of	Sybil’s	 specialties.”

     “Nevertheless,	 the	queen	could	 have	killed	  you	 yesterday.	You	 need	to	 be

careful.”

     “I	  know,	 Princess.	I	 have	 no	 interest	 in	 returning	 to	 that	 throne	room	 as

anything	other	than	a	loyal	guard.”

     A	 rumble	 overhead	caught	Winter’s	 attention.	Through	 the	dome,	 the	lights

of	a	dozen	spaceships	were	fading	as	they	streaked	across	the	star-scattered	sky.

Heading	toward	Earth.

     “Soldiers,”	 Jacin	muttered.	She	couldn’t	 tell	if	 he	meant	it	as	a	statement	or	a

question.	“How’s	 the	war	effort?”

33
     “No	  one	 tells	  me	 anything.	  But	  Her	 Majesty	  seems	 pleased	 with	  our

victories	 …	 though	 still	 furious	 about	 the	missing	 emperor,	 and	the	 canceled

wedding.”

     “Not	 canceled.	Just	delayed.”

     “Try	 telling	 her	that.”

     He	grunted.

     Winter	 leaned	 forward	 on	 her	elbows,	 cupping	 her	 chin.	 “Did	  the	cyborg

really	 have	 a	 device	 like	  you	 said?	 One	 that	 can	 keep	 people	from	  being

manipulated?”

     A	 light	sparked	in	his	eyes,	as	if	she’d	reminded	him	 of	something	important,

but	when	he	tried	to	 lean	toward	her,	his	binds	 held	him	 back.	He	grimaced	and

cursed	beneath	his	breath.

     Winter	 scooted	closer	to	him,	making	up	the	distance	herself.

     “That’s	  not	 all,”	 he	 said.	 “Supposedly,	 this	 device	can	 keep	Lunars	 from

using	their	gift	 in	the	first	place.”

     “Yes,	 you	mentioned	that	in	the	throne	room.”

     His	gaze	burrowed	into	 her.	“And	it	 will	 protect	their	minds.	She	said	it	keeps

them	from…”

     Going	crazy.

     He	didn’t	 have	to	 say	it	out	 loud,	not	when	 his	face	held	so	much	hope,	like

he’d	solved	the	world’s	 greatest	problem.	His	meaning	hung	between	them.

     Such	a	device	could	heal	her.

     Winter’s	  fingers	  curled	 up	 and	 settled	 under	 her	 chin.	 “You	   said	 there

weren’t	any	more	of	them.”

     “No.	 But	 if	 we	could	 find	the	 patents	for	the	invention	 …	 to	even	know	 it’s

34
possible…”

     “The	queen	will	do	anything	to	keep	more	from	being	made.”

     His	expression	darkened.	“I	know,	but	I	had	to	offer	something.	If	only	Sybil

hadn’t	arrested	me	in	the	first	place,	ungrateful	witch.”	Winter	smiled,	and	when

Jacin	caught	the	look,	his	irritation	melted	away.	“Doesn’t	matter.	Now	that	I

know	it’s	possible,	I’ll	find	a	way	to	do	it.”

     “The	visions	are	never	so	bad	when	you’re	around.	They’ll	be	better	now	that

you’re	back.”

     His	jaw	tensed.	“I’m	sorry	I	left.	I	 regretted	it	as	soon	as	I	realized	what	I’d

done.	It	happened	so	fast,	and	then	I	couldn’t	come	back	for	you.	I’d	just	…

abandoned	you	up	here.	With	her.	With	them.”

     “You	 didn’t	 abandon	me.	 You	 were	taken	hostage.	You	 didn’t	 have	a

choice.”

     He	looked	away.

     She	straightened.	“You	weren’t	manipulated?”

     “Not	the	whole	time,”	he	whispered,	like	a	confession.	“I	chose	to	side	with

them,	when	Sybil	and	I	boarded	their	ship.”	Guilt	washed	over	his	face,	and	it

was	such	an	odd	expression	on	him	Winter	wasn’t	sure	she	was	interpreting	it

right.	“Then	I	betrayed	them.”	He	thumped	his	head	against	the	sundial,	harder

than	necessary.	“I’m	such	an	idiot.	You	should	hate	me.”

     “You	may	be	an	idiot,	but	I	assure	you,	you’re	quite	a	lovable	one.”

     He	shook	his	head.	“You’re	the	only	person	in	the	galaxy	who	would	ever

call	me	lovable.”

     “I’m	 the	only	person	in	the	galaxy	crazy	enough	to	believe	it.	Now	tell	me

what	you’ve	done	that	is	worth	hating	you	for.”

35
     He	swallowed,	 hard.	“That	cyborg	Her	 Majesty	is	searching	for?”

     “Linh	 Cinder.”

     “Yeah.	 Well,	  I	thought	 she	was	 just	some	crazy	 girl	 on	 a	suicide	 mission,

right?	 I	 figured	  she	was	 going	 to	  get	 us	all	  killed	  with	 these	 delusions	 of

kidnapping	 the	emperor	 and	 overthrowing	 the	 queen	…	 to	 listen	 to	 her	talk,

anyone	would	have	thought	that.	So	I	 figured,	I’d	 rather	take	a	chance	and	come

back	to	you,	if	I	 could.	Let	her	throw	 her	own	life	away.”

     “But	 Linh	 Cinder	did	kidnap	the	emperor.	And	 she	got	away.”

     “I	  know.”	 He	 shifted	 his	attention	 back	 to	Winter.	  “Sybil	  took	one	 of	 her

friends	hostage,	some	girl	named	Scarlet.	Don’t	suppose	you	know—”

     Winter	 beamed.	“Oh,	yes.	The	queen	gave	her	to	me	as	a	pet,	and	she’s	being

kept	in	 the	menagerie.	I	 like	 her	a	great	 deal.”	 Her	brow	 creased.	“Although	  I

can’t	tell	if	 she’s	decided	to	like	me	or	not.”

     He	 flinched	  at	 a	sudden	 unknown	 pain	 and	 spent	a	 moment	 re-situating

himself.	“Can	you	 get	her	a	message	for	me?”

     “Of	 course.”

     “You	 have	 to	be	careful.	 I	won’t	  tell	you	 if	 you	can’t	 be	discreet—for	 your

own	sake.”

     “I	 can	be	discreet.”

     Jacin	looked	skeptical.

     “I	 can.	I	 will	 be	as	secretive	as	a	spy.	As	secretive	as	you.”	Winter	 scooted	a

bit	closer.

     His	voice	 fell,	as	if	 he	were	no	longer	certain	those	cameras	didn’t	come	with

audio.	“Tell	 her	they’re	coming	for	 her.”

     Winter	 stared.	“Coming	for	 …	coming	here?”

36
     He	nodded,	a	subtle	dip	 of	his	head.	“And	 I	 think	 they	might	actually	 have	a

chance.”

     Frowning,	 Winter	 reached	forward	 and	tucked	 the	strands	of	 Jacin’s	sweat-

and	dirt-stained	 hair	 behind	 his	 ears.	He	 tensed	at	 the	touch,	 but	 didn’t	  pull

away.	“Jacin	Clay,	you’re	 speaking	in	riddles.”

     “Linh	  Cinder.”	 His	 voice	 became	hardly	 more	than	 a	breath	and	 she	tilted

closer	yet	to	hear	him.	 A	curl	 of	her	 hair	fell	 against	his	shoulder.	He	licked	 his

lips.	“She’s	Selene.”

     Every	 muscle	in	her	body	 tightened.	She	pulled	back.	“If	  Her	Majesty	 heard

you	say—”

     “I	  won’t	 tell	 anyone	 else.	But	 I	 had	to	 tell	 you.”	 His	 eyes	 crinkled	 at	the

corners,	full	of	sympathy.	 “I	know	 you	loved	her.”

     Her	heart	thumped.	“My	 Selene?”

     “Yes.	 But	…	I’m	 sorry,	 Princess.	I	don’t	think	 she	remembers	you.”

     Winter	  blinked,	  letting	 the	 daydream	 fill	   her	 up	 for	 one	 hazy	 moment.

Selene,	alive.	Her	cousin,	her	friend?	Alive.

     She	scrunched	her	shoulders	against	 her	neck,	casting	 the	hope	away.	“No.

She’s	dead.	I	was	there,	Jacin.	I	saw	the	aftermath	of	the	fire.”

     “You	 didn’t	 see	her.”

     “They	 found—”

     “Charred	flesh.	 I	know.”

     “A	 pile	of	 girl-shaped	ashes.”

     “They	 were	 just	ashes.	Look,	 I	 didn’t	 believe	it	 either,	 but	I	 do	 now.”	 One

corner	of	his	mouth	tilted	 up,	into	 something	like	pride.	 “She’s	our	 lost	princess.

And	she’s	coming	home.”

37
     A	 throat	cleared	behind	Winter	 and	her	skeleton	nearly	leaped	from	her	skin.

She	swiveled	her	torso	around,	falling	onto	her	elbow.

     Her	personal	guard	was	standing	beside	the	dais,	scowling.

     “Ah!”	   Heart	fluttering	  with	  a	thousand	startled	 birds,	 Winter	 broke	 into	 a

relieved	smile.	“Did	 you	catch	the	monster?”

     There	 was	no	 return	smile,	 not	 even	a	flush	 of	 his	 cheeks,	which	 was	 the

normal	 reaction	 when	  she	let	  loose	 that	 particular	  look.	  Instead,	 his	 right

eyebrow	began	to	twitch.

     “Your	  Highness.	 I	 have	come	 to	 retrieve	you	 and	 escort	you	 back	 to	 the

palace.”

     Righting	 herself,	Winter	 clasped	her	hands	in	front	 of	 her	chest.	“Of	 course.

It’s	 so	kind	  of	 you	 to	worry	  after	 me.”	 She	glanced	 back	at	 Jacin,	who	 was

eyeing	the	guard	 with	 distrust.	No	 surprise.	He	 eyed	everyone	with	 distrust.	 “I

fear	tomorrow	 will	 be	 even	more	difficult	  for	 you,	Sir	 Clay.	 Do	try	 to	 think	 of

me	when	you	can.”

     “Try,	 Princess?”	He	smirked	up	at	her.	“I	 can’t	seem	to	think	of	much	else.”

38
	




                                                        Four







Cinder	lay	on	the	ground,	 staring	up	at	the	Rampion’s	 vast	engine,	its	ductwork,

and	revolving	  life-support	  module.	 The	 system	blueprints	  she’d	 downloaded

weeks	ago	were	 overlaid	 across	her	 vision—a	 cyborg	 trick	  that	 had	come	 in

handy	countless	times	when	 she	was	a	working	 mechanic	in	 New	 Beijing.	 She

expanded	the	blueprint,	 zooming	in	 on	a	cylinder	 the	 length	of	 her	arm.	It	 was

tucked	near	the	engine	room’s	wall.	Coils	of	 tubing	sprouted	from	both	sides.

     “That	 has	 to	be	 the	problem,”	  she	muttered,	dismissing	 the	 blueprint.	 She

shimmied	 beneath	the	 revolving	  module,	 dust	 bunnies	 gathering	 around	 her

shoulders,	and	eased	herself	back	to	sitting.	There	was	just	enough	space	for	her

to	squeeze	in	between	the	labyrinth	of	wires	and	coils,	pipes	and	tubes.

     Holding	 her	 breath,	she	pressed	her	ear	against	the	cylinder.	The	 metal	was

ice	cold	against	her	skin.

     She	waited.	Listened.	Adjusted	the	volume	 on	her	audio	sensors.

     What	she	heard	was	the	door	to	the	engine	room	opening.

     Glancing	  back,	 she	spotted	 the	 gray	 pants	 of	 a	 military	  uniform	  in	  the

yellowish	 light	 from	the	corridor.	 That	 could	have	been	anyone	on	the	ship,	but

the	shiny	black	dress	shoes	…

39
     “Hello?”	  said	Kai.

     Her	heart	thumped—every	single	time,	 her	heart	thumped.

     “Back	 here.”

     Kai	 shut	 the	door	 and	crouched	down	 on	 the	far	 side	of	 the	room,	 framed

between	the	 jumble	  of	 thumping	 pistons	 and	 spinning	 fans.	 “What	  are	 you

doing?”

     “Checking	 the	oxygen	filters.	 One	minute.”

     She	placed	her	 ear	against	the	cylinder	  again.	There—a	faint	 clatter,	 like	 a

pebble	banging	around	inside.	“Aha.”

     She	dug	a	wrench	from	her	pocket	and	set	to	loosening	the	nuts	on	either	side

of	the	cylinder.	 As	soon	as	it	was	free,	the	ship	 fell	 eerily	quiet,	like	 a	humming

that	became	noticeable	only	after	it	stopped.	Kai’s	eyebrows	shot	upward.

     Cinder	 peered	into	 the	cylinder’s	 depths,	before	 sticking	 her	fingers	 in	 and

pulling	 out	a	 complicated	filter.	  It	 was	made	of	 tiny	 channels	and	crevices,	all

lined	with	 a	thin	gray	film.

     “No	 wonder	the	takeoffs	have	been	rocky.”

     “I	 don’t	 suppose	you	could	use	some	help?”

     “Nope.	 Unless	you	want	to	find	 me	a	broom.”

     “A	 broom?”

     Raising	 the	filter,	 Cinder	banged	the	end	of	 it	 on	one	of	the	 overhead	pipes.

A	dust	cloud	exploded	around	her,	covering	her	hair	and	arms.	Coughing,	Cinder

buried	her	 nose	in	 the	crook	 of	 her	 elbow	 and	kept	 banging	until	  the	biggest

chunks	had	been	dislodged.

     “Ah.	 A	 broom.	 Right.	 There	might	 be	one	up	in	 the	kitchen?…	 I	 mean,	the

galley.”

40
     Blinking	  the	dust	from	her	eyelashes,	Cinder	grinned	at	him.	 He	was	usually

so	self-assured	that	in	the	rare	moments	when	he	was	flustered,	it	made	all	of	her

insides	swap	wrong	side	up.	And	he	was	flustered	a	lot	 lately.	Since	the	moment

he’d	woken	 up	aboard	the	Rampion,	 it	 was	clear	that	Kai	 was	twelve	 thousand

kilometers	 outside	of	 his	 element,	yet	 he	 adapted	well	 in	 the	past	 weeks.	He

learned	the	 terminology,	  he	 ate	 the	 canned	 and	 freeze-dried	 meals	 without

complaint,	he	traded	his	fancy	wedding	 clothes	for	the	standard	military	 uniform

they	all	wore.	 He	insisted	on	helping	out	 where	he	could,	even	cooking	a	few	 of

those	bland	meals,	despite	how	Iko	pointed	out	that—as	he	was	their	 royal	guest

—they	should	 be	waiting	 on	 him.	 Thorne	laughed,	 though,	and	the	 suggestion

seemed	to	make	Kai	even	more	uncomfortable.

     While	 Cinder	couldn’t	 imagine	him	 abdicating	his	throne	and	setting	off	 on	a

lifetime	 of	space	travel	and	adventure,	it	was	rather	adorable	watching	him	try	 to

fit	in.

     “I	  was	kidding,”	  she	 said.	“Engine	  rooms	are	 supposed	to	 be	dirty.”	  She

examined	the	filter	  again	and,	deeming	 it	 satisfactory,	 twisted	it	 back	 into	 the

cylinder	and	bolted	it	 all	in	 place.	The	humming	 started	up	again,	but	the	pebble

clatter	was	gone.

     Cinder	 squirmed	feetfirst	  out	from	 beneath	the	 module	and	 ductwork.	 Still

crouching,	Kai	 peered	down	 at	her	 and	smirked.	“Iko’s	  right.	 You	 really	 can’t

stay	clean	for	more	than	five	minutes.”

     “It’s	 part	 of	the	job	description.”	 She	sat	up,	sending	a	cascade	of	lint	off	 her

shoulders.

     Kai	 brushed	some	of	the	 larger	chunks	from	 her	hair.	 “Where	 did	you	 learn

to	do	all	this,	anyway?”

41
     “What,	 that?	Anyone	can	clean	an	oxygen	filter.”

     “Trust	  me,	 they	 can’t.”	  He	 settled	 his	 elbows	 on	  his	 knees	and	 let	 his

attention	wander	around	the	engine	room.	“You	know	 what	all	this	does?”

     She	followed	 the	look—every	  wire,	every	 manifold,	 every	compression	coil

—and	shrugged.	“Pretty	 much.	Except	 for	that	 big,	rotating	 thing	in	 the	corner.

Can’t	figure	it	 out.	But	how	 important	could	it	 be?”

     Kai	 rolled	his	eyes.

     Grasping	 a	pipe,	 Cinder	 hauled	herself	 to	 her	feet	 and	shoved	the	 wrench

back	into	her	pocket.	“I	  didn’t	 learn	it	anywhere.	I	 just	look	 at	things	and	figure

out	how	 they	work.	 Once	you	 know	 how	something	 works,	you	 can	figure	 out

how	to	fix	 it.”

     She	tried	 to	shake	the	last	bits	of	 dust	from	 her	hair,	 but	there	seemed	to	be

an	endless	supply.

     “Oh,	  you	  just	  look	  at	 something	 and	  figure	  out	 how	  it	  works,”	   Kai

deadpanned,	standing	beside	her.	“Is	that	all?”

     Cinder	 fixed	  her	 ponytail	 and	 shrugged,	suddenly	 embarrassed.	“It’s	  just

mechanics.”

     Kai	 scooped	an	arm	 around	her	waist	 and	pulled	 her	against	him.	 “No,	 it’s

impressive,”	he	said,	using	the	pad	of	his	thumb	 to	brush	something	off	 Cinder’s

cheek.	“Not	to	mention,	weirdly	 attractive,”	 he	said,	before	capturing	her	lips.

     Cinder	 tensed	briefly,	 before	 melting	 into	 the	kiss.	 The	rush	 was	the	same

every	 time,	  coupled	 with	  surprise	 and	  a	 wave	 of	  giddiness.	 It	  was	 their

seventeenth	kiss	(her	brain	interface	 was	keeping	a	tally,	 somewhat	 against	her

will),	 and	she	wondered	if	she	would	ever	get	used	to	this	feeling.	Being	desired,

when	she’d	spent	her	life	 believing	no	 one	would	ever	see	her	as	anything	but	a

42
bizarre	science	experiment.

     Especially	not	 a	boy.

     Especially	 not	Kai,	 who	 was	smart	and	honorable	and	kind,	 and	could	 have

had	any	girl	he	wanted.	Any	girl.

     She	 sighed	 against	 him,	  leaning	 into	  the	 embrace.	 Kai	  reached	for	  an

overhead	pipe	 and	 pressed	 Cinder	 against	 the	 main	 computer	 console.	 She

offered	no	 resistance.	Though	her	body	 wouldn’t	 allow	 her	 to	blush,	there	 was

an	unfamiliar	 heat	that	flooded	every	 inch	of	 her	when	he	was	this	close.	 Every

nerve	ending	 sparked	and	thrummed,	 and	she	knew	 he	could	 kiss	 her	another

seventeen	thousand	times	and	she	would	never	grow	tired	of	it.

     She	 tied	 her	 arms	 around	 his	 neck,	 molding	  their	  bodies	 together.	 The

warmth	of	his	chest	seeped	into	her	clothes.	It	felt	 nothing	but	right.	 Nothing	 but

perfect.

     But	 then	 there	was	the	 feeling,	 always	 lurking,	 always	 ready	 to	cloud	 her

contentment.	The	knowledge	that	this	couldn’t	 last.

     Not	so	long	as	Kai	 was	engaged	to	Levana.

     Angry	  at	the	 thought’s	 invasion,	  she	kissed	 Kai	 harder,	 but	 her	thoughts

continued	to	 rebel.	Even	if	 they	 succeeded	and	Cinder	was	able	to	 reclaim	 her

throne,	she	would	be	 expected	to	stay	on	Luna	 as	their	new	queen.	She	was	no

expert,	but	 it	 seemed	problematic	 to	 carry	 on	 a	relationship	 on	 two	 different

planets—

     Er,	a	planet	and	a	moon.

     Or	whatever.

     The	point	 was,	there	would	 be	384,000	kilometers	of	 space	between	her	and

Kai,	which	 was	a	lot	of	space,	and—

43
     Kai	 smiled,	 breaking	 the	 kiss.	“What’s	  wrong?”	 he	 murmured	 against	her

mouth.

     Cinder	 leaned	back	to	look	at	him.	 His	hair	 was	getting	longer,	 bordering	on

unkempt.	As	a	prince,	he’d	 always	been	groomed	to	near	perfection.	But	then	he

became	an	emperor.	The	 weeks	since	 his	coronation	 had	been	spent	 trying	 to

stop	a	war,	hunt	 down	a	wanted	fugitive,	  avoid	getting	 married,	and	endure	his

own	kidnapping.	As	 a	result,	haircuts	became	a	dispensable	luxury.

     She	hesitated	before	asking,	“Do	you	ever	think	 about	the	future?”

     His	expression	turned	wary.	“Of	 course	I	do.”

     “And	 …	does	it	include	 me?”

     His	 gaze	softened.	Releasing	the	 overhead	pipe,	he	 tucked	a	 strand	of	 hair

behind	her	ear.	“That	depends	on	whether	I’m	 thinking	 about	the	good	 future	or

the	bad	one.”

     Cinder	tucked	her	head	under	his	chin.	“As	 long	as	one	of	them	does.”

     “This	 is	 going	 to	work,”	  Kai	 said,	speaking	 into	 her	hair.	 “We’re	 going	 to

win.”

     She	nodded,	glad	he	couldn’t	see	her	face.

     Defeating	 Levana	and	becoming	Luna’s	 queen	was	only	the	beginning	 of	an

entire	galaxy’s	worth	 of	worries.	 She	so	badly	wanted	to	stay	like	this,	cocooned

in	this	 spaceship,	together	and	 safe	and	alone	…	 but	 that	was	 the	opposite	 of

what	was	going	 to	happen.	Once	they	overthrew	 Levana,	Kai	 would	go	 back	to

being	the	emperor	of	the	Eastern	Commonwealth	and,	someday,	he	was	going	to

need	an	empress.

     She	might	 have	a	 blood	claim	 to	 Luna	 and	the	hope	that	 the	Lunar	 people

would	 choose	anyone	over	 Levana,	even	a	 politically	  inept	 teenager	who	was

44
made	up	of	 36.28	percent	 cybernetic	and	manufactured	 materials.	But	 she	had

seen	the	prejudices	of	the	people	in	the	Commonwealth.	Something	told	her	they

wouldn’t	 be	as	accepting	of	her	as	a	ruler.

     She	wasn’t	even	sure	she	wanted	to	be	empress.	She	was	still	getting	used	to

the	idea	of	being	a	princess.

     “One	thing	 at	a	time,”	she	whispered,	trying	 to	still	her	swirling	 thoughts.

     Kai	 kissed	 her	temple	 (which	 her	brain	 did	 not	 count	as	#18),	 then	pulled

away.	“How’s	 your	training	 going?”

     “Fine.”	  She	 disentangled	 herself	 from	  his	 arms	 and	 glanced	 around	 the

engine.	“Oh,	hey,	while	 you’re	here,	can	you	help	me	with	 this?”	 Cinder	scooted

around	him	and	opened	a	panel	on	the	wall,	revealing	a	bundle	of	knotted	wires.

     “That	 was	a	subtle	change	of	subject.”

     “I	 am	 not	changing	the	 subject,”	she	said,	although	 a	forced	clearing	 of	 her

throat	negated	her	denial.	“I’m	 rewiring	 the	orbital	defaults	so	the	ship’s	systems

will	 run	 more	efficiently	  while	 we’re	 coasting.	These	cargo	ships	are	made	for

frequent	landings	and	takeoffs,	not	the	constant—”

     “Cinder.”

     She	pursed	her	lips	and	unplugged	a	few	 wire	connectors.	“Training	 is	 going

fine,”	she	repeated.	“Could	you	hand	me	the	wire	cutters	on	the	floor?”

     Kai	 scanned	the	ground,	then	grabbed	two	tools	and	held	them	up.

     “Left	 hand,”	 she	said.	He	handed	them	to	her.	“Sparring	with	Wolf	 has	gotten

a	lot	easier.	Although	  it’s	 hard	to	 tell	if	  that’s	because	I’m	 getting	 stronger,	or

because	he’s	…	you	know.”

     She	didn’t	  have	a	word	 for	 it.	 Wolf	  had	been	a	shadow	 of	 his	former	 self

since	Scarlet	had	 been	captured.	The	only	 thing	 holding	 him	 together	 was	his

45
determination	to	get	to	Luna	and	rescue	her	as	soon	as	possible.

     “Either	  way,”	 she	added,	“I	 think	 he’s	 taught	me	 as	much	about	 using	my

Lunar	gift	 as	he’s	 going	to	 be	able	to.	From	 here	on,	I’ll	  have	to	 wing	 it.”	 She

examined	the	mess	of	wires,	 aligning	 it	 with	 a	diagram	over	 her	retina	display.

“Not	 like	that	 hasn’t	been	my	primary	 tactic	this	 whole	time.”	 She	furrowed	 her

brow	and	made	a	few	snips.	“Here,	hold	these	wires	and	don’t	let	them	touch.”

     Edging	 against	her,	Kai	took	 hold	of	 the	wires	she	indicated.	“What	 happens

if	they	touch?”

     “Oh,	  probably	 nothing,	  but	 there’s	 a	 small	 chance	 the	 ship	 would	  self-

destruct.”	 Pulling	  out	 two	  of	 the	 fresh-cut	  wires,	 she	 began	to	  twist	 them

together	into	a	new	sequence.

     Kai	 hardly	 breathed	until	she’d	taken	 one	of	the	threatening	wires	 out	of	 his

grip.	“Why	 don’t	 you	practice	on	me?”	he	said.

     “Practice	what?”

     “You	 know.	 Your	mind-manipulation	 thing.”

     She	paused	with	the	cutters	hovering	over	a	blue	wire.	“Absolutely	 not.”

     “Why?”

     “I	 said	I’d	 never	manipulate	you,	and	I’m	sticking	 with	 that.”

     “It	  isn’t	 manipulation	 if	 I	 know	 you’re	 doing	 it.”	 He	 hesitated.	“At	 least,	 I

don’t	think	 so.	We	could	 use	a	code	word,	so	I’ll	 know	 when	you’re	 controlling

me.	Like	…	what	 were	those	called	again?”

     “Wire	 cutters?”

     “Like	 wire	 cutters.”

     “No.”

     “Or	 something	else.”

46
     “I’m	 not	practicing	on	you.”	Slipping	the	cutters	into	her	pocket,	she	finished

splicing	the	rest	of	the	wires	and	relieved	Kai	of	his	duty.	“There,	we’ll	see	how

that	goes.”

     “Cinder,	I	have	nothing	better	to	do.	Literally,	nothing	better	to	do.	My	time

on	this	ship	has	taught	me	that	I	have	zero	practical	skills.	I	can’t	cook.	I	can’t

fix	anything.	I	can’t	help	Cress	with	surveillance.	I	know	nothing	about	guns	or

fighting	or	…	Mostly,	I’m	just	a	good	talker,	and	that’s	only	useful	in	politics.”

     “Let’s	not	overlook	your	ability	to	make	every	girl	swoon	with	just	a	smile.”

     It	took	Kai	a	moment	to	hear	her	over	his	frustration,	but	then	his	expression

cleared	and	he	grinned.

     “Yep,”	she	said,	shutting	the	panel.	“That’s	the	one.”

     “I	mean	it,	Cinder.	I	want	to	be	useful.	I	want	to	help.”

     She	turned	back	to	face	him.	Frowned.	Considered.

     “Wire	cutters,”	she	said.

     He	tensed,	a	trace	of	doubt	clouding	his	expression.	But	then	he	lifted	his

chin.	Trusting.

     With	the	slightest	nudge	at	Kai’s	will,	she	urged	his	arm	to	reach	around	her

and	pull	 the	 wrench	from	 her	 back	pocket.	It	 was	 no	 more	difficult	  than

controlling	her	own	cyborg	limbs.	A	mere	thought,	and	she	could	have	him	do

anything.

     Kai	blinked	at	the	tool.	“That’s	wasn’t	so	bad.”

     “Oh,	Kai.”

     He	glanced	at	her,	then	back	to	the	wrench	as	his	hand	lifted	the	tool	up	to

eye	level	and	his	fingers,	no	longer	under	his	control,	began	to	twirl	the	wrench

—over	one	finger,	under	the	other.	Slow	at	first,	then	faster,	until	the	gleaming

47
of	the	metal	looked	like	 a	magic	trick.

     Kai	 gaped,	awestruck,	but	 there	was	an	 edge	of	discomfort	  to	it.	 “I	 always

wondered	how	you	did	that.”

     “Kai.”

     He	looked	back	at	her,	the	wrench	still	 dancing	over	his	knuckles.

     She	shrugged.	“It’s	 too	easy.	I	 could	do	this	 while	 scaling	a	mountain,	or	 …

solving	complex	mathematical	equations.”

     His	eyes	narrowed.	“You	 have	a	calculator	in	 your	head.”

     Laughing,	 she	 released	her	 hold	 on	 Kai’s	 hand.	 Kai	 jumped	 back	 as	 the

wrench	clattered	to	the	ground.	 Realizing	he	had	control	 of	 his	own	limb	 again,

he	stooped	to	pick	it	up.

     “That’s	 beside	the	point,”	  said	Cinder.	“With	  Wolf,	 there’s	 some	challenge,

some	focus	required,	but	with	Earthens…”

     “All	  right,	 I	 get	it.	 But	what	 can	I	 do?	I	feel	 so	useless,	milling	 around	this

ship	 while	 the	 war	 is	 going	 on,	 and	 you’re	  all	 making	 plans,	 and	 I’m	  just

waiting.”

     She	grimaced	at	the	frustration	in	his	tone.	Kai	 was	responsible	for	billions	 of

people,	and	she	knew	he	felt	like	he	had	abandoned	them,	even	if	he	hadn’t	been

given	a	choice.	Because	she	hadn’t	given	him	a	choice.

     He	was	kind	 to	her.	Since	that	first	 argument	after	he’d	 woken	up	aboard	the

Rampion,	he	was	careful	 not	 to	blame	her	 for	his	 frustrations.	 It	was	 her	fault,

though.	He	knew	 it	and	she	knew	it	 and	sometimes	it	 felt	like	 they	were	 caught

in	a	dance	Cinder	didn’t	  know	the	steps	to.	Each	of	 them	avoiding	 this	obvious

truth	so	 they	didn’t	  disrupt	 the	mutual	 ground	 they’d	 discovered.	The	 all-too-

uncertain	happiness	they’d	discovered.

48
     “The	 only	 chance	we	have	of	succeeding,”	 she	said,	“is	if	 you	 can	persuade

Levana	to	host	the	 wedding	on	 Luna.	So	 right	now,	 you	 can	be	thinking	 about

how	you’re	 going	to	 accomplish	that.”	 Leaning	 forward,	 she	pressed	a	soft	kiss

against	his	mouth.	(Eighteen.)	“Good	thing	 you’re	such	a	great	talker.”

49
	




                                                         Five







Scarlet	pressed	her	body	against	the	steel	bars,	straining	to	grasp	the	tree	branch

that	dangled	just	outside	 her	cage.	Close—so	close.	The	 bar	bit	 into	her	 cheek.

She	flailed	her	fingers,	brushing	a	leaf,	a	touch	of	bark—yes!

     Her	 fingers	  closed	 around	the	 branch.	 She	 dropped	 back	 into	 her	 cage,

dragging	 the	 branch	 closer.	 Wriggling	  her	 other	 arm	 through	  the	 bars,	she

snapped	off	 three	 leaf-covered	 twigs,	 then	 broke	off	  the	 tip	 and	let	 go.	 The

branch	swung	 upward	and	 a	cluster	 of	 tiny,	 unfamiliar	 nuts	 dropped	onto	 her

head.

     Scarlet	 flinched	 and	 waited	 until	 the	 tree	had	 stopped	shaking	 before	 she

turned	the	hood	of	 her	red	sweatshirt	inside	out	 and	shook	out	the	nuts	that	 had

attacked	her.	They	sort	of	looked	 like	hazelnuts.	If	 she	could	figure	out	 a	way	to

crack	into	them,	they	might	not	 be	a	bad	snack	later.

     A	 gentle	 scratching	 pulled	 her	attention	 back	 to	 the	situation.	 She	 peered

across	the	menagerie’s	pathway,	to	the	white	wolf	 who	was	standing	on	his	hind

legs	and	batting	at	the	bars	of	his	own	enclosure.

     Scarlet	had	spent	a	lot	 of	 time	 wishing	 Ryu	could	 leap	over	those	bars.	His

enclosure’s	wall	 was	waist	high	 and	he	should	have	been	able	to	clear	it	 easily.

50
Then	Scarlet	could	 pet	 his	fur,	 scratch	his	 ears.	What	 a	luxury	 it	 would	 be	 to

have	a	bit	of	 contact.	She	had	always	been	fond	of	 the	animals	on	 the	farm—at

least	until	 it	 was	 time	 to	slaughter	 them	and	 cook	up	 a	 nice	ragoût—but	  she

never	realized	 how	 much	she	appreciated	 their	 simple	 affection	 until	 she	had

been	reduced	to	an	animal	herself.

     Unfortunately,	  Ryu	wouldn’t	  be	escaping	 his	confinement	 any	 sooner	than

Scarlet	would.	 According	 to	Princess	Winter,	 he	had	a	chip	 embedded	between

his	shoulder	blades	that	would	 give	him	 a	painful	shock	if	 he	tried	 to	jump	 over

the	rail.	The	poor	creature	had	learned	to	accept	his	habitat	a	long	time	ago.

     Scarlet	doubted	she	would	ever	accept	hers.

     “This	  is	it,”	  she	said,	grabbing	 her	 hard-earned	treasure:	three	small	 twigs

and	a	splintered	branch.	She	held	them	up	for	the	wolf	 to	see.	He	yipped	and	did

an	enthusiastic	dance	along	 the	 enclosure	wall.	 “I	  can’t	 reach	any	more.	 You

have	to	take	your	time	with	these.”

     Ryu’s	 ears	twitched.

     Rising	 to	her	knees—as	close	to	standing	as	she	could	get	inside	 her	cage—

Scarlet	grabbed	hold	of	an	overhead	bar,	took	aim	with	 one	of	the	smaller	twigs,

and	threw.

     Ryu	 chased	after	it	 and	snatched	the	stick	 from	 the	air.	 Within	 seconds,	he

pranced	back	to	his	 pile	 of	sticks	 and	dropped	the	twig	  on	top.	Pleased,	he	sat

back	on	his	haunches,	tongue	lolling.

     “Good	 job,	Ryu.	 Nice	show	 of	restraint.”	 Sighing,	 Scarlet	picked	up	another

stick.

     Ryu	 had	just	 taken	off	 when	 she	heard	the	padding	 of	 feet	down	 the	path.

Scarlet	sat	back	 on	her	 heels,	instantly	 tense,	but	relieved	 when	 she	spotted	a

51
flowing	 cream-colored	gown	 between	the	stalks	of	 exotic	flowers	 and	drooping

vines.	The	princess	rounded	the	path’s	corner	a	moment	later,	basket	in	hand.

     “Hello,	 friends,”	 said	Princess	Winter.

     Ryu	 dropped	 his	newest	 stick	 onto	 the	pile,	 then	 sat	down,	 chest	 high	 as

though	he	were	showing	her	proper	respect.

     Scarlet	scowled.	“Suck-up.”

     Winter	 tilted	 her	head	in	Scarlet’s	direction.	 A	spiral	 of	black	 hair	fell	 across

her	cheek,	obstructing	her	scars.

     “What	 did	 you	bring	 me	today?”	 Scarlet	asked.	“Delusional	 mutterings	with

a	side	of	crazy?	Or	is	this	one	of	your	good	days?”

     The	 princess	grinned	and	sat	down	 in	 front	 of	 Scarlet’s	cage,	uncaring	 that

the	path	of	tumbled	 black	rock	 and	ground	covers	would	soil	 her	dress.	“This	 is

one	of	my	best	days,”	she	said,	settling	the	basket	on	her	lap,	“for	I	 have	brought

you	a	treat,	with	a	side	of	news.”

     “Oh,	 oh,	don’t	 tell	 me.	They’re	 moving	me	 to	a	bigger	cage?	Oh,	please	tell

me	this	 one	 comes	with	 real	 plumbing.	 And	  maybe	one	 of	 those	fancy	 self-

feeders	the	birds	get?”

     Though	Scarlet’s	 words	were	laced	with	 sarcasm,	in	truth,	a	larger	cage	with

real	plumbing	would	 have	been	a	vast	improvement.	Without	being	 able	to	stand

up,	her	muscles	were	becoming	weaker	by	the	day,	and	it	would	be	heaven	if	she

didn’t	 have	to	rely	on	the	guards	to	lead	her	into	the	next	 enclosure,	twice	a	day,

where	she	was	graciously	escorted	to	a	trough	to	do	her	business.

     A	 trough.

     Winter,	 immune	 as	ever	to	the	 bite	in	 Scarlet’s	tone,	 leaned	forward	 with	 a

secretive	smile.	“Jacin	has	returned.”

52
     Scarlet’s	 brow	 twitched,	 her	 emotions	at	 this	statement	 pulling	 in	 a	dozen

directions.	 She	knew	 Winter	  had	a	 schoolgirl’s	  crush	on	 this	 Jacin	 guy,	 but

Scarlet’s	 one	 interaction	  with	  him	  had	 been	when	  he	 was	 working	  for	  a

thaumaturge,	attacking	her	and	her	friends.

     She’d	convinced	herself	 that	he	was	dead,	because	the	alternative	was	that	he

killed	Wolf	 and	Cinder,	and	that	was	unacceptable.

     “And?”	 she	prodded.

     Winter’s	  eyes	 sparkled.	 There	  were	 times	 when	  Scarlet	 felt	  like	 she’d

hardened	her	heart	 to	the	 girl’s	  impeccable	beauty—her	 thick	 hair	 and	 warm

brown	skin,	her	gold-tinged	 eyes	and	rosy	lips.	But	 then	the	princess	would	give

her	a	look	 like	 that	 and	 Scarlet’s	heart	 would	 skip	 and	she	would	 once	again

wonder	how	it	was	possible	this	wasn’t	 a	glamour.

     Winter’s	 voice	turned	to	a	conspiratorial	 whisper.	“Your	 friends	are	alive.”

     The	 simple	 statement	sent	the	 world	 spinning.	 Scarlet	 spent	a	 moment	 in

limbo,	distrusting,	 unwilling	 to	hope.	“Are	 you	sure?”

     “I’m	  sure.	He	said	that	even	the	captain	and	the	satellite	girl	were	all	right.”

     Like	  a	 marionette	 released,	she	drooped	 over	 her	 knees.	 “Oh,	 thank	 the

stars.”

     They	were	alive.	 After	 nearly	a	month	of	 subsisting	on	dogged	stubbornness,

finally	 Scarlet	had	 a	reason	to	hope.	 It	was	 so	sudden,	so	unexpected,	she	felt

dizzy	with	 euphoria.

     “He	 also	 said	to	 tell	 you,”	  Winter	 continued,	 “that	 Wolf	  misses	you	 very

much.	Well,	  Jacin’s	 words	were	 that	 he	drove	 everyone	 rocket-mad	 with	 his

pathetic	whining	about	you.	That’s	 sweet,	don’t	you	think?”

     Something	cracked	inside	Scarlet.	She	hadn’t	 cried	once	since	she’d	come	to

53
Luna—aside	from	 tears	of	 pain	 and	delirium	 when	 she	was	tortured,	 mentally

and	physically.	But	now	 all	the	fear	and	all	the	panic	and	all	the	horror	 welled	up

inside	 her	 and	 she	 couldn’t	  hold	  it	 back,	 couldn’t	   even	 think	 beyond	  the

onslaught	of	sobs	and	messy	tears.

     They	were	alive.	 They	were	all	alive.

     She	knew	Cinder	was	still	 out	there—word	 had	spread	even	to	the	menagerie

that	she	had	infiltrated	 New	 Beijing	 Palace	and	kidnapped	the	emperor.	 Scarlet

had	felt	 smug	 for	 days	when	 the	gossip	 reached	her,	even	 if	 she	didn’t	  have

anything	to	do	with	 the	heist.

     But	 no	 one	 mentioned	accomplices.	 No	 one	 said	anything	 about	 Wolf	  or

Thorne	or	the	satellite	girl	they’d	 been	trying	to	rescue.

     She	swiped	at	her	 nose	and	pushed	her	greasy	hair	off	 her	face.	Winter	 was

watching	Scarlet’s	show	of	emotion	 like	one	might	watch	 a	butterfly	shucking	its

cocoon.

     “Thank	  you,”	  said	 Scarlet,	hiccuping	  back	 another	 sob.	 “Thank	 you	  for

telling	me.”

     “Of	 course.	You’re	 my	friend.”

     Scarlet	rubbed	her	palm	across	her	eyes	and,	for	the	first	time,	didn’t	argue.

     “And	 now	for	 your	treat.”

     “I’m	  not	 hungry.”	  It	 was	a	 lie,	 but	 she’d	come	 to	 despise	how	 much	she

relied	on	Winter’s	 charity.

     “But	 it’s	 a	sour	apple	petite.	A	Lunar	delicacy	that	is—”

     “One	of	 your	favorites,	yeah,	I	know.	 But	I’m	 not—”

     “I	  think	 you	  should	 eat	it.”	  The	 princess’s	 expression	 was	innocent	 and

meaningful	all	 at	 once,	in	that	 peculiar	way	 she	had.	“I	 think	 it	 will	  make	you

54
feel	better,”	  she	continued,	 pushing	a	 box	 through	 the	bars.	 She	waited	 until

Scarlet	had	taken	it	 from	 her,	then	 stood	and	made	her	 way	across	the	path	 to

Ryu.	She	crouched	to	give	the	wolf	 a	loving	 scratch	behind	his	ears,	then	leaned

over	the	rail	and	started	gathering	up	his	pile	of	sticks.

     Scarlet	lifted	 the	lid	of	 the	box,	revealing	the	red	marble-like	 candy	in	its	 bed

of	spun	sugar.	Winter	had	brought	her	many	treats	since	her	imprisonment,	 most

of	them	laced	with	 painkillers.	 Though	the	pain	from	 Scarlet’s	finger,	which	 had

been	chopped	off	during	her	 interrogation	with	 the	queen,	had	faded	to	a	distant

memory,	the	candies	still	helped	with	 the	aches	and	pains	of	life	in	such	cramped

quarters.

     But	 as	she	 lifted	 the	 candy	 from	 the	box,	 she	 saw	something	 unexpected

tucked	beneath	it.	A	handwritten	message.

     Patience,	friend.	 They’re	 coming	 for	you.

     She	closed	the	 box	fast	 before	the	security	 camera	over	her	 shoulder	could

see	it,	and	shoved	the	candy	into	her	mouth,	heart	thundering.	She	shut	her	eyes,

hardly	 feeling	 the	crack	 of	 the	 candy	shell,	 hardly	 tasting	 the	sweet-and-sour

gooeyness	inside.

     “What	 you	said	at	the	trial,”	  said	Winter,	returning	 with	 a	bundle	of	sticks	 in

her	arms	 and	 laying	 them	 down	 where	 Scarlet	 could	 reach	 them.	 “I	  hadn’t

understood	then,	but	I	do	now.”

     Scarlet	 swallowed	 too	 quickly.	  The	 candy	 went	 down	 hard,	 bits	 of	 shell

scratching	her	throat.	She	coughed,	wishing	the	princess	had	brought	some	water

too.	“Which	 part?	I	was	under	a	lot	of	duress,	you	might	recall.”

     “The	 part	about	Linh	Cinder.”

     Ah.	 The	part	about	Cinder	 being	the	lost	 Princess	Selene.	The	true	queen	of

55
Luna.

     “What	 about	it?”	 she	said,	bristling	with	 suspicion.	Had	Jacin	said	something

about	Cinder’s	 plans	to	 reclaim	 her	throne?	 And	 whose	side	was	 he	on,	 if	 he

spent	weeks	with	her	friends	but	had	now	returned	to	Levana?

     Winter	 considered	the	question	for	a	long	time.	“What	 is	she	like?”

     Scarlet	dug	her	tongue	into	 her	molars,	thinking.	 What	 was	Cinder	like?	 She

hadn’t	known	 her	for	all	 that	long.	 She	was	a	brilliant	 mechanic.	She	seemed	to

be	honorable	and	 brave	and	determined	 to	do	 what	 needed	to	be	done	 …	 but

Scarlet	suspected	she	wasn’t	always	 as	confident	 as	she	tried	to	 appear	on	the

outside.

     Also,	  she	had	 a	 crush	 on	 Emperor	 Kai	 as	 big	 as	 Winter	  had	on	 Jacin,

although	Cinder	tried	a	lot	harder	to	pretend	otherwise.

     But	 Scarlet	 didn’t	  think	 that	 answered	Winter’s	  question.	 “She’s	 not	 like

Levana,	if	that’s	what	you’re	 wondering.”

     Winter	 exhaled,	as	if	a	fear	had	been	released.

     Ryu	whined	 and	rolled	onto	his	back,	missing	their	attention.

     Winter	 grabbed	a	stick	from	 the	pile	and	tossed.	The	wolf	 scrambled	back	to

his	feet	and	raced	after	it.

     “Your	 wolf	 friend,”	 Winter	 said.	“Is	he	one	of	the	queen’s?”

     “Not	 anymore,”	 Scarlet	 spat.	Wolf	 would	 never	 belong	to	 the	queen	again.

Not	if	 she	could	help	it.

     “But	  he	was,	and	now	 he	has	betrayed	 her.”	 The	princess’s	 tone	had	gone

dreamy,	her	eyes	staring	off	into	 space	even	after	Ryu	returned	and	dropped	the

stick	beside	his	bars,	beginning	 a	new	pile.	 “From	 what	I	 know	 of	her	 soldiers,

that	should	not	be	possible.	At	least,	not	while	 they	are	under	the	control	of	 their

56
thaumaturge.”

     Suddenly	 warm,	 Scarlet	 unzipped	 her	 hoodie.	It	  was	filthy	   with	 dirt	 and

sweat	and	blood,	 but	wearing	 it	 still	 made	her	feel	 connected	to	Earth	 and	the

farm	and	 her	grandmother.	It	 reminded	 her	that	 she	was	human,	despite	being

kept	in	a	cage.

     “Wolf’s	  thaumaturge	is	 dead,”	she	said,	“but	 Wolf	  fought	against	 him	even

when	he	was	alive.”

     “Perhaps	 they	 made	 a	mistake	 with	  him,	 when	 they	  altered	his	 nervous

system.”

     “It	 wasn’t	 a	mistake.”	Scarlet	smirked.	 “I	 know,	they	 think	they’re	 so	clever,

giving	 soldiers	the	instincts	 of	 wild	 wolves.	 The	instincts	 to	 hunt	and	kill.	  But

look	 at	 Ryu.”	 The	 wolf	  had	 lain	 down	 and	 was	 gnawing	 at	 the	stick.	  “His

instincts	lean	 as	much	toward	 playing	 and	 loving.	 If	 he	had	 a	mate	and	 cubs,

then	his	instincts	would	 be	to	protect	 them	at	all	 costs.”	Scarlet	twirled	 the	cord

of	her	hoodie	around	a	finger.	“That’s	 what	Wolf	 did.	He	protected	me.”

     She	grabbed	another	stick	from	the	pile	outside	her	cage.	Ryu’s	attention	 was

piqued,	but	 Scarlet	only	 ran	her	 fingers	 over	the	 peeling	bark.	 “I’m	  afraid	 I’ll

never	see	him	again.”

     Winter	 reached	through	the	bars	and	stroked	Scarlet’s	hair	with	her	knuckles.

Scarlet	tensed,	but	didn’t	pull	away.	Contact,	any	contact,	was	a	gift.

     “Do	 not	worry,”	  said	Winter.	“The	 queen	will	 not	kill	 you	 so	long	as	you	are

my	pet.	You	will	 have	a	chance	to	tell	your	Wolf	 that	you	love	him.”

     Scarlet	glowered.	 “I’m	 not	your	 pet,	just	like	 Wolf	 isn’t	 Levana’s	 anymore.”

This	time,	she	did	 pull	 back,	and	Winter	 let	her	hand	fall	 into	 her	lap.	“And	 it’s

not	that	I	love	him.	It’s	 just…”

57
     She	hesitated,	and	 again	Winter	 listed	 her	 head	and	peered	at	Scarlet	 with

penetrating	curiosity.	 It	 was	unnerving,	 to	think	 she	was	being	 psychoanalyzed

by	someone	who	frequently	complained	that	the	castle	walls	had	started	bleeding

again.

     “Wolf	  is	all	 I	 have	left,”	  Scarlet	clarified.	 She	threw	 the	stick	 halfheartedly

across	the	path.	It	landed	within	  paw’s	reach	of	 Ryu	and	he	simply	 stared	at	it,

like	it	 wasn’t	worth	 the	effort.	Scarlet’s	 shoulders	slumped.	“I	need	him	as	much

as	he	needs	me.	But	that	doesn’t	make	it	love.”

     Winter	 lowered	 her	lashes.	“Actually,	 dear	friend,	 I	 suspect	that	is	precisely

what	makes	it	love.”

58
	




                                                           Six







“These	two	 newsfeeds	include	statements	from	 that	waitress,	 Émilie	 Monfort,”

said	Cress,	trailing	her	fingers	 along	the	netscreen	in	the	cargo	bay,	pulling	 up	a

picture	 of	 a	 blonde-haired	 girl	 speaking	 to	 a	 news	crew.	 “She	 claims	 to	 be

overseeing	Benoit	 Farms	and	Gardens	in	 Scarlet’s	 absence.	Here	she	makes	a

comment	about	the	work	getting	 to	be	a	lot	for	 her,	and	joked	that	if	 the	Benoits

don’t	 return	 soon	she	might	 have	 to	 start	auctioning	 off	 the	 chickens.”	 Cress

hesitated.	“Or,	maybe	it	wasn’t	 a	joke.	I’m	 not	sure.	Oh,	and	here	she	talks	about

Thorne	and	Cinder	coming	to	the	farm	and	scaring	her	witless.”

     She	glanced	over	 her	shoulder	 to	see	whether	 Wolf	 was	 still	 listening.	 His

eyes	were	glued	 to	 the	screen,	his	 brow	 set,	 as	silent	 and	brooding	 as	usual.

When	he	said	nothing,	she	cleared	her	throat	and	clicked	to	a	new	tab.	“As	far	 as

the	finances	are	concerned,	Michelle	Benoit	did	 own	the	land	outright,	 and	these

bank	 statements	show	 that	 the	  property	 and	 business	taxes	 continue	  to	 be

automatically	 deducted.	I’ll	 set	up	 payments	to	go	through	 to	the	 labor	android

rentals	too.	She	missed	last	 month’s	 payment,	but	 I’ll	 make	 it	 up,	and	it	 looks

like	 she’s	  been	a	 loyal	  customer	 long	  enough	 the	 missed	 payment	  didn’t

interrupt	 their	 work.”	  She	enlarged	a	 grainy	 photo.	 “This	 satellite	 imagery	 is

59
from	 thirty-six	 hours	 ago	and	shows	the	 full	 team	of	 androids	and	 two	human

foremen	working	 this	 crop.”	 She	shrugged	and	turned	 to	face	Wolf.	  “The	 bills

are	being	paid,	the	animals	 are	being	tended,	and	the	crops	are	being	 managed.

Any	 accounts	that	 were	 expecting	regular	 deliveries	 are	 probably	 annoyed	at

Scarlet’s	absence,	but	that’s	 the	 worst	of	 it	 right	 now.	 I	 estimate	it	 can	go	 on

being	self-sustaining	for	…	 oh,	another	two	to	three	months.”

     Wolf	  didn’t	 take	his	 forlorn	 stare	 from	 the	satellite	 image.	“She	 loves	that

farm.”

     “And	 it	 will	  be	there	waiting	 for	her	 when	we	get	her	back.”	 Cress	sounded

as	optimistic	 as	she	could.	She	wanted	to	add	that	Scarlet	was	going	 to	be	fine,

that	every	day	they	 were	getting	closer	 to	rescuing	her—but	 she	bit	her	tongue.

The	words	had	 been	tossed	around	so	much	lately	 they	were	 beginning	to	 lose

their	meaning,	even	to	her.

     The	 truth	 was	that	 no	one	 had	any	 idea	if	  Scarlet	was	 still	 alive,	 or	 what

shape	they	would	find	her	in.	Wolf	 knew	that	better	than	anyone.

     “Is	 there	anything	else	you	want	me	to	look	up?”

     He	began	to	shake	his	head,	but	stopped.	His	 eyes	flashed	to	her,	sharp	with

curiosity.

     Cress	gulped.	Though	she’d	warmed	to	Wolf	 during	her	time	 aboard	the	ship,

he	still	sort	of	terrified	 her.

     “Can	you	 find	information	 about	people	on	Luna?”

     Her	shoulders	sank	with	 an	apology.	“If	  I	could	 have	found	out	about	her	by

now,	I—”

     “Not	  Scarlet,”	he	 said,	his	 voice	rough	 when	he	 said	her	name.	“I’ve	  been

wondering	about	my	parents.”

60
     She	blinked.	 Parents?	She	had	never	imagined	 Wolf	 with	 parents.	The	idea

of	this	 hulking	 man	having	 once	been	a	dependent	child	 didn’t	 fit.	 In	 fact,	 she

couldn’t	 imagine	any	 of	 the	queen’s	soldiers	having	 parents,	having	 once	been

children,	having	once	been	loved.	But	of	course	they	had—once.

     “Oh.	 Right,”	  she	stammered,	smoothing	 down	the	 skirt	 of	 the	worn	 cotton

dress	she’d	taken	from	the	satellite,	what	felt	like	 ages	ago.	Though	she’d	spent	a

day	wearing	one	of	 the	military	  uniforms	found	 in	 her	crew	quarters,	a	lifetime

spent	barefoot	 and	 in	  simple	 dresses	had	 made	the	 clothes	 feel	  heavy	 and

cumbersome.	Plus,	all	of	the	pants	were	way	too	long	 on	her.	“Do	 you	think	you

might	see	them?	When	we’re	on	Luna?”

     “It’s	  not	 a	priority.”	   He	 said	it	 like	 a	 military	  general,	but	 his	 expression

carried	more	emotion	 than	his	 voice.	“But	  I	 wouldn’t	 mind	 knowing	 if	 they’re

still	 alive.	Maybe	 seeing	them	again,	 someday.”	His	 jaw	 flexed.	 “I	 was	twelve

when	I	was	taken	away.	They	must	think	I’m	 dead.	Or	a	monster.”

     The	 statement	resonated	through	her	body,	 leaving	 her	chest	vibrating.	 For

sixteen	years,	her	father	had	thought	she	was	dead	too,	while	she’d	been	told	that

her	parents	had	willingly	 sacrificed	 her	to	Luna’s	 shell	infanticide.	 She’d	 barely

been	reunited	with	  her	father	 before	he	 died	of	 letumosis,	 in	 the	labs	 at	New

Beijing	 Palace.	She’d	tried	to	mourn	his	 death,	but	mostly	she	mourned	the	idea

of	having	a	father	at	all	and	the	loss	of	all	 the	time	they	should	have	had	to	get	to

know	each	other.

     She	still	 thought	of	 him	 as	Dr.	Erland,	 the	odd,	curmudgeonly	 old	man	who

had	started	the	cyborg	 draft	 in	 the	 Eastern	Commonwealth.	 Who	 had	dealt	 in

shell	trafficking	 in	Africa.

     He	was	also	the	man	who	helped	Cinder	escape	from	prison.

61
     So	many	 things	he’d	 done—some	good,	 some	terrible.	 And	all,	 Cinder	 had

told	her,	because	he	was	determined	to	end	Levana’s	rule.

     To	avenge	his	daughter.	To	avenge	her.

     “Cress?”

     She	jolted.	“Sorry.	  I	don’t	 …	I	 can’t	access	Luna’s	databases	from	here.	But

once	we’re	on	Luna—”

     “Never	 mind.	 It	 doesn’t	 matter.”	 Wolf	  leaned	against	the	cockpit	 wall	  and

clawed	his	hands	into	his	unkempt	 hair.	He	looked	like	 he	was	on	the	verge	of	a

meltdown,	but	 that	was	his	 normal	look	 these	days.	“Scarlet’s	 the	priority.	  The

only	priority.”

     Cress	considered	mentioning	that	overthrowing	 Levana	and	crowning	 Cinder

as	queen	were	decent-size	priorities	too,	but	she	dared	not.

     “Have	 you	mentioned	your	parents	to	Cinder?”

     He	cocked	his	head.	“Why?”

     “I	 don’t	 know.	She	mentioned	not	having	any	allies	on	Luna	 …	how	it	 would

be	useful	to	have	more	connections.	Maybe	they	would	help	us?”

     His	 gaze	 darkened,	both	 thoughtful	  and	 annoyed.	“It	  would	  put	 them	 in

danger.”

     “I	 think	 Cinder	might	 intend	to	 put	a	lot	of	 people	in	danger.”	 Cress	worried

at	her	lower	lip,	then	sighed.	“Is	 there	anything	else	you	need?”

     “For	 time	to	move	faster.”

     Cress	wilted.	 “I	 meant	more	 like	 …	food,	 or	 something.	When	 did	you	 last

eat?”

     Wolf’s	 shoulders	hunched	closer	to	his	ears,	and	the	guilty	expression	was	all

the	answer	she	 needed.	She’d	heard	 rumors	of	 his	 insatiable	 appetite	and	 the

62
high-octane	metabolism	 that	kept	 him	always	 fidgeting,	 always	 moving.	 She’d

hardly	 seen	any	of	 that	 since	coming	 aboard	the	 ship,	and	 she	could	 tell	 that

Cinder,	in	 particular,	 was	worried	 about	him.	 Only	 when	 they	were	 discussing

strategies	for	Cinder’s	revolution	 did	 he	seem	rejuvenated—his	fists	flexing	 and

tightening	like	 the	fighter	he	was	meant	to	be.

     “All	  right.	 I’m	 going	to	make	you	 a	sandwich.”	Standing,	Cress	gathered	her

courage,	along	with	 her	most	demanding	 voice,	and	planted	 a	hand	on	her	 hip.

“And	 you	 are	 going	 to	 eat	 it	 without	  argument.	You	  need	to	 keep	 up	 your

strength	if	you’re	 going	to	be	of	any	use	to	us,	and	Scarlet.”

     Wolf	 raised	an	eyebrow	at	her	newfound	gumption.

     Cress	flushed.	“Or	…	 at	least	eat	some	canned	fruit	or	something.”

     His	 expression	softened.	“A	sandwich	 sounds	good.	With	…	 tomatoes,	if	we

have	any	left.	Please.”

     “Of	  course.”	 Drawing	  in	 a	 deep	 breath,	she	 grabbed	her	 portscreen	 and

headed	toward	the	galley.

     “Cress?”

     She	paused	and	 turned	back,	 but	 Wolf	 was	 looking	 at	 the	 floor,	 his	 arms

crossed.	He	looked	about	as	awkward	as	she	usually	felt.

     “Thank	 you.”

     Her	 heart	expanded,	ballooning	 with	  sympathy	for	 him.	 Words	 of	 comfort

sprang	to	her	 tongue—She’ll	 be	 all	 right.	 Scarlet	 will	 be	 all	 right—but	  Cress

stuffed	them	back	down.

     “You’re	  welcome,”	she	said,	before	turning	into	the	corridor.

     She	had	nearly	reached	the	galley	when	she	heard	Thorne	call	her	name.	She

paused	and	backtracked	to	the	 last	door,	left	 slightly	  ajar,	and	pressed	it	 open.

63
The	captain’s	quarters	were	the	largest	of	the	crew	cabins	and	the	only	room	that

didn’t	 have	bunks.	 Though	Cress	had	 been	inside	plenty	 of	 times	 to	help	 him

with	the	 eyedrop	solution	Dr.	 Erland	made	in	 order	to	repair	 Thorne’s	damaged

optical	nerve,	she	never	lingered	 long.	Even	with	 the	 door	wide	open,	the	 room

felt	too	intimate,	 too	personal.	There	was	a	huge	map	of	Earth	on	one	wall,	filled

with	 Thorne’s	 handwritten	 notes	and	 markers	indicating	  the	places	he’d	 been

and	the	places	he	wanted	to	go,	along	with	 a	dozen	to-scale	models	 of	different

spaceships	scattered	across	the	captain’s	desk,	including	  a	prominent	 one	of	 a

214	Rampion.	The	bed	was	never	made.

     The	first	 time	 she’d	been	in	 that	room	 she	asked	Thorne	about	the	map	and

listened,	captivated,	 while	 he	 talked	about	 the	 things	he’d	 seen,	from	  ancient

ruins	 to	  thriving	  metropolises,	  tropical	  forests	 to	 white-sand	  beaches.	His

descriptions	had	filled	 Cress	with	longing.	 She	was	happy	here	on	the	spaceship

—it	was	roomier	 than	her	satellite	had	been,	and	the	bonds	she	was	forming	with

the	rest	of	the	 crew	felt	 like	 friendship.	 But	she	had	still	 seen	so	little	 of	 Earth,

and	the	thought	 of	 seeing	those	 things,	while	  standing	at	 Thorne’s	 side,	their

fingers	laced	together	…	the	fantasy	made	her	pulse	race	every	time.

     Thorne	 was	sitting	 in	the	 middle	of	 the	floor,	 holding	 a	 portscreen	at	arm’s

length.

     “Did	 you	call	 me?”	she	asked.

     A	 grin	dawned	on	his	face,	impishly	 delighted.	“Cress!	I	 thought	I	heard	your

footsteps.	Come	here.”	He	circled	his	whole	 arm,	like	he	could	draw	 her	forward

with	the	vacuum	it	created.

     When	she	reached	his	side,	Thorne	flailed	his	 hand	around	until	he	found	her

wrist	and	pulled	her	down	beside	him.

64
     “It’s	 finally	  working,”	 he	said,	holding	up	the	port	again	with	 his	free	hand.

     Cress	blinked	 at	the	small	screen.	A	 net	drama	was	playing,	though	 the	feed

was	muted.	“Was	it	broken?”

     “No,	 the	solution.	 It’s	 working.	 I	 can	see”—releasing	 her	wrist,	 he	waved	a

finger	 in	the	 screen’s	direction—“kind	   of	 a	bluish	 light.	 And	 the	lights	  in	the

ceiling.”	 He	 tilted	 his	head	back,	 eyes	wide	and	 pupils	 dilated	as	they	 tried	 to

take	in	  as	much	 information	  as	 they	 could.	 “They’re	  more	 yellow	  than	 the

screen.	That’s	it,	though.	Light	 and	dark.	Some	blurry	shadows.”

     “That’s	 wonderful!”	  Although	  Dr.	Erland	 believed	Thorne’s	 eyesight	would

begin	to	 improve	 after	 a	 week	or	 so,	 that	week	 had	come	 and	gone	 with	 no

change.	It	had	now	 been	nearly	 two	weeks	 since	the	solution	 had	run	 out,	and

she	knew	the	wait	had	tried	even	Thorne’s	relentless	optimism.

     “I	 know.”	  Crushing	his	 eyes	shut,	Thorne	lowered	 his	head	again.	 “Except,

it’s	kind	 of	giving	 me	a	headache.”

     “You	 shouldn’t	 overdo	it.	You	 might	strain	them.”

     He	 nodded	and	pressed	a	hand	 over	 both	eyes.	“Maybe	  I	 should	wear	 the

blindfold	 again.	Until	 things	start	to	come	into	focus.”

     “It’s	  up	 here.”	 Cress	stood	and	found	 the	 blindfold	  and	the	 empty	vial	  of

eyedrops	nestled	among	the	model	ships.	When	 she	turned	around,	Thorne	was

looking	at	her,	or	through	her,	his	brow	 tense.	She	froze.

     It	 had	been	a	 long	time	 since	 he	looked	at	 her,	and	 back	then	they’d	 been

scrambling	 for	  their	 lives.	  That	 had	 been	 before	 he	 cut	 her	 hair	  too.	 She

sometimes	wondered	how	much	he	remembered	about	what	she	looked	like,	and

what	he	would	think	 when	he	saw	her	again	…	practically	for	the	first	 time.

     “I	 can	see	your	shadow,	sort	of,”	  he	said,	cocking	his	head.	“Kind	  of	a	hazy

65
silhouette.”

     Gulping,	 Cress	folded	 the	blindfold	  into	 his	palm.	 “Give	 it	 time,”	 she	said,

pretending	the	thought	of	 him	inspecting	 her,	seeing	every	unspoken	confession

written	 across	her	face,	wasn’t	terrifying.	  “The	 doctor’s	 notes	said	your	 optical

nerve	would	continue	to	heal	for	weeks	on	its	own.”

     “Let’s	  hope	it	 starts	 healing	faster	 after	 this.	I	 don’t	  like	 seeing	blurs	 and

shadows.”	He	twisted	 the	blindfold	 between	his	 fists.	“One	 of	these	days,	I	 just

want	to	open	my	eyes	and	see	you.”

     Heat	rushed	into	her	cheeks,	but	the	depth	of	his	words	 hadn’t	sunk	in	before

Thorne	 laughed	 and	 scratched	his	 ear.	 “I	  mean,	 and	 everyone	 else	too,	  of

course.”

     She	smothered	the	start	of	a	giddy	smile,	cursing	herself	for	 getting	her	hopes

up	again,	for	 the	thousandth	time,	when	 Thorne	had	made	it	 quite	clear	 he	saw

her	as	nothing	 more	 than	a	good	 friend,	 and	a	 loyal	 member	of	 his	 crew.	 He

hadn’t	tried	 to	kiss	 her	again,	not	 once	since	the	battle	atop	 the	palace	rooftop.

And	 sometimes	she	thought	 he	might	 be	 flirting	  with	 her,	 but	then	 he’d	 start

flirting	 with	 Cinder	or	Iko	 and	she’d	remember	that	a	touch	here	or	a	smile	there

wasn’t	special	to	him	like	 it	was	to	her.

     “Of	 course,”	 she	said,	moving	back	toward	the	door.	 “Of	 course	you	want	to

see	everyone.”

     She	stifled	a	sigh,	realizing	 she	was	going	to	have	to	train	 herself	not	to	stare

at	him	quite	 as	often	as	she	was	used	to,	otherwise	there	would	be	no	chance	of

hiding	the	 fact	that,	 despite	all	his	 attempts	to	persuade	her	otherwise,	 she	was

still	hopelessly	in	love	 with	him.

66
	




                                                       Seven







Jacin	awoke	with	 a	 jolt.	 He	was	 damp	and	sticky	 and	 smelled	like	 sulfur.	 His

throat	and	lungs	 were	burning—not	  painfully,	 but	 like	 they’d	 been	improperly

treated	and	they	wanted	to	make	sure	he	knew	about	it.	Instinct	 told	 him	he	was

not	in	 immediate	 danger,	 but	 the	fuzziness	 of	 his	 thoughts	 set	him	 on	 edge.

When	he	peeled	his	 eyes	open,	blaring	overhead	lights	 burst	across	his	 retinas.

He	grimaced,	shutting	them	again.

     Memories	 flooded	 in	 all	 at	 once.	The	 trial.	 The	 lashings.	The	 forty	 mind-

numbing	hours	spent	tied	 to	that	sundial.	 The	mischievous	 smile	Winter	 shared

only	with	 him.	 Being	carted	to	 the	med-clinic	 and	the	doctor	 prepping	his	body

for	immersion.

     He	was	still	 at	the	clinic,	in	 the	suspended-animation	tank.

     “Don’t	  move,”	said	a	voice.	“We’re	 still	 disconnecting	the	umbilicals.”

     Umbilicals.	 The	word	 sounded	far	too	bloody	and	organic	for	this	contraption

they’d	stuck	him	in.

     There	was	a	pinch	 in	his	 arm	and	the	tug	of	 skin	as	a	series	of	needles	were

pulled	from	  his	veins,	 then	a	 snap	of	 electrodes	as	sensors	were	pried	 off	 his

chest	and	scalp,	the	cords	tangling	in	his	hair.	 He	tested	his	eyes	again,	blinking

67
into	the	brightness.	A	doctor’s	shadow	hung	over	him.

     “Can	you	 sit?”

     Jacin	tested	his	fingers,	curling	them	into	 the	thick	gel	substance	he	was	lying

on.	He	grasped	the	sides	of	the	 tank	and	pulled	 himself	 up.	He’d	 never	been	in

one	of	these	before—had	never	been	injured	enough	to	need	it—and	 despite	the

confusion	upon	first	waking,	 he	already	felt	surprisingly	 lucid.

     He	looked	 down	at	his	body,	 traces	of	the	tank’s	 blue	gel-like	 substance	still

clinging	to	 his	belly	 button	and	the	hairs	on	his	legs	and	the	towel	they’d	 draped

across	his	lap.

     He	touched	one	of	the	jagged	scars	that	cut	across	his	abdomen,	looking	as	if

it	had	healed	years	ago.	Not	bad.

     The	 doctor	 handed	him	 a	 child-size	 cup	 filled	 with	  syrupy	 orange	liquid.

Jacin	eyed	the	doctor’s	crisp	lab	coat,	the	ID	 tag	on	his	chest,	the	soft	hands	that

were	used	to	holding	portscreens	and	syringes,	not	guns	and	knives.	There	was	a

pang	of	envy,	a	reminder	that	this	was	closer	to	the	life	 he	would	have	chosen,	if

he’d	been	given	 a	choice.	If	 Levana	 hadn’t	 made	the	choice	for	 him	 when	she

selected	him	 for	 the	royal	  guard.	Though	 she’d	 never	made	 the	threat	 aloud,

Jacin	had	known	 from	 the	beginning	 that	Winter	 would	 be	punished	if	 he	ever

stepped	out	of	line.

     His	dream	of	being	 a	doctor	had	stopped	mattering	a	long	time	ago.

     He	shot	back	the	drink,	 swallowing	 his	thoughts	along	with	 it.	Dreaming	 was

for	people	with	nothing	 better	to	do.

     The	medicine	tasted	bitter,	but	the	burning	in	 his	throat	began	to	fade.

     When	he	handed	the	cup	back	to	the	doctor,	he	noticed	a	figure	hovering	near

the	doorway,	ignored	by	 the	doctors	and	nurses	who	puttered	around	the	storage

68
cells	of	 countless	 other	 tanks,	checking	 diagnostics	 and	 making	 notations	on

their	ports.

     Thaumaturge	Aimery	  Park.	Looking	  smugger	than	ever	 in	 his	fancy	 bright

white	coat.	The	queen’s	new	favorite	hound.

     “Sir	 Jacin	Clay.	You	look	 refreshed.”

     Jacin	didn’t	 know	 if	 his	voice	would	 work	 after	being	 immersed	in	the	tank,

and	he	didn’t	 want	his	first	 words	to	 the	thaumaturge	to	be	a	pathetic	croak.	 He

cleared	his	throat,	though,	and	it	felt	almost	normal.

     “I	  am	 to	retrieve	  you	 for	 an	audience	 with	 Her	 Majesty.	  You	 may	 have

forfeited	 your	 honored	position	 in	 service	 to	 the	royal	 entourage,	but	 we	 still

intend	to	find	a	use	for	you.	I	 trust	you	are	fit	to	return	to	 active	duty?”

     Jacin	tried	 not	to	look	 relieved.	 The	last	thing	 he	wanted	was	to	become	the

personal	guard	to	the	head	thaumaturge	again—especially	now	that	Aimery	  was

in	 the	 position.	  He	 embraced	 a	particular	  loathing	  for	 this	  man,	 who	 was

rumored	to	 have	abused	more	than	 one	palace	servant	with	 his	 manipulations,

and	whose	leering	attentions	landed	far	too	often	on	Winter.

     “I	  trust	 I	 am,”	 he	 said.	His	 voice	 was	 a	little	  rusty,	 but	 not	 horrible.	 He

swallowed	again.	 “May	 I	 request	a	new	uniform?	 A	 towel	 seems	inappropriate

for	the	position.”

     Aimery	 smirked.	 “A	 nurse	 will	 escort	you	 to	the	showers,	 where	a	uniform

will	 be	waiting.	I	 will	 meet	you	outside	the	armory	when	you’re	ready.”


                                                          *			 *			*

The	vaults	 beneath	the	Lunar	 palace	 were	carved	 from	 years	of	 emptied	 lava

tubes,	their	 walls	 made	of	 rough	 black	 stone	and	 lit	 by	 sparse	glowing	  orbs.

69
These	underground	places	were	never	seen	by	the	queen	or	her	court,	 hence	no

one	worried	about	making	 them	beautiful	to	 match	the	rest	of	the	palace	with	its

glossy	white	surfaces	and	crystalline,	reflection-less	windows.

     Jacin	sort	of	 liked	 it	down	 in	the	vaults.	 Down	here,	it	 was	easy	to	forget	he

was	beneath	the	capital	 at	all.	 The	 white	 city	 of	 Artemisia,	 with	 its	 enormous

crater	lake	  and	towering	  spires,	 had	 been	built	  upon	 a	 solid	 foundation	  of

brainwashing	and	manipulation.	 In	comparison,	 the	lava	tubes	were	as	cold	and

rough	and	natural	as	the	landscape	outside	the	domes.	They	were	unpretentious.

They	did	not	do	 themselves	up	with	lavish	 decorations	and	glitz	in	 an	attempt	to

conceal	the	horrible	things	that	happened	inside	their	walls.

     Even	 still,	 Jacin	 moved	briskly	  toward	 the	armory.	 There	 was	no	 residual

pain,	just	 the	 memory	 of	 each	 spiked	 lash	and	 the	 betrayal	of	  his	 own	 arm

wielding	 the	weapon.	That	betrayal	 was	something	he	was	used	to,	though.	 His

body	hadn’t	  felt	 entirely	 his	 own	 since	 he	became	a	 member	of	 the	 queen’s

guard.

     At	 least	he	was	home,	for	better	or	worse.	 Once	again	able	to	watch	over	his

princess.	Once	again	under	Levana’s	thumb.

     Fair	trade.

     He	cleared	Winter	 from	 his	thoughts	as	he	turned	into	the	armory.	She	was	a

danger	to	his	hard-earned	neutrality.	 Thinking	  about	her	tended	to	 give	him	 an

unwanted	hitch	in	his	lungs.

     There	was	no	sign	 of	Aimery,	 but	 two	guards	stood	at	the	barred	door	 and	a

third	sat	at	the	desk	inside,	all	wearing	the	gray-and-red	uniforms	of	 royal	guards

identical	to	Jacin’s	but	 for	the	metallic	 runes	over	the	breast.	Jacin	ranked	higher

than	any	of	them.	He’d	 worried	 he	would	lose	his	position	 as	a	royal	guard	after

70
his	 stint	  with	  Linh	  Cinder,	 but	  evidently	  his	 betrayal	  of	 her	  counted	 for

something	after	all.

     “Jacin	 Clay,”	  he	 said,	 approaching	the	 desk,	 “reporting	  for	 reinstatement

under	the	order	of	Her	Majesty.”

     The	guard	scanned	a	holograph	chart	 and	gave	a	terse	nod.	A	second	barred

door	filled	 up	 the	wall	 behind	him,	 hiding	 shelves	of	weaponry	 in	 its	shadows.

The	man	retrieved	a	bin	that	held	a	handgun	and	extra	ammunition	and	pushed	it

across	the	desk,	through	the	opening	in	the	bars.

     “There	 was	also	a	knife.”

     The	 man	scowled,	as	if	 a	 missing	knife	 were	 the	biggest	hassle	of	 his	day,

and	crouched	down	to	peer	into	the	cupboard.

     Jacin	dropped	the	gun’s	magazine,	reloading	 it	while	 the	man	riffled	 through

the	cabinet.	As	 Jacin	was	 tucking	 the	gun	 into	 his	holster,	 the	man	 tossed	his

knife	onto	 the	desk.	It	skidded	across,	off	 the	surface.	Jacin	snatched	it	from	the

air	just	before	the	blade	lodged	itself	in	his	thigh.

     “Thanks,”	 he	muttered,	turning.

     “Traitor,”	  one	of	the	guards	at	the	door	said	beneath	his	breath.

     Jacin	twirled	 the	knife	 beneath	the	guard’s	nose	and	sank	it	into	the	scabbard

on	his	 belt	 without	 bothering	 to	 make	eye	contact.	 His	 early	 rise	through	 the

ranks	had	earned	him	plenty	of	 enemies,	morons	who	seemed	to	think	Jacin	had

cheated	somehow	to	earn	such	 a	desirable	position	 so	young.	 When	 really	 the

queen	just	wanted	to	keep	a	closer	eye	on	him	and,	through	him,	Winter.

     The	click	 of	 his	boots	echoed	through	 the	tunnel	as	he	left	 them	behind.	 He

turned	a	corner	and	neither	flinched	nor	slowed	when	 he	spotted	Aimery	waiting

by	the	elevator.

71
     When	 he	was	six	steps	away,	Jacin	 came	to	a	stop	and	clapped	 a	fist	 to	his

chest.

     Stepping	aside,	Aimery	 swooped	his	arm	toward	the	elevator	doors.	The	long

white	sleeve	of	his	coat	swung	with	it.	 “Let’s	 not	keep	Her	Majesty	waiting.”

     Jacin	entered	without	argument,	taking	 up	his	usual	spot	beside	the	elevator’s

door,	arms	braced	at	his	sides.

     “Her	 Majesty	and	I	have	been	discussing	your	role	here	since	your	trial,”	 said

Aimery	once	the	doors	had	closed.

     “I’m	  eager	to	be	of	service.”	 Only	years	of	 practice	disguised	how	abhorrent

the	words	tasted	in	his	mouth.

     “As	 we	wish	to	once	again	have	faith	in	your	 loyalty.”

     “I	 will	 serve	in	whatever	way	Her	Majesty	 sees	fit.”

     “Good.”	  There	was	that	smile	again,	and	this	 time	it	 came	with	 a	suspicious

chill.	 “Because	Her	Royal	 Highness,	the	princess	herself,	has	made	a	request	of

you.”

     Jacin’s	 gut	tightened.	 There	was	no	 way	 to	stay	indifferent	  as	his	 thoughts

started	to	race.

     Please,	 please,	you	 hateful	  stars—don’t	 let	 Winter	  have	done	 something

stupid.

     “If	  your	service	meets	with	 Her	Majesty’s	 expectations,”	 Aimery	 continued,

“we	will	 return	you	 to	your	previous	position	 within	 the	palace.”

     Jacin	 inclined	 his	 head.	“I	  am	most	 grateful	 for	 this	 opportunity	 to	 prove

myself.”

     “I	 have	no	doubt	of	it,	Sir	 Clay.”

72
	




                                                       Eight







The	elevator	doors	opened	into	 the	queen’s	solar—an	 octagonal	room	made	up

of	windows	 on	all	sides.	The	cylindrical	 elevator	itself	 was	encapsulated	in	glass

and	stood	at	the	room’s	 center	so	that	no	part	 of	the	view	 would	 be	obstructed.

The	décor	was	simple—thin	white	 pillars	and	a	glass	dome	overhead,	mimicking

the	dome	 over	the	 city.	 This	 tower,	 this	 very	 room,	 was	the	 highest	point	  in

Artemisia,	and	the	sight	of	 all	those	buildings	 white	and	glittering	 beneath	them,

and	an	entire	 jewelry	 case	of	 stars	overhead,	was	 all	 the	decoration	 the	room

required.

     Jacin	 had	been	 there	 dozens	of	 times	 with	  Sybil,	 but	 never	 for	 his	 own

audience	with	  the	 queen.	 He	 forced	 himself	  to	 be	 unconcerned.	If	  he	 was

worried,	the	queen	might	 detect	it,	 and	the	last	thing	 he	wanted	was	for	 anyone

to	question	his	loyalty	to	the	crown.

     Though	an	elaborate	chair	was	set	on	a	raised	platform,	the	queen	herself	was

standing	at	 the	windows.	  The	glass	 was	crystal	 clear	 and	 showed	no	 hint	 of

reflection.	 Jacin	didn’t	 know	 how	 they’d	 managed	to	make	 glass	like	 that,	but

the	palace	was	full	of	it.

     Sir	 Jerrico	 Solis,	the	 captain	of	 the	 guard	and	technically	  Jacin’s	superior,

73
was	also	there,	but	Jacin	didn’t	spare	him	a	glance.

     “My	 Queen,”	 said	Aimery,	“you	 requested	Sir	Jacin	Clay.”

     Jacin	dropped	to	one	knee	as	the	queen	turned.	“You	 may	stand,	Jacin.	How

good	of	you	to	come.”

     Now,	 wasn’t	that	sweet.

     He	did	stand,	daring	to	meet	her	gaze.

     Queen	 Levana	 was	horrifically	   beautiful,	 with	  coral-red	 lips	  and	skin	  as

pristine	as	white	marble.	 It	was	all	 her	glamour,	 of	course.	Everyone	knew	 that,

but	it	 didn’t	 make	any	 difference.	Looking	  at	her	could	 steal	the	breath	 of	any

mortal	man.

     However—and	  Jacin	kept	 this	 thought	 very,	  very	 quiet	 in	 his	 head—the

princess	could	steal	both	their	breath	and	their	heart.

     “Sir	  Clay,”	  said	 the	 queen,	her	 voice	 a	 lullaby	  now	 compared	 with	  the

harshness	from	the	trial.	“Aimery	 and	I	 have	been	discussing	your	surprising	yet

joyful	 return.	I	 would	 like	 to	see	you	reinstated	to	 your	previous	 position	 soon.

Our	guard	is	weaker	without	you.”

     “I	 am	yours	to	command.”

     “I’ve	  taken	into	consideration	the	comm	 you	sent	to	Thaumaturge	Mira	 prior

to	her	death,	along	with	 two	years	of	 loyal	service.	I’ve	 also	had	a	team	looking

into	 your	claims	 about	 this	 …	 device	Linh	 Garan	 invented,	and	 it	 seems	you

were	correct.	He	unveiled	a	prototype	 he	called	a	bioelectrical	 security	device	at

an	Earthen	convention	 many	years	 ago.	As	it	 happens,	this	 discovery	 has	also

solved	a	mystery	 that	 my	 pack	of	 special	operatives	 in	 Paris	had	encountered

earlier	this	year.	We	now	know	 that	Linh	 Cinder	was	not	the	only	person	to	have

had	this	 device	  installed—but	 that	 her	 longtime	  protector,	 a	 woman	 named

74
Michelle	 Benoit,	 had	one	 too.	We	 can	only	 guess	how	 many	more	 might	 still

exist.”

     Jacin	said	nothing,	 though	his	 heart	was	expanding	at	this	news.	 Cinder	had

seemed	sure	no	more	of	these	devices	had	been	made,	but	maybe	she	was	wrong.

And	if	 she	was	wrong	 …	 if	 there	were	more	of	 them	out	 there	…	he	could	 get

one	for	Winter.	He	could	 save	her.

     “No	  matter,”	 said	Levana,	 gliding	  a	hand	through	 the	 air.	 “We’re	  already

finding	 ways	to	ensure	no	such	invention	 will	 ever	come	to	 the	Earthen	market.

The	reason	I	called	you	here	was	to	discuss	what	is	now	to	become	of	you.	And	I

have	a	 special	 role	  in	 mind,	 Sir	  Clay.	 One	 that	 I	  think	 you	  will	  not	 find

disagreeable.”

     “My	 opinion	 means	nothing.”

     “True,	  but	 the	 opinions	  of	 my	  stepdaughter	do	 yet	  carry	 some	 weight.

Princess	Winter	may	 not	have	been	born	with	 my	 blood,	 but	I	 think	 the	people

acknowledge	that	she	is	a	part	of	my	family,	 a	true	darling	among	the	court.	And

I	did	 love	her	 father	so.”	 She	said	this	with	 a	small	 sigh,	though	Jacin	 couldn’t

tell	whether	it	was	faked	or	not.	She	turned	away.

     “You	  know	  I	 was	 there	 when	 Evret	 was	 murdered,”	  Levana	 continued,

peering	at	the	full	Earth	through	the	windows.	 “He	died	 in	my	arms.	His	last	plea

was	that	I	 would	 take	 care	of	 Winter,	 our	 sweet	daughter.	How	 old	 were	you

when	he	died,	Jacin?”

     He	forced	his	shoulders	to	relax.	“Eleven,	 Your	Majesty.”

     “Do	 you	remember	him	well?”

     He	 clenched	his	 teeth,	not	 knowing	 what	 she	wanted	him	 to	 say.	Winter’s

father	and	Jacin’s	 father	had	both	 been	royal	guards	and	 the	closest	of	 friends.

75
Jacin	had	grown	up	with	 plenty	of	 admiration	for	 Evret	Hayle,	 who	had	kept	his

position	even	 after	marrying	  Levana,	then	a	 princess.	He	 stayed	a	guard	 even

after	Queen	Channary	died	and	Selene	disappeared	and	Levana	ascended	to	the

throne.	He	often	 said	he	had	no	desire	to	sit	 on	the	throne	 beside	her,	and	even

less	to	sit	around	drinking	  wine	and	getting	 fat	among	the	 pompous	families	 of

Artemisia.

     “I	 remember	him	well	 enough,”	he	finally	 said.

     “He	 was	a	good	man.”

     “Yes,	 Your	Majesty.”

     Her	gaze	slipped	down	 to	the	fingers	of	 her	left	hand.	There	was	no	wedding

band	there—at	least,	not	that	she	was	allowing	him	to	see.

     “I	 loved	 him	very	much,”	 she	repeated,	and	Jacin	would	have	believed	her	if

he	believed	she	was	capable	of	such	a	thing.	“His	death	nearly	killed	me.”

     “Of	 course,	My	Queen.”

     Evret	 Hayle	  had	 been	murdered	 by	  a	power-hungry	  thaumaturge	 in	 the

middle	of	the	night,	 and	Jacin	still	remembered	how	devastated	Winter	had	been.

How	 inadequate	all	of	 his	 attempts	to	comfort	 or	 distract	 her.	He	 remembered

listening	to	 the	sad	gossip:	how	Evret	 had	died	protecting	 Levana,	and	how	she

had	avenged	him	by	plunging	a	knife	into	 the	thaumaturge’s	heart.

     They	said	Levana	had	sobbed	hysterically	for	hours.

     “Yes,	  well.”	  Levana	 sighed	again.	 “As	  I	 held	 him	  dying,	 I	  promised	 to

protect	Winter—not	  that	I	 wouldn’t	 have	 regardless.	She	is	my	 daughter,	after

all.”

     Jacin	said	nothing.	His	reserves	of	mindless	agreements	were	running	low.

     “And	 what	 better	way	 to	protect	 her	than	to	instate	 as	her	guard	one	whose

76
concern	for	 her	well-being	 matches	my	 own?”	 She	smiled,	but	 it	 had	a	hint	 of

mocking	to	 it.	 “In	 fact,	Winter	 herself	 requested	you	be	given	the	 position	as	a

member	of	her	personal	guard.	Normally	 her	suggestions	are	rooted	in	nonsense,

but	this	time,	even	I	have	to	acknowledge	the	idea	has	merit.”

     Jacin’s	heart	thumped,	 despite	his	best	efforts	to	 remain	disconnected.	Him?

On	Winter’s	 personal	guard?

     It	 was	 both	 a	dream	 and	a	 nightmare.	The	 queen	was	 right—no	  one	else

could	 be	 as	 trusted	 as	 he	 was	 to	 ensure	 her	 safety.	 In	  many	 ways,	  he’d

considered	himself	Winter’s	 personal	guard	already,	with	or	without	 the	title.

     But	 being	 her	guard	was	 not	the	 same	as	being	 her	friend,	 and	he	 already

found	it	difficult	  enough	to	walk	the	line	between	the	two.

     “The	 changing	of	her	guard	happens	at	19:00,”	 said	the	queen,	swaying	back

toward	the	windows.	“You	 will	 report	 then.”

     He	wet	his	throat.	“Yes,	 My	 Queen.”	He	turned	to	go.

     “Oh,	 and	Jacin?”

     Dread	slithered	down	his	spine.	Locking	 his	jaw,	he	faced	the	queen	again.

     “You	  may	not	 be	aware	that	 we	 have	had	…	 difficulties,	  in	 the	past,	with

Winter’s	 guard.	 She	can	be	 difficult	  to	 manage,	given	 to	 childish	 games	and

fancies.	She	seems	to	have	little	respect	for	her	role	 as	a	princess	and	a	member

of	this	court.”

     Jacin	pressed	his	disgust	down,	down,	into	the	pit	of	 his	stomach,	where	even

he	couldn’t	feel	it.	 “What	would	 you	have	me	do?”

     “I	 want	 you	to	keep	her	under	control.	 My	 hope	is	that	 her	affection	for	 you

will	 lend	itself	 to	some	restraint	on	her	part.	I	 am	sure	you’re	aware	that	the	 girl

is	coming	 to	 be	 of	 a	 marriageable	age.	I	 have	 hopes	for	 her,	 and	 I	 will	  not

77
tolerate	her	bringing	humiliation	 on	this	palace.”

     Marriageable	  age.	 Humiliation.	   Restraint.	  His	 disgust	 turned	  to	 a	 hard

pebble,	but	his	face	was	calm	as	he	bowed.	“Yes,	My	Queen.”


                                                          *			 *			*

Winter	 stood	 with	 her	 ear	pressed	against	 the	door	 of	 her	 private	 chambers,

trying	to	 slow	her	breathing	 to	the	point	 of	dizziness.	Anticipation	  crawled	over

her	skin	like	a	thousand	tiny	ants.

     Silence	in	the	hallway.	 Painful,	agonizing	 silence.

     Blowing	 a	curl	 out	of	her	face,	she	glanced	at	the	holograph	of	Luna	near	her

room’s	 ceiling,	  showing	  the	 progression	 of	  sunlight	  and	 shadows	and	  the

standardized	digital	clock	beneath	it.	18:59.

     She	wiped	 her	damp	palms	 on	her	dress.	Listened	 some	more.	Counted	the

seconds	in	her	head.

     There.	Footsteps.	The	hard,	steady	thump	of	boots.

     She	bit	her	lip.	 Levana	had	given	her	no	indication	 if	 Winter’s	 request	would

be	accepted—she	didn’t	even	know	 if	her	 stepmother	was	going	to	consider	 the

request—but	it	was	possible.	It	was	possible.

     The	 guard	who	 had	been	standing	 statuesque	outside	her	chambers	for	 the

past	four	hours,	relieved	of	duty,	 left.	His	 footsteps	were	a	perfect	metronome	to

those	that	had	just	arrived.

     There	was	a	moment	 of	shuffling	 as	the	new	guard	 arranged	himself	against

the	corridor	 wall,	 the	last	 line	 of	defense	should	 a	spy	or	 an	assassin	make	an

attack	on	the	princess,	and	the	first	person	responsible	for	 whisking	 her	away	to

safety	should	the	security	of	Artemisia	 Palace	ever	be	compromised.

78
     She	squeezed	her	eyes	shut	and	fanned	her	fingers	against	the	wall,	as	if	 she

could	feel	his	heartbeat	through	the	stone.

     Instead	she	felt	something	warm	and	sticky.

     Gasping,	she	pulled	away,	finding	 her	palm	stained	with	blood.

     Exasperated,	she	used	 the	bloody	 hand	 to	 push	her	 hair	 back,	although	 it

instantly	 tumbled	 forward	  again.	“Not	  now,”	  she	 hissed	to	 whatever	 demon

thought	this	was	an	appropriate	time	to	give	her	visions.

     She	closed	her	eyes	again	and	counted	backward	from	ten.	When	she	opened

them,	the	blood	was	gone	and	her	hand	was	clean.

     With	 a	whistled	 breath,	Winter	adjusted	her	gown	 and	opened	the	door	wide

enough	to	 poke	her	 head	out.	She	 turned	to	 the	statue	of	 a	 guard	outside	 her

door,	and	her	heart	swelled.

     “Oh—she	 said	 yes!”	 she	squealed,	whipping	 the	 door	open	 the	rest	 of	 the

way.	She	trotted	around	to	face	Jacin.

     If	 he’d	heard	her,	he	didn’t	respond.

     If	 he	saw	her,	he	showed	no	sign	of	it.

     His	expression	was	stone,	his	blue	eyes	focused	on	some	point	over	her	head.

     Winter	 wilted,	 but	 it	was	 from	 annoyance	as	much	as	disappointment.	“Oh,

please,”	she	 said,	 standing	 toe-to-toe,	 chest-to-chest,	which	  was	 not	 simple.

Jacin’s	flawless	 posture	made	her	feel	as	if	 she	were	tilting	  backward,	a	breath

away	from	falling	 over.	“That’s	 not	necessary,	is	it?”

     Five	 complete,	 agonizing	  seconds	passed	in	 which	  she	could	  have	 been

staring	at	a	 mannequin,	before	Jacin	 took	in	 a	 slow	breath	 and	let	it	 out	 all	 at

once.	His	gaze	dropped	to	hers.

     That	was	all.	Just	the	breath.	Just	the	eyes.

79
     But	 it	made	him	human	again,	and	she	beamed.	“I’ve	 been	waiting	all	 day	to

show	you	something.	Come	here.”

     Winter	 danced	around	him	 again,	retreating	back	into	 her	sitting	 parlor.	 She

skipped	to	 the	 desk	 on	 the	other	 side	 of	 the	 room,	 where	 she’d	 draped	her

creation	with	  a	bedsheet.	Taking	 hold	 of	 two	 corners,	she	turned	 back	 to	the

door.

     And	 waited.

     “Jacin?”

     She	waited	some	more.

     Huffing,	 she	released	the	sheet	and	stalked	back	toward	the	hall.	Jacin	hadn’t

moved.	Winter	  crossed	her	 arms	over	 her	 chest	and	 leaned	against	 her	door

frame,	inspecting	him.	Seeing	Jacin	in	his	guard	uniform	 was	always	bittersweet.

On	 one	 hand,	  it	  was	 impossible	  not	  to	 notice	  how	  very	  handsome	and

authoritative	he	looked	 in	it.	 On	the	 other	hand,	the	uniform	 marked	him	 as	the

property	of	the	queen.	Still,	 he	was	particularly	 striking	 today,	all	 freshly	healed

from	his	trial	 and	smelling	of	soap.

     She	knew	 that	he	 knew	 that	she	was	standing	 there,	staring	 at	him.	 It	 was

infuriating	 how	he	could	do	such	a	blasted	good	job	of	ignoring	her.

     Tapping	 a	finger	 against	the	flesh	 of	her	elbow,	 she	deadpanned,	“Sir	 Jacin

Clay,	there	is	an	assassin	under	my	bed.”

     His	 shoulders	knotted.	His	jaw	 tensed.	Three	more	seconds	passed	before	he

stepped	away	from	the	wall	 and	marched	into	her	chambers	without	 looking	 her

way.	Past	the	covered	surprise	on	the	desk	and	straight	through	to	 her	bedroom.

Winter	followed,	 shutting	the	door.

     As	soon	as	he	reached	the	bed,	Jacin	knelt	down	and	lifted	the	bed	skirt.

80
     “The	  assassin	seems	 to	  have	 gotten	 away	  this	 time,	  Your	  Highness.”

Standing,	he	turned	back	to	face	her.	“Do	let	me	know	if	 he	returns.”

     He	 marched	 back	 toward	 the	 door,	 but	 she	stepped	in	  front	 of	 him	  and

flashed	a	 coquettish	smile.	 “I	  certainly	 will,”	  she	 said,	bouncing	 on	 her	toes.

“But	as	long	as	you’re	here—”

     “Princess.”

     His	 tone	was	a	warning,	 but	she	ignored	him.	 Backing	 away	into	 the	parlor,

she	tore	the	sheet	away,	revealing	 a	table-size	model	 of	 their	 solar	system,	the

planets	suspended	from	silk	strings.	“Ta-da!”

     Jacin	didn’t	 come	closer	as	she	started	fidgeting	with	 the	planets,	but	he	also

didn’t	leave.

     Winter	  nudged	 the	 painted	 spheres	into	  a	slow	  orbit,	  each	one	 moving

separate	from	  the	 others.	 “I	  had	 the	 idea	 when	  the	 engagement	was	 first

announced,”	she	 said,	 watching	 Earth	 complete	 a	 full	 circle	  around	 the	sun

before	dragging	to	a	stop.	“It	 was	going	to	 be	a	wedding	gift	 for	Emperor	 Kaito,

before	…	 well.	 Anyway,	 it’s	 been	a	 distraction	 while	 you	were	 gone.”	 Lashes

fluttering,	 she	risked	a	nervous	glance	up	at	Jacin.	He	 was	staring	at	the	model.

“It	helps,	you	know,	 to	focus	on	something.	To	think	 about	the	details.”

     It	 helped	keep	 her	thoughts	 in	order,	 helped	keep	 her	sanity.	 She’d	started

having	the	hallucinations	 when	 she	was	thirteen,	a	 little	 more	than	 a	year	after

she’d	 made	 the	 decision	  to	 never	 again	 use	 her	 glamour,	  to	  never	 again

manipulate	someone’s	 thoughts	 or	 emotions,	to	 never	 again	 fool	 herself	 into

believing	 such	an	 unnatural	use	of	 power	 could	 be	harmless.	 Jacin,	not	 yet	a

guard,	had	spent	many	hours	 with	 her,	distracting	 her	with	 games	and	projects

and	puzzles.	Idleness	had	 been	her	enemy	for	 years.	 It	was	 in	 those	moments

81
when	her	mind	 was	most	focused	on	 a	task,	no	matter	 how	trivial,	  that	she	felt

safest.

     Making	 the	model	 without	 him	 hadn’t	 been	as	much	fun,	 but	she	did	 enjoy

the	sensation	of	being	in	 control	of	 this	tiny	 galaxy,	 when	she	was	in	control	 of

so	very	little	of	 her	own	life.

     “What	 do	you	think?”

     With	 a	resigned	sigh,	 Jacin	stepped	forward	to	 examine	the	contraption	 that

gave	each	planet	its	own	orbital	path.	“How	 did	you	make	it?”

     “I	 commissioned	 Mr.	 Sanford	 in	 AR-5	 to	design	 and	build	 the	framework.

But	I	did	 all	the	painting	 myself.”	 She	was	pleased	to	see	Jacin’s	impressed	nod.

“I	 hoped	 you	 might	 be	 able	to	 help	 me	 with	 Saturn.	 It’s	  the	last	 one	 to	 be

painted,	and	I	thought—I’ll	   take	the	rings,	 if	 you	want	 to	do	the	 planet…”	 She

trailed	off.	  His	expression	 had	hardened	again.	Following	  his	fingers,	 she	saw

him	batting	 Luna	 around	 the	Earth—the	 way	 Mr.	 Sanford	 had	given	 Luna	its

own	little	 orbit	 around	the	blue	planet	was	nothing	short	 of	brilliant,	 in	 Winter’s

opinion.

     “I’m	  sorry,	 Highness,”	 said	 Jacin,	standing	 upright	 again.	“I’m	   on	duty.	 I

shouldn’t	even	be	in	here,	and	you	know	that.”

     “I’m	  quite	 sure	I	 don’t	 know	 that.	 It	 seems	you	can	 guard	me	even	 better

from	in	here	than	out	there.	What	if	 someone	comes	in	through	the	windows?”

     His	 lips	quirked	 into	 a	wry	smile.	 No	one	was	going	 to	come	in	 through	the

windows,	 they	 both	knew,	 but	 he	 didn’t	 argue	 the	point.	  Instead,	he	stepped

closer	and	settled	his	 hands	on	her	 shoulders.	It	 was	a	rare,	unexpected	touch.

Not	quite	the	Eclipse	Waltz,	 but	her	skin	tingled	all	 the	same.

     “I’m	  glad	to	be	on	your	guard	now,”	 he	said.	“I	would	 do	anything	for	 you.	If

82
you	did	 have	 an	assassin	under	 your	 bed,	I	 would	 take	 that	 bullet	 without	 a

second	thought,	without	anyone	having	to	manipulate	me.”

     She	tried	to	interrupt	 him,	but	he	talked	over	her.

     “But	  when	I’m	  on	 duty,	 that’s	 all	 I	 can	be.	Your	  guard.	Not	 your	 friend.

Levana	already	knows	 I’m	 too	 close	to	you,	 that	I	 care	about	 you	more	 than	I

should—”

     Her	 brow	  drew	 together,	 and	 again	 she	 tried	  to	 interject,	  thinking	  that

statement	deserved	further	explanation,	but	he	kept	talking.

     “—and	 I	am	not	going	 to	give	her	anything	else	to	hold	 over	me.	Or	you.	I’m

not	going	to	be	another	pawn	in	her	game.	Got	it?”

     Finally,	  a	 pause,	and	 her	 head	was	 swimming,	  trying	  to	 hold	 on	 to	 his

declaration—what	 do	you	 mean	you	 care	about	 me	more	 than	you	 should?—

without	contradicting	 his	concerns.

     “We	 are	already	 pawns	in	her	 game,”	she	said.	“I	  have	been	a	pawn	in	 her

game	since	the	 day	 she	married	 my	 father,	 and	you	 since	 the	 day	you	 were

conscripted	into	her	guard.”

     His	 lips	 tensed	and	he	moved	to	 pull	 his	hands	away,	 the	extended	contact

overstepping	a	thousand	of	 his	professional	 boundaries,	but	 Winter	 reached	up

and	wrapped	her	hands	around	his.	 She	held	them	 tight,	bundling	 both	 of	 their

hands	between	them.

     “I	 just	 thought…”	  She	hesitated,	her	attention	 caught	on	 how	much	 bigger

his	hands	were	compared	with	 the	 last	time	 she’d	held	 them.	It	 was	a	startling

realization.	“I	 thought	it	 might	be	nice	to	step	off	 the	game	board	every	now	and

then.”

     One	of	 Jacin’s	thumbs	 rubbed	against	her	fingers—just	  once,	like	 a	tic	 that

83
had	to	be	stifled.

     “That	 would	be	nice,”	 he	said,	“but	it	can’t	 be	while	I’m	 on	duty,	and	it	 really

can’t	be	behind	closed	doors.”

     Winter	 glanced	past	him,	at	the	door	 she’d	shut	when	he’d	 come	in	to	 check

for	a	fictional	 assassin.	“You’re	saying	that	I’m	 going	 to	see	you	every	day,	but	I

have	to	go	on	pretending	like	I	don’t	 see	you	at	all?”

     He	pried	 his	hands	away.	“Something	 like	 that.	I’m	 sorry,	 Princess.”	With	 a

step	back,	he	morphed	seamlessly	into	the	stoic	guard.	“I’ll	   be	in	the	corridor	 if

you	need	me.	Really	need	me.”

     After	 he’d	 gone,	Winter	stood	gnawing	 at	her	lower	 lip,	unable	to	 ignore	the

momentary	 bits	 of	 elation	  that	 had	slipped	 into	  the	 cracks	 of	 an	 otherwise

disappointing	meeting.

     I	care	about	 you	more	than	I	should.

     “Fine,”	 she	murmured	to	herself.	“I	 can	work	with	 that.”

     She	gathered	up	the	little	 compact	of	paints,	a	few	 paintbrushes,	and	the	fist-

size	model	of	Saturn	waiting	for	 its	kaleidoscope	of	rings.

     This	 time,	 Jacin	started	a	little	 when	 she	emerged	in	 the	corridor.	 The	first

time	he’d	been	expecting	her,	but	 this	must	have	been	a	surprise.	She	bit	back	a

grin	 as	she	walked	 around	to	 his	 other	 side	and	 slid	 down	 the	wall,	 planting

herself	on	the	floor	 next	to	 him	with	 crisscrossed	legs.	Humming	 to	herself,	she

spread	her	painting	supplies	out	before	her.

     “What	 are	you	doing?”	Jacin	muttered	beneath	his	breath,	though	the	hallway

was	empty.

     Winter	 pretended	to	 jump.	“Oh,	 I’m	  so	sorry,”	 she	said,	peering	 up	at	him.

“I’m	 afraid	I	 didn’t	 see	you	there.”

84
     He	scowled.

     Winking,	 she	turned	her	attention	back	to	her	work,	 dipping	a	paintbrush	into

rich	cerulean	blue.

     Jacin	said	nothing	 else.	Neither	 did	 she.	After	 the	first	 ring	 was	completed,

she	leaned	her	head	against	his	thigh,	 making	 herself	more	 comfortable	 as	she

picked	out	 a	sunburst	orange.	Overhead,	Jacin	 sighed,	and	she	felt	 the	faintest

brush	of	fingertips	 against	her	hair.	 A	hint,	 a	suggestion	of	 togetherness,	before

he	became	a	statue	once	more.

85
	




                                                    Nine







“Evaporated	milk	…	kidney	beans	…	tuna	…	more	tuna	…	oh!”	Cress	nearly

toppled	headfirst	into	the	crate	as	she	reached	for	the	bottom.	She	grabbed	a	jar

and	emerged	victorious.	“Pickled	asparagus!”

     Iko	stopped	digging	through	the	crate	beside	her	long	enough	to	shoot	her	a

glare.	“You	and	your	taste	buds	can	stop	bragging	anytime	now.”

     “Oh,	sorry.”	Pressing	her	lips,	Cress	set	the	jar	on	the	floor.	“Good	thing	we

opened	this	one.	The	galley	was	starting	to	look	pretty	scarce.”

     “More	weapons	in	here,”	said	Wolf,	his	shoulders	knotted	as	he	leaned	over

another	one	of	the	crates.	“For	a	planet	that’s	seen	a	century	of	world	peace,	you

manufacture	a	lot	of	guns.”

     “There	will	always	be	criminals	and	violence,”	said	Kai.	“We	still	need	law

enforcement.”

     Wolf	made	a	strangled	sound,	pulling	everyone’s	attention	toward	him	as	he

lifted	a	handgun	from	the	crate.	“It’s	just	like	the	one	Scarlet	had.”	He	flipped

the	gun	in	his	palms,	running	his	thumbs	along	the	barrel.	“She	shot	me	in	the

arm	once.”

     This	confession	was	said	with	as	much	tenderness	as	if	Scarlet	had	given	him

86
a	bouquet	of	wildflowers	 rather	than	a	bullet	wound.

     Cress	and	the	others	traded	sorrowful	looks.

     Kai,	 who	was	standing	nearest	to	Wolf,	dropped	a	hand	onto	his	shoulder.	“If

she’s	in	Artemisia,”	 he	said,	“I	will	  find	her.	I	promise.”

     A	  slight	 dip	  of	 his	 head	 was	 the	 only	 indication	  Wolf	  had	 heard	 him.

Turning,	he	handed	the	gun,	handle	first,	to	Cinder,	who	 was	sitting	cross-legged

in	the	center	of	the	cargo	bay,	organizing	 what	weaponry	 they	had	found.	It	 was

an	impressive	 haul.	  It	 was	 a	 shame	that	 when	  it	 came	 to	 fighting	  Lunars,

weapons	in	the	 hands	of	 their	 allies	could	 be	 as	dangerous	as	weapons	in	 the

hands	of	their	enemies.

     “This	 one’s	 all	 medical	 supplies	and	common	 medicines,”	 said	Iko.	 “If	  we

could	 find	  one	 with	 replacement	 escort-droid	  vertebrae	 and	synthetic-tissue

paneling,	we’d	be	getting	somewhere.”

     Cress	smiled	sympathetically.	 Iko	 was	wearing	the	silk	 wrap	top	 she’d	worn

to	impersonate	a	member	 of	 the	palace	staff	 during	 the	emperor’s	 kidnapping,

and	its	high	 collar	almost	 covered	the	damage	that	had	been	done	to	her	bionic

neck	and	clavicle	 during	 the	 fight	 on	the	 rooftop—but	 not	 quite.	She’d	 gotten

creative	with	 scraps	of	miscellaneous	fabric	to	 hide	the	rest	of	her	injury,	  which

was	as	much	as	they	could	do	until	Cinder	had	the	parts	to	finish	her	repairs.

     “Is	 this	 what	I	 think	 it	 is?”	Having	 returned	his	 focus	to	 his	own	 crate,	Kai

held	up	 a	carved	 wooden	doll	  adorned	with	 bedraggled	 feathers	and	four	 too

many	eyes.

     Cinder	 finished	 unloading	the	 handgun	and	set	it	 next	to	 the	others.	“Don’t

tell	me	you’ve	 actually	seen	one	of	those	hideous	things	before.”

     “Venezuelan	 dream	dolls?	We	 have	some	on	display	 in	 the	palace.	They’re

87
incredibly	rare.”	 He	examined	its	back.	“What	 is	it	doing	here?”

     “I’m	  pretty	sure	Thorne	stole	it.”

     Kai’s	 expression	filled	 with	clarity.	 “Ah.	 Of	 course.”	He	nestled	the	doll	back

into	its	packaging.	“He’d	 better	plan	on	giving	 all	this	stuff	 back.”

     “Sure	I’ll	  give	it	back,	Your	 Majesticness.	For	a	proper	finder’s	fee.”

     Cress	swiveled	around	to	see	Thorne	leaning	against	the	cargo	bay	wall.

     She	blinked.	 Something	 was	 different	 about	him.	  The	blindfold	  he’d	 been

wearing	since	his	 eyesight	had	begun	to	 return	weeks	ago	was	 now	around	 his

neck,	and	he	was	 exceptionally	 clean-cut,	like	 he’d	 gotten	 a	closer	shave	than

usual,	and	he	was	…

     Electricity	 jolted	 down	her	spine.

     He	was	looking	at	her.

     No.	Not	 just	looking.	 There	was	an	intense	inspection	behind	that	gaze,	along

with	a	curious	bewilderment.	 He	was	surprised.	Almost	…	captivated.

     Heat	rushed	up	her	neck.	She	gulped,	sure	that	she	was	imagining	things.

     Worldly,	   confident	 Captain	 Thorne	  could	 never	 be	 captivated	 by	  plain,

awkward	her,	and	she’d	been	disappointed	by	such	wishful	thinking	 before.

     One	corner	 of	 Thorne’s	mouth	 lifted.	 “The	 short	 hair,”	 he	said,	with	 half	 a

nod.	“It	works.”

     Cress	reached	 up,	 grasping	at	 the	 wispy	 ends	 that	 Iko	 had	 trimmed	 into

something	resembling	a	hairstyle.

     “Oh!”	  said	Iko,	launching	to	her	feet.	“Captain!	 You	 can	see!”

     Thorne’s	 attention	skipped	 over	to	 the	android	seconds	before	she	launched

herself	over	 Cress	 and	into	  his	 arms.	Thorne	 stumbled	 against	 the	wall	  and

laughed.

88
     “Iko?”	  Thorne	 said,	holding	 her	at	 arm’s	distance	and	 drinking	 her	in.	 The

dark,	flawless	 skin,	 the	 long	 legs,	the	 braids	dyed	 in	 varying	 shades	of	 blue.

Accepting	 the	scrutiny,	 Iko	 gave	 a	twirl.	  Thorne	 clicked	 his	 tongue.	“Aces.	 I

really	know	how	 to	pick	them,	don’t	 I?”

     “Sight	 unseen,”	said	Iko,	flipping	 her	braids	off	 her	shoulder.

     Deflating,	  Cress	began	filling	   up	her	 arms	 with	 canned	goods.	 Definitely

wishful	thinking.

     “Excellent,”	  said	 Cinder,	 standing	 up	 and	brushing	 off	 her	 hands.	“I	  was

beginning	to	worry	 we	wouldn’t	  have	a	pilot	for	 when	it’s	 time	to	take	Kai	 back

to	Earth.	Now	I	just	 have	to	worry	about	not	having	a	competent	one.”

     Thorne	 leaned	against	the	crate	Cress	was	 organizing.	 She	froze,	but	 when

she	dared	to	peer	up	through	her	lashes,	his	attention	was	on	the	other	side	of	the

cargo	bay.	“Oh,	 Cinder,	I’ve	  missed	seeing	your	face	when	 you	make	sarcastic

comments	in	an	attempt	to	hide	your	true	feelings	about	me.”

     “Please.”	 Rolling	  her	eyes,	 Cinder	started	 organizing	 the	 guns	against	the

wall.

     “See	that	eye	roll?	 It	 translates	to	‘How	 am	I	possibly	 keeping	my	 hands	off

you,	Captain?’”

     “Yeah,	 keeping	them	from	strangling	 you.”

     Kai	 folded	 his	arms,	grinning.	 “How	  come	no	one	told	 me	I	 had	such	steep

competition?”

     Cinder	glared.	“Don’t	  encourage	him.”

     With	 flushed	 cheeks,	gritted	 teeth,	 and	three	stacks	 of	 cans	cradled	in	 her

arms,	Cress	spun	toward	 the	 main	 corridor—and	 sent	 the	top	 can	of	 peaches

sailing	off	 the	stack.

89
     Thorne	snatched	it	from	the	air	 before	Cress	could	gasp.

     She	froze,	and	for	 a	moment	 it	was	there	again—the	 way	he	was	looking	  at

her,	causing	the	world	to	blur	 and	her	stomach	to	swoop.	It	 was	a	good	catch,	to

be	sure,	and	she	couldn’t	help	but	 wonder	if	 he’d	been	paying	more	 attention	to

her	than	she	thought.

     Thorne	 beamed	at	the	peaches.	“Lightning-fast	 reflexes.	Still	  got	them.”	 He

took	some	canned	corn	off	the	stack.	“Want	help?”

     She	 fixated	 on	 the	 cans.	“No-thank-you-I’ve-got-it.”	     Her	 words	 were	 all

rushed	and	full	of	 nerves	as	another	blush	flamed	across	her	face.	It	occurred	 to

her	she’d	been	blushing	from	 the	moment	 he	walked	in,	 with	 his	cavalier	 smile

and	his	eyes	that	saw	right	through	her.

     She	wanted	to	climb	into	 one	of	those	crates	and	pull	down	the	lid.	 He	hadn’t

had	his	eyesight	 back	for	 five	 minutes	 and	already	 she’d	turned	 back	into	 the

anxious,	giddy,	flustered	girl	 she’d	been	when	they	met.

     “All	  right,”	 Thorne	said	slowly,	 nestling	 the	cans	back	into	her	arms.	“If	 you

insist.”

     Cress	dodged	around	him	 and	made	her	way	to	 the	galley.	 It	was	a	relief	 to

dump	the	food	onto	the	counter	and	take	a	moment	to	stabilize	herself.

     So	he	 could	 see	again.	It	 didn’t	 change	anything.	 He	 didn’t	 think	  she	was

irresistible	 when	 he	first	  saw	her	 over	 that	 D-COMM	  link	  ages	ago,	and	 he

wasn’t	going	to	think	 she	was	irresistible	now.	Especially	not	 when	Iko	was	right

there.	Android	or	not,	she	was	the	one	with	pearly	teeth	and	coppery	eyes	and	…

     Cress	sighed,	halting	the	 envy	before	it	 could	go	any	 further.	It	 wasn’t	 Iko’s

fault	Thorne	 wasn’t	interested	in	 a	tiny,	 skittish	 girl.	 In	 fact,	she	was	happy	for

Iko,	who	took	 more	delight	in	her	new	body	than	most	humans	ever	did.

90
     Cress	just	wished	 she	could	have	half	 her	confidence.	If	 she	had	the	guts	 to

throw	 herself	into	 Thorne’s	 arms,	to	 wink	 and	 make	flirtatious	  comments	and

pretend	like	none	of	it	mattered	…

     Except	it	 did	matter,	or	it	would	 have,	if	she	dared	try	it.

     Just	friends,	 she	reminded	herself.	 They	were	 only	 friends,	and	would	 only

be	friends	from	 here	on	out.	It	 was	a	friendship	 that	was	to	be	cherished,	as	she

cherished	all	the	friendships	she’d	made	aboard	this	ship.	She	wouldn’t	ruin	 it	by

wishing	things	 could	be	more.	 She	would	be	grateful	 for	 what	affection	 she	did

have.

     Cress	let	 out	 a	 slow	 breath	 and	stood	 straighter.	 It	 wouldn’t	  be	 so	 hard,

pretending	 this	 was	  all	 she	 wanted.	 Imagining	   she	was	  satisfied	 with	  his

companionship	and	platonic	 fondness.	Now	 that	he	could	 see	again,	she	would

be	extra	vigilant	in	making	 sure	any	of	her	deeper	feelings	didn’t	show	through.

     Thorne	was	her	friend	and	her	captain,	and	nothing	more.

     When	 she	returned	 to	 the	 cargo	 bay,	 the	lightheartedness	 had	dissipated.

Hearing	her,	Thorne	glanced	over	his	 shoulder,	but	she	fixed	her	eyes	resolutely

on	Kai.

     “I	 understand	this	is	 sooner	than	we’d	 expected,”	Kai	 was	saying,	“but	 now

that	Thorne	  can	finally	   see	again,	 what	 are	 we	 waiting	 for?	  We	 can	 leave

tomorrow.	We	could	 leave	now.”

     Cinder	 shook	her	head.	“There’s	 so	 much	to	 do.	We	still	  have	the	video	 to

edit,	and	 we	 haven’t	 confirmed	 which	 route	 we’re	 going	 to	 take	to	 the	outer

sectors,	and—”

     “All	  things	you	don’t	 need	my	help	for,”	 interrupted	Kai.	 “All	  things	you	can

be	working	on	 while	I’m	 doing	 my	part.	People	are	dying	 every	day.	My	 people

91
are	being	 attacked	at	 this	very	 moment,	 and	I	 can’t	 do	 anything	 for	 them	 up

here.”

     “I	 know.	I	 know	it’s	 hard—”

     “No,	 it’s	 torture.”	 Kai	 lowered	 his	voice.	“But	 once	you	 take	me	back,	I	can

talk	to	Levana.	Negotiate	 a	new	cease-fire	and	start	putting	our	plan	into	 motion

—”

     “Get	 to	Scarlet	sooner,”	said	Wolf.

     Cinder	 groaned.	“Look,	 I	 get	it.	 It’s	 been	a	really	 long	month	 and	we’re	 all

anxious	to	move	forward,	it’s	 just	…	our	 strategy—”

     “Strategy?	  Look	   at	  us—we’re	   spending	 our	   time	  unpacking	  pickled

asparagus.”	Kai	 shoved	a	hand	through	his	hair.	 “How	 is	this	a	good	 use	of	our

time?”

     “Every	 day	 we	wait,	 our	 chances	of	success	get	better.	Every	 day,	more	 of

her	army	 is	heading	to	 Earth,	leaving	 Levana	 and	the	capital	 unprotected.	The

weaker	she	is,	 the	 better	chance	we	 have	of	 this	 revolution	  succeeding.”	She

pointed	at	 the	netscreen,	even	 though	it	 was	 turned	off.	  “Plus,	 the	Union	 has

been	fighting	   back.	 She’s	 lost	  a	 lot	  of	 soldiers	  already	 and	 maybe	 she’s

beginning	to	feel	a	little	 concerned?”

     “She’s	 not	concerned,”	said	Wolf.

     Cinder	frowned.	 “Well,	 at	least	she	may	have	realized	this	war	won’t	 be	won

as	easily	as	she’d	hoped,	which	means	she’ll	 be	that	much	more	 thrilled	 to	hear

Kai	 has	returned	and	the	 wedding	 is	back	 on.	She’ll	 be	 eager	to	reschedule	it

right	away.”	 She	looped	her	fingers	around	her	left	wrist,	where	skin	met	metal.

     Cress	bit	 her	 lip,	 watching	 the	 fear	and	 nerves	flash	 across	Cinder’s	 face.

Though	she	always	did	 her	best	to	hide	it,	 Cress	knew	Cinder	 wasn’t	always	 as

92
brave	as	she	pretended.	It	was	sort	of	comforting	to	think	 they	might	have	this	in

common.

     Kai’s	 shoulders	 dropped	and	his	 voice	 lost	 its	desperation	when	 he	took	 a

step	closer	to	her.	“I	 understand	you	 want	to	feel	 like	 you’re	 ready—like	 we’re

all	ready.	But,	 Cinder	…	 we’re	never	 going	to	feel	 that	way.	At	 some	point,	 we

have	to	stop	planning	and	start	doing.	I	think	that	time	 is	now.”

     It	 took	 her	a	 moment,	but	 she	finally	  met	his	 gaze,	then	shifted	 to	 look	 at

each	of	them	in	turn.	Though	Thorne	was	their	captain,	they	all	 knew	Cinder	was

the	one	that	held	them	together.

     “We’re	  all	  risking	 our	  lives,”	  she	said.	 “I	  just	 don’t	  want	 to	 risk	  them

unnecessarily.	I	 want	 to	make	 sure	we’re	 prepared	 to—”	 She	 froze,	 her	eyes

unfocusing.	Cress	recognized	the	look	 from	when	 Cinder	was	seeing	something

on	her	retina	display.

     Blinking	  rapidly,	 Cinder	 turned	back	 to	Kai,	 stunned.	 “Ship,	 turn	on	 cargo

bay	netscreen,	Commonwealth	newsfeed.”

     Kai	 frowned.	“What’s	 going	on?”

     The	netscreen	flickered	to	life.	 It	 showed	Kai’s	 chief	adviser—Konn	 Torin—

standing	at	 a	podium.	 Before	 the	 audio	 signal	could	 connect,	 though,	 Cinder

said,	“I’m	 so	sorry,	Kai.	Your	 palace	is	under	attack.”

93
	




                                                          Ten







They	watched	the	newsfeed	in	silence,	the	cameras	trembling	as	android-manned

hovers	circled	the	 palace	below.	Many	 of	 the	gardens	were	smoking	 from	 fires

set	by	the	queen’s	soldiers,	statues	toppled	and	the	 massive	gate	torn	to	shreds,

but	 the	palace	 itself	 remained	 untouched.	 So	 far	 the	 single	 regiment	 of	 the

Commonwealth’s	 military	  stationed	 at	the	 palace	had	 kept	 the	enemy	 at	bay

while	they	waited	for	 reinforcements	to	arrive.

     The	siege	on	New	Beijing	 Palace	went	against	the	strategies	the	wolf	soldiers

had	been	using	throughout	the	war.	They	had	become	infamous	for	their	 guerilla

attacks	and	scare	tactics,	as	concerned	with	making	the	people	of	 Earth	terrified

of	them	as	they	were	with	winning	 actual	battles.	To	date,	there	had	been	no	real

battles	 at	 all—only	  skirmishes	  and	 surprise	 attacks,	 resulting	 in	  too	 much

bloodshed	and	too	many	nightmares.

     The	 wolf	 soldiers	 moved	in	 packs,	 stealthy	and	quick.	  They	caused	havoc

and	 destruction	 wherever	  they	 went,	  then	 disappeared	 before	 the	  Earthen

military	 could	 catch	up	 to	them.	There	 was	speculation	that	 they	were	 moving

through	the	sewers	or	 disappearing	into	the	 wilderness,	leaving	 a	trail	 of	 blood

and	severed	limbs	in	their	 wake.	They	were	fond	 of	leaving	 at	least	one	witness

94
alive	in	the	aftermath	to	report	on	their	 brutality.

     Again	 and	again,	their	message	was	clear.	No	one	is	safe.

     Earth	 had	killed	  their	 share	of	 the	Lunar	 soldiers,	 as	well	  as	some	of	 the

thaumaturges	that	led	 each	pack.	 They	 weren’t	 invincible,	  as	Earthen	 leaders

pointed	out	again	and	again.	But	after	126	years	of	peace,	the	Earthen	Union	was

unprepared	to	wage	a	war,	especially	one	so	unpredictable.	For	generations,	their

militaries	had	become	more	decorated	social	service	workers	than	anything	 else,

providing	  manual	 labor	 in	  impoverished	 communities	  and	 running	 supplies

when	natural	disasters	struck.	 Now,	 every	country	 was	scrambling	 to	conscript

more	soldiers	into	their	forces,	to	train	them,	to	 manufacture	weaponry.

     All	  the	while,	  the	Lunar	 soldiers	 decimated	whole	 neighborhoods,	 leaving

only	the	echo	of	their	bloodthirsty	 howls	behind.

     Until	 now.

     This	 attack	on	New	Beijing	 Palace	was	the	first	 time,	as	far	 as	anyone	could

tell,	multiple	  packs	had	come	together	in	 one	orchestrated	attack,	and	 in	broad

daylight	too.	 Cinder	wondered	if	 they	were	getting	 cocky,	or	 if	they	 were	trying

to	make	a	 statement.	She	tried	 to	take	 solace	in	 the	fact	 that	there	 were	more

wolf-mutant	 bodies	 lying	 on	 the	 palace	grounds	 than	she’d	 ever	 seen	in	 one

place—surely	this	 battle	would	 hurt	their	 numbers,	at	least	in	New	 Beijing.	 But

it	was	little	  comfort,	 when	their	 blood	was	 mixed	with	 that	 of	Earthen	 soldiers

and	one	of	the	palace’s	towers	was	smoldering.

     “The	  palace	 has	 been	 evacuated,”	 said	 a	 journalist,	   speaking	 over	 the

catastrophe	in	the	video,	“and	all	 human	officials	 and	servants	have	been	moved

to	safety.	The	secretary	of	 defense	commented	in	a	speech	only	twenty	 minutes

ago	that	they	are	not	 speculating	at	this	 time	how	 long	 this	siege	might	 last,	or

95
how	 much	 destruction	 might	  be	 incurred.	  So	far,	  military	  experts	 estimate

upward	of	 three	hundred	Commonwealth	 soldiers	have	been	lost	 in	 this	attack,

and	close	to	fifty	Lunars.”

     “I	  feel	so	 useless,”	Iko	 said,	her	 tone	deep	 with	 a	misery	 only	 an	android

could	understand.	Iko	was	by	 no	means	a	typical	 android,	but	she	still	 managed

to	harbor	one	 distinguishable	trait	 all	 androids	had	been	programmed	 with:	 the

need	to	be	useful.

     On	Cinder’s	 other	side	 was	Kai,	stricken.	 No	doubt	 he	was	experiencing	his

own	sense	of	uselessness.	No	doubt	it	was	tearing	him	apart.

     “The	 military	 will	 hold	them,”	 Cinder	said.

     He	nodded,	but	his	brow	was	drawn.

     Sighing,	 she	let	her	gaze	travel	from	Kai	to	 Wolf,	 Thorne	to	Cress	to	Iko.	All

watching	the	 screen,	determined	and	angry	 and	horrified.	  Her	attention	 swung

back	to	Kai.	 He	was	veiling	 his	emotions	well,	 but	 she	knew	it	was	killing	  him.

Watching	his	home	burn.	 Having	never	had	a	home	she	cared	about,	at	least	not

until	she’d	 come	aboard	the	Rampion,	Cinder	 couldn’t	 imagine	the	 pain	he	was

in.

     She	clenched	her	teeth,	thinking	of	all	 their	calculations,	all	their	 plans.

     Kai	 was	right.	She	would	never	feel	 ready,	but	they	couldn’t	 sit	around	doing

nothing	forever.

     Thorne	had	his	sight	back.

     Wolf	 had	 told	her	 about	his	parents—laborers	 who	had	worked	 in	 factories

and	regolith	 mines	all	 their	 lives.	If	  they	were	alive,	 he	thought	 they	 might	be

willing	 to	offer	 them	shelter	on	Luna.	They	might	be	allies.

     The	queen	was	 making	the	 boldest	move	she’d	 made	since	the	war	 started,

96
which	either	 meant	she	was	getting	overconfident	 or	 she	was	getting	desperate.

Either	way,	Cinder	 didn’t	 want	Luna	 to	win	 this	battle.	 She	didn’t	want	 them	to

have	control	of	 New	 Beijing	 Palace,	even	if	it	 was	merely	 symbolic.	 It	was	 the

home	of	 the	 Commonwealth’s	  royal	 family.	  It	 belonged	to	 Kai,	  not	 Levana.

Never	Levana.

     “We	  have	had	 word,”	 said	 the	journalist,	  “that	 the	 radical	 political	  group

calling	 themselves	the	Association	 for	 Commonwealth	 Security	 has	issued	yet

another	statement	calling	for	the	forced	abdication	 of	Emperor	Kaito,	 once	again

insisting	that	he	cannot	be	the	ruler	 we	need	in	these	troubled	times,	 and	that	so

long	as	he	remains	in	the	hands	of	terrorists,	it	 is	impossible	 for	him	 to	have	the

country’s	 welfare	 as	his	primary	 concern.	 Though	the	 ACS	ideology	 has	 been

largely	ignored	 in	mainstream	politics,	 a	recent	net-based	poll	has	indicated	that

their	opinions	are	growing	in	 popularity	 among	the	general	public.”

     “Terrorists?”	 said	Iko,	 looking	around	the	group.	“Does	 she	mean	us?”

     Cinder	dragged	a	frustrated	hand	down	her	face.	Kai	 would	be	a	great	leader,

was	a	great	leader,	but	he	hadn’t	 yet	been	given	the	 chance	to	prove	himself.	 It

made	her	 stomach	 churn	 to	 think	 that	 his	 reign	 could	 be	 cut	 short,	 and	 all

because	of	her.

     She	wanted	to	hug	 Kai	and	tell	 him	 they	were	idiots.	 They	had	no	 idea	how

much	he	cared	about	his	country’s	welfare.

     But	that’s	 not	what	he	needed	to	hear.

     Her	 retina	display	 switched	 between	her	most-watched	feeds.	Body	 counts;

death	tolls;	  footage	 from	 the	 plague	 quarantines;	 teenagers	standing	 in	 line

outside	recruitment	centers,	too	 many	of	 them	looking	 almost	 giddy	to	 join	 the

fight	and	defend	their	planet	from	 this	invasion.	Levana	in	her	sheer	white	veil.

97
     She	sent	the	feeds	away.

     Kai	 was	watching	her.	“It’s	 time,	Cinder.”

     Time	 to	say	good-bye.	Time	to	move	ahead.	Time	to	let	go	of	 the	little	utopia

they’d	cocooned	themselves	in.

     “I	 know,”	 she	said,	her	voice	 sad	and	heavy.	“Thorne,	let’s	 get	ready	to	take

Kai	home.”

98
	




                                                 Eleven







“Thought	I	might	find	you	down	here.”

     Cinder	peeked	around	the	side	of	 the	 podship.	Kai	was	 loitering	in	 the

doorway,	hands	in	his	pockets,	dressed	again	in	his	wedding	finery.

     She	brushed	some	loose	strands	of	hair	off	her	forehead.	“Just	doing	some

basic	maintenance,”	she	said,	disconnecting	the	power	cell	 gauge	from	the

podship	and	closing	the	hatch.	“Making	sure	it’s	ready	for	 your	big	return.	I

figured	it	was	enough	risk	letting	Thorne	be	your	pilot;	the	least	I	could	do	is

make	sure	the	transport	is	in	good	condition.”

     “I	wish	you	were	coming	with	us.”

     “Yeah,	me	too,	but	we	can’t	risk	it.”

     “I	 know.	It’s	 just	nice	to	have	a	mechanic	on	board.	In	case	anything,	you

know	…	breaks.”	He	scratched	his	ear.

     “Oh,	that’s	 why	you	 want	me	there.	How	flattering.”	 Cinder	wrapped	the

cord	around	the	gauge	and	returned	it	to	a	cabinet	bolted	to	the	wall.

     “That,	and	I’m	going	to	miss	you.”	His	voice	had	gone	soft,	and	it	warmed

the	base	of	her	stomach.

     “With	any	luck,	we’ll	see	each	other	again	soon.”

99
     “I	know.”

     Cinder	peeled	off	her	work	gloves	and	shoved	them	into	her	back	pocket.

There	was	still	a	tinge	of	panic	at	the	action—her	brain	reminding	her,	out	of

habit,	that	 she	wasn’t	 supposed	to	remove	the	 gloves	in	 front	 of	 anyone,

especially	Kai—but	she	ignored	it.	 Kai	 didn’t	 blink	 at	 the	unveiling	 of	her

cyborg	hand,	like	he	didn’t	even	notice	it	anymore.

     She	knew	she	was	thinking	about	it	less	and	less.	Sometimes	she	was	even

surprised	upon	seeing	a	flash	of	metal	in	the	corner	of	her	eye	when	she	went	to

pick	something	up.	 It	 was	 strange.	She’d	always	been	aware	of	 it	 before,

mortified	that	someone	might	see	it.

     “Are	you	scared?”	she	asked,	pulling	a	wrench	from	her	tool	belt.

     “Terrified,”	 he	said,	but	with	a	nonchalance	that	made	her	feel	better	about

her	own	insides	being	wound	into	tight	little	knots.	“But	I’m	ready	to	go	back.

I’m	sure	Torin	is	about	to	have	a	heart	attack.	And…”	He	shrugged.	“I’m	a	little

homesick.”

     “They’ll	 be	glad	to	have	you	back.”	Cinder	knelt	beside	the	ship,	checking

the	bolts	on	the	landing	gear.	She	fit	the	wrench	onto	one,	two,	three	bolts—

none	were	loose.	“Do	you	know	what	you’re	going	to	say	to	Levana?”

     Kai	crouched	beside	her,	elbows	braced	against	his	knees.	“I’m	going	to	tell

her	I’ve	fallen	for	one	of	my	captors	and	the	wedding	is	off.”

     Cinder’s	arm	froze.

     He	smirked.	“At	least,	that’s	what	I	wish	I	could	tell	her.”

     She	blew	a	lock	of	hair	out	of	her	face	and	finished	checking	the	bolts,	before

moving	to	the	other	side	of	the	ship	to	repeat	the	process.

     “I’m	 going	to	 tell	her	I	 had	nothing	to	do	with	 the	kidnapping,”	said	Kai,

100
donning	what	Cinder	 had	come	to	think	of	 as	his	emperor	voice.	“I’m	 in	 no	way

affiliated	 with	you	 or	the	crew	and	I	did	 my	best	to	bargain	for	 a	quick	release.	I

was	a	victim,	 held	 hostage,	unable	to	escape.	I’ll	 probably	 make	up	 something

about	inhumane	treatment.”

     “Sounds	about	right.”

     “Then	 I’ll	 beg	her	to	marry	me.	Again.”	 His	lip	 curled	with	 disgust.

     Cinder	couldn’t	 blame	 him.	The	more	she	thought	of	 it,	the	more	she	wanted

to	hijack	this	podship	and	head	for	Mars.

     “When	 I	 see	you	again,”	 said	Kai,	 “I’ll	   have	clothes	for	 everyone	and	 new

plating	for	 Iko.	 If	you	 think	 of	anything	 else	you	need,	Cress	thinks	she	can	get

me	an	encrypted	comm.”	  He	inhaled	 deeply.	“Whatever	 happens,	I’m	 on	 your

side.”

     The	sentiment	 both	encouraged	her	and	sent	a	shock	of	 anxiety	 through	her

nerves.	“I’m	 sorry	to	put	you	in	so	much	danger.”

     “You’re	  not,”	he	said.	“She	was	already	going	to	kill	 me.”

     “You	 could	try	 sounding	a	little	more	concerned	when	you	say	that.”

     “What	 is	 there	to	 be	concerned	about?”	His	 eyes	glinted.	 “You’re	  going	 to

rescue	me	long	before	that	happens.”

     Finished	with	 the	bolts,	she	stood	and	shoved	the	wrench	back	into	her	belt.

     “Cinder…”

     She	froze,	disconcerted	at	the	serious	edge	in	his	voice.

     “There’s	 something	I	have	to	say	before	I	go.	In	case—”

     “Don’t.	  Don’t	you	 even	think	this	will	 be	the	last	time	we	see	each	other.”

     A	  wistful	  smile	 touched	 his	  mouth,	 but	 quickly	  fled	  again.	 “I	  want	 to

apologize.”

101
     “For	 suggesting	this	might	be	the	last	time	we	see	each	other?	Because	that	is

cruel,	when	here	I	am,	trying	to	get	some	work	done,	and—”

     “Cinder,	 listen	to	me.”

     She	clenched	her	jaw	shut	and	allowed	 Kai	to	 take	her	shoulders,	his	thumbs

tender	against	her	collarbone.	 “I’m	  sorry	about	 what	happened	at	the	 ball.	I’m

sorry	I	didn’t	 trust	you.	I’m	 sorry	I	 …	I	said	those	things.”

     Cinder	 looked	away.	Though	 so	much	had	changed	between	them	since	that

night,	it	still	 felt	 like	an	ice	pick	 in	her	heart	when	she	remembered	the	way	he’d

looked	at	her,	and	his	horrified	 words:	 You’re	 even	more	painful	to	 look	at	than

she	is.

     “It	 doesn’t	matter	anymore.	You	 were	in	shock.”

     “I	 was	 an	idiot.	 I’m	 ashamed	at	how	I	 treated	you.	 I	should	 have	had	more

faith	in	you.”

     “Please.	You	 barely	 knew	me.	 Then	to	find	  out	all	 at	once	that	 I’m	 cyborg

and	Lunar	…	I	wouldn’t	  have	trusted	me	either.	Besides,	you	were	under	a	lot	of

stress	and—”

     He	tipped	forward	 and	kissed	her	on	the	forehead.	The	gentleness	stilled	her.

     “You	 were	 still	 the	girl	 who	 fixed	 Nainsi,”	 he	said.	“You	  were	still	 the	 girl

who	warned	 me	about	 Levana’s	 plans.	You	 were	 still	 the	girl	  who	 wanted	to

save	her	little	sister.”

     She	flinched	at	the	mention	of	 Peony,	her	younger	stepsister.	Her	death	was	a

wound	that	hadn’t	fully	 healed.

     Kai’s	 hands	slipped	 down	her	 arms,	interlacing	 with	 her	fingers—flesh	 and

metal	alike.	“You	 were	 trying	to	 protect	yourself,	 and	I	should	have	tried	harder

to	defend	you.”

102
     Cinder	gulped.	“When	you	 said	I	was	even	more	painful	 to	look	 at	than

Levana…”

     Kai	inhaled	sharply,	like	the	memory	of	the	words	hurt	him	as	much	as	it	hurt

her.

     “…	do	I	…	did	I	look	like	her?	Does	my	glamour	look	like	hers?”

     A	crease	formed	between	his	brows,	and	he	stared	at	her,	into	her,	before

shaking	his	head.	“Not	exactly.	You	still	looked	like	you,	just…”	He	struggled

for	a	word.	“Perfect.	A	flawless	version	of	you.”

     It	was	clear	that	it	wasn’t	meant	as	a	compliment.

     “You	mean,	an	unnatural	version	of	me.”

     After	a	hesitation,	he	said,	“I	suppose	so.”

     “I	 think	it	was	instinct,”	she	said.	“I	didn’t	 realize	I	was	using	a	glamour.	I

just	knew	I	didn’t	want	you	to	know	I	was	a	cyborg.”	A	wry	chuckle.	“It	seems

so	silly	now.”

     “Good.”	He	tugged	her	close	again.	“We	must	have	made	progress.”

     His	lips	had	just	brushed	hers	when	the	door	opened.

     “Got	 everything	we	need?”	said	Thorne,	chipper	as	ever.	Iko,	Cress,	and

Wolf	filed	in	after	him.

     Kai	dropped	Cinder’s	hands	and	she	took	a	step	back,	adjusting	her	tool	belt.

“The	pod’s	ready.	Triple-checked.	There	shouldn’t	be	any	surprises.”

     “And	the	guest	of	honor?”

     “I	 have	everything	I	came	with,”	said	Kai,	indicating	his	rumpled	wedding

clothes.

     Iko	stepped	forward	and	handed	Kai	a	box	labeled	PROTEIN	OATS.	“We	have	a

gift	for	you	too.”

103
     He	flipped	 it	over	to	the	child’s	 game	printed	on	the	back.	“Yum?”

     “Open	it,”	 said	Iko,	 bouncing	on	her	toes.

     Prying	 open	the	top,	Kai	 turned	it	over	 and	dumped	a	thin	silver	 chain	and	a

medallion	 into	  his	 palm.	 He	 lifted	  it	 up	 to	 eye	 level,	  inspecting	 the	 rather

tarnished	insignia.	“‘The	 American	 Republic	86th	Space	Regiment,’”	 he	read.	“I

can	see	why	it	made	you	think	of	me.”

     “We	 found	 it	 in	one	of	 the	old	 military	 uniforms,”	  said	Iko.	 “It’s	  to	remind

you	that	you’re	one	of	us	now,	no	matter	what	happens.”

     Kai	 grinned.	“It’s	  perfect.”	 He	looped	 the	chain	around	his	 neck	and	tucked

the	medallion	 under	 his	 shirt.	 He	 gave	Cress	a	 quick	 farewell	 embrace,	 then

pulled	Iko	into	 a	hug.	Iko	squeaked,	frozen.

     When	Kai	 pulled	 away,	Iko	looked	 from	him,	 to	Cinder,	 then	back.	Her	eyes

suddenly	rolled	up	into	her	head	and	she	collapsed	onto	the	floor.

     Kai	  jumped	  back.	  “What	   happened?	Did	   I	  hit	  her	 power	  button	  or

something?”

     Frowning,	 Cinder	took	a	step	closer.	“Iko,	 what	are	you	doing?”

     “Kai	 hugged	me,”	said	Iko,	 eyes	still	closed.	“So	I	fainted.”

     With	  an	awkward	 laugh,	 Kai	 turned	 to	face	 Cinder.	 “You’re	  not	 going	 to

faint	too,	are	you?”

     “Doubtful.”

     Kai	 wrapped	his	 arms	around	Cinder	and	kissed	her,	 and	though	she	wasn’t

used	to	  having	 an	 audience,	 Cinder	  didn’t	  hesitate	 to	 kiss	  him	  back.	 An

impractical,	 uncalculating	 part	 of	 her	brain	 told	 her	 to	not	 let	 go.	 To	not	 say

good-bye.

     The	light	 mood	was	gone	when	they	 separated.	He	set	his	brow	against	hers,

104
the	tips	of	his	 hair	brushing	her	cheeks.	“I’m	  on	your	side,”	 he	said.	“No	 matter

what.”

     “I	 know.”

     Kai	 turned	 to	face	 Wolf	 last.	He	 lifted	 his	 chin	 and	adjusted	his	 fine	 shirt.

“All	 right,	 I’m	 ready	when	you—”

     The	 punch	 hit	 Kai	  square	in	 the	 cheek,	knocking	  him	 back	 into	 Cinder.

Everyone	gasped.	Iko	jerked	upward	 with	 a	surprised	cry	as	Kai	 pressed	a	hand

against	his	face.

     “Sorry,”	  said	 Wolf,	 cringing	  with	 guilt.	 “It’s	  better	 when	you	 don’t	 see	it

coming.”

     “I	 somehow	doubt	that,”	said	Kai,	 his	words	slurred.

     Cinder	 pried	his	 hand	away	 to	examine	the	 wound,	which	 was	 flaming	 red

and	already	beginning	to	swell.	“You	 didn’t	 break	the	skin.	He’s	 fine.	It’ll	  bruise

up	nicely	by	the	time	he’s	back	on	Earth.”

     “Sorry,”	 Wolf	 said	again.

     Kai	 gave	his	 head	a	shake	and	didn’t	 complain	 when	Cinder	 pressed	a	kiss

against	his	cheek.	“Don’t	worry,”	  she	whispered.	“It’s	weirdly	 attractive.”

     His	 laugh	 was	 wry,	 but	 appreciative.	 He	 kissed	 her	 one	last	 time	 before

hurrying	into	 the	podship,	like	he	might	 change	his	mind	if	 he	stayed	for	another

moment.

     “Do	 I	get	a	good-bye	kiss	too?”	said	Thorne,	stepping	in	front	 of	Cinder.

     Scowling,	 Cinder	shoved	him	away.	“Wolf’s	  not	the	only	 one	who	can	throw

a	right	hook	around	here.”

     Thorne	chuckled	and	raised	a	suggestive	eyebrow	at	Iko.

     The	android,	still	 on	the	floor,	 shrugged	apologetically.	 “I	 would	love	 to	give

105
you	a	good-bye	kiss,	Captain,	but	 that	lingering	 embrace	from	His	 Majesty	may

have	fried	 a	few	 wires,	and	 I’m	 afraid	 a	kiss	from	 you	 would	 melt	 my	central

processor.”

     “Oh,	 trust	me,”	said	Thorne,	winking	 at	her.	“It	 would.”

     For	an	instant,	while	 the	joke	 was	still	 written	across	his	face,	Thorne’s	 gaze

flickered	  hopefully	  toward	  Cress,	  but	 Cress	 was	  captivated	  by	 her	  own

fingernails.

     Then	the	 look	 vanished	and	Thorne	 was	marching	to	 the	pilot’s	  side	of	 the

shuttle.

     “Good	 luck,”	 said	Cinder,	watching	them	adjust	their	harnesses.

     Thorne	 gave	her	a	 quick	 salute,	but	it	 was	 Kai	 she	was	worried	 about.	 He

tried	to	smile,	 still	 rubbing	his	cheekbone,	as	the	doors	sank	down	around	them.

“You	 too.”

106
	




                                                     Twelve







Kai	 watched	 Thorne’s	  hands,	 seemingly	 competent,	 as	 they	 toggled	 a	 few

switches	on	 the	 podship’s	 control	 panel.	 They	 emerged	from	  the	 Rampion’s

dock	and	 dove	toward	 planet	 Earth.	Thorne	 tapped	some	 coordinates	into	 the

computer	and	Kai	 was	surprised	at	the	jolt	 of	 longing	 he	felt	to	 see	the	satellite

imagery	of	the	Commonwealth	appear	on	the	screen.

     The	 plan	was	for	 Thorne	 to	leave	 Kai	 at	one	of	 the	royal	 safe	houses—far

enough	from	 civilization	  that	 the	 podship	should	 go	 undetected,	if	 they	 were

quick	about	it,	but	 close	enough	to	the	city	that	Kai	 would	be	retrieved	within	 an

hour	of	alerting	his	security	 staff	to	his	return.

     “This	  must	be	 weird	 for	 you,”	  Thorne	said,	 dragging	 his	 fingers	 across	a

radar	screen.	“Your	 cyborg	girlfriend	  being	a	wanted	outlaw	 and	your	fiancée’s

niece	and	all	that.”

     Kai	 grimaced,	 which	 made	his	cheek	 start	smarting	 again.	“Honestly,	  I	try

not	to	 think	 about	 the	details.”	 He	 shifted	 his	 gaze	toward	 the	Rampion	 as	it

receded	fast	  from	  the	 viewing	  window.	  “Does	  she	 really	  call	 herself	  my

girlfriend?”

     “Oh,	 I	 wouldn’t	 know.	 We	haven’t	 spent	an	evening	gossiping	 and	painting

107
each	other’s	toenails	since	the	kidnapping.”

     Glaring,	 Kai	 leaned	 back	against	the	 headrest.	“I’m	  already	uncomfortable

with	 you	piloting	  this	ship	 and	being	 in	control	 of	 my	 life.	 Try	 not	to	 make	it

worse.”

     “Why	 does	everyone	think	I’m	 such	a	bad	pilot?”

     “Cinder	 told	me	as	much.”

     “Well,	  tell	 Cinder	I’m	 perfectly	 capable	of	 flying	 a	blasted	 podship	without

killing	 anyone.	My	 flight	 instructor	 at	Andromeda—which	  is	a	very	 prestigious

military	 academy	in	the	Republic,	I	will	 have	you	know—”

     “I	 know	what	 Andromeda	Academy	is.”

     “Yeah,	 well,	my	 flight	 instructor	said	I	was	a	natural.”

     “Right,”	  Kai	drawled.	 “Was	that	the	same	flight	 instructor	who	 wrote	in	your

official	  report	 about	 your	  inattentiveness,	refusal	  to	 take	 safety	 precautions

seriously,	and	 overconfident	 attitude	 that	 often	 bordered	on	 …	 what	 was	 the

word	she	used?	‘Foolhardy,’	I	think?”

     “Oh,	 yeah.	Commander	 Reid.	 She	had	a	thing	 for	 me.”	 The	 radar	blinked,

picking	up	 a	cruiser	in	the	 far	distance,	and	Thorne	deftly	 changed	directions	to

keep	them	out	of	 its	course.	“I	 didn’t	 realize	I	 had	a	royal	 stalker.	I’m	 flattered,

Your	Majesty.”

     “Even	 better—you	 had	 an	entire	 government	 team	assigned	to	 digging	 up

information	 on	you.	They	 reported	twice	daily	 for	 over	a	week.	You	 did	run	 off

with	the	most-wanted	criminal	 in	the	world,	 after	all.”

     “And	 your	girlfriend.”

     Kai	 smothered	both	a	smile	and	a	glare.	“And	my	girlfriend,”	  he	conceded.

     “It	  took	them	 a	week,	huh?	Cress	could	 have	laid	 out	my	 whole	 biography

108
within	hours.”

     Kai	 pondered	this.	“Maybe	I’ll	  offer	her	a	job	when	this	is	all	 over.”

     He	 expected	 it,	 and	 he	wasn’t	  disappointed—the	 irritated	  twitch	 beneath

Thorne’s	  eye.	  He	  hid	  it	   easily,	  though,	  his	  expression	  morphing	   into

nonchalance.	“Maybe	you	should.”

     Kai	 shook	his	head	and	looked	 away.	Earth	filled	 up	 the	viewing	 window,	 a

kaleidoscope	of	 ocean	and	 land.	 He	 gripped	 his	harness,	knowing	  they	 were

hurtling	 through	space	at	terrifying	 speeds,	yet	feeling	like	 he	was	suspended	in

time	for	one	still,	 quiet	moment.

     He	let	 his	shoulders	settle,	awed	by	the	 sight.	The	next	time	 he	would	 be	up

here—if	all	 went	according	to	plan—he’d	 be	on	his	way	to	Luna.

     “You	  know	 what’s	  really	 strange	 to	 think	 about?”	 Kai	  said,	 as	much	 to

himself	as	to	Thorne.	“If	 Levana	hadn’t	tried	 to	kill	 Cinder	when	she	was	a	kid,	I

might	be	 engaged	to	her	right	 now.	 She	would	 already	be	queen.	We	could	 be

plotting	an	alliance	together.”

     “Yeah,	 but	 she	would	have	been	raised	on	 Luna.	And	 from	 what	 I	can	 tell,

being	raised	 on	 Luna	 really	  messes	people	up.	 She	 wouldn’t	  be	the	 cuddly

cyborg	we’ve	all	 come	to	adore.”

     “I	 know.	 I	could	 have	despised	her	as	much	as	I	despise	Levana,	though	it’s

difficult	 to	imagine.”

     Thorne	nodded,	and	Kai	 was	relieved	 he	didn’t	 say	something	obnoxious	 as

the	podship	slipped	into	 a	bank	of	 clouds.	The	light	 around	them	began	to	bend

and	brighten	as	they	entered	the	first	 layers	of	 Earth’s	 atmosphere.	The	friction

made	the	ship	tremble	and	beads	of	water	slicked	back	off	the	view	 window,	 but

it	wasn’t	long	 before	they’d	broken	through.	 The	Pacific	Ocean	sparkled	beneath

109
them.

     “I	suppose	this	is	all	pretty	weird	for	you	too,”	said	Kai.	“A	wanted	criminal,

piloting	a	kidnapped	political	leader	back	to	the	country	you	first	escaped	from.”

     Thorne	snorted.	“The	weird	part	is	I’m	not	getting	any	ransom	money	out	of

it.	Although,	if	you’re	feeling	generous…”

     “I’m	 not.”

     Thorne	scowled.

     “Well,	maybe	a	little.	You’re	set	to	serve	time	in	three	countries,	right?	The

Commonwealth,	America,	and	Australia?”

     “Don’t	 remind	me.	One	would	 think	 the	whole	unionization	thing	 would

mean	we	could	have	a	little	consistency	in	our	judicial	 systems,	but,	no,	you

commit	crimes	in	three	different	countries	and	everyone	wants	to	help	dole	out

the	punishment.”

     Kai	pinched	his	lips,	giving	himself	one	last	chance	to	reconsider.	He’d	only

had	the	idea	a	few	days	ago,	and	his	word	would	be	gold	once	he	said	it	aloud.

He	didn’t	want	to	set	an	unfair	precedent	as	his	country’s	leader,	but	at	the	same

time—this	felt	right.	 And	what	was	the	point	of	being	emperor	if	 he	couldn’t

sometimes	do	something	just	because	it	felt	right?

     “I	 might	 come	to	 regret	this,”	 he	said,	dragging	in	 a	deep	breath,	“but,

Carswell	 Thorne,	  I	   pardon	 all	   of	  your	  crimes	  against	  the	  Eastern

Commonwealth.”

     Thorne	whipped	his	focus	toward	Kai.	The	podship	surged	forward	and	Kai

gasped,	grabbing	hold	of	his	harness.

     “Whoops,	sorry.”	Thorne	leveled	the	ship’s	nose	and	resumed	their	steady

flight.	“That	was	a,	uh	…	an	air	…	doldrum.	Thing.	But	you	were	saying?”

110
     Kai	 exhaled.	“I’m	  saying	 you	 can	consider	 your	 time	 served,	for	 the

Commonwealth,	at	least.	If	we	both	survive	this,	when	it’s	all	over,	I’ll	make	it

official.	I	can’t	do	anything	about	the	other	countries,	though,	other	than	put	in	a

good	word	for	 you.	And	 to	 be	honest,	they’ll	 probably	think	 I’m	 crazy.	Or

suffering	from	Stockholm	syndrome.”

     “Oh,	you	are	definitely	suffering	from	Stockholm	syndrome,	but	I	won’t	hold

it	against	you.	So—right.	Great.	Can	I	get	this	in	writing?”

     “No,”	 said	Kai,	watching	the	podship	controls	as	Thorne	had	his	attention

pinned	on	him	again.	“And	the	deal	is	only	valid	if	we	both	survive.”

     “Mutual	 survival.	Not	a	 problem.”	Grinning,	Thorne	checked	their	course

and	made	a	few	adjustments	to	his	flight	instruments	as	Japan	appeared	on	the

horizon.

     “Also,	I	have	one	condition.	You	have	to	return	everything	you	stole.”

     Thorne’s	grin	started	to	fizzle,	but	he	locked	his	hands	around	the	console

and	brightened	again.	“Dream	dolls	and	some	surplus	uniforms?	Done.”

     “And?”

     “And	 …	 and	that’s	pretty	 much	it.	 Aces,	you	make	it	 sound	like	 I’m	 a

kleptomaniac	or	something.”

     Kai	cleared	his	throat.	“And	the	ship.	You	have	to	give	back	the	ship.”

     Thorne’s	knuckles	whitened.	“But	…	she’s	my	ship.”

     “No,	she	belongs	to	the	American	Republic.	If	you	want	a	ship	of	your	own,

then	you’re	going	to	have	to	work	for	it	and	buy	one	like	everybody	else.”

     “Hey,	Mr.	 Born-into-Royalty,	what	do	 you	know	about	it?”	 But	 Thorne’s

defensiveness	faded	as	quickly	as	it	  had	come,	ending	in	  a	grumpy	 sulk.

“Besides,	I	did	work	for	it.	Thievery	isn’t	easy,	you	know.”

111
     “You’re	  not	really	arguing	with	 me	about	this,	are	you?”

     Thorne	 clenched	his	eyes	shut,	and	 every	muscle	in	 Kai’s	 body	 tensed,	but

then	Thorne	sighed	and	opened	them	again.	“You	don’t	 get	it.	The	Rampion	 and

I	have	been	through	a	lot	together.	I	may	 have	stolen	her	at	first,	but	now	 it	does

feel	like	she	belongs	to	me.”

     “But	 she	doesn’t	belong	to	you.	And	 you	can’t	expect	the	rest	of	your	crew	to

want	to	stay	on	in	a	stolen	ship.”

     Thorne	guffawed.	 “My	 crew?	Let	 me	tell	you	 what’s	going	 to	become	of	my

crew	when	this	is	 over.”	 He	ticked	off	 on	his	 fingers.	“Cinder	 will	  be	the	ruling

monarch	of	 a	big	 rock	 in	 the	sky.	 Iko	 will	  go	 wherever	Cinder	 goes,	so	 let’s

assume	she	becomes	the	queen’s	hairdresser	or	something.	You—are	you	a	part

of	the	crew	 now?	Doesn’t	 matter,	we	both	know	 where	you’re	 going	 to	end	up.

And	once	we	get	Scarlet	back,	 she	and	Wolf	are	going	 to	retire	to	 some	farm	in

France	and	have	a	litter	of	baby	wolf	 cubs.	That’s	what’s	going	 to	become	of	my

crew	when	this	is	done.”

     “It	 sounds	like	you’ve	 put	some	thought	into	this.”

     “Maybe,”	  said	 Thorne,	with	  a	one-shoulder	 shrug.	“They’re	  the	first	  crew

I’ve	ever	had,	and	most	of	them	even	call	me	Captain.	I’m	 going	to	miss	them.”

     Kai	 squinted.	“I	 notice	you	left	 out	Cress.	What’s	going	on	between	you	two,

anyway?”

     Thorne	laughed.	“What?	 Nothing’s	 going	 on.	We’re	 …	I	 mean,	what	do	you

mean?”

     “I	 don’t	 know.	 She	seems	more	comfortable	 around	you	 than	anybody	 else

on	the	ship.	I	just	thought…”

     “Oh,	 no,	 there’s	nothing	 like	  …	we	 were	 in	the	 desert	together	for	 a	 long

112
time,	but	 that’s	 it.”	  He	ran	 his	 fingers	absently	 over	 the	podship	 controls	 but

didn’t	touch	 anything.	“She	used	to	have	a	crush	on	me.	Actually”—he	 chuckled

again,	but	it	was	more	strained	this	 time—“she	 thought	she	was	in	love	with	 me

when	we	first	met.	Funny,	right?”

     Kai	 watched	him	from	the	corner	of	 his	eye.	“Hilarious.”

     Thorne’s	 knuckles	 whitened	 on	 the	 controls,	 then	 he	 glanced	at	 Kai	 and

started	to	shake	his	head.	“What	is	this,	a	therapy	session?	It	doesn’t	matter.”

     “It	 sort	 of	matters.	I	 like	 Cress.”	Kai	 shifted	 in	 the	harness.	“I	 like	you	 too,

despite	my	better	judgment.”

     “You’d	  be	surprised	how	often	I	hear	that.”

     “Something	  tells	 me	  Cress	might	  still	  like	  you	 too—against	  her	 better

judgment.”

     Thorne	sighed.	“Yeah,	 that	pretty	much	sums	that	up.”

     Kai	 cocked	his	head.	“How	so?”

     “It’s	 complicated.”

     “Oh,	 it’s	complicated.	 Because	I	have	no	idea	what	that’s	like.”	Kai	 snorted.

     Thorne	 glared	at	him.	 “Whatever,	 Doctor.	 It’s	 just,	when	 Cress	thought	she

was	in	love	with	 me,	she	was	actually	in	 love	with	 this	other	guy	 she’d	made	up

in	her	head,	who	was	all	brave	and	selfless	and	stuff.	I	mean,	he	was	a	real	catch,

so	who	could	 blame	her?	Even	I	 liked	that	 guy.	I	 kind	 of	wish	 I	was	that	 guy.”

He	shrugged.

     “Are	 you	so	sure	you’re	not?”

     Thorne	laughed.

     Kai	 didn’t.

     “You’re	  kidding,	right?”

113
     “Not	really.”

     “Um,	hi,	 I’m	 Carswell	Thorne,	a	convicted	criminal	in	your	country.	Have

we	met?”

     Kai	rolled	 his	eyes.	“I’m	 saying	maybe	you	should	stop	putting	so	much

energy	into	lamenting	the	fact	that	Cress	was	wrong	about	you,	and	start	putting

your	energy	into	proving	her	right,	instead.”

     “I	 appreciate	the	confidence,	Your	Imperial	Psychologist,	but	we’re	 way

beyond	that.	Cress	is	over	me	and	…	it’s	for	the	best.”

     “But	you	do	like	her?”

     When	Thorne	didn’t	 respond,	Kai	glanced	over	to	see	Thorne’s	attention

fixed	on	the	cockpit	window.	Finally,	Thorne	responded,	“Like	I	said,	it	doesn’t

matter.”

     Kai	looked	away.	Somehow,	Thorne’s	inability	to	talk	about	his	attraction	to

Cress	spoke	so	much	louder	than	an	outright	confession.	After	all,	he	had	no

trouble	making	suggestive	commentary	about	Cinder.

     “Fine,”	he	said.	“So	what	is	Cress	going	to	do	once	this	is	all	over?”

     “I	don’t	know,”	 said	Thorne.	“Maybe	she	will	go	work	for	you	on	your	royal

stalking	team.”

     Below,	the	blur	of	land	became	beaches	and	skyscrapers	and	Mount	Fuji	and,

beyond	it,	an	entire	continent,	lush	and	green	and	welcoming.

     “I	 don’t	 think	that’s	what	 she	would	want,	though,”	Thorne	mused.	“She

wants	to	see	the	world	after	being	trapped	in	that	satellite	her	whole	life.	She

wants	to	travel.”

     “Then	I	guess	she	should	stay	with	you	after	all.	What	better	way	to	travel

than	by	spaceship?”

114
     But	 Thorne	shook	his	head,	adamant.	“No,	 believe	me.	She	deserves	a	better

life	than	this.”

     Kai	 leaned	forward	  to	better	 get	a	 view	 of	 his	 home	spreading	out	 before

them.	“My	 point	exactly.”

115
	




                                              Thirteen







“When	did	you	learn	to	embroider?”	Jacin	said,	picking	through	the	basket	that

hung	on	Winter’s	elbow.

     She	preened.	“A	few	weeks	ago.”

     Jacin	lifted	a	hand	towel	from	the	collection	and	eyed	the	precise	stitches	that

depicted	a	cluster	of	stars	and	planets	around	the	towel’s	border.	“Were	you

getting	any	sleep?”

     “Not	very	much,	no.”	She	riffled	through	the	basket	and	handed	him	a	baby

blanket	embroidered	with	a	school	of	fish	swimming	around	the	border.	“This

one’s	my	favorite.	It	took	four	whole	days.”

     He	grunted.	“I	take	it	the	visions	were	bad	that	week.”

     “Horrible,”	 she	said	lightly.	“But	now	I	have	all	of	these	gifts.”	She	took	the

blanket	back	from	him	and	tucked	it	among	the	rest	of	the	colorful	fabrics.	“You

know	keeping	busy	helps.	It’s	when	I’m	idle	the	monsters	come.”

     Jacin	glanced	at	her	from	the	corner	of	his	eye.	He	had	been	her	guard	for

weeks	now,	but	rarely	did	they	get	to	talk	so	casually	or	walk	side	by	side	like

this—it	was	expected	that	guards	keep	a	respectful	distance	from	their	charges.

But	today	Winter	had	dragged	him	along	to	AR-2,	one	of	the	domes	adjacent	to

116
the	 central	  sector.	  It	  was	  mostly	  high-end	  shops	 set	  among	  residential

neighborhoods,	but	this	early	in	 the	day	all	of	 the	shops	were	still	closed	and	the

streets	empty	and	peaceful.	There	was	no	one	to	care	about	propriety.

     “And	 all	these	gifts	are	for	the	shopkeepers?”

     “Shopkeepers,	 clerks,	  household	  servants.”	 Her	  eyes	  glimmered.	  “The

overlooked	machine	of	Artemisia.”

     The	lower	 classes,	then.	The	people	who	dealt	with	 the	trash	and	cooked	the

food	 and	ensured	 all	 the	 needs	of	  Luna’s	 aristocracy	 were	 met.	 They	 were

rewarded	with	 lives	 much	more	enviable	 than	the	laborers	 in	the	 outer	sectors.

Full	 stomachs,	at	 the	 least.	 The	only	  downfall	  was	that	 they	 had	 to	 live	  in

Artemisia,	 surrounded	 by	 the	 politics	  and	 mind	 games	of	  the	 city.	 A	  good

servant	was	treated	like	a	prized	 pet—spoiled	and	fawned	 over	when	they	 were

wanted,	beaten	and	discarded	when	they’d	overstayed	their	usefulness.

     Jacin	had	always	thought	that,	given	 a	choice,	he’d	rather	take	his	luck	 to	the

mines	or	factories.

     “You’ve	  been	visiting	them	a	lot?”	 he	asked.

     “Not	 as	much	 as	I’d	 like	 to.	But	 one	of	 the	milliner’s	  assistants	had	a	baby

and	I’ve	been	meaning	to	make	her	something.	Do	you	think	she’ll	 like	 it?”

     “It’ll	  be	the	nicest	thing	the	kid	has.”

     Winter	 gave	a	joyful	 skip	as	she	walked.	“My	 mother	was	a	great	seamstress,

you	know.	She	was	becoming	quite	popular	 among	the	dress	shops	when—well.

Anyway,	 she	embroidered	 my	 baby	blanket.	 Levana	tried	 to	 throw	 it	 out,	 but

Papa	was	able	to	 stash	it	 away.	It’s	  one	of	 my	 most	prized	 possessions.”	She

fluttered	her	lashes	and	Jacin	felt	his	lips	twitch	at	her,	rather	against	his	will.

     “I	 knew	 she	was	a	seamstress,”	he	said,	“but	how	 come	I’ve	 never	seen	this

117
special	blanket	of	yours?”

     “I	 was	embarrassed	to	tell	you	about	it.”

     He	 laughed,	 but	 when	  Winter	 didn’t	  join	  him,	  the	 sound	fizzled	  away.

“Really?”

     Winter	 shrugged,	grinning	 her	impish	grin.	 “It’s	 silly,	 isn’t	 it?	 Holding	 on	to

a	baby	 blanket,	 of	 all	 things?”	 She	took	 in	 a	 deep	breath.	 “But	 it’s	  also	my

namesake.	She	embroidered	a	scene	from	Earth’s	winter,	with	snow	 and	leafless

trees	and	a	 pair	 of	 little	  red	mittens.	 Those	 are	like	  gloves,	but	 with	  all	 the

fingers	joined	together.”

     Jacin	shook	 his	head.	“Embarrassed	to	 show	me.	 That’s	 the	stupidest	thing

I’ve	ever	heard.”

     “Fine.	 I’ll	 show	you,	if	 you	want	to	see	it.”

     “Of	  course	I	 want	 to	 see	it.”	 He	 was	 surprised	how	 much	 her	confession

stung.	He	and	Winter	 had	shared	everything	 since	they	 were	kids.	It	 had	never

occurred	to	him	 she	might	 harbor	 something	like	 this,	 especially	something	 so

important	as	a	 gift	 from	 her	mother,	who	 had	died	 in	childbirth.	  But	 his	mood

brightened	when	 he	remembered—“Did	  I	tell	 you	 I	 saw	snow	 when	I	 was	 on

Earth?”

     Winter	 stopped	walking,	her	eyes	going	wide.	“Real	 snow?”

     “We	 had	to	hide	the	spaceship	in	Siberia,	on	this	enormous	tundra.”

     She	was	staring	at	 him	like	 she	would	 tackle	him	 if	 he	didn’t	 offer	 up	more

details.

     Smirking,	  Jacin	hooked	 his	 thumbs	 over	his	 belt	 and	 rocked	 back	on	 his

heels.	“That	was	all.”

     Winter	 smacked	him	in	the	chest.	“That	is	not	all.	 What	was	it	like?”

118
     He	shrugged.	“White.	Blinding.	And	really	cold.”

     “Did	it	glisten	like	diamonds?”

     “Sometimes.	When	the	sun	hit	it	right.”

     “What	did	it	smell	like?”

     He	cringed.	“I	don’t	know,	Win—Princess.	Sort	of	like	ice,	I	guess.	I	didn’t

spend	much	time	outside.	Mostly	we	were	stuck	on	the	ship.”

     Her	 gaze	flickered	 with	  the	almost	 slip	 of	  her	 name,	something	like

disappointment	that	gave	Jacin	a	shot	of	guilt.

     So	he	smacked	her	back	lightly	on	 the	shoulder.	“Your	parents	did	well.

You’re	named	after	something	beautiful.	It’s	fitting.”

     “Winter,”	she	whispered.	Her	expression	turned	speculative,	the	lights	from	a

dress	shop	highlighting	the	specks	of	gray	in	her	eyes.

     Jacin	tried	not	to	be	awkward	when	he	looked	away.	There	were	times	when

she	stood	so	close	that	he	was	amazed	at	his	own	ability	to	keep	his	hands	to

himself.

     Moving	 the	basket	to	her	other	 arm,	Winter	started	walking	 again.	“Not

everyone	thinks	I’m	beautiful.”

     He	scoffed.	“Whoever	told	you	that,	they	were	lying.	Or	jealous.	Probably

both.”

     “You	don’t	think	I’m	beautiful.”

     He	snorted—somewhat	uncontrollably—and	laughed	harder	when	she	glared

at	him.

     “That’s	funny?”

     Schooling	his	expression,	he	mimicked	her	glare.	“Keep	saying	things	like

that	and	people	will	start	to	think	you’ve	gone	crazy.”

119
     She	opened	 her	mouth	 to	 refute.	 Hesitated.	Nearly	  ran	into	 a	 wall	 before

Jacin	scooped	her	back	into	the	center	of	the	narrow	alley.

     “You’ve	  never	once	called	 me	beautiful,”	 she	said	after	 his	hand	had	 fallen

back	to	his	side.

     “In	 case	you	 haven’t	noticed,	 you	 have	an	entire	country	 of	 people	singing

your	praises.	Did	 you	know	 they	 write	 poetry	about	you	 in	 the	outer	sectors?	I

had	to	listen	to	this	drunk	 sing	a	whole	ballad	 a	few	months	back,	all	 about	your

goddess-like	perfection.	I’m	 pretty	sure	the	galaxy	 doesn’t	need	my	input	 on	the

matter.”

     She	ducked	her	 head,	hiding	 her	face	behind	 a	cascade	of	hair.	 Which	 was

just	as	well.	Jacin’s	cheeks	had	gone	warm,	which	made	him	both	self-conscious

and	irritated.

     “Your	 input	is	the	only	 input	that	matters,”	she	whispered.

     He	stiffened,	 cutting	a	glance	to	her	that	 she	didn’t	return.	 It	occurred	to	him

that	he	may	have	led	them	into	a	topic	 he	had	no	intentions	of	 exploring	further.

Fantasies,	sure.	Wishes,	 all	 the	 time.	 But	  reality?	 No—this	  was	taboo.	 This

would	end	in	nothing	good.

     She	was	a	princess.	Her	stepmother	was	a	tyrant	who	would	marry	Winter	off

to	someone	who	was	politically	 beneficial	for	her	own	 desires.

     Jacin	was	the	opposite	of	politically	 beneficial.

     But	 here	they	 were,	and	 there	she	was	looking	  all	pretty	 and	 rejected,	and

why	had	he	opened	his	big,	stupid	mouth?

     Jacin	sighed,	exasperated.	With	her.	With	 himself.	 With	 this	whole	situation.

“Come	on,	 Princess.	You	 know	 how	 I	 feel	about	 you.	Everyone	 knows	how	 I

feel	about	you.”

120
     Winter	  stopped	 again,	but	  he	kept	  walking,	  shaking	 his	 finger	 over	  his

shoulder.	“I’m	  not	saying	 these	things	and	looking	 at	 you	at	the	 same	time,	so

keep	up.”

     She	scurried	after	him.	“How	 do	you	feel	 about	me?”

     “No.	 That’s	 it.	 That’s	 all	I’m	  saying.	I	 am	your	 guard.	I	 am	here	to	 protect

you	and	keep	you	out	 of	trouble,	 and	that’s	 it.	We	 are	not	swapping	words	 that

will	 result	in	a	whole	lot	 of	awkward	nights	 standing	outside	your	bedroom	door,

got	it?”

     He	was	surprised	at	how	 angry	he	sounded—no,	how	 angry	he	felt.	 Because

it	was	impossible.	It	 was	impossible	and	unfair,	and	he	had	spent	too	many	years

in	the	trenches	of	unfairness	to	get	riled	up	about	it	now.

     Winter	 strode	beside	him,	her	 fingers	clenched	around	the	basket	handle.	At

least	she	wasn’t	trying	to	catch	his	eye	anymore,	which	was	a	small	mercy.

     “I	 do	 know	 how	you	 feel	about	me,”	 she	finally	  said,	and	it	 sounded	like	 a

confession.	“I	 know	that	 you	are	my	 guard,	and	you	are	my	 best	friend.	I	 know

you	would	 die	 for	 me.	And	 I	 know	 that	 should	that	 ever	happen,	I	 would	 die

immediately	after.”

     “Yeah,”	  he	 said.	 “That’s	 pretty	  much	 it.”	  The	 sound	of	 a	 nearby	 coffee

grinder	 rumbled	 through	 the	 stone	walkway,	  and	 the	 smell	 of	 baking	 bread

assaulted	his	senses.	He	braced	himself.	“Also,	I	think	 you’re	sort	of	 pretty.	You

know.	On	a	good	day.”

     She	giggled	and	nudged	him	 with	 her	shoulder.	He	nudged	her	back	and	she

stumbled	into	a	flower	planter,	 laughing	harder	now.

     “You’re	  sort	 of	 pretty	 too,”	 she	said.	 He	threw	 a	 scowl	at	 her,	but	 it	 was

impossible	to	hold	on	to	when	she	was	laughing	like	that.

121
     “Your	 Highness!”

     They	 both	paused.	Jacin	stiffened,	 his	 hand	going	 to	his	 gun	holster,	 but	it

was	only	a	young	girl	 watching	 them	from	 the	doorway	of	 a	little	 shop.	A	soap-

filled	 bucket	 stood	untouched	at	 her	feet	 and	her	 eyes	were	as	big	 as	the	 full

Earth.

     “Oh,	 hello,”	 said	Winter,	adjusting	her	basket.	“Astrid,	 isn’t	 it?”

     The	girl	 nodded,	heat	climbing	 up	her	cheeks	as	she	gaped	at	the	princess.	“I

—”	  She	glanced	 toward	  the	 shop,	 then	 back	 to	  Winter.	 “Wait	   here!”	  she

squealed,	then	dropped	a	rag	into	the	bucket	with	a	wet	plop	 and	rushed	through

the	door.

     Winter	 cocked	her	head	to	one	side,	her	hair	tumbling	over	her	shoulder.

     “You	 know	 that	kid?”

     “Her	 mother	 and	father	run	this	 florist.”	  She	ran	her	fingers	 along	a	trailing

vine	in	the	window	 box.

     Jacin	grunted.	“What	 does	she	want?”

     “How	 should	I	 know?	I	wish	I’d	 brought	them	something…”

     The	 girl	 reappeared,	now	with	  two	 younger	boys	 in	 tow.	 “See?	I	 told	 you

she’d	be	back!”	 she	was	saying.	The	 boys	each	paused	to	stare	at	Winter,	 their

jaws	hanging.	 The	youngest	was	 gripping	 a	ring	 of	 twigs	and	 dried	flowers	 in

both	hands.

     “Hello,”	  said	Winter,	  curtsying	to	 each	one.	“I	 don’t	 believe	 we’ve	 had	the

pleasure	of	meeting.	I’m	Winter.”

     When	 the	boys	couldn’t	 find	 the	courage	to	 speak,	Astrid	answered,	“These

are	my	 brothers,	 Your	 Highness,	Dorsey	 and	 Dylan.	 I	 told	 them	 you	 bought

flowers	from	 our	shop	before	and	they	didn’t	believe	me.”

122
     “Well,	 it’s	true.	I	 bought	a	posy	of	blue	belldandies	and	kept	them	on	my

nightstand	for	a	week.”

     “Wow,”	Dorsey	breathed.

     Winter	smiled.	“I’m	sorry	we	can’t	stay	to	take	a	look	through	your	shop	this

morning,	but	we’re	off	to	visit	the	milliner’s	assistant.	Have	you	been	to	see	the

new	baby	yet?”

     All	 three	of	them	shook	their	heads.	Then	Astrid	nudged	the	younger	boy,

Dylan,	with	her	elbow.	He	jumped,	but	still	couldn’t	bring	himself	to	speak.

     “We	made	something	for	you,”	said	Astrid.	“We’ve	been	waiting	for	you	to

come	back.	It’s	 just	…	 it’s	 just	 from	 the	leftovers,	but…”	 She	nudged	her

brother	again,	harder	this	time,	and	he	finally	held	up	the	ring	of	flowers.

     “What	is	this?”	asked	Winter,	taking	it	into	her	hands.

     Jacin	frowned,	then	jolted	as	he	realized	what	it	was.

     The	older	boy	answered,	“It’s	a	crown,	Your	 Highness.	Took	us	almost	a

week	of	scrounging	to	get	all	the	pieces.”	His	cheeks	were	flushed	bright	red.

     “I	know	it’s	not	much,”	said	the	girl,	“but	it’s	for	you.”

     The	 younger	boy,	 having	 divested	his	 gift,	  blurted	 suddenly,	“You’re

beautiful,”	before	ducking	behind	his	brother.

     Winter	laughed.	“You’re	all	too	kind.	Thank	you.”

     A	hazy	light	caught	Jacin’s	eye.	Glancing	upward,	he	spotted	a	nodule	in	the

eaves	of	the	next	shop—a	tiny	camera	watching	over	the	shops	and	servants.

There	were	thousands	of	identical	cameras	in	sectors	all	over	Luna,	and	he	knew

the	chances	of	anyone	minding	the	footage	from	a	dull	morning	in	AR-2	was

unlikely,	but	a	threatening	chill	still	crept	down	his	spine.

     “The	crown	is	lovely,”	Winter	said,	admiring	the	tiny	white	sprigs	of	flowers.

123
She	settled	it	on	top	of	her	thick	 black	curls.	 “As	 splendid	as	the	queen’s	jewels.

I	shall	cherish	it	always.”

     With	 a	growl,	 Jacin	snatched	the	crown	off	 her	 head	and	dropped	it	into	 the

basket.	“She	will	 cherish	it	just	as	well	in	 there,”	he	snapped,	his	tone	a	warning.

“The	 princess	is	busy.	 Go	back	inside,	 and	don’t	 go	 bragging	about	 this	to	 all

your	friends.”

     With	 frightened	 squeaks	and	wide	eyes,	the	 children	couldn’t	  have	scurried

back	into	the	florist	 shop	any	faster.	Grabbing	Winter’s	 elbow,	Jacin	dragged	her

away,	though	she	soon	ripped	her	arm	out	of	his	grip.

     “Why	 did	you	 do	that?”	she	demanded.

     “It	 looked	bad.”

     “Accepting	 a	gift	 from	 a	few	children?	 Honestly,	Jacin,	you	don’t	 have	to	be

so	mean.”

     “You	  could	stand	to	 be	a	little	  less	nice,”	 he	spat	back,	 scanning	the	walls

and	windows	 but	not	 seeing	any	 more	cameras.	“Putting	 it	 on	 your	 head.	Are

you	insane?”	She	scowled	at	him	and	he	scowled	unapologetically	back.	“You’re

lucky	no	 one	saw.”	He	 gestured	to	the	basket.	“Cover	 it	 up	before	I	 rip	 it	apart

and	bury	it	in	one	of	these	planters.”

     “You’re	  overreacting,”	 Winter	 said,	 though	she	did	 tuck	 a	few	 of	her	 hand

towels	around	the	mess	of	branches.

     “You’re	  not	a	queen,	Princess.”

     Her	gaze	met	his	again,	aghast.	“I	do	not	wish	to	be	queen.”

     “Then	 stop	accepting	crowns.”

     Huffing,	  Winter	 turned	 away	 and	marched	 on	ahead—like	 a	 true	princess

would	march	ahead	of	her	guard.

124
	




                                             Fourteen







Kai	waited	until	Thorne’s	podship	was	a	glint	in	the	distance	before	he	pulled

out	the	portscreen	Cinder	had	given	him.	Without	an	official	ID	chip	confirming

his	identity,	his	 comm	to	Royal	 Adviser	Konn	 Torin	was	intercepted	by	the

palace	communications	mainframe.	The	face	of	a	young	intern	appeared.

     “New	Beijing	Palace.	How	may	I	…	direct…”	Her	eyes	widened.

     Kai	smiled.	“Emperor	Kaito,	for	Royal	Adviser	Konn	Torin,	please.”

     “Y-yes,	Your	Majesty.	Of	course.	Right	away.”	Her	cheeks	bloomed	red	as

she	scrambled	to	redirect	the	commlink.	Soon	her	image	was	 replaced	with

Torin’s.

     “Your	Majesty!	Is	it—are	you—one	moment.	I’m	stepping	out	of	a	meeting

with	the	cabinet—are	you	all	right?”

     “I’m	 fine,	Torin.	But	I’m	ready	to	come	home.”

     He	heard	the	click	of	a	door.	“Where	are	you?	Are	you	safe?	Do	you	need—”

     “I’ll	 tell	you	everything	when	I	get	back.	Right	now	I’m	at	our	safe	house	on

the	Taihang	terraces,	and	I’m	alone.	If	you	could	alert	the	palace	guard—”

     “Right	away,	Your	Majesty.	We’ll	be	there	right	away.”

     Torin	suggested	they	keep	the	link	open,	afraid	someone	else	would	come	for

125
Kai	before	his	own	security	 team	reached	him.	Although	Cinder	had	ensured	that

the	 portscreen	  itself	  was	  untraceable,	 the	  link	  wasn’t	  set	  up	  for	  direct

communications	 and	it	 was	 possible	Lunars	 were	 listening	 in.	 But	 Kai	  knew

Luna	had	lost	 their	 best	method	 of	surveillance	 when	 they’d	 lost	 Cress,	so	he

insisted	he	was	fine,	he	would	be	fine,	before	terminating	the	link.

     He	 needed	a	moment	to	 think	 before	the	 whole	galaxy	 spun	out	 of	 control

again.

     Clipping	  the	 port	  to	 his	 belt,	 Kai	  climbed	  onto	 one	 of	 the	 large	 rocks

overlooking	the	valley.	 He	folded	his	legs	beneath	him,	surprised	at	how	calm	he

felt	staring	out	at	the	terraces,	plateaus	that	curled	around	the	lush	mountains,	the

teasing	sparkle	of	 a	river	 winding	 at	 their	 feet.	He	 could	have	 gone	inside	the

safe	house	to	 wait,	  but	 the	 weather	was	 warm	 and	 there	 was	a	 breeze	that

smelled	 like	 jasmine	 and	 it	  had	 been	far	  too	 long	 since	 he’d	  admired	 the

beautiful	country	he’d	 been	born	to.

     After	 weeks	aboard	the	Rampion,	with	its	recycled	 air	and	reprocessed	water,

he	was	glad	to	be	home.

     And	 though	he’d	never	seen	Luna	or	its	biodomes	filled	 with	 artificial	 forests

and	man-made	lakes,	he	was	beginning	to	understand	why	Levana	might	want	to

dig	her	claws	into	Earth	too.

     Little	 time	 had	passed	when	Kai	 heard	the	hum	of	 engines.	He	kept	 his	eye

on	the	 horizon,	 waiting	 for	  the	podships.	 When	 they	arrived,	 they	 arrived	 in

force—a	 dozen	 military	  ships	 surrounding	 the	 safe	 house,	 many	 with	  guns

drawn,	and	any	number	of	personnel	scanning	the	landscape	for	signs	of	a	threat.

     Squinting	 against	the	 sunlight,	 Kai	 pushed	his	 hair	 off	 his	 brow	 while	 the

largest	ship	 landed	 not	 far	  from	 the	 house.	 Uniformed	  officers	 poured	 out,

126
establishing	a	perimeter	 and	scanning	 for	 nearby	life-forms,	  all	 jabbering	 into

their	headphones	and	holding	ominous	guns	at	the	ready.

     “Your	  Imperial	 Majesty,”	 barked	a	gray-haired	 man,	leading	 a	team	of	four

men	up	to	 him.	 “We	 are	glad	to	 see	you,	sir.	 Permission	to	 conduct	a	security

clearance	scan?”

     Kai	 pulled	  himself	 off	  the	rock	 and	 handed	the	 portscreen	to	 one	 of	 the

officers,	 who	 secured	it	 in	a	 crime	 evidence	bag.	He	 held	 out	his	 arms	while

another	officer	dragged	a	scanner	down	his	limbs.

     “All	  clear.	Welcome	home,	Your	Majesty.”

     “Thank	 you.	Where	is	Konn—”

     A	 bang	sent	half	a	dozen	personnel	spinning	 toward	 the	safe	house,	barking

and	leveling	their	guns	at	a	cellar	door	that	had	burst	open.

     Konn	 Torin	  emerged,	 more	harried	 than	 Kai	  had	ever	 seen	him.	  “Royal

Adviser	 Konn	 Torin,”	  he	yelled,	 holding	 up	 his	hands.	His	 gaze	flashed	 once

over	the	guns,	 then	landed	on	 Kai	 near	the	edge	of	 the	 plateau.	His	 shoulders

drooped	with	relief	 and	as	soon	as	one	of	the	officers	 had	scanned	his	wrist	and

confirmed	his	identity,	 Torin	 did	something	he	had	never	done	before.

     He	rushed	toward	Kai	 and	hugged	him.

     The	 embrace	was	as	quick	 as	it	 was	unexpected,	before	Torin	 pulled	 away

and	held	Kai	 at	arm’s	 length,	examining	 him.	Kai	 was	surprised	to	 find	 he	was

slightly	 taller	 than	Torin.	 That	 couldn’t	 have	 happened	in	the	past	 few	weeks.

Maybe	he’d	 been	taller	for	 months	and	had	never	noticed.	Having	 known	 Torin

since	he	was	a	child,	it	was	difficult	 to	change	his	perception	of	him	now.

     Cinder	 told	him	 that	 Torin	 had	informed	 her	of	 Kai’s	 second	tracking	 chip.

Maybe	he	was	full	of	 more	surprises	than	Kai	gave	him	credit	for.

127
     “Your	 face!”	 said	Torin.	“What	 did	 they	do	to	you?	She	promised	me—”

     “I’m	  fine,”	 said	Kai,	 squeezing	Torin’s	 arm.	“It’s	  just	a	bruise.	 Don’t	 worry

about	it.”

     “Don’t	  worry—!”

     “Your	  Majesty,”	  interrupted	  the	gray-haired	  man,	 “it	  may	 help	 to	 avoid

media	attention	if	you	return	 through	the	safe	house	sublevels.	We’ll	send	a	team

to	escort	you.”

     Kai	 glanced	 around.	 A	 number	of	  palace	guards	had	 emerged	to	 join	 the

flocking	 military.	  “If	 I’d	  known	that	 was	an	option,	 I	 would	 have	skipped	this

whole	charade.”

     The	officer	 didn’t	 react.

     “Yes,	 fine.	Thank	you	for	 your	thoroughness.	Let’s	go.”

     Torin	 fell	  into	 step	beside	him,	 along	 with	 way	 too	 many	 guards,	as	they

were	ushered	toward	the	cellar	door.

     “Nainsi	  will	 have	 tea	waiting	 for	 you,	 and	the	 chefs	have	been	 ordered	to

prepare	refreshments	 for	  your	  return,”	  said	 Torin.	  “The	  press	secretary	 is

drafting	 up	 a	 statement	for	 the	 media,	 but	 you’ll	  want	 to	 be	 briefed	 on	 the

palace’s	official	 position	regarding	the	security	breach	and	kidnapping	before	we

release	anything.”

     Kai	 had	to	duck	his	head	entering	the	house’s	basement.	It	was	tidy,	despite	a

few	cobwebs	 in	the	 corners,	and	as	they	 headed	into	the	 passageways	beneath

the	mountains	they	got	brighter	and	cleaner.

     “What’s	 the	status	on	the	palace?”	asked	Kai.

     “The	 enemy	 soldiers	 have	not	 yet	 breached	the	palace	 walls.	 Our	 tactical

analysts	believe	 that	if	  they	 do	overrun	 the	 palace	and	 discover	there	 are	no

128
people	to	kill,	 they	will	 redirect	 their	attention	to	elsewhere.	So	far,	we’ve	 found

that	these	soldiers	 do	not	 seem	interested	in	 general	destruction	 or	 theft,	 only

killing.”

     “Unless	 Levana	 is	using	 the	palace	 to	make	 a	statement.	It	 would	 suggest

they’re	winning.”

     “That	 is	a	possibility.”

     They	 rounded	a	 corner	and	 in	 the	distance	 Kai	 could	 make	out	 activity—

talking	 and	footsteps	and	the	buzz	of	 machinery.	 His	entire	 staff	was	 crammed

into	this	 labyrinth	 of	rooms	 and	hallways.	 He	almost	wished	 he’d	stayed	up	on

the	terrace.

     “Torin,	 what	about	the	families	 of	all	these	people?	Are	they	safe?”

     “Yes,	  sir.	 The	 families	 of	 all	  government	 officials	  were	 relocated	to	 the

palace	within	forty-eight	 hours	of	the	first	 attacks.	They	are	all	here.”

     “And	  what	 about	the	 people	who	 aren’t	 government	 officials?	 The	 chefs?

The	…	the	housekeepers?”

     “I’m	  afraid	we	didn’t	 have	room	for	 everyone.	We	would	have	brought	down

the	whole	city	if	 we	could.”

     Kai’s	 gut	clenched.	He	would	have	brought	the	whole	 country	with	 him,	if	 he

could.

     “Of	 course,”	 he	said,	forcing	 himself	 not	 to	dwell	 on	the	 things	he	couldn’t

change.	“Do	I	have	an	office	 down	here?	I	need	Nainsi	to	 set	up	a	meeting.	This

afternoon,	if	possible.”

     “Yes,	 Your	  Majesty.	 There	 are	also	 private	 rooms	set	 aside	for	 the	 royal

family.	I’m	 having	 them	made	up	now.”

     “Well,	  there’s	 only	  one	of	 me,	 and	 I	 only	 need	 one	room.	 We	 can	 find

129
something	more	useful	to	do	with	the	rest	of	them.”

     “Of	 course.	Who	is	Nainsi	to	 contact	for	this	meeting?”

     He	inhaled	deeply.	“My	  fiancée.”

     Torin’s	 pace	slowed	and	Kai	 thought	he	might	 come	to	 a	complete	stop,	but

Kai	pulled	 his	shoulders	back	and	kept	marching	down	 the	corridors.	One	of	 the

guards	ahead	of	them	was	yelling	 again—“Clear	  the	way!	 Clear	the	way!”—as

curious	staff	and	officials	  emerged	from	doorways.	 Rumors	were	spreading	fast

and	as	Kai	 met	 the	eyes	of	 those	he	passed,	he	saw	 joy	 and	relief	 cross	their

faces.

     He	gulped.	It	 was	strange	to	think	how	 many	people	were	worried	 about	him

—not	  just	  the	  people	  he	  saw	  every	  day,	  but	  citizens	   throughout	  the

Commonwealth—waiting	  to	hear	if	 the	 kidnappers	would	 return	 their	 emperor

safely,	having	 no	 idea	that	Linh	  Cinder	 was	the	last	 person	in	 the	world	  who

would	 hurt	 him.	 It	 made	 him	 feel	 a	little	  guilty	 for	  having	 enjoyed	his	 time

aboard	the	Rampion	as	much	as	he	had.

     “Your	  Majesty,”	  said	Torin,	 lowering	  his	voice	 as	he	 caught	up	 with	 him

again,	“I	 must	advise	 you	to	 reconsider	your	 arrangement	with	 Queen	Levana.

We	should	at	 least	discuss	the	best	course	of	 action	before	we	 make	any	hasty

decisions.”

     Kai	 cut	a	glance	toward	 his	adviser.	“Our	 government	is	being	 run	out	of	 an

enormous	bomb	shelter	and	there	are	Lunar	 mutants	beating	down	 the	doors	of

my	palace.	I’m	not	making	 hasty	decisions.	I’m	doing	 what	has	to	be	done.”

     “What	  will	 the	 people	think	 when	 they	 hear	you	 intend	 to	follow	  through

with	 a	marriage	to	the	 woman	who	 is	responsible	for	 hundreds	of	thousands	of

deaths?”

130
     “Millions.	   She’s	responsible	for	 millions	 of	 deaths.	But	that	 doesn’t	change

anything—we	still	 need	her	letumosis	antidote,	 and	I’m	 hoping	she’ll	 accept	the

terms	of	a	new	cease-fire	while	we	confirm	 alliance	details.”

     One	 of	  the	 guards	 gestured	 toward	  an	 open	 door.	 “Your	   office,	  Your

Majesty.”

     “Thank	  you.	 I	 require	 a	 moment	 of	  privacy	 with	  Konn-dàren,	 but	 if	  an

android	comes	by	with	some	tea,	let	her	in.”

     “Yes,	 sir.”

     He	stepped	into	the	office.	 It	 was	less	lavish	than	his	office	in	 the	palace,	but

not	uncomfortable.	 Without	 windows,	 the	 room	 was	filled	 with	  artificial	 light,

but	 bamboo	matting	  on	 the	 walls	 gave	 the	 space	some	warmth	  and	 helped

deaden	the	sound	of	Kai’s	 footsteps	 on	the	concrete	floor.	 A	 large	 desk	with	 a

netscreen	and	half	a	dozen	chairs	took	up	the	rest	of	the	space.

     Kai	 froze	when	 his	eyes	landed	on	 the	desk	and	he	started	to	laugh.	 On	the

corner	of	 the	desk	 sat	a	small,	 grime-filled	  cyborg	 foot.	 “You’re	  kidding,”	  he

said,	picking	it	up.

     “I	 thought	 it	was	 becoming	a	token	of	 good	luck,”	  said	Torin.	 “Although	 in

hindsight,	I	can’t	 imagine	what	led	me	to	think	 that.”

     Smiling	 in	amusement,	Kai	set	Cinder’s	abandoned	foot	back	down.

     “Your	  Majesty,”	   continued	 Torin,	  “what	  did	  you	 mean	 when	 you	  said

Levana	is	already	responsible	for	millions	of	 deaths?”

     Kai	 leaned	against	the	 desk.	“We	 thought	 this	war	 began	when	 her	special

operatives	attacked	those	first	fifteen	 cities,	but	we	were	 wrong.	This	 war	began

when	letumosis	was	manufactured	in	a	Lunar	laboratory	and	brought	to	Earth	for

the	first	 time.	All	  these	years,	she’s	been	waging	biological	  warfare	on	us,	and

131
we	had	no	idea.”

     Though	 Torin	 was	 skilled	 at	disguising	 his	 emotions,	 he	couldn’t	  hide	his

growing	horror.	 “You’re	 certain	of	this?”

     “Yes.	 She	 wanted	 to	 weaken	us,	 in	 population	 and	 resources,	before	 she

struck.	I	 also	 suspect	her	 ploy	 to	 offer	 an	 antidote	as	 a	bargaining	 chip	 was

designed	 to	 create	 an	 immediate	  dependency	 on	 Luna—once	  she	 became

empress.”

     “And	 you	don’t	 think	 this	changes	anything?	Knowing	it’s	 all	 been	a	strategy

to	coerce	you	 into	 this	alliance,	 you	 still	 plan	 on	going	 through	 with	 it?	 Your

Majesty,	 there	must	 be	 another	way.	 Something	 we	 haven’t	 considered	yet.”

Torin’s	 expression	tightened.	“I	 should	 inform	 you	that	 in	your	 absence,	we’ve

had	a	team	focused	 on	designing	 a	new	 class	of	 military-grade	 weaponry	 that

will	 be	able	to	penetrate	even	the	biodomes	on	Luna.”

     Kai	 held	his	gaze.	“We’re	building	 bombs.”

     “Yes.	 It’s	  been	a	slow	 process.	No	 Earthen	 military	  has	built	 or	 harbored

such	weapons	since	 the	 end	of	 the	 Fourth	 World	 War,	 and	 there	 are	unique

modifications	 required	to	weaken	Luna.	But	 we	believe	that	with	 Luna’s	 limited

resources	and	dependency	on	the	domes	to	protect	 them—the	success	of	a	few

bombs	could	mean	a	swift	end	to	the	war.”

     Kai	 stared	down	at	his	desk.	All	 of	Luna’s	 population	lived	 beneath	specially

designed	biodomes	that	provided	them	with	 breathable	atmosphere	and	artificial

gravity	  and	 the	 ability	  to	  grow	 trees	 and	 crops.	 Destroying	  one	 of	  those

protective	barriers	would	kill	 everyone	inside.

     “How	 long	before	these	weapons	are	ready?”	he	asked.

     “We’ve	 finished	 the	first	prototype,	 and	hope	to	have	the	first	batch	complete

132
in	four	to	 six	weeks.	The	fleet	of	 spaceships	required	to	transport	the	weapons	is

ready	now.”

     Kai	  grimaced.	 He	 didn’t	  want	 to	 say	 it,	 but	 he	 despised	the	 thought	 of

reducing	Luna’s	  cities	 to	 rubble.	 Already	 he	 had	begun	 to	 think	 of	 Luna	 as

belonging	 to	 Cinder,	 and	 he	didn’t	  want	 to	 destroy	 the	 kingdom	 that	 could

someday	be	hers.	But	if	it	could	end	the	war,	and	protect	Earth	…

     “Keep	 me	informed	of	 any	developments,”	he	said,	“and	 have	the	space	fleet

ready	at	a	 moment’s	 notice.	This	 is	 a	last	 resort.	First,	 we	 will	 try	 to	 reach	a

peaceful	resolution.	Unfortunately,	 that	begins	with	appeasing	Levana.”

     “Your	 Majesty,	 I	beg	you	to	reconsider.	We	are	not	losing	this	war.	Not	 yet.”

     “But	  we	 aren’t	 winning	 it,	 either.”	  Kai’s	 lips	 twitched	 upward.	 “And	  one

thing	has	changed.	Until	 now,	Levana	 has	been	calling	all	 the	shots,	but	for	 the

first	time,	I	 might	be	a	step	ahead	of	her.”

     Eyes	narrowing,	 Torin	 took	a	step	closer.	“This	 isn’t	 about	an	alliance	at	all,

is	it?”

     “Oh,	 I	fully	  intend	to	form	 an	alliance	with	 Luna.”	Kai	 glanced	at	the	cyborg

foot	again.	“I	 just	intend	to	put	a	different	 queen	on	the	throne	first.”

133
	




                                                 Fifteen







The	communication	link	 took	 ages	to	 connect,	while	Kai	 stood	 before	the

netscreen	with	his	hands	clasped	behind	his	back	and	his	heart	thudding	louder

than	the	Rampion’s	engine.	He	hadn’t	bothered	to	change	from	the	white	silk

wedding	shirt	he’d	 been	wearing	when	he’d	been	kidnapped,	though	it	 was

wrinkled	and	had	a	tiny	hole	where	Cinder’s	tranquilizer	dart	had	punctured	it.

Still,	 he	thought	 Levana	might	appreciate	that	contacting	her	 was	his	 first

priority—above	a	fresh	change	of	clothes,	above	even	alerting	the	Earthen	media

to	his	return.

     He	was	going	to	use	every	tactic	he	could	think	of	to	get	on	her	good	side.

Anything	to	make	this	believable.

     Finally,	 finally,	 the	 small	 globe	in	 the	 corner	stopped	turning	 and	 the

netscreen	brightened,	revealing	Levana	in	her	sheer	white	veil.

     “Could	it	be	my	dear	young	emperor?”	she	cooed.	“I	had	all	but	given	you	up

for	lost.	What	has	it	been,	more	than	a	month,	I	believe?	I	thought	for	sure	your

captors	had	murdered	and	dismembered	you	by	now.”

     Kai	 smiled,	pretending	she’d	made	an	amusing	joke.	“A	 few	bumps	and

scratches	here	and	there,	but	nothing	so	horrible	as	all	that.”

134
     “I	 see,”	Levana	mused,	tilting	her	head.	“That	bruise	on	your	cheek	looks

recent.”

     “More	recent	than	some	of	the	others,	yes,”	said	Kai.	Pretending	his	time

aboard	the	Rampion	had	been	a	trial,	barely	endured,	was	the	first	step	in	his

strategy.	“Linh	Cinder	made	it	clear	from	the	start	that	I	was	a	prisoner	aboard

her	ship,	not	a	guest.	Between	you	and	me,	I	think	she	was	still	bitter	I’d	had	her

arrested	at	the	ball.”

     “How	savage.”

     “I’m	 considering	myself	lucky	for	now.	 I	was	finally	 able	to	negotiate	my

freedom.	I’ve	just	returned	to	New	Beijing.	Informing	you	of	my	return	was	my

highest	priority.”

     “And	to	 what	do	we	owe	this	happy	occasion?	I	suspect	those	negotiations

must	have	been	cumbersome.”

     “My	 kidnappers	had	many	demands.	A	monetary	payout,	of	course,	and	also

that	I	 call	 off	  the	ongoing	search	for	 the	 fugitives,	both	 Linh	 Cinder	 and

Carswell	Thorne.”

     The	veil	fluttered	as	Levana	adjusted	her	hands	on	her	lap.	“They	must	have

believed	their	capture	was	imminent,”	she	said,	her	tone	unimpressed.	“Although

I	can’t	see	how	that	would	be,	given	that	you	could	not	apprehend	them	whilst

they	were	in	your	own	palace.”

     Kai’s	smile	remained	poised.	“Nevertheless,	I	agreed	to	it.	However,	I	made

no	guarantees	for	the	rest	of	the	Union,	nor	Luna.	I	expect	these	criminals	will

be	found	and	brought	to	justice	for	their	crimes,	including	my	own	assault	and

kidnapping.”

     “I	expect	they	will,”	said	Levana,	and	he	knew	she	was	mocking	him,	but	for

135
the	first	time	the	knowledge	didn’t	 crawl	 beneath	his	skin.

     “They	 had	one	additional	demand.”	 Behind	his	back,	Kai	 squeezed	his	hands

together,	forcing	 his	 nervous	energy	into	 them.	 “They	 insisted	 that	I	 refuse	to

follow	 through	 with	 the	alliance	 terms	you	and	I	 had	agreed	upon.	They	 asked

that	the	wedding	not	be	allowed	to	continue.”

     “Ah,”	  said	the	 queen,	with	 a	spiteful	 laugh,	“now	 we	 get	to	 the	reason	that

contacting	me	was	such	a	high	 priority.	 I	 am	sure	it	 killed	 you	to	 agree	to	such

egregious	terms.”

     “Not	 really,”	 he	deadpanned.

     Levana	 leaned	back,	and	 he	could	 see	her	shoulders	trembling.	  “And	 why

should	these	criminals	 concern	themselves	with	 intergalactic	 politics?	 Are	they

not	 aware	that	 they	 are	 already	 responsible	 for	 starting	  a	war	  between	our

nations?	Do	they	 not	believe	 I	 will	 find	  a	way	to	 sit	 upon	the	Commonwealth

throne	regardless	of	your	selfish	bargain?”

     Kai	 gulped	 painfully.	  “Perhaps	their	 interest	 has	to	do	 with	 Linh	  Cinder’s

claim	that	she	is	the	lost	Princess	Selene.”

     A	 silence	crackled	between	him	and	the	netscreen,	still	as	ice	on	a	pond.

     “She	 seems	to	 think,”	  Kai	  continued,	 “that	  should	we	 proceed	 with	  this

wedding	and	coronation,	it	 will	 weaken	what	claim	 she	might	have	on	the	Lunar

throne.”

     “I	  see.”	Levana	 had	reclaimed	 her	composure	 and	her	 flippant,	 whimsical

tone.	“I	had	wondered	if	 she	would	fill	 your	 head	with	falsehoods.	I	imagine	you

were	a	captive	audience.”

     He	shrugged.	“It’s	 a	pretty	small	spaceship.”

     “You	 believe	these	claims	of	hers	to	be	fact?”

136
     “Honestly?”	He	steeled	himself.	“I	don’t	care	one	way	or	the	other.	I	have

over	five	 billion	 people	living	 under	my	protection,	and	for	 the	past	month,

every	one	of	them	has	gone	to	bed	wondering	if	this	would	be	the	night	their

home	was	attacked.	If	this	was	the	night	their	windows	would	be	broken,	their

children	pulled	from	their	beds,	their	neighbors	mutilated	in	the	streets,	all	by

your	…	by	these	monsters	you’ve	created.	I	can’t—”	He	grimaced.	This	pain,	at

least,	did	not	have	to	 be	faked.	“I	  can’t	let	 this	continue,	and	Linh	 Cinder,

whether	or	not	she	is	the	lost	princess,	is	not	the	one	in	charge	of	the	Lunar

military	right	 now.	I	don’t	 care	about	Lunar	politics	and	family	dynamics	and

conspiracy	theories.	I	want	this	to	end.	And	you’re	the	one	with	the	power	to	end

it.”

     “A	heartrending	speech,	young	emperor.	But	our	alliance	is	over.”

     “Is	it?	You	seem	convinced	that	I	would	bow	to	the	whims	of	criminals	and

kidnappers.”

     She	said	nothing.

     “You	had	my	word	long	before	I	gave	it	to	Linh	Cinder.	Therefore,	I	feel	my

agreement	with	you	takes	precedence.	Wouldn’t	you	agree?”

     The	veil	shifted	by	her	hands,	like	she	was	fidgeting	with	something.	“I	see

that	your	time	away	has	not	diminished	your	impressive	skills	at	diplomacy.”

     “I	hope	not.”

     “You’re	telling	me	that	you	wish	to	proceed	with	our	previous	arrangement?”

     “Yes,	under	the	same	terms.	We	both	agree	to	a	cease-fire	on	all	Earthen	land

and	space	territories,	effective	immediately.	Upon	your	coronation	as	empress	of

the	Eastern	Commonwealth,	all	Lunar	soldiers	will	be	removed	from	Earthen

soil,	 and	you	 will	  allow	 us	 to	 manufacture	and	distribute	 your	 letumosis

137
antidote.”

     “And	 what	 assurances	can	you	give	me	that	our	wedding	won’t	 be	subjected

to	the	 same	mortifying	  spectacle	as	the	last	 one?	Surely	 your	 cyborg	 and	her

friends	won’t	 be	pleased	when	they	learn	you’ve	ignored	their	demands.”

     “I’m	  afraid	I	 haven’t	 had	time	to	 develop	a	plan.	We’ll	  increase	security,	of

course.	Bring	in	military	 reinforcements—I	 know	 how	much	you	admire	them.”

     Levana	scoffed.

     “But	 Linh	 Cinder	 has	proven	herself	to	be	resourceful.	One	 option	would	 be

to	hold	 the	ceremony	 in	secret,	and	 not	release	the	proof	 of	 the	wedding	 until

after	the	coro—”

     “No.	 I	 will	 not	 leave	any	question	in	 the	minds	 of	the	 Earthen	people	that	I

am	your	wife,	and	their	empress.”

     Kai’s	 clenched	his	teeth	to	keep	from	 gagging	at	the	words.	Your	 wife.	Their

empress.	“I	understand.	We	 can	consider	other	 locations	to	 host	the	ceremony,

something	more	remote	and	secure.	A	spaceship,	perhaps?	Or	even…”

     He	hesitated,	trying	to	look	 appalled	at	his	own	unspoken	thought.

     “Or	 even	what?”

     “I	  was	just	 …	 I	 doubt	this	 would	 appeal	to	 you.	 It	 would	 require	 a	lot	 of

work,	and	I	 don’t	 know	 if	 it’s	 even	plausible	…	 but,	why	 not	host	the	 wedding

on	Luna?	It	would	be	impossible	for	 Linh	 Cinder	to	interfere	then.”

     Here,	he	paused,	and	tried	not	to	seem	like	he	was	holding	his	breath.

     The	silence	grew	thick	 between	them.	Kai’s	heart	began	to	pound.

     It	 was	too	much.	He’d	made	her	suspicious.

     Kai	 started	to	chuckle,	shaking	 his	head.	“Never	mind,	 it	 was	a	stupid	idea.”

His	mind	whirred	 for	 another	angle	he	could	take.	“I’m	 sure	we’ll	 find	 a	suitable

138
location	on	Earth.	I	just	need	some	time	to—”

     “You	 are	clever,	aren’t	 you?”

     His	heart	skipped.	“Excuse	me?”

     The	 queen	 tittered.	 “Somewhere	  remote,	 somewhere	secure.	 My	  darling

emperor,	of	course	we	should	host	the	wedding	on	Luna.”

     Kai	  paused,	waited,	 then	 exhaled	slowly,	  keeping	 his	 expression	 neutral.

Another	moment,	 and	he	remembered	to	even	be	skeptical.	 “Are	 you	sure?	We

already	  have	  everything	   set	  up	  on	  Earth.	   All	   the	  transportation	   and

accommodations,	the	catering,	the	announcements—”

     “Don’t	  be	 ridiculous.”	  She	 fluttered	 her	 fingers	 behind	 the	 veil.	 “I	  don’t

know	 why	  I	 didn’t	  think	  of	 it	 sooner.	 We	 will	  host	 the	 ceremony	 here	 in

Artemisia.	 We	have	plenty	 of	 space	for	 accommodations,	and	I	 have	no	doubt

you	will	 be	pleased	with	the	hospitality	we	can	offer.”

     Kai	  pursed	his	 lips,	  worried	 to	 dissuade	 her	 from	 the	 idea,	 and	 equally

worried	to	appear	too	enthusiastic.

     “Is	 this	a	problem,	Your	 Imperial	Majesty?”

     “I	 don’t	 doubt	 Artemisia	 is	…	 lovely.	 But	 now	 that	I’m	  considering	it,	 I’m

concerned	this	might	 alienate	those	guests	who	 would	 have	been	privileged	  to

attend	the	 wedding	  here	on	 Earth.	 In	  particular,	 the	 leaders	 of	 the	 Earthen

Union.”

     “But	  of	 course	the	 invitation	 will	  be	 extended	to	 all	 Earthen	 diplomats.	 I

would	be	disappointed	if	 they	didn’t	 attend.	After	all,	 our	union	will	 be	a	symbol

of	peace,	not	only	between	Luna	and	the	Commonwealth,	but	 between	Luna	and

all	 Earthen	nations.	 I	 can	extend	the	 invitation	  to	each	 of	 our	Earthen	 guests

personally,	if	you	think	 that	would	 be	appropriate.”

139
     He	 scratched	behind	his	 ear.	“With	  all	 due	respect,	there	 may	be	some	 …

hesitation	from	 the	Union	leaders.	If	I	 may	be	blunt,	how	 can	you	guarantee	that

we—they	won’t	  be	walking	 into	 a	 trap?	You’ve	 made	no	 attempts	to	 disguise

your	threats	against	Earth	and	there	are	suspicions	that	 you	might	 still	 use	your

status	as	empress	as	a	launchpad	for,	well…”

     “World	 domination?”

     “Precisely.”

     Levana	tittered.	“And	  what	do	you	fear,	exactly?	That	I	 might	assassinate	the

heads	of	the	Earthen	Union	while	they’re	 here,	as	a	way	of	paving	an	easier	path

to	taking	control	of	 their	silly	 little	 countries?”

     “Precisely.”

     Another	 giddy	 laugh.	“My	  dear	emperor,	this	is	an	offer	 of	 peace.	I	want	 to

earn	the	 trust	 of	 the	 Union,	  not	 alienate	them.	 You	  have	my	  word	 that	 all

Earthen	guests	will	be	treated	with	the	utmost	courtesy	and	respect.”

     Kai	 slowly,	  slowly	 let	 his	 shoulders	 relax.	Not	  that	he	 believed	her	 for	 a

minute,	but	it	didn’t	 matter.	She	had	acted	how	he’d	hoped	she	would.

     “In	 fact,”	 continued	Levana,	“as	 a	show	of	my	 goodwill,	 I	 will	 agree	to	your

request	of	an	immediate	cease-fire	throughout	the	Union,	and	that	cease-fire	will

be	upheld	in	every	Earthen	territory	 whose	leaders	accept	our	invitation	to	attend

the	wedding	here	in	Artemisia.”

     Kai	 flinched.

     That	was	one	way	to	increase	attendance.

     He	 rubbed	his	 palms	down	 the	 wrinkled	 fabric	 of	 his	 shirt.	 “I	 can’t	 argue

with	the	point	 that	Artemisia	 is	 more	secure	than	any	place	we	could	choose	on

Earth.	I	will	 discuss	this	with	the	leaders	of	the	Earthen	Union	immediately.”

140
     “Please	do,	 Your	Majesty.	 As	 I’m	 sure	the	change	of	 location	 will	 not	 be	a

problem,	I’ll	  begin	making	 preparations	for	your	 visit,	 and	our	matrimonial	 and

coronation	ceremonies.”

     “Right,	 and	…	on	that	note.	When	would	 you	like—”

     “I	  suggest	the	eighth	 of	 November	 for	 our	 wedding	 and	celebratory	 feast,

followed	 by	 both	 coronations	 on	 the	 day	 following	  the	 new	 moon.	 We	 can

schedule	it	to	coincide	with	 our	sunrise—it	is	a	beautiful	time	 here	on	Luna.”

     Kai	 blinked.	 “That’s	 …	 my	 days	might	 be	a	little	  off,	 what	with	 the	 whole

hostage	thing,	but	…	isn’t	that	only	 a	week	away?”

     “Ten	 days,	Your	 Majesty.	 This	alliance	 has	been	deterred	for	too	 long.	I	 do

not	believe	anyone	wishes	to	see	my	patience	tried	further.	 I	 do	so	look	forward

to	receiving	you	 and	your	guests.”	 She	dipped	her	head	in	a	courteous	farewell.

“My	 ports	will	 be	ready	to	receive	you.”

141
	




                                                Sixteen







The	audio	feed	disconnected	with	a	soft	click,	leaving	the	cargo	bay	in	silence.

Sitting	atop	one	of	the	now-empty	storage	crates,	Cress	glanced	around,	taking

in	Cinder’s	tense	shoulders	as	she	stared	at	the	blank	netscreen,	the	way	Wolf

was	tapping	his	fingers	against	his	elbows,	and	Iko,	who	was	still	focused	on	the

portscreen	on	her	lap,	trying	to	figure	out	her	next	move	in	the	game	she	and

Cress	had	been	playing	for	the	last	hour.

     “He	did	it,”	mumbled	Cinder.

     “Of	course	he	did,”	said	Iko,	without	looking	up.	“We	knew	he	would.”

     Turning	her	back	on	 the	screen,	Cinder	scratched	idly	at	her	wrist.	“The

eighth	is	a	lot	sooner	than	I’d	expected.	I	bet	Earthen	leaders	will	start	departing

within	the	next	forty-eight	hours.”

     “Good,”	said	Wolf.	“The	wait	is	driving	me	crazy.”

     No,	the	separation	from	Scarlet	was	driving	him	crazy,	Cress	knew,	but	no

one	said	anything.	Maybe	the	wait	was	driving	them	all	a	little	crazy.

     “Jester	to	A1!”	 Iko	 finally	 announced.	Beaming,	she	held	the	port	out	to

Cress.

     “King	to	C4,	and	I	claim	all	rubies,”	said	Cress,	without	hesitation.

142
     Iko	 paused,	looked	down	at	 the	screen,	and	deflated.	“How	 are	you	so	good

at	this?”

     Cress	felt	 a	 rush	of	 pride	 behind	 her	sternum,	although	 she	wasn’t	 sure	 if

such	a	talent	 was	impressive	or	 embarrassing.	“I	 played	 this	 a	lot	 when	I	 was

bored	on	the	satellite.	And	I	got	bored	a	lot.”

     “But	 my	brain	is	 supposed	to	be	superior.”

     “I’ve	 only	 ever	played	against	a	computer	if	that	makes	you	feel	better.”

     “It	  doesn’t.”	 Iko	 crinkled	 her	nose.	“I	 want	 that	diamond.”	  Setting	the	port

back	into	 her	lap,	 she	fisted	 her	hand	 around	a	ponytail	  of	braids,	 once	again

deep	in	concentration.

     Cinder	 cleared	her	 throat,	 drawing	 Cress’s	focus,	 but	 not	 Iko’s.	 “Kai	  will

have	a	fleet	with	him.	It’s	 imperative	we	 know	which	ship	 he’s	on.”

     Cress	nodded.	“I	can	find	out.”

     “This	 plan	will	  work,”	 said	Wolf	 forcefully,	  like	 he	was	threatening	the	plan

itself.	 He	 started	to	 pace	between	the	 cockpit	 and	 medbay.	His	 and	 Cinder’s

anxiety	made	Cress	more	nervous	than	anything.

     This	was	it,	 their	only	chance.	Either	it	 worked,	or	they	failed.

     “Crown-maker	 to	A12.”

     It	 took	 Cress	a	moment	 to	 switch	 her	thoughts	 back	to	 the	game.	 Iko	 had

made	the	move	 she	expected	her	 to,	the	 same	move	her	 computer	 aboard	the

satellite	would	have	made.

     Cress	sacrificed	  her	Jester,	then	 proceeded	to	 sneak	 her	Thief	  across	the

board,	snatching	 up	 every	 loose	 emerald,	 until	 even	 Iko’s	  coveted	 diamond

wouldn’t	 win	her	the	game.

     “Ah!	  Why	 didn’t	 I	 see	that?”	Growling,	 Iko	 pushed	the	portscreen	away.	“I

143
never	liked	this	game	anyway.”

     “Podship	  detected,”	 said	 the	 Rampion’s	 monotone	  voice.	 Cress	jumped,

every	muscle	in	 her	body	 tightening.	 “Captain	Thorne	 is	requesting	 permission

to	dock.	Submitted	code	word:	Captain	 is	King.”

     She	exhaled,	 relieved	not	 only	 that	 they	hadn’t	 been	 spotted	by	 an	enemy

ship,	but	that	Thorne	was	back.	All	 the	worry	 she’d	been	harboring	since	he	and

Kai	had	left	rose	to	the	surface	of	her	skin	and	evaporated	with	a	single	breath.

     “Permission	 granted,”	said	Cinder,	a	fair	 amount	of	relief	 in	her	tone	as	well.

She	crossed	her	arms	over	her	chest.	“Step	one	complete.	Kai	 is	back	 on	Earth,

the	wedding	 is	 rescheduled	 to	take	 place	 on	 Luna,	 and	Thorne	 has	 returned

safely.”	 She	rocked	back	on	her	 heels,	a	crease	between	her	eyebrows.	“I	 can’t

believe	nothing	went	wrong.”

     “I	 would	 wait	 until	 you’re	 sitting	 on	a	throne	before	 making	statements	like

that,”	said	Wolf.

     Cinder	 twisted	her	 lips.	 “Good	 point.	All	  right,	 everyone.”	 She	slapped	her

hands	together.	“Let’s	get	started	on	any	last-minute	preparations.	Cress	and	Iko,

you’re	in	charge	of	making	 final	edits	to	the	video.	Wolf,	 I	 need	you	to—”

     The	door	 to	the	sublevel	hatch	burst	 open,	crashing	against	the	wall.	 Thorne

heaved	himself	up	 the	ladder	 and	immediately	 rounded	on	 Cinder,	who	 took	 a

startled	step	back.

     “You	painted	 my	ship?”	he	yelled.	“Why—what—why	   would	you	do	that?”

     Cinder	opened	her	mouth,	 but	hesitated.	She	had	clearly	expected	a	different

sort	of	 greeting.	“Oh.	 That.”	  She	glanced	around	at	Cress,	Wolf,	  and	Iko,	 like

asking	for	backup.	“I	  thought—wow,	 that	was	a	long	 time	ago.	I	 guess	I	should

have	mentioned	it.”

144
     “Mentioned	 it?	 You	 shouldn’t	 have—!	 You	  can’t	 go	 around	painting

someone	else’s	ship!	Do	you	know	how	long	it	took	me	to	paint	that	girl	in	the

first	place?”

     Cinder	squinted	one	eye	shut.	“Judging	from	how	precise	and	detailed	it	was,

I’m	going	to	guess	…	ten	minutes?	Fifteen?”

     Thorne	scowled.

     “All	  right,	 I’m	 sorry.	But	 the	 silhouette	was	too	recognizable.	It	 was	a

liability.”

     “A	 liability!	 You’re	a	liability!”	 He	pointed	at	Wolf.	“He’s	a	liability.	 Cress

is	a	liability.	We’re	all	liabilities!”

     “Am	I	one	too?”	asked	Iko.	“I	don’t	want	to	be	left	out.”

     Thorne	rolled	his	eyes	and	threw	his	hands	into	the	air.	“Whatever.	It’s	fine.

Not	like	it’s	 my	ship	anyway,	is	it?”	Growling,	he	dragged	a	hand	through	his

hair.	“I	 do	wish	 you	would	 have	said	something	before	I	had	a	heart	attack

thinking	I’d	just	hailed	the	wrong	ship.”

     “You’re	 right.	 Won’t	 happen	again.”	Cinder	 attempted	a	nervous	smile.

“So	…	how	did	it	go?”

     “Fine,	fine.”	Thorne	waved	the	question	away.	“Despite	my	inherent	distrust

of	authority	figures,	I’m	starting	to	like	this	emperor	of	yours.”

     Cinder	raised	an	eyebrow.	“I	don’t	know	if	I	should	be	relieved	or	worried.”

     Cress	bit	her	cheek,	burying	an	amused	smile.	She’d	sensed	some	discomfort

from	 Thorne	when	 Kai	 had	 come	aboard—after	all,	 “Emperor”	 outranked

“Captain”	by	just	about	anyone’s	standards—but	she’d	also	noticed	how	Thorne

stood	a	little	 straighter	in	Kai’s	 presence,	like	he	wanted	the	emperor	to	be

impressed	by	him	and	his	ship	and	his	crew	…	just	a	little.

145
     Shrugging	 off	 his	jacket,	Thorne	 draped	it	over	 the	nearest	crate.	“Anything

exciting	 happen	while	  I	 was	 away?”	 For	 the	first	  time,	 his	 gaze	darted	 past

Cinder	and	Iko	 to	 land	on	 Cress,	and	the	look	 was	so	 sudden	and	focused	she

became	instantly	 flustered.	 Tearing	 her	 gaze	away,	 she	set	 to	 inspecting	 the

metal	wall	plating.

     “The	 wedding	is	back	on,”	said	Cinder.	 “It	 will	 take	place	in	Artemisia	on	the

eighth,	with	the	coronation	to	 follow	 two	days	later	at	Lunar	sunrise.”

     Thorne’s	eyebrows	jumped	upward.	 “Not	 wasting	any	time.	Anything	 else?”

     “Levana	 agreed	to	a	cease-fire,”	said	Wolf,	 “but	 we’re	 waiting	 to	hear	if	 it’s

been	implemented.”

     “Also,	 Cress	destroyed	me	in	a	game	of	Mountain	Miners,”	 said	Iko.

     Thorne	nodded,	as	if	these	two	announcements	carried	the	same	weight.	“She

is	a	genius.”

     Cress’s	 blush	 deepened,	frustratingly.	   It	 had	 been	 easier	to	  pretend	 she

wasn’t	in	 love	 with	 him	 when	 he	couldn’t	 tell	 how	 often	 her	gaze	attached	to

him,	how	she	blushed	at	every	stray	compliment.

     “Yeah,	 but	I’m	 an	android.”

     Thorne	 laughed,	all	anger	over	 the	painted	ship	 gone.	“Why	 don’t	 you	 play

Android	Assault	 then?	Maybe	that’ll	 give	you	an	upper	hand.”

     “Or	 Robot	Resistance,”	suggested	Cinder.

     Thorne	snapped	his	fingers.	“Yes.	Vintage	 quality.”	 His	 eyes	were	twinkling,

all	calm	 and	confident	 in	that	 way	that	 always	made	Cress	feel	more	 calm	and

confident	too,	 just	from	 being	near	him	 and	knowing	 he	was	brave	and	capable

and—

     And	 he	was	looking	at	her.	Again.

146
     She	looked	away.	Again.

     Stupid,	stupid,	stupid.

     Mortified,	  she	found	herself	fantasizing	 about	crawling	 down	 to	the	podship

dock	and	getting	sucked	out	into	space.

     “We	 should	 get	 started,”	Cinder	 said.	 “Pack	 what	 supplies	we	 think	 we’ll

need,	prepare	the	ship	for	extended	neutral	orbit.”

     “You	 mean	abandonment,”	said	Thorne,	the	lightness	fading	from	his	tone.

     “I’ve	  already	 adjusted	the	wiring	  for	 the	 most	efficient	  settings.	It	 will	  be

fine.”

     “You	 know	 that’s	 not	true.	Without	 Cress	disrupting	 the	signals,	it	 won’t	 be

long	before	the	ship	is	found	and	confiscated.”

     Cinder	 sighed.	“It’s	 a	risk	 we	have	to	 take.	How	about,	 once	I’m	 queen,	I’ll

use	my	royal	coffers	or	whatever	to	buy	you	a	new	ship?”

     Thorne	glowered.	“I	 don’t	 want	a	new	ship.”

     Cress	felt	a	pang	of	 sympathy.	They	were	all	 sad	to	be	leaving	the	Rampion.

It	had	been	a	good	home	for	the	short	time	it	sheltered	them.

     “You	  know,	 Thorne,”	 said	Cinder,	 speaking	softly,	  like	 she	didn’t	 want	 to

say	what	she	was	about	to	say,	“you	don’t	have	to	come	with	 us.	You	could	 take

us	to	Kai,	 then	 come	back	 to	the	Rampion	 and	…	 you	 know	 we	 would	 never

give	you	away.”	 She	took	in	a	deep	breath.	“I	 mean	it.	For	all	 of	you.	 You	don’t

have	to	go	with	 me.	 I	know	 the	danger	I’m	  putting	 you	in,	 and	that	you	 didn’t

know	what	you	 were	signing	up	 for	when	you	 joined	me.	You	 could	go	 on	with

your	lives,	and	I	wouldn’t	 stop	you.	Wolf,	 Cress,	returning	to	Luna	 must	feel	like

a	death	sentence	to	you	both.	And,	Iko—”

     Iko	 held	 up	a	 hand.	“You	 need	a	 system	debug	if	 you’re	 suggesting	 that	I

147
would	abandon	you	now.”

     Thorne	 grinned.	His	 self-assured,	one-sided	grin.	 “She’s	right.	 It’s	 sweet	 of

you	to	worry,	but	 there’s	no	way	you	can	pull	this	off	 without	 us.”

     Pressing	her	lips,	Cinder	didn’t	 argue.

     Cress	stayed	 silent,	 wondering	 if	  she	was	 the	 only	 one	 who	 was	 briefly

tempted	by	Cinder’s	 offer.	Returning	 to	Luna	was	like	 sentencing	themselves	to

death—especially	 a	 shell	 like	 her,	 who	  should	 have	 been	killed	  years	 ago.

Undermining	 Levana	from	 the	safety	of	space	was	one	thing.	 But	walking	 right

into	Artemisia	 …	it	was	almost	like	 asking	to	be	killed.

     But	Thorne	 was	right.	Cinder	needed	them.	All	of	 them.

     She	shut	her	eyes	and	reminded	herself	to	be	brave.

     “Besides,”	 added	Iko,	 breaking	 the	tension,	“our	 captain	 is	still	 holding	 out

for	that	reward	money.”

     The	 others	laughed	 and	a	 smile	 fluttered	 over	 Cress’s	 lips,	 but	 when	she

opened	her	eyes,	Thorne	wasn’t	laughing	with	the	rest	of	them.

     In	 fact,	 he	looked	 suddenly	uncomfortable,	 his	shoulders	 tense.	“Well,	 you

know,	some	people	might	say	that	doing	the	right	thing	 is	a	reward	in	itself.”

     The	cargo	bay	fell	 still.	Cress	blinked.

     Uncertainty	 stretched	between	them.

     With	  a	 nervous	chuckle,	  Thorne	 added,	“But	  those	 people	die	 poor	 and

destitute,	so	 who	 cares	what	 they	 think?”	  He	 brushed	away	 his	 own	 words.

“Come	on,	freeloaders.	Let’s	get	to	work.”

148
	




                                                Seventeen







Kai	stared	out	the	 window,	 watching	the	clouds	 swirl	 over	the	continent	 below.

He	sought	out	the	 Great	Wall	 snaking	across	the	Commonwealth	 and	smiled	to

think	 his	 ancestors	had	built	 something	 even	 the	Fourth	 World	  War	 couldn’t

destroy.

     He	hoped	this	wouldn’t	 be	the	last	time	he	saw	his	beautiful	country.

     He	  knew	 the	  danger	 he	 was	 putting	  himself	  in,	  along	 with	  countless

representatives	from	the	rest	 of	the	 Union.	He	 hoped	Levana	had	 been	truthful

when	she	said	she	meant	them	no	harm.	He	hoped	this	wasn’t	 about	to	turn	into

a	bloodbath	in	which	the	naïve	Earthens	made	for	easy	prey.

     He	hoped,	 but	hoping	 did	little	 to	 comfort	 him.	He	 didn’t	 trust	Levana.	 Not

for	a	moment.

     But	 this	 was	 the	only	  way	 to	give	 Cinder	 the	 chance	she	 needed	to	face

Levana	and	start	 her	rebellion.	 Cinder’s	 success	would	rid	 them	 all	 of	 Levana

and	her	tyranny.	No	more	plague.	No	more	war.

     Stars,	he	hoped	this	worked.

     Burying	 a	sigh,	he	cast	his	 restless	gaze	around	the	sitting	room	of	 his	royal

ship.	If	it	 weren’t	for	 the	breathtaking	view	of	 Earth,	Kai	would	 have	had	no	idea

149
he	was	aboard	a	spaceship	at	all.	The	décor	held	all	 the	old-world	 decadence	of

the	palace:	ornate	lanterns	and	gilt	wallpapers	and	a	theme	of	 flying	 bats	carved

into	the	 crown	moldings.	 Long	 ago,	bats	had	 been	a	symbol	of	 good	 luck,	 but

over	the	years	they	had	come	to	 symbolize	 safe	travels	through	the	darkness	of

space.

     Torin	 caught	his	eye	from	an	upholstered	chair	on	the	other	side	of	 the	room,

where	he	was	busy	reading	 his	portscreen.	He	had	insisted	 on	coming	 to	Luna,

asserting	that	the	Chair	 of	National	 Security,	 Deshal	Huy,	 would	 be	capable	of

acting	as	head	of	the	Commonwealth	 in	their	 absence.	Torin’s	place	was	beside

Kai—for	 whatever	it	was	worth.

     “Is	 something	wrong,	Your	 Majesty?”

     “Not	 so	far.”	 He	 rubbed	his	palms	on	his	 thighs.	“You	 told	 the	pilots	 I	want

to	be	informed	if	 any	ships	hail	us?”

     “Of	 course.	I	 wish	 I	could	 tell	 you	they	 found	it	 to	be	a	 reasonable	request,

but	they	seemed	understandably	suspicious.”

     “Just	as	long	as	they	do	it.”

     “And	 you’re	 sure	this	is	a	good	idea?”

     “Not	  in	 the	 slightest.”	  The	 ship	 turned	 and	Earth	 was	 no	 longer	 visible

through	the	window.	Kai	 turned	away.	“But	 I	trust	her.”

     Torin	 set	down	his	port.	“Then	I	 have	no	choice	but	to	trust	her	as	well.”

     “Hey,	 you’re	the	one	who	told	 her	about	my	second	tracking	chip.”

     “Yes,	 and	I	 have	 since	wondered	if	 that	 was	the	 biggest	mistake	 I’ve	 ever

made.”

     “It	 wasn’t.”	 Kai	 rolled	his	shoulders,	trying	 to	relax.	“Cinder	 can	do	this.”

     “You	 mean,	Selene	can	do	this.”

150
     “Selene.	Cinder.	She’s	the	same	person,	Torin.”

     “I	  must	 disagree.	 To	 the	 world,	  Linh	  Cinder	 is	 a	 dangerous	felon	  who

kidnapped	a	world	 leader	and	instigated	 a	war,	 while	 Princess	Selene	could	be

the	solution	 to	all	 our	problems	 with	 Luna.	By	 helping	 Linh	 Cinder,	 the	world

will	 think	 you’re	 nothing	 but	an	infatuated	 teenager.	By	helping	 Selene,	you’re

making	a	brave	stand	against	our	country’s	 enemies	and	doing	what	you	believe

is	best	for	the	Commonwealth’s	future.”

     A	 wisp	of	 a	smile	 jotted	across	Kai’s	 lips.	“Whatever	 the	world	 thinks,	 they

are	the	same	person.	I	 want	what’s	 best	for	 Cinder,	and	I	 want	 what’s	best	for

my	country.	Conveniently,	 I	believe	those	are	the	same	thing.”

     It	 had	been	a	 relief	 to	tell	 Torin	  everything—the	 only	 person	he	trusted	 to

keep	his	secrets.	Cinder’s	identity,	 the	real	 reason	they	were	going	to	 Luna,	the

revolution	 she	 planned	to	 start	 there,	and	 Kai’s	  role	 in	 it	 all.	  Though	 Torin

expressed	concern	that	Kai	was	risking	far	 too	much,	he	hadn’t	 tried	to	talk	 him

out	of	it.	 In	 fact,	Kai	 wondered	if	 Torin	 wasn’t	developing	 a	little	 bit	of	 faith	 in

Cinder	as	well,	even	if	he	tried	to	hide	it	 behind	cold	cynicism.

     Torin	 returned	his	 attention	to	 his	portscreen,	and	Kai	 sat	watching	 through

the	window,	 his	 heart	skipping	 every	 time	 he	spotted	another	 ship	against	the

backdrop	of	space.

     Hours	passed	like	days.	Kai	 tried	to	 take	a	nap,	to	no	avail.	 He	read	over	his

wedding	vows	 without	  comprehending	a	 word.	 He	paced	back	 and	forth,	 and

drank	half	 a	cup	of	 tea	that	someone	brought	him—except	 it	wasn’t	 as	good	as

Nainsi	 would	 have	made,	which	  made	him	 miss	his	 trusted	 android	assistant.

He’d	come	 to	rely	 on	her	 practical,	no-nonsense	conversation,	but	 Levana	was

adamant	that	no	androids	would	 be	allowed	on	 Luna,	so	he	was	forced	 to	leave

151
Nainsi	behind.

     He	set	the	tea	aside,	his	stomach	writhing	 with	nerves.	He	should	 have	heard

from	 Cinder	 by	now.	 Something	 had	gone	 wrong,	 and	here	he	 was	flying	  an

entire	fleet	 of	Earth’s	 most	powerful	 people	 right	 into	Levana’s	 clutches	and	it

would	all	be	for	 nothing	and—

     “Your	 Majesty?”

     His	head	snapped	up.	The	ship’s	first	mate	stood	in	the	doorway.

     “Yes?”

     “We’ve	  been	 hailed	 by	 the	 American	 Republic’s	  secretary	of	 defense.	 It

seems	they’re	having	technical	issues	with	 their	ship’s	 computer	mainframe	and

have	requested	permission	to	board	and	complete	the	trip	to	Artemisia	with	us.”

     Kai	 exhaled.

     “The	 captain	suggests	we	send	one	of	the	military	 escorts	to	assist	them.	I’m

happy	to	put	them	in	touch—”

     “That	 won’t	 be	necessary,”	said	 Kai.	 “We	 have	the	room.	Let	 them	board.”

Though	 a	  dozen	 province	  representatives	 and	  some	 journalists	  from	   the

Commonwealth	media	were	already	aboard,	the	ship	was	nowhere	near	capacity.

     The	officer	 frowned.	 “I	 do	believe	it’s	 a	matter	of	security,	 not	space.	Due	to

their	technical	 difficulties,	 we’ve	 been	unable	to	obtain	 a	proper	ID	 on	the	 ship

or	its	 officers.	 Their	 vid-comm	  is	also	 malfunctioning.	 Our	 visual	 of	 the	 ship

does	confirm	 it	  as	a	Republic	  military	  ship,	 Rampion	 class,	but	 beyond	that

we’re	 forced	to	 take	them	 at	their	 word,	 and	I’m	  sure	I	 don’t	 need	to	 remind

Your	Majesty	 that	…	your	kidnappers	were	also	in	a	Rampion.”

     Kai	 pretended	to	consider	his	point.	“The	Rampion	I	 was	held	hostage	aboard

had	the	silhouette	of	 a	lady	painted	 on	its	port	 side.	Is	there	 such	a	marking	on

152
the	secretary’s	ship?”

     The	 officer	  relayed	 the	 question	 into	 a	 comm-chip	  on	 his	 collar,	 and	 a

moment	later	confirmed	 that	 no	such	lady	 was	visible.	 Only	 black	 paneling	on

the	boarding	ramp.

     “There	 you	have	it,”	  said	Kai,	 attempting	nonchalance.	“We	 will	 accept	our

American	allies	 on	board,	assuming	their	podships	are	in	working	 order.	In	 fact,

why	 don’t	  I	 come	 down	 to	 the	 dock	 to	 greet	 them,	 as	a	 show	 of	 political

goodwill?”

     “I’ll	  come	as	well,”	 said	Torin,	setting	his	port	aside.

     The	 first	  mate	 looked	  like	 he	 wanted	  to	 object	 but,	  after	 an	 uncertain

moment,	clicked	his	heels	together	and	nodded.	“Of	course,	Your	Majesty.”


                                                          *			 *			*

Even	the	waiting	 room	 outside	the	 podship	dock	 was	luxurious	 and	Kai	 found

himself	 tapping	  his	 foot	  on	 thick	  carpet	 while	  machinery	  hummed	 in	 the

surrounding	walls.	  The	ship’s	 captain	 had	joined	 them,	 waiting	 to	 greet	 their

guests	before	 returning	 to	 the	 bridge,	 and	 he	 and	the	 first	  mate	 stood	with

impeccable	posture	in	their	unwrinkled	 uniforms.

     The	screen	beside	the	sealed	doors	announced	that	the	dock	was	safe	to	enter.

     The	 captain	went	 first,	 Kai	 right	 behind	 him.	 There	were	 six	 of	 their	 own

podships	waiting,	 and	empty	spaces	for	three	more.	 The	Rampion’s	 shuttle	had

taken	the	farthest	spot	and	sat	with	its	engines	powering	down.

     The	 two	 doors	 rose	 simultaneously	 and	 five	 people	 emerged—America’s

secretary	of	defense,	one	assistant,	one	intern,	and	two	security	agents.

     The	 captain	shook	the	 secretary’s	hand,	welcoming	 the	 newcomers	aboard,

153
followed	by	 a	series	of	diplomatic	bows.

     “Thank	 you	for	 your	hospitality.	 We	do	apologize	 for	any	inconvenience	this

may	have	caused,”	 said	the	 secretary,	as	Kai	 tried	 to	 figure	 out	who	 this	 was

beneath	the	illusion.	He	 guessed	Thorne	and	Wolf	 were	the	security	agents,	but

the	glamour	being	cast	for	the	Republic’s	 secretary	was	perfect,	straight	down	to

the	mole	 on	 the	right	 side	 of	 her	chin.	 The	 assistant	and	intern	 were	 equally

convincing.	It	 was	impossible	to	distinguish	them	from	 Cinder,	Iko,	 and	Cress.

     “Evidently,”	   added	the	assistant,	gaze	 flashing	 in	 Kai’s	 direction,	 “this	  all

could	have	been	avoided	if	 the	ship’s	mechanic	had	remembered	to	bring	 a	pair

of	wire	cutters.”

     Kai’s	 mouth	 twitched.	 That	 one,	then,	was	Cinder.	 He	 tried	to	 imagine	 her

beneath	the	glamour,	smug	over	her	use	of	their	 new	“code	word.”	 He	 refrained

from	rolling	 his	eyes	at	her.

     “It’s	  no	 inconvenience	at	 all,”	 said	Kai,	  focusing	 on	the	 secretary.	“We’re

glad	we	could	 be	of	assistance.	Do	you	need	us	to	send	anyone	to	retrieve	 your

ship?”

     “No,	 thank	 you.	The	 Republic	has	already	sent	a	maintenance	crew,	 but	we

didn’t	 want	to	 be	delayed	longer	 than	necessary.	We	do	have	a	party	 to	get	 to,

you	know.”

     The	secretary	winked,	very	un-diplomat-like.	  Iko,	then.

     Remembering	Cinder’s	 warning—that	  it	would	 be	tiring	  for	her	 to	not	 only

glamour	herself	but	also	manipulate	the	perception	of	her	four	comrades,	and	she

didn’t	 know	 how	 long	 she’d	 be	able	 to	maintain	 it—Kai	  gestured	toward	 the

exit.	“Come	 with	 me.	 We	have	 a	sitting	 room	 where	we’ll	  all	 be	comfortable.

Can	I	offer	you	some	tea?”

154
     “I’ll	 have	a	whiskey	on	the	rocks,”	said	one	of	the	security	personnel.

     Cinder-the-assistant	cast	a	cold	glare	at	the	man.	Thorne.

     “We’re	fine,”	said	Cinder.	“Thank	you.”

     “Right	this	way.”	Kai	and	Torin	led	their	guests	away	from	the	docking	bay,

dismissing	the	captain	and	first	mate.	No	one	spoke	until	they’d	made	their	way

back	to	his	private	rooms.

     When	Kai	faced	his	guests	again,	the	disguises	were	gone	and	the	reality	of

seeing	five	known	criminals	in	his	sitting	room	reminded	him	that	he’d	just	put

everyone	aboard	this	ship	in	a	great	amount	of	danger.

     “Is	this	room	secure?”	asked	Thorne.

     “It	should	be,”	said	Kai.	“We	use	it	for	international	conferencing	and—”

     “Cress?”

     “On	it,	Captain.”	Cress	pulled	a	portscreen	from	her	back	pocket	and	went	to

the	control	 panel	built	 into	 the	wall,	 running	whatever	system	check	she’d

devised.

     “This	is	Konn	Torin,	my	head	adviser.	Torin,	you	remember	Cin—”

     “Wait,”	said	Cinder,	holding	up	a	hand.

     Kai	paused.

     Nine	 long,	 silent	 seconds	passed	between	them,	 before	 finally	  Cress

unplugged	her	portscreen.	“All	clear.”

     “Thank	you,	Cress,”	said	Thorne.

     Cinder	lowered	her	hand.	“Now	we	can	talk.”

     Kai	raised	an	eyebrow.	“Right.	Torin,	you	remember	Cinder	and	Iko.”

     Torin	nodded	at	them,	his	arms	crossed,	and	Cinder	returned	the	nod,	laced

with	an	equal	amount	of	tension.	“I	told	you	I’d	return	him	safely,”	she	said.

155
     A	flicker	 of	irony	passed	over	Torin’s	face.	“You	promised	no	harm	would

come	to	him.	In	my	opinion,	that	includes	physical	injury.”

     “It	 was	just	one	punch,	Torin.”	Kai	shrugged	at	Cinder.	“I	tried	to	explain	it

was	all	a	part	of	the	charade.”

     “I	  understand	perfectly,	 but	  forgive	 me	  for	 being	 defensive.”	 Torin

scrutinized	their	new	guests.	“Though	I’m	 grateful	Kai	 has	been	returned,	it

seems	this	ordeal	is	hardly	over.	I	 hope	you	know	 what	you’re	 doing,	Linh

Cinder.”

     Kai	expected	her	to	make	some	self-deprecating	remark	about	how	Torin

wasn’t	the	only	one,	but	instead,	after	a	long	silence,	Cinder	asked,	“How	much

does	he	know?”

     “Everything,”	said	Kai.

     She	turned	back	to	Torin.	 “In	 that	case,	thank	you	for	 your	help.	May	 I

introduce	you	to	the	rest	of	 our	team:	Iko	you’ve	 met,	and	this	is	our	 ship’s

captain,	Carswell	Thorne,	our	software	engineer,	Cress	Darnel,	and	my	security

officer	…	Wolf.”

     As	Torin	greeted	their	guests	with	more	respect	than	was	required,	given	the

circumstances,	Kai’s	attention	lingered	on	Cinder.	She	stood	ten	full	paces	away

from	him,	 and	as	much	 as	Kai	 wanted	to	cross	the	 room	and	kiss	 her,	he

couldn’t.	Maybe	it	was	Torin’s	presence.	Maybe	it	was	knowing	they	were	on

their	way	to	Luna,	where	he	would	be	married.	Maybe	he	was	afraid	their	time

spent	on	the	Rampion	had	been	a	dream,	too	fragile	to	survive	in	reality.

     Though	he’d	seen	her	three	days	ago,	it	felt	like	a	lifetime.	A	wall	had	been

erected	between	them	during	that	absence,	though	he	wasn’t	sure	what	had

changed.	Their	relationship	was	precarious.	Kai	felt	like	if	he	breathed	the	wrong

156
way,	 he	 might	  destroy	 everything,	  and	 he	 could	 see	 the	 same	uncertainty

mirrored	in	Cinder’s	 face.

     “Oh,	 look,”	 said	Iko,	 crossing	to	the	row	 of	windows.	 Luna	was	emerging	in

their	view,	bright	 white	and	pocked	with	 a	thousand	craters	and	cliffs.	They	were

close	enough	to	see	the	biodomes,	sunlight	glinting	off	their	surfaces.

     Kai	 had	never	in	his	life	 dreamed	he	would	step	foot	on	Luna.	Seeing	it	 now,

the	inevitability	 of	his	fate	made	his	stomach	squeeze	tight.

     Cinder	turned	 to	Kai.	She	was	doing	a	good	job	 of	hiding	 her	anxiety,	but	 he

was	learning	to	recognize	it	beneath	her	squared	shoulders	and	determined	looks.

“I	hope	you	have	something	for	us?”

     Kai	 gestured	at	a	cabinet	against	the	wall.

     Iko	  was	 the	 first	  one	 there,	 yanking	  open	 the	 doors	  with	  effervescent

enthusiasm,	but	it	wilted	 fast	when	she	saw	the	clothes	Nainsi	had	gathered.	The

stack	was	a	mix	of	browns	and	grays	and	dull	whites,	linens	and	cottons.	Simple,

utilitarian	 clothing.

     “That	 looks	 right,”	 said	Wolf,	  who	had	 been	the	most	helpful	 in	 describing

what	the	people	of	Luna’s	outer	sectors	might	wear.

     While	 they	 eyed	the	clothes	and	began	deciding	 who	got	 which	 pieces,	Kai

crossed	to	another	cabinet	 and	pulled	 out	a	 sheet	of	fiberglass	 android	 plating

and	a	tub	of	 synthetic	 skin	fibers.	 “And	 this	 is	for	 Iko.	 Plus	 everything	Cinder

should	need	to	install	it.”

     Iko	 squealed	and	launched	herself	 across	the	room.	 Kai	 braced	himself	 for

another	hug,	 but	 instead	she	 was	all	  over	 the	new	 plating,	  marveling	 at	 the

supplies.	Cinder	wasn’t	far	behind.

     “These	 are	 perfect,”	 said	 Cinder,	 examining	  the	 fibers.	 Her	 eyes	 glinted

157
teasingly.	“You	 know,	 if	 this	emperor	thing	 doesn’t	work	 out,	you	might	 have	a

future	career	in	espionage.”

     He	gave	her	 a	wry	 look.	“Let’s	  make	sure	this	 emperor	thing	works	 out,	all

right?”

     Cinder’s	 face	softened	and	she	smiled	for	the	first	time	 since	they’d	boarded.

Dropping	the	fibers	back	into	 their	tub,	she	hesitated	for	a	moment,	before	taking

the	last	few	steps	toward	Kai	and	wrapping	her	arms	around	him.

     He	 shut	his	eyes.	Just	like	 that,	 the	wall	 was	gone.	His	 arms	were	 eager	to

pull	her	against	him.

     “Thank	 you,”	 Cinder	whispered,	and	he	knew	 it	wasn’t	 for	the	clothes	or	 the

android	parts.	The	 words	were	weighted	 with	 faith	 and	trust	 and	sacrifices	Kai

wasn’t	ready	to	think	 about	just	yet.	He	squeezed	her	tighter,	pressing	his	temple

against	her	hair.

     Cinder	 was	 still	  smiling	  when	 she	 extricated	 herself	 from	  the	 embrace,

though	it	  was	laced	 with	  determination.	 “Time	  is	 running	 out,”	 she	 said.	 “I

suggest	we	go	over	the	plan,	one	more	time.”

158
	




                                                 Eighteen







Winter	let	 the	maid	style	her	hair,	pulling	 the	top	half	 into	a	thick	 braid	threaded

with	 strands	 of	 gold	 and	 silver	  and	leaving	  the	 rest	to	  cascade	around	 her

shoulders.	She	let	the	maid	 pick	 out	a	pale	 blue	dress	that	grazed	her	skin	 like

water	and	a	strand	of	rhinestones	to	accent	her	neck.	She	let	the	maid	rub	scented

oils	into	her	skin.

     She	did	not	let	the	maid	 put	any	makeup	on	her—not	even	to	cover	the	scars.

The	maid	didn’t	 put	up	much	of	a	fight.	 “I	 suppose	you	don’t	need	it,	Highness,”

she	said,	bobbing	a	curtsy.

     Winter	 knew	 she	had	a	sort	of	exceptional	 beauty,	but	she	had	never	before

been	given	a	reason	to	enhance	it.	No	 matter	what	 she	did,	gazes	would	follow

her	down	the	corridors.	No	 matter	what	she	did,	her	stepmother	would	 snarl	and

try	to	hide	her	envy.

     But	 since	 Jacin	confessed	he	was	 not	 immune	to	 her	 appearance,	she	had

been	looking	 forward	  to	 this	chance	 to	dress	 up	in	 new	 finery.	  Not	 that	 she

expected	much	to	come	from	it	 other	than	a	heady	satisfaction.	She	knew	it	 was

naïve	to	think	Jacin	might	 ever	do	something	as	crazy	as	profess	his	love	for	her.

If	he	did	 love	her	at	all.	 Which	she	was	confident	 he	did,	he	must,	after	all	these

159
years	…	yet,	 his	treatment	 of	her	 had	had	a	distant	 quality	 since	he	joined	 the

royal	guard.	The	 professional	respect	he	maintained	too	often	 made	her	want	to

grab	his	lapels	and	kiss	him,	just	to	see	how	long	it	would	take	for	 him	to	thaw.

     No,	 she	did	 not	expect	a	 confession	or	 a	kiss,	and	 she	knew	all	 too	 well	 a

courtship	was	out	 of	 the	question.	 All	 she	wanted	was	 an	admiring	 smile,	 one

breathless	look	that	would	sustain	her.

     As	 soon	as	the	maid	had	gone,	Winter	 peeked	into	the	corridor,	 where	Jacin

stood	at	his	post.

     “Sir	  Clay,	 might	 I	 solicit	 your	 opinion	 before	 we	 go	to	 greet	our	 Earthen

guests?”

     He	 waited	  two	  full	  breaths	 before	 responding.	 “At	   your	 service,	  Your

Highness.”

     He	did	not,	however,	 remove	his	attention	from	the	corridor	 wall.

     Smoothing	 down	her	skirt,	 Winter	 situated	herself	in	front	 of	him.	 “I	 wanted

to	know	if	 you	thought	I	looked	 sort	of	pretty	today?”

     Another	 breath,	this	one	a	bit	louder.	“Not	funny,	 Princess.”

     “Funny?	 It’s	 an	honest	question.”	She	bunched	her	lips	to	 one	side.	“I’m	 not

sure	blue	is	my	color.”

     With	 a	glower,	he	finally	 looked	at	her.	“Are	 you	trying	 to	drive	me	crazy?”

     She	laughed.	“Crazy	loves	company,	 Sir	Clay.	I	 notice	you	haven’t	 answered

my	question.”

     His	 jaw	tightened	 as	he	returned	his	focus	 to	some	spot	over	 her	head.	“Go

look	  for	  compliments	 elsewhere,	  Princess.	 I’m	  busy	 protecting	  you	  from

unknown	threats.”

     “And	 what	 a	fine	job	 you’re	 doing.”	 She	tried	to	hide	 her	disappointment	as

160
she	headed	back	into	her	chambers,	patting	Jacin	on	the	chest	as	she	passed.	But

with	that	 touch,	his	hand	gathered	up	a	fistful	  of	her	skirt,	 anchoring	 her	beside

him.	Her	 heart	flipped,	 and	despite	all	 her	bravado,	Jacin’s	 piercing	gaze	made

her	feel	tiny	and	childish.

     “Please	stop	 doing	this,”	 he	 whispered,	more	pleading	 than	angry.	 “Just	…

leave	it	alone.”

     She	gulped,	 and	thought	 to	 feign	 ignorance.	But,	 no—ignorance	 was	what

she	feigned	  for	  everyone	 else.	 Not	 Jacin.	  Never	 Jacin.	 “I	  hate	 this,”	   she

whispered	back.	“I	hate	having	to	pretend	like	 I	don’t	even	see	you.”

     His	expression	softened.	“I	 know	you	see	me.	That’s	all	that	matters.	Right?”

     She	gave	 a	slight	 nod,	 though	 she	wasn’t	 sure	 she	agreed.	How	 lovely	  it

would	have	been	to	live	in	a	world	 where	she	didn’t	have	to	pretend.

     Jacin	 released	her	 and	 she	slipped	  into	 her	 chambers,	 shutting	 the	 door

behind	her.	She	was	surprised	to	 find	 herself	light-headed.	She	must	have	 been

holding	her	breath	when	he’d	stopped	her	and	now—

     She	froze	 a	few	 steps	into	 the	sitting	 room.	 Her	 gut	 tightened,	her	 nostrils

filling	 with	 the	iron	tang	of	blood.

     It	 was	all	 around	her.	 On	the	 walls.	Dripping	  from	 the	chandelier.	 Soaking

into	the	upholstered	cushions	of	the	settee.

     A	 whimper	escaped	her.

     It	 had	been	weeks	since	 she	had	one	of	 the	visions.	 None	 had	haunted	her

since	Jacin’s	 return.	 She’d	 forgotten	  the	 overwhelming	 dread,	 the	 swoop	 of

horror	in	her	stomach.

     She	squeezed	her	eyes	shut.

     “J-Jacin?”	 Something	warm	splattered	on	her	shoulder,	no	 doubt	staining	the

161
beautiful	 blue	 silk.	 She	 took	 a	step	 back	 and	felt	  the	area	 rug	 squish	wetly

beneath	her	feet.	“Jacin!”

     He	 burst	through	 the	door,	 and	though	she	kept	 her	eyes	pressed	tight,	 she

could	imagine	him	behind	her,	weapon	drawn.

     “Princess—what	 is	it?”	He	 grabbed	her	elbow.	“Princess?”

     “The	 walls,”	 she	whispered.

     A	 beat,	 followed	 by	 a	low	  curse.	She	heard	 his	gun	 being	 replaced	in	 its

holster,	then	 he	 was	 in	 front	 of	  her,	 his	 hands	on	 her	 shoulders.	His	  voice

dropped,	becoming	tender.	“Tell	me.”

     She	tried	 to	swallow,	  but	her	saliva	 was	thick	 and	metallic.	  “The	 walls	are

bleeding.	The	chandelier	too,	and	it	 got	on	my	 shoulder,	and	I	think	 it’s	 staining

my	shoes,	and	I	can	smell	it,	 and	taste	it,	and	why—”	 Her	voice	 unraveled	all	at

once.	“Why	does	the	palace	hurt	so	much,	Jacin?	Why	is	it	always	dying?”

     He	 pulled	 her	 against	 him,	 cradling	 her	 body.	 His	 arms	 were	 stable	and

protective	 and	he	 was	not	 bloody	 and	 he	was	 not	 broken.	She	 sank	into	 the

embrace,	too	dazed	to	 return	 it,	 but	willing	  to	 accept	the	 comfort.	 She	buried

herself	in	the	security	of	him.

     “Take	 a	breath,”	he	commanded.

     She	did,	though	the	air	was	clouded	with	 death.

     She	was	glad	to	let	it	out	again.

     “It’s	 all	 in	your	head,	Princess.	You	know	that.	Say	it	now.”

     “It’s	 all	 in	my	head,”	she	murmured.

     “Are	 the	walls	bleeding?”

     She	shook	her	head,	feeling	 the	press	of	 his	ranking	 pin	against	her	 temple.

“No.	They	 don’t	bleed.	It’s	 all	in	my	 head.”

162
     His	hold	 tightened.	“You’re	 all	 right.	It	will	  pass.	Just	keep	breathing.”

     She	did.	  Again	 and	again	 and	 again,	his	 voice	 coaxing	 her	 through	 each

breath	until	the	smell	of	blood	 gradually	subsided.

     She	felt	 dizzy	and	exhausted	and	sick	to	 her	stomach,	but	glad	her	breakfast

hadn’t	come	up.	“It’s	 better	now.	It’s	 gone.”

     Jacin	exhaled,	like	he’d	 been	forgetting	to	breathe	himself.	Then,	 in	a	strange

moment	of	vulnerability,	 he	craned	his	head	and	kissed	her	on	the	shoulder,	right

where	the	nonexistent	drop	of	 blood	had	fallen	 before.	“That	 wasn’t	so	bad,”	 he

said,	with	a	new	lightness.	“No	 windows	at	least.”

     Winter	 cringed,	remembering	the	first	 time	she	saw	the	castle	walls	bleeding.

She’d	been	so	 distraught	and	 desperate	to	get	away	 she	tried	 to	throw	 herself

from	the	second-floor	balcony—Jacin	 barely	got	to	her	in	time	to	 pull	her	back.

     “Or	 sharp	utensils,”	she	said,	carrying	it	 off	as	a	joke.	The	time	she’d	stabbed

a	dozen	holes	into	 her	drapes	trying	 to	kill	  the	spiders	that	 were	crawling	 over

them,	once	stabbing	her	own	hand	in	the	process.	It	had	not	been	a	deep	wound,

but	Jacin	took	care	to	keep	sharp	objects	away	from	her	ever	since.

     He	pushed	to	arm’s	length,	inspecting	her.	She	forced	a	smile,	then	realized	it

wasn’t	forced	after	all.	 “It’s	 over.	I’m	 all	right.”

     His	 eyes	warmed	and	for	the	briefest	of	moments	she	thought—this	 is	it,	this

is	when	he	will	kiss	me—

     There	was	a	cough	from	the	doorway.

     Jacin	recoiled.

     Winter	 spun	around,	heart	thundering.

     Aimery	 stood	in	the	open	door,	his	expression	dark.	“Your	 Highness.”

     Catching	her	breath,	Winter	 tucked	a	curl	behind	her	ear—it	 must	have	fallen

163
loose	from	 the	braid.	She	was	warm	 all	 over.	Flustered	and	nervous	 and	aware

that	she	should	 be	embarrassed,	but	she	was	more	 annoyed	at	the	 interruption

than	anything	else.

     “Thaumaturge	 Park,”	 she	said	with	 a	cordial	 nod.	“I	  was	having	one	of	 my

nightmares.	Sir	Clay	was	assisting	me.”

     “I	 see,”	said	Aimery.	 “If	 the	nightmare	has	receded,	I	suggest	he	return	to	his

post.”

     Jacin	clicked	 his	heels	and	left	wordlessly,	 though	it	was	impossible	 to	tell	 if

it	was	by	his	own	volition	 or	if	 Aimery	 was	controlling	 him.

     Still	 trying	 to	 compose	herself,	Winter	 fluttered	 a	smile	 at	the	thaumaturge.

“It	must	be	time	to	 leave	for	the	docks?”

     “Nearly,”	  he	 said,	and,	to	 her	 surprise,	he	turned	 and	shut	 the	door	 to	 the

corridor.	 Her	 fingers	twitched	  defensively,	 but	not	 out	 of	 concern	for	 herself.

Poor	Jacin	would	hate	to	be	left	 stranded	on	the	other	side,	unable	to	protect	her

should	anything	happen.

     Which	 was	an	inane	thought.	Even	if	 Jacin	was	present,	he	could	do	nothing

against	a	 thaumaturge.	 Winter	  often	  thought	 this	  was	 a	 weakness	in	  their

security.	She	never	trusted	the	thaumaturges,	yet	they	were	given	so	much	power

within	the	palace.

     After	 all,	a	thaumaturge	killed	 her	father,	and	she	never	got	over	this	fact.	To

this	day,	 a	long	 sleeve	caught	 from	 the	corner	 of	 her	eye	too	 often	 made	her

startle.

     “Was	   there	  something	   you	  needed?”	  she	  asked,	  trying	   to	   appear

unconcerned.	She	was	still	recovering	from	the	vision.	 Her	stomach	was	in	knots

and	warm	 sweat	clung	 to	the	 back	of	 her	neck.	 She	wanted	to	 lie	 down	 for	 a

164
minute,	but	she	didn’t	 want	to	appear	any	weaker	than	she	already	did.	Than	she

already	was.

     “I	 have	come	 to	pose	a	rather	interesting	 proposition,	 Your	 Highness,”	 said

Aimery.	 “One	 I	have	been	thinking	 on	 for	 some	time,	and	that	 I	hope	you	 will

agree	is	beneficial	to	us	both.	 I	have	already	suggested	the	idea	to	Her	 Majesty,

and	she	has	voiced	her	approval,	on	the	condition	of	your	consent.”

     His	 voice	 was	both	 slippery	 and	kind.	  Always	 when	 she	was	in	 Aimery’s

presence	Winter	 wished	to	 both	 cower	away	 and	 curl	 up	sleepily	 beneath	his

steady	timbre.

     “Forgive	 me,	 Aimery,	 my	 brain	 is	still	 muddled	 from	 the	hallucination	 and

I’m	having	 difficulties	 understanding	you.”

     His	 gaze	slipped	 over	 her,	 lingering	 on	 her	 scars	and	on	 her	 curves,	and

Winter	was	glad	she	didn’t	involuntarily	  shudder.

     “Princess	Winter	 Blackburn.”	  He	slinked	 closer.	She	couldn’t	 resist	taking	a

step	back	before	she	managed	to	stop	herself.	Fear	was	a	weakness	in	the	court.

Much	better	to	act	unperturbed.	Much	safer	to	act	crazy,	when	in	doubt.

     She	wished	 she	had	not	 told	 him	 the	 nightmare	was	 over.	She	wished	 the

walls	had	gone	on	bleeding.

     “You	  are	a	darling	 of	 the	 people.	Beloved.	 Beautiful.”	  His	 fingers	 stroked

beneath	her	chin,	 with	  the	delicacy	 of	 a	 feather.	This	  time,	 she	did	 shudder.

“Everyone	 knows	you	 will	 never	 be	queen,	but	that	does	not	 mean	you	cannot

wield	 your	own	 sort	of	 power.	 An	ability	  to	appease	the	people,	to	bring	 them

joy.	 They	 admire	 you	 greatly.	 It	 is	 important	 that	 we	 show	 the	people	 your

support	for	the	royal	family	 and	the	court	that	serves	them.	Don’t	you	agree?”

     Her	skin	 had	become	a	mess	of	goose	bumps.	“I	have	always	shown	support

165
for	the	queen.”

     “Certainly	  you	have,	my	 princess.”	His	 smile	was	lovely	 when	 he	wanted	it

to	be,	and	the	loveliness	of	it	curdled	 her	stomach.	Again,	he	looked	at	her	scars.

“But	 your	 stepmother	and	I	 agree	it	 is	 time	 to	make	 a	grand	 statement	to	the

people.	A	 symbolic	 gesture	that	 shows	where	 you	fit	  into	 this	 hierarchy.	It	 is

time,	Princess,	for	you	to	take	a	husband.”

     Winter’s	 muscles	went	 taut.	She	had	thought	it	 might	 be	coming	to	 this,	but

the	words	in	his	mouth	were	repulsive.

     She	pressed	her	lips	up	into	a	smile.	 “Of	 course,”	she	said.	“I	 will	 be	glad	 to

give	 consideration	 to	 my	 future	 happiness.	I	 have	 been	told	  there	are	 many

suitors	who	 have	posed	an	interest.	 As	 soon	as	my	 stepmother’s	wedding	 and

coronation	ceremonies	are	 complete,	I’ll	  enjoy	 looking	 at	 the	potential	 suitors

and	carrying	out	courtships.”

     “That	 will	 not	be	necessary.”

     Her	smile	was	plaster.	“What	 do	you	mean?”

     “I	 have	come	to	request	your	hand,	Your	Highness.”

     Her	lungs	convulsed.

     “We	 are	perfectly	matched.	You	 are	beautiful	and	adored.	I	am	powerful	 and

respected.	You	 are	in	 need	of	 a	partner	 who	 can	protect	 you	 with	 his	 gift	 to

offset	 your	 own	 disabilities.	 Think	  of	 it.	 The	 princess	 and	the	 queen’s	 head

thaumaturge—we	will	 be	the	greatest	envy	of	the	court.”

     His	 eyes	were	shining	and	 it	became	clear	he	had	been	imagining	 this	 for	 a

long	time.	 Winter	 had	often	thought	 Aimery	 might	 be	attracted	to	 her,	and	this

knowledge	had	been	the	seed	for	countless	nightmares.	She	knew	how	he	treated

the	women	he	was	attracted	to.

166
     But	 she	had	never	imagined	 he	would	 seek	a	marriage,	 above	the	families,

above	even	a	potential	Earthen	arrangement—

     No.	 Now	 that	 Levana	would	 be	 an	Earthen	 empress,	it	 wouldn’t	 matter	 if

Winter	 could	make	a	 match	with	 the	blue	 planet	as	well.	 Instead,	to	 marry	her

weak,	pathetic	 stepdaughter	off	  to	 a	man	 with	  such	an	 impressive	 ability	  to

control	the	people	…

     It	 was	a	smart	match,	indeed.

     Aimery’s	  grin	 crawled	 into	her	 skin.	 “I	 see	I	 have	left	 you	 speechless,	my

princess.	Can	I	take	your	shock	for	acquiescence?”

     She	 forced	 herself	 to	 breathe	and	 look	  away—demure,	 not	 disgusted.	“I

am	…	flattered	by	 your	offer,	 Thaumaturge	Park.	I	do	 not	deserve	the	attentions

of	one	as	accomplished	as	yourself.”

     “Don’t	  pretend	to	be	coy.”	 He	cupped	her	cheek	and	she	flinched.	 “Say	yes,

Princess,	and	we	can	announce	our	engagement	at	tonight’s	feast.”

     She	stepped	away	from	 his	touch.	“I	 am	honored,	but	 …	this	 is	so	sudden.	I

need	time	 to	consider.	 I	 …	 I	 should	speak	with	  my	 stepmother	and	…	 and	 I

think…”

     “Winter.”	  His	 tone	 had	a	 new	harshness,	though	his	 face	remained	 gentle,

even	impassive.	“There	 is	 nothing	 to	 consider.	Her	 Majesty	 has	approved	 the

union.	It	is	 now	only	 your	acceptance	that	is	needed	to	confirm	our	engagement.

Take	my	offer,	Princess.	It	is	the	best	you	will	 receive.”

     She	 glanced	at	 the	 door,	 seeking	what	  solace	she	didn’t	  know.	  She	was

trapped.

     Aimery’s	  eyes	darkened.	“I	 hope	you	aren’t	 expecting	 that	guard	to	 ask	for

your	hand.	I	 hope	you	aren’t	harboring	 some	childish	 fantasy	that	to	deny	me	is

167
to	accept	him.”

     She	clenched	her	 teeth,	smiling	 around	 the	strain.	 “Don’t	 be	 silly,	 Aimery.

Jacin	is	a	dear	friend,	but	I	have	no	intentions	toward	him.”

     He	scoffed.	“The	 queen	would	never	allow	such	a	marriage.”

     “I	 just	said—”

     “What	 is	your	answer?	Do	not	toy	with	 words	and	meanings,	Princess.”

     Her	 head	swam.	 She	would	  not—could	 not—say	 yes.	To	 Aimery?	  Cruel,

deceitful	 Aimery,	 who	 smiled	 when	 there	was	 bloodshed	on	 the	throne	 room

floor?

     But	 to	say	 no	would	 not	do	 either.	She	did	 not	 care	what	they	 might	 do	to

her,	but	if	 she	endangered	Jacin	with	 her	refusal,	if	 Aimery	  believed	Jacin	was

the	reason	for	her	refusal	…

     A	 knock	prolonged	her	indecision.

     Aimery	 growled,	 “What?”

     Jacin	entered,	and	though	he	wore	no	expression,	as	usual,	Winter	detected	a

resentful	shade	of	red	on	his	cheeks.

     “Her	 Highness	has	been	summoned	to	join	the	queen’s	entourage	in	meeting

with	our	Earthen	guests.”

     Winter	 crumbled	with	 relief.	“Thank	 you,	Sir	 Clay,”	 she	said,	skirting	around

Aimery.

     Aimery	 grabbed	her	wrist	 before	she	was	out	 of	reach.	Jacin’s	 hand	went	to

his	gun,	but	he	didn’t	draw.

     “I	 will	 have	an	answer,”	Aimery	 said	under	his	breath.

     Winter	 placed	her	hand	on	 top	of	 Aimery’s,	 imagining	 herself	unconcerned.

“If	 you	must	have	it	 now,	then	I’m	 afraid	the	answer	must	be	no,”	 she	said,	with

168
a	flippancy	 that	 denied	her	 true	feelings.	 “But	  give	 me	time	 to	 consider	your

offer,	Thaumaturge	Park,	and	perhaps	the	answer	will	be	different	 when	next	we

speak	of	it.”

     She	gave	his	knuckles	a	gentle	tap	and	was	thankful	when	he	released	her.

     The	look	 he	gave	to	Jacin	as	they	passed,	though,	spoke	not	of	 jealousy,	but

murder.

169
	




                                              Nineteen







It	took	 a	heroic	amount	of	effort	 for	Kai	 to	pretend	like	he	wasn’t	 sick	with

nerves.	The	ship	settled	with	a	thud	that	made	him	jump.	Torin’s	presence	beside

him,	at	least,	was	stabilizing,	and	he	could	hear	the	anxious	whispers	of	the

Commonwealth	ambassadors	as	they	waited	to	debark	the	ship’s	common	room.

He	could	sense	five	stowaways	hidden	aboard	the	ship—even	though	he	didn’t

know	where,	so	there	was	no	chance	he	could	give	their	location	away	with	a

stray	glance.

     If	anyone	was	going	to	draw	suspicion,	it	would	be	him.	Only	he	and	Torin

knew	about	Cinder	and	her	allies,	and	Torin’s	expression	was	as	unperturbed	as

ever.	The	ship’s	crew	was	too	busy	with	their	arrival	procedures	to	question	the

disappearance	of	America’s	 secretary	of	 defense,	and	 none	 of	 the	 other

passengers	knew	they’d	taken	guests	aboard	in	the	first	place.

     Whereas	Kai	couldn’t	stop	thinking	 about	these	people—his	friends—and

what	he	was	helping	them	do.	Invade	Luna.	Start	a	rebellion.	End	a	war.

     He	also	couldn’t	stop	counting	the	thousands	of	things	that	could	go	wrong.

     He	needed	to	focus.	This	 would	 only	work	 if	 Levana	believed	Kai	 was

determined	to	finalize	their	marriage	alliance,	once	and	for	all.	He	had	to	make

170
her	think	she	had	won.

     The	ramp	 started	to	descend.	Kai	took	in	 a	deep	breath	and	held	it,	 trying	 to

clear	his	 mind.	 Trying	  to	 convince	 himself	 he	wanted	 this	 marriage	 and	this

alliance	to	succeed.

     Artemisia’s	   royal	 port	  was	 glowing	   up	 from	  the	  floor	  in	  a	 way	 that

immediately	 made	 him	  disconcerted.	The	 walls	  themselves	were	  rocky	 and

black,	 but	 lit	 with	  thousands	of	 tiny	 lights	  like	 a	 starry	 night	 sky.	 The	 port

contained	dozens	of	 ships	in	 various	sizes,	mostly	 Lunar	 ships	that	 glimmered

uniformly	 white,	painted	with	 unfamiliar	 runes	and	displaying	the	royal	seal.	Kai

also	recognized	Earthen	 emblems	among	 the	ships—some	 Earthen	guests	had

already	begun	to	arrive.	Seeing	them	gathered	together	filled	him	with	 dread.

     Movement	 drew	 his	gaze	and	Kai	 spotted	 Levana	herself	gliding	  along	the

wide	platform	 that	circled	 the	docks.	She	was	surrounded	by	 her	entourage:	the

ever-smug	Head	Thaumaturge	Aimery	Park	stood	to	her	right	 and	a	girl	in	a	pale

blue	dress	followed	 behind	the	queen,	her	head	lowered	and	her	face	obstructed

by	an	 abundance	of	curly	 black	 hair.	 There	were	 five	 additional	 thaumaturges

and	at	least	a	dozen	more	guards.	It	 made	for	an	impressive	 amount	of	security

—overkill,	 in	Kai’s	 opinion.

     Was	 Levana	 expecting	 something	 to	 go	 wrong?	 Or	  was	this	  a	show	  of

intimidation?

     Bracing	  himself,	 Kai	  descended	the	  ramp	 to	 meet	 the	 queen.	 His	 own

entourage,	including	ten	of	his	own	guards,	followed	 behind.

     “Your	  Majesty,”	 said	Kai,	 accepting	Levana’s	 proffered	hand.	 He	bowed	to

kiss	it.

     “Always	  so	formal,”	  Levana	 said	in	 that	 cloying	 voice	 that	made	 his	skin

171
crawl.	“We	 cannot	refer	to	each	other	in	such	droll	 terms	forever.	Perhaps	I	shall

henceforth	call	you	My	 Beloved,	and	you	shall	call	me	your	 Sweet.”

     Kai	 hovered	over	 her	hand,	hatred	blistering	 his	skin	 where	it	 touched	hers.

After	a	drawn-out	 moment,	he	released	her	and	straightened.	“Your	Majesty,”	he

started	again,	“it	is	 an	honor	to	be	welcomed	to	 Luna.	My	 ancestors	would	have

been	filled	with	 pride	to	witness	such	an	occasion.”

     “The	  pleasure	is	 my	 own.”	  Levana’s	 gaze	 slinked	 over	 the	 ambassadors

gathered	on	the	ship’s	 ramp.	“I	 hope	you	 will	 find	 our	 hospitality	 agreeable.	If

you	need	for	anything,	please	let	one	of	 the	servants	know	and	they	will	 see	that

you	are	well	taken	care	of.”

     “Thank	 you,”	  said	Kai.	 “We’re	  all	curious	 about	the	 famed	luxuries	 of	 the

white	city.”

     “I’ve	   no	 doubt	  of	 it.	  I’ll	   have	 some	 servants	 brought	  to	 unload	  your

belongings	and	have	them	taken	to	your	rooms.”

     “That	  won’t	  be	necessary.	 Our	 crew	 is	 already	 unloading	 the	 ship.”	  He

gestured	over	his	shoulder.	A	 second	loading	ramp	had	been	lowered	out	 of	the

cargo	bay.	He	had	made	sure	to	tell	the	captain	he	wanted	the	crew	to	 make	this

a	top	priority.	  He	 wanted	to	 be	sure	the	ship	 was	emptied	 of	 both	people	 and

cargo	as	soon	as	possible,	so	Cinder	 and	the	others	wouldn’t	  be	trapped	in	 the

docks	for	too	long.

     “How	  efficient,”	  Levana	said.	 “In	 that	case,	your	 ambassadors	may	follow

Thaumaturge	Lindwurm	 to	our	 guest	suites.”	She	indicated	a	black-coated	man.

“I’m	 sure	they	would	like	 to	rest	from	such	a	long	journey.”

     Within	 moments,	Kai’s	 following	  of	nervous	companions	were	being	led	to	a

set	of	enormous	arched	doors	that	glittered	 with	 a	depiction	 of	a	crescent	moon

172
over	Earth.	 Though	 the	 presence	of	 his	 Earthen	 companions	 had	offered	  no

security	at	 all,	 Kai	 still	 felt	 abandoned	as	 he,	Torin,	 and	 his	guards	remained

behind.

     “I	 hope	you	 won’t	 think	 it	 rude	that	I	 didn’t	 offer	 full	  introductions	to	 your

guests,”	said	Levana.	“My	  stepdaughter	is	easily	 distressed,	and	too	many	new

faces	could	 unnerve	 her.”	 She	 floated	 a	 hand	out	 to	 her	 side,	 like	  she	was

conducting	 a	symphony.	 “But	  do	 allow	 me	 to	introduce	 you,	 at	 least,	to	 my

stepdaughter,	Princess	Winter	Hayle-Blackburn	of	Luna.”

     “Of	 course.	I’ve	heard	so	much	…	about	…	 you.”

     Kai	 trailed	 off	 as	the	 princess	lifted	 her	 head	and	peered	at	him	 through	 a

fringe	of	thick	 lashes.	It	was	a	brief	look,	 barely	a	glance,	but	that	was	all	it	 took

for	a	rush	of	 heat	to	climb	 up	Kai’s	 neck	 and	into	his	 ears.	He	had	heard	of	the

princess’s	legendary	 beauty.	Beauty	 that	 was	 not	created	 by	 a	glamour,	 they

said,	unlike	Levana’s.	The	rumors	weren’t	 exaggerated.

     Clearing	 his	throat,	Kai	 forced	a	composed	smile.	“I’m	 honored	to	 meet	you,

Your	Highness.”

     The	 princess’s	 eyes	 were	 teasing	 as	 she	 stepped	beside	 the	 queen	 and

lowered	 into	 a	curtsy	 with	  the	grace	 of	 a	dancer.	 When	 she	rose	again,	 Kai

noticed	her	scars	for	the	first	time.	Three	uniform	 scars	cut	down	her	right	cheek.

These,	too,	were	legendary,	along	with	 the	 tale	of	how	 out	of	 envy	Levana	 had

forced	the	princess	to	mutilate	her	own	face.

     The	sight	twisted	 his	stomach.

     Princess	Winter	offered	 him	a	docile,	close-lipped	 smile.	“The	honor	 is	mine,

Your	Imperial	 Majesty.”	 Drifting	  closer,	she	pressed	a	light	kiss	to	Kai’s	bruised

cheek.	His	 insides	turned	 to	goo.	 He	 had	the	 presence	of	mind	 to	 be	grateful

173
Cinder	wasn’t	 witnessing	this	exchange,	because	something	told	him	he’d	 never

hear	the	end	of	it.

     The	 princess	 stepped	back	 and	he	 was	 able	 to	 breathe	again.	 “With	  our

introductions	 complete,	 I	 feel	it	  is	safe	 for	 us	to	 drop	 any	 future	 formalities.

After	all,	 with	your	 upcoming	nuptials,	you’re	 practically	 my	father.”

     Kai	 reeled	back,	his	jaw	dropping	open.

     Silent	 laughter	glimmered	 in	the	princess’s	gaze	as	she	took	her	spot	behind

her	stepmother	again.	She	seemed	neither	distressed	nor	unnerved.

     The	 queen	gave	her	stepdaughter	an	 annoyed	look,	 before	gesturing	 to	 the

man	on	 her	other	 side.	“You	  will	  of	 course	remember	my	 head	 thaumaturge,

Aimery	Park.”

     Snapping	 his	 mouth	 shut,	 Kai	 inclined	 his	 head,	 though	 the	 thaumaturge

offered	only	his	signature	smugness	in	return.	“Welcome	to	 Luna,”	he	drawled.

     Scanning	 the	rest	of	 the	 entourage,	Kai	 recognized	 two	 of	 the	guards	too.

Seeing	the	queen’s	captain	of	 the	guard	was	no	surprise,	 but	his	teeth	clenched

when	he	 spotted	the	 blond	guard	 who	 had	been	 like	 a	shadow	 to	Sybil	  Mira

when	she’d	been	a	guest	in	New	Beijing.

     Distrust	 twisted	 his	insides.	 Cinder	had	thought	 this	 guard	was	an	 ally,	 but

she	now	suspected	he’d	betrayed	them	to	 Sybil	 when	they	were	 trying	 to	make

their	escape	from	the	palace.	His	presence	here,	in	uniform	again,	confirmed	 her

suspicions.

     No	matter,	he	thought.	Cinder	had	succeeded,	despite	his	betrayal.

     Levana	 grinned,	  like	  she	detected	 the	 rebelliousness	 of	  Kai’s	  thoughts,

despite	all	 his	 attempts	to	 appear	complacent.	“I	  believe	 that	leaves	only	 one

matter	of	business	to	tend	 to	before	we	 show	you	to	 your	rooms.”	 She	snapped

174
her	fingers,	 and	two	 of	 her	thaumaturges	and	 six	guards	 snapped	to	attention.

“Search	their	ship.”

     Despite	all	 his	 attempts	at	normalcy,	 Kai	 couldn’t	 keep	away	the	panic	 that

flared	in	 his	chest.	 “Excuse	me?”	 he	said,	swiveling	  his	head	as	the	 entourage

marched	past	him.	“What	are	you	doing?”

     “My	  dear	beloved,	 you	 didn’t	  think	 I	 would	 blindly	  trust	 your	word	  after

you’ve	 shown	 so	 much	 sympathy	 to	 my	 enemies,	 did	 you?”	  She	laced	 her

fingers	together.	They	 might	 have	been	discussing	the	weather.	 “In	 monitoring

your	fleet,	 we	noted	 that	you	 took	aboard	some	passengers	from	the	 American

Republic,	but	it	seems	they’re	too	shy	to	show	themselves.”

     Kai’s	 stomach	 sank	as	one	of	 her	 guards	pulled	 him	 and	Torin	 behind	 the

queen,	and	he	was	left	to	watch	helplessly	 as	Levana’s	men	boarded	his	ship.	If

his	own	 guards	thought	to	 offer	 any	protection,	 they	were	already	 under	Lunar

control.

     Kai	 tightened	his	fists.	 “This	 is	absurd.	The	Americans	 were	with	 that	group

you	just	sent	away.	There’s	nothing	on	that	ship	but	luggage	and	wedding	gifts.”

     The	 queen’s	face	 hardened.	“For	 your	 sake,	 Emperor	Kaito,	  I	 hope	that’s

true.	Because	if	you	came	here	to	betray	me,	I’m	afraid	 this	will	 be	a	remarkably

unpleasant	visit.”

175
	




                                                    Twenty







Cinder	was	pressed	into	the	corner	of	a	storage	closet,	her	heart	pounding	in	 the

darkness.	Faint	strips	of	 light	spilled	 through	 the	slots	in	 the	door,	allowing	 her

to	make	out	the	 profiles	and	bright	 eyes	of	 her	companions.	She	could	hear	the

shuffling	and	thumping	 as	the	cargo	bay	was	unloaded	beneath	their	feet.

     She	tried	 to	think	 of	 this	like	 a	homecoming.	 She	had	been	born	here—this

moon,	this	city.	 Here,	her	birth	 had	been	celebrated.	Here,	she	would	have	been

raised	to	be	a	queen.

     But	no	 matter	how	she	tried	to	think	 of	it,	she	did	not	 feel	like	she	was	home.

She	was	hiding	in	a	closet	with	 the	very	 real	possibility	 that	she	would	be	killed

the	moment	someone	recognized	her.

     She	glanced	at	her	companions.	Wolf	 was	beside	her,	jaw	tense	and	brow	set

in	concentration.	 Against	 the	opposite	wall,	 Iko	 was	 crouched	down	 with	 both

hands	over	 her	 mouth,	 like	 the	 need	to	 be	 quiet	 was	 torture.	 In	 the	 hollow

silence,	Cinder	could	detect	a	subtle	hum	 coming	from	 the	android,	a	hint	 at	the

machinery	 beneath	 her	 synthetic	 skin.	  Her	 neck	  was	 fixed	  now—Kai	  had

brought	exactly	what	Cinder	needed.

     Standing	beside	Iko,	 Thorne	 had	one	arm	 draped	around	Cress’s	shoulders,

176
his	free	hand	scratching	at	his	jaw.	Tucked	against	him,	 Cress	seemed	paler	than

usual,	her	anxiety	evident	even	in	the	darkness.

     They	 were	  a	ragtag	 group	  in	 the	 drab	 clothing	  Kai	  had	 brought	 them,

including	a	black	 knit	hat	to	 cover	Iko’s	 blue	hair	and	heavy	gloves	for	 Cinder’s

cyborg	hand.	Putting	them	on	had	dredged	up	a	number	of	 memories.	There	had

been	a	time	when	she	wore	gloves	everywhere,	when	 she’d	been	so	ashamed	of

being	cyborg	 she	refused	to	 let	her	 prostheses	show.	She	couldn’t	 recall	 when

that	had	changed,	but	now	the	gloves	felt	like	a	lie.

     A	  blue	 glow	  drew	  her	 attention	 back	  to	 Cress,	 who	 had	 turned	  on	 a

portscreen	and	was	pulling	  up	a	 diagram	of	 Artemisia’s	  royal	 port.	“We’re	  in

good	position,”	 she	whispered,	tilting	 the	screen	to	show	them.	There	were	three

exits	from	the	port—one	 that	led	into	 the	palace	above	them,	one	that	connected

to	 the	city’s	  public	  spaceship	docks,	 and	 one	 that	 led	 down	 to	 the	 maglev

tunnels,	which	 was	 their	 destination.	The	 maglev	 tunnels	made	up	 a	complex

underground	transit	 system,	linking	  all	 of	 Luna’s	 sectors	together.	Cinder	 had

studied	the	 system	 so	 many	 times	 she	 would	 have	 had	 it	  memorized	 even

without	 having	the	map	downloaded	 to	her	brain-machine	 interface.	To	her,	 the

system	resembled	a	spiderweb	and	the	capital	city	of	Artemisia	was	the	spider.

     Cress	was	right.	 The	pilots	 had	settled	 the	ship	close	 to	the	exit	 that	would

take	them	down	to	the	maglev	tunnels.	It	was	the	best	they	could	have	hoped	for.

     Yet	 she	couldn’t	  deny	how	 tempting	 it	 was	to	 abandon	the	plan,	 to	 forget

patience,	to	try	 to	end	 it	here,	now.	 She	was	at	Levana’s	 doorstep.	She	was	so

close.	Her	body	was	wound	up	tight,	ready	to	storm	the	palace—an	army	of	one.

     She	glanced	 at	 Wolf.	 His	  fists	 flexed,	 in	 and	out,	 in	 and	 out.	 There	was

murder	in	 his	eyes.	He	 would	 have	stormed	 the	palace	with	 her,	 she	knew,	in

177
hopes	that	Scarlet	was	there.	But	they	didn’t	even	know	whether	Scarlet	was	still

alive.

     But	 it	 was	 desperation	goading	 her,	 not	 confidence.	 Even	if	  she	got	 past

Levana’s	security	and	somehow	 managed	to	kill	 her,	she	would	 end	up	dead	as

well.	Then	some	other	Lunar	would	 step	in	to	take	the	throne	and	Luna	would	be

no	better	off	than	it	had	been	before.

     She	shoved	 the	temptation	 down	 into	 the	 pit	 of	 her	stomach.	 This	 wasn’t

about	assassinating	Levana.	This	was	about	giving	 the	citizens	 of	 Luna	a	voice

and	ensuring	it	was	heard.

     She	tried	 to	distract	herself	 by	going	 over	their	 plan	again	in	 her	head.	This

was	the	most	dangerous	part,	but	she	hoped	Levana	and	her	security	team	would

be	so	busy	with	  the	arriving	 Earthen	 guests	they	wouldn’t	  notice	a	 handful	 of

dockworkers	slipping	 out	 of	the	royal	 port.	 Their	goal	 was	to	make	it	 to	Sector

RM-9	where	they	 hoped	to	find	Wolf’s	  parents	and	be	offered	temporary	shelter

from	which	 to	 start	the	next	phase	of	their	 plan—informing	  the	people	of	 Luna

that	their	true	queen	had	returned.

     If	 they	could	make	it	there	undetected,	Cinder	knew	they	had	a	chance.

     The	 clomp	 of	 feet	startled	 her.	It	 was	 too	loud—like	  someone	was	on	 the

same	level	as	they	 were,	not	 down	below	 in	 the	cargo	 bay.	She	traded	frowns

with	her	 companions.	A	distant	 door	was	slammed	shut	and	she	heard	someone

yelling	orders.	More	 scuffling	 followed.

     “Is	  it	  just	 me,”	  whispered	 Thorne,	  “or	  does	 it	 sound	 like	  someone	 is

searching	the	ship?”

     His	 words	 mirrored	 her	 thoughts	 exactly.	 Comprehension	 turned	fast	 into

horror.	“She	knows	we’re	 here.	They’re	looking	 for	us.”

178
     She	 looked	  around	 at	 her	  companions,	 their	  expressions	 ranging	 from

terrified	 to	eager	and	all	 of	them,	she	realized	 with	 a	start,	looking	 back	at	her.

Awaiting	 instruction.

     Outside	 their	 confined	 closet,	 the	 voices	grew	 louder.	 Something	 crashed

against	the	floor.

     Cinder	 tightened	her	gloved	 fists.	 “Wolf,	 Thorne,	 the	second	a	thaumaturge

sees	either	of	 you	they’ll	  try	 to	 control	 you.”	 She	licked	 her	 lips.	 “Do	 I	 have

permission	to	take	control	of	you	first?	 Just	your	bodies,	not	your	minds.”

     “I’ve	  been	waiting	 for	you	 to	admit	 you	wanted	my	 body,”	 said	Thorne.	He

laid	a	hand	on	the	gun	at	his	waist.	“Be	my	guest.”

     Wolf	 looked	less	enthusiastic,	but	he	gave	her	a	sharp	nod.

     Cinder	 slipped	her	 will	  into	 Thorne	as	easily	 as	slicing	 through	 a	block	 of

tofu.	 Wolf’s	 energy	 was	more	 chaotic,	 but	she’d	 spent	so	much	 time	 training

with	 him	  aboard	the	 Rampion	 that	 his	 energy,	 too,	 offered	 little	  resistance.

Cinder	felt	their	 limbs	as	if	they	were	an	extension	of	her	own.	Though	 she	knew

she	was	doing	it	 for	 their	own	 protection,	keeping	 them	from	 being	turned	 into

weapons	for	the	enemy,	she	couldn’t	 help	feeling	 like	 manipulating	 them	was	a

betrayal	of	their	 trust.	It	 was	an	unfair	 balance	of	 power—their	 safety	was	now

her	responsibility.

     She	thought	of	 Levana,	forcing	 her	guard	to	take	a	bullet	 for	her	 at	the	royal

ball,	and	wondered	 if	 she	would	ever	 make	that	same	decision	with	  one	of	her

friends.

     She	hoped	she	would	never	have	to.

     A	 voice	echoed	in	the	 nearby	corridor:	 “Nothing	 in	 the	engine	room.	You—

split	up.	Search	these	corridors	and	report	back.”

179
     They	 were	close,	and	 if	 there	was	a	 thaumaturge,	she	knew	 it	 wouldn’t	 be

long	before	he	or	 she	was	near	enough	to	detect	the	bioelectricity	  coming	from

this	storage	closet.	She	pictured	 the	ship’s	layout	 and	tried	 to	formulate	 a	plan,

but	 there	 was	 little	  hope	 now	  of	  slipping	  away	 without	  announcing	  their

presence.

     They	would	 have	to	fight	 their	way	 out	of	the	ship.	They	 would	have	to	fight

all	the	way	to	the	maglev	shuttles.

     “Cinder,”	  Thorne	whispered.	 His	body	 was	statue	still,	 waiting	 for	 Cinder’s

command.	“Send	me	out	there.”

     Cress’s	head	snapped	up,	but	he	didn’t	return	the	look.

     Cinder	frowned.	 “What?”

     “Send	 me	as	a	decoy,	out	 the	main	ramp	 and	away	from	 the	maglev	 doors.

I’ll	 draw	them	off	 long	enough	for	you	to	get	out	through	 the	cargo	bay.”

     “Thorne…”

     “Do	 it.”	  His	 eyes	flashed.	He	 still	 wouldn’t	  look	 at	Cress.	“We	 made	it	 to

Luna.	You	don’t	 need	a	pilot	here,	or	a	captain.”

     Her	pulse	thundered.	“You	 don’t	have	to—”

     Outside	someone	called,	“Press	room	is	clear!”

     “Stop	 wasting	time,”	 Thorne	said	through	his	 teeth.	“I’ll	  lead	them	away	and

circle	back	to	you.”

     She	knew	 he	was	being	overconfident,	 but	 Cinder	 found	herself	 nodding	at

the	same	time	Cress	started	shaking	her	head.

     “My	  control	of	 you	will	 be	intermittent	 inside	 the	ship,	but	if	 I	 can	find	you,

I’ll	 reclaim	 you	 as	soon	as	we’re	all	 outside.”	 If	 they	don’t	 claim	 you	first,	 she

thought,	unwilling	  to	speak	it	 out	loud.	Controlling	  an	Earthen	like	 Thorne	was

180
easy,	but	 wresting	 control	  away	from	  a	 thaumaturge	was	 significantly	  more

difficult.

     “Got	 it.”	 Thorne’s	jaw	 tensed.

     “Be	  careful,”	  Cress	 said,	 more	 a	 squeak	than	  a	whisper,	  and	 Thorne’s

attention	alighted	on	her	for	the	briefest	of	moments	…

     Before	  Cinder	 kicked	  open	 the	 door	  and	 sent	 Thorne	 bolting	  into	  the

corridor.	He	 collided	 with	 the	wall,	 but	 pushed	himself	off	 and	careened	to	the

left.	His	 arms	and	legs	pumped	as	he	raced	toward	the	main	deck.	It	wasn’t	long

before	he	 was	 out	 of	  her	reach.	 Too	 much	 steel	 divided	  them.	 Cinder	 lost

control,	and	Thorne	was	on	his	own.

     Seconds	after	her	grasp	on	him	 had	snapped,	they	heard	a	crash.	Thorne	had

broken	something.

     Cinder	hoped	it	wasn’t	 some	priceless	Commonwealth	artifact.

     In	 the	 next	 chamber,	 a	 stampede	of	  feet	 raced	after	  him.	 When	 Cinder

reached	out	with	  her	thoughts,	 she	couldn’t	  feel	 any	bioelectricity	  other	 than

Wolf’s.	 This	side	of	the	ship	had	been	cleared.

     She	tipped	her	head	into	the	corridor.	No	 sign	of	anyone	aboard.	On	the	other

side	of	the	ship,	she	heard	yelling.

     Cinder	 ran	in	 the	 opposite	direction	 she’d	 sent	Thorne.	 The	others	 hurried

after	her—down	two	 levels	on	a	narrow,	spiraling	stairwell,	 through	an	industrial

galley	that	 made	the	 kitchen	 on	the	 Rampion	 feel	like	  a	child’s	 play	 set,	and

along	a	utilitarian	  corridor	 dividing	 the	 podship	docks.	They	 paused	above	the

hatch	that	would	 drop	them	into	 the	cargo	bay.	Cinder	 could	still	 hear	shuffling

and	the	crank	of	machinery	 below,	but	 she	had	no	way	of	 knowing	if	 it	 was	the

Earthen	workers	unloading	the	cargo,	or	Lunars	inspecting	it.

181
     Whoever	it	 was,	they	didn’t	have	time	to	 wait	for	them	to	leave.

     Cinder	 loaded	 a	 bullet	 into	 her	 projectile	  finger.	 They’d	 found	  plenty	 of

ammunition	 aboard	the	Rampion,	 but	 she	couldn’t	 help	 wishing	 Kai	 had	been

able	to	procure	more	tranquilizer	darts	for	her	on	Earth.

     Too	late.	No	 time	to	think.

     Wolf	 popped	open	the	hatch	and	jumped	 down	first.	 Cinder	 once	again	took

control	of	his	body,	 in	case	there	were	Lunars	down	there,	but	she	had	nothing	to

do	with	the	growl	 or	flash	of	teeth.

     Cinder	 swung	 herself	down	 beside	him.	 The	 floor	 clanged	 as	Iko	 dropped

next,	followed	 by	the	tentative	thuds	of	Cress’s	footsteps	on	the	ladder.

     Three	figures	 that	had	been	inspecting	the	crates	swung	around	to	face	them.

Cinder	registered	 the	uniforms	  of	 a	black-coated	 thaumaturge	and	 two	 Lunar

guards	at	the	same	moment	a	gun	fired.

     Her	left	 leg	kicked	 out	from	 under	her,	the	shock	 wave	vibrating	 up	through

her	hip	and	into	her	spine.	The	bullet	had	hit	her	metal	thigh.

     Cress	cried	 out	and	froze	 on	 the	ladder,	releasing	 the	rungs	only	 when	 Iko

grabbed	her	 and	 yanked	 her	 off.	  Cinder	 urged	 Wolf’s	  legs	 to	  move.	 They

scurried	behind	a	pallet	loaded	with	 Commonwealth	merchandise	just	as	another

bullet	pinged	on	the	wall	 overhead.	A	third	 hit	the	crate,	splintering	 the	wood	on

the	other	side.

     The	firing	 stopped.

     Cinder	pressed	her	back	to	the	crate,	reorienting	herself.	She	stretched	out	her

thoughts,	finding	 the	 Lunars’	 bioelectricity	 sizzling	  in	the	 room,	but	 of	 course

the	guards	were	already	under	the	thaumaturge’s	control.

     The	ramp	that	 would	let	 them	escape	from	the	ship	was	on	the	 opposite	side

182
of	the	cargo	bay.

     Eerie	silence	fell,	 leaving	Cinder	 jumpy	 as	she	strained	to	listen	for	footsteps

coming	toward	them.	She	expected	the	Lunars	would	try	to	surround	them.	Their

weapons	wouldn’t	stay	quiet	for	 long.

     Wolf’s	  limbs	 were	 still	  for	 once,	 and	it	  occurred	to	 Cinder	 that	 she	was

holding	him	 so	still.	Only	 his	expression	was	alive.	Fierce,	wild.	 He	was	her	best

weapon,	but	under	 her	control	 he	 would	 be	clunky	 and	awkward—not	  half	 as

brutal	as	he	could	be	on	his	own.	Their	training	 aboard	the	Rampion	had	focused

on	stopping	an	enemy.	Disarming	them.	Removing	a	threat.

     She	wished	 now	 they	 would	 have	spent	more	 time	 practicing	 how	 to	 turn

people	into	weapons.	It	was	a	skill	that	Levana	and	her	minions	excelled	at.

     Wolf	 met	her	gaze,	and	a	thought	occurred	to	her.	Cinder	was	controlling	  his

body,	but	not	 his	mind	 or	his	emotions.	What	 if	 she	changed	tactics?	She	could

still	protect	him	 from	the	thaumaturge’s	power	while	 allowing	 him	 to	do	what	he

did	best.

     “Get	  the	 thaumaturge,”	  she	 whispered,	 then	 released	 Wolf’s	   body	 and

snatched	at	his	thoughts	instead.	She	fed	 him	a	vision	 of	 the	first	 terrible	 thing

that	came	to	mind:	 the	fight	 aboard	the	Rampion	between	them	and	Sybil	 Mira.

The	day	Scarlet	had	been	taken.

     Wolf	 vaulted	over	the	crate.	Gunshots	blared,	bullets	pinged,	the	walls	shook.

     Iko	 roared	and	launched	herself	past	Cinder,	 tackling	 a	guard	who	 appeared

in	the	corner	of	 Cinder’s	 vision.	 His	gun	fired;	 the	 bullet	struck	 the	ceiling.	 Iko

punched	him	 and	his	 head	cracked	 against	the	 metal	floor.	  His	 body	stopped

flailing,	 unconscious.

     Cinder	 jumped	to	 her	feet,	holding	 her	 cyborg	hand	like	 a	gun,	 and	spotted

183
the	second	 guard	creeping	 around	 to	 their	 other	 side.	 His	 face	 was	blank—

unafraid.	 Then,	  as	 she	 watched,	 it	  cleared.	 His	  eyes	 focused	 on	  Cinder,

bewildered.

     The	thaumaturge	had	lost	control	of	him.

     The	 moment	was	fleeting.	 The	 guard	snarled	and	 aimed	his	 gun	at	Cinder,

but	he	was	too	late.	Already	 she	had	a	grip	on	his	bioelectricity.	 With	 a	thought,

she	sent	 him	 spiraling	  into	  unconsciousness.	He	 dropped	 to	 his	 knees	 and

collapsed	face-first	  to	the	 floor	  with	 a	 crunch.	Blood	  spurted	from	  his	 nose.

Cinder	recoiled.

     A	 scream	echoed	through	the	bay.

     Cinder	 could	no	 longer	see	Wolf,	 and	terror	 struck	her.	 In	taking	 control	 of

the	guard,	she’d	forgotten	about	protecting	Wolf’s	 mind	from—

     The	screaming	stopped,	followed	by	 a	thud.

     A	 second	later,	 Wolf	 appeared	from	 behind	 a	shelf	 stacked	with	 suitcases,

snarling	and	shaking	out	his	right	fist.

     Pulse	thrumming,	 Cinder	turned	 to	see	Iko	with	 her	 arm	wrapped	around	an

extra-pale	Cress.

     They	 ran	for	 the	ramp,	 and	Cinder	was	 grateful	that	 it	 was	lowered	to	 face

away	from	  the	 palace	entrance.	 As	 they	 crept	 downward,	 she	 scanned	their

surroundings,	with	both	her	eyes	and	her	Lunar	gift.	 In	this	wide-open	space,	she

could	sense	a	cluster	of	people	in	the	distance	and	she	could	tell	there	were	both

Earthens	and	Lunars	in	the	mix.

     Their	 route	to	the	maglev	doors,	at	least,	was	unblocked.	If	they	were	careful,

they	could	stay	hidden	behind	this	row	of	 ships.

     At	 least,	until	 one	of	 those	Lunars	picked	 up	on	Wolf’s	  sizzling	 energy	and

184
questioned	what	a	modified	soldier	was	doing	here.

     She	waved	her	arm	and	they	skimmed	 around	the	side	of	the	ramp.	 A	breath

passed	while	Cinder	 waited	 for	 a	sign	 they’d	 been	noticed.	When	 none	came,

they	darted	to	the	next	 ship,	and	the	next.	Every	 thump	of	 their	feet	 pounded	in

her	ears.	Every	breath	sounded	like	a	windstorm.

     A	 shout	startled	her	and	together	 they	ducked	behind	the	 landing	gear	of	 an

elaborately	painted	 ship	from	  the	African	  Union.	 Cinder	 held	her	 hand	at	 the

ready,	the	bullet	still	loaded	in	 her	finger.

     “Over	 there!”	someone	yelled.

     Cinder	 peered	around	 the	telescoping	 legs	of	 the	 spacecraft	and	 spotted	a

figure	bolting	 between	ships.	Thorne,	running	away	from	them	at	full	 speed.

     Not	yet	 controlled	by	a	Lunar.

     Heart	leaping,	 Cinder	reached	out	 for	his	 mind,	hoping	 to	get	 to	him	 before

one	of	the	Lunars	on	the	other	side	of	the	dock	…

     Success.

     Like	 with	Wolf,	 she	thrust	an	idea	into	his	head.

     Get	back	here.

     Startled,	Thorne	 tripped	 and	fell,	 rolled	 a	couple	times,	and	 sprang	again	to

his	feet.	 Cinder	  flinched	 with	  guilt,	 but	 was	 relieved	 when	 Thorne	 changed

directions.	He	skirted	around	a	couple	podships,	dodging	a	volley	of	 bullets	from

a	cluster	of	guards	that	had	emerged	from	the	main	ramp	of	Kai’s	ship.

     “I’ve	 got	 him,”	 said	Cinder.	“Come	on.”

     Keeping	 half	 her	focus	on	 Thorne,	the	 rest	on	her	own	 careful	 movements,

Cinder	 stayed	close	 to	 Wolf	 as	 they	 ducked	in	 and	 out	 of	 the	 safety	 of	 the

spacecraft,	weaving	their	 way	 to	 the	wide	 platform	 that	 stood	shoulder	 height

185
around	the	perimeter	 of	 the	 docks.	Their	 exit	 loomed	 before	them.	 Enormous

double	doors	carved	in	mysterious	Lunar	runes.	A	 sign	above	them	indicated	the

way	to	the	maglev	platform.

     They	reached	the	last	ship.	They’d	 run	 out	of	shelter.	Once	they	 were	on	the

platform,	they	would	 be	on	raised,	wide-open	ground.

     Cinder	 glanced	back.	Thorne	was	 on	his	stomach	beneath	the	tail	 of	 a	solo-

pilot	pod.	He	waved	at	them	to	go	ahead,	to	hurry.

     “Iko,	  you	and	 Cress	go	first,”	  said	Cinder.	 If	 they	 were	seen,	they	 at	least

couldn’t	be	manipulated.	“We’ll	  cover	you.”

     Iko	 put	herself	between	Cress	and	the	palace	doors	and	they	ran	for	the	short

flight	 of	steps.	Cinder	swung	her	embedded	gun	from	 side	to	side,	searching	for

threats,	but	the	guards	were	too	focused	on	finding	Thorne	to	notice	them.

     A	 hiss	 drew	her	 attention	 back	to	 the	platform.	 Iko	  and	Cress	were	 at	the

doors,	but	they	were	still	shut.

     Cinder’s	 stomach	dropped.

     They	were	supposed	to	open	automatically.

     But—no.	  Levana	  had	 been	 expecting	  them.	 Of	  course	 she	 had	  taken

precautions	to	ensure	they	wouldn’t	be	able	to	escape.

     Her	 face	contorted,	desperation	crashing	into	 her.	She	struggled	to	 come	up

with	 another	way	 out.	 Would	 Wolf	  be	strong	 enough	to	 pry	 open	the	 doors?

Could	they	fire	their	 way	through?

     As	 she	racked	her	 brain,	a	 new	expression	 came	over	Cress,	replacing	 her

wide-eyed	terror	 with	  resolve.	Cinder	 followed	  her	 gaze	to	 a	circular	 control

booth	that	stood	between	the	maglev	and	palace	entrances.	Before	Cinder	 could

guess	her	plan,	Cress	had	dropped	to	her	hands	and	knees	and	started	crawling

186
along	the	wall.

     A	 gun	fired.	Cress	flinched	but	kept	going.

     It	 was	followed	by	 another	shot,	and	another,	each	making	Cinder	duck	down

farther.	With	the	third	 shot	there	was	a	shatter	of	glass.

     Cinder	spun	around,	her	heart	in	her	throat,	and	sought	out	Thorne.	He	hadn’t

moved,	but	now	 he	was	holding	 a	handgun,	and	had	it	aimed	behind	 him.	He’d

shot	out	a	window	on	Kai’s	 ship.

     He	was	causing	another	distraction,	 trying	to	 draw	more	attention	to	himself,

to	keep	it	away	from	Cress.

     Throat	dry	 as	desert	sand,	Cinder	looked	back	to	see	that	Cress	had	made	it	to

the	booth.	  She	was	 clutching	  her	 portscreen,	the	 fingers	  of	 her	 other	 hand

dancing	over	 an	invisi-screen.	 Iko	 was	still	 by	 the	doors,	crouched	 into	a	 ball,

ready	to	spring	up	and	run	at	the	slightest	provocation.

     Beside	Cinder,	 Wolf	 was	focused	on	Thorne,	ready	to	 rush	into	the	fight	 the

second	one	broke	out.

     Footsteps	came	pounding	down	 the	ramp	of	Kai’s	  ship	and	additional	 Lunar

guards	swarmed	the	aisles.	It	 wasn’t	the	 guards	that	concerned	Cinder,	 though.

They	wouldn’t	  be	skilled	  enough	to	 detect	Thorne	 in	their	 midst.	 It	 was	 their

thaumaturges	that	worried	her,	but	she	couldn’t	find	them.

     Doors	 whistled.	Wolf	  grabbed	Cinder’s	 elbow	before	 she	could	turn	 around

and	dragged	her	up	to	the	platform.

     Cress	had	gotten	the	doors	open.

     Iko	 was	already	 on	the	other	 side,	her	back	against	a	 corridor	 wall,	 waving

them	on.	She	had	drawn	her	own	 gun	for	 the	first	 time	 and	was	searching	for	a

target.

187
     “There!”

     Wolf	 and	Cinder	pounded	up	the	stairs.	A	 bullet	 pinged	against	the	wall,	and

she	ducked	and	stumbled	through	the	doors.	They	slammed	into	 the	wall	 beside

Iko.

     Cinder	 looked	 back,	 panting.	 Their	 pursuers	had	given	 up	 trying	  to	catch

them	off	guard	and	were	now	running	 toward	them	at	full	 speed.	But	Thorne	had

a	head	start,	and	he,	too,	had	given	up	secrecy	for	speed.	Cinder	fed	images	into

his	 mind—his	 legs	 running	  fast	as	 a	 gazelle’s,	 his	 feet	 barely	 touching	 the

ground.	She	was	too	afraid	 that	to	turn	 him	 into	a	puppet	 would	only	 slow	 him

down,	but	 the	mental	encouragement	seemed	to	work.	 His	 speed	increased.	He

bounded	up	the	stairs	in	two	steps.

     Over	 his	shoulder,	Cinder	 finally	 saw	 the	thaumaturge,	a	woman	with	 short

black	hair	and	a	red	coat.

     Gritting	 her	teeth,	she	raised	her	arm	and	fired.	She	didn’t	 know	where	she’d

hit	her,	but	the	woman	cried	out	and	fell.

     Thorne	threw	 himself	 across	the	threshold	as	the	guards	reached	the	base	of

the	platform	steps.	The	doors	slammed	shut	behind	him.

     Thorne	  collapsed	 against	 the	 wall,	  holding	  his	 chest.	 His	  cheeks	were

flushed,	but	 his	 eyes	were	 bright	 with	 adrenaline	 as	he	 looked	 around	at	 the

group.	At	Cinder,	at	Iko,	 at	Wolf.

     The	growing	 smile	vanished.	“Cress?”

     Cinder,	still	 gasping	for	her	own	breath,	shook	her	head.

     His	 jaw	fell	 slack	with	 horror.	He	pushed	himself	 off	the	wall	 and	lunged	for

the	doors,	but	Wolf	jumped	in	 front	of	 him,	pinning	 Thorne’s	arms	to	his	sides.

     “Let	 me	go,”	Thorne	growled.

188
     “We	 can’t	go	back,”	 said	Wolf.	“It’s	  suicide.”

     To	punctuate	his	words,	a	volley	 of	 bullets	struck	the	doors,	their	loud	 clangs

echoing	down	the	corridor	they	were	now	 trapped	in.

     “We’re	 not	leaving	 her.”

     “Thorne—”	  started	Cinder.

     “No!”	  Wriggling	  one	 arm	free,	 Thorne	swung,	 but	 Wolf	 ducked.	 In	 half	a

heartbeat,	Wolf	 had	spun	around	and	pinned	Thorne	 to	the	wall,	 one	 enormous

hand	at	Thorne’s	throat.

     “She	gave	us	this	chance,”	Wolf	 said.	“Don’t	 waste	it.”

     Thorne’s	 jaw	flexed.	 His	body	 was	taut	as	a	cable,	ready	to	fight,	 though	 he

was	no	match	for	Wolf.	 Panic	was	etched	into	every	 line	of	 his	face,	but	slowly,

slowly,	his	erratic	 breaths	started	to	even.

     “We	 have	to	go,”	said	Cinder,	almost	afraid	to	 suggest	it.

     Thorne’s	focus	shifted	 to	the	closed	doors.

     “I	 could	stay?”	suggested	Iko,	her	tone	uncertain.	“I	 could	go	back	for	her?”

     “No,”	 said	Cinder.	 “We	stay	together.”

     Thorne	flinched	 and	 Cinder	realized	the	 cruelty	of	 her	words	 too	late.	Their

group	was	already	divided.

     She	inched	forward	 to	settle	a	hand	on	Thorne’s	arm,	but	thought	better	of	 it.

“We’d	 still	 be	out	there	if	 it	 wasn’t	 for	her.	We’d	 all	 be	captured,	but	thanks	 to

Cress,	we’re	not.	She	saved	us.	Now,	we	have	to	go.”

     He	squeezed	his	eyes.	His	shoulders	slumped.

     His	whole	 body	was	trembling,	but	he	nodded.

     Wolf	 released	him	and	they	ran.

189
	



                                      BOOK
                                       Two

             The	huntsman	took	pity	on	her	and	said,

“Run	 away	into	the	woods,	child,	and	never	come	back.”

190
	




                                         Twenty-One







At	some	point	during	the	excitement	following	Emperor	Kaito’s	arrival,	Jacin

had	placed	himself	in	front	of	Winter—ever	her	protector—and	she	gathered	up

the	back	of	his	shirt’s	material	in	one	fist.	His	presence	was	part	comfort,	part

annoyance.	He	kept	blocking	her	view.

     Her	sight	was	clear	as	daybreak,	though,	as	she	watched	four	figures	dash

through	the	exit	that	led	down	to	the	maglev	shuttles.	The	doors	slammed	shut	to

a	volley	of	gunfire.	Though	they	had	been	too	far	away	to	see	clearly,	Winter

was	certain	one	of	them	was	Linh	Cinder.

     Her	dear	missing	cousin,	Princess	Selene.

     “Follow	them!”	Levana	shouted.	The	guards	who	had	been	sent	to	search	the

emperor’s	ship	were	at	the	exit	within	seconds,	trying	to	pry	the	doors	open,	but

they	wouldn’t	budge.

     Levana	wheeled	around	to	face	Sir	Jerrico	Solis.	“Send	one	team	through	the

palace	to	the	lakeside	entrances,	another	through	the	city.	Try	to	cut	them	off	at

the	platform.”

     Jerrico	clasped	a	hand	to	his	 fist	 and	was	gone,	summoning	eight	other

guards	to	follow.

191
     “Aimery,”	   Levana	barked,	 “see	to	 it	 that	all	 shuttles	leaving	 Artemisia	  are

stopped.	Have	them	searched,	along	with	 all	 connecting	 tunnels	and	platforms.

They	are	not	to	 make	it	out	 of	the	city.	 And	 find	 out	how	 they	were	able	to	 get

through	those	doors!”

     Aimery	 bowed.	 “I	 have	already	summoned	the	technician.	 We	will	 have	the

entire	system	locked	down.”

     Nostrils	  flaring,	  Levana	  straightened	 her	 spine	  and	 turned	 to	  face	 the

emperor.	He	was	standing	 near	the	back	of	 their	 small	group—alone,	 but	for	 a

handful	 of	 Earthen	guards	and	 his	 adviser.	Yet	 he	 didn’t	  look	 afraid.	 Winter

thought	he	 should	have	 looked	 afraid,	but	 his	 lips	 were	pressed	together	 in	 a

strained	effort	not	to	smile.

     Winter	 cocked	her	head,	inspecting	him.	He	seemed	proud.	Borderline	smug.

She	began	to	feel	guilty	for	having	teased	him	before.

     “Stowaways,”	   he	 said,	 once	  he	 had	 Levana’s	  attention.	 His	  shoulders

twitched	in	an	unconcerned	shrug.	“What	an	unexpected	surprise.”

     Levana’s	 face	was	fiercely	 beautiful.	 Breathtaking	 in	 her	viciousness.	“You

have	brought	a	known	 enemy	into	 the	heart	of	my	 country.	 In	a	time	 of	mutual

cease-fire,	you	have	committed	an	act	of	treason.”

     Kai	 didn’t	 flinch.	 “My	 loyalty	 lies	with	 the	Eastern	Commonwealth	and	with

Earth.	Not	with	 Luna,	and	certainly	not	with	 you.”

     Levana’s	 eyes	narrowed.	“You	 seem	confident	 that	I	 won’t	 have	you	 killed

for	this.”

     “You	 won’t,”	  he	said	with,	 as	her	stepmother	guessed,	an	overabundance	of

confidence.	Winter	 squirmed,	suddenly	afraid	for	 him.	 “At	 least,”	Kai	 amended,

“not	yet.”

192
     One	perfect	eyebrow	 lifted.	 “You’re	 right,”	  said	Levana.	“Perhaps	I	 will	 kill

your	adviser	instead.	Surely	he	was	aware	of	this	blatant	betrayal	of	my	trust.”

     “Do	  with	 me	as	you	 see	fit,”	  said	the	 adviser,	as	 unshaken	as	Kaito.	 “My

loyalties	lie	only	 with	 my	emperor.”

     Kai’s	 cheek	twitched.	“If	 you	 harm	any	one	of	your	Earthen	guests	as	either	a

punishment	or	a	threat	to	me,	I	will	 refuse	to	continue	with	this	wedding.”

     “Then	 I	will	 no	longer	have	any	reason	to	keep	you	alive.”

     “I	 know,”	 said	Kai,	“but	 you	also	won’t	 get	to	be	empress.”

     Their	 gazes	warred	with	each	other	while	Winter,	 Jacin,	and	the	other	guards

watched.	Winter’s	 heartbeat	was	erratic	 as	she	waited	 for	 the	queen’s	order	 to

have	Emperor	Kaito	killed—for	  his	insolence	as	much	as	for	his	role	 in	bringing

Linh	Cinder	to	 Artemisia.

     The	 doors	to	the	 palace	opened	and	a	guard	entered,	escorting	 one	of	 their

technicians.

     “My	 Queen,	you	summoned?”

     Aimery	 stepped	forward.	 “There	 had	been	strict	 orders	that	 the	exits	out	 of

this	port	 were	 to	 be	 locked,	 but	 it	 seems	there	has	 been	a	 malfunction.	 Her

Majesty	 demands	to	know	 what	 went	 wrong,	 and	be	 assured	it	won’t	  happen

again.”

     The	 technician	bowed	 and	scurried	 around	the	 platform	 toward	 the	control

panel	 that	 monitored	 the	 exits	  and	 the	 massive	 spaceship-holding	 chamber

beyond	the	port	doors.

     Winter	 was	watching	 him	 when	her	eye	caught	 on	a	slip	 of	movement.	 She

frowned,	sure	she	saw	someone	ducking	in	between	some	of	the	Earthen	cargo.

     Or	 as	sure	as	she	could	be	of	anything	 she	saw,	which	 was	not	very	 sure	at

193
all.

     Her	 stepmother	rounded	 again	on	the	 emperor	and	 flicked	 her	 arm	toward

him,	irritated	 with	 his	 presence.	“Take	the	Earthens	to	their	 quarters,”	she	said,

“and	keep	them	there.”

     The	 emperor	and	his	 entourage	put	up	 no	resistance	as	the	guards	shuffled

them	away	 with	 more	 force	 than	 was	necessary.	Kai	 didn’t	  look	 in	 Winter’s

direction,	but	 as	he	passed	she	could	see	he	was	no	 longer	hiding	 his	 grin.	 He

might	have	become	a	prisoner	of	the	queen,	but	clearly	he	saw	this	as	a	victory.

     The	guards’	clomping	 footsteps	had	faded	when	the	technician	shouted,	“My

Queen!”	 His	 fingers	 were	 dancing	 over	 the	screens,	his	 face	 set	with	  panic.

Levana	swept	toward	 him.	 The	 rest	of	 her	 entourage	trailed	 after,	and	 though

Jacin	moved	 to	keep	 himself	 in	 front	 of	 Winter,	  she	dodged	around	 him	 and

skipped	ahead,	ignoring	  his	low	  growl.	 She	scanned	the	 stacks	of	 crates	and

luggage	again,	but	 there	was	 no	sign	 of	 the	mysterious	 figure	 she’d	imagined

before.

     “What?”	 Levana	snapped.

     The	 technician	 didn’t	 turn	 away	 from	 the	 controls.	On	 the	 nearest	screen,

Winter	could	 see	a	map	of	the	shuttle	system	and	a	flashing	error	message	in	the

corner.	Jacin	appeared	again	at	her	side	and	cast	her	a	cool	glare	for	leaving	 the

circle	of	his	protection.	 She	ignored	him.

     “It’s—”	  the	technician	started.	He	swiveled	to	another	screen.

     “I	  suggest	 you	 find	  your	 tongue	  before	 I	 disable	 it	  permanently,”	  said

Levana.

     The	 technician	shuddered	and	 turned	back	 to	 face	them,	 though	his	 hands

lingered	uselessly	over	the	screens.	“The	system	is…”

194
     Levana	waited.

     Winter	 became	very	worried	for	this	 man’s	life.

     “…	 inaccessible,	My	  Queen.	I	can’t	 …	 I	can’t	 access	the	shuttle	schedules,

the	manual	 overrides	 …	 even	 the	entrances	to	 the	 main	 platform	  have	been

locked.	With	 …	 with	 the	exception	of	 the	corridor	 connecting	it	 to	these	docks,

which	alone	was	left	unimpeded.”

     Levana,	lips	pressed	into	a	firm	 line,	said	nothing.

     “The	 system	has	been	hacked?”	said	Aimery.

     “Y-yes,	 I	 think	 so.	It	 could	 take	hours	to	 reconfigure	 the	access	codes	…	I

don’t	even	know	what	they	did.”

     “Are	 you	 telling	 me,”	 said	Levana,	 “that	 you	cannot	 even	put	a	stop	 to	the

shuttles	leaving	the	city?”

     The	 technician	had	 gone	pale.	“I	  will	 keep	 trying,	 Your	 Majesty.	 I’ll	  have

much	better	access	to	the	system	from	the	palace	control	room,	so	I’ll	just—”

     “Do	 you	have	an	apprentice?”	said	the	queen.	“Or	a	partner	in	your	trade?”

     The	hair	stood	up	on	Winter’s	 neck.

     The	technician	 stammered,	“Th-there	are	three	of	us	…	 here	in	the	palace	…

but	I	have	the	most	experience,	with	over	twenty	years	of	loyal	 service	and—”

     “Kill	  him.”

     A	 guard	removed	the	gun	from	his	holster.	Winter	 turned	her	head	away,	and

though	it	was	a	petty	thought,	she	was	glad	it	wasn’t	 Jacin	being	forced	to	do	the

murder.	If	 he	had	 still	 been	guard	to	 the	head	thaumaturge,	 it	very	 well	 could

have	been.

     “Please,	My	 Que—”

     Winter	 jumped	 as	the	shot	rang	through	 her	head,	followed	  by	a	sound	 she

195
was	all	too	familiar	 with.	A	 whimper.	Coming	 from	behind	a	stack	of	cargo	bins.

     Behind	 her,	the	crackle	of	 wiring	 and	splinter	 of	plastic	 suggested	the	bullet

had	struck	one	of	the	screens	as	well.	The	guard	holstered	his	gun.

     Aimery	 turned	to	 the	queen.	“I	 will	 contact	Jerrico	and	see	if	 his	teams	have

managed	to	gain	 access	to	the	 platform,	 and	alert	 him	 that	 their	 way	 may	be

impeded.”

     “Thank	 you,	Aimery.	 Also	 alert	the	other	two	technicians	to	the	problem	with

the	shuttle	system.”

     Aimery	 pulled	 out	his	portscreen	and	stepped	away	from	their	 group,	toward

the	edge	of	the	platform.	 He	was	overlooking	 the	piled	 cargo	crates,	and	though

his	attention	 was	 on	 his	 port,	 Winter	 was	 searching	 for	 another	 sign	 of	 life

below.

     There.	A	foot,	 she	thought,	curling	in	against	a	large	trunk.

     Winter	 gasped	delightedly	 and	laced	her	fingers	 beneath	her	chin.	Everyone

spun	to	her,	startled	 at	her	presence,	which	was	not	 uncommon.	“Do	  you	think

the	Earthens	brought	us	gifts,	Stepmother?”

     Without	 waiting	  for	 a	response,	she	lifted	 her	skirts	 and	trotted	 toward	 the

cargo,	climbing	 over	the	 uneven	stacks	of	crates	and	bins	 until	 she	reached	the

lower	level.

     “Winter,”	  Levana	snapped.	“What	are	you	doing?”

     “Looking	  for	 presents!”	 she	called	back,	giggling.	  Jacin’s	shadow	 fell	 over

her	from	above.	She	could	picture	 his	expression	down	to	the	 annoyed	twitch	in

his	brow,	 and	she	knew	 that	from	 where	 he	stood	with	 the	 rest	of	 the	queen’s

entourage,	he	could	not	see	what	she	was	seeing.

     A	 girl	with	 cropped	blonde	hair	and	terrified	 blue	eyes	was	curled	into	a	tight

196
ball.	Her	back	was	pressed	up	against	a	crate,	her	whole	body	trembling.

     Winter	 lifted	 her	head	and	beamed,	first	at	Jacin,	then	her	stepmother,	doing

her	best	not	to	look	 at	 the	spray	of	blood	 on	the	 far	wall.	 “This	 one	says	it	 has

wine	from	 Argentina!	 It	 must	be	 from	 the	Americans.	We	 can	toast	to	 such	an

eventful	afternoon.”

     She	leaned	over	 the	shaking	girl	 and	 unlatched	the	crate	with	  a	loud	clack.

She	pried	up	the	lid.	“Oh,	 drat,	the	box	lied.	It’s	 only	 packing	fluff.”	  Holding	 the

lid	with	  one	hand,	she	started	pulling	 out	the	 shredded	paper	as	quickly	 as	she

could,	scattering	it	over	the	floor	 at	her	feet.	The	girl	gawked	up	at	her.

     Her	 stepmother’s	 voice	  had	turned	 to	  ice.	 “Sir	 Clay,	  please	escort	 your

charge	from	the	premises.	She	is	embarrassing	herself.”

     Her	 words	carried	too	 much	weight,	 but	Winter	 didn’t	 try	 to	decipher	 them.

She	was	busy	nudging	 at	the	girl	 with	 her	toe,	 gesturing	for	 her	to	 get	into	 the

crate.

     Jacin’s	boots	thumped	 against	the	cargo	as	he	descended	toward	her.	Winter

grabbed	the	girl’s	elbow	 and	tugged,	spurring	the	girl	 into	action.	She	scrambled

onto	her	 knees,	gripped	 the	edge	 of	 the	crate,	 and	hauled	 herself	inside—the

noise	muffled	by	Winter’s	 crumpling	 of	the	paper.

     Without	 waiting	 to	see	whether	the	girl	was	comfortable,	 Winter	 dropped	the

lid	 shut	as	 Jacin	dropped	 down	beside	 her.	Her	 grin	 brightened	 at	 him.	 “Oh,

good,	you’re	 here!	 You	 can	help	 me	carry	 this	paper	 up	to	 my	 room.	What	 a

thoughtful	gift	 from	 the	Americans,	don’t	you	think?”

     “Princess—”

     “I	 agree,	Jacin.	A	box	 full	 of	 paper	is	a	bit	messy	for	 a	wedding	gift,	 but	we

shan’t	be	ungrateful.”	She	scooped	up	an	armful	of	the	paper	and	pranced	toward

197
the	palace	entrance,	not	once	daring	to	look	back.

198
	




                                         Twenty-Two







Cinder	was	used	to	sensing	Wolf’s	energy—tireless	and	agitated	and	steaming

off	him	 like	heat	waves	over	pavement.	But	it	was	a	new	thing	coming	from

Thorne,	who	was	normally	unshakable.	As	they	ran	down	an	endless	staircase,

deeper	and	deeper	into	Luna’s	underground,	Thorne’s	energy	was	every	bit	as

palpable	as	Wolf’s.	Angry,	 terrified,	burdened	with	guilt.	 Cinder	wished	she

could	turn	off	her	Lunar	gift	so	she	wouldn’t	have	to	deal	with	her	companions’

tirade	of	emotions	in	addition	to	her	own.

     They’d	lost	Cress.	Levana	knew	of	Kai’s	betrayal.	Already	their	group	was

fragmented	and	her	plan	was	falling	to	pieces.

     The	steps	leveled	off	into	a	long,	narrow	corridor	lined	with	robed	statues,

each	holding	a	glowing	orb	that	cast	swells	of	light	onto	the	arched	ceiling.	The

floor	was	fitted	with	 thousands	of	tiny	black	and	gold	tiles,	creating	a	pattern

that	swirled	and	ebbed	like	the	Milky	  Way.	It	 would	have	been	a	marvel	to

behold	if	 they	had	the	time	 to	appreciate	it,	but	 Cinder’s	thoughts	were	too

tumultuous.	Listening	for	sounds	of	pursuit.	Picturing	Cress’s	face,	determined

in	spite	of	her	fear.	Trying	to	plan	their	next	move,	and	what	they	would	do	if

the	maglevs	failed—for	Levana	must	know	where	they	were	heading.

199
     At	 the	 end	of	 the	 corridor	 they	 came	to	 another	spiraling	 staircase	carved

from	dark,	 polished	wood.	The	 rails	and	steps	were	undulating	 and	uneven,	and

it	took	Cinder	two	 flights—gripping	  the	rails	to	keep	from	falling	 headfirst	in	 her

hurry—to	 realize	the	staircase	was	carved	to	resemble	an	enormous	octopus	that

was	allowing	them	passage	on	its	looping	tentacles.

     So	beautiful.	 So	strange.	Everything	 made	 with	 such	striking	 craftsmanship

and	detail.	And	all	 this	in	just	 some	tunnels	hundreds	of	feet	beneath	the	moon’s

surface.	She	couldn’t	imagine	how	stunning	the	palace	itself	must	be.

     They	reached	another	set	of	double	doors	inset	with	 an	artfully	 rendered	map

showing	the	entirety	of	the	maglev	system.

     “This	 is	the	platform,”	 said	Iko,	the	only	 one	of	them	not	panting.

     “I’ll	  go	 out	first,”	  said	Cinder.	“If	  anyone	is	out	 there,	I’ll	  use	a	glamour	to

make	them	see	us	as	members	of	Levana’s	court.	 Any	 thaumaturges	we	kill	 on

sight.	Everyone	else	we	ignore.”

     “What	 about	guards?”	said	Iko.

     “Guards	 are	 easy	 to	 control.	 Let	  me	 deal	 with	 them.”	  She	adjusted	 the

scratchy	gloves	Kai	 had	given	her,	then	opened	her	thoughts,	prepared	to	detect

the	bioelectricity	 off	 anyone	who	might	 have	been	on	the	platform.	 She	pressed

her	palm	 against	the	 doors.	At	 her	 touch,	they	 divided	 into	 four	 sections	 that

spiraled	into	the	walls.	Cinder	stepped	onto	the	platform.

     Empty.

     She	couldn’t	 imagine	it	would	 be	that	way	for	long.

     Three	shimmering	 white	 shuttles	 waited	on	 the	rails.	 They	 ran	for	 the	first

one.	Cinder	let	 the	others	climb	  in	first,	 ready	 to	call	 up	a	 glamour	at	 the	first

sign	of	 someone	approaching,	but	 the	platform	  remained	silent.	 Wolf	 grabbed

200
Cinder	and	dragged	her	in	with	them.

     “How	 do	we	 work	this	 thing?”	Iko	 cried,	pounding	 at	the	control	screen.	The

shuttle	remained	open	and	motionless.	“Shut	door!	Move!	 Get	us	out	of	here!”

     “It	  won’t	  work	  for	  you,”	  said	 Wolf,	  leaning	 past	 Iko	  to	 press	all	  five

fingertips	against	the	screen.	It	lit	up	and	the	doors	glided	shut.

     It	 was	a	false	sense	of	protection,	but	Cinder	couldn’t	help	a	breath	of	relief.

     A	 tranquil	 voice	 filled	  the	 shuttle.	“Welcome,	  Alpha	 Ze’ev	 Kesley,	 Lunar

Special	Operative	Number	962.	Where	shall	I	take	you?”

     He	glanced	at	Cinder.

     She	stared	at	the	screen,	sifting	through	the	possibilities.	 Giving	 directions	to

RM-9	was	a	sure	way	of	 leading	Levana	straight	to	them.	She	pulled	up	the	map

of	Luna	on	 her	retina	display,	 trying	 to	strategize	the	best	route,	one	that	would

lead	Levana	off	their	track.

     “WS-1,”	   said	 Thorne.	  He	 was	 slumped	 on	  the	 floor	  between	 the	 two

upholstered	benches,	his	hands	draped	over	his	knees,	his	head	against	the	wall.

Between	 the	 disheartened	expression	 and	 collapsed	 posture,	 he	 was	 almost

unrecognizable.	But	  at	 his	 voice,	 the	 shuttle	 rose	up	 on	 the	 magnetic	 force

beneath	the	rails	and	started	racing	away	from	Artemisia.

     “Waste	salvage?”	Iko	 said.

     Thorne	 shrugged.	“I	  thought	 it	 would	  be	good	 to	 have	 a	Plan	 B	 in	 case

something	like	this	happened.”

     After	  a	short	 silence,	in	 which	 Iko’s	  internal	 workings	 hummed,	she	 said,

“And	 Plan	B	is	to	go	to	the	waste	salvage	sector?”

     Thorne	 looked	up.	 His	 voice	was	 neutral	as	he	explained,	 “It’s	  a	short	 trip

from	 Artemisia,	 so	we	 won’t	 be	giving	  Levana	too	 much	time	 to	 regroup	and

201
send	people	after	us	before	we	 get	out	of	 this	 shuttle.	And	 it’s	 one	of	 the	most

connected	sectors	on	 Luna,	 given	 that	 everyone	has	 waste.	There	 are	fifteen

maglev	tunnels	branching	 out	from	 that	 one	platform.	 We	can	go	 on	foot	 for	 a

ways,	throw	them	off	 our	course,	then	start	doub—”

     “Don’t	  say	it,”	said	Cinder.	“We	 don’t	 know	if	 we’ll	 be	recorded	in	here.”

     Thorne	shut	his	mouth	and	nodded.

     Cinder	 knew	he’d	 been	about	to	 say	they	 could	start	 doubling	 back	toward

RM-9.	She	focused	in	 on	sector	WS-1	 on	the	map	in	 her	head,	and	Thorne	was

right.	It	 was	a	smart	plan.	 She	couldn’t	 believe	she	hadn’t	 thought	of	 it	herself.

“Good	call,	Thorne.”

     He	shrugged	again,	without	enthusiasm.	“Criminal	 mastermind,	remember?”

     Cinder	 sagged	onto	the	bench	beside	Wolf,	allowing	 her	body	 a	brief	respite

from	the	pumping	adrenaline.	“The	 system	recognized	you.”

     “Every	 Lunar	 citizen	 is	in	the	 database.	I’ve	only	 been	missing	for	 a	couple

of	months—I	figured	 they	wouldn’t	 have	had	my	identity	 removed	yet.”

     “Do	 you	 think	 they’ll	 notice	 if	 a	special	operative	who’s	 supposed	to	be	on

Earth	suddenly	shows	up	again?”

     “I	 don’t	 know.	 But	 as	long	 as	we’re	 traveling	by	 shuttle,	 using	my	 identity

will	 draw	less	attention	than	yours.	And	without	 Cress	here	to	break	into	it…”

     Thorne	 flinched	 and	pressed	his	forehead	into	 the	 shuttle	wall.	 They	 sat	in

silence	for	a	long	 time,	the	lack	of	 Cress’s	presence	filling	 up	the	hollow	 spaces

around	them.

     Only	 in	 her	 absence	did	Cinder	 realize	 how	 much	 they’d	 been	relying	 on

Cress.	She	could	have	sneaked	them	through	the	maglev	system	without	 having

to	input	 any	identities.	 And	Cress	had	been	confident	 that,	once	they	 arrived	in

202
RM-9,	she	could	disable	any	surveillance	 equipment	that	might	 give	them	away.

Plus	 there	 was	 the	 all-important	  matter	  of	 infiltrating	   Luna’s	  broadcasting

system	to	share	Cinder’s	message	with	Luna’s	citizens.

     But	 knowing	 how	 much	Cress’s	loss	 impacted	their	 objectives	was	nothing

compared	to	the	horror	 Cinder	felt.	 Cress	would	 be	tortured	 for	 information	 on

their	whereabouts	and	then	almost	certainly	killed.

     “She’s	 a	shell,”	Cinder	 said.	“They	 can’t	detect	her	bioelectricity.	 As	 long	as

she	stays	hidden,	she’ll	be—”

     “Don’t,”	  said	Thorne.

     Cinder	  stared	 at	  his	  whitened	  knuckles	  and	  struggled	  for	  something

meaningful	to	 say.	Her	grand	plan	of	 revolution	 and	change	had	just	begun	and

already	she	felt	like	a	failure.	This	 seemed	worse	than	failing	the	people	of	Luna,

though.	She’d	failed	the	people	she	cared	about	most	in	the	universe.

     Finally,	 she	whispered,	“I’m	 so	sorry,	Thorne.”

     “Yeah,”	 he	said.	“Me	 too.”

203
	




                                      Twenty-Three







Jacin	was	extra	broody	as	Winter	led	him	into	the	elevator.

     “Why	 do	I	 have	a	 bad	feeling	about	this?”	 he	grumbled,	eyeing	Winter

suspiciously.

     “You	have	a	bad	feeling	about	everything,”	she	said,	nudging	him	with	her

shoulder.	It	was	a	 playful	gesture,	one	that	always	made	her	giddy	 to	have

returned.	This	time,	it	was	not	returned.	She	frowned.	“I	forgot	something	down

in	the	ports.	It	will	only	take	a	moment.”

     She	fluttered	her	lashes	at	him.

     He	scowled	and	looked	away.	He	was	in	 guard	mode.	Uniform.	 Posture.

Inability	to	hold	eye	contact	for	more	than	half	a	second.

     Guard	Jacin	was	not	her	favorite	Jacin,	but	she	knew	it	was	only	a	disguise,

and	one	that	was	forced	upon	him.

     She	was	itching	to	tell	him	the	truth	from	the	instant	they’d	left	the	ports.	She

was	stricken	with	anxiety	over	the	fate	of	the	girl	she’d	ushered	into	that	crate.

Was	she	still	in	hiding?	Did	she	try	to	run	and	rejoin	her	friends?	Had	she	been

found?	Captured?	Killed?

     This	girl	was	an	ally	of	Linh	Cinder’s,	and	perhaps	a	friend	of	her	Scarlet’s

204
as	well.	Fear	for	 her	 life	 turned	Winter	 into	 a	pacing,	fidgety	 mess	for	 the	two

hours	that	 she’d	 forced	 herself	 to	  wait	 in	 her	 chambers,	 so	as	 not	 to	 draw

attention	to	 her	 return	to	 the	 docks.	Her	 awareness	of	the	 palace	surveillance

system	kept	her	from	telling	the	secret	to	even	Jacin.	It	had	been	a	difficult	 secret

to	retain.

     But	 if	she’d	been	acting	odd,	even	Jacin	didn’t	 ask	her	about	it.	No	 doubt	the

day’s	excitement	was	plenty	reason	enough	for	her	agitation.

     “What	 was	it?”	Jacin	asked.

     Winter	 peeled	 her	focus	 from	 the	 descending	indicator	 above	 the	elevator

door.	“Pardon?”

     “What	 did	you	forget	 in	the	ports?”

     “Oh.	 You’ll	 see.”

     “Princess—”

     The	 doors	swished	open.	 She	grabbed	his	 arm	and	pulled	 him	 through	 the

lavish	 gallery	 where	 Artemisians	 could	 await	  their	 transport.	 This	 level	 was

abandoned,	just	as	 she’d	hoped.	 Though	 it	 had	been	easy	 for	 Winter	 to	 gain

access	to	the	ports	from	the	 guard	in	the	palace	above—it	 had	taken	little	 more

than	a	pout	and	defiantly	 ignoring	Jacin’s	 groan—the	ports	were	supposed	to	be

off-limits	  for	the	 duration	of	 the	Earthens’	 visit.	 For	 the	security	 of	their	 ships

and	belongings,	 Levana	 had	 said,	 but	 Winter	 knew	 it	  was	really	  to	 prevent

anyone	from	trying	to	 leave.

     The	ports	were	quiet	when	they	 stepped	onto	the	main	platform.	The	glowing

floor	 made	the	ships’	 shadows	appear	monstrous	on	 the	high	 ceilings,	 and	the

cavernous	walls	echoed	every	footstep,	every	breath.	Winter	imagined	 she	could

hear	her	own	thunderous	heartbeat	ricocheting	back	to	her.

205
     She	took	 off	  around	the	 platform	 with	  Jacin	following	   at	a	 fast	clip.	  She

couldn’t	 help	 glancing	toward	 the	 control	 booth,	and	 though	there	remained	 a

broken	screen	and	a	few	dark	stains	on	the	wall,	the	technician’s	body	was	gone.

To	her	knowledge,	his	replacements	were	still	in	the	palace’s	main	control	 center

trying	to	regain	access	to	the	malfunctioning	system.

     Her	 attention	swept	 down	to	 the	lower	 level	 and	endless	relief	 filled	 her	 to

see	the	cargo	untouched.	Though	 the	ambassadors’	personal	luggage	had	 been

taken	to	their	suites,	their	gifts	 and	trade	goods	had	been	left	behind	for	retrieval

at	a	later	date.

     Winter	 spotted	the	box	of	Argentinian	 wine.	Her	pace	quickened.

     “Stars	 above,”	 Jacin	 grumbled.	 “If	  you	 dragged	 me	 down	 here	for	  more

packing	paper—”

     “Paper,”	 said	Winter,	 scrambling	unladylike	 over	the	cargo	boxes,	“is	 a	most

difficult	   resource	to	  obtain.	  The	 lumber	  sectors	have	  enough	 demand	 for

building	 supplies.	 I	 once	had	to	 trade	 a	pair	 of	 silk	 slippers	 for	 half	 a	dozen

greeting	cards,	you	know.”

     It	 was	 only	 partly	 true.	 Most	 of	 the	 paper	goods	 available	 in	 Artemisia’s

shops	were	made	from	pulped	bamboo,	which	was	one	of	 the	few	resources	that

grew	with	 abundance	in	the	agriculture	 sectors.	But	bamboo	also	contributed	 to

textile	and	furniture	 manufacturing,	and	even	that	paper	was	in	limited	supply.

     Winter	 was	fond	of	 paper.	She	liked	the	crisp,	tactile	 way	it	crinkled	 beneath

her	fingers.

     Jacin	sat	down	on	a	plastic	bin,	 his	legs	dangling	over	the	edge.	In	the	serene

solitude	of	 the	docks,	 Guard	Jacin	 had	withdrawn.	 “You	  want	to	 turn	 packing

paper	into	greeting	cards?”

206
     “Oh,	 no,”	she	said.	“I	have	no	interest	in	the	paper.”

     One	eyebrow	rose.	“The	wine,	 then?”

     Winter	 unlatched	the	shipping	crate.	“Not	the	wine,	 either.”

     She	held	her	breath	and	heaved	open	the	lid.	 It	clattered	against	the	next	 bin

and	Winter	found	 herself	staring	into	a	large	shipping	 crate	with	a	layer	 of	tight-

packed	wine	bottles	and	loose	bits	of	paper	and	no	sign	of	the	girl.

     Her	heart	plummeted.

     “What?”	 Jacin	 leaned	forward	to	 peer	into	the	box.	 His	face	 took	on	a	layer

of	concern.	“Princess?”

     Her	 lips	  parted,	 then	 snapped	 shut	 again.	 She	 turned	 in	 a	 slow	  circle,

examining	the	 crates	stacked	all	 around	her.	 The	girl	 could	 have	sneaked	into

any	of	them.

     Or	she	could	have	run.

     Or	she	could	already	have	been	found	by	someone	else.

     Jacin	dropped	down	from	 his	perch	and	grabbed	her	elbow.	“What’s	wrong?”

     “She’s	 gone,”	Winter	murmured.

     “She?”

     “There	  was—”	  She	 hesitated.	Her	  gaze	darted	 up	  to	 one	 of	 the	  many

inconspicuous	cameras	along	 the	 dock’s	 perimeter.	 Though	 the	 queen	would

have	demanded	them	to	be	disabled	while	she	was	there,	Winter	had	no	idea	if	or

when	they’d	been	reinstated.

     Jacin	bristled,	with	 impatience	but	 also	worry.	Checking	 for	the	cameras	was

the	first	  sign	 someone	was	 going	 against	the	 queen’s	 wishes.	 After	 a	 quick

sweep	of	the	ceiling,	 he	shook	his	head.	“No	 indicator	 lights.	 They’re	 still	 off.”

He	was	frowning	as	he	said	it,	though.	“Tell	 me	what’s	going	 on.”

207
     Winter	 swallowed.	“There	 was	a	girl.	 I	think	 she	came	with	Linh	 Cinder	and

her	companions.	I	 saw	 her	sneaking	 around	these	crates	while	  the	queen	was

arguing	with	the	technician,	so	I	hid	 her	in	here.	But	…	now	 she’s	gone.”

     Jacin	rocked	back	on	his	heels.	Winter	expected	him	 to	chastise	her	for	doing

something	so	 dangerous	and	right	 in	 front	 of	 the	 queen,	no	less.	 But	 instead,

after	a	long	hesitation,	he	asked,	“What	did	she	look	like?”

     “Small.	   Short	  blonde	  hair.	  Afraid.”	   Remembering	  the	  girl’s	   terrified

expression	made	 Winter	 shiver.	 “Maybe	  she	tried	 to	 rejoin	  her	 companions.

Or	…	or	maybe	she’s	back	on	the	emperor’s	ship?”

     Jacin’s	 gaze	 had	 unfocused.	 “Cress,”	  he	 whispered,	 turning	  around.	 He

released	Winter’s	  elbow	 and	 bounded	back	 up	 the	 crates,	vaulting	  onto	 the

platform	overhead.

     “What?	 Jacin?”	She	lifted	 her	skirt	 over	her	knees	and	hurried	after	 him.	By

the	time	 she’d	 managed	 to	get	 back	 up	 onto	 the	 platform,	 Jacin	 was	in	  the

control	booth,	 yanking	 open	cabinets	filled	 with	 wires	 and	cords	and	computer

parts	that	Winter	didn’t	 comprehend.

     He	found	 the	girl	 behind	the	third	 door	he	opened,	her	body	curled	into	 such

a	 tight	 ball	  Winter	  couldn’t	  believe	 she	 hadn’t	  suffocated.	 Her	 wide	  eyes

attached	to	Jacin	and	widened,	impossibly,	further.

     Winter	 staggered	to	a	halt	as	Jacin	reached	into	the	cabinet	and	pulled	the	girl

out.	The	girl	 yelped,	 trying	 to	regain	 her	footing	 as	Jacin	shoved	the	door	 shut

behind	her.	 She	 pried	 her	 arm	out	 of	  his	 grip	 and	 backed	against	 the	 wall,

trembling	like	 a	caged	animal.

     Rather	than	 reaching	for	 her	again,	 Jacin	took	 a	step	back	and	 pinched	the

bridge	of	 his	nose.	He	 cursed.	“Princess,	you	 have	got	 to	stop	collecting	  these

208
rebels.”

     Ignoring	 him,	Winter	 drifted	 toward	the	girl,	 her	hands	placating.	“We	 won’t

hurt	you,”	she	cooed.	“It’s	 all	right.”

     The	girl	 spared	her	a	hasty	glance	before	turning	back	to	Jacin.	Terrified,	 but

also	angry.

     “My	 name	is	Winter,”	 she	said.	“Are	 you	hurt?”

     “We	 can’t	 stay	here,”	said	Jacin.	“The	 cameras	will	 be	coming	on	again	any

minute.	It’s	a	miracle	 they	haven’t	already.”

     The	girl	 continued	to	stare	at	him	with	her	timid	 ferocity.

     “Wait.”	  Jacin	laughed.	“You	disabled	them,	didn’t	 you?”

     The	girl	 said	nothing.

     Winter	 swiveled	her	attention	from	 her	to	Jacin.	“She	disabled	them?”

     “This	  girl	 used	 to	 be	the	 queen’s	best-kept	 secret.	She	 can	find	  her	way

around	 any	 computer	  system.”	 He	  crossed	 his	 arms,	 his	  stern	 expression

softening	into	 an	 almost	smile.	 “You’re	  the	one	 who’s	 been	messing	with	 the

shuttles	too.”

     The	girl’s	 lips	thinned	 into	a	line.

     “What’s	 your	name?”	asked	Winter.

     When	the	girl	 still	 didn’t	 respond,	Jacin	answered,	“Her	name	is	Cress.	She’s

a	shell	 and	 one	 of	 Linh	  Cinder’s	 allies.”	  He	 scratched	his	 temple.	 “I	  don’t

suppose	you	have	a	plan	as	to	what	we’re	supposed	to	do	with	her?”

     “We	 could	 sneak	her	 up	to	 the	guest	 wing?	 I’m	 sure	the	 Earthen	emperor

would	watch	over	her.	He	did	help	 them	get	here,	after	all.”

     Jacin	shook	 his	 head.	“He’s	 under	 too	 much	security.	 We’d	 never	 get	her

close.	Besides,	the	fewer	 people	who	 know	 you	helped	 her,	the	less	chance	of

209
Levana	finding	out.”

     The	 girl—Cress—seemed	to	 be	relaxing	 as	it	 became	apparent	Winter	 and

Jacin	weren’t	going	 to	have	her	executed.	Winter	 smiled	at	her.	“I’ve	  never	met

a	shell	before.	 What	 a	marvelous	gift.	  I	can’t	 sense	you	at	 all,	 like	 you’re	 not

even	 there,	 even	 though	 you’re	  standing	  right	  in	 front	  of	  me.”	  Her	 grin

broadened.	“That	would	drive	my	 stepmother	mad.”

     “It	 was	 a	shell	who	 killed	 the	 last	king	 and	queen,”	 said	Jacin.	“Maybe	 we

can	turn	her	into	an	assassin.”

     Winter	 turned	to	him,	aghast.	“Does	she	look	like	an	assassin?”

     He	 shrugged.	 “Does	 she	 look	 like	  she’s	 capable	 of	 disabling	 our	  entire

maglev	system?”

     “I	 didn’t	 disable	it.”	 Cress’s	voice	 was	meek,	but	Winter	 was	so	surprised	to

hear	 her	 speak,	 she	 might	  as	 well	  have	  shouted.	 “I	  changed	 the	  access

parameters	so	the	queen	couldn’t	shut	it	down.”

     Jacin	stared	at	her.	“But	you	could	disable	it,	 if	you	 wanted	to.”

     After	 a	beat,	the	girl	dropped	her	gaze	to	the	floor.

     “We	 have	to	 find	someplace	to	 keep	her,”	said	 Winter,	 tugging	on	 a	curl	of

hair.	“Somewhere	safe.”

     “Why?”	  said	Cress.	“Why	are	you	helping	me?”

     Winter	 didn’t	 know	 if	 she	was	asking	 her	or	Jacin,	 but	Jacin	answered	first

with	a	grumbled	“Good	 question.”

     Winter	 shoved	him	hard	in	the	shoulder.	He	barely	shifted.

     “Because	it’s	  the	right	 thing	 to	do.	 We’re	 going	to	 protect	 you.	Aren’t	  we,

Jacin?”

     When	Jacin	said	nothing,	Winter	 shoved	him	again.	“Aren’t	 we?”

210
     Jacin	sighed.	 “I	 think	 we	can	sneak	her	 into	 the	guard	quarters.	It’s	 not	 far

and	we	won’t	have	to	go	into	the	main	part	of	 the	castle.”

     With	 obvious	disbelief,	 Cress	said,	“You’re	going	to	protect	me?”

     “Rather	against	my	will,”	  said	Jacin,	“but	it	 looks	like	 it.”

     “For	 as	long	 as	we	can,”	 said	Winter.	 “And,	 if	 the	opportunity	  arises,	we’ll

do	our	best	to	reunite	you	with	your	 friends.”

     For	the	first	 time,	Cress’s	defenses	began	to	slip.	“They	got	away?”

     “It	 would	 seem	so.	They	haven’t	been	found	yet,	as	far	as	I	can	tell.”

     “But	 the	queen	won’t	 stop	looking,”	 added	Jacin,	as	if	either	of	them	weren’t

aware.

     Cress	had	stopped	trembling.	Her	expression	became	thoughtful	as	she	stared

at	Jacin.	Finally,	 she	asked,	“I	 don’t	 suppose	the	guard	quarters	have	access	to

the	royal	broadcasting	network?”

211
	




                                           Twenty-Four







Their	progress	through	 Luna’s	 outer	 sectors	was	slow	 and	tedious.	Sometimes

taking	maglev	shuttles,	sometimes	walking	through	 the	tunnels,	sometimes	using

Wolf’s	 identity	 to	 send	a	shuttle	on	without	 them	before	 skipping	to	 a	different

platform	 and	 heading	in	 the	 opposite	 direction.	 Sometimes	they	 split	  up	and

rejoined	one	another	a	couple	of	 sectors	over,	to	confuse	any	security	 personnel

looking	for	 a	group	of	two	men	and	two	women	traveling	 together.

     They	kept	their	 heads	down.	Iko	kept	her	hair	hidden	beneath	her	cap.	Cinder

fidgeted	with	 her	gloves	 to	be	sure	her	 metal	hand	wouldn’t	  be	seen	on	any	of

the	cameras.	Though	 they	 avoided	what	 surveillance	 cameras	they	 could,	 she

knew	they	 couldn’t	 miss	them	 all.	 She	hoped	there	were	so	 many	surveillance

feeds	on	Luna	they	couldn’t	possibly	all	 be	monitored.

     Though	 they	occasionally	 ventured	up	to	 the	surface	in	 order	to	switch	 to	 a

different	 shuttle	line,	 they	avoided	 it	 when	they	 could.	Wolf	  warned	them	 that

most	of	 the	 outer	 sectors	were	 manned	by	 armed	 guards.	Though	 they	 were

meant	to	be	there	for	the	 security	of	the	 people,	it	seemed	they	spent	more	time

punishing	anyone	who	dared	to	speak	out	against	the	crown.	The	few	 times	they

did	sneak	up	 into	 the	surface	domes,	 they	managed	to	 go	unassaulted	in	 their

212
disguises	and	 cowed	 postures,	but	  Cinder	 knew	 it	  wouldn’t	  be	 long	 before

security	measures	were	increased	all	over	Luna.

     They	 barely	 talked.	 Cinder	 spent	the	 hours	mulling	  over	 the	 battle	in	 the

docks,	 folding	  every	 misstep	 over	  in	 her	 head	 again	 and	 again,	 trying	  to

determine	a	way	 she	could	 have	gotten	 them	all	 away	 safely,	trying	 to	 rescue

Cress,	trying	to	keep	Kai	out	of	Levana’s	 clutches.

     She	never	found	a	good	solution.

     The	constant	churning	of	her	thoughts	threatened	to	drive	her	mad.

     The	  farther	 they	  traveled	 from	  Artemisia,	  the	 more	  their	  surroundings

changed.	It	began	to	 feel	 like	 they’d	 stepped	into	 a	different	 world	 altogether.

Judging	from	  how	 opulent	 the	 royal	 docks	 were,	 Cinder	 had	constructed	 an

image	in	her	head	of	how	beautiful	all	 of	Luna	must	be.	But	 it	soon	became	clear

that	the	outer	sectors	received	none	of	the	capital’s	 luxuries.	Each	platform	 they

passed	held	new	signs	of	 neglect—crumbling	 stone	walls	 and	flickering	  lights.

Graffiti	 scribbled	onto	the	tunnel	walls	 spoke	of	unrest.
     SHE’S	      WATCHING…,	              read	one	message,	painted	in	 white	upon

the	black	cave	walls.	Another	asked,	HAVE	      YOU	    SEEN	     MY	   SON?

     “How	   would	  we	 know	  if	  we	  had?”	 Iko	  asked.	 “They	  didn’t	   leave	 a

description.”

     “I	 think	 it’s	meant	to	be	thought	provoking,”	 said	Cinder.

     Iko	 frowned,	looking	 unprovoked.

     They	 stopped	when	 they	heard	 a	shuttle	 approaching	or	 when	they	 had	 to

wait	for	 a	platform	to	clear,	 relishing	their	 brief	respites	before	moving	 on.	They

had	brought	a	couple	packs	of	food	rations—not	knowing	 when	they	would	 have

an	opportunity	 to	 find	 more—and	 Cinder	doled	 them	out	 in	 small	 increments,

213
even	though	no	one	was	all	that	hungry.

     Though	Cinder	 knew	she	couldn’t	 be	the	only	 one	whose	back	was	sore	and

legs	were	aching,	 no	one	complained.	 Iko	 alone	kept	 a	graceful	 bounce	to	 her

step,	having	been	fully	charged	before	they	left	Kai’s	 ship.

     By	 shuttle,	this	 trip	 should	have	lasted	 only	a	 couple	of	 hours.	By	 the	time

they	finally	 arrived	 at	their	destination,	Cinder’s	 internal	clock	 told	 her	they	had

left	Artemisia	 over	nineteen	hours	ago.

     When	 they	emerged	from	  the	darkened	tunnel	 onto	the	 shuttle	platform	  of

RM-9:	REGOLITH	MINING,	the	elaborate	beauty	of	Artemisia	felt	  like	 a	 distant

dream.	Gone	 were	  the	 glistening	 tiles	  and	 intricate	 statues,	 gone	 were	 the

polished	woods	and	glowing	orbs.	This	 platform	 was	dark	and	cold	and	tasted	of

still,	sterile	 air.	Every	 surface	was	covered	in	a	layer	of	 dust,	years	of	footprints

pressed	into	it.	Cinder	brushed	her	hand	across	a	wall	and	her	fingers	came	away

coated	in	gray.

     “Regolith	 dust,”	 said	Wolf.	“It	 covers	everything	 out	here.”

     Iko	 pressed	both	of	her	palms	 against	one	wall.	 When	she	pulled	away,	 two

handprints	remained,	perfect,	yet	lacking	the	normal	creases	of	a	human	palm.

     “Doesn’t	 seem	healthy,”	Thorne	muttered.

     “It’s	 not.”	 Wolf	 swiped	 at	his	nose,	like	the	dust	was	tickling	 him.	 “It	 gets	in

your	lungs.	Regolith	sickness	is	common.”

     Cinder	clenched	her	teeth	and	added	unhealthy	living	 and	work	 conditions	to

her	long	list	of	problems	she	was	going	to	address	when	she	was	queen.

     Iko	 smeared	her	dust-covered	hands	on	her	pants.	“It	feels	abandoned.”

     “Everyone’s	 working,	 either	in	the	mines	or	the	factories.”

     Cinder	 checked	her	 internal	 clock,	 which	 she	had	synced	 with	 Lunar	 time

214
before	leaving	the	Rampion.	 “We	 have	about	eight	minutes	 before	the	workday

ends.”	She	 turned	 to	 Wolf.	  “We	 can	 wait	 here,	 or	 we	 can	 try	 to	 find	  your

parents’	house.	What	do	you	want	to	do?”

     He	 looked	 conflicted	 as	he	 peered	up	a	 set	of	 narrow,	 uneven	steps.	“We

should	wait	  here.	There	 aren’t	 many	 reasons	for	 people	 to	 be	on	 the	 streets

during	work	 hours.	We’d	 be	too	obvious.”	 He	 gulped.	“Besides,	they	 might	 not

be	there.	My	parents	might	be	dead.”

     He	tried	to	 say	it	with	nonchalance,	but	he	failed.

     “All	  right,”	 said	Cinder,	 stealing	back	into	 the	shadows	of	 the	tunnel.	“How

far	are	we	from	the	factories?”

     Wolf’s	  brow	 was	drawn,	 and	she	could	 see	him	 straining	to	 remember	the

details	of	 his	 childhood	 home.	“Not	  far.	 I	 remember	them	 all	 being	clustered

near	the	dome’s	center.	We	should	be	able	to	 blend	in	with	 the	laborers	as	soon

as	the	day	ends.”

     “And	 the	mines?”

     “Those	 are	farther	away.	 There	are	two	 mine	entrances	on	the	other	 side	of

the	dome.	Regolith	 is	 one	of	 the	few	 natural	 resources	Luna	has,	so	it’s	 a	 big

industry.”

     “So…,”	 started	Thorne,	scratching	his	ear,	“your	 best	resource	is	…	rocks?”

     Wolf	 shrugged.	“We	have	a	lot	of	 them.”

     “Not	  just	rock,”	  said	Cinder,	 as	her	 net	database	fed	 her	an	abundance	of

unsolicited	information.	 “Regolith	 is	 full	 of	metals	and	compounds	too.	Iron	and

magnesium	in	the	highlands,	aluminum	 and	silica	 in	the	lowlands.”	 She	chewed

the	inside	of	her	cheek.	“I	 figured	 all	of	 the	metal	would	 have	had	to	come	from

Earth.”

215
     “A	  lot	of	 it	 did,	 ages	ago,”	said	Wolf.	  “We’ve	 become	experts	at	 recycling

the	materials	that	 were	brought	 up	 from	 Earth	during	 colonization.	  But	we’ve

also	learned	 to	 make	 do.	Most	  new	 construction	 uses	materials	 mined	 from

regolith—stone,	metal,	soil	 …	Almost	 the	entire	city	of	 Artemisia	was	built	 from

regolith.”	 He	paused.	“Well,	and	wood.	We	grow	 trees	in	the	lumber	sectors.”

     Cinder	 stopped	listening.	  She	had	already	 educated	herself	 as	well	 as	 she

could	 on	 Luna’s	 resources	and	 industries.	 Though,	 for	 their	  purposes,	she’d

spent	most	of	her	time	researching	Lunar	media	and	transportation.

     It	 was	all	 controlled	 by	 the	government,	 of	course.	 Levana	didn’t	 want	 the

outer	sectors	to	have	easy	communication	with	 one	another.	The	less	interaction

her	citizens	had	with	 each	other,	the	more	difficult	  it	would	 be	for	them	 to	form

a	rebellion.

     A	 series	 of	 chimes	pealed	 through	 the	 tunnel,	 making	 her	jump.	  A	 short

melody	followed.

     “The	  Lunar	 anthem,”	 said	 Wolf,	  his	 expression	 dark,	 as	 if	 he	 had	 long

harbored	a	deep	hatred	for	the	song.

     The	 anthem	was	followed	  by	 a	pleasant	female	 voice:	 “This	  workday	 has

ended.	Stamp	your	 times	and	retire	  to	your	 homes.	We	hope	 you	enjoyed	this

workday	and	look	forward	 to	your	return	 tomorrow.”

     Thorne	grunted.	“How	 considerate.”

     Soon	they	could	 hear	the	drumming	 footsteps	of	 exhausted	workers	pouring

into	the	streets.

     Wolf	 cocked	his	head,	indicating	it	 was	time,	and	led	them	up	the	steps.	They

emerged	into	artificial	  daylight,	 where	the	dome’s	curved	 glass	blocked	out	 the

glow	 of	 stars.	This	 sector	was	 not	much	 of	 an	improvement	 over	 the	 tunnels

216
below.	Cinder	 was	staring	at	 a	patchwork	 of	browns	 and	grays.	Narrow	 streets

and	run-down	 buildings	 that	had	no	 glass	in	their	 windows.	 And	 dust,	dust,	so

much	dust.

     Cinder	 found	herself	 shrinking	 away	from	 the	 first	 sparse	groups	of	people

they	saw—instinct	 telling	 her	to	stay	hidden—but	 no	one	even	glanced	at	them.

The	people	they	passed	looked	weary	and	filthy,	hardly	talking.

     Wolf	  rolled	  his	 shoulders,	his	 gaze	 darting	 over	 the	 buildings,	 the	 dust-

covered	streets,	the	artificial	 sky.	 Cinder	wondered	 if	 he	was	embarrassed	they

were	seeing	this	glimpse	into	his	past,	and	she	tried	to	imagine	Wolf	 as	a	normal

child,	 with	 parents	who	 loved	him	 and	 a	home	he	 grew	up	 in.	 Before	 he	was

taken	away	and	turned	into	a	predator.

     It	 was	impossible	to	think	 that	every	member	of	Levana’s	army,	 every	one	of

those	mutants,	had	started	out	this	way	too.	How	many	of	them	had	been	grateful

to	be	given	 the	chance	to	get	away	from	 these	sectors	with	 the	dust	that	coated

their	homes	and	filled	their	lungs?

     How	 many	had	been	devastated	to	leave	their	families	behind?

     The	graffiti	 echoed	back	at	her:	Have	you	seen	my	son?

     Wolf	  pointed	 down	 one	of	 the	 narrow	 streets.	“This	  way.	 The	residential

streets	are	mostly	in	the	outer	rings	of	the	sector.”

     They	 followed,	 trying	 to	 mimic	 the	dragging	 feet	and	lowered	 heads	of	the

laborers.	 It	 was	  difficult,	   when	 Cinder’s	  own	 adrenaline	  was	 singing,	 her

heartbeat	starting	to	race.

     The	first	 part	of	 her	plan	had	already	 gone	horribly	 wrong.	 She	didn’t	 know

what	she	would	do	if	 this	failed	too.	She	needed	Wolf’s	 parents	to	be	alive,	to	be

allies.	She	needed	the	security	they	could	offer—a	 safe	place	to	hide	 while	 they

217
figured	out	what	they	were	going	to	 do	without	Cress.

     It	 was	as	far	ahead	as	she	could	think.

     Find	a	sanctuary.

     Then	she	would	start	worrying	 about	revolutions.

     They	 hadn’t	gone	 far	from	 the	maglev	 tunnel	 when	Cinder	 spotted	the	first

guards,	in	full	  uniform,	 each	clutching	 ominous	guns	 in	their	 arms.	Unlike	  the

civilians,	their	 noses	and	mouths	were	covered	to	protect	them	from	the	dust.

     Cinder	 shivered	at	the	sight	of	 them	and	cast	her	attention	around,	searching

for	the	signature	aura	of	 a	thaumaturge.	She	had	never	known	 a	guard	to	be	far

from	one,	but	she	didn’t	sense	any	here.

     How	 was	it	 possible	that	a	few	 weak-minded	guards	could	 hold	such	power

over	hundreds	of	gifted	 civilians?	 Though	she	guessed	the	Lunars	in	these	outer

sectors	wouldn’t	 be	nearly	 as	strong	as	Levana	 or	her	 court,	surely	 they	could

manipulate	a	few	guards?

     No	sooner	had	she	questioned	it	than	the	answer	came	to	her.

     These	guards	may	not	have	a	thaumaturge	with	 them,	but	the	threat	was	still

there,	implied	in	their	 very	presence.	The	people	of	this	sector	could	revolt.	They

could	have	these	guards	killed	  or	enslaved	easily.	 But	 such	an	act	 of	 defiance

would	bring	 the	 wrath	of	 the	queen	down	 on	them.	 The	next	guards	that	 came

would	not	be	without	 the	protection	 of	a	thaumaturge,	and	retribution	 would	 not

be	merciful.

     When	 they	passed	by	the	guards,	Cinder	 made	sure	to	keep	her	 face	turned

away.

     They	shuffled	 through	the	dome’s	center,	where	a	water	fountain	stood	in	 the

middle	 of	 a	dust-covered	courtyard,	 forcing	 the	 crowd	 to	 flow	 around	 it.	 The

218
fountain	was	 carved	into	 the	figure	 of	 a	woman,	her	head	veiled	 and	crowned,

clear	water	pouring	from	 her	outspread	hands	as	if	she	were	offering	life	itself	 to

the	people	who	crossed	her	path.

     The	 sight	of	 it	 made	 the	blood	 freeze	in	 Cinder’s	 veins.	 Levana	 had	been

queen	for	 barely	 over	a	 decade,	yet	she’d	 already	 put	her	 mark	 on	these	far-

reaching	sectors.

     Such	a	beautiful,	serene	fountain,	but	it	felt	 like	a	threat.

     They	  followed	   the	 dispersing	  crowd	  through	  blocks	  of	  factories	  and

warehouses	that	smelled	of	chemicals,	 before	the	industrial	 buildings	 gave	way

to	houses.

     Though	 houses	was	a	relative	term.	 More	 like	 shacks,	these	homes	were	as

unplanned	and	patched	together	as	the	overcrowded	Phoenix	Tower	Apartments

in	 New	 Beijing.	 Now	  Cinder	understood	 what	 Wolf	  meant	by	 how	 they	 had

become	experts	at	recycling	  materials.	Every	 wall	 and	 roof	 looked	like	  it	had

been	cut	and	chopped	and	resoldered	and	rebolted	and	twisted	and	reconfigured

again.	As	there	was	no	weather	to	rust	or	corrode	the	materials,	they	were	 left	to

deteriorate	at	 the	 hands	of	  people.	Houses	 pulled	 apart	 and	reconstituted	 as

families	  moved	  and	 changed	 and	  grew.	 The	  entire	  neighborhood	  was	 a

ramshackle	assortment	of	metal	sheets	and	wood	panels	and	stray	materials	 left

abandoned	in	the	spaces	between,	waiting	to	be	given	a	new	use.

     Wolf	 froze.

     Nerves	humming,	 Cinder	scanned	the	nearby	windows	and	opened	the	tip	 of

her	pointer	finger	in	preparation	for	 an	attack.	“What	is	it?”

     Wolf	 didn’t	 speak.	Didn’t	 move.	He	was	focused	on	a	house	down	the	street,

unblinking.

219
     “Wolf?”

     His	breath	rattled.	 “It	 might	be	nothing,	but	 I	think	 …	I	thought	 I	smelled	my

mother.	A	 soap	that	seemed	familiar	  …	though	 I	 didn’t	 have	these	senses	last

time	I	saw	her.	It	might	 not…”

     He	looked	burdened	and	afraid.

     He	also	looked	hopeful.

     A	 few	of	 the	shanties	had	flower	 boxes	hung	from	 their	windows,	 and	some

of	them	even	had	live	flowers.	The	house	Wolf	 was	staring	at	was	one	of	them—

a	messy	cluster	of	blue	daisies	spilling	 over	the	rough-hewn	 wood.	They	 were	a

spot	of	 beauty,	 simple	 and	elegant	 and	 completely	 at	 odds	with	  their	 dreary

surroundings.

     They	paused	in	front	 of	the	house.	There	was	no	yard,	only	a	spot	of	concrete

in	front	  of	 a	plain	 door.	 There	was	 one	window	  but	it	 had	 no	 glass.	Instead,

faded	fabric	had	been	tacked	around	its	frame.

     Wolf	  was	rooted	to	 the	ground,	 so	it	 was	Thorne	who	 shouldered	past	him

and	gave	a	quick	rap	against	the	door.

     With	 the	fabric	 alone	acting	 as	a	sound	barrier,	they	 could	hear	every	 creak

of	the	floors	 within	 as	someone	came	to	the	door	and	opened	it	a	timid	crack.	 A

small	 woman	 peeked	out,	 alarmed	when	 she	 saw	Thorne.	 She	was	 naturally

petite	but	 unnaturally	  gaunt,	as	 if	 she	 hadn’t	 had	a	 complete	 meal	 in	 years.

Brown	hair	 was	chopped	short,	and	though	she	had	olive-toned	skin	like	Wolf’s,

her	eyes	were	coal	black,	nothing	like	his	striking	 green.

     Thorne	flashed	his	most	disarming	smile.

     It	 had	no	obvious	effect.

     “Mrs.	 Kesley?”

220
     “Yes,	 sir,”	 she	said	meekly,	her	gaze	sweeping	out	to	 the	others.	She	passed

over	Wolf	 first,	 then	Cinder	and	Iko,	before	her	eyes	rounded,	almost	comically.

She	gasped	and	 looked	 at	 Wolf	  again,	 but	 then	 her	 lips	 turned	 down	  with

distrust.

     “My	  name,”	  Thorne	 said,	 with	 a	 respectful	 tilt	  of	 his	 head,	 “is	 Captain

Carswell	Thorne.	I	believe	you	 may	know—”

     A	 strangled	sound	escaped	the	woman.	 Her	shock	 and	suspicion	multiplied

by	the	 second,	warring	 against	each	other	as	she	stared	at	 her	son.	She	pulled

open	the	door	the	rest	of	the	way	and	took	one	hesitant	step	forward.

     Wolf	  had	become	a	statue.	Cinder	 could	feel	 the	anxiety	 rolling	 off	 him	 in

waves.

     “Ze’ev?”	 the	woman	whispered.

     “Mom,”	  he	whispered	back.

     The	uncertainty	 cleared	from	her	eyes,	replaced	with	 tears.	She	clapped	both

hands	over	her	 mouth	and	 took	 another	step	forward.	 Paused	again.	Then	 she

strode	the	 rest	 of	 the	 way	 and	 wrapped	 her	 arms	around	 Wolf.	  Though	 he

dwarfed	her	in	every	way,	 he	looked	suddenly	small	and	fragile,	 hunching	down

to	fit	better	into	 her	embrace.

     Wolf’s	 mother	pulled	 away	far	enough	to	cup	his	face	in	her	hands.	Taking	in

how	 handsome	and	mature	 he’d	 become,	 or	 maybe	wondering	  about	 all	 the

scars.

     Cinder	spotted	a	tattoo	on	her	forearm,	in	the	same	place	where	Wolf	had	one

marking	him	 as	a	special	operative.	 His	mother’s,	 though,	 was	stamped	simply

RM-9.	It	 reminded	Cinder	 of	how	 someone	might	mark	their	 pet,	to	be	returned

home	in	case	it	got	lost.

221
     “Mom,”	   Wolf	  said	  again,	 choking	  down	 his	 emotions.	  “Can	 we	  come

inside?”

     The	 woman	 raked	 her	 attention	 over	 the	 others,	 pausing	 briefly	  on	 Iko.

Cinder	wondered	if	 she	was	confounded	by	 Iko’s	 lack	 of	bioelectricity,	  but	she

didn’t	ask.	“Of	 course.”

     With	 those	simple	words,	 she	extracted	herself	from	Wolf	  and	ushered	them

inside.

     They	found	 themselves	in	a	tiny	room	 with	 a	single	rocking	chair	 and	a	sofa,

a	seam	ripped	open	to	reveal	yellow	  stuffing	 inside.	A	 fist-size	 holograph	node

was	stuck	 in	 the	center	of	 one	 wall	 and	a	 squat	table	 was	pushed	beneath	it.

There	was	a	drinking	glass	full	of	 more	blue	daisies.

     One	doorway	 led	to	a	short	hall	 where	Cinder	assumed	there	were	bedrooms

and	the	 washroom.	 A	  second	door	 offered	 a	 glimpse	 into	  an	equally	  small

kitchen,	the	shelves	and	counters	overflowing	with	 dishes.

     It	 looked	like	it	 hadn’t	been	dusted	in	a	year.	But	then,	so	did	the	woman.

     Wolf	 hunched	in	the	room	 as	if	he	no	longer	physically	 fit	 inside	it,	while	 his

mother	gripped	the	back	of	the	chair.

     “Everyone,”	  said	Wolf,	 “this	 is	my	 mother,	Maha	Kesley.	 Mom—this	 is	Iko

and	Thorne	 and	…	 Cinder.”	  He	 chewed	on	 the	words	 like	 he	 wanted	 to	say

more,	and	Cinder	knew	he	was	debating	whether	 or	not	to	tell	 his	mom	 her	true

identity.

     Cinder	 did	 her	 best	 to	look	  friendly.	  “Thank	 you	 for	  welcoming	 us.	 I’m

afraid	we’ve	put	you	 into	a	lot	of	danger	by	coming	 here.”

     Maha	stood	a	little	 straighter,	still	wary.

     Thorne	 had	his	hands	in	 his	pockets,	 as	if	 he	was	afraid	 to	touch	 anything.

222
“Will	 your	 husband	be	home	soon?”

     Maha	stared	at	him.

     “We	 don’t	want	 any	surprises,”	Cinder	added.

     Maha	pursed	her	lips.	She	looked	at	Wolf,	 and	Cinder	knew.	Wolf	 tensed.

     “I’m	   sorry,	 Ze’ev,”	  said	 Maha.	 “He	  died	 four	 years	 ago.	 There	was	 an

accident.	At	the	factory.”

     Wolf’s	   expression	 gave	  away	 nothing.	  Slowly,	   his	 head	 bobbed	  with

acceptance.	He’d	seemed	more	surprised	to	see	his	mother	alive	than	to	learn	of

his	father’s	death.

     “Are	  you	  hungry?”	  said	 Maha,	  burying	  her	 shock.	 “You	  were	  always

hungry	…	before.	But	I	 suppose	you	were	a	growing	boy	then…”

     The	words	hung	between	them,	filled	 with	a	lost	childhood,	 so	many	years.

     Wolf	  smiled,	 but	not	 enough	to	 show	 his	sharp	 canine	teeth.	“That	  hasn’t

changed	much.”

     Maha	 looked	 relieved.	 She	tucked	a	 stray	 hair	behind	 her	 ear	and	bustled

toward	the	 kitchen.	 “Make	 yourselves	comfortable.	 I	 think	 I	 might	 have	some

crackers.”

223
	




                                            Twenty-Five







Jacin	felt	heavy	with	 dread	as	he	entered	the	throne	room.	The	seats	reserved	for

the	members	of	 the	court	 were	empty.	 Only	 the	queen	sat	on	 her	throne,	 with

Aimery	 at	her	side.	Not	even	their	personal	guards	were	with	them,	which	 meant

that	whatever	this	meeting	was	about,	Levana	didn’t	trust	anyone	to	know	of	 it.

     Cress,	he	thought.	She	knew	about	Cress.	He’d	been	hiding	her	in	 his	private

quarters,	keeping	her	safe	like	 he’d	 promised	Winter	 he	 would,	 but	he	knew	 it

couldn’t	last	forever.

     How	 had	Levana	found	out?

     A	 screen	had	been	brought	into	the	room,	a	large	flat	 netscreen	like	the	ones

they	used	for	two-dimensional	 Earthen	media,	only	 this	one	was	more	elaborate

than	anything	 Jacin	 had	seen	on	 Earth.	It	 was	 set	on	 an	easel	and	 framed	 in

polished	silver,	 bands	of	roses	and	thorns	surrounding	the	 screen	as	if	it	 were	a

piece	of	art.	The	queen	sparing	no	expense,	as	usual.

     Queen	Levana	 and	Thaumaturge	Park	 both	wore	 dark	 expressions	as	Jacin

came	to	a	stop	and	clicked	his	heels	together,	trying	 not	to	 think	of	 the	last	time

he’d	stood	in	this	 spot.	When	he	was	sure	he	would	be	killed,	 and	Winter	would

have	to	watch.

224
     “You	 summoned,	My	 Queen?”

     “I	 did,”	 Levana	drawled,	running	her	fingers	 over	the	arm	of	her	throne.

     He	held	 his	breath,	racking	 his	brain	for	 some	way	he	could	 explain	 Cress’s

presence	that	didn’t	incriminate	Winter.

     “I	 have	been	thinking	 a	great	deal	about	our	 little	 dilemma,”	 said	the	queen.

“I	desire	to	put	my	 trust	in	you	 again,	as	I	did	when	you	were	under	Sybil’s	 care,

yet	I	haven’t	 been	able	to	convince	 myself	that	you	 serve	me.	Your	queen.	And

not…”	 She	whisked	 her	fingers	 through	the	air,	 and	her	beautiful	 face	 took	on

something	akin	to	a	snarl.	“Your	 princess.”

     Jacin’s	 jaw	tensed.	He	waited.	 Waited	 for	her	 to	accuse	him	 of	sheltering	 a

known	traitor.	Waited	 for	his	punishment	to	be	declared.

     But	the	queen	seemed	to	be	waiting	too.

     Finally	  he	dipped	his	 head.	“All	  due	 respect,	Your	 Majesty,	 my	 becoming

Princess	Winter’s	guard	was	your	decision.	Not	mine.”

     She	shot	 him	 a	 sultry	 look.	 “And	  how	 very	 upset	 you	 seemed	about	it.”

Sighing,	Levana	 rose	to	 her	feet	 and	walked	 behind	Winter’s	  usual	chair.	 She

smoothed	her	fingers	along	the	top	of	the	upholstery.	“After	  much	deliberation,	I

have	devised	a	test	of	sorts.	A	 mission	 to	prove	your	 loyalty	 once	and	for	 all.	 I

think,	 with	 this	mission	 completed,	there	 will	 be	 no	qualms	about	 placing	you

back	into	 the	 service	of	 my	 head	thaumaturge.	 Aimery	 is	 eager	to	 have	your

skills	under	his	command.”

     Aimery’s	 eyes	glinted.	“Quite.”

     Jacin’s	 brows	 knit	 together	 and	it	 dawned	 on	him	 slowly	  that	 this	wasn’t

about	Cress	at	all.

     He	would	 have	felt	relief,	except,	if	 it	wasn’t	 about	Cress	…

225
     “I	 told	you	before	of	my	promise	to	my	husband,	Winter’s	father,”	Levana

continued.	“I	told	him	 I	would	 protect	the	child	to	the	best	of	my	ability.	 All

these	years,	I	have	held	to	that	promise.	I	have	taken	care	of	her	and	raised	her	as

my	own.”

     Though	he	tried,	Jacin	could	not	stifle	a	surge	of	rebellion	at	these	words.

She	had	raised	Winter	as	her	own?	No.	She	tortured	Winter	 by	making	 her

attend	every	trial	and	execution,	though	everyone	knew	how	she	hated	them.	She

had	handed	Winter	the	knife	that	disfigured	her	beautiful	face.	She	had	mocked

Winter	relentlessly	for	what	she	saw	as	her	mental	“weaknesses,”	having	no	idea

how	strong	Winter	had	to	be	to	avoid	the	temptation	of	using	her	glamour,	and

how	much	willpower	it	had	taken	her	to	suppress	it	over	the	years.

     A	 wry	smile	crept	over	 Levana’s	bloodred	lips.	“You	do	 not	like	 when	I

speak	of	your	darling	princess.”

     “My	  queen	may	 speak	of	 whomever	 she	pleases.”	The	 response	was

automatic	and	monotone.	It	would	make	no	difference	to	try	to	deny	he	cared	for

Winter,	not	when	 every	person	in	this	 palace	had	witnessed	their	childhood

antics,	their	games,	and	their	mischief.

     He’d	grown	up	 beside	Winter	because	their	fathers	were	so	close,	despite

how	improper	it	was	for	a	princess	to	be	climbing	trees	and	playing	at	sword

fights	with	the	son	of	a	lowly	guard.	He	remembered	wanting	to	protect	her	even

then,	even	 before	 he	 knew	 how	  much	 she	 needed	protecting.	He	  also

remembered	trying	to	steal	a	kiss	from	her,	once—only	once—when	he	was	ten

and	she	was	eight.	She	laughed	and	turned	away,	scolding	him.	Don’t	be	silly.

We	can’t	do	that	until	we’re	married.

     No,	his	only	 defense	was	to	pretend	he	didn’t	care	that	everyone	knew	it.

226
That	 their	 taunts	 didn’t	 bother	 him.	  That	 every	 time	 Levana	 mentioned	 the

princess,	his	blood	didn’t	 turn	 to	ice.	That	he	wasn’t	 terrified	 Levana	would	 use

Winter	against	him.

     Levana	stepped	off	 the	raised	platform.	 “She	 has	been	given	the	best	tutors,

the	finest	 clothes,	the	most	 exotic	of	 pets.	When	 she	makes	a	request	of	 me,	I

have	tried	my	best	to	see	it	done.”

     Though	she	paused,	Jacin	did	not	think	she	was	expecting	a	response.

     “Despite	 all	 this,	she	does	not	belong	 here.	Her	mind	 is	too	weak	 for	 her	to

ever	be	 useful,	 and	 her	 refusal	to	  hide	those	 hideous	 scars	has	made	 her	 a

laughingstock	among	the	 court.	She	is	making	 a	mockery	 of	the	 crown	and	the

royal	family.”	  She	set	her	jaw.	“I	 did	 not	realize	the	 extent	of	her	disgrace	until

recently.	Aimery	 offered	 his	own	 hand	in	marriage	 to	the	girl.	 I	 could	 not	have

hoped	for	a	better	match	 for	a	child	 who	 has	no	royal	blood.”	 Her	 tone	became

snarling	and	 Jacin	felt	 her	 studying	 him	 again,	but	 he’d	 recaptured	control	 of

himself.	She	would	get	no	rise	from	 him,	not	even	on	this	topic.

     “But,	 no,”	 said	the	queen	at	last.	“The	child	 refuses	even	this	generous	offer.

For	no	 other	reason,	I	 can	fathom,	 than	 to	jilt	  my	 most	worthy	 counselor	 and

bring	further	 humiliation	 on	this	 court.”	 She	tilted	her	 chin	up.	“Then	 there	was

the	incident	in	AR-2.	 I	trust	you	remember?”

     His	 mouth	 turned	sour.	If	  he	had	not	 been	so	careful	 to	hide	 his	mounting

dread,	he	would	have	cursed.

     “No?”	  Levana	  purred	 when	 he	 said	 nothing.	 “Allow	    me	 to	 spark	 your

memory.”

     Her	fingers	 glided	across	the	netscreen.	It	flickered	to	 life	inside	 its	elaborate

frame,	showing	footage	 of	a	quaint	 little	 row	of	 shops.	He	saw	himself,	 smiling

227
at	Winter.	Nudging	 her	with	 his	shoulder,	and	letting	 her	nudge	him	back.	Their

eyes	taking	glimpses	of	each	other	when	the	other	wasn’t	looking.

     His	chest	felt	 hollowed	out.	Anyone	 could	see	how	they	felt	about	each	other.

     Jacin	watched,	but	 he	didn’t	 have	to.	 He	remembered	the	children	 and	their

handmade	crown	of	twigs.	 He	remembered	how	 beautiful	Winter	 had	looked	 as

she	put	it	on	her	head,	unconcerned.	He	remembered	ripping	it	away	and	stuffing

it	into	the	basket.

     He	had	hoped	the	whole	incident	would	 go	unnoticed.

     He’d	 known	better.	Hope	was	a	coward’s	tool.

     His	 attention	shifted	back	to	 the	queen,	but	she	was	scowling	at	the	imagery,

loathing	in	 her	eyes.	His	 gut	churned.	She	had	mentioned	 a	special	mission	for

him	that	would	 prove	his	loyalty,	 yet	all	she’d	talked	 about	was	Winter	and	what

an	embarrassment	she’d	become.

     “I’m	  disappointed	 in	you,	 Sir	 Clay.”	 Levana	 rounded	on	 him.	 “I	 thought	 I

could	trust	you	to	keep	her	under	control,	 to	make	sure	she	didn’t	do	anything	 to

embarrass	me	and	my	court.	But	you	 failed.	Did	 you	 think	it	 was	proper	for	 her

to	go	 gallivanting	  around	the	 city,	 playing	 at	 being	 a	queen	 before	her	 loyal

subjects?”

     Jacin	held	 his	 ground,	already	 resigning	himself	 to	 death.	She	had	brought

him	here	to	have	him	executed	after	all.	He	was	grateful	she	had	decided	to	spare

Winter	the	sight.

     “Well?	 You	 have	nothing	to	say	in	your	defense?”

     “No,	  My	 Queen,”	  he	said,	 “but	 I	  hope	you’ll	   allow	 me	 to	 speak	in	  her

defense.	The	children	gave	her	a	gift	as	thanks	for	purchasing	some	flowers	from

the	florist.	 They	were	 confused—they	didn’t	 understand	what	 it	would	 suggest.

228
The	princess	meant	nothing	by	this.”

     “Confused?”	  Levana’s	 gaze	turned	 brittle.	 “The	  children	 were	 confused?”

She	cackled.	“And	  how	 much	confusion	 am	 I	to	 tolerate?	Am	 I	 to	 ignore	 the

sickening	way	they	idolize	 her?	How	they	 talk	about	her	beauty	and	her	scars	as

if	 they	were	 a	badge	of	 honor,	when	 they	have	no	 idea	how	 weak	she	is!	 Her

illness,	her	delusions.	She	would	be	crushed	if	 she	ever	sat	on	a	throne,	but	they

don’t	 see	that.	 No—they	  think	 only	 of	  themselves	and	 their	 pretty	 princess,

giving	 no	thought	 to	all	 I’ve	 done	 to	bring	 them	security	 and	structure	 and—”

She	spun	away,	 her	shoulders	 trembling.	 “Am	  I	 to	 wait	 until	 they	 put	 a	real

crown	on	her	head?”

     Horror	 filled	 up	Jacin’s	chest	and	this	time	he	couldn’t	disguise	it.

     She	was	psychotic.

     This	 he’d	 known,	of	 course.	But	 he’d	 never	seen	her	vanity	 and	 greed	and

envy	enflame	her	like	 this.	 She’d	become	irrational,	 and	her	anger	was	directed

at	Winter.

     No—Winter	  and	Selene.	That’s	 where	this	 was	coming	 from.	 There	 was	a

girl	 claiming	 to	be	 her	lost	 niece	and	Levana	 felt	threatened.	She	was	 worried

that	her	grip	 on	 the	throne	was	 loosening	and	 she	was	overcompensating	with

paranoia	and	tightening	control.

     Jacin	placed	a	fist	to	 his	chest.	“My	 Queen,	I	assure	you	the	princess	is	not	a

threat	to	your	crown.”

     “Would	  you	not	 bow	to	 her?”	 said	Levana,	spinning	 back	to	 face	him	 with

venom	in	 her	eyes.	“You,	  who	 love	her	 so	dutifully?	  Who	 are	so	loyal	 to	 the

royal	family?”

     He	forced	down	 a	gulp.	“She	is	not	of	royal	 blood.	She	can	never	be	queen.”

229
     “No.	 She	will	 never	 be	queen.”	She	swayed	toward	 him,	 and	he	felt	 like	he

was	being	encircled	 by	a	python,	 smothered	and	choked.	“Because	you	 are	my

loyal	servant,	as	you	have	so	vehemently	 proclaimed.	And	 you	are	going	 to	kill

her.”

     Jacin’s	tongue	ran	dry	as	moon	rock.	“No,”	 he	whispered.

     Levana	raised	an	eyebrow.

     “I	  mean—My	 Queen.”	 He	cleared	 his	throat.	 “You	  can’t…”	  He	looked	 at

Aimery,	 who	 was	half	 smiling,	 pleased	with	 this	 decision.	“Please.	Ask	 her	 to

marry	you	again.	I’ll	 talk	 to	her.	I’ll	  make	sure	she	agrees.	She	can	still	be	useful

—it’s	 a	good	match.	She’s	just	nervous—”

     “You	 dare	to	question	me?”	said	Levana.

     His	pulse	thundered.	“Please.”

     “I	 offered	 my	 hand	to	the	 princess	as	a	kindness,”	 said	Aimery,	 “to	 protect

her	from	the	offers	 of	far	 less	sympathetic	suitors.	Her	refusal	 has	demonstrated

how	ungrateful	she	is.	I	would	 no	longer	take	her	if	she	begged	me.”

     Jacin	clenched	his	jaw.	His	heart	was	racing	now	and	he	couldn’t	 stop	it.

     The	 queen’s	attention	 softened,	full	  of	 honey	and	 sugar.	She	was	 close	to

him.	Close	enough	that	he	could	grab	his	knife	and	cut	her	throat.

     Would	  his	  arm	 be	 faster	  than	 her	 thoughts?	  Would	  it	  be	 faster	 than

Aimery’s?

     “Dearest	 Sir	  Clay,”	  she	 mused,	and	 he	 wondered	 if	  she’d	  detected	his

desperation.	“Do	not	think	 I	am	unaware	of	what	 I	am	asking	you	to	do	 and	how

difficult	 it	 will	  be	for	 you.	But	 I	 am	being	merciful.	 I	 know	 you	 will	 be	quick.

She	will	 not	 suffer	at	 your	hands.	In	 this	 way,	I	 also	fulfill	   my	promise	 to	her

father,	don’t	you	see?”

230
     She	was	insane.	Absolutely	insane.

     The	worst	 of	it	 was	that	he	thought	 she	might	actually	 believe	what	she	was

saying.

     His	fingers	 twitched.	A	 drop	of	sweat	slipped	down	his	neck.

     “I	 can’t,”	  he	said.	“I	 won’t.	 Please	…	please	spare	her.	Take	away	her	 title.

Turn	her	into	 a	servant.	Or	banish	her	to	the	outer	sectors,	and	you’ll	 never	hear

from	her	again,	I	promise	you…”

     With	 a	 withering	 glare,	Levana	 turned	away	 and	sighed.	 “How	 many	 lives

would	 you	sacrifice	 for	 hers?”	 She	strolled	 toward	 the	screen.	The	 video	 was

paused	now,	showing	the	three	children	in	the	doorway.	“Would	 you	 rather	I	had

these	children	killed	instead?”

     His	heart	kicked,	 trying	to	free	itself	 from	his	 rib	cage.

     “Or	  what	 about…”	 She	 turned	 back	to	 him,	  tapping	 a	finger	  against	the

corner	of	her	mouth.	 “Your	 parents?	If	 I	recall	 correctly,	 Sir	Garrison	Clay	 was

transferred	to	a	guard	post	in	one	of	the	outer	sectors.	Tell	me,	when	was	the	last

time	you	spoke	to	them?”

     He	 pressed	his	lips	together,	 frightened	 that	any	admission	 could	be	 turned

against	him.	 He	had	not	 seen	or	 spoken	to	his	 parents	in	 years.	Just	like	 with

Winter,	he	 had	been	sure	the	best	way	to	protect	 his	loved	 ones	was	to	pretend

he	didn’t	  love	 them	at	 all,	 so	 they	 could	 never	be	 used	against	him.	  Just	as

Levana	was	using	them	now.

     How	 had	he	 failed	like	  this?	He	couldn’t	  protect	anyone.	He	 couldn’t	 save

anyone—

     He	 knew	 his	 face	was	 contorted	 with	 panic,	 but	 he	 couldn’t	 stifle	  it.	 He

wanted	to	fall	 to	 his	knees	and	plead	for	 her	to	 change	her	mind.	He	 would	 do

231
anything,	anything	but	this.

     “If	 you	refuse	me	again,”	Levana	said,	“it	will	be	clear	that	your	loyalty	is

false.	You	will	be	executed	for	treason	and	your	parents	will	follow.	Then	I	will

send	Jerrico	to	deal	with	the	princess,	and	I	do	not	think	he	will	be	as	gentle	with

her	as	you	would	have	been.”

     Jacin	choked	back	his	misery.	It	would	do	him	no	good.

     The	thought	of	Jerrico—the	smug	and	brutal	captain	of	the	guard—being

given	this	same	order	made	his	blood	run	cold.

     “Will	 you	complete	this	task	for	me,	Sir	Clay?”

     He	bowed	his	head	to	hide	his	despair,	though	the	show	of	respect	nearly

killed	him.

     “I	will.	 My	Queen.”

232
	




                                              Twenty-Six







For	the	first	  time	since	 she	had	abandoned	it,	 Cress	found	herself	 missing	 her

satellite.	Jacin’s	 private	 quarters	were	smaller	 than	her	 satellite	had	 been.	The

walls	were	so	thin	 that	she	dared	not	even	sing	 to	pass	the	time.	And	 when	 she

needed	to	use	the	facilities,	 she	had	 to	wait	 for	 Jacin	to	 get	off	 his	 shift	 so	he

could	sneak	her	in	and	out	of	 the	washroom	that	was	shared	between	the	guards

and	their	 families,	 all	 of	 whom	 lived	 in	 this	 underground	wing	 of	 the	 palace.

Once	she	crossed	paths	with	  another	person,	and	while	  it	 was	only	 a	 guard’s

wife	who	 smiled	 kindly	 at	her	without	 any	 sign	of	 suspicion,	the	encounter	left

Cress	shaken.

     She	sensed	the	queen	and	her	court	 all	around	 her.	She	was	aware	at	every

moment	that	one	person	recognizing	 her	for	 a	shell	would	 mean	death.	Perhaps

torture	and	interrogation	 first.	 She	was	sick	with	 anxiety	for	 her	own	 safety	and

terrified	 for	the	 fate	of	 her	friends.	She	was	 frustrated	that	Jacin	never	 had	any

news	about	them.

     She	told	herself	this	was	a	good	sign.	Jacin	would	know	 if	they’d	 been	found.

Wouldn’t	 he?

     Cress	distracted	herself	doing	what	she	could	to	 help	Cinder’s	cause	with	 the

233
limited	resources	available	to	her	in	Jacin’s	quarters.	She	still	had	her	portscreen,

and	though	she	dared	not	 send	any	comms,	knowing	 how	 easily	 they	could	 be

traced,	she	 was	able	 to	 connect	 to	 the	 queen’s	 broadcasting	system	 via	 the

holograph	node	embedded	in	Jacin’s	wall.	 The	nodes	were	everywhere	on	Luna

—as	common	as	netscreens	on	Earth,	 and	the	feeds	as	easily	 hacked.	She	still

had	Cinder’s	  prerecorded	video	 stored	 in	 her	 port	 but	 she	 was	afraid	 to	 do

anything	 with	 it	 without	 knowing	  whether	 Cinder	 and	the	 others	were	 ready.

Instead	she	spent	her	time	interrupting	propaganda	messages	from	the	queen	and

trying	to	 come	up	with	 some	way	she	could	 indicate	to	her	 friends	that	she	was

alive	and	relatively	 safe.	She	could	never	think	of	anything	 that	wasn’t	either	too

obvious	or	too	 obscure	though,	and	she	was	too	timid	 to	do	 anything	that	could

alert	the	queen	to	her	presence.

     She	wished	again	and	again	that	she	had	access	to	the	same	technology	she’d

had	in	the	satellite.	She	felt	more	cut	off	 from	the	world	 than	she	ever	had—with

no	media	 to	 view	 but	 that	 approved	by	 the	 crown.	 No	 way	 to	 send	a	 direct

communication.	 No	access	to	 Luna’s	surveillance	 network	 or	 security	 systems

and,	hence,	no	 way	 to	 fulfill	   the	 duties	Cinder	 had	 given	 her.	 As	 the	 hours

merged	into	days,	she	grew	 more	anxious	and	addled,	 itching	 to	get	out	 of	this

enclosed	space	and	do	something.

     She	was	 altering	 the	 soundtrack	from	  a	royal	 message	about	 their	 “brave

victories	 against	the	weak-minded	 Earthens,”	when	 hard-soled	footsteps	 in	the

hall	made	her	pause.

     They	 stopped	outside	Jacin’s	door.	Cress	disconnected	her	portscreen,	threw

herself	off	Jacin’s	cot,	 and	scurried	underneath	it,	pressing	herself	as	close	to	the

wall	as	possible.	Outside,	she	heard	the	input	of	 a	code	and	fingerprint	check	on

234
the	lock.	The	door	opened	and	shut.

     She	held	her	breath.

     “Just	me,”	 came	Jacin’s	voice,	sounding	as	disillusioned	as	ever.

     Exhaling,	 Cress	crawled	 out	from	 her	 hiding	 spot.	She	stayed	on	 the	floor,

her	back	pressed	against	the	cot’s	side.	The	cot	 was	the	only	 place	to	sit	 in	this

tiny	room	 and	she	felt	 guilty	 taking	 it	from	 Jacin—although	 she	couldn’t	 recall

him	ever	sitting	 in	her	presence.	He	had	even	slept	on	the	floor	since	her	arrival,

without	any	discussion	of	it.

     “Any	 news?”	she	asked.

     Jacin	leaned	against	the	 door,	his	 shadowed	eyes	caught	on	the	 ceiling.	 He

seemed	strangely	disheveled.	“No.”

     Cress	pulled	her	knees	into	her	chest.	“What’s	wrong?”

     Still	 entranced	by	the	ceiling,	 he	muttered,	“You	 disabled	 the	cameras	in	the

dock.”

     She	blinked.

     “Could	 you	do	it	 again?	To	any	cameras	in	the	palace?”

     She	reached	for	 her	hair.	 The	 habit	of	 fidgeting	  with	 it	 was	hard	to	 break,

though	it	had	been	short	for	 weeks	now.	“If	  I	had	access	to	the	system.	Which	I

don’t.”

     He	opened	his	mouth,	paused,	shut	it	again.

     Cress	frowned.	Jacin	was	rarely	chatty,	but	this	was	unusual	even	for	him.

     Finally,	 he	said,	“I	could	 get	you	access	to	the	system.”

     “Why	 are	we	disabling	cameras?”

     His	chest	rose	and	his	focus	traveled	down	the	bare	stone	walls	and	landed	on

Cress.	“You’re	   leaving.	 You,	 Winter,	  and	 that	 redhead	girl	  are	 leaving	 the

235
palace.	Tonight.”

     Cress	hauled	herself	to	her	feet.	“What?”

     “Winter	 can’t	 stay	here,	and	she	won’t	leave	without	 that	friend	 of	hers.	You

help	me	get	them	out	of	here,	and	it’s	 your	ticket	too.”	 He	started	to	massage	his

temple.	“You	 know	 where	Cinder	 was	heading,	right?	 You	 can	find	 her.	She’ll

keep	Winter	safe.	She	better	keep	her	safe.”

     Suspicion	 crawled	up	 her	spine	at	 the	mention	of	 Cinder.	 Was	this	 a	trick?

Was	he	trying	 to	 get	information	 from	 her	to	 be	sold	 to	the	queen	for	 his	 own

gains?	He’d	done	it	before.

     “It	  will	 look	 suspicious	 if	 a	bunch	 of	camera	feeds	 go	down	 at	once,”	 she

said.

     He	nodded.	“I	 know,	but	hopefully	 you’ll	 be	gone	before	anyone	notices.”

     She	gnawed	 on	 her	 lip.	 She	could	 put	 them	 on	 a	 timer,	 try	 to	 make	 the

blackouts	seem	like	random	power	 failures	or	a	system	glitch,	 but	even	that	had

the	potential	for	being	discovered.

     Jacin	had	 started	to	pace.	She	could	 see	his	thoughts	 churning.	 A	 plot	was

forming	in	 his	head,	though	she	couldn’t	begin	to	guess	how	he	planned	to	sneak

them	out	of	 the	 palace	without	 anyone	seeing	them—especially	 when	Princess

Winter	was	so	recognizable.

     “What	 happened?”	said	Cress.	“Did	Levana	find	out	about	me?”

     “No.	 It	 was	 something	else.”	 He	was	pinching	 the	 bridge	of	 his	 nose	now.

“She’s	going	to	have	Winter	 killed.	 I	have	to	get	her	out	of	here.	I	think	 I	know	 a

way.	I	can	set	it	up,	but…”	 His	eyes	turned	pleading.	“Will	  you	help	me?”

     Cress’s	heart	squeezed.	In	the	little	time	she’d	known	Jacin,	he	had	struck	her

as	cold,	 heartless,	even	cruel	 at	times.	 But	 now	 he	 was	fringed	 at	 the	edges,

236
ready	to	tear	apart.

     “By	 disabling	the	cameras?”	she	asked.

     He	nodded.

     She	looked	 at	her	portscreen.	Though	 she’d	detached	it	 from	 the	holograph

node	when	she	scuttled	 beneath	the	cot,	the	connector	 cable	was	still	 dangling

from	its	 side.	This	 was	her	 chance.	She	could	get	away	 from	 the	palace,	away

from	this	city	 and	all	 its	dangers.	She	could	be	with	her	friends	 again.	She	could

be	safe,	tonight.

     The	temptation	engulfed	her.	She	had	to	get	out	of	here.

     But	 when	 she	turned	her	 face	up	 toward	 Jacin	again,	she	was	 shaking	her

head.

     Bewilderment	 flashed	across	his	face.

     “It	  will	  be	safest	for	 the	 princess	and	Scarlet	 if”—she	  swallowed,	 but	her

saliva	stuck	in	her	throat—“if	 I	 stay	behind.”

     “What?”

     “Our	 best	chance	for	 the	tampering	 to	go	 unnoticed	will	  be	if	 I	 operate	the

system	failure	manually.	 I	 can	turn	the	cameras	off	 for	 short	bursts,	make	them

look	like	 random	power	outages.	A	full	 blackout	would	 draw	too	much	attention,

and	blacking	out	just	 a	portion	of	 them	would	 give	the	queen	a	clue	as	to	which

way	Winter	 and	Scarlet	went.	But	 if	I	 disable	and	restart	random	sections	of	the

surveillance	system	at	the	same	time	 …	I	 can	make	it	 look	like	 a	coincidence.”

She	tapped	a	 finger	 against	 her	 lower	 lip.	 “I	  could	 set	 up	 a	distraction	  too.

Maybe	an	alarm	 in	another	part	of	 the	palace,	to	 draw	people	away	from	 them.

And	all	the	door	locks	 in	the	major	thoroughfares	can	be	altered	remotely	too.”

     She	was	growing	  confident	 in	her	 decision.	She	would	 stay	 behind	to	 give

237
Winter	and	Scarlet	the	best	chance	for	escape.

     “You’re	  insane,”	said	Jacin.	“Do	you	want	to	 die	in	this	palace?”

     She	 stiffened.	 “Levana	 doesn’t	 know	 I’m	  here.	 As	 long	 as	you	 keep	 me

hidden…”

     “As	 soon	as	Levana	learns	I	let	Winter	go,	she’ll	 kill	 me.”

     She	clenched	her	fists,	annoyed	that	he	was	punching	 holes	in	her	newfound

courage.	“Scarlet	 was	 captured	during	  an	attempt	 to	 rescue	me.	 And	 Winter

protected	me,	even	though	she	didn’t	  have	to,	and	I	 know	 it	put	 her	in	 a	lot	 of

danger.	This	is	how	I	can	repay	them	both.”

     Jacin	stared	and	she	could	 see	the	moment	he	accepted	her	decision.	It	 was

their	best	chance	and	he	had	to	know	it.	He	turned	away,	his	shoulders	starting	to

fall.	“I	  was	Sybil’s	 pilot	 for	over	 a	year,”	he	said.	“I	  knew	about	you	for	 over	a

year,	and	I	did	nothing	to	help	you.”

     His	 confession	 stabbed	her	 in	 the	 chest.	She’d	 always	 thought	 Sybil	 had

come	alone,	never	realizing	she	had	a	pilot	 with	her	 until	it	 was	too	late.	Maybe

Jacin	could	have	helped	her,	even	rescued	her.

     They	would	 never	know.

     He	 didn’t	 apologize.	 Instead,	he	set	his	 jaw	 and	met	her	 eye	again.	“I	  will

protect	Winter	with	 my	life.	 Second	only	to	her,	I	promise	to	protect	you	 too.”

238
	




                                         Twenty-Seven







Scarlet	was	working	on	this	new	thing	 she	liked	to	call	not	reacting.

     It	 was	a	skill	 that	by	 no	means	came	to	her	naturally.	 But	when	 she	was	the

one	locked	inside	 a	cage	and	her	enemy	 was	the	one	on	 the	outside,	jabbering

and	giggling	  and	generally	 being	 buffoons,	 not	 reacting	 seemed	like	 a	better

habit	than	screaming	obscenities	and	trying	to	smack	them	through	the	bars.

     At	 least	it	carried	a	bit	more	dignity.

     “Can’t	  you	 get	 her	 to	 do	 a	 trick?”	  asked	the	 Lunar	 woman,	 holding	  an

umbrella	of	 owl	 feathers	over	one	shoulder,	though	Scarlet	couldn’t	  guess	what

she	was	protecting	herself	from.	According	 to	 Winter,	 they	had	another	six	days

to	go	before	they	saw	real	sunshine	again,	and	there	was	no	rain	on	Luna	at	all.

     The	 woman’s	 companion	leaned	 over,	resting	 his	 hands	on	his	 knees,	and

peered	at	Scarlet	through	 the	bars.	 He	was	 wearing	orange	 sunglasses.	Again,

Scarlet	didn’t	know	 why.

     Scarlet,	cross-legged	on	the	ground,	her	hands	folded	and	her	hood	pulled	up

past	her	ears,	peered	back.

     I	am	a	vision	 of	tranquility	 and	indifference.

     “Do	 something,”	he	ordered.

239
     Scarlet	blinked.

     He	 glared	 at	 her.	 “Everyone	 says	 Earthens	are	 supposed	to	 be	 cute	 and

amusing.	Why	don’t	 you	do	a	dance	for	us?”

     Her	insides	 writhed,	wanting	 more	than	anything	 to	show	this	man	 how	cute

and	amusing	she	could	be.	Outside,	however,	she	was	statuesque.

     “Are	  you	mute,	 or	 just	stupid?	 Don’t	  they	teach	you	 how	 to	 address	your

betters	down	on	that	rock?”

     I	am	the	essence	of	peace	and	calm.

     “What’s	 wrong	 with	her	hand?”	said	the	woman.

     The	man	glanced	down.	“What’s	 wrong	with	 your	hand?”

     Her	fingers	 didn’t	so	much	as	twitch.	Not	 even	the	half-missing	one.

     The	woman	yawned.	“I’m	  bored	and	Earthens	smell	bad.	Let’s	go	look	 at	the

lions.”

     The	 man	  straightened,	 arms	 akimbo.	 Scarlet	  could	 see	 him	  calculating

something	in	his	tiny	 head.	She	didn’t	think	 he	would	try	to	 use	his	gift	on	her—

no	one	had	manipulated	her	since	 she’d	been	brought	to	 the	menagerie	and	she

was	beginning	to	 suspect	her	status	as	one	of	the	princess’s	pets	was	protecting

her	from	that	torture,	at	least.

     He	took	a	step	forward.	Behind	 him,	Ryu	growled.

     It	 was	a	test	of	willpower	  for	Scarlet	 to	smother	a	grin.	 That	wolf	 had	really

grown	on	her	lately.

     Though	 the	woman	 glanced	back	at	 the	wolf’s	  enclosure,	the	man	kept	 his

attention	 pinned	 on	 Scarlet.	 “You’re	  here	 to	 entertain	 us,”	  he	 said,	“so	  do

something.	Sing	a	song.	Tell	a	joke.	Something.”

     For	 my	 next	 trick,	 I	 will	  win	 a	 staring	 contest	with	 the	 moron	 in	 orange

240
sunglasses.

     Snarling,	 the	 man	grabbed	 the	umbrella	 from	  his	 girlfriend	  and	closed	 it.

Holding	 on	to	the	curved	handle,	he	pushed	the	pointy	 end	through	the	bars	and

jabbed	Scarlet	in	the	shoulder.

     Ryu	barked.

     Scarlet’s	 hand	 whipped	  upward,	 her	 fist	  wrapping	  around	 the	 feathered

fabric.	 She	yanked	it	 toward	 her	 and	the	 man	stumbled	 against	the	cage.	She

shoved	the	umbrella’s	handle	up	 toward	his	face.	He	 screamed	and	reeled	back,

his	glasses	clattering	to	the	ground.	Blood	spurted	from	his	nose.

     Scarlet	smirked	 long	enough	to	 shove	the	umbrella	out	 onto	the	path—there

was	no	point	 keeping	it,	 as	the	 guards	would	 just	take	it	 away.	 She	stifled	 her

smug	expression	and	returned	her	face	to	neutral.

     This	not-reacting	 thing	was	working	 out	better	than	she’d	expected.

     After	  cursing	and	 screaming	and	 getting	 blood	 all	 over	 his	shirt,	 the	 man

grabbed	his	 girlfriend	  and	 the	umbrella	  and	stormed	 away,	 back	 toward	 the

menagerie’s	entrance.	They	were	probably	going	to	rat	her	out	to	the	guards.	She

would	probably	miss	a	meal	or	two	 for	her	misbehavior.

     It	 was	totally	worth	 it.

     She	met	Ryu’s	yellow	 gaze	across	the	way	and	winked.	In	response,	the	wolf

raised	his	nose	and	howled,	a	short,	joyful	sound.

     “You’ve	  made	a	friend.”

     She	started.	A	guard	was	leaning	against	a	large-leafed	tree,	arms	crossed	and

eyes	steely.	He	 wasn’t	 one	of	 her	 normal	 guards,	though	 there	was	 an	air	 of

familiarity	 to	him.	 She	wondered	how	long	he’d	been	standing	there.

     “We	 animals	have	to	 stick	together,”	 she	said,	but	then	resolved	 that	was	as

241
much	as	he	would	get	out	of	her.	She	was	not	here	to	entertain	the	spoiled	Lunar

aristocrats,	and	 she	was	 certainly	  not	 going	 to	 entertain	 one	 of	 the	 queen’s

brainless	minions.

     “Guess	it	makes	sense	you’d	like	that	one.	He’s	related	to	your	 boyfriend.”

     Her	heart	thumped.	A	sense	of	foreboding	stirred	in	 her	chest.

     Pushing	himself	 off	 the	 tree,	the	guard	strolled	 in	 front	 of	Ryu’s	 enclosure.

One	hand	was	resting	 at	his	 belt,	 on	the	 hilt	 of	 a	large	 knife.	 The	wolf	  froze,

standing	on	all	fours	like	 he	hadn’t	decided	whether	to	trust	this	stranger	or	not.

     “This	  one’s	father	 was	 the	wolf	  they	first	  gathered	DNA	 from	  when	they

started	experimenting	with	 the	soldiers.	The	queen’s	prized	arctic	 wolf.	 Once	an

alpha	male.”	 He	turned	 to	Scarlet.	“But	  you	need	a	pack	 to	be	 an	alpha,	don’t

you?”

     “I	 wouldn’t	 know,”	 she	deadpanned.

     “Take	 my	word	 for	 it.”	 He	listed	 his	head,	inspecting	her.	 “You	 don’t	 know

who	I	am.”

     He	 said	 it	 at	the	 same	moment	 her	 memory	 clicked.	 The	 blond	 hair,	 the

uniform,	his	creepy	knowledge	of	 Wolf.

     Her	recognition	 only	made	her	more	wary.

     “Sure	I	 do.	I	can’t	get	the	princess	to	shut	up	about	you.”

     She	 watched	 him	 carefully,	  curious	 if	  Winter’s	  feelings	  were	 even	half

mutual,	but	he	gave	nothing	away.

     He	was	 handsome,	sure	enough.	Broad	shouldered	and	chisel	jawed.	But	 he

wasn’t	 what	 she’d	 been	 expecting.	 His	 posture	 spoke	of	  condescension,	his

expression	disinterest.	He	was	 all	brambles	 and	icicles	as	he	 strode	toward	her

cage.

242
     He	 was	about	 as	opposite	of	 warm,	 spacey,	babbling	 Winter	  as	she	could

imagine.

     Jacin	didn’t	 crouch	or	bend	down	and	it	was	a	strain	on	Scarlet’s	neck	to	look

up	at	him.	Her	dislike	 increased.

     “I	 trust	she	told	you	about	your	friends.”

     Winter	 had	 told	 her	they	 were	alive.	 That	 they	 were	coming	 for	 her.	 That

Wolf	missed	her	very	much.

     Now,	 meeting	the	infamous	Jacin,	she	couldn’t	envision	 him	being	the	one	to

make	that	report.

     “I	 got	the	message.”

     Scarlet	wondered	if	 he	expected	a	thank-you,	 which	 he	wasn’t	 going	to	 get,

given	that	he	was	here	on	Luna,	wearing	that	uniform.	Whose	side	was	he	on?

     Scarlet	 huffed	 and	 leaned	back	 on	 her	 elbows.	 It	 may	 not	 have	 been	as

dignified,	 but	 she	wasn’t	about	 to	let	 this	 guy	intimidate	  her	into	 a	permanent

neck	ache.	“Is	there	something	you	needed?”

     “Winter	 thinks	 you’re	a	friend.”

     “That	 makes	one	of	us.”

     After	 a	beat,	he	revealed	a	crack	in	his	armor.	The	tiniest	of	smiles.

     “What?”	 she	asked.

     Rocking	 back	on	his	heels,	Jacin	rested	his	hand	on	the	knife	again.	“I	wasn’t

sure	what	kind	of	 girl	 could	make	a	special	op	 go	ballistic	 over	her.	I’m	 glad	 to

see	it’s	not	the	stupid	kind.”

     She	curled	 her	 hands	 into	 fists.	 “Also	  not	 the	kind	  that	buys	 into	 empty

flattery.”

     Wrapping	 a	hand	around	one	of	the	bars,	Jacin	finally	 crouched	so	they	were

243
at	eye	level.	“You	know	 why	you’re	 still	 alive?”

     She	gritted	  her	teeth	 and	answered,	 somewhat	begrudgingly,	  “Because	of

Winter.”

     “That’s	 right,	 firework.	 Try	not	to	forget	 it.”

     “It’s	 hard	to	forget	 when	I’m	 locked	up	in	her	cage,	sunshine.”

     The	corner	of	 his	mouth	 crinkled	with	 restrained	amusement,	but	it	vanished

just	as	fast.	Unnerving.	He	nudged	his	chin	toward	 her	hand.	“When	was	the	last

time	someone	checked	that	for	infection?”

     “I	 know	what	 infection	looks	 like.”	 She	resisted	the	urge	to	hide	her	wounded

finger,	 but	there	 was	no	 way	 she	was	showing	 this	 guy	 her	 finger	 stub.	“It’s

fine.”

     He	made	a	noncommittal	sound.	“They	 say	you’re	a	decent	pilot.”

     She	scowled.	“What	is	 this,	a	job	interview?”

     “Have	 you	ever	flown	 a	Lunar	ship	before?”

     For	 the	first	 time,	 he	had	 her	full	  attention,	but	 her	curiosity	  was	crowded

with	suspicion.

     “Why?”

     “They’re	 not	 much	different	 from	Earthen	ships.	Little	 different	 layout	of	 the

flight	 controls,	smoother	liftoff	 generally.	I	 think	you	 could	figure	it	 out.”

     “And	 why	 would	it	 matter	if	I	can	fly	 a	Lunar	ship?”

     His	 gaze	cut	 through	 her,	saying	 more	than	 his	words.	 He	 stood.	“Just	 be

ready.”

     “Be	 ready	for	what?	And	why	 do	you	care	about	me,	anyway?”

     “I	 don’t,”	  he	said,	so	casual	Scarlet	had	to	believe	him.	“But	  I	do	care	about

the	princess,	and	she	could	 use	an	 ally.”	 He	 looked	 away.	“A	  better	ally	 than

244
me.”

245
	




                                          Twenty-Eight







Winter’s	  heart	fluttered	  as	 she	pushed	 open	 the	 massive	 glass	door	  to	 the

menagerie.	Sounds	of	wildlife	 spilled	into	 the	corridor—squawking	 birds	in	their

palatial	cages,	monkeys	chattering	from	overhead	vines,	white	 stallions	neighing

in	distant	stables.

     She	 shut	 the	door	  before	 the	heat	 could	 escape	and	 scanned	the	 forked

pathways,	but	there	was	no	sign	of	Jacin.	The	menagerie	took	up	several	acres	of

this	wing	 of	the	palace,	a	labyrinth	 of	 barred	cages	and	glass	enclosures.	It	was

always	humid	 and	perfumed	with	 exotic	 flowers,	 an	aroma	that	 barely	covered

up	the	animal	scent.

     It	 was	her	favorite	 place—had	been	even	before	Scarlet	had	lived	 there.	She

always	felt	 at	 home	with	 the	 animals,	who	 knew	 nothing	of	 mind	 control	 and

manipulation.	 They	didn’t	  care	if	 she	was	 beautiful	 or	 if	 she	was	the	 queen’s

stepdaughter	or	if	 she	was	going	mad.	She	could	 not	remember	ever	 having	an

episode	of	madness	inside	these	walls,	surrounded	by	her	friends.	Here,	she	was

calmer.	Here,	she	could	pretend	that	she	was	in	control	of	her	own	senses.

     She	tucked	an	unruly	curl	 behind	her	ear	and	moved	away	from	the	door.	She

passed	the	chilled	 home	 of	 the	 arctic	 fox,	 who	 was	 curled	 atop	a	 birch	 log,

246
hiding	his	 face	behind	a	bristled	tail.	 The	next	cage	held	a	mother	 snow	leopard

and	her	litter	of	 three	prancing	cubs.	On	the	opposite	side	of	the	mossy	path	was

a	sleeping	white	owl.	It	 peeped	its	huge	eyes	open	as	Winter	passed.

     She	spotted	Ryu’s	  enclosure	ahead,	but	he	 must	have	been	sleeping	 in	 his

den,	as	 the	 wolf	 was	 nowhere	 to	 be	 seen.	Then	 there	 was	Scarlet,	 the	 one

creature	in	the	menagerie	that	was	not	made	up	 of	all-white	 fur	 or	feathers,	and

she	wore	the	distinction	 with	 defiance	in	her	red	 hair	and	the	hooded	sweatshirt

she	never	took	off	despite	the	humidity.	 She	was	sitting	with	 her	knees	pulled	up

to	her	chest,	staring	at	the	flowering	moss	outside	her	cage.

     She	startled	as	Winter	came	closer.

     “Hello,	 friend.”	 Winter	 knelt	in	 front	of	 Scarlet’s	cage.

     “Hello,	  crazy,”	 said	 Scarlet.	It	 sounded	like	  an	endearment.	“How	  are	the

castle	walls	today?”

     Winter	  hummed	thoughtfully.	  She’d	 been	 so	distracted	 she’d	 hardly	 been

paying	attention	to	the	walls.	“Not	 as	bloody	as	usual,”	she	determined.

     “That’s	 something.”	 Scarlet	 pulled	 her	curls	to	 one	side.	Her	 hair	 was	dark

with	 grease	and	grime,	extinguishing	 the	 fiery	 redness	that	had	once	reminded

Winter	 of	 a	comet’s	 tail.	 She’d	also	 lost	too	 much	 weight	 since	her	 captivity.

Winter	felt	 a	pang	of	guilt.	She	should	have	brought	a	snack.

     Scarlet’s	 gaze	raked	 over	 Winter	 with	  a	tinge	 of	 suspicion,	 taking	 in	  the

fluttery	 dress	that	 sparkled	a	 bit	 more	 than	usual.	 “You	 look…”	   She	paused.

“Never	mind.	 What’s	the	occasion?”

     Winter	 knotted	her	hands	together.	“Jacin	asked	me	to	meet	him	here.”

     Scarlet	 nodded,	unsurprised.	“Yeah,	  he	came	by	 a	bit	 ago.”	 She	 tilted	 her

chin	toward	the	path.	“He	went	that	way.”

247
     Winter	 stood	 again,	knees	shaking.	Why	 was	she	nervous?	This	 was	Jacin,

who	had	seen	her	covered	in	 mud	and	scratches	when	they	 were	children,	 who

had	bandaged	her	wounds	when	 she	got	 a	scrape,	who	had	 held	her	 when	the

visions	were	closing	in,	his	whispers	dragging	her	back	to	reality.

     But	something	had	been	different	when	he	asked	her	to	meet	him	here.

     For	once,	he	seemed	anxious.

     She	spent	half	the	 night	wondering	 what	it	 could	mean,	and	her	imagination

always	pulled	her	back	to	one	possibility,	 one	glittering	hope.

     He	 was	 going	 to	  tell	 her	 that	 he	 loved	 her.	 He	 didn’t	  want	  to	 pretend

anymore,	despite	the	politics,	despite	her	stepmother.	He	couldn’t	go	another	day

without	kissing	 her.

     She	shivered.

     “Thank	 you,”	 she	murmured	to	Scarlet.	Adjusting	 her	skirt,	she	headed	down

the	path.

     “Winter?”

     She	paused.	Scarlet	was	clutching	the	bar	nearest	her	face.	“Be	careful.”

     Winter	 cocked	her	head.	“What	do	you	mean?”

     “I	 know	you	 like	him.	 I	know	you	 trust	him.	But	just	…	 be	careful.”

     Winter	  smiled.	 Poor,	 untrusting	 Scarlet.	“If	   you	 insist,”	 she	 said,	turning

away.

     She	spotted	 him	 as	soon	as	 she’d	rounded	 the	corner	 of	 Ryu’s	 enclosure.

Jacin	was	standing	on	a	bridge	that	overlooked	the	menagerie’s	central	pond	and

burbling	 waterfalls.	 A	  family	  of	 six	 swans	was	 clustered	beneath	 him	 as	he

tossed	bread	crumbs	from	his	pockets.

     He	 was	wearing	 his	uniform,	 ready	 to	start	 his	shift	 as	her	 personal	guard.

248
His	hair	 was	 so	pale	in	 the	 menagerie’s	hazy	 light	 that	for	 a	 sinking	 moment

Winter	imagined	he	was	one	of	Levana’s	animals—one	of	 her	pets.

     She	brushed	the	thought	 away	as	Jacin	looked	 up.	His	 expression	was	dark

and	her	giddiness	faded.	So	this	was	not	a	romantic	 meeting	after	all.	 Of	 course

it	wasn’t.	It	 never	was.

     This	 disappointment	did	 not,	however,	chase	away	the	fantasy	of	 how	badly

she	wanted	him	 to	 press	her	 against	these	caged	walls	 and	 kiss	her	 until	 she

could	think	of	 nothing	else.

     She	 cleared	 her	  throat	 and	 came	 to	  stand	 beside	 him.	  “This	  is	  quite

clandestine,”	she	said,	nudging	 him	 with	 her	shoulder	 as	he	emptied	the	 bread

from	his	pockets.

     Jacin	 hesitated,	before	 nudging	 her	 back.	 “The	 menagerie	 is	 open	to	 the

public,	Highness.”

     “Yes,	 and	the	doors	will	be	locking	 in	five	 minutes.	No	one’s	here.”

     He	glanced	over	his	shoulder.	“You’re	 right.	 I	suppose	it	is	clandestine.”

     A	 new	whisper	of	hope	stirred	between	her	ears.	Maybe.	Maybe	…

     “Walk	 with	 me,”	Jacin	said,	ducking	off	 the	bridge.

     She	followed	  him	around	 the	pond.	 His	 attention	was	glued	 to	 the	ground,

one	hand	brushing	against	the	handle	of	his	knife.	Ever	the	guard.

     “Was	 there	something…?”

     “Yeah,”	  he	whispered,	as	if	  pulling	 himself	 from	 deep	thoughts,	 “there’s	 a

thing	or	two.”

     “Jacin?”

     He	 massaged	his	brow.	Winter	  couldn’t	 recall	 the	last	time	 he’d	 looked	 so

unsure	of	himself.	“In	 fact,	there	are	a	whole	lot	of	things	I’d	 like	 to	say	to	you.”

249
     Her	 heart	 ricocheted.	 Struggling	  through	 the	 topsy-turvy	  thoughts	in	  her

head,	all	she	managed	to	say	was	a	baffled	“oh?”

     Jacin’s	eyes	flickered	 to	her,	but	didn’t	 linger,	 darting	instead	down	the	path.

They	crossed	another	 ivory-carved	 bridge.	 Most	 of	  the	swans	had	 gone	their

separate	ways,	but	one	 was	floating	  after	them	 still,	 dipping	  its	head	 into	 the

water.	On	the	 other	side	of	 the	 path	were	albino	 hares	that	watched	 them	pass

with	red	eyes	and	twitching	noses.

     “Ever	 since	we	were	kids,	all	I	ever	wanted	was	to	protect	you.”

     Her	lips	 tingled.	She	wished	he	would	stop	walking	 so	she	could	see	his	face.

But	he	 didn’t	 stop,	 guiding	 her	past	rocky	  outcroppings	and	 drooping,	 heavy-

headed	flowers.

     “Knowing	  you	were	there	at	the	trial,	 all	 I	could	think	 was,	I	 have	to	survive

this.	I’m	 not	going	to	make	her	sit	there	and	watch	me	die.”

     “Jacin—”

     “But	 I	was	stupid	to	think	 I	could	 protect	you	forever.	Not	from	 her.”

     His	 tone	turned	 harsh.	Winter’s	 emotions	 were	shredded	from	 the	 constant

flipping	 of	this	conversation.

     “Jacin,	what	 is	this	about?”

     He	took	in	 a	shaky	breath.	They’d	come	full	 circle	and	she	could	see	that	Ryu

was	awake	now,	prowling	behind	his	bars.

     Jacin	 stopped	walking,	  and	Winter	 tore	 her	 gaze	from	 the	 wolf.	  She	was

pinned	beneath	Jacin’s	ice-blue	stare.	She	gulped.

     “She	wants	to	kill	 you,	Princess.”

     Winter	 shivered,	first	 with	 the	 intensity	 of	his	 words,	and	second	with	 their

meaning.	She	supposed	such	a	 declaration	 should	have	 shocked	her,	but	 ever

250
since	Levana	had	given	her	these	scars,	she	had	been	expecting	this.

     Her	disappointment	 over	Jacin	not	 bringing	 her	here	to	confess	his	love	was

more	potent	than	the	knowledge	her	stepmother	wanted	her	dead.

     “What	 have	I	done?”

     He	shook	his	head,	the	deep	sadness	returning.	“Nothing	that	you	could	 help.

The	people	love	you	so	much.	 Levana’s	just	realized	 how	much.	She	thinks	you

could	be	a	threat	to	her	crown.”

     “But	 I	 could	 never	be	 queen,”	she	said.	“The	  bloodline.	 The	people	would

never—”

     “I	 know.”	 His	expression	was	sympathetic.	“But	 it	doesn’t	matter.”

     She	drew	 back,	 hearing	his	 words	 again.	Spoken	 with	 such	 certainty.	 She

wants	to	kill	you,	Princess.

     “She	told	 you	this?”

     A	 sharp,	single	nod.

     Bright	 spots	flickered	 in	 her	vision.	 She	stepped	backward,	grasping	the	rail

of	 Ryu’s	 enclosure.	Behind	  her,	she	 heard	a	 growl,	 followed	  by	 Ryu’s	 nose

against	her	fingers.	She	hadn’t	realized	he	was	there.

     “She	asked	you	to	do	it.”

     His	jaw	 clenched.	Guiltily,	 he	glanced	at	the	wolf.	“I’m	  so	sorry,	Princess.”

     When	 the	world	 stopped	spinning,	 she	dared	to	look	 up	 at	the	camera	over

his	shoulder.	She	rarely	paid	the	cameras	much	attention,	but	now	she	wondered

if	her	stepmother	was	watching,	waiting	 to	see	her	stepdaughter	murdered	so	she

could	protect	her	throne	from	an	imaginary	 threat.

     “Why	 would	 she	do	that	to	you?”

     He	laughed,	like	 someone	had	stabbed	him	in	 the	chest	and	he	had	no	other

251
choice	but	to	find	it	 amusing.	“To	me?	Really?”

     She	forced	 herself	to	stand	tall.	 Recalling	 her	breathless	anticipation	 of	 this

meeting,	she	thought	of	what	a	naïve,	silly	girl	 she’d	been.

     “Yes,”	  she	 said,	firmly.	   “How	  could	 she	be	 so	 cruel,	 to	 ask	 you,	of	  all

people?”

     His	face	softened.	“You’re	 right.	 It’s	 torture.”

     Tears	started	to	 mist	 her	eyes.	“She	 threatened	someone,	didn’t	 she?	She’s

going	to	have	someone	killed	if	you	 don’t	do	this.”

     He	didn’t	 respond.

     She	sniffed,	  blinking	 the	 tears	away.	 He	 didn’t	  have	to	 tell	 her.	 It	 didn’t

really	matter	 who	it	 was.	“It’s	  selfish	 of	me,	but	 I’m	 glad	 it’s	 you,	Jacin.”	 Her

voice	shook.	“I	 know	you’ll	 make	it	 quick.”

     She	tried	to	imagine	it.	 Would	he	use	his	knife?	A	 gun?	She	had	no	idea	what

was	the	fastest	way	to	die.	She	didn’t	want	to	know.

     Jacin	would	 have	had	to	 ask	these	same	questions.	All	 the	night	before.	 All

that	day.	 He	must	 have	been	planning	 how	 to	 do	it,	 dreading	 this	 meeting	as

much	as	she’d	been	yearning	for	it.

     Her	heart	broke	for	 him.

     Behind	her,	Ryu	 started	to	growl.

     “Winter…”

     It	 had	 been	so	long	 since	 he’d	 called	 her	by	 her	 name.	Always	  Princess.

Always	Highness.

     Her	lip	 quivered,	but	she	refused	to	cry.	She	wouldn’t	do	that	to	him.

     Jacin’s	fingers	curled	 around	his	knife.

     It	 was	torture.	Jacin	looked	 more	afraid	than	 when	he’d	stood	on	 trial.	More

252
pained	now	than	when	his	torso	had	been	stripped	raw	from	the	lashings.

     This	was	the	last	time	she	would	ever	see	him.

     This	was	her	last	moment.	Her	last	breath.

     Suddenly,	  all	 of	  the	  politics	  and	 all	  of	  the	 games	 stopped	 mattering.

Suddenly,	she	felt	daring.

     “Jacin,”	 she	said,	with	 a	shaky	smile.	“You	 must	know.	 I	cannot	remember	a

time	when	I	didn’t	 love	you.	I	 don’t	think	 such	a	time	ever	existed.”

     His	 eyes	filled	 with	 a	thousand	emotions.	But	 before	he	could	 say	whatever

he	would	say,	before	he	could	kill	 her,	Winter	 grabbed	the	front	 of	his	shirt	 with

both	hands	and	kissed	him.

     He	 thawed	much	 quicker	 than	 she’d	expected.	 Almost	 instantly,	 like	  he’d

been	waiting	 for	 this	moment,	 he	grabbed	her	hips	 and	pulled	 her	against	him

with	a	possessiveness	that	overwhelmed	her.	His	lips	were	desperate	and	starved

as	he	leaned	 into	 the	 kiss,	 pressing	her	 against	the	 rail.	 She	 gasped,	and	he

deepened	the	kiss,	threading	one	hand	into	the	hair	at	the	nape	of	her	neck.

     Her	head	swam,	muddled	with	heat	and	a	lifetime	 of	desire.

     Jacin’s	other	hand	abandoned	her	hip.	She	heard	the	ring	of	steel	as	the	knife

was	pulled	from	 its	scabbard.	Winter	 shuddered	and	kissed	him	harder,	filling	 it

with	every	fantasy	she’d	ever	had.

     Jacin’s	 hand	 slipped	 out	of	  her	hair.	 His	  arm	encircled	 her.	 He	 held	 her

against	him	 like	 they	 couldn’t	 get	close	 enough.	Like	 he	 meant	to	 absorb	her

body	into	his.

     Releasing	his	 shirt,	 Winter	 found	his	 neck,	his	 jaw.	 She	felt	 the	tips	 of	 his

hair	on	her	thumbs.	He	made	a	noise	and	she	couldn’t	tell	if	 it	was	desire	or	pain

or	regret	 or	a	mix	  of	everything.	 His	 arm	 tensed	against	her	back.	 His	weight

253
shifted	as	he	raised	the	knife.

     Winter	 squeezed	her	eyes	tight.

     Having	 seen	so	many	deaths	in	her	life,	 she	had	the	distant	thought	 that	this

was	not	such	a	horrible	way	to	go.

     His	arm	jerked	 downward	and	Winter	gasped,	the	rush	of	air	separating	them.

Her	eyes	flew	open.	Behind	 her,	Ryu	yelped,	but	 the	sound	turned	to	a	betrayed

whimper.

     Jacin’s	eyes	were	open	too,	blue	and	regretful.

     Winter	  tried	 to	 back	away	 but	 he	 held	her	 firm.	  She	had	 nowhere	 to	go

anyway,	pinned	 between	him	 and	the	 railing	 as	she	was.	Over	 his	 shoulder,	a

camera’s	light	 glowed	 against	the	 ceiling.	 Her	 breaths	were	 ragged.	Her	 head

spun.	She	couldn’t	tell	her	heartbeat	from	Jacin’s.

     Jacin.	 Whose	cheeks	were	 flushed	and	whose	 hair	was	 a	mess.	Jacin,	who

she	had	finally	dared	to	kiss.	Jacin,	who	had	kissed	her	back.

     But	 if	she’d	 expected	to	see	desire	in	his	face,	she	was	disappointed.	He	had

frozen	again.

     “Do	 me	a	favor,	Princess,”	he	whispered,	his	breath	warm	 against	her	mouth.

“The	next	time	someone	says	they’re	going	to	kill	 you,	don’t	 just	let	them.”

     She	stared	at	him,	dazed.	What	had	he	done?

     Winter’s	 knees	gave	out.	 Jacin	caught	her,	sliding	 her	down	 the	enclosure’s

bars.	Her	hand	landed	in	something	warm	 and	wet	seeping	out	from	 underneath

the	short	wall.

     “You’re	  all	right,	Princess,”	Jacin	murmured.	“You’re	  all	right.”

     “Ryu?”	 Her	voice	 broke.

     “They’ll	   think	 the	blood	 is	 yours.”	 He	 was	 explaining	 something,	 but	she

254
didn’t	 understand.	“Wait	  here.	Don’t	  move	until	  I	 turn	 out	the	 lights.	 Got	 it?

Princess?”

     “Don’t	  move,”	she	whispered.

     Jacin	pulled	away	and	she	heard	the	knife	being	ripped	from	 the	wolf’s	 flesh.

The	body	sagged	against	the	bars.	Jacin	cupped	her	scarred	cheek,	studying	her

to	be	sure	she	wasn’t	 mid-breakdown,	 to	 be	sure	she’d	understood,	 but	all	 she

could	comprehend	was	the	warm	stickiness	soaking	through	her	skirt.	Blood	 was

flooding	the	pathway.	Gallons	 and	gallons	of	blood	were	suddenly	dripping	 from

the	glass	ceiling,	splattering	on	her	arms,	filling	 up	the	pond.

     “Winter.”

     She	gaped	at	Jacin,	incapable	of	 speaking.	The	 memory	of	 the	kiss	clouded

over	with	something	awful	 and	unfair.	Ryu.	Sweet,	innocent	Ryu.

     “Until	  the	lights	 go	out,”	 he	repeated.	“Then	I	 want	you	to	 get	your	redhead

friend	and	get	 off	 this	damned	game	board.”	 Jacin’s	thumbs	rubbed	against	her

skin,	stirring	her	from	 her	shock.	“Now	 play	dead,	Princess.”

     She	sagged,	finding	  relief	 in	 the	command.	 They	were	 playing	 a	 game.	A

game.	Like	when	they	were	kids.	It’s	 a	game	and	the	blood	isn’t	real	 and	Ryu—!

     She	scrunched	her	face	against	the	 tears.	A	sob	stayed	locked	 in	 her	throat.

Jacin	propped	 her	against	 the	cage	wall	  and	then	 his	 warmth	 was	gone.	 The

heaviness	of	his	boots	 thudded	away,	leaving	 a	path	 of	 sticky	footprints	  in	his

wake.

255
	




                                           Twenty-Nine







Scarlet’s	frown	 felt	 etched	into	her	 face	as	she	stared	down	the	empty	 pathway

of	the	menagerie.	Winter	had	gone	that	way	what	 felt	like	 hours	ago,	and	Scarlet

knew	no	guests	were	supposed	to	 be	in	the	menagerie	this	 late.	Probably	 those

rules	didn’t	apply	 to	princesses,	though.	Maybe	Winter	was	getting	that	romantic

tryst	she’d	wanted,	after	all.

     But	 something	 didn’t	  feel	 right	 about	 it.	 Scarlet	 could	 have	 sworn	 she’d

heard	Ryu	emerge	from	 his	den,	 but	he	hadn’t	 yet	come	 to	see	her,	as	was	his

normal	routine.	 And	 she’d	 heard	a	noise—something	 that	reminded	 her	of	 the

sound	a	goat	makes	during	slaughter.	Something	that	sent	chills	down	her	limbs,

despite	the	menagerie’s	warmth	and	her	zipped-up	hoodie.

     Finally,	 footsteps.	Scarlet	wrapped	her	hands	around	the	bars.

     She	knew	 her	suspicions	were	right	 as	soon	as	the	guard	 came	into	view,	 a

knife	 clutched	 in	 one	hand.	 Her	 heart	pounded.	 Even	 from	 this	 distance	 she

could	see	darkness	on	 the	blade.	 Even	not	 knowing	 Jacin,	 she	could	 read	the

regret	on	his	face.

     Her	knuckles	whitened	 on	the	bars.

     “What	 did	 you	do?”	 she	said,	choking	 back	the	fury	 that	wanted	 to	explode

256
out	of	her,	but	would	have	nowhere	to	go.	“Where’s	 Winter?”

     His	 gaze	didn’t	  waver	 as	he	 came	to	 stand	 outside	her	 cage,	and	 Scarlet

didn’t	shrink	 back	from	him,	 despite	the	knife	and	the	blood.

     “Hold	 out	your	 hand,”	he	said,	crouching.

     She	sneered.	“Do	 you	know	 what	happens	to	people	around	here	who	 ‘hold

out	their	hand’?”

     He	stabbed	the	point	of	 the	knife	into	 the	soft	moss	and,	before	Scarlet	could

move,	reached	for	 her	wrist	 and	twisted	 so	hard	a	scream	of	 pain	arced	up	 her

shoulder.	Scarlet	gasped	and	her	hand	betrayed	her,	opening,	palm	up.	It	 wasn’t

mental	manipulation,	just	a	plain	old	 dirty	trick.

     Scarlet	 tried	 to	 rip	 her	arm	 back	 through	 the	bars,	 but	 his	grip	  was	iron.

Changing	tactics,	she	pressed	her	body	against	the	cage	and	clawed	at	 his	face,

but	he	hovered	out	of	reach.

     Dodging	 a	second	swipe	 of	Scarlet’s	 nails,	the	 guard	removed	his	 scabbard

from	his	belt	and	tipped	it	 over.	A	tiny	 cylinder	dropped	into	 her	palm.

     He	released	her.	Scarlet’s	fingers	curled	around	the	cylinder	 instinctively,	 her

body	shuddering	back	out	of	the	guard’s	reach.

     “Plug	 that	into	the	security	port	 of	a	Lunar	ship	and	it	will	 allow	 royal	access.

You	 can	figure	  out	 the	rest.	 There’s	 also	 a	message	from	 a	 friend	 of	  yours

encoded	in	there,	but	 I	suggest	you	wait	 until	 you’re	 far	 away	before	 worrying

about	that.”

     “What’s	 going	on?	What	did	 you	do?”

     He	slammed	the	knife	 into	 the	scabbard	and,	to	her	surprise,	tossed	it	at	her.

She	flinched,	but	it	landed	harmlessly	in	her	lap.

     “You	 need	to	find	Artemisia	 Port	E,	Bay	22.	Repeat	it.”

257
     Her	 pulse	 was	 hammering.	  She	looked	  down	 the	 path	 again,	 expecting

Winter’s	 black	curly	 hair	and	glittering	 dress	and	the	uncanny	grace	of	her	walk

to	appear	any	second.	Any	second	…

     “Repeat	it.”

     “Port	 E,	Bay	22.”	She	wrapped	her	fingers	around	the	knife’s	 handle.

     “I	 suggest	going	 through	the	gamekeepers’	halls	 first.	Winter	 will	  know	 the

way	from	  there.	We’ll	  do	 what	 we	 can	about	 the	security,	 but	 try	 not	 to	 do

anything	stupid.	And	 if	you’re	 tempted	to	try	and	leave	Luna,	fight	 it.	You’ll	  just

draw	attention,	 and	that	little	  pod	isn’t	 equipped	for	 far	 distances	anyway.	Act

like	 you’re	 going	to	 pick	 up	a	delivery	  in	RM-9.	  That’s	where	 your	 boyfriend

grew	up.	Understand?”

     “No.”

     “Just	 get	away	 from	 Artemisia.	  Port	E,	 Bay	 22.	 Sector	RM-9.”	  He	 stood.

“And	 when	you	see	that	princess	of	yours,	tell	her	to	hurry	up.”

     Scarlet	 dragged	her	 attention	 back	 to	 him,	  thinking,	 Winter?	  Winter	 had

better	hurry	 up?	But	 then	she	realized	 he	was	talking	 about	the	other	 princess.

Selene.	Cinder.

     Jacin	 rounded	the	 cage	 to	 the	side	 with	  the	barred	 door	 and	 pressed	his

thumbprint	into	 the	pad,	identifying	 himself.	He	entered	a	code.	Scarlet	heard	the

telltale	release	of	the	lock,	the	clunk	of	the	bolt.	 Her	nerves	hummed.

     “Count	 to	ten.”	Without	 looking	 at	her,	Jacin	turned	and	walked	away.

     Everything	  in	 her	 screamed	to	 shove	 that	 door	 open	and	 race	 down	 the

pathway	to	 find	 Winter,	 but	she	refrained.	 Her	 fingers	twitched.	 He	 had	given

her	a	weapon	and	an	escape.	She	didn’t	know	what	was	going	on,	but	something

told	her	that	not	reacting	for	 ten	measly	seconds	wasn’t	going	to	kill	 her.

258
     On	the	count	of	 four,	she	shoved	the	small	cylinder	 into	 her	hoodie’s	pocket.

On	five,	 she	tucked	the	knife	 into	the	back	 of	her	torn	 and	disgusting	jeans.	On

six,	she	neared	the	bars	again	and	pressed	her	face	against	them.	On	seven,	she

screamed,	“Winter!	Are	you—”

     On	eight,	the	lights	 went	out,	plunging	her	into	 blackness.

     Scarlet	 froze.	 That	 jerk.	  Was	this	  supposed	to	 make	 it	 easier?	Was	 this

supposed	to	be	helpful?	Was	this—

     Oh.	The	cameras.

     Huffing,	 Scarlet	checked	that	the	knife	 was	secure	and	pushed	open	the	cage

door.	She	scrambled	through	it	 and	used	the	bars	to	pull	 herself	to	her	feet.	Her

legs	wobbled	 from	 lack	 of	 use.	She	steadied	herself	 and	stepped	out	onto	 the

moss.

     First,	see	if	the	princess	was	dead.

     Second,	find	out	where	the	hell	Port	E	 was.

     “Winter?”	  she	hissed,	shuffling	 across	the	path.	 The	enclosure	wall	 seemed

farther	than	 she	remembered,	her	 own	 muddled	 senses	playing	 tricks	 on	 her.

Finally	 her	hand	 found	the	 railing	 and	she	used	it	 to	 guide	 her	way	 down	 the

path.	“Ryu?”

     The	wolf	 didn’t	 answer.	Another	oddity.

     Above	 the	 artificial	  jungle	 canopy	and	 the	glass	wall,	  stars	could	 be	seen

twinkling	  in	  abundance,	and	 Scarlet’s	  eyes	adjusted	 to	  the	 dim	 light	  they

provided.	As	she	rounded	a	corner,	she	could	make	out	only	 the	shadows	of	tree

boughs	overhead	and	her	own	hand	in	front	of	her	face.

     She	squinted.	There	was	something	 white	in	 the	pathway,	which	 could	 have

been	any	number	of	albino	 animals	that	had	their	 run	of	 the	place,	but	Scarlet’s

259
instincts	told	her	exactly	what	it	 was.	Who	it	was.

     “Winter!”	   She	jogged	the	rest	 of	the	 way,	her	 hand	skimming	 the	rail.	 The

princess’s	shape	took	 form,	  slumped	across	the	 bars.	Something	 dark	 pooled

beneath	her.	“Oh,	 no—oh,	  no—Princess!”	 She	 collapsed	to	 her	 knees,	tilting

Winter	back	and	feeling	around	her	throat.

     “The	 walls	are	bleeding.”

     The	 faint,	 near-delirious	words	 sent	a	wave	 of	 relief	 over	Scarlet.	 Winter’s

heartbeat	was	strong	when	she	found	it.	“Where	are	you	hurt?”

     “The	 blood	…	everywhere	…	 so	much	blood.”

     “Winter.	 I	 need	you	to	talk	to	me.	Where	did	he	hurt	you?”	 She	ran	her	hands

over	the	 princess’s	arms,	shoulders,	 throat,	but	 the	blood	 was	all	 beneath	her.

Her	back	then?

     “He	 killed	 Ryu.”

     Scarlet	froze.

     The	princess	sobbed	and	fell	forward,	 pressing	her	forehead	into	the	crook	of

Scarlet’s	neck.	“He	was	trying	 to	protect	me.”

     Scarlet	didn’t	 know	if	 she	meant	the	wolf	or	the	guard.	“You’re	 all	 right,”	 she

said,	 more	  confirmation	  for	  herself.	  She	 glanced	  around.	 The	  menagerie

disappeared	in	 blackness,	 but	 she	could	  hear	the	 gurgle	  of	 a	 waterfall,	  the

prowling	 of	 small	paws,	the	 leaves	of	a	 tree	shaking	as	some	creature	scurried

through	it.	 She	caught	sight	 of	 the	bundle	 of	 white	 fur	 behind	Winter	 and	 her

heart	twinged,	but	she	quickly	smothered	the	feeling.

     Like	 with	 her	grandmother,	 there	would	 be	time	to	 mourn	later.	 Right	 now,

she	was	getting	them	out	of	here.

     Her	brain	clicked	 into	overdrive.

260
     Guards	were	always	posted	at	the	menagerie	doors,	and	they	would	no	doubt

become	 suspicious	 when	  Princess	 Winter	  didn’t	  return.	  Unless	 Jacin	 had

something	up	his	sleeve	for	them,	but	either	 way,	Scarlet	wasn’t	 about	to	traipse

out	into	the	middle	of	 the	queen’s	palace.

     She	looked	past	Ryu.	On	the	far	wall	 she	could	make	out	the	vague	outline	of

the	door	 that	 led	 into	 the	 gamekeepers’	hallways,	 corridors	 used	 to	 feed	the

animals	and	maintain	their	cages.	Jacin	had	suggested	this	route,	and	much	as	he

got	under	her	skin,	she	had	no	reason	to	question	him.

     “Come	 on.”	She	hauled	Winter	to	her	feet.

     The	princess	peered	down	at	her	hands	and	started	to	shake.	“The	blood…”

     “Yes,	 yes,	the	walls	 are	bleeding,	I	 get	it.	 Look.	 Over	there.	Focus.”	 Scarlet

grabbed	Winter’s	  elbow	 and	spun	 her	 around.	“See	 that	 door?	 That’s	 where

we’re	heading.	Here,	I’ll	  give	you	 a	boost.”	She	knitted	her	fingers	 together,	but

Winter	 didn’t	  move.	 “Winter.	  I	 am	 giving	 you	 five	  seconds	to	 get	 your	 act

together	and	decide	to	 help	me	out,	 or	else	I	 am	leaving	 you	behind	 with	 your

dead	wolf	and	your	bleeding	walls.	Got	 it?”

     Winter’s	 lips	 were	 parted	and	her	expression	dazed,	but	 after	three	seconds

she	nodded.	Or,	 her	head	dipped	 and	Scarlet	 thought	her	 eyelashes	may	have

fluttered	a	little,	 which	she	was	going	to	count.

     “Good.	 Now	step	into	my	 hands	and	get	over	that	rail.”

     The	 princess	did	 as	she	was	told.	 The	 act	was	clumsy,	 which	 was	 at	odds

with	every	 movement	Scarlet	had	ever	seen	her	make.	As	Winter	 collapsed	into

the	wolf’s	 enclosure,	the	reality	of	the	situation	crashed	down	around	Scarlet.

     That	guard	 had	given	them	a	chance	to	 escape.	They	were	making	a	run	 for

it.

261
     Adrenaline	 rushed	 through	 her	veins.	 Scarlet	 checked	the	 knife	 one	 more

time,	then	grasped	the	rail	and	hauled	herself	over.

     She	landed	with	 a	grunt	 and	sprang	back	up,	running	 for	 the	door.	It	 swung

open,	and	to	her	relief,	no	 alarms	sounded.	She	glanced	back	to	see	the	princess

stooped	over	Ryu’s	body,	but	before	Scarlet	could	yell	 for	her,	the	princess	lifted

her	chin,	swiped	her	bloodied	palms	on	her	skirt,	and	followed.

262
	




                                                      Thirty







The	feeding	 halls	 were	 pitch-black.	  Scarlet	 paused	to	 listen	 for	 footsteps	 or

voices,	but	there	was	nothing	but	the	muffled	 chatter	of	 birds	they’d	 left	 behind.

The	smell	reminded	 her	of	 the	farm,	 a	heady	combination	 of	 feed	and	hay	and

manure.	 She	oriented	  herself.	 Going	  right	 would	  lead	 her	 farther	  into	  the

menagerie,	but	left	might	 land	them	 back	in	the	 palace—hopefully	 in	some	sort

of	servants’	quarters.	With	 one	hand	on	the	wall,	she	grabbed	Winter’s	wrist	 and

took	off.	 Her	fingers	skimmed	 over	closed	doors	and	she	used	what	she	knew	of

the	menagerie	to	 count	 them.	 This	must	 be	the	 stag.	This	 could	 be	 the	snow

leopard.	Is	this	is	the	arctic	 fox?

     They	 turned	a	corner	and	a	blinking	  light	 caught	her	eye—hazy	and	distant.

She	headed	toward	it	and	found	a	control	panel	embedded	in	the	wall,	where	one

could	control	the	menagerie’s	lights	and	temperature	and	automatic	feeders.

     Beside	the	panel,	barely	seen	in	its	faint	light,	 was	a	door.

     She	pressed	the	unlock	mechanism,	hoping	beyond	hope	that	this	door	didn’t

lead	to	the	lion.	Nothing	 happened.

     Cursing,	Scarlet	pressed	the	unlock	mechanism	again.	Nothing.

     Then	 the	control	 panel	pinged,	 startling	 her,	and	a	 message	scrolled	across

263
the	top.


     BE	CAREFUL,	  SCARLET.


     Her	jaw	 fell.	“What—?”

     Before	 she	 could	 question	 it,	 she	heard	 the	 door	 unlock.	 Trembling,	  she

reached	for	the	handle.	The	door	slid	open.

     She	flinched	 at	the	onslaught	of	light	 and	pulled	 Winter	against	the	wall,	 but

a	glance	told	her	this	well-lit	  hallway	 was	equally	desolate.	Narrow	and	plain.	 If

Scarlet	had	to	guess	what	a	servants’	hall	looked	like,	this	would	be	it.

     She	listened	and	heard	nothing.

     She	looked	up	and	her	heart	jumped.

     A	 camera	was	rotating	on	 the	ceiling,	 scanning	the	hallway,	 back	and	forth.

But	no	 sooner	had	Scarlet	spotted	it	 than	 it	 froze.	Its	 power	light	  dimmed	and

went	out.	 Startled,	 Scarlet	 leaned	farther	 into	 the	 hallway	  and	saw	 a	second

camera	some	fifty	paces	away	just	as	it,	too,	shut	off.

     What	had	Jacin	said?	Something	about	handling	the	security?

     But	…	 how?

     Fumbling	 for	 Winter’s	 elbow,	Scarlet	dragged	her	into	 the	hallway.	“Do	 you

know	where	we	are?”

     “Near	 the	guest	wing.”

     Well,	 that	 was	something.	At	 least	Scarlet	didn’t	  have	to	worry	 about	 them

starting	out	hopelessly	lost.

     “We’re	 trying	 to	get	to	Artemisia	 Port	E.	You	know	 where	that	is,	right?”

     “E…,”	  murmured	 Winter.	  “E	 for	  execution.	Earth.	  Evret.	 Emperor.”	  She

pondered	a	moment	longer.	“E	for	escape.”

264
     Scarlet	groaned.	“E	for	 unhelpful.”

     “No,	 that	does	not	work.”

     Scarlet	spun	on	 her	and	the	 princess	came	to	a	hasty	 stop.	The	back	 of	her

skirt	was	dark	with	 blood,	 and	smears	of	it	covered	her	 arms,	her	legs,	even	her

face.	In	fact	…

     Looking	  down,	Scarlet	 saw	that	 she	had	a	 fair	 amount	of	 it	 on	 herself,	 as

well.	This	would	 not	help	to	make	them	inconspicuous.

     “The	 docks,	 Winter,”	  she	said,	 glowering	  at	the	 princess.	“Do	  you	 know

where	they	are	or	not?”

     The	princess	 scrunched	up	her	face	and	pressed	her	bloodied	 palms	against

her	cheeks	and	for	a	moment	Scarlet	thought	she	was	going	to	cry.

     “No.	 Yes.	 I	don’t	 know.”	 Her	 breaths	shortened,	her	shoulders	beginning	to

quake.

     “Princess,”	 warned	Scarlet.

     “I	 think	 so.	The	docks	…	yes,	the	docks.	With	the	mushrooms.”

     “Mushrooms?”

     “And	 the	shadows	that	dance.	Port	E.	E	for	escape.”

     “Yeah,	  E	 for	 escape.”	 Scarlet	 could	  feel	 her	 hope	 slipping	 through	  her

fingers.	There	was	no	way	this	was	going	to	work.	 “How	 do	we	get	there?”

     “We	 take	the	rail.	To	the	edge	of	the	city.”

     “The	 rail.	All	 right.	 How	do	we	get	there?”

     “Down,	 down,	down	 we	go.”

     Scarlet	could	feel	her	patience	unraveling.	“And	 how	 do	we	go	down?”

     Winter	 shook	her	head,	apology	swimming	 in	 her	amber	eyes.	Scarlet	would

have	wanted	to	hug	her	if	she	hadn’t	simultaneously	wanted	to	strangle	her.

265
     “Fine.	 I’ll	  figure	 it	 out.	 Come	on.”	 She	took	 off	 down	 the	hallway,	 hoping

they	would	 stumble	across	a	flight	  of	stairs	 or	an	elevator.	 Servants	had	to	get

around	quickly,	didn’t	 they?	Surely	they	would	 find—

     She	rounded	a	corner	and	screeched,	nearly	colliding	with	 a	girl,	 a	maid	who

couldn’t	have	been	more	than	fourteen	years	old.	Winter	crashed	into	Scarlet	and

she	grasped	the	 princess’s	 arm,	adrenaline	 thundering	 in	 her	 ears.	The	 maid

stared	at	Scarlet	 for	 a	 heartbeat,	then	at	 the	 princess,	covered	 in	 blood,	 then

dropped	into	a	nervous	curtsy,	clutching	the	linens	in	her	arms.

     “Y-your	  Highness,”	she	stammered.

     Clenching	 her	teeth,	Scarlet	grabbed	the	knife	out	of	the	scabbard	and	lunged

for	the	girl,	 pinning	her	against	the	wall	with	 the	blade	against	her	throat.

     The	girl	 squeaked.	The	linens	tumbled	around	their	feet.

     “We	 need	to	get	to	the	rail	that	will	  take	us	to	the	docks.	Quickest	way	there.

Now.”

     The	girl	 started	to	shake,	her	eyes	round.

     “Do	 not	 be	afraid,”	 said	 Winter,	 her	voice	 singsong	and	delicate.	“She	 will

not	hurt	you.”

     “Like	 hell	 I	won’t.	 How	do	we	get	to	the	docks?”

     The	 girl	 raised	a	 finger.	 “D-down	  this	 hallway,	 to	 the	right.	 The	 stairs	go

down	to	the	sh-shuttle	platform.”

     Pulling	 away,	 Scarlet	grabbed	 a	white	 tablecloth	 from	 the	fallen	 stack	 and

ushered	Winter	down	the	hall	without	 looking	 back.

     The	 corridor	 ended	 in	 a	T.	 Scarlet	 turned	 right	 and	found	  an	alcove	 that

dropped	into	 a	 bright	 stairwell.	 Once	 the	door	 had	 shut	behind	 them,	 Scarlet

shook	out	the	 tablecloth	and	draped	it	 around	Winter,	  doing	her	best	to	 knot	 it

266
into	 something	 that	 resembled	 a	cloak,	  hiding	 the	 blood	 and	 the	 princess’s

recognizable	beauty.	 Deeming	 her	work	 passable,	she	grabbed	 Winter’s	 hand

and	headed	 down	 the	 steps.	As	 they	 reached	 the	 second	landing,	 the	 walls

changed	to	rough	gray-brown	stone.	They	were	underground,	 in	the	sublevels	of

the	palace.

     Three	 floors	 down	 they	 emerged	onto	 a	 platform	 lit	  by	 glowing	 sconces.

Before	them	 were	silent	 magnetic	 rails.	 Scarlet	approached	the	 ledge,	peering

each	way	down	the	tunnel.

     She	 spotted	a	 second	doorway,	 arched	 and	trimmed	  with	 phosphorescent

tiles.	 The	 entry	 into	  the	 palace	 corridors,	 as	 opposed	to	  the	 dull	 servants’

entrance.

     Something	 clicked.	 The	 magnets	started	to	 hum.	 Heart	 launching	 into	 her

throat,	Scarlet	held	 out	 her	arm	 and	backed	Winter	 against	the	 wall.	 A	 bullet-

shaped	shuttle	 emerged	from	  the	tunnel	 and	 glided	 to	 a	 stop	 on	 the	 tracks.

Scarlet	held	 still,	  hoping	 whoever	 it	 was	 wouldn’t	  see	 them,	wouldn’t	   even

glance	their	way.

     The	shuttle	 door	lifted	 with	 a	hiss	of	 hydraulics	and	a	giggling	 noblewoman

stepped	out,	 wearing	  a	 flamboyant	  emerald-green	 gown	 that	 glittered	  with

jeweled	peacock	feathers.	A	man	followed	  in	a	tunic	 stitched	with	 runes	similar

to	those	worn	by	 the	thaumaturges.	He	reached	over	and	squeezed	the	woman’s

backside.	She	squealed	and	swished	him	away.

     Scarlet	 didn’t	 breathe	until	  they’d	 stumbled	 to	the	 door	 and	their	 laughter

faded	in	the	stairwell.

     “That	 was	not	her	husband,”	Winter	whispered.

     “I	 really	don’t	 care.”	Scarlet	lunged	toward	the	shuttle.	“Open!”

267
     The	shuttle	didn’t	 move.	The	door	didn’t	 open.

     “Open,	 you	stupid	 piece	of	 junk!”	  Digging	 her	fingers	 into	the	 crack	of	 the

door,	Scarlet	tried	to	pry	 it	open.	Her	injured	 finger	throbbed	 for	the	first	 time	in

days.	“Come	on.	What’s	wrong	 with	this	thing?	 How	do	we—”

     The	door	 opened,	nearly	knocking	 Scarlet	off	 balance.	A	 robotic	voice	 said,

“Transport	to	Artemisia	 Port	E.”

     Goose	bumps	 rushed	along	 her	skin,	 but	 she	urged	 Winter	 inside,	 silently

thanking	 whatever	invisible	  ally	 was	helping	 them.	 Climbing	  in	 after	 Winter,

Scarlet	collapsed	onto	a	 bench.	The	door	breezed	shut,	sealing	 them	inside.	As

the	 shuttle	 lifted	  and	 began	to	  glide	 down	  the	 tracks,	 Winter	  added,	“For

escape.”

     Scarlet	 swiped	 her	damp	 forehead	with	  a	dirty	  sleeve.	When	 she	felt	  her

panic	settle	down	 enough	to	 speak,	she	asked,	“What	 happened	back	there?	In

the	menagerie?”

     The	 strength	 that	had	 entered	Winter’s	  eyes	just	 as	 quickly	 extinguished.

“The	queen	sent	him	to	kill	 me,”	she	said,	“but	he	killed	 Ryu	instead.”

     Scarlet	unzipped	her	 hoodie,	trying	 to	cool	 her	burning	 skin.	“Why	 does	the

queen	want	to	kill	you?”

     “She	believes	I	am	a	threat	to	her	crown.”

     Scarlet	snorted,	an	exhausted	sound	that	didn’t	carry	half	 as	much	derision	as

it	should	have.	“Really?	Has	she	ever	heard	you	talk?”

     Winter	 turned	questioning	eyes	on	her.

     “Because	you’re	 crazy,”	 explained	Scarlet.	 “Not	 exactly	 queen	material.	No

offense.”

     “I	 cannot	be	queen	because	I	am	not	of	royal	descent.	Her	Majesty	is	only	my

268
stepmother.	I	have	none	of	her	blood.”

     “Right,	 because	that’s	what’s	important	in	 a	ruler.”

     Though	  there	 were	 two	  monarchies	 in	  the	 Earthen	 Union—the	  United

Kingdom	 and	the	Eastern	Commonwealth—Scarlet	 had	grown	 up	 in	Europe,	 a

democracy	 made	 up	  of	 checks	  and	 balances,	 voter	 ballots,	  and	 province

representatives.	She	generally	figured,	to	each	his	own,	and	clearly	the	countries

of	the	 Union	 were	doing	 something	 right	 to	have	gotten	 through	 126	years	of

world	peace.

     But	that	wasn’t	 the	case	with	Luna.	Something	was	broken	with	their	 system.

     The	shuttle	 began	to	slow.	 Scarlet	glanced	toward	 the	window	 as	the	 rocky

black	cave	opened	up	to	an	enormous	spaceship	port	bustling	 with	activity.	  The

tiled	floor	 glowed,	casting	the	shadows	of	countless	ships	against	the	dark	walls.

But	this	 dock	was	 crowded	and	huge,	 with	 several	more	sets	of	 maglev	 tracks

bringing	 in	more	 shuttles	every	 second.	Cargo	was	being	 unloaded	on	 another

set	of	 tracks,	food	 and	 goods	coming	 in	 from	 the	 outer	sectors,	by	 men	 who

yelled	at	one	another	in	abbreviated	orders	that	sounded	like	another	language.

     “Bay	 22,”	 Scarlet	reminded	 herself	as	their	 shuttle	door	 opened.	“Try	 to	 fit

in.”

     Winter	 glanced	 at	her,	 a	moment	 of	perfect	 clarity	 and	 even	humor	 in	 the

look.

     She	was	right.	They	 were	filthy.	 They	were	 bloody.	Winter	 was	a	well-loved

princess	who	 was	prettier	 than	a	bouquet	 of	 roses	and	crazier	 than	a	headless

chicken.

     Fitting	 in	would	 be	a	miracle.

     “You	 could	use	your	glamour,”	 Scarlet	suggested.

269
     The	 connection	 severed	 and	 Winter	 turned	 away.	 “No.	  I	  couldn’t.”	  She

stepped	out	onto	the	platform.

     Scarlet	followed,	 relieved	 that	she	didn’t	 see	anyone	wearing	rich	finery	 and

donning	 ridiculous	  headpieces.	This	  was	 a	 place	 for	  trade	 and	 cargo,	 not

aristocrats,	but	 that	didn’t	  mean	they	 were	 safe.	Already	 she	 could	 sense	the

workers	pausing,	looking	again,	staring.

     “You	 mean	you	won’t,”	 said	Scarlet.

     “I	 mean	I	won’t,”	 agreed	the	princess.

     “Then	 at	least	keep	your	head	down.”	Scarlet	adjusted	the	tablecloth	material

over	Winter’s	 hair	as	they	moved	away	from	the	rails.

     The	 port	was	 enormous,	stretching	 far	 into	 the	distance.	Hundreds	 of	 dark

alcoves	lined	either	side,	numbers	carved	above	them.	Scarlet	scanned	the	cargo

as	they	passed,	her	eye	catching	on	words	of	war.

      SMALL	    ARMS	    AMMUNITION
      DELIVER:	      LUNAR	    REGIMENT	       51,	 PACK	   437
      THAUM	     LAIGHT,	     ALPHA	     GANUS
      STATIONED:	       ROME,	    ITALY,	    EF,	  EARTH

     Ammunition.	  These	were	weapons	 destined	for	 Earth	to	 aid	in	 Luna’s	 war

efforts.

     Don’t	 react,	she	told	herself,	 fists	clenching.	Every	 fiber	in	 her	body	yearned

to	find	a	weapon	and	set	fire	to	every	crate	in	this	port.

     Don’t	 react.	Do	not	 react.

     Steadying	 her	 breath,	 she	 forged	 ahead,	Winter	  trailing	  beside	 her.	 She

caught	E7	stenciled	on	a	wall	to	her	left,	E8	on	her	right.	 Almost	there.

     It	 took	every	ounce	of	willpower	 not	to	sprint	 to	Bay	22.

270
     “Can	I	 help	you?”

     They	paused.	A	worker	 stepped	toward	them	wearing	filthy	  coveralls.	“What

are	you…”	 He	caught	himself,	his	 gaze	landing	on	Winter,	 or	what	he	could	 see

of	her	down-turned	face.	“I	 …	forgive	 me.	Your	Highness?”

     Winter	 looked	up.	Color	flooded	 into	the	man’s	cheeks.

     “It	 is	you,”	 he	breathed.	“I	didn’t	 …	can	I	help	you,	 Your	Highness?”

     Scarlet	bristled.	 No	 one	else	 had	noticed	 them	yet.	 She	grabbed	the	man’s

arm	before	he	bowed.	“Her	Highness	does	not	wish	to	be	gawked	at.	If	 you	want

to	help,	you	can	escort	us	to	Bay	22.”

     Anxiety	 flashed	across	the	man’s	face	and	he	nodded,	as	if	he	were	afraid	 of

her.	Maybe	he	thought	she	was	a	thaumaturge	in	training.

     “Y-yes,	 of	course.	Right	this	way.”

     Scarlet	released	him	 and	shot	Winter	 a	cool	 glare,	gesturing	 for	 her	to	hide

her	face	again.	 The	man’s	 stride	was	 stiff	 as	he	led	 them	 past	hovering	 cargo

platforms	 and	crates	on	 complicated	 tracks.	Scratching	 his	 neck	with	  his	free

hand,	he	glanced	twice	over	his	shoulder.

     “Is	 something	wrong?”	said	Scarlet,	steel	in	her	tone.

     “N-no.	 I’m	 sorry.”

     “Then	 stop	looking	at	her.”

     He	opened	his	mouth	 and	Scarlet	thought	he	wanted	to	mention	 the	blood	or

the	grime	or	Winter’s	 very	 existence,	but	then	he	shut	it	again	and	kept	his	 head

down.

     Some	of	the	alcoves	they	 passed	had	heavy	metal	doors	over	them,	but	most

were	open,	showing	docked	ships	within.

     “See?”	Winter	 whispered.	“Mushrooms,	 and	the	shadows	that	dance.”

271
     Scarlet	followed	 her	gesture.	The	spacecrafts’	shadows	on	the	walls	 did	look

something	like	 dancing	mushrooms.	Sort	of.	 If	 she	tilted	 her	head	and	squinted

just	right.

     “Bay	 22,	Your	Highness.”

     Scarlet	glanced	at	the	number	over	the	arched	door	and	the	podship	enclosed

within.	 It	 was	 a	 two-person	carrier,	 inset	 with	  the	gold	 insignia	  of	 the	royal

court.

     “Thank	 you,”	 said	Scarlet.	“That	will	 be	all.”

     The	 man’s	 eyebrows	 stitched	 together.	“Will	   …	 will	  you	 need	 an	escort

back?”

     Scarlet	 shook	her	head	 and	linked	 her	elbow	 with	  Winter’s	 again,	but	 had

only	taken	 two	steps	when	 she	paused.	“Tell	 no	one	you	 saw	us,”	 she	told	 the

man.	 “But	  if	 someone	 asks,	 tell	 them	  we	 glamoured	 you	 into	  helping	 us.

Understand?”

     His	round	 eyes	fell	on	Winter,	who	 smiled	warmly.	 His	blush	deepened.

     “I’m	  not	so	sure	you	didn’t,”	 he	muttered.

     Rolling	  her	eyes,	Scarlet	hauled	 the	princess	toward	 the	ship.	 She	checked

that	the	 man	 was	 gone	before	 she	opened	 the	 pilot’s	  side	door	 and	 nudged

Winter	inside.	“All	  the	way	over,	unless	you	plan	on	flying	 this	thing.”

     Winter	  complied	  without	  question.	 Scarlet	 removed	 the	 knife	  from	  her

waistband	and	settled	it	 between	 them.	She	shut	the	 door	and	 the	noise	of	 the

docks	silenced	in	the	vacuum-sealed	ship.

     Scarlet	 exhaled,	 willing	  her	 hands	 to	 stop	 shaking.	 Willing	  the	 mess	 of

controls	in	 front	 of	 her	 to	come	 into	 focus.	She	 examined	the	 cockpit,	 noting

what	was	similar	to	 the	delivery	ship	she’d	 flown	 since	she	was	fifteen	and	what

272
was	different.

     “I	 can	do	this,”	she	whispered,	pressing	her	fingers	against	the	main	screen.	It

brightened.	The	controls	lit	up.


     SECURITY	 CLEARANCE	  UNDETERMINED


     She	stared	at	the	message.	She	had	to	read	it	four	times	before	the	meaning	of

the	words	sank	in.	She	half	 expected	their	phantom	helper	to	override	 the	ship’s

security	 and	  start	 the	 engines	  for	  her	 too.	  When	 nothing	  happened,	 she

remembered	the	cylinder	Jacin	had	given	 her.	She	fished	it	from	 her	pocket	and

popped	off	 its	cap,	holding	 her	 breath	as	she	jammed	it	 into	 the	corresponding

security	port.

     An	 icon	whirled	 over	the	message.

     And	 whirled.

     And	 whirled.

     Her	stomach	tightened.	A	drop	 of	sweat	slid	down	the	back	of	her	neck.


     CLEARANCE	  GRANTED.	 WELCOME,	  ROYAL	 GUARD	  JACIN	 CLAY.


     Scarlet	whooped,	 dizzy	 with	 relief.	 She	jogged	 a	few	 switches.	The	engine

hummed	and	the	ship	 lifted	 up	on	 the	magnetic	force	 beneath	the	ports,	steady

and	sure.	Outside	 their	alcove,	 a	series	of	 cargo	 ships	were	making	 their	 way

toward	the	sealed	chamber	that	separated	Artemisia’s	Port	E	from	 the	emptiness

of	space.	They	 could	slip	 in	 right	 behind	 them	and	no	 one	would	 stop	a	royal

ship,	no	one	would	even	question—

     “Wait,”	  said	Winter	as	Scarlet	nudged	the	podship	forward.

     Scarlet’s	  heart	  dropped.	  “What?”	   she	 said,	  scanning	  the	  port	  for	  a

273
thaumaturge,	a	guard,	a	threat.

     Winter	  reached	over	  and	pulled	  the	 pilot’s	  harness	over	 Scarlet’s	  head.

“Safety	first,	 Scarlet-friend.	We	are	fragile	 things.”

274
	




                                           Thirty-One







Winter	was	mesmerized	by	Scarlet’s	confident	hands	as	they	skimmed	over	the

ship’s	controls.	Behind	the	ship,	enormous	iron	doors	slammed	shut,	locking

them	in	 a	 vacuum-sealed	chamber	with	a	dozen	other	ships	waiting	 to	 be

released	from	Artemisia’s	underground	port.	Tearing	her	attention	away	from

Scarlet	and	the	twinkling	instruments,	Winter	glanced	over	her	shoulder	at	the

interlocking	doors—so	ancient	they	looked	almost	like	they	had	existed	on	the

moon	even	before	colonization.

     Now	they	divided	her	from	the	ports,	the	city,	the	palace.

     And	Jacin.

     Scarlet	was	all	nerves,	tapping	her	fingers	across	the	instruments.	“How	long

is	this	going	to	take?”

     “I	don’t	know.	I’ve	only	ever	left	Artemisia	on	the	maglev	rails.”

     “They	just	have	to	seal	a	couple	doors,	right?”	Scarlet	reached	overhead	and

toggled	a	few	switches.	The	lights	inside	the	ship	faded	to	black.	“This	would	be

a	bad	time	for	someone	to	look	over	and	recognize	you.	They’d	probably	think	I

was	kidnapping	you.”

     “You	are,	in	a	manner.”

275
     “No.	 I’m	 saving	you	from	your	 psychotic	stepmother.	There’s	a	difference.”

     Winter	  pulled	 her	attention	 away	 from	 the	 doors	 and	scanned	the	 nearby

ships.	Most	 seemed	to	 be	cargo	 ships.	She	wondered	 how	 many	 were	taking

supplies	for	 the	war	 efforts	 on	Earth	 or	carrying	 more	 of	the	 queen’s	soldiers.

Still,	 most	would	 be	headed	to	the	outer	 sectors	for	deliveries	 or	 to	load	up	 on

goods	to	be	brought	back	to	the	capital.	It	 was	much	faster	to	fly	 than	to	take	the

maglev	shuttles	halfway	around	the	moon.

     “Are	 we	going	to	Earth?”

     Scarlet’s	frown	 deepened.	“Jacin	said	this	 ship	wouldn’t	 make	it	 that	far.	He

said	to	go	to	Sector	RM-9.”

     Jacin.	Brave	Jacin.	 Always	protecting	 her.

     She’d	abandoned	him.

     Scarlet	tugged	 on	one	of	 the	drawstrings	 of	 her	hoodie,	 the	end	frayed	 and

dirty.	 “Jacin	said	this	 sector	we’re	 going	to	 is	where	Wolf	  grew	up.	 His	family

might	still	 be	there.”

     Winter	 trailed	her	fingers	along	her	harness	and	sang	to	herself,	“The	Earth	is

full	tonight,	 tonight,	and	the	wolves	all	howl,	 aa-ooooooooooh…”

     “We	  need	an	 ally.	 Someone	we	 can	 trust.	 Maybe	 I	 can	 persuade	Wolf’s

parents	to	shelter	us.	 Hide	us,	 until	 we	come	 up	with	 a	better	 plan,	and	in	 the

name	of	all	the	stars,	what	is	taking	so	long?”

     Winter	 blinked	at	her.	“Aa-ooooh?”

     Scarlet	huffed.	 “Would	  you	focus?	We	 need	to	find	 someplace	we	can	hide

from	the	queen.”

     “She	will	 find	 us	anywhere.	We	will	 not	be	safe.”

     “Don’t	  say	that.	The	people	like	you,	don’t	they?	They’ll	  protect	you.	Us.”

276
     “I	 do	not	wish	to	put	 them	in	danger.”

     “You	 need	to	get	over	that	mode	of	thinking	 right	now.	 This	is	us	against	her,

Winter.	From	now	 on,	I	need	you	to	think	like	 a	survivalist.”

     Winter	 took	in	 a	shuddering	breath,	jealous	of	 the	embers	that	burned	inside

Scarlet.	She	felt	hollow	and	cold	on	the	inside.	Easily	 shattered.

     Scarlet	 popped	 one	 of	  her	 sweatshirt’s	 drawstrings	  into	 her	 mouth	  and

gnawed	on	the	plastic	end.	 “RM-9,”	  she	muttered	to	herself.	“What	  does	RM-9

mean?”

     “Regolith	 Mining	 Sector	9.	That	is	a	dangerous	sector.”

     “Dangerous?	Dangerous	how?”

     “Regolith	 sickness.	Many	deaths.”

     Scarlet’s	mouth	quirked.	 “Sounds	like	 the	sort	of	place	Levana	wouldn’t	 look

for	you.”	 Scarlet	clicked	on	a	screen	and	opened	up	a	map.	“Perfect.”

     The	second	set	of	 massive	doors	began	to	 slide	apart,	disappearing	 into	the

black	cavern	walls.	Faint	light	 spilled	in.

     “Scarlet?”

     “What?”	 Scarlet	looked	up	and	gasped.	“Finally.”

     As	the	gap	between	the	doors	grew,	Winter	saw	they	were	in	 a	cave	built	into

the	side	of	a	 crater.	Beyond	its	 rim	 lay	the	rocky	 wasteland	of	 Luna,	its	 jagged

rocks	and	pockmarked	surface	as	unwelcoming	as	a	black	hole.

     “Jacin	saved	us	both,”	she	whispered,	her	chest	aching.

     Scarlet	 harrumphed	 and	guided	 the	 ship	 forward,	 falling	  in	 line	 with	  the

others.	Ahead,	the	boosters	on	the	ships	nearest	the	exit	flamed	 and	thrust	them

into	space.	“He	could	have	been	a	little	more	forthcoming	 with	 information.	 But,

yeah.	Remind	me	to	thank	him	someday.”

277
     “Levana	 will	 kill	 him.”	 She	looked	down.	 There	was	dried	blood	beneath	her

fingernails,	 smearing	 her	dress,	 drenching	 her	slippers.	 She	 blinked,	 and	 the

bloodstains	began	to	seep	through	the	fabric,	spreading.

     Winter	 let	out	a	weak	breath.	It’s	not	real,	 Princess.

     “I’m	  sure	 he	stayed	 behind	 for	 a	reason,”	 said	 Scarlet.	 “He	 must	 have	a

plan.”

     Their	 ship	 reached	the	 front	 of	 the	 line	 and	 the	whole	 galaxy	 opened	 up

before	them.	A	bold	smile	curled	 on	Scarlet’s	lips.	“Here	 we	go.”

     As	 Scarlet’s	fingers	 flew	 over	the	controls	 and	the	podship	hummed	 around

them,	Winter	glanced	back	 one	last	time.	There	was	a	jerk.	 Her	stomach	flipped

and	then	they	were	soaring	out	of	 the	holding	 bay	and	Scarlet	was	laughing	and

the	crystal	dome	 that	housed	Artemisia	 was	beneath	them	and	growing	 smaller

and	smaller	and	…

     Winter	 sobbed	and	pressed	a	hand	to	her	mouth.

     “Hey,	 hey,	none	of	that,”	 said	Scarlet,	not	bothering	to	 hide	her	own	effusive

joy.	“We	 made	it,	Winter,	and	I’m	 sure	Jacin	will	 be	fine.	He	seems	tough.”

     Winter’s	 neck	 began	to	ache	from	 being	 twisted	 in	 her	seat,	but	she	didn’t

want	to	 tear	 her	 gaze	away	 from	 Artemisia,	  not	 even	as	 the	 palace	and	 the

buildings	blurred	together	and	the	lights	twinkled	 and	went	out,	invisible	 beneath

the	dome’s	surface.

     “She	will	 kill	  him.”

     “I	  know	 you’re	  worried,	 but	 look.	 We	 are	 out	 of	 that	 star-forsaken	 city.

We’re	alive	and	we’re	 free,	so	stop	moping.”

     Winter	 rested	her	cheek	against	her	chair’s	back.	More	tears	were	threatening

to	escape,	but	she	held	them	back,	focusing	instead	on	her	ragged	breaths.

278
     After	a	long	silence,	she	felt	a	hand	settle	over	hers.

     “I’m	 sorry,”	said	Scarlet.	“That	wasn’t	fair.	I	know	you	like	him.”

     Winter	swallowed.	“I	 love	him	 like	I	 love	my	 own	platelet-manufacturing

plant.”

     “Your	own	what?”

     “I	don’t	know.	My	heart,	I	think.	My	body.	I	love	him,	every	part	of	him.”

     “Fine,	you	love	him.	But,	Winter,	he	seemed	to	know	what	he	was	doing.”

     “Protecting	me,”	Winter	whispered.	“He’s	always	protecting	me.”	She	was

startled	by	the	unexpected	scent	of	blood	invading	her	lungs.	She	looked	down

and	gasped.

     “What?	What’s	wrong?”

     Winter	held	the	fabric	of	her	dress	away	from	her	stomach.	The	blood	had

soaked	the	shimmering	white	material,	turning	it	dark	red.	Even	the	cloth	they’d

taken	from	the	servant	was	covered.	The	stench	was	so	thick	she	could	taste	it.

     “Winter?”

     “It—it’s	  nothing,”	she	stammered,	trying	to	 imagine	it	 away.	The	 blood

dripped	down	her	legs.

     “You’re	hallucinating,	aren’t	you?”

     Winter	leaned	back	against	the	seat.	She	wrapped	her	fingers	around	the

straps	of	her	harness.	It’s	all	in	your	head,	Princess.	It	isn’t	real.	“I’m	 fine.	It

will	go	away	soon.”

     “Honestly,”	Scarlet	snapped,	“why	don’t	you	just	use	your	glamour?	Why	let

it	drive	you	crazy	like	this?”

     “I	won’t.”	 Winter	choked	down	another	difficult	breath.

     “I	get	that,	but	why?”

279
     “It	is	a	cruel	gift.	I	wish	I	hadn’t	been	born	with	it.”

     “Well,	 you	were	born	with	 it.	 Look	at	 you,	Winter.	You’re	 a	mess.	Why

don’t	you	just—I	don’t	know—make	me	think	your	hair	is	orange	or	something?

Something	harmless?”

     “It’s	 never	harmless.”	The	harness	constricted.	Her	fingernails	clawed	at	the

straps.

     “If	 I	had	the	gift,”	continued	Scarlet,	ignorant	of	the	harness’s	choking	hold,

the	gushing	blood,	“I	would	have	shown	those	snotty	imbeciles	a	thing	or	two.

See	how	they	like	being	asked	to	do	tricks.”

     Winter’s	hands	were	wet	and	slick	and	sticky.

     “My	 grandfather	was	Lunar,”	said	Scarlet.	“I	never	met	him,	but	I	do	know

he	died	in	an	insane	asylum.	I	have	to	assume	because	he	made	the	same	choice

you’re	making	now.	He	was	down	on	Earth	and	trying	to	hide	what	he	was,	so

maybe	he	had	a	reason.	But	you?	Why	do	this	to	yourself?	How	does	it	make

anything	better?”

     “It	does	not	make	anything	worse.”

     “It	makes	you	worse.	Why	can’t	you	just	…	do	good	things	with	it?”

     Winter	laughed	against	the	strain	of	the	delusion.	“They	all	believe	they	are

doing	good.”	Her	head	fell	to	the	side	and	she	watched	Scarlet	with	her	bleary

eyes.	“My	stepmother	is	not	only	powerful	because	the	people	fear	her,	she	is

powerful	because	she	can	make	them	love	her	when	she	needs	them	to.	We	think

that	if	we	choose	to	do	only	good,	then	we	are	only	good.	We	can	make	people

happy.	We	can	offer	tranquility	or	contentment	or	love,	and	that	must	be	good.

We	do	not	see	the	falsehood	becoming	its	own	brand	of	cruelty.”

     The	ship	trembled	and	their	speed	increased.	Luna	blurred	beneath	them.

280
     “Once,”	  Winter	  continued,	 pushing	 the	words	 out	  of	 her	 lungs.	 “Once	 I

believed	with	all	 my	heart	that	I	was	doing	good.	But	I	 was	wrong.”

     Scarlet’s	gaze	darted	to	her,	then	back	to	the	landscape.	“What	happened?”

     “There	 was	a	servant	who	 tried	to	 kill	 herself.	I	 stopped	her.	I	 forced	her	to

change	her	mind.	  I	 made	her	 happy.	 I	 was	so	 sure	I	  was	helping	 her.”	  Her

breaths	came	in	strangled	gasps,	but	she	kept	talking,	hoping	to	push	through	the

hallucination	 if	 she	ignored	it	 enough.	“But	 all	I	 did	 was	give	her	more	 time	to

be	tortured	by	Aimery.	 He	was	quite	fond	of	her,	you	see.”

     Scarlet	went	quiet,	but	Winter	 dared	not	look	at	her.

     “The	 next	 time	 she	tried	  to	take	 her	 life,	 she	succeeded.	Only	 then	 did	 I

realize	that	I	hadn’t	helped	her	at	all.”	 She	swallowed,	hard.	“That	day	I	 swore	to

never	manipulate	anyone	again.	Even	 if	 I	believed	 I	 was	doing	good—for	  who

am	I	to	presume	what	is	good	for	others?”

     The	 harness	 tightened	 again,	 pressing	 against	 Winter’s	  sternum,	 cutting

against	her	ribs.	The	blood	 was	spilling	 over	 it	now.	 Soon	it	 would	 be	sloshing

around	her	ankles.	The	 harness	would	cut	 right	 through	her,	 chopping	her	 into

girl-shaped	pieces.	Razor	wire	slicing	through	her	flesh.

     Winter	 shut	her	eyes.

     Stay	with	me,	Princess.

     After	  a	 suffocating	  silence,	 Scarlet	 murmured,	 “It	  just	 seems	 like	 there

should	be	a	way	to	manage	it,	without	…	this.”

     The	harness	tightened,	forcing	 the	air	out	 of	her	lungs.	 With	 a	whimper,	 she

tilted	her	head	back	to	avoid	it	pressing	against	her	windpipe.

     “What—Winter?”

     Stars	danced	behind	 her	 eyelids.	Her	 lungs	 burned.	 Blood	 dripped	 off	 the

281
curls	of	 her	hair	and	soaked	into	 the	harness	straps.	She	stopped	fighting	it	 and

let	her	body	slump	forward.	The	straps	crushed	her	sternum,	snapped	her	ribs.

     Scarlet	cursed,	but	the	sound	was	distant	and	muffled.

     Hands	thumped	against	her	like	mittened	fingers,	leaning	her	back	against	the

seat	and	feeling	 her	throat.	 She	heard	her	name	but	 it	 was	far	 away,	 trying	 to

reach	her	across	a	whole	sea	of	stars	and	everything	was	fading	fast	…

     There	was	a	series	of	loud	clicks	and	the	whir	of	 the	harness	being	reeled	into

the	ship’s	roof.

     Winter	 collapsed	into	 Scarlet’s	arms,	both	 of	them	crumpled	 over	the	center

console.	Scarlet	struggled	to	 lift	 Winter’s	  head	and	open	her	 air	passage	while

keeping	the	ship	from	colliding	 with	 Luna’s	jagged	terrain.

     Air	  rushed	 back	  into	 Winter’s	   lungs.	 She	 gasped,	swallowing	   it	 down

hungrily.	Her	 throat	was	still	stinging,	 but	the	aches	in	her	chest	were	fading	into

the	lost	depths	of	the	hallucination.	 She	coughed	and	forced	 her	eyes	open.	The

blood	had	receded,	and	now	 only	 the	remnants	of	 Ryu’s	 death	were	left,	 dried

and	smeared	on	her	skirt.

     “Are	 you	all	 right?”	Scarlet	cried,	half	 hysterical.

     Winter	  met	  her	 bewildered	  face,	 still	  dizzy	  from	  the	 loss	 of	  air,	  and

whispered,	“The	harness	tried	to	kill	 me.”

     Dragging	 a	 hand	 through	 her	hair,	  Scarlet	fell	  back	 into	 the	 pilot’s	 seat.

Through	the	window,	  half	a	 dozen	distant	domes	were	growing	 larger—a	 slow

growth,	giving	 way	to	the	subtle	impression	of	buildings	 underneath.

     “The	 harness	didn’t	do	anything,”	 Scarlet	growled.	 “It’s	 your	 brain	that’s	the

problem.”

     Winter	 started	to	 giggle,	but	 it	 was	cut	short	 by	sobs.	“Y-you’re	  right,”	  she

282
stammered,	hearing	Jacin’s	voice	in	her	head.

     Stay	with	me,	Princess.	Stay	with	me—

     But	she	was	already	so	far	away.


                                                          *			 *			*

“My	  Queen,	 we	 have	 been	experiencing	  minor	 glitches	  in	 the	 surveillance

system.	Random	power	failures	that	have	been	occurring	throughout	the	palace.”

     Levana	stood	before	the	grand	windows	of	 her	solar,	listening	to	the	third-tier

thaumaturge	present	his	 daily	 report,	though	 she	was	 lacking	 her	usual	 focus.

Her	thoughts	were	a	maze	of	distractions.	Despite	using	every	resource	available

to	her	and	demanding	that	 her	security	team	review	 hours	and	hours	of	 footage

from	 the	outer	 sectors,	Linh	 Cinder	 and	her	 companions	had	yet	 to	 be	found.

Wedding	preparations	were	underway,	but	she	had	been	too	livid	 to	even	look	at

her	husband-to-be	since	he’d	arrived.

     Now	 she	 had	Winter	  to	concern	 herself	 with.	 The	 ungrateful	 wretch	 of	 a

princess	had	been	nothing	but	an	embarrassment	to	her	since	the	day	Levana	had

married	her	father.	 If	 Jacin	succeeded,	she	would	 never	again	have	to	 listen	to

her	mindless	 mutterings.	 She	would	 never	again	 have	to	 defend	her	 from	 the

mocking	laughter	 of	 the	court.	She	would	 never	again	 have	to	see	the	looks	 of

desire	following	 the	doltish	girl	 down	the	palace	corridors.

     Levana	wanted	the	princess	gone.	She	wished	to	let	go	of	the	resentment	that

had	plagued	 her	 for	 so	 long.	 Her	 life	 was	 beginning	 anew,	 finally,	  and	 she

deserved	this	fresh	beginning	 without	 the	cumbersome	girl	 dragging	 her	down,

reminding	her	of	a	too-painful	 past.

     But	if	 Jacin	failed	…

283
     Levana	couldn’t	 stomach	another	failure.

     “My	 Queen?”

     She	turned	to	the	thaumaturge.	“Yes?”

     “The	 technicians	need	to	 know	 how	you	 would	 like	 them	to	 proceed.	They

estimate	an	hour	 or	 two	will	  be	 required	to	 locate	the	 source	of	 these	system

glitches	and	 restore	the	 defaults.	 They	 might	 need	to	 disable	 portions	 of	 the

system	while	they’re	working	 on	it.”

     “Will	  this	take	them	away	from	the	search	for	the	cyborg?”

     “It	 would,	 Your	Majesty.”

     “Then	 it	can	wait.	The	cyborg	is	 our	top	priority.”

     He	bowed.	“We	 will	 keep	you	updated	on	further	developments.”

     Aimery	  gestured	 toward	 the	 door.	 “That	  will	  be	 all.	 Thank	 you	 for	  the

report.”

     The	 thaumaturge	swept	 away,	 but	 another	 figure	 was	 standing	inside	 the

elevator	when	the	doors	opened.

     Levana	straightened	at	the	sight	of	Jacin	Clay.	There	was	a	shadow	across	his

face,	a	 loathing	 that	 he	normally	  worked	 so	hard	 to	 disguise.	 Levana’s	 gaze

slipped	down	to	his	hands.	They	were	covered	in	blood.	 There	was	a	stain	on	the

knee	of	his	pants	too,	dried	black.

     He	stepped	off	 the	elevator,	but	 Jerrico	stopped	him	in	 his	tracks,	a	palm	 on

Jacin’s	chest.

     “Sir	 Clay?”	 she	said.

     “It’s	 done.”	 His	tone	carried	all	the	horror	 that	the	simple	words	concealed.

     A	  smile	 tickled	  Levana’s	 mouth.	  She	spun	 away	 to	  hide	 it—an	  act	 of

generosity.	“I	  know	  it	 could	 not	 have	 been	easy	for	  you,”	 she	 said,	hoping

284
sympathy	carried	 in	 her	voice.	 “I	  know	 how	 you	cared	 for	 her,	but	 you	 have

done	the	right	thing	for	your	 crown	and	your	country.”

     Jacin	said	nothing.

     When	 she	could	 school	 her	 face	 again,	Levana	 turned	 back.	 Aimery	 and

Jerrico	were	impassive,	while	 Jacin	looked	 like	he	would	 rip	 out	Levana’s	 still-

beating	heart	if	he	had	the	chance.

     She	took	 pity	 on	him,	 choosing	to	forgive	 these	rebellious	 instincts.	He	 had

loved	the	girl,	after	all,	 hard	as	it	was	to	fathom.

     “What	 did	you	do	with	 the	body?”

     “I	  took	  it	 to	 the	 menagerie’s	 incinerator,	  where	 they	 take	 the	 deceased

animals.”	None	 of	his	anger	faded	as	he	recounted	the	task,	though	 he	made	no

movement	toward	 Levana.	Still,	 Jerrico	 did	not	 relax.	 “I	 killed	 the	white	 wolf,

too,	to	cover	 the	blood,	 and	left	 the	wolf’s	 body	 behind.	The	gamekeepers	will

think	it	was	a	random	attack.”

     Levana	 frowned,	 her	 mood	dampening.	 “I	  did	 not	 tell	 you	 to	 destroy	the

body,	Sir	Clay.	The	people	must	see	proof	of	her	death	if	 she	is	no	longer	to	be	a

threat	to	my	throne.”

     His	 jaw	tightened.	“She	was	never	a	threat	to	your	 throne,”	he	growled,	 “and

I	 wasn’t	  about	 to	 leave	 her	  there	 to	 be	 pecked	 apart	 by	 whatever	  albino

scavengers	you	keep	 down	there.	 You	 can	find	  some	other	 way	 to	break	 the

news	to	the	people.”

     She	pressed	her	lips	against	a	sour	taste	in	her	mouth.	“So	I	shall.”

     Jacin	swallowed,	 hard,	regaining	 some	composure.	“I	 hope	you	 won’t	 mind

that	I	 also	disposed	of	 a	witness,	My	 Queen.	I	 thought	it	 would	 be	contrary	 to

your	objectives	 if	 word	 got	 out	 that	a	royal	 guard	 had	murdered	 the	princess.

285
People	might	question	if	it	 was	under	your	order,	after	all.”

     She	bristled.	“What	 witness?”

     “The	 Earthen	girl.	I	didn’t	 think	 anyone	would	miss	her.”

     “Ah,	  her.”	 With	  a	 scoff,	 Levana	 brushed	her	 hand	through	 the	 air.	 “She

should	have	been	dead	weeks	ago.	You	have	done	me	a	service	by	ridding	me	of

her.”	She	tilted	her	head,	examining	him.	It	 was	amusing	to	see	so	much	emotion

revealed	 when	 it	  was	 normally	  so	  impossible	 to	  aggravate	 him.	  “You’ve

exceeded	my	expectations,	Sir	Clay.”	 She	placed	a	hand	on	his	cheek.	A	muscle

twitched	beneath	her	 palm	and	 she	tried	to	 ignore	the	 glower	 searing	into	 her.

His	anger	was	expected,	but	he	would	soon	realize	it	was	for	the	best.

     If	 he	didn’t,	she	could	always	force	him	 to.

     Levana	 felt	  lighter	  already,	 knowing	  she	 would	  never	 have	 to	 see	 her

stepdaughter’s	face	again.

     She	dropped	her	hand	 and	floated	back	 to	the	windows.	 Beyond	 the	curved

dome	she	could	see	the	barren	landscape	of	Luna,	white	craters	and	cliffs	against

the	black	sky.	“Is	there	anything	else?”

     “Yes,”	 said	Jacin.

     She	raised	an	eyebrow.

     “I	 wish	 to	 resign	from	 the	royal	 guard.	 I	ask	 to	be	reassigned	to	 the	sector

where	my	father	 was	sent	years	ago.	This	 palace	holds	too	many	 memories	for

me.”

     Levana’s	face	softened.	“I	 am	sure	it	 does,	Jacin.	I	am	sorry	that	I	had	to	 ask

this	of	you.	But	your	 request	is	denied.”

     His	nostrils	 flared.

     “You	  have	proven	 yourself	 to	 be	 loyal	 and	trustworthy,	  traits	 I	 would	 be

286
remiss	to	lose.	You	 may	take	leave	for	 the	rest	of	 today,	with	 my	 gratitude,	but

tomorrow	 you	will	  report	for	 your	 new	assignment.”	 She	grinned.	“Well	  done,

Jacin.	You	are	dismissed.”

287
	




                                          Thirty-Two







Cinder	was	losing	her	mind.	They	had	been	hiding	in	Maha	Kesley’s	tiny	shack

for	days.	Wolf	and	his	mother,	Thorne,	Iko,	and	herself,	all	crammed	into	little

rooms,	tripping	over	one	another	every	time	they	tried	to	move.	Though	they

didn’t	move	much.	There	was	nowhere	to	go.	 They	were	afraid	to	 be	heard

through	the	small,	glassless	windows,	so	they	communicated	mostly	in	hand

signals	and	messages	tapped	out	on	their	one	remaining	portscreen.	The	silence

was	horrendous.	The	stillness	was	suffocating.	The	waiting,	agony.

     She	thought	often	of	Cress	and	Scarlet	and	wondered	if	either	of	them	was

alive.

     She	worried	about	Kai	as	the	wedding	loomed	ever	closer.

     There	was	guilt	too.	Not	only	had	they	put	Maha	in	danger	by	being	there,

they	were	also	eating	far	too	 much	food,	having	already	burned	through	the

measly	packs	they’d	brought	with	them.	Maha	said	nothing	about	it,	but	Cinder

could	tell.	Food	was	strictly	rationed	in	the	outer	sectors,	and	Maha	was	barely

able	to	feed	herself.

     They	spent	their	days	trying	to	rework	their	plan,	but	after	all	 the	plotting

they’d	done	aboard	the	Rampion,	Cinder	was	disheartened	to	be	back	at	square

288
one.	The	video	they’d	 recorded	remained	 unused—copies	of	it	 downloaded	not

only	to	the	portscreen,	but	to	Cinder’s	 and	Iko’s	 internal	computers	too.	It	 didn’t

matter	how	many	copies	of	it	 they	had.	Without	 Cress	being	there	to	tap	into	the

broadcasting	system,	the	video	was	useless.

     They	 discussed	starting	a	grassroots	movement.	 Maha	Kesley	 could	 spread

the	word	of	 Selene’s	return	 to	the	laborers	in	 the	mine	 and	let	the	 news	spread

from	 there.	 Or	  they	 could	 send	 messengers	through	 the	 tunnels,	  scrawling

messages	on	the	tunnel	walls.	But	these	were	slow	strategies,	with	too	much	risk

for	miscommunication	 and	little	chance	the	news	would	spread	far.

     There	was	a	reason	Levana	kept	her	people	isolated	from	 one	another.	There

was	a	reason	no	 one	had	attempted	a	 cohesive	rebellion	 yet,	not	 because	they

didn’t	 want	 to.	 It	 was	 clear	from	 the	 government-sanctioned	 propaganda	that

Levana	and	her	ancestors	had	sought	to	brainwash	the	Lunar	people	into	a	belief

that	their	 rule	 was	 righteous	 and	fated.	 It	 was	 equally	 clear	 from	 the	 tunnel

graffiti	 and	the	 people’s	downcast	 eyes	that	they	 no	longer	 believed	it,	 if	 they

ever	had.

     Any	 spark	of	defiance	may	have	been	starved	and	threatened	out	of	them,	but

the	more	Lunars	Cinder	saw,	the	more	she	believed	she	could	reignite	them.

     All	 she	needed	was	a	way	to	talk	to	them.

     Maha	had	gone	to	the	maglev	 platform	to	 wait	in	 line	for	 her	weekly	rations,

leaving	the	rest	of	 them	staring	at	 a	holographic	map	 of	Luna.	 It	had	been	over

an	hour,	but	few	suggestions	had	been	posed.

     Cinder	 was	 beginning	 to	 feel	 hopeless,	 and	all	  the	while,	  the	 clock	 was

ticking.	To	 the	wedding.	To	the	coronation.	To	their	 inevitable	discovery.

     An	 unexpected	chorus	of	chimes	made	Cinder	jump.	The	map	faded,	the	feed

289
overridden	by	 a	 mandatory	message	being	 broadcast	from	 the	 capital.	 Cinder

knew	that	the	same	message	would	be	playing	on	a	dozen	embedded	screens	on

the	dome	outside,	making	sure	that	every	citizen	saw	it.

     Head	 Thaumaturge	  Aimery	  Park	 appeared	 before	 them,	  handsome	and

arrogant.	Cinder	recoiled.	The	 holograph	made	it	seem	as	though	he	were	in	the

room	with	them.

     “Good	 people	of	 Luna,”	 he	said,	“please	stop	what	 you	are	doing	 and	listen

to	this	announcement.	I	 am	afraid	we	 have	tragic	news	to	impart.	 Earlier	 today,

Her	 Royal	 Highness,	 Princess	Winter	  Hayle-Blackburn,	  stepdaughter	of	 Her

Majesty	the	Queen,	was	found	murdered	in	the	royal	menagerie.”

     Cinder’s	 brow	 furrowed	  and	she	traded	 frowns	 with	 her	 companions.	She

knew	little	  about	the	 princess,	only	 that	 she	was	 said	to	 be	beautiful	  and	the

people	loved	 her,	 which	 must	 mean	Levana	 hated	her.	 She	had	heard	 of	 the

princess’s	scarred	face,	a	 punishment	inflicted	  by	 the	queen	herself,	 or	 so	the

rumors	went.

     “We	 are	 reviewing	 security	 footage	in	 an	attempt	 to	bring	 the	 murderer	to

justice,	and	we	 will	 not	 rest	until	 our	beloved	 princess	is	avenged.	Though	 our

devoted	queen	is	devastated	at	this	loss,	she	wishes	to	proceed	with	her	wedding

ceremony	as	scheduled,	so	we	might	have	joy	 in	this	time	 of	sadness.	A	funeral

procession	for	Her	 Highness	will	  be	scheduled	for	 the	coming	 weeks.	Princess

Winter	Hayle-Blackburn	 will	 be	missed	by	us	all,	but	never	forgotten.”

     Aimery’s	 face	disappeared.

     “Do	 you	think	 Levana	killed	her?”	 Iko	asked.

     “Of	 course	I	do,”	 Cinder	said.	“I	wonder	 what	the	princess	did	to	anger	her.”

     Thorne	 folded	 his	 arms.	 “I’m	   not	 sure	you	 have	 to	 do	 anything	 to	 earn

290
Levana’s	wrath.”

     He	 looked	ragged,	unshaven	and	 weary,	even	more	 so	than	the	 day	Cinder

had	met	 him	 in	 New	 Beijing	 Prison.	 Though	 no	one	 had	dared	 to	talk	 about

abandoning	Cress,	Cinder	knew	he	was	taking	her	loss	harder	than	any	 of	them.

She’d	sensed	from	the	moment	they	were	reunited	in	 Farafrah	that	Thorne	felt	 a

responsibility	toward	 Cress,	but	for	the	first	 time	she	was	beginning	to	wonder	if

his	feelings	didn’t	 go	deeper	than	that.

     Wolf’s	  head	suddenly	 snapped	up,	 his	eyes	 locking	 on	 the	fabric-covered

window.

     Cinder	went	 rigid,	 ready	to	load	a	bullet	 into	her	finger	 or	use	her	Lunar	 gift

to	defend	 herself	and	her	 friends—whatever	 this	 unseen	threat	called	 for.	 She

felt	the	tension	rise	around	her.	Everyone	falling	 silent,	watching	Wolf.

     His	nose	twitched.	His	 brow	drew	closer,	doubtful.	 Suspicious.

     “Wolf?”	  Cinder	prodded.

     He	sniffed	 again	and	his	eyes	brightened.

     Then	he	was	gone—hurling	 himself	past	the	group	and	tearing	open	the	front

door.

     Cinder	jumped	to	 her	feet.	“Wolf!	 What	 are	you—”

     Too	 late.	The	door	 slammed	shut	behind	him.	 She	cursed.	This	 was	not	the

time	for	 her	 mutant	wolf	 ally	 to	 start	running	 around	 and	drawing	 attention	to

himself.

     She	yanked	on	her	boots	to	chase	after	him.


                                                          *			 *			*

Scarlet	landed	 the	ship	 in	 a	tiny	  underground	port	 that	 had	only	  two	 ancient

291
delivery	 ships	already	inside.	 Once	the	chamber	had	been	sealed,	two	 blinding

lightbulbs	lit	 up	 the	ceiling,	 one	of	them	 with	a	sporadic	 flicker.	 Scarlet	got	out

first,	scanning	every	corner,	inspecting	beneath	each	ship.	Empty.

     There	were	two	enormous	freight	 elevators	and	three	stairwells	leading	to	the

surface,	labeled	RM-8,	RM-9,	 RM-11.

     Every	surface	was	covered	in	dust.

     “You	 coming?”	 she	called	to	 Winter,	 who	had	made	it	 so	far	as	opening	the

podship	door.	The	princess’s	 hair	was	a	tangled	mess	and	her	skirt	 crusted	with

blood.	 The	 tablecloth	 they’d	 stolen	 had	 slipped	 down	 around	 her	 shoulders.

Whereas	the	escape	had	filled	Scarlet	with	adrenaline,	it	had	left	 Winter	drained.

Her	head	bobbed	as	she	pulled	herself	out	of	the	ship.

     Scarlet	planted	her	hands	on	her	hips,	her	patience	stretched	to	near	breaking.

“Do	I	 have	to	carry	you?”

     Winter	 shook	her	head.	“You	don’t	 think	we	were	followed?”

     “I’m	  hoping	no	one	has	figured	out	we’re	 missing	yet.”	 Scarlet	read	the	signs

again,	the	 letters	 almost	undetectable	 beneath	the	 dust.	“Not	  that	 we	 have	a

whole	lot	of	 options	at	this	point,	even	if	we	were	followed.”

     Scarlet	turned	 back	and	tightened	the	 tablecloth	around	Winter’s	  waist	so	it

looked	like	 an	ill-fitting	  skirt,	 covering	 the	blood,	then	she	unzipped	her	hoodie

and	helped	Winter	 into	 the	sleeves.	She	tucked	 the	princess’s	voluminous	 hair

back	and	pulled	 the	 hood	over	 her	 face	as	well	 as	 she	could.	 “Not	 great,	 but

better	than	nothing.”

     “Do	 you	think	 he’s	dead	yet?”

     Scarlet	paused	in	 the	middle	 of	zipping	 up	 the	hoodie	again.	 Winter	 peered

back	at	her,	looking	small	and	vulnerable.

292
     She	sighed.	“He’s	 smart	and	 he’s	strong.	He’ll	  be	all	right.”	  She	tugged	the

zipper	up	to	Winter’s	 throat.	“Come	on.”

     When	 they	emerged	on	 the	surface,	protected	 beneath	the	enormous	dome,

Scarlet	paused	to	get	her	bearings.	She	had	looked	up	the	Kesley	address	on	the

ship’s	database,	though	the	series	of	numbers	and	letters	made	no	sense	to	her.

     The	 spaceship	port	 was	 meant	 for	 freight	  and	this	 entrance	 was	situated

between	 two	  warehouses,	one	 wall	   lined	 with	   carts	 that	 were	  heaped	 to

overflowing	 with	  chipped	 black	rock.	 Not	 far	 away	 was	 an	enormous	cavern

opening	up	 into	what	 looked	 like	 a	mine	 or	rock	 quarry.	 Regolith	 Mining,	 the

sector	map	had	said.

     Were	 Wolf’s	 parents	miners?	Would	 Wolf	  have	become	a	miner,	 too,	if	 he

hadn’t	been	 conscripted	into	 the	army?	 It	 was	impossible	 to	 imagine	 a	life	 in

which	he	lived	 here,	on	this	moon,	 beneath	this	dome,	and	never	came	to	Earth.

Never	met	her.

     “This	 doesn’t	appear	to	be	residential,”	she	muttered.

     “Residences	are	usually	in	the	outer	rings	of	each	sector,”	said	Winter.

     “Outer	 ring.	 Right.”	  Scarlet	scanned	the	 squat	warehouses.	“Which	 way	 is

that?”

     Winter	  pointed	 up	  at	 the	 dome	 that	 encapsulated	 them.	 Even	 with	  the

surrounding	 buildings,	 it	 was	 clear	 where	 the	dome’s	 highest	 point	 was	 and

where	it	rounded	out	toward	the	edges.

     Scarlet	turned	away	from	the	dome’s	center.

     As	 they	 walked,	 she	tried	 to	 cobble	together	 a	plan.	 First,	 find	 where	 the

people	lived.	 Second,	figure	 out	how	 their	 homes	were	addressed	and	find	 the

home	of	 Wolf’s	  parents.	Third,	  stumble	through	 an	 awkward	 conversation	 in

293
which	she	tried	to	 explain	to	them	 who	she	was	and	why	they	 had	to	shelter	her

and	Winter.

     When	 the	industrial	 buildings	  gave	way	 to	ramshackle	 homes,	Scarlet	was

relieved	to	see	address	numbers	painted	on	the	concrete	in	front	of	each	building,

faded	 from	 years	 of	  foot	  traffic.	  “A-49,	  A-50,”	   she	 murmured	 to	  herself,

quickening	 her	pace.	 The	 next	circle	  of	 houses	were	 labeled	with	  Bs.	“Easy

enough.	The	Kesley	 house	was	 D-313,	right?	 So	 we’ll	 head	to	 the	 row	 of	Ds

and…”

     She	glanced	back.

     Winter	 was	gone.

     Cursing,	 Scarlet	spun	in	 a	full	 circle,	 but	there	 was	no	sign	 of	the	 princess.

“You	 can’t	  be	serious,”	 she	 growled,	 backtracking	 her	 steps.	 She’d	been	 so

immersed	in	 finding	  the	house,	she	couldn’t	  recall	 hearing	 Winter	 beside	her

since	she’d	 left	 the	 warehouses	behind.	She’d	 probably	 wandered	 off,	 strung

along	by	some	hallucination	…

     Scarlet	paused,	catching	sight	of	the	princess	down	an	alley.	She	was	wedged

between	two	factories	and	mesmerized	by	a	metal	shaft	that	poked	 out	of	one	of

the	buildings.	Broken	white	 rock	tumbled	out	of	 it	into	a	cart	below.

     The	 red	hood	was	 still	 pulled	 over	the	princess’s	 face	and	a	 great	cloud	 of

dust	was	billowing	 around	her,	but	she	didn’t	seem	to	notice.

     Huffing,	  Scarlet	 squared	 her	shoulders	 and	 started	marching	  toward	 her,

ready	to	drag	the	 crazy	girl	 away	 by	her	hair	 if	 she	had	to.	 She	hadn’t	crossed

half	 the	 distance,	 though,	 when	 Winter’s	  head	 snapped	around,	 away	 from

Scarlet.

     Scarlet’s	 pace	 slowed,	 dread	 pulsing	 through	 her	 as	 she,	 too,	 heard	 the

294
footsteps.	Pounding	 footsteps,	like	 someone	was	 running	 at	full	  speed	toward

them.

     She	reached	for	the	knife	Jacin	had	given	her.

     “Winter,”	  she	hissed—but	 either	she	was	 too	far	 away,	 or	the	 noise	of	 the

clattering	rock	and	machinery	was	too	loud.	“Winter!”

     A	 man	 barreled	around	 a	corner,	 heading	straight	 for	 the	princess.	 Winter

tensed	half	a	second	before	he	reached	her.	Grabbing	Winter’s	elbow,	he	yanked

back	the	red	hood.

     Scarlet	 gasped.	Her	  knees	weakened.	 The	 man	 stared	 at	 Winter	  with	 a

mixture	of	confusion	 and	disappointment	and	maybe	even	anger,	all	locked	up	in

eyes	so	vividly	green	Scarlet	could	see	them	glowing	from	 here.

     She	was	the	one	hallucinating	now.

     She	took	 a	stumbling,	 uncertain	 step	forward.	 Wanting	 to	 run	 toward	him,

but	terrified	 it	 was	a	trick.	 Her	hand	tightened	around	the	knife	 handle	as	Wolf,

ignoring	how	 Winter	 was	trying	 to	pull	 away,	 grabbed	her	arm	and	smelled	the

filthy	 red	sleeve	of	Scarlet’s	hoodie,	streaked	with	dirt	and	blood.

     He	growled,	 ready	to	tear	the	princess	apart.	“Where	did	you	get	this?”

     So	desperate,	so	determined,	so	him.	The	knife	slipped	out	of	Scarlet’s	hand.

     Wolf’s	 attention	snapped	up	to	her.

     “Wolf?”	  she	whispered.

     His	eyes	brightened,	wild	 and	hopeful.

     Releasing	Winter,	 he	strode	forward.	 His	tumultuous	 eyes	scooped	over	her.

Devoured	her.

     When	he	was	in	arm’s	reach,	Scarlet	almost	collapsed	into	him,	 but	at	the	last

moment	she	had	the	presence	of	 mind	to	 step	back.	She	planted	 a	hand	on	his

295
chest.

     Wolf	 froze,	hurt	flickering	  across	his	face.

     “I’m	  sorry,”	 said	Scarlet,	her	 voice	teetering	with	 exhaustion.	 “It’s	 just	 …	I

smell	so	awful,	 I	can	hardly	stand	to	be	around	myself	right	 now,	so	I	can’t	 even

imagine	what	it’s	 like	for	 you	and	your	sense	of	sm—”

     Batting	 her	hand	away,	Wolf	  dug	his	fingers	 into	 Scarlet’s	hair	 and	crushed

his	mouth	against	hers.	Her	protests	died	with	a	muffled	gasp.

     This	time,	 she	did	collapse,	her	legs	unable	to	hold	her	a	second	longer.	Wolf

fell	with	 her,	dropping	 to	his	 knees	to	break	Scarlet’s	fall	 and	cradling	her	body

against	his.

     He	was	here.	He	was	here.

     She	was	crying	 when	she	broke	away,	and	part	of	 her	hated	that,	and	part	of

her	felt	like	it	 was	long	overdue.	“How?”

     “I	 smelled	you.”	 Wolf	 was	grinning	 so	wide	 she	could	see	the	sharp	teeth	he

normally	tried	 to	hide.	It	had	been	a	long	time	since	she’d	seen	him	so	happy.

     Actually	 …	 she	wasn’t	sure	if	she’d	ever	seen	him	so	happy.

     She	started	to	laugh,	though	it	was	born	out	of	 delirium.	 “Of	 course	you	did,”

she	said.	“I	really	need	a	bath.”

     He	pushed	a	lock	 of	 Scarlet’s	dirty	 hair	away	 from	her	 cheek,	following	 the

gesture	with	his	 eyes,	still	 beaming.	He	ran	a	 thumb	across	her	shoulder,	down

her	arm,	and	lifted	  her	hand—the	one	 with	 the	bandaged	finger.	 A	 moment	of

fury	dulled	 his	smile,	but	it	 was	brief,	and	then	he	was	examining	her	face	again.

“Scarlet,”	he	whispered.	“Scarlet.”

     With	 a	sob,	she	settled	her	head	into	the	crook	of	his	neck.	“If	 this	 is	a	Lunar

trick,	I	 am	going	to	be	furious.”

296
     A	 thumb	brushed	against	her	ear.	“You	called	them	swine.”

     Her	brow	 furrowed.	“What?”

     Wolf	  pulled	back	 and	cupped	her	 face	in	 his	gigantic	 hands,	still	 beaming.

“In	 the	tavern	in	Rieux,	 when	all	 those	men	were	making	 jokes	about	Cinder	 at

the	ball.	You	called	them	swine	and	you	got	 up	on	the	bar	and	defended	her	even

though	she	was	 Lunar,	and	 that	was	 the	moment	 I	started	 to	fall	 in	 love	 with

you.”

     Heat	rushed	into	her	cheeks.	“Why	are	you…?”

     “No	 Lunar	 would	know	 that.”	His	 grin	 turned	impish.	“So	 I	can’t	 be	a	Lunar

trick.”

     Her	 lips	  parted	 in	 understanding,	 and	 another	sniff	  turned	 into	  a	laugh.

“You’re	  right.”	  She	 thought	 back,	 to	 a	time	  before	she	 knew	 about	 mutant

soldiers	and	 missing	 Lunar	  princesses.	“When	  you	 came	to	 the	 farm	  and	I

thought	I	would	 have	to	shoot	you.	You	 told	me	to	aim	 for	the	torso	because	it’s

a	bigger	target,	then	laughed	 when	I	 said	your	head	looked	 big	enough	to	 me.”

She	dug	her	fingers	into	his	shirt.	“That’s	 when	I…”

     He	kissed	her	again,	molding	their	 bodies	together.

     A	  high-pitched	  whistle	 sounded	 over	 the	  clattering	 rocks,	  startling	 her.

Pulling	 away,	 she	saw	Cinder	 and	 Thorne—the	 source	of	 the	 whistle—along

with	 a	dark-skinned	 girl	  with	 blue	 hair	 who	 had	 her	hands	 pressed	dreamily

against	her	cheeks.

     It	 was	 such	 a	 welcome	 sight,	 Scarlet	started	 crying	  again.	Disentangling

herself	from	Wolf’s	  arms,	she	hobbled	to	her	feet.	He	was	quick	 to	join	her,	one

arm	encircling	her	shoulders.	“I	 can’t	believe	it.	 You’re	here.	On	Luna.”

     “We’re	  here,”	agreed	Thorne.	 “And	 if	  you’d	 bothered	to	 RSVP,	we	 would

297
have	brought	you	 a	snack.”	His	 eyes	skimmed	down	 her	body.	 “When	 was	the

last	time	you	ate?”

     Scarlet	 glanced	  down.	 Her	  clothes	 hung	  from	  her	 bones,	 her	 muscles

withered	to	almost	nothing	in	 the	tiny	cage.	Still,	he	didn’t	 need	to	point	it	out.

     “You	 look	 lovely,”	 said	the	blue-haired	girl.	 “A	 little	 rough	around	the	edges,

but	it	adds	character.”

     “Um,	  thanks,”	 said	Scarlet,	 swiping	 the	 tears	from	  her	cheeks.	“And	  you

are…?”

     The	 girl	 bounced	on	 her	 toes.	“It’s	  me,	Iko!	  The	captain	 found	 me	a	 real

body.”

     Scarlet’s	eyebrows	jotted	upward.	This	 was	Iko?	Their	spaceship?

     Before	she	could	reply,	a	sweet	singing	voice	floated	 through	the	alley.

     “The	 parakeets	 sing	 ta-weet-a-weet-a-weet,	 and	 the	 stars	 twinkle	  all	 the

night…”

     Four	pairs	 of	eyes	swiveled	toward	 the	cart	that	was	now	full	  of	shimmering

white	rock,	 though	the	shaft	 from	 the	building	 had	fallen	 silent.	At	 some	point,

Winter	 had	crawled	 behind	it,	 wedging	 herself	 between	the	 cart	and	 the	wall.

Scarlet	could	see	the	top	of	the	red	hood	pulled	over	Winter’s	hair.

     “And	 the	monkeys	frolic	a-eet-eet-eet,	while	the	rockets	fly	on	by…”

     Cinder	 approached	the	cart	with	 her	brow	 drawn	and	rolled	 it	 away.	Winter

was	curled	 up	on	 her	side,	 facing	 the	wall	 and	 drawing	 little	 designs	into	 the

dust.	The	tablecloth	had	fallen	open,	revealing	her	blood-covered	skirt.

     “And	  the	 Earth	  is	  full	  tonight,	  tonight,	  and	 the	  wolves	 all	  howl,	  aa-

ooooooooooh…”

     The	dainty	howl	 faded	away.

298
     Scarlet	could	 feel	 everyone’s	 curious	gazes	switching	 between	 her	and	the

princess.	She	cleared	her	throat.	“She’s	harmless,”	she	said.	“I’m	pretty	sure.”

     Winter	 rolled	onto	her	back	so	she	was	staring	at	Cinder	upside-down.

     Cinder’s	 eyes	widened.	The	others	crept	forward.

     After	 three	slow	 blinks,	 Winter	 rolled	 onto	 her	stomach	and	pushed	herself

up	to	 her	knees.	She	 turned	down	 the	 hood,	letting	 her	 thick	 hair	 tumble	 out

around	her	shoulders.	“Hello.”

     Scarlet	started	laughing	 again.	She	remembered	what	 it	 was	like	 seeing	the

princess	for	 the	first	 time.	 Her	 full	  lips,	 delicate	shoulders,	huge	 eyes	flecked

with	 shavings	of	 gray,	all	 paired	 with	 the	unexpected	scars	on	her	 right	 cheek

that	should	have	made	her	less	stunning	but	didn’t.

     It	 occurred	 to	 Scarlet	that	 Wolf	  hadn’t	 seemed	to	 notice.	 She	felt	 a	 little

twinge	of	pride.

     “Stars,”	 whispered	Iko.	“You’re	  beautiful.”

     A	 loud	  click	 echoed	 through	 the	 alley.	 “Drop	  your	 glamour,”	  demanded

Thorne,	aiming	a	gun	at	the	princess.

     Scarlet’s	pulse	 hiccuped.	“Wait—”	  she	started,	but	Cinder	 had	already	put	a

hand	on	his	wrist	and	was	pressing	the	gun	back	down.

     “It’s	 not	a	glamour,”	 she	said.

     “Really?”	 Thorne	leaned	toward	Cinder	 and	whispered,	“Are	you	sure?”

     “I’m	  sure.”

     This	 statement	was	followed	  by	 another	long,	 heady	silence,	during	 which

Winter	passed	her	sweetest	smile	between	each	of	them.

     Thorne	clicked	 the	safety	on	and	shoved	the	gun	 back	into	its	 holster.	“Holy

spades,	you	Lunars	have	good	 genes.”	An	 awkward	 pause	followed,	 before	he

299
added,	“Who	is	she?”

     “This	 is	Winter,”	 said	Scarlet.	“Princess	Winter.”

     Thorne	 guffawed	  and	 pushed	 a	 hand	 into	 his	 hair.	  “Are	  we	 running	  a

boardinghouse	for	misplaced	royalty	around	here,	or	what?”

     “Princess	  Winter?”	  said	  Cinder.	  “They	  just	  announced	 that	 you	  were

murdered.”

     “Jacin	faked	the	murder,”	 said	Scarlet,	“and	helped	us	escape.”

     Cinder’s	 eyes	flashed	toward	her,	surprised.	“Jacin?”

     Scarlet	nodded.	“The	guard	who	attacked	us	aboard	the	Rampion.”

     A	 shadow	fell	over	Cinder’s	 expression.	She	looked	away.

     “She’s	 just	so	pretty.”	Iko	 sighed,	feeling	her	own	face	for	comparison.

     Scarlet	glared.	“She	can	hear.”

     Cocking	 her	head,	Winter	 held	out	a	hand	toward	 Thorne.	His	eyes	widened

and	it	seemed	an	automatic	response	to	help	her	to	her	feet.

     He	 was	blushing	 when	 Winter	 took	 her	hand	 away	and	 adjusted	her	skirt.

“You	 are	all	very	kind,”	 she	said,	but	it	 was	Cinder	that	her	attention	had	landed

on.	She	studied	the	cyborg,	 curious.	Cinder	 scrunched	her	shoulders	in	 tight	 to

her	body.	“And	 you,”	said	Winter,	 “are	my	long-lost	 cousin	and	very	dear	friend.

I	could	 not	believe	it	 until	 now,	 but	it	 is	true.”	 Winter	 took	Cinder’s	 hands	into

hers.	“Do	you	remember	me?”

     Cinder	slowly	 shook	her	head.

     “It’s	 all	 right,”	 said	Winter,	 and	her	expression	said	that	it	was	all	 right.	“My

memories	are	hazy	too,	and	I’m	a	year	older.	Still,	 I	hope	we	can	be	good	friends

again.”	She	interlaced	their	 fingers.	 “This	 hand	is	unusual,”	 she	said,	lifting	 the

titanium-plated	one.	“Is	 it	made	of	ashes?”

300
     “Is	it	made	…	I’m	sorry,	what?”

     “Don’t,”	 said	Scarlet,	waving	a	hand.	“I	find	it’s	better	if	you	don’t	ask.”

     The	princess	grinned	again.	“Forgive	me.	You	are	no	longer	only	my	friend

or	my	cousin,	and	this	is	 no	way	to	 greet	you.”	She	dropped	into	a	dancer’s

curtsy	and	placed	a	kiss	on	Cinder’s	metal	knuckle.	“My	Queen,	it	is	my	honor

to	serve	you.”

     “Er—thank	you?”	Cinder	pried	her	hand	away	and	hid	it	behind	her	back.

“That’s	kind,	but	you	don’t	have	to	do	that.	Again.	Ever.”

     Thorne	cleared	his	throat.	“We	need	to	get	back	to	the	house.	We’ve	already

risked	drawing	enough	attention,	and	she…”	He	looked	at	Winter.	There	was	an

edge	to	his	expression,	like	he	didn’t	trust	anyone	who	was	more	attractive	than

he	was.	“…	will	definitely	draw	attention.”

301
	




                                           Thirty-Three







Wolf	 helped	Scarlet	clean	and	bandage	her	wounded	finger	without	asking	her	to

tell	 him	 what,	exactly,	 had	happened.	Though	 his	 expression	had	said	he	 was

ready	to	tear	out	Queen	Levana’s	jugular,	his	hands	had	been	breathlessly	gentle.

Afterward,	 Scarlet	 insisted	she	 be	given	 time	 to	 bathe,	and	 though	Wolf	  had

looked	borderline	devastated,	the	time	apart	was	worthwhile.	The	tiny	 washroom

in	his	childhood	 home	was	by	no	 means	luxurious,	but	it	 was	a	far	cry	 from	 the

trough	she’d	 had	in	the	 menagerie,	and	she	felt	 brand-new	when	 she	emerged.

She	and	Winter	  were	given	 new	 clothes	 out	 of	 Maha	 Kesley’s	 meager	stash

while	theirs	were	washed,	though	Scarlet	was	already	anxious	to	have	her	hoodie

back.	It	had	become	her	own	personal	armor.

     “I	 can’t	 believe	 you	kidnapped	 Prince	Kai,”	  she	said,	untacking	 the	curtain

on	the	 front	 window	  to	 peek	outside.	 Blue	 daisies	 in	 a	window	  box	 were	 a

solitary	spot	of	color.

     “Emperor	 Kai,”	 Wolf	 corrected.	He	was	leaning	against	the	wall,	 holding	 the

hem	of	her	shirt	in	his	fingers.	 Winter	was	taking	her	turn	 in	the	washroom	while

the	others	had	crowded	into	 the	kitchen,	 trying	 to	 cobble	together	enough	food

for	everyone.	Scarlet	had	heard	someone	mention	rations,	and	it	 occurred	to	her

302
that	this	 tiny	  household	wasn’t	 meant	 to	 support	guests,	 especially	so	 many.

Wolf’s	 mom	would	 be	back	soon	from	collecting	that	week’s	 supply	of	food,	 but

of	course,	that	was	meant	for	only	one	woman.

     Scarlet	 tried	 to	imagine	 what	 this	 must	 be	like	 for	  Wolf.	 To	 return	 home

more	than	a	decade	after	being	 taken	away,	a	grown	 man	with	  scars	and	fangs

and	the	blood	of	countless	victims	on	his	hands.

     And	 now	…	with	 a	girl.

     Scarlet	 was	 trying	 not	 to	 think	  about	meeting	 his	 mother—it	  all	 felt	  too

strange.

     “Emperor,	  right.”	  She	 retacked	 the	 curtain.	  “That’s	  weird	  to	 say,	 after

eighteen	years	of	listening	to	 celebrity	gossip	feeds	go	on	 and	on	about	‘Earth’s

favorite	prince.’”	  She	claimed	one	 of	the	lumpy	 sofa	cushions,	 curling	 her	legs

beneath	her.	“I	had	a	picture	of	him	 taped	to	my	wall	 when	I	was	fifteen.	 Grand-

mère	cut	it	off	a	cereal	box.”

     Wolf	 scowled.

     “Of	 course,	half	 the	 girls	in	 the	world	  probably	had	that	 same	picture	from

that	same	cereal	box.”

     Wolf	 scrunched	his	 shoulders	against	his	neck,	and	Scarlet	grinned,	 teasing.

“Oh,	 no.	You’re	  not	going	 to	 have	to	 fight	 him	 for	 pack	dominance	 now,	 are

you?	Come	here.”	She	beckoned	him	with	 a	wave	of	her	hand	and	he	was	at	her

side	in	half	a	second,	the	glower	softening	as	he	pulled	her	against	his	chest.

     His	  brazenness	was	  new—so	  different	  from	  the	 shyness	 she’d	  grown

accustomed	to.	On	the	Rampion,	Wolf	 was	always	pattering	around	his	feelings,

like	he	didn’t	 want	to	risk	the	tentative	trust	they’d	 started	to	rebuild	since	Paris.

     Now,	 when	he	kissed	her	or	put	his	 arms	around	her,	Scarlet	felt	like	 he	was

303
staking	 a	 claim.	  Which	  normally	  would	  have	 sent	 her	  on	 a	 tirade	  about

relationship	 independence,	except	she	felt	 like	 she’d	 claimed	 him	a	 long	 time

ago.	The	moment	she’d	 expected	him	to	 choose	her	over	his	pack,	 the	moment

she’d	dragged	him	 aboard	that	ship	 and	taken	him	 away	 from	 everything	 he’d

ever	known,	she’d	 made	the	decision	for	 them	both.	He	 was	hers	now,	just	like

she	was	his.

     Except	 she	wondered	if	 everything	 had	changed	between	them,	once	again.

She’d	figured	 he	would	come	back	 to	the	farm	 with	 her	when	all	 this	was	over,

but	now	 he’d	been	reunited	 with	 his	mom,	 the	only	 family	  he	had	left.	 Scarlet

could	no	longer	 assume	she	was	the	most	important	thing	to	him,	 and	she	knew

it	wouldn’t	  be	fair	 to	ask	 him	to	 choose	between	her	and	the	family	  he’d	 been

taken	away	from.	Not	now,	and	maybe	not	ever.

     In	 the	 kitchen,	 a	cupboard	slammed,	 saving	 her	from	 thoughts	 she	wasn’t

ready	 for.	  Not	 when	  she’d	 just	  found	  him	  again.	 She	 heard	 Thorne	  say

something	about	freeze-dried	cardboard	and	Iko	accuse	him	of	 being	insensitive

to	those	without	any	taste	buds	at	all.

     Scarlet	 nestled	her	head	 against	Wolf’s	  shoulder.	“I	  was	so	 worried	 about

you.”

     “You	 were	worried?”	  Wolf	 angled	her	 away	from	 him.	 “Scarlet—they	 took

you,	and	I	 couldn’t	 do	 anything	about	it.	 I	 didn’t	 know	 if	 you	 were	dead,	or	if

they	were…”	 He	 shuddered.	“I	 would	 have	killed	  every	one	of	 them	 to	get	 to

you.	I	would	 have	done	anything	to	get	you	back.	Knowing	 that	we	were	coming

here	was	the	only	 thing	 that	 kept	me	 sane.”	His	 brow	 creased.	“Though	 there

were	a	couple	times	when	I	went	a	little	insane	anyway.”

     Scarlet	nudged	him	 with	 her	elbow.	 “That	 shouldn’t	 sound	as	romantic	as	it

304
does.”

     “Dinner	  is	served,”	 said	Thorne,	 coming	 out	of	 the	 kitchen	with	  a	plate	in

each	hand.	“And	 by	 dinner,	 I	 mean	soggy	brown	 rice	 and	oversalted	 meat	on

stale	crackers.	You	Lunars	sure	know	how	to	live	it	 up.”

     “We	 were	trying	 to	only	take	things	from	 the	pantry,”	 said	Cinder,	as	she	and

Iko	 filed	  into	  the	 front	  room,	  though	 there	 was	 hardly	  enough	 space	 for

everyone.	“There	isn’t	 much	in	the	way	 of	fresh	food,	 and	Maha’s	already	given

us	enough.”

     Scarlet	 glanced	at	 Wolf.	  “I	 assumed	you’d	  never	had	 tomatoes	or	 carrots

before	because	those	things	couldn’t	 be	grown	 here	on	Luna,	but	 that’s	 not	the

case,	is	it?	They	just	don’t	ship	them	to	the	outer	sectors.”

     He	 shrugged,	without	 a	hint	 of	 self-pity.	 “I	  don’t	 know	 what	 they	can	and

can’t	grow	 in	 the	agriculture	 sectors.	Whatever	it	 is,	 I’m	 sure	it	 can’t	 compete

with	 Benoit	 Farms	and	Gardens.”	 His	 eyes	twinkled,	 and	Scarlet—to	 her	 own

surprise—started	to	blush	again.

     “You	 two	are	giving	 me	a	stomachache,”	Thorne	griped.

     “I’m	   pretty	 sure	 that’s	 the	 meat,”	 said	 Cinder,	  ripping	 a	 piece	 of	 dried

mystery	meat	with	her	teeth.

     The	food	wasn’t	 appetizing,	but	it	 was	no	worse	than	what	she’d	gotten	in	the

menagerie,	and	Scarlet	ate	her	small	share	with	relish.	Winter	 emerged	from	 the

washroom,	her	dark	 ringlets	 still	 dripping	 and	the	 too-short	pants	and	 ill-fitted

blouse	doing	 nothing	 to	 lessen	her	beauty.	A	  hush	fell	 over	 the	group	 as	she

joined	them,	kneeling	 on	the	floor	 around	the	small	 table	and	scanning	the	food

with	sad,	distant	eyes.

     Scarlet	spoke	first,	pushing	 a	couple	of	crackers	across	the	table.	“I	know	 it’s

305
not	what	you’re	used	to,”	she	said,	“but	you	 have	to	eat	something.”

     Offense	 flashed	across	Winter’s	  face.	“I’m	  not	 particular.”	  Her	 expression

softened	as	she	stared	at	the	crackers.	“I	just	hadn’t	realized	how	 much	I’d	 been

given.	I	 knew	 conditions	 were	bad	in	 the	outer	 sectors,	but	not	 as	bad	as	this.

Others	have	gone	hungry	so	my	stomach	might	be	full	 each	night.”	 Sighing,	 she

sat	back	on	her	heels	and	folded	her	hands	in	her	lap.	“I’m	  not	hungry,	 anyway.

Someone	else	can	have	mine.”

     “Winter—”

     “I’m	  not	 hungry.”	 Her	 voice	 was	sterner	than	 Scarlet	had	ever	 heard	it.	 “I

couldn’t	eat	it	if	 I	tried.”

     Scarlet	frowned,	but	 let	it	go.	Wolf	 eventually	 ate	the	crackers,	looking	guilty

about	it.

     “You	 said	Jacin	told	 you	where	to	find	 us?”	said	Cinder.	 Her	shoulders	were

tense,	and	it	 had	been	clear	 from	 the	moment	 Scarlet	had	 explained	what	 she

could	about	their	escape	that	Jacin	wasn’t	popular	with	 her	friends.	“How	 did	 he

know?”

     “I	 would	 imagine,”	said	Winter,	 “that	your	 miniature	friend	 told	him.”

     “Our	 miniature	friend?”	 asked	Cinder.

     Winter	 nodded.	“Cress,	isn’t	it?”

     Silence	expanded	over	them,	drawing	all	the	oxygen	from	 the	room.

     Thorne	leaned	forward	first.	 “Cress?	You’ve	 seen	Cress?”

     “I	 haven’t	seen	her	in	days,	but	Jacin	was	keeping	her	safe.”

     “Oh!	 That	 reminds	me.”	 Scarlet	dug	out	the	 small	cylinder.	 “Jacin	 gave	this

to	me	 and	said	 it	 had	a	 message	from	 a	friend	 in	 it.	  Maybe	he	 meant	her—

Cress?”

306
     Thorne	  snatched	it	  away	 before	  she’d	 finished	  talking	  and	 flipped	  the

cylinder	over	in	 his	palm.	“What	 is	it?	How	do	we	work	 it?”

     Cinder	 grabbed	it	away	from	 him	 and	inserted	it	 into	the	holograph	 node	on

the	wall.	A	holograph	 flickered	to	life	 in	the	center	of	the	room.

     Scarlet	wouldn’t	  have	recognized	 the	queen’s	hacker,	having	 only	 seen	her

once	through	a	comm	link.	  The	girl’s	 long,	 unruly	 hair	had	been	chopped	short

and	her	skin,	though	still	pale,	had	at	least	seen	the	sun	in	the	recent	past.

     Thorne	 launched	himself	 from	 his	 seat,	circling	 the	room	 to	 put	himself	 in

front	of	the	holograph	as	she	began	to	speak.

     “Hello,	  everyone.	 If	 you’re	 seeing	 this,	 our	 good	friends	 from	  the	palace

must	have	found	you.	I	wish	I	 could	have	joined	them.	My	 current	guardian	gave

me	the	option	 of	leaving,	 but	 I	had	to	 stay	behind	to	 assist	with	 their	 travels.	I

know	you’ll	  understand.	I	 wanted	you	 to	 know	 I’m	 all	 right,	 though.	 I’m	 safe

and	unhurt,	and	I	 know	 you’ll	  come	for	 me.	When	you	 do,	I’ll	  be	ready.	Until

then,	I	 promise	 to	 be	careful	 and	stay	 hidden.”	 She	 paused.	A	 fleeting	 smile

crossed	her	lips,	like	proof	of	 her	courage,	though	her	eyes	stayed	anxious.	After

a	deep	breath,	she	continued,	 “My	 absence	has	probably	 changed	some	things

for	you,	 and	I	know	 you	 were	relying	 on	me	for	 help	 with	 some	of	your	 plans.

I’ve	 built	 a	program	into	 this	 file.	 Insert	this	 cylinder	 into	 the	universal	port	 in

the	dome’s	broadcast	receiver	and	follow	the	prompts	I’ve	 set	up	for	you.	On	 the

chance	this	could	fall	 into	 the	wrong	hands,	I	 have	locked	the	program	with	 the

same	passcode	we	used	on	the	ship.”	Her	lashes	dipped,	and	there	was	that	weak

smile	again.	 “I	  hope	this	 message	reaches	you	safely.	 I	 …	 I	 miss	 you.”	 She

opened	her	mouth	to	 say	more,	but	 hesitated	and	shut	it	 again.	A	 second	later,

the	message	ended.

307
     They	stared	at	the	empty	 air	where	Cress	had	been.	Scarlet	fidgeted	with	 her

hoodie’s	zipper,	 knowing	 for	 sure	now	that	 the	girl	 had	been	the	one	watching

over	her	and	Winter	 during	their	 escape.	She	had	saved	them,	and	sacrificed	her

own	safety	to	do	it.

     “Brave,	 stupid	 girl,”	  Thorne	muttered.	He	 sank	back	down	 to	 the	floor,	 his

expression	torn	between	relief	and	increased	distress.

     “She’s	 still	 with	 Jacin,	then,”	 said	Cinder.	“I	 guess	…	 I’m	 grateful	 for	what

he’s	done,	but	…	 I	 don’t	 like	 him	knowing	 where	 we	are,	or	 being	responsible

for	Cress.	I	don’t	trust	him.”

     Winter	 stared	at	her,	aghast.	“Jacin	is	a	good	 person.	He	would	never	betray

you,	or	Cress.”

     “Too	 late,”	said	Thorne.	“He	 already	did	once.”

     Winter	 laced	her	fingers	together.	“He	 regrets	betraying	you.	It	was	never	his

intention.	He	only	 …	he	had	to	come	back	to	Luna.	For	me.”

     Iko	 made	a	noise	that	was	 probably	meant	to	 be	a	snort.	Scarlet	 cocked	her

head	to	inspect	the	android.	What	had	been	endearing	tics	when	she	had	been	the

Rampion’s	control	system	were	a	little	 disconcerting	in	her	humanoid	body.

     “It’s	  true,”	 Winter	 insisted,	her	 eyes	crinkling	 at	 the	corners.	“I	  understand

why	you	 don’t	 trust	him,	 but	he’s	 trying	 to	make	amends.	He	wants	to	 see	you

back	on	your	throne	as	much	as	anyone.”

     “He	 did	  save	my	 life,”	  added	Scarlet.	 Then,	 after	 a	pause,	she	shrugged.

“Probably	just	 because	he	needed	me	to	save	her	life,	but	still,	it	has	to	count	for

something.”

     Thorne	crossed	his	arms	and	said	 grudgingly,	 “I	 wish	he	would	 have	tried	 a

little	harder	to	send	Cress	with	you.”

308
     “At	least	we	know	she’s	alive,”	said	Cinder.

     Thorne	grunted.	“All	  we	know	 is	 she’s	still	 in	 Artemisia	and	under	the

protection	of	a	guy	who	betrayed	us	once.	The	princess	thinks	he’s	on	our	side?

Fine.	But	that	doesn’t	change	the	fact	he	sold	us	out	in	New	Beijing,	and	I	don’t

doubt	he’ll	do	it	again	if	it	means	saving	his	own	skin.”

     “On	the	contrary,	he	cares	very	little	for	his	own	skin.”	Winter’s	voice	was

sharp,	her	shoulders	trembling.	“It	is	my	safety	alone	that	he	cares	about,	and	I

will	never	be	safe	again	so	long	as	my	stepmother	is	the	queen.”	She	turned	to

Cinder.	“I	believe	he	will	 do	anything	he	can	to	help	your	revolution	succeed.

We	both	will.”

     A	long	silence	was	followed	by	Thorne	grumbling,	“I	still	plan	on	punching

him	if	I	ever	see	him	again.”

     Scarlet	rolled	her	eyes.

     Cinder	tapped	her	fingers	against	the	table.	“I	don’t	understand	why	Levana

tried	to	have	you	killed	now.	She	has	Kai.	She’s	getting	what	she	wants.”

     “I	 believe	she’s	afraid	of	losing	her	grip	on	Luna,”	said	Winter,	“especially

with	the	rumors	that	our	true	queen	is	still	alive.	She’s	become	paranoid,	afraid

of	every	potential	threat.”

     Cinder	shook	her	head.	“But	you’re	not	her	real	daughter.	Isn’t	there	some

superstition	about	bloodlines?”

     “Yes.	Only	a	person	of	royal	blood	can	sit	on	Luna’s	throne.	It	is	believed

that	should	a	person	of	nonroyal	blood	ascend	to	the	throne,	the	gift	bestowed

upon	our	people	will	cease	to	exist.	There	have	been	countless	studies	proving

this.”

     Scarlet	laughed.	“Let	 me	guess—the	studies	were	paid	for	 by	the	 royal

309
family.”

     “Does	 it	 matter?”	 said	 Winter.	 “Whether	  the	people	 believe	it	  or	not,	 my

stepmother	is	frightened.	She’s	desperate	to	maintain	her	power.	That	is	why	she

tried	to	kill	 me.”

     “Good,”	  said	 Cinder.	“People	 make	 mistakes	when	 they’re	 desperate,	and

trying	to	kill	 you	 could	be	a	big	one.”	She	leaned	back	on	her	hands.	“From	what

I	can	tell,	the	people	adore	you.	If	they	knew	 Levana	tried	to	have	you	murdered,

it	could	 be	just	the	thing	 to	persuade	them	to	 choose	me	over	her.	Listen,	 Your

Highness—we	have	a	video.	 If	 Cress’s	program	works,	 we’ll	  be	able	to	play	 it

across	all	outer	sectors.	It	will	 tell	 the	people	who	I	 am	and	ask	them	to	join	 me

in	ending	Levana’s	reign.”	 She	inhaled.	“I’d	  like	to	include	 a	message	from	you,

to	show	the	people	 you’re	alive	 and	tell	 them	Levana	 was	the	one	who	 tried	to

have	you	killed.	Having	 your	support	would	 mean	a	lot.	To	them,	and	to	me.”

     Winter	 held	 her	gaze	for	 a	long	 time,	 considering,	 before	she	sighed.	 “I’m

sorry,	but	I	can’t.	Levana	would	 find	 out,	and	she	can’t	know	I’m	 alive.”

     “Why	 not?”	 said	Scarlet.	“The	 people	care	about	you.	They	deserve	to	know

the	truth.”

     “Jacin	was	ordered	to	kill	 me,”	 said	Winter,	her	voice	 growing	weak,	“and	 he

went	through	a	lot	of	trouble	 to	make	it	look	 like	he	succeeded.	I	won’t	endanger

him	by	announcing	the	truth.	 The	longer	she	goes	on	believing	that	Jacin	is	loyal

to	her,	the	 safer	he’ll	 be.”	 She	looked	 up	again.	“The	 safer	 your	Cress	will	  be

too.”

     Thorne	looked	away.

     “I’m	  sorry	that	 I	can’t	 help	 you	with	 this.	 For	what	 it’s	 worth,	you	 do	have

my	support,	even	if	 it	 must	be	a	secret.”	 Winter	 slumped.	Scarlet	could	 see	her

310
withdrawing	 into	 herself	 and	her	 worries	 over	 Jacin’s	 safety.	She	wished	 she

could	offer	 some	comfort,	but	she	had	spent	enough	time	under	Levana’s	thumb

to	know	there	was	nothing	she	could	say	that	would	make	Winter	feel	 any	better.

     “All	   right,”	  Cinder	 conceded.	“I	  understand.	We’ll	  just	 have	 to	 hope	the

video	succeeds	without	you.”

     The	front	 door	 opened	and	they	all	started.	Scarlet	spun	around	as	a	woman

shut	the	door	behind	 her.	She	wore	 coveralls	dusted	with	 regolith	 particles	and

was	carrying	 a	worn	 wooden	 box	 full	 of	 food.	 She	had	 Wolf’s	  dark	hair	 and

olive-toned	skin,	 but	she	also	had	the	bone	structure	of	 a	bird.	 Wolf	 could	have

crushed	her	with	his	fingertips.

     Scarlet	felt	weird	 for	having	 such	a	thought.

     Everyone	relaxed.	 Everyone	but	Scarlet	and	Wolf,	 whose	arm	 turned	to	iron

around	her.

     Leaning	 against	 the	door,	 Maha	 surveyed	the	 room	 with	  a	fluttery	  smile.

“They	 were	 giving	  out	  sugar,”	 she	 chirped,	 “in	  celebration	 of	  the	 queen’s

upcoming…”	  She	 trailed	  off,	 noticing	  Scarlet	 with	  Wolf’s	   arm	 across	 her

shoulders.

     Winter	 stood	 up,	drawing	 Maha’s	 surprise	to	 her.	Scarlet	 scrambled	to	 her

feet,	but	Maha’s	attention	was	caught	on	the	princess	now.	Her	jaw	had	fallen.

     Winter	 curtsied.	“You	  must	be	Mother	 Kesley.	I	 am	Princess	Winter	 Hayle-

Blackburn,	and	I’m	 frightfully	  sorry	about	the	crackers.”

     Maha	stared,	speechless.

     “I	  hope	you	 don’t	 mind	 our	intrusion	 into	 your	 hospitality.	  Your	 wolf	 cub

welcomed	 us.	 He’s	 surprisingly	  tender,	 given	 the	 teeth.	 And	  the	 muscles.”

Winter	 raised	 her	 eyes	to	 the	 chipping	  plaster	 around	 the	 door.	 “He	 rather

311
reminds	me	of	another	wolf	I	 once	knew.”

     Scarlet	grimaced.

     “Your	 …	 Your	 Highness,”	 stammered	Maha,	looking	 like	she	wasn’t	 sure	if

she	should	be	afraid	or	honored.

     “Mom,”	  said	 Wolf,	 “this	 is	 Scarlet.	She’s	 the	one	we	 told	 you	about—that

was	taken	 off	 our	 ship	 by	 the	 thaumaturge.	She’d	 been	held	 prisoner	 in	 the

palace,	but	she’s	…	she	escaped.	This	is	her.	This	is	Scarlet.”

     Maha	had	not	yet	managed	to	pull	up	her	jaw.	“The	 Earthen.”

     Scarlet	nodded.	 “Mostly.	  My	 grandfather	 was	Lunar,	 but	I	 never	 met	him.

And	I	have	no	…	um,	gift.”

     With	 that	 statement,	it	occurred	 to	Scarlet	that	 Maha	probably	 did	 have	the

gift.	They	 all	did	 to	some	degree,	didn’t	 they?	Even	Wolf	 had	had	it,	 before	the

scientific	tampering	took	 it	away.

     But	 it	 was	 impossible	to	 imagine	 this	 petite	 woman	abusing	 it	 like	 it	 was

abused	in	the	capital.	 Was	that	naïve?	How	 hard	it	 must	be	to	 navigate	society

here,	never	knowing	who	was	controlling	 and	who	was	being	controlled.

     “Hello,	  Scarlet,”	  said	 Maha,	 composing	 herself	 enough	 to	 smile.	 “Ze’ev

failed	to	mention	he	was	in	love	with	 you.”

     Scarlet	could	feel	her	cheeks	turning	as	red	as	her	hair.

     Thorne	muttered,	“How	 could	you	 not	tell?”

     Cinder	kicked	 him.

     Wolf	 gripped	Scarlet’s	 hand.	“We	didn’t	 know	 if	she	was	alive.	I	 didn’t	 want

to	tell	you	about	her	if	 …	if	 you	never	met	her…”

     Scarlet	squeezed	his	hand.	He	squeezed	back.

     In	 the	back	of	her	head,	she	heard	her	grandma’s	voice,	reminding	her	of	 her

312
manners.	“I’m	 so	pleased	to	meet	you.	I	…	um.	Thank	you	for	your	hospitality.”

     Maha	set	the	box	of	 rations	by	the	door	 and	crossed	the	tiny	room,	wrapping

Scarlet	up	in	a	hug.	 “I	 look	forward	 to	 getting	to	know	 you.”	 Releasing	Scarlet,

she	turned	back	to	Wolf	and	settled	her	hands	on	his	shoulders.	“When	they	took

you	away,	I	 feared	you	would	 never	 know	love	 at	all.”	 She	embraced	him,	 and

her	smile	was	as	bright	as	a	bouquet	of	blue	daisies.	“This	 has	all	been	so	much.

So	very	much.”

     “Are	  we	 almost	 done	 with	  the	gushing	 and	 the	 weeping?”	  said	Thorne,

massaging	his	temple.	“When	do	we	start	planning	a	revolution	again?”

     This	time,	 it	was	Iko	that	kicked	 him.

     “I	 knew	 you	 were	in	 love	with	 him.”	  Winter	 tapped	her	fingers	 against	her

elbow.	“I	 can’t	understand	why	no	one	ever	listens	to	me.”

     Scarlet	glared,	 but	 there	was	no	 ire	behind	 it.	 “You’re	  right,	 Winter.	 It’s	 a

complete	mystery.”

313
	




                                         Thirty-Four







Linh	Pearl	stepped	off	the	elevator,	clutching	the	strings	of	her	purse	against	her

shoulder.	She	was	 shaking—livid	 with	 rage.	Since	 Cinder	had	 made	that

spectacle	at	the	ball	and	been	revealed	to	be	not	only	an	insane	cyborg	but	an

even	more	insane	Lunar,	Pearl’s	world	had	crumbled	around	her.

     At	first	it	 had	been	minor	inconveniences—annoying,	but	tolerable.	With	no

servant	cyborg	and	no	money	to	hire	new	help,	Pearl	was	now	expected	to	help

around	the	apartment.	Suddenly	she	had	“chores.”	Suddenly	her	mother	wanted

her	to	help	with	the	shopping	and	to	cook	her	own	meals	and	even	do	the	dishes

when	she’d	finished,	even	though	it	had	been	her	stupid	decision	to	sell	off	their

only	functioning	android.

     But	that	she	could	have	lived	with,	if	 her	social	life	hadn’t	simultaneously

splintered	along	with	her	dignity.	Overnight,	she	had	become	a	pariah.

     Her	friends	had	dealt	with	 it	 well	 enough	at	first.	 Filled	 with	 shock	and

sympathy,	they	flocked	around	Pearl	like	she	was	a	celebrity,	wanting	to	know

everything.	Wanting	 to	 offer	 their	 condolences,	knowing	that	 her	adopted

stepsister	had	been	such	a	terror.	Wanting	to	hear	every	horrific	story	of	their

childhood.	Like	a	girl	who’d	barely	escaped	death,	she	had	been	the	center	of	all

314
their	conversations,	all	their	curiosity.

     That	had	dwindled,	 though,	 when	Cinder	escaped	from	 prison	and	remained

at	large	 for	 too	long.	 Her	 name	became	 synonymous	with	 traitors	 and	 it	 was

dragging	Pearl	down	with	it.

     Then	 her	mother—her	 ignorant	 fool	 of	 a	 mother—had	 unknowingly	  aided

Cinder	 in	  the	  kidnapping	  of	  Emperor	  Kai	  by	  giving	   her	 their	  wedding

invitations.

     She’d	traded	them	for	napkins.	Napkins.

     And	 it	 had	baffled	her.	Hours	 before	they	were	 to	attend	the	royal	 wedding,

already	 dressed	 in	 their	  finest,	  her	 mother	  had	 torn	  the	 apartment	 apart,

frantically	 digging	 through	 every	 drawer,	crawling	  on	her	 hands	and	knees	to

peer	beneath	the	furniture,	searching	every	pocket	in	 her	wardrobe.	Cursing	and

swearing	over	and	over	that	she’d	 had	them,	she’d	seen	them	just	that	 morning,

when	that	awkward	woman	 from	the	palace	had	brought	them	and	explained	the

mishap	and	where	could	they	have	gone?

     They	missed	the	wedding,	naturally.

     Pearl	had	screamed	and	cried	and	hidden	in	her	room	to	watch	the	newsfeeds

—the	 live	 footage	 that	had	 gone	 from	 talk	 of	 wedding	 traditions	  and	palace

décor	to	a	devastating	account	of	an	assault	on	the	palace	and	the	disappearance

of	Emperor	Kai.

     Linh	  Cinder	 was	behind	 it	 all.	  Her	 monstrous	stepsister,	once	 again,	 had

ruined	everything.

     It	 had	taken	two	days	for	the	palace’s	security	team	to	trace	the	invitations	 of

a	Bristol-dàren	(who	had	been	at	home	in	Canada,	enjoying	a	bottle	of	fine	wine)

back	to	the	actual	invitations	 that	had	been	given	to	Linh	 Adri	 and	her	daughter,

315
Linh	Pearl.	Only	 then	did	her	mother	 understand.	Cinder	had	made	her	out	to	be

an	idiot.

     That	had	been	the	last	straw	for	Pearl’s	friends.

     “Traitors,”	   Mei-Xing	  had	 called	 them,	 accusing	Pearl	 and	 her	 mother	 of

helping	the	cyborg	and	putting	Kai	 in	danger.

     Furious,	 Pearl	had	stormed	out,	 screaming	that	they	 could	believe	 whatever

they	wanted	for	 all	 she	cared.	She	was	the	victim	  in	 all	of	 this,	 and	she	didn’t

need	so-called	friends	to	throw	 these	accusations	at	her.	She	had	enough	to	deal

with	as	it	was.

     She’d	expected	them	to	chase	after	her,	apologies	in	tow.

     They	didn’t.

     She	walked	all	the	way	home	with	 her	fists	clenched	at	her	sides.

     Cinder.	 This	was	 all	Cinder’s	 fault.	 Ever	 since	Peony—no,	 ever	since	their

dad	had	 caught	 the	 plague	 and	been	 taken	 away	 from	 her.	 Everything	  was

Cinder’s	fault.

     Karim-jiĕ,	  their	neighbor	 in	 1816,	didn’t	 move	 aside	as	Pearl	barreled	past.

Her	shoulder	smacked	the	woman	against	the	wall	and	Pearl	paused	long	enough

to	glare	at	 her—was	the	 old	hog	 turning	 blind	 now,	 as	well	 as	lazy?—but	 she

was	met	with	a	haughty	snort.

     This	 reaction,	too,	was	one	Pearl	had	seen	too	often	since	the	ball.	 Who	was

this	woman	to	 look	down	 on	Pearl	and	her	mother?	She	was	nothing	 but	an	old

widow	 whose	husband	had	died	 from	 a	love	of	 drink,	 and	who	 now	 sat	in	 her

garbage-smelling	apartment	with	a	sad	collection	of	ceramic	monkeys.

     And	 she	thought	she	was	better	than	Pearl?

     The	whole	world	 had	turned	against	her.

316
     “So	  sorry,”	  Pearl	 said	  through	 her	  teeth,	 stomping	  ahead	to	  her	 own

apartment.

     The	door	 was	opened	slightly,	 but	 Pearl	didn’t	 give	 it	any	 thought	until	 she

shoved	it	open	and	it	banged	against	the	wall.

     She	froze.

     The	living	  room	had	been	torn	apart.	Even	 worse	than	when	her	mother	had

been	searching	for	those	stupid	invitations.

     The	 pictures	and	plaques	 had	all	 been	shoved	off	 the	 fireplace	 mantel,	the

brand-new	netscreen	was	lying	  facedown	on	 the	floor,	  and	the	urn	 containing

Peony’s	ashes	…

     Pearl’s	stomach	plummeted.	The	door	came	back	to	hit	her	shoulder.

     “Mom?”	  she	said,	darting	across	the	hall.

     She	froze.	A	scream	crawled	up	her	throat	but	died	in	a	petrified	 squeak.

     He	was	leaning	against	the	living	 room’s	far	 wall.	Though	 he	had	the	form	of

a	man,	he	stood	with	 hunched	shoulders	and	enormous	 clawed	hands.	His	 face

had	been	disfigured	into	a	snout	with	 teeth	that	jutted	 between	his	lips	and	dark,

glassy	eyes	sunk	back	in	his	face.

     Pearl	whimpered.	 Instinct	 prompted	her	 to	take	a	 step	back,	though	instinct

also	told	her	it	was	useless.

     A	 hundred	 horrific	 stories,	 from	 newsfeeds	to	 whispered	gossip,	 filled	 her

head.

     The	killings	 were	random,	people	said.

     The	 Lunar	monsters	could	 be	 anywhere	at	any	 time.	 No	one	 could	discern

any	pattern	or	logic	to	their	 strikes.	They	might	swarm	a	crowded	office	 building

one	day	and	 kill	 every	 soul	 on	the	 ninth	 floor,	 but	 leave	the	rest	 alone.	They

317
might	kill	  one	child	 asleep	in	 their	 bed,	but	 not	their	 brother	 across	the	room.

They	might	 dismember	a	man	as	he	dashed	from	a	hover	to	his	 front	door,	 then

ring	the	doorbell	so	a	loved	one	would	find	 him	still	 bleeding	on	the	step.

     The	terror	 of	 it	was	 in	the	 randomness.	The	brutality	 and	the	senseless	way

they	chose	their	victims,	while	 leaving	so	many	witnesses	to	spread	the	fear.

     No	one	was	safe.

     No	one	was	ever	safe.

     But	 Pearl	 never	 thought	 they	 would	  come	 here,	 to	 their	 inconsequential

apartment,	in	such	a	crowded	city	…

     And—and	 the	war	 was	in	cease-fire.	There	hadn’t	 been	any	attacks	in	 days.

Why	now?	Why	 her?

     A	 whine	squeezed	through	her	throat.	The	 creature	smirked	and	she	realized

his	jaw	had	 been	working	 when	she’d	come	in.	 Like	 he’d	been	helping	 himself

to	a	snack.

     Mom.

     Sobbing,	she	turned	to	run.

     The	door	slammed	shut.	A	second	creature	blocked	her	way.

     Pearl	collapsed	to	her	knees,	sobbing	and	shaking.	“Please.	Please.”

     “You	  sure	we	 can’t	 eat	her?”	 said	 the	 one	by	 the	 door,	his	 words	 barely

discernible	beneath	a	gruff,	 raspy	tone.	 He	grabbed	Pearl’s	arm	 and	hauled	her

back	to	  her	feet.	 She	 screamed	and	 tried	 to	 cower	  away,	 but	 his	 grip	 was

merciless.	He	peeled	the	arm	away	from	her	body,	extending	 it	so	he	could	get	a

good	view	of	her	forearm.	“Just	 a	taste?	She	looks	so	sweet.”

     “Yet	 smells	so	sour,”	said	the	other.

     Pearl,	 through	  her	 hysteria,	 smelled	 it	  too.	 There	  was	 warm	 dampness

318
between	her	legs.	She	wailed	and	her	legs	gave	out	again,	leaving	 her	to	dangle

from	the	monster’s	hold.

     “Mistress	 said	to	bring	 them	unharmed.	You	want	to	 take	a	nibble,	go	ahead.

Her	wrath,	your	head.”

     The	 one	holding	 Pearl	 pressed	his	wet	 nose	against	her	elbow	 and	 sniffed

longingly.	 Then	he	 let	the	 arm	fall	 and	scooped	Pearl	over	 one	shoulder.	“Not

worth	it,”	 he	said	with	a	growl.

     “I	  agree.”	 The	 second	beast	came	 closer	and	 pinched	 Pearl’s	 face	in	  his

massive,	hairy	hand.	“But	maybe	we’ll	 get	to	sample	her	when	they’re	done.”

319
	




                                          Thirty-Five







“There’s	the	guardhouse,”	said	Thorne,	crouched	in	an	alleyway	between	Iko

and	Wolf.	For	the	hundredth	time	since	they’d	left	Maha’s	house,	he	checked	his

pocket	for	the	cylinder	containing	Cress’s	message.

     “I	had	higher	expectations,”	said	Iko.

     Just	like	everything	in	this	sector,	the	guardhouse	was	drab	and	covered	in

dust.	It	was	also	made	of	stone	and	lacking	windows,	which	made	it	one	of	the

more	impenetrable	buildings	Thorne	had	 seen.	One	uniformed	guard	stood

watch	at	the	door,	 a	rifle	 laid	 across	his	arms	and	a	helmet	and	dust	mask

obscuring	his	face.

     Inside	would	 be	weaponry,	dome	maintenance	equipment,	a	cell	to	hold

lawbreakers	before	sending	them	for	trial	 in	 Artemisia,	and	a	small	 control

center	for	accessing	the	dome’s	power	grid	and	security	system.	Most	important,

this	was	where	the	receiver-transmitter	was	housed	that	connected	this	sector	to

the	government-run	broadcasting	network.

     “How	much	time	do	we	have?”	he	asked.

     “Estimated	two	minutes,	fourteen	seconds	until	the	next	patrol	guard	comes

into	view,”	said	Iko.

320
     “Wolf,	  you’re	up.”

     There	was	a	flash	 of	razor-sharp	 teeth	before	Wolf	 straightened	and	strolled

out	from	the	alley.	Thorne	and	Iko	 ducked	out	of	sight.

     A	 harsh	voice	ordered,	“Stop	and	identify	yourself.”

     “Special	 Operative	Alpha	 Kesley.	I’m	 here	on	orders	from	Thaumaturge	Jael

to	check	your	weapons	inventory.”

     “You’re	  special	op?	What	 are	you	 doing	out—”	  A	 gasp	was	followed	 by	 a

short	scuffle	and	thump.	Thorne	 braced	himself	for	 the	blare	of	a	gunshot,	but	 it

never	came.	When	silence	reigned,	he	and	Iko	peered	around	the	corner	again.

     Wolf	  was	already	 dragging	 the	guard’s	 unconscious	form	  to	the	 door	 and

holding	his	 fingertips	against	the	screen.	Thorne	and	Iko	 rushed	to	join	 him	just

as	the	door	popped	open.	They	dragged	the	guard	inside.

     The	 interior	 of	  the	guardhouse	wasn’t	  much	of	 an	 improvement	 over	 the

exterior.	Slightly	 less	dusty,	but	 still	dim	 and	uncomfortable.	 In	this	main	 room,

a	large	desk	took	up	most	of	the	space,	separating	them	from	two	barred	doors	in

the	back	wall.

     Thorne	wasted	no	time	 in	ripping	 off	 the	itchy	 linen	 shirt	he’d	 been	wearing

to	fit	 in	 with	 the	miners.	Squatting	 beside	the	guard,	he	started	unbuttoning	 the

uniform’s	 shirt.	Though	the	guard	was	a	bit	stockier	than	he	was,	it	looked	 like	it

would	fit.

     “I	 don’t	 suppose	you	need	help	with	that?”	 Iko	said,	sounding	too	 hopeful	as

she	watched	Thorne	work	the	guard’s	limp	arms	out	of	his	sleeves.

     Thorne	paused	to	glare	 at	her	and,	remembering	the	cylinder,	 dug	it	 out	and

pressed	it	into	her	fist.	“You	 get	to	work.”

     Iko	 gave	him	a	quick	 salute	and	threw	herself	behind	the	desk.	Soon,	Thorne

321
could	hear	her	lighthearted	humming	as	she	found	the	universal	port	and	inserted

the	cylinder.	A	 screen	pinged,	and	Iko	proclaimed	proudly,	“Code	 word:	Captain

is	King!”

     Thorne’s	lips	 twitched	as	he	tugged	the	guard’s	shirt	over	his	head.

     “It	 worked!	 I’m	 in!”	 said	Iko.	“Uploading	 the	program	now.”

     Wolf	 helped	Thorne	tie	on	the	awkward	shoulder	armor.

     “Just	  about	 done	 and	 …	  that’s	  it.	 Selecting	  sectors	 to	 receive	 altered

programming,	 and	uploading	 Cinder’s	 video	 into	 the	holding	  queue	…	 Wow,

Cress	couldn’t	have	made	this	any	easier.”

     Thorne	 grunted,	not	 wanting	 to	hear	how	 great	of	 a	job	 Cress	had	done	 in

helping	them	from	afar.	He	wished	she	would	 have	just	sent	herself.

     He	dropped	 the	dust	mask	over	his	 face	to	hide	his	 grimace	and	wedged	his

feet	into	the	guard’s	boots.	He	raised	questionable	eyebrows	at	Wolf.

     Wolf	 nodded.	“Passable.”

     “Give	 me	at	least	four	more	minutes,”	said	Iko.

     “Got	  it.	 Two	 knocks	 means	 trouble,	 three	 means	coast	is	 clear.”	  Thorne

grabbed	the	guard’s	 rifle.	 He	 heard	Wolf	  cracking	 his	 knuckles	as	 he	slipped

back	through	 the	door	 to	take	 up	the	guard’s	 post.	The	 grim-faced,	 shoulders-

back	posture	came	easily	and	he	was	glad	that,	for	once,	his	military	training	was

coming	in	handy.

     He	 counted	off	  six	seconds	before	 the	guard	 patrolling	 this	 portion	 of	 the

dome	came	into	 view.	 He	strolled	 past	Thorne	with	 his	 own	gun	 held	over	 his

shoulder,	 searching	 for	  errant	 civilians	  or	 laborers	  who	 should	  have	 been

working.

     If	 the	 guard	looked	 at	 him,	 Thorne	 didn’t	 know	 it.	 He	 kept	 his	own	 gaze

322
pinned	to	the	horizon,	stoic	and	serious.

     The	guard	passed	by.

     Behind	the	dust	mask,	Thorne	smirked.


                                                          *			 *			*

Cinder	wished	 she	had	more	 floor	 space	in	 which	 to	pace.	Her	 nerves	were	 a

wreck	as	she	waited	to	hear	from	Iko.

     “Are	 you	 all	right?”	  Scarlet	asked,	sitting	cross-legged	on	the	rocking	 chair.

She	was	fidgety	too,	toying	with	 the	drawstring	of	her	freshly	 cleaned	hoodie.

     “I’m	  fine,”	 Cinder	lied.	The	truth	was	that	she	was	as	tense	as	a	coiled	spring,

but	she	didn’t	want	to	 talk	about	it.	 They’d	already	talked	 their	strategy	to	death.

Everything	that	could	go	right.	 Everything	 that	could	go	wrong.

     The	 people	would	 answer	 her	call,	 or	 they	 wouldn’t.	 Either	 way,	 she	was

about	to	show	Levana	her	hand.

     In	 the	 kitchen,	 Princess	 Winter	 was	 humming	 an	 unfamiliar	  song.	 She’d

hardly	stopped	moving	since	her	arrival	 the	evening	before.	She’d	dusted,	swept,

beat	rugs,	 reorganized	cabinets,	 and	folded	 laundry,	 and	 done	 it	 all	 with	 the

grace	of	a	butterfly.	All	 her	work	 was	making	Cinder	feel	like	 a	bad	houseguest.

     Cinder	 wasn’t	 sure	 what	 to	 make	 of	 the	princess.	 She	both	 admired	 and

questioned	Winter’s	  decision	 to	 not	 use	her	 glamour.	 Life	  had	been	simpler

before	Cinder	had	use	of	her	own	gift,	 and	she’d	too	often	been	terrified	 to	think

she	was	becoming	more	and	more	 like	 Levana.	But	 at	the	same	time,	now	 that

she	had	her	gift,	 she	couldn’t	 imagine	 giving	 it	 up,	especially	 seeing	the	toll	 it

was	taking	on	the	princess’s	sanity.

     But	 to	write	off	 the	princess	as	merely	crazy	didn’t	 feel	right,	 either.	She	was

323
quirky	 and	strange	 and	ridiculously	  charismatic.	 She	also	 seemed	to	honestly

care	about	the	people	around	 her	and	she	showed	glimpses	 of	intelligence	 that

would	have	been	easy	to	overlook.	While	 she	exuded	humbleness,	Cinder	didn’t

think	she	was	as	ignorant	of	her	own	charms	as	she	pretended	to	be.

     She	wished	 she	could	remember	her	 from	 when	they	 were	children,	 but	all

her	memories	consisted	of	flames	and	burning	coals	and	seared	flesh.	There	was

nothing	about	 a	friend,	 a	 cousin.	It	 had	never	 even	occurred	 to	her	 she	might

have	such	a	connection	from	her	brief	 life	on	 Luna—she’d	assumed	everyone	in

the	palace	would	be	her	enemy.

     A	 comm	popped	up	on	her	retina	display.

     Cinder	 froze,	read	it,	 and	released	a	heavy	breath.	“They’re	 in	 position.	The

video	is	set	to	play	 one	minute	following	  the	end	of	the	workday	 announcement

across	all	outer	sectors.	Thorne	is	standing	watch.	No	alarms	raised—yet.”

     Cinder	placed	a	hand	over	her	knotted	 stomach.	This	was	the	moment	all	her

preparations	had	been	for.

     A	 thousand	horrors	clouded	 her	mind.	 That	they	 wouldn’t	 believe	her.	 That

they	wouldn’t	 follow	 her.	That	they	wouldn’t	 want	her	revolution.

     As	 far	 as	she	could	 tell,	 this	 would	 be	 the	first	  time	 Luna’s	 outer	sectors

would	 be	exposed	 to	a	 message	that	wasn’t	 crown-sanctioned	 propaganda	 or

fearmongering.	Every	 bit	of	 media	they	 had	came	from	 the	crown,	 from	public

executions	  that	  villainized	    anyone	  who	   dared	  criticize	   the	   queen,	  to

documentaries	on	the	royal	 family’s	  generosity	and	 compassion.	Sectors	could

be	singled	out	for	individual	 broadcasts	or	all	set	to	receive	one	message	at	once,

although	Cinder	 suspected	the	queen	rarely	 did	mass	communications.	 Rather,

the	rich	communities	 of	 Artemisia	 might	 see	coverage	on	the	most	elite	 parties

324
of	the	season	while	 laborers	in	 the	outer	 sectors	saw	reports	on	food	 shortages

and	reduced	 rations.	 Without	 any	 way	  to	 communicate	 between	themselves,

though,	how	were	they	to	know	any	different?

     Cinder	was	about	to	hijack	 Levana’s	most	valuable	brainwashing	 tool—more

powerful	 even	 than	 her	glamour.	  For	 the	first	  time,	 the	 people	 in	 the	 outer

sectors	would	hear	a	message	of	truth	and	empowerment.	For	the	first	time,	they

would	be	united.

     She	hoped.

     A	  familiar	   chime	 blared	  outside,	 followed	  by	  Luna’s	  anthem	 and	 the

woman’s	polite	voice	 sending	the	workers	home	from	the	workday.

     Cinder	wrapped	 her	arms	around	herself,	squeezing	tight	in	 an	effort	to	 keep

from	dissolving.	 “That’s	 it,”	  she	said,	looking	 at	Scarlet.	They	 had	discussed	at

length	 whether	 or	 not	 Cinder	 should	 risk	 being	 out	  in	 the	 sector	when	 her

message	played.	Her	 companions	 had	all	 encouraged	her	 to	 wait	 and	 let	 the

video	do	its	job	 without	putting	 herself	at	risk,	 but	she	knew	in	that	moment	that

waiting	wasn’t	 an	option.	 She	had	to	be	there	to	see	their	reaction,	in	this	 sector

at	least,	if	she	couldn’t	see	the	reactions	anywhere	else.

     Scarlet’s	lips	 turned	down.	“You’re	 going	 out	there,	aren’t	you?”

     “I	 have	to.”

     Scarlet	 rolled	 her	 eyes,	 though	 she	didn’t	  look	 surprised.	 She	 stood	and

glanced	toward	the	kitchen,	where	 Winter’s	 humming	had	become	dramatic	and

overwrought.	“Winter?”

     The	princess	appeared	a	moment	later,	her	hands	covered	in	wall	putty.

     Scarlet	settled	her	hands	on	her	hips.	“What	are	you	doing?”

     “Patching	 up	the	house,”	said	Winter,	 as	if	 it	were	obvious.	 “So	it	 won’t	 fall

325
apart.”

     “Right.	 Well,	 good	job.	 Cinder	and	I	 are	going	to	watch	the	video.	 If	 anyone

comes	to	the	house,	hide.	Don’t	leave,	and	try	not	to	do	anything	crazy.”

     Winter	 winked.	“I	 shall	be	a	vestibule	of	unhampered	sanity.”

     With	 an	exasperated	shake	of	her	head,	Scarlet	turned	back	to	Cinder.	“She’ll

be	fine.	Let’s	go.”

     The	 clock	 in	 Cinder’s	 head	was	 counting	 down	 the	minutes,	 and	 she	and

Scarlet	had	 barely	 left	 the	 house	when	 the	 dome	 darkened	overhead.	 In	 the

distance	she	could	see	the	first	 laborers	heading	home	from	 the	factories.	 They

all	paused	and	looked	up,	waiting	 to	 hear	whatever	bad	news	the	queen	had	for

them	now.

     A	 series	of	building-size	squares	flickered	across	the	surface	of	the	dome	and

sharpened	into	one	image,	duplicated	a	dozen	times	in	every	direction—Cinder’s

face	plastered	half	a	dozen	times	across	the	sky.

     Cinder	 grimaced	at	the	 sight.	When	 they	had	recorded	the	video	 aboard	the

Rampion,	she	felt	bold	 and	resolute.	She	hadn’t	bothered	to	dress	up,	preferring

the	people	to	see	her	as	she	was.	In	the	video	she	was	wearing	the	same	military-

issued	T-shirt	 and	cargo	pants	she’d	 found	 aboard	the	Rampion	 ages	ago.	Her

hair	was	in	the	same	ponytail	she	always	wore	 it	in.	Her	 arms	were	crossed	over

her	chest,	her	cyborg	hand	on	full	display.

     She	looked	nothing	at	all	 like	her	regal,	glamorous,	powerful	 aunt.

     “Cinder,”	 Scarlet	hissed.	“Shouldn’t	 you	be	using	your	glamour?”

     She	started	and	 called	up	 the	glamour	 of	 the	plain	 teenage	girl	 she’d	 used

during	 the	 trek	  from	  Artemisia.	 It	  would	  keep	 anyone	 in	 the	  sector	from

recognizing	her	at	least,	though	it	wouldn’t	 protect	her	from	camera	footage.

326
     She	hoped	Levana	would	have	a	lot	of	footage	to	be	examining	after	this.

     Her	likeness	in	the	sky	began	to	speak.

     “Citizens	  of	 Luna,	I	 ask	 that	 you	stop	 what	 you’re	 doing	 to	 listen	 to	this

message.	My	name	 is	Selene	Blackburn.	 I	 am	 the	daughter	 of	the	 late	Queen

Channary,	niece	to	Princess	Levana,	and	the	rightful	 heir	to	Luna’s	 throne.”	She

had	practiced	the	 words	 a	thousand	times	 and	Cinder	 was	 relieved	she	 didn’t

sound	like	 a	 complete	idiot	  saying	them.	 “You	  were	 told	 that	I	 died	 thirteen

years	ago	in	a	nursery	fire,	 but	 the	truth	 is	that	my	 aunt,	Levana,	did	 try	 to	kill

me,	but	I	was	rescued	and	taken	to	Earth.	There,	I	have	been	raised	and	protected

in	 preparation	 for	  the	 time	 when	 I	  would	  return	 to	 Luna	  and	reclaim	  my

birthright.

     “In	  my	 absence,	Levana	has	enslaved	you.	 She	takes	 your	sons	 and	turns

them	into	 monsters.	She	takes	your	 shell	infants	 and	slaughters	them.	 She	lets

you	go	 hungry,	 while	 the	people	in	 Artemisia	  gorge	themselves	on	rich	 foods

and	delicacies.”	Her	expression	turned	fierce.	“But	 Levana’s	rule	is	coming	 to	an

end.	I	have	returned	and	I	am	here	to	take	back	what	is	mine.”

     Chills	  skittered	 down	 Cinder’s	  arms	at	 hearing	 her	 own	 voice	  sound	so

capable,	so	confident,	so	worthy.

     “Soon,”	  the	video	 continued,	“Levana	 is	 going	 to	marry	 Emperor	 Kaito	 of

Earth	and	be	crowned	the	empress	of	the	Eastern	Commonwealth,	an	honor	that

could	not	be	given	 to	anyone	less	deserving.	I	 refuse	to	allow	 Levana	to	extend

her	tyranny.	I	will	  not	stand	aside	while	my	 aunt	enslaves	and	abuses	my	people

here	on	Luna,	and	wages	a	 war	across	Earth.	Which	 is	 why,	before	 an	Earthen

crown	 can	be	placed	 on	 Levana’s	head,	 I	 will	  bring	 an	army	 to	 the	gates	 of

Artemisia.”

327
     Above,	her	smile	 turned	devious	and	unflinching.

     “I	 ask	that	you,	 citizens	of	 Luna,	be	that	 army.	You	 have	the	power	 to	fight

against	Levana	and	the	people	that	oppress	you.	Beginning	 now,	tonight,	 I	 urge

you	to	 join	  me	in	 rebelling	  against	this	 regime.	 No	 longer	 will	 we	 obey	 her

curfews	or	 forgo	 our	rights	 to	 meet	and	talk	 and	 be	heard.	No	 longer	will	  we

give	up	 our	children	 to	 become	her	disposable	 guards	and	soldiers.	No	 longer

will	 we	slave	away	growing	 food	 and	raising	wildlife,	  only	 to	see	it	shipped	off

to	 Artemisia	 while	  our	 children	  starve	around	 us.	 No	 longer	  will	  we	 build

weapons	for	Levana’s	war.	Instead,	we	will	 take	them	for	ourselves,	for	our	war.

     “Become	 my	 army.	Stand	up	and	 reclaim	your	 homes	from	 the	guards	who

abuse	and	terrorize	you.	 Send	a	message	to	Levana	that	 you	will	  no	longer	 be

controlled	by	 fear	and	manipulation.	 And	 upon	the	commencement	of	 the	royal

coronation,	 I	  ask	that	  all	 able-bodied	  citizens	 join	  me	 in	 a	 march	  against

Artemisia	and	the	queen’s	palace.	Together	we	will	  guarantee	a	better	future	for

Luna.	A	 future	without	 oppression.	A	 future	 in	which	 any	 Lunar,	no	matter	 the

sector	they	live	 in	 or	the	family	  they	were	born	 to,	can	achieve	their	 ambitions

and	live	without	 fear	of	unjust	persecution	or	a	lifetime	 of	slavery.

     “I	 understand	that	I	am	asking	 you	to	risk	 your	lives.	 Levana’s	thaumaturges

are	powerful,	  her	 guards	are	 skilled,	 her	 soldiers	 are	 brutal.	 But	 if	  we	 join

together,	we	can	be	invincible.	 They	can’t	 control	us	all.	 With	 the	people	united

into	one	army,	we	will	 surround	the	capital	 city	and	overthrow	 the	impostor	who

sits	on	 my	throne.	 Help	 me.	Fight	 for	 me.	 And	 I	 will	 be	 the	first	 ruler	 in	 the

history	of	Luna	who	 will	 also	fight	for	 you.”

     The	video	focused	on	Cinder’s	 indomitable	expression	for	a	heartbeat	and	cut

out.

328
	




                                            Thirty-Six







“Wow,”	Scarlet	whispered.	“Good	speech.”

     Cinder’s	heart	was	thundering.	“Thanks.	Kai	wrote	most	of	it.”

     She	peered	down	the	empty	row	of	houses.	The	few	people	she	had	spotted

before	were	still	milling	around,	staring	up	at	the	dome.	More	miners	and	factory

workers	should	have	returned	by	now,	but	the	streets	stayed	empty.	The	dome

was	a	vacuum	of	silence.

     It	should	have	frightened	Cinder,	knowing	that	she	had	made	her	first	move.

She	had	been	running	for	so	long.	Levana	had	kept	her	on	the	defensive	since	the

moment	she’d	seen	her	at	the	Commonwealth	ball.

     No	more.	She	felt	energized.	Ready.	Far	from	looking	like	a	fool	in	the	video,

she	had	sounded	like	a	queen.	She	sounded	like	a	revolutionary.	She	sounded

like	she	could	actually	pull	this	off.

     “Come	on,”	said	Scarlet,	marching	ahead.	“Let’s	go	see	what’s	happening.”

     Cinder	hurried	after	her.	They	heard	shouting	coming	from	the	central	square

and	the	distant	citizens	were	drifting	toward	the	residential	streets,	though	they

frequently	paused	to	look	back.	As	Cinder	and	Scarlet	got	closer,	the	shouting

turned	into	barking	orders.

329
     The	 sector	guards	had	 shoved	their	 way	 into	 the	loitering	  crowd,	 gripping

long,	slender	clubs	in	their	fists.

     “Move	 along,”	 a	guard	shouted.	All	 but	 his	eyes	were	concealed	beneath	his

helmet	and	face	mask.	“Four	 minutes	to	curfew!	 Loitering	  is	strictly	 prohibited,

and	no	video	is	changing	that.”

     Cinder	and	Scarlet	ducked	behind	a	delivery	cart.

     The	 citizens	  were	 clustered	 into	  small	 groups,	  their	 hair	  and	 uniforms

covered	in	regolith	 dust.	A	 few	 had	their	sleeves	rolled	 up,	revealing	 the	RM-9

tattoos	on	their	 forearms.	Most	 lowered	their	 eyes	when	the	guards	approached

them,	recoiling	  at	the	 prospect	of	 those	clubs	 being	turned	 on	 them.	But	 few

seemed	to	be	leaving.

     One	 guard	 grabbed	a	 man	by	 his	 elbow	 and	 shoved	 him	 away	 from	 the

bubbling	 fountain	at	 the	dome’s	 center.	“Get	 along,	all	 of	 you.	Don’t	  make	us

file	a	report	of	misconduct.”

     Gazes	shifted	between	the	tired	workers.	The	crowd	was	thinning.	 Their	 tired

shoulders	drooping	as	they	 dispersed.	Groups	dissolved	 without	 even	an	angry

word	shouted	back	at	the	guards.

     Cinder’s	 heart	squeezed.

     They	weren’t	 fighting.

     They	weren’t	 defending	themselves.

     They	were	cowed	by	their	 oppressors	every	bit	as	much	as	before.

     Disappointment	 swarmed	over	 her	and	 she	stumbled,	slouching	 against	the

cart.	 Had	 she	not	  been	persuasive	 enough?	Had	 she	 failed	  to	 convey	 how

important	it	was	that	they	all	 stand	up,	unified	and	resolute?	Had	she	failed?

     Scarlet	laid	 a	hand	on	 her	shoulder.	“It’s	  only	 one	sector,”	she	said.	“Don’t

330
be	discouraged.	We	don’t	know	what	else	is	happening	out	there.”

     Though	 her	words	 were	kind,	 Cinder	 could	 see	her	frustration	 mirrored	 on

Scarlet.	It	might	be	true—they	 didn’t	know	 what	was	happening	in	the	rest	of	the

sectors	and	they	had	no	way	of	knowing.	What	she	saw	here,	though,	did	little	 to

give	her	confidence.

     “Don’t	  touch	me!”	a	man	yelled.

     Cinder	glanced	around	the	cart.	A	 guard	was	staring	down	a	skinny	man	with

sickly	 pale	skin.	 Despite	the	 gaunt	bent	to	 his	body,	 the	man	 stood	before	 the

guard	with	clenched	fists.

     “I	 will	 not	return	 to	my	home	in	recognition	 of	curfew,”	 he	said.	“Threaten	to

report	me	 all	you	 like—after	  a	video	 like	 that,	the	 queen	and	her	 minions	 are

going	to	have	their	 hands	full	 rounding	 up	people	guilty	 of	 much	bigger	crimes

than	staying	out	a	few	extra	minutes.”

     Two	 other	guards	stopped	ushering	 the	people	away	 and	moved	toward	 the

man.	Their	gloved	hands	tightened	on	their	clubs.

     The	 remaining	workers	 stopped	to	 watch.	 Curious.	Wary.	 But	 also,	 Cinder

thought—angry.

     The	 first	 guard	 loomed	 over	 the	 man.	His	 voice	 was	 muffled	  behind	 the

mask,	but	his	arrogance	was	clear.	“Our	laws	are	for	the	protection	 of	all	 people,

and	no	one	will	 be	exempt	from	 them.	I	suggest	you	go	home	before	I’m	 forced

to	make	an	example	of	you.”

     “I’m	  perfectly	capable	of	making	 an	example	of	myself.”	 The	man	snarled	at

the	 guards	that	  were	 converging	 around	 him,	  then	 at	 the	 people	 who	 had

hesitated	at	the	edges	of	the	square.	“Don’t	  you	get	 it?	If	 the	other	 sectors	saw

that	video	too—”

331
     The	 guard	wrapped	 his	 free	hand	 around	the	 back	of	 the	 man’s	 neck	and

shoved	him	down,	forcing	 the	man	onto	his	knees.	His	words	were	cut	off	 with	a

strangled	grunt.

     The	guard	raised	his	club.

     Cinder	pressed	a	hand	over	her	mouth.	She	reached	out	with	her	gift,	 but	she

was	too	far	away	to	stop	it,	too	far	to	control	 him.

     The	other	two	 guards	joined	in,	their	 clubs	falling	 onto	the	man’s	head,	back,

shoulders.	He	fell	onto	his	side	and	covered	his	face,	screaming	from	the	force	of

the	blows,	but	they	wouldn’t	 relent—

     Cinder	 gritted	her	 teeth	and	took	 a	step	into	the	 road,	but	another	 voice	cut

through	the	man’s	cries	before	she	could	speak.

     “Stop!”	 a	woman	screamed.	She	shoved	her	way	through	the	crowd.

     One	of	the	guards	did	stop.	No,	he	froze.

     The	other	 two	 hesitated,	seeing	their	companion	with	  his	club	 held	halfway

through	a	swing.	The	woman’s	face	was	contorted	in	concentration.

     “Unlawful	   use	of	 manipulation,”	  bellowed	 another	 guard.	He	 grabbed	the

woman	and	pulled	her	arms	behind	her	back.	Before	he	could	bind	them,	though,

another	miner	 had	stepped	forward—an	 elderly	 man	with	  his	back	 bent	under

years	of	work.	His	gaze	was	sharp,	though,	as	he	raised	one	hand.

     The	guard’s	body	turned	to	stone.

     Another	 civilian	  stepped	forward.	 Then	 another,	their	 expressions	made	of

grim	 determination.	One	 by	 one,	the	guards	 dropped	their	 clubs.	 One	by	 one,

their	bodies	were	claimed	by	the	people.

     A	 young	boy	 rushed	toward	 the	man	who	 had	been	beaten.	He	lay	 limp	 on

the	ground,	groaning	in	pain.

332
     The	 woman	 who	had	 stepped	forward	 first	 snarled	 at	the	 guards.	“I	  don’t

know	 if	 that	girl	  was	Princess	Selene	or	 not,	 but	I	 do	 know	 she’s	right.	  This

might	be	our	only	 chance	to	stand	together,	and	I,	for	 one,	refuse	to	be	afraid	of

you	anymore!”	 Her	face	was	strained,	full	of	resentment.

     As	Cinder	 watched,	the	guard	she	was	controlling	reached	for	the	knife	 at	his

belt	and	lifted	it,	 pressing	the	blade	against	his	own	throat.

     Horror	 cascaded	over	her	like	ice	water.

     “No!”	  Cinder	 screamed.	She	ran	forward,	releasing	the	glamour	 of	the	plain

girl.	 “Don’t!	  Don’t	  kill	 them!”	  Barreling	 into	 the	 center	of	 the	crowd,	 Cinder

held	her	hands	toward	the	gathered	civilians.	Her	pulse	was	racing.

     She	was	met	 first	 with	 rage,	the	remnants	of	 years	of	tyranny	 and	yearning

for	revenge	turned	to	disgust	at	her	interruption.

     But	then,	slowly,	 there	was	recognition,	matched	with	 confusion.

     “I	 understand	these	men	have	been	the	queen’s	weapons.	They	have	abused

and	degraded	 you	 and	your	  families.	 But	 they	 are	 not	 your	 enemies.	 Many

guards	 were	 removed	 from	  their	  loved	  ones	 and	 forced	 into	  the	 queen’s

employment	  against	 their	  will.	   Now,	  I	   don’t	  know	  about	  these	 guards,

specifically,	 but	killing	  them	without	 offering	 a	fair	 trial	 or	showing	 any	mercy

will	 only	further	 the	cycle	of	 distrust.”	 She	met	the	eyes	of	the	woman	who	held

the	guard	and	his	 knife	 in	 thrall.	 “Don’t	  become	like	 the	queen	and	her	 court.

Don’t	kill	  them.	We’ll	 take	them	prisoner	until	further	 notice.	We	might	 still	find

a	use	for	them.”

     The	 guard’s	arm	 began	to	lower,	 removing	 the	knife’s	 imminent	 threat.	 He

was	watching	Cinder,	though,	 not	the	woman.	Maybe	he	was	relieved	 that	she’d

intervened.	Maybe	 he	 was	embarrassed	at	 his	 lack	 of	 power.	 Maybe	 he	was

333
plotting	to	kill	 all	 of	these	rebellious	citizens	the	moment	he	had	a	chance.

     It	 occurred	to	 her	that	 this	same	scenario	could	 be	playing	 out	in	 countless

other	sectors,	 without	 her	 there	 to	 stop	it.	  She	wanted	 the	 people	to	 defend

themselves	from	Levana’s	regime	but	 she	hadn’t	considered	how	she	might	also

be	sentencing	thousands	of	guards	to	death.

     She	tried	 to	tamp	 down	the	 sting	of	 guilt,	 telling	 herself	 this	was	war	 now,

and	wars	came	with	casualties.	But	it	didn’t	 make	her	feel	much	better.

     She	 approached	the	 fountain	  and	 stepped	 up	 onto	 the	 edge.	 The	 water

sprayed	against	her	calves.

     The	 crowd	 around	her	 had	grown	 and	 was	still	  growing.	 People	who	 had

wandered	off	to	their	 residences	returned	in	force,	drawn	 by	the	commotion	 and

the	spreading	whispers	of	 rebellion.	 With	 the	guards	subdued,	their	heads	were

lifted.

     She	 imagined	 hundreds	 of	 thousands,	even	 millions	  of	 Lunars	  gathering

together	like	this,	daring	to	envision	 a	new	regime.

     Then	a	 man’s	voice	 shouted,	“It’s	  a	trick!	 This	 is	Levana	 testing	us!	 She’ll

slaughter	us	all	for	this.”

     The	 crowd	rustled,	 made	nervous	by	 the	accusation.	Their	 eyes	roved	 over

Cinder’s	 face,	her	clothes,	 the	metal	 hand	she	wasn’t	 hiding.	 She	felt	 like	 she

was	at	 the	 ball	 again,	 the	 center	 of	 unwanted	 attention,	 forging	 ahead	 with

single-minded	resolve	and	the	knowledge	 that	she	couldn’t	 turn	back	now,	 even

if	she	wanted	to.

     “This	  isn’t	 a	 trick,”	  she	said,	 loud	 enough	that	 her	 words	echoed	 off	 the

nearest	factory	walls.	 “And	  it	 isn’t	 a	test.	I	 am	Princess	Selene,	and	the	 video

you	just	 saw	was	broadcast	to	 almost	every	sector	 on	Luna.	 I	am	 organizing	a

334
rebellion	that	 will	 span	the	entire	 surface	of	Luna—starting	 here.	Will	  you	join

me?”

     She	 hoped	to	 be	 met	 with	 cheers,	 but	 uncomfortable	 silence	 greeted	her

instead.

     The	elderly	 man	she’d	seen	before	cocked	his	head.	“But	you’re	only	a	kid.”

     She	 glared	at	 him,	 indignant,	  but	 before	she	 could	 speak	a	 familiar	  face

emerged	in	the	crowd.	Maha	came	to	stand	before	her.	Despite	her	small	stature,

she	carried	every	ounce	of	Wolf’s	fearlessness	in	her	stance.

     “Didn’t	  you	 hear	the	video?	Our	 true	queen	has	returned!	Will	  we	cower	 in

fear	and	ignore	this	one	chance	we	have	to	make	a	better	life	for	ourselves?”

     The	old	 man	gestured	toward	the	 sky.	“One	 pretty	speech	will	 not	 make	for

an	organized	rebellion.	 We	have	no	training	 and	no	weapons.	We	 have	no	time

to	prepare.	What	do	you	expect	us	to	do—march	into	Artemisia	 with	 shovels	and

pickaxes?	We’ll	be	slaughtered!”

     It	 was	 clear	 from	 the	 scattered	frowns	 and	 bobbing	 heads	that	he	 wasn’t

alone	in	his	thoughts.

     “What	  we	 lack	 in	 training	 and	 time,”	  said	Maha,	 “we’ll	   make	 up	 for	 in

numbers	and	determination,	just	like	Selene	said.”

     “‘Numbers	 and	determination’?	 You’ll	  take	two	steps	into	Artemisia	 and	her

thaumaturges	will	 have	you	cutting	 open	your	 own	throats	 before	you	even	see

the	palace.”

     “They	 can’t	brainwash	all	 of	us!”	someone	yelled	from	 the	crowd.

     “Exactly,”	  agreed	Maha.	“Which	 is	why	 we	have	to	do	this	now,	 when	all	 of

Luna	can	move	forward	together.”

     “How	 do	 we	even	know	the	other	 sectors	will	 fight?”	 said	the	man.	“Are	 we

335
expected	to	risk	our	lives	for	some	fantasy?”

     “Yes!”	  Maha	screamed.	“Yes,	I	will	 risk	my	 life	for	 this	fantasy.	Levana	took

both	of	my	sons	away	from	me	and	I	could	 do	nothing	to	protect	them.	I	couldn’t

stand	up	to	 her,	even	though	 it	 killed	 me	 to	let	 them	go.	 I	 will	 not	 waste	this

chance	now!”

     Cinder	 could	tell	 her	words	meant	 something	to	the	gathered	civilians.	 Eyes

dropped	to	 the	 ground.	 A	  handful	 of	 children,	 covered	 in	 the	 same	 dust	as

everyone	else,	were	pulled	into	the	shelter	of	their	parents’	arms.

     The	man’s	face	tightened.	“I	 have	wished	for	 change	my	whole	life,	 which	 is

precisely	how	I	 know	it’s	 not	going	to	be	that	simple.	 Levana	may	not	be	able	to

send	manpower	into	 every	sector	 if	 we	all	 riot	 at	once,	 but	what	 will	 stop	 her

from	halting	 the	supply	trains?	She	can	starve	us	into	submission.	Our	rations	are

already	too	low	as	it	is.”

     “You’re	  right,”	 said	Cinder.	 “She	could	 cut	your	 rations	and	halt	 the	supply

trains.	But	 not	if	 we	 control	 the	maglev	system.	 Don’t	 you	see?	The	only	 way

this	can	work	 is	if	 we	all	 band	together.	If	 we	refuse	to	accept	the	rules	 Levana

has	forced	on	us.”

     She	 caught	sight	  of	 Scarlet	 in	 the	 crowd,	 then	 Iko,	  too,	 with	 Wolf	  and

Thorne.	Thorne	was	wearing	 a	guard	uniform	 but	 had	taken	off	 the	helmet	 and

face	mask.	She	hoped	his	open	grin	would	be	enough	to	halt	anyone’s	misplaced

hatred.

     Their	 presence	bolstered	her.

     She	tried	to	meet	the	eyes	of	as	many	citizens	as	she	could.	“I	 have	no	doubt

the	other	sectors	are	dealing	 with	 the	same	fears	you	have.	I	 suggest	we	select

volunteers	to	act	as	runners	to	your	neighboring	sectors.	We’ll	 tell	 them	that	I’m

336
here	and	that	 everything	 I	 said	on	 that	 video	 is	true.	 I	 will	  be	marching	 into

Artemisia,	and	I	will	 reclaim	 my	birthright.”

     “And	  I	 will	  be	with	  you,”	 said	 Maha	Kesley.	 “I	  believe	 you	are	 our	 true

queen,	and	we	owe	you	 our	 allegiance	on	that	 alone.	But	 as	a	mother	reunited

with	her	son,	I	owe	you	so	much	more.”

     Cinder	smiled	 at	her,	grateful.

     Maha	returned	it.	Then	she	dropped	to	one	knee	and	bowed	her	head.

     Cinder	tensed.	“Oh,	Maha,	you	 don’t	have	to…”	 She	trailed	off	 as,	all	around

her,	the	crowd	started	to	 follow	 suit.	The	 change	was	gradual	at	first	 but	spread

like	ripples	in	 a	pond.	Her	friends	alone	stayed	standing,	and	Cinder	was	grateful

for	their	lack	of	 reverence.

     Her	 fears	started	to	melt	 away.	She	didn’t	 know	 if	 her	video	 had	persuaded

every	civilian	to	 join	her	cause,	and	maybe	not	even	most	of	them.

     But	the	sight	before	her	was	proof	 that	her	revolution	had	begun.

337
	




                                           Thirty-Seven







Kai	stood	with	 his	 arms	crossed,	glaring	at	the	window	 of	 his	lavish	 guest	suite

but	seeing	nothing	 of	 the	beautiful	 lake	or	 city	 below.	 He	had	not	 managed	to

appreciate	any	of	 the	luxuries	 of	 his	fine	 prison,	 despite	the	 suite	being	 larger

than	most	 houses	in	the	 Commonwealth.	 Levana	was	 feigning	 respect,	giving

him	 accommodations	 complete	 with	  an	 enormous	 bedroom	 and	closet,	 two

sitting	 parlors,	an	 office,	 and	a	 washroom	that,	 at	first	 glance,	 had	seemed	as

though	it	had	an	actual	pool	in	it,	before	Kai	 realized	it	was	the	bathtub.

     Breathtaking,	 to	be	sure.	It	 was	even	more	luxurious	 than	the	guest	suites	in

New	Beijing	 Palace,	though	Kai	and	his	ancestors	had	prided	themselves	on	how

they	welcomed	and	treated	their	diplomatic	guests.

     The	 effect	 was	ruined,	 however,	 by	the	 fact	 that	the	 double	doors	 leading

onto	his	outdoor	balcony	remained	locked	 and	Lunar	guards	were	posted	outside

his	 chambers	day	 and	 night.	  He	 had	 fantasized	 about	 breaking	 one	 of	 the

windows	and	trying	 to	scale	down	 the	wall	 of	the	palace—it	 was	probably	what

Cinder	would	 have	done—but	what	 was	the	point?	Even	if	 he	avoided	breaking

his	neck,	he	had	nowhere	to	go.	 Though	it	 pained	him	to	 think	 it,	his	 place	was

here,	beside	Levana,	 doing	 his	 best	 to	 keep	her	 occupied	 with	 wedding	 and

338
coronation	rubbish.

     Which	 was	not	 going	 well,	 given	that	 he	hadn’t	 seen	Levana	or	any	 of	 her

cohorts	since	they’d	locked	 him	in	 here	after	the	ambush	in	the	docks.	The	 only

visitors	 he’d	  had	 were	 mute	 servants	 bringing	  him	 overflowing	   platters	 of

extravagant	food	that	went	largely	untouched.

     With	 an	 exasperated	growl,	 he	started	pacing	 again,	sure	he	would	  wear	a

hole	through	this	stone	floor	before	this	ordeal	was	over.

     He	had	succeeded	in	getting	 Cinder	and	the	others	to	 Luna,	which	 had	been

his	primary	role	 in	their	 planning,	but	it	 hadn’t	gone	smoothly	 and	he	was	going

mad	not	knowing	what	had	happened.	Had	they	gotten	away?	Was	anyone	hurt?

     Even	without	 a	D-COMM	  link,	he	would	 have	been	tempted	to	send	a	comm

to	Iko	 or	Cinder	 just	to	 know	what	 was	happening,	but	Levana	 had	confiscated

his	portscreen.	It	 was	 maddening,	but	 given	 the	risk	 of	 a	comm	 being	 traced,

possibly	for	the	best.

     His	 anxiety	 would	 have	been	quelled	if	 he	could	 have	moved	 forward	 with

his	other	objectives.	 In	 addition	to	 distracting	 Levana,	he	had	also	 been	tasked

with	 gathering	 information	  about	Scarlet	 Benoit,	 but	 he	 could	 learn	 nothing,

nothing,	while	 trapped	in	here.

     It	 was	like	being	stuck	on	the	Rampion	again,	but	a	hundred	times	worse.

     A	 bell	echoed	through	his	suite.

     He	 bolted	 through	 the	main	 parlor	  and	yanked	 open	the	 door.	 A	 liveried

servant	stood	on	 the	other	 side,	a	boy	 a	 few	years	 younger	than	 Kai.	 He	was

flanked	by	four	Lunar	 guards.

     “I	 am	 not	a	prisoner,”	 Kai	 started,	wedging	 his	foot	 into	 the	door	 in	case	it

was	slammed	shut	as	it	had	been	countless	times	before.	The	servant	stiffened.	“I

339
am	the	emperor	of	the	Eastern	Commonwealth,	not	some	common	criminal,	 and

I	will	 be	treated	with	diplomatic	 respect.	I	have	the	right	to	hold	counsel	with	 my

adviser	and	cabinet	officials	  and	I	demand	to	 hear	Queen	Levana’s	reasons	for

detaining	us	in	this	manner!”

     The	  servant’s	  mouth	   worked,	  speechless,	 for	   a	 moment,	   before	  he

stammered,	“I-I	have	been	s-summoned	to	escort	you	to	Her	Majesty.”

     Kai	  blinked,	 momentarily	  baffled,	 but	  he	quickly	  gathered	 himself.	 “It’s

about	time.	Take	me	to	her	immediately.”

     The	servant	bowed	and	stepped	back	into	the	corridor.

     Kai	 was	marched	through	 the	palace	feeling	 even	more	like	 a	prisoner	 with

the	guards	spread	out	at	his	back,	though	no	one	touched	him.	He	did	his	 best	to

observe	the	palace	layout,	picking	out	memorable	landmarks	when	he	could—an

interesting	sculpture,	 an	intricate	 tapestry.	Over	a	sky	 bridge	 and	down	a	 long,

narrow	corridor	where	holographic	 portraits	were	lined	up	like	 a	gauntlet.

     His	feet	 stumbled	once	when	he	saw	the	last	holograph.	He	had	to	look	twice

to	be	sure	he	wasn’t	losing	his	mind.

     The	 final	  holograph	 was	 a	woman	 who	  looked,	 at	 first	 glance,	 just	 like

Cinder.

     His	 heart	pounded,	but	 as	the	holograph	turned	 toward	him,	 he	realized	 his

mistake.	This	was	a	mature	version	of	Cinder,	 with	flirtatious	  eyes	and	a	vixen’s

smile.	Her	 cheekbones	were	more	pronounced,	her	nose	a	bit	narrower.	 In	fact,

the	real	similarities	  lay	 not	between	 this	woman	 and	the	 Cinder	 he	knew,	 but

between	her	and	the	Cinder	he’d	seen	at	the	base	of	the	ballroom	steps.

     He	  checked	  the	 plaque,	  confirming	   his	  suspicions.	  QUEEN	CHANNARY

BLACKBURN.

340
     Cinder’s	 unintentional	 glamour,	painfully	  beautiful	as	it	 had	been,	looked	so

much	like	her	mother.

     “Your	 Majesty?”

     He	startled	and	whipped	his	 attention	away.	He	said	nothing	to	 the	servant	as

he	left	the	swaying	holograph	behind.

     He	had	expected	to	be	taken	to	 the	throne	room,	 but	as	they	walked	through

an	iron-grated	door	and	into	a	far	less	luxurious	 hallway,	he	grew	suspicious.	On

his	left	they	passed	an	elaborate	vault	door.

     “What’s	 in	there?”

     Expecting	 to	be	ignored,	 he	was	surprised	when	the	servant	answered,	“The

crown	jewels	and	regalia.”

     The	 crown	  jewels.	  In	  New	  Beijing	  they	  stored	 priceless	 artifacts	  and

heirlooms	 in	  one	 of	 the	 most	  secure	underground	 vaults.	  There	 they	 kept

gemstones	the	size	of	eggs,	millennia-old	  gold-plated	 swords,	even	the	 crowns

of	the	emperor	and	empress	when	they	weren’t	in	use.

     It	 was	clear	that	this	wing	was	not	open	for	 general	palace	tours.	Where	were

they	taking	him?

     They	 turned	another	corner	 and	Kai	 was	ushered	through	 a	door	into	 some

sort	of	computer	control	center,	full	 of	 invisi-screens	and	holograph	nodes.	Maps

and	surveillance	 videos	were	 flickering	  on	 every	wall	 and	 there	were	 at	least

thirty	 men	 and	 women	 analyzing	 the	abundance	 of	 feeds	and	 compiling	  the

ongoing	data.

     Before	he	could	begin	to	 make	sense	of	what	they	were	doing,	he	was	shoved

through	a	door	 into	 an	adjacent	room.	 The	door	 was	shut,	locking	  him	 behind

soundproof	glass.

341
     His	 gaze	swept	around	the	new	 space.	A	backdrop	 on	one	wall	 showed	 the

city	of	Artemisia	 and	Earth	off	 the	horizon.	Two	elaborate	thrones	sat	before	it.

     The	 rest	of	 the	 room	 was	 full	 of	 enormous	 standing	 lights	 and	recording

equipment.	It	  reminded	 him	 of	 the	 media	 room	 in	 New	 Beijing	  Palace,	 but

without	any	seats	set	up	for	journalists.

     Levana	 stood	behind	one	 of	 the	thrones,	her	 hands	rested	on	its	 back.	She

was	dressed	in	a	shimmering	 black	gown	 hung	with	 a	silver	 sash.	A	brooch	 on

the	sash	had	a	delicate	gold	 filigree	 and	rhinestones	that	 read	Princess	Winter,

Though	Gone,	Never	Forgotten.

     Kai’s	 lips	curled	in	 disgust.	This	bit	of	 gossip,	at	least,	had	reached	him	in	his

captivity.	 Princess	Winter	 had	 been	murdered.	Some	 were	saying	 it	 was	by	 a

guard,	some	were	saying	 a	jealous	lover.	 But	 after	seeing	the	way	 Levana	had

snarled	at	her	stepdaughter,	Kai	couldn’t	help	having	his	own	theories.

     Thaumaturge	Aimery	 stood	by	 the	door,	along	with	 the	red-haired	captain	of

the	guard.	An	unfamiliar	 man	was	fiddling	 with	one	of	the	lights.

     Though	Levana’s	mouth	 was	smiling,	her	eyes	were	vicious.

     Something	had	happened.

     Kai	 planted	his	 feet	and	shoved	his	 hands	into	his	 pockets,	hoping	 to	come

across	as	composed	but	formidable.	“Hello,	 my	sweet,”	he	drawled,	recalling	 the

sycophantic	endearments	she’d	mentioned	in	the	ports.

     Levana	 gave	 him	 a	 withering	 look,	  which	 spoke	 volumes.	 If	  she	wasn’t

willing	 to	fake	amusement,	then	something	had	gone	horribly	wrong.

     Which	 he	hoped	meant	something	had	gone	horribly	right.

     “I	 was	 promised	that	 I	would	 be	 treated	as	a	diplomatic	 guest,”	 he	said.	“I

wish	to	hold	 counsel	with	 Konn	 Torin	and	the	 rest	of	the	Earthen	delegates	and

342
to	be	allowed	access	to	roam	the	palace	and	city.	We	are	not	your	prisoners.”

     “Unfortunately,	  I	 am	 not	 taking	 demands	today.”	 Levana’s	 long	 nails	dug

into	the	 back	of	 her	false	 throne.	“You	 are,	 however,	going	 to	help	 me	with	 a

little	project.	 Are	we	ready?”

     The	 man	was	 holding	 up	pieces	 of	 paper	in	 varying	 tones	of	 white.	 “One

more	moment,	My	Queen.”

     Kai	 raised	an	eyebrow.	 “I’m	  not	helping	 you	 with	 anything	 until	 you	grant

my	requests	and	answer	my	questions.”

     “My	  dear	groom-to-be,	you	gave	up	your	 rights	to	diplomatic	 courtesy	when

you	brought	those	criminals	into	my	 home.	Sit	down.”

     Kai	 experienced	 a	heartbeat’s	worth	 of	 defiance	 before	 his	legs	 moved	 of

their	 own	 accord	and	 he	collapsed	 into	 one	 of	 the	thrones.	 He	 glared	at	 the

queen.

     “I’m	  told,”	 he	 pressed,	“that	you	 took	an	Earthen	 prisoner	during	 a	time	 of

cease-fire.	A	citizen	of	 the	European	Federation	by	the	name	of	Scarlet	Benoit.	I

demand	to	know	if	there	is	any	truth	to	these	rumors	and	where	the	girl	is	now.”

     Levana	 started	to	laugh.	 “I	 assure	you	 there	is	no	 Earthen	prisoner	 by	that

name	here.”

     Her	 laughter	  set	Kai’s	  teeth	 on	  edge	and	 her	 statement	 did	 nothing	  to

convince	him.	 Was	Levana	implying	 that	Scarlet	was	dead?	Or	no	 longer	in	 the

palace?	Or	no	longer	in	Artemisia	at	all?

     Levana	grabbed	a	veil	 from	 a	mannequin’s	 head	and	draped	it	 over	herself.

Aimery	 stepped	 forward	 and	 settled	 the	 queen’s	 crown	 on	 her	 head.	 When

Levana	 turned	  back,	 her	  glamour	  was	 no	  longer	  visible.	  Having	  grown

accustomed	to	her	beautiful	face,	Kai	had	forgotten	how	this	blank	 veil	had	filled

343
him	with	 horror	for	so	long.

     “What	 are	we	doing	here?”	Kai	asked.

     “Filming	   a	 little	   video,”	  came	 Levana’s	 voice.	  “There	  has	 been	 some

confusion	in	 the	 outer	sectors	of	 late,	 and	I	 thought	it	 pertinent	 to	 remind	 the

people	of	 their	 true	 loyalties,	 and	all	 the	 great	things	 you	 and	I	 are	 going	 to

accomplish	once	we	are	husband	and	wife.”

     He	studied	her,	but	could	see	little	beneath	the	veil.

     She	was	telling	 him	so	little,	 but	 she	was	telling	him	 enough.	Cinder’s	video

had	played.	Levana	was	on	the	defensive.	It	had	to	be.

     “What	 do	you	expect	me	to	say?”

     Levana	 clicked	 her	teeth	 and	took	 the	 throne	beside	 him.	 “Nothing	  at	all,

darling.	I	will	 do	the	talking	 for	you.”

     Dismay	 kicked	 behind	his	 sternum.	He	 tried	to	 jolt	 to	 his	feet,	 but	his	 legs

had	become	stone.	He	wrapped	 his	hands	around	the	 chair’s	 arms,	digging	 his

nails	into	the	polished	wood.	“I	 don’t	 think—”

     His	tongue	halted.

     The	 technician	 counted	 down	  on	 his	 fingers	 and	 a	 light	  glowed	 on	 the

cameras	before	him.

     Kai’s	 body	relaxed.	His	 hands	released	the	chair’s	arms	and	settled	in	his	lap.

His	posture	was	poised	 but	natural,	his	 gaze	soft.	He	 was	smiling	 as	he	looked

into	the	camera’s	lens.

     On	 the	inside,	however,	 he	was	furious.	 He	 was	screaming	and	 threatening

Levana	with	 every	law	 regarding	intergalactic	 policies	 he	could	 think	 of.	None

of	it	mattered.	His	tirade	was	apparent	to	no	one	but	himself.

     “My	  good	people,”	 said	Levana,	“it	 has	come	to	my	 attention	that	 you	have

344
been	accosted	by	an	impostor	claiming	 to	 be	our	beloved	 Princess	Selene,	who

was	tragically	 lost	to	us	thirteen	 years	ago.	It	has	distressed	me	greatly	that	this

girl,	whose	real	name	is	Linh	 Cinder	and	who	is	a	wanted	criminal	 both	on	Luna

and	on	Earth,	has	dared	to	take	advantage	of	this	painful	 episode	in	 our	history,

particularly	 when	we	are	still	 in	 mourning	over	 the	death	of	my	stepdaughter.	It

breaks	my	heart	to	inform	you	that	this	girl’s	 claims	 are	nothing	but	lies	meant	to

confuse	you	and	 manipulate	you	 into	 joining	 her	 even	when	your	 good	 sense,

when	not	so	manipulated,	would	refuse	to	participate.”

     She	gestured	to	Kai.	 “I	 wish	 to	introduce	 you	all	 to	my	 future	 husband,	His

Imperial	 Majesty,	 Emperor	Kaito	 of	 Earth’s	 Eastern	Commonwealth.	 He	has	a

reputation	of	being	 a	most	fair	 and	compassionate	ruler,	and	I	have	no	doubt	he

will	 be	a	great	king	 to	 us	as	well.	 Together,	we	 will	 unite	 our	countries	 with	 a

union	built	on	admiration	 and	mutual	respect.”

     Inside,	Kai	 gagged.

     Outside,	he	turned	love-struck	eyes	toward	his	bride.

     “You	  may	not	 know,”	  Levana	continued,	 “that	 His	 Majesty	 has	had	many

personal	dealings	with	 Linh	 Cinder,	 this	 criminal	 who	 is	masquerading	as	Her

Highness,	Princess	Selene.	I	wanted	 you	to	 hear	his	opinion	 of	 the	girl	 so	 you

might	make	decisions	based	on	facts,	and	not	emotional	 responses.	Please	grace

him	with	 your	full	 attention.”

     Kai	 faced	the	camera	again	and	the	words	that	came	out	of	 his	mouth	would

later	have	him	scrubbing	his	own	tongue.

     “Citizens	 of	 Luna,	it	is	 my	honor	to	 address	you	as	your	future	king,	and	my

greatest	sadness	that	 my	  introduction	  to	 you	  must	 be	 on	 such	 tumultuous

grounds.	As	 your	 queen	 has	stated,	I	  have	had	 many	 interactions	 with	 Linh

345
Cinder,	and	I	 know	with	 certainty	 she	is	not	what	 she	claims	to	be.	The	truth	 is

that	she	is	 a	violent	 criminal,	  responsible	for	 countless	 thefts	and	 murders	on

planet	Earth.	 After	  developing	 an	 obsession	with	 me,	 she	even	 attempted	to

assassinate	my	beloved	bride-to-be,	your	queen,	during	our	annual	peace	festival

in	New	Beijing.	 When	that	attempt	failed,	 she	went	so	far	as	to	kidnap	me	on	the

day	that	 had	 been	intended	 as	our	 wedding,	  proceeding	to	 hold	 me	 hostage

against	my	will	  and	under	inhumane	 conditions	 until	 I	promised	 to	give	 up	on

this	union	 between	Earth	 and	Luna	 and	agree	to	 marry	her,	 instead.	It	 is	 only

thanks	to	Luna’s	 brave	soldiers	and	Her	 Majesty’s	 indomitable	 spirit	 that	I	was

safely	released.	Unfortunately,	 Linh	 Cinder	 has	not	given	 up.	She	continues	 to

live	a	fantasy	 in	which	 she	is	Princess	Selene,	returned	from	the	 dead,	in	hopes

that	she	might	win	 my	affection.	 Her	instability	  and	recklessness	have	made	her

a	dangerous	felon	and	a	threat,	not	only	to	my	safety,	but	to	 the	well-being	of	 all

who	come	in	 contact	with	 her.	I	 would	 urge	you	all,	 if	 you	 see	Linh	Cinder,	 to

report	her	to	officials	 immediately.	 Do	not	speak	to	her.	Do	not	approach	her.	As

your	future	 king,	I	 am	now	 most	concerned	with	 your	safety,	and	 it	is	 my	hope

that	Linh	 Cinder	will	  be	found	 and	brought	to	 Artemisia	 where	she	can	be	met

with	the	justice	her	crimes	deserve.”

     By	 the	time	he	had	finished	 speaking,	Kai	felt	 like	 he	would	have	ripped	 out

his	own	tongue	if	given	 the	chance.

     Levana	started	again,	“Of	  course,	if	 ever	there	was	found	 to	be	any	truth	 to

the	rumors	that	my	dear	niece,	Selene,	had	survived	all	 those	years	ago,	I	would

joyfully	  welcome	her	 into	my	 heart	and	 home	and	place	Luna’s	 crown	 myself

upon	her	head.	Sadly,	it	is	 not	to	be.	Selene	lies	with	 the	stars,	and	I	alone	must

maintain	the	security	and	livelihoods	 of	 our	people.	I	know	 times	are	difficult.	 It

346
is	with	 great	sadness	that	I	watch	our	 food	production	 diminish	 year	after	 year,

and	our	limited	 resources	fail	to	meet	the	needs	of	our	growing	populace.	Which

is	why	it	 has	been	the	topmost	priority	 of	my	 regime	to	secure	this	alliance	with

Earth,	so	 that	 our	future	  might	 be	brighter	  and	our	 people	 taken	care	 of	 for

generations	to	come.	This,	 my	 people,	is	 the	future	 that	I	 alone	can	offer	 you.

Not	  this	 cyborg,	  this	  impostor,	  this	  fraud.”	   As	  her	 tone	  dipped	 toward

resentment,	Levana	paused	and	 regathered	herself.	 Her	 voice	 carried	 a	smile

again	as	she	finished,	“I	  am	your	 queen	and	you	are	my	 people.	It	 is	my	 great

privilege	to	guide	us	all	 into	a	bright	new	future.”

     The	technician	stopped	the	recording	and	Kai’s	 body	throbbed	as	control	was

returned	to	 him.	 He	 bolted	 to	 his	 feet	 and	rounded	 on	 Levana.	 “I	 am	 not	 a

brainless	instrument	to	be	used	for	your	propaganda.”

     Levana	removed	 the	crown	 and	veil	 and	passed	them	to	Aimery.	 “Be	 calm,

my	beloved.	You	spoke	so	eloquently.	No	doubt	the	people	were	impressed.”

     “Cinder	 will	 know	 it	was	fake.	She’ll	know	 you	were	controlling	 me.”

     Levana’s	eyes	flashed.	“What	do	I	 care	what	Cinder	thinks?	Her	opinion,	 like

yours,	means	nothing.”	She	snapped	her	fingers	at	the	guard.	“I	am	finished	with

him.	You	may	take	him	 back.”

347
	




                                            Thirty-Eight







As	soon	as	the	emperor	had	been	led	away	by	 the	contingent	of	 guards,	Levana

swept	out	of	the	studio	 into	the	control	 room.	“Have	 that	video	 edited	and	set	to

play	in	 all	 sectors	where	 the	cyborg’s	 message	went	out.	 Monitor	  those	feeds

carefully.	I	 want	hourly	reports	on	how	 each	broadcast	is	being	received.	What	is

the	current	status	of	the	outer	sectors?”

     “We	  are	 seeing	 minor	  upheavals	in	  thirty-one	  sectors,”	 said	 a	 woman.

“Mostly	 civilians	 have	been	refusing	to	respect	curfew	laws,	and	there	have	been

some	attacks	on	sector	guards.”

     A	 man	 added,	“We’re	 also	 seeing	an	increase	of	 thefts	 in	 two	 agricultural

sectors.	Laborers	returned	to	the	fields	and	have	been	harvesting	food	rations	for

their	own	use.	Guards	have	been	incapacitated	in	both	sectors.”

     Levana	  huffed.	  “Send	 added	 security	  to	  all	  sectors	 showing	  signs	 of

insurgence.	We	must	quell	this	immediately.	And	 find	 that	cyborg!”

     She	stood	watching	 the	flicker	  of	surveillance	 videos	for	 a	moment,	 though

her	thoughts	were	far	away.	As	 her	blood	boiled,	 she	found	herself	back	in	New

Beijing,	 watching	the	girl	 rush	past	her	in	that	 tawdry	silver	 ball	gown.	 She	saw

her	trip	on	the	ballroom	 steps	and	tumble	down	toward	the	gardens.	Her	hideous

348
metal	foot	snapped	off	at	the	ankle	and	the	full	 force	of	 her	glamour	surged	over

her,	crackling	like	 electricity,	rolling	  off	her	body	like	 heat	waves	in	the	desert.

     In	 her	 unpracticed	 state,	the	 girl	 had	 done	 nothing	 more	 than	call	  up	an

exaggeratedly	beautiful	  version	 of	 herself,	 and	 in	  so	doing,	  she	had	 turned

herself	into	Channary.	Her	mother.	Levana’s	tormentor.

     Levana	 could	  still	  see	 her	 like	  a	 photograph	  imprinted	  forever	 in	  her

memory.	Hatred	she	had	not	felt	in	 years	surged	through	her	veins.	Fury	sparked

in	her	vision,	white	 and	blinding.

     Selene.	 She	 was	 meant	  to	 die	  thirteen	  years	 ago,	 yet	  here	 she	 was,

disastrously	alive.	 And	  just	 as	Levana	had	 feared	 back	then,	 she	would	 take

everything	from	her.	Everything	 that	Levana	had	worked	so	hard	for.

     It	 made	her	sick.	Why	 couldn’t	 Selene	have	died,	easily,	mercifully,	 the	way

she’d	planned?	When	 she	had	coaxed	that	young	 nanny	into	 setting	fire	 to	 the

princess’s	playhouse,	 it	 should	 have	ended	 it	 all.	 No	 niece.	No	  princess.	No

future	queen.

     But	 she’d	been	tricked.	 Selene	was	alive	 and	 attempting	to	 take	her	throne

from	her.

     Her	  attention	  refocused	 on	  the	 screens.	 “These	  are	 my	  people,”	   she

whispered.	“My	 blood	and	my	soul.	I	am	their	 queen.”

     Aimery	 appeared	at	her	side.	“Of	 course	you	are,	Your	 Majesty.	 The	cyborg

has	no	 idea	what	 it	 is	 to	 be	 queen.	What	 choices	one	 must	 live	 with.	  What

sacrifices	must	be	made.	When	 she	is	gone,	the	 people	will	 recognize	 that	you

have	always	been	the	one	to	rightly	sit	upon	our	throne.”

     “‘When	 she	is	gone,’”	 Levana	repeated,	grasping	at	the	words.	“But	how	will

I	ever	know	that	she	is	gone	if	I	cannot	find	 her?”

349
     It	 was	infuriating.	 She	had	known	 the	cyborg	was	 a	threat	from	the	 moment

she	recognized	her	 on	Earth.	 But	 for	 her	 to	attempt	 to	 turn	Levana’s	 citizens

against	her	was	a	blow	she	couldn’t	 fathom.	The	thought	of	 their	love	 turning	to

biased	hatred	stole	the	air	from	her	lungs	and	left	her	feeling	 hollowed	out	 to	her

core.

     That	 was	 the	cyborg’s	 plan	 too.	 To	 turn	 as	many	 people’s	 minds	 against

Levana	 as	 she	 could,	 knowing	   that	 large	 numbers	 would	  be	  her	 greatest

advantage.	Levana	could	 control	  hundreds,	perhaps	thousands	of	 her	 citizens

when	she	had	 a	need	to	 do	 it.	 With	 her	 thaumaturges	behind	 her,	they	 could

control	entire	sectors,	entire	cities.

     But	even	she	had	limits.

     She	shook	her	head.	It	mattered	not.	The	people	would	not	revolt	 against	her.

The	people	loved	her.

     She	rubbed	two	fingers	against	her	brow.	“What	 will	 I	do?”

     “My	 Queen,”	 said	Aimery,	“perhaps	I	 can	offer	a	bit	of	good	news.”

     Releasing	her	breath,	 she	turned	to	the	 thaumaturge.	“Good	 news	would	 be

very	welcome	indeed.”

     “I	 received	an	interesting	report	 from	your	 laboratories	this	morning,	 but	had

not	had	a	chance	to	share	their	discoveries	in	the	wake	of	the	cyborg’s	broadcast.

However,	it	 has	been	confirmed	 that	we	are	capable	of	 duplicating	 the	mutated

letumosis	microbes	 that	were	 recovered	from	 the	body	 of	 Dr.	 Sage	Darnel	 on

Earth,	 and	  that	  our	  immunity	  to	  the	  original	   disease	 has	 in	  fact	  been

compromised	by	this	mutation.”

     It	 took	 Levana	a	moment	to	 change	the	direction	 of	 her	thoughts.	“And	  the

antidote?”

350
     “Still	  effective,	 though	 there	is	 a	much	 shorter	window	 in	 which	 it	 can	be

used.”

     Levana	tapped	her	fingers	against	her	lower	lip.	“That	 is	interesting.”

     Years	ago,	Levana	 had	unleashed	this	plague	on	Earth,	 and	she	would	soon

embrace	the	results.	Earth	was	weak	and	desperate.	Desperate	to	cure	the	plague.

Desperate	to	end	the	war.

     When	 she	gave	 them	the	 antidote,	 they	would	  be	unspeakably	 grateful	 to

their	new	empress.

     She	had	never	expected	her	lab-created	disease	to	mutate	in	the	wild,	though.

Now,	no	one	was	immune,	not	even	her	own	people.	What	 a	strange,	miraculous

thing.

     “Thank	  you,	 Aimery.	 This	 could	 be	 the	 answer	I’ve	  been	seeking.	 If	 the

people	do	not	see	their	errors	and	come	crawling	back	to	 my	good	graces,	I	may

have	to	employ	 new	 means	of	persuasion.	It	 would	 break	 my	 heart	to	 see	my

people	suffering,	but	that	is	 one	of	those	difficult	 decisions	a	queen	finds	herself

making	from	time	 to	time.”

     Her	heart	fluttered	 as	she	imagined	the	people	filling	up	the	courtyard	beyond

the	palace	 walls	 and	 kneeling	  before	her,	 tears	 on	 their	 faces.	 They	 would

worship	her	for	 having	saved	them.	She	would	 save	them	all	 with	her	 goodness

and	charity.

     Oh,	how	they	would	 adore	her,	their	savior,	their	rightful	 queen.

     “Your	 Majesty!”

     She	pivoted	 toward	the	voice.	 A	 woman	had	stood	up	 and	was	adjusting	an

invisi-screen.	“I	 think	I’ve	 found	something.”

     Levana	 shoved	past	 Aimery	 to	 get	 a	better	 view.	 The	 screen	showed	 the

351
central	square	of	an	outer	sector—regolith	 mining,	 perhaps,	judging	 by	the	dust

that	 covered	 every	 surface,	 smudging	  even	 the	 camera	 lens.	 The	 fountain

depicting	her	 likeness	could	 be	seen	in	 the	 footage,	a	thing	 of	 beauty	 in	 their

drab	world.

     The	square	was	full	of	 people,	a	rarity	in	itself.	 Her	mandated	curfew	ensured

that	the	people	 focused	on	 their	 work	 and	their	 rest	without	  being	tempted	 to

converge	with	their	neighbors	during	 off-work	 hours.

     “Is	 this	live?”	 she	asked.

     “No,	 My	 Queen.	This	was	filmed	not	 long	after	the	end	of	the	workday.”	 She

hastened	through	the	footage,	 and	Levana	 squinted	to	 try	 to	make	 sense	of	it.

Guards,	civilians,	a	just	punishment,	and	then	…

     “Pause	the	video.”

     The	 woman	 did,	 and	 Levana	found	 herself	 staring	 into	 the	 face	 that	 had

haunted	her	for	months.	 If	there	had	 been	any	doubt,	the	monstrous	metal	hand

dispelled	it.

     “Where	 is	this?”

     “Regolith	 Mining	 9.”

     Levana’s	lips	 curled	upward.

     The	cyborg	was	hers.

     “Aimery,	  assemble	a	 team	for	  immediate	 deployment	 to	 this	sector.	 Linh

Cinder	is	to	 be	arrested	and	brought	to	me	 for	a	public	 trial	 and	execution.	Use

whatever	methods	you	see	fit	to	detain	her.”	Her	 vision	bled	with	 loathing	 as	she

stared	at	the	 screen.	The	haughty	 girl	 with	  her	ignorant	 words	 and	her	 proud

displays.	“We	 are	not	 to	tolerate	 any	sympathizing	 with	 her	 or	her	 allies.	This

uprising	must	be	brought	to	an	end.”

352
	



                                      BOOK
                                     Three

      “Your	 stepmother	will	soon	know	you	are	here,”

     warned	the	kindly	dwarfs.	“Do	not	let	anyone	in.”

353
	




                                             Thirty-Nine







Levana’s	rebuttal	 video	 was	 playing	 for	 the	 third	 time	 that	 hour.	Cinder	 was

doing	her	best	to	ignore	 it,	but	 every	time	 Kai	started	speaking	the	sound	of	 his

voice	made	her	jump,	only	 to	be	reminded	all	over	again	that	he	wasn’t	 here.	He

was	under	Levana’s	control,	as	Levana	had	so	deftly	illustrated.

     From	 her	spot	 around	a	 worktable	 on	the	 third	 floor	 of	 a	 regolith	 factory,

Cinder	could	see	most	of	one	of	the	screens	embedded	on	the	dome.	It	showed	a

contented	Levana	and	a	peaceful	Kai.	So	happy	together.	There	was	one	moment

when	Kai	 turned	to	Levana	 and	smiled	all	 dreamy-like	 that	made	Cinder’s	 skin

crawl.	For	 the	billionth	 time,	 she	wished	Cress	was	with	 them.	She	would	 have

known	how	to	turn	 it	off.

     Cinder	 turned	 away	  from	 the	 video	 to	  concentrate.	She	 had	 no	 way	 of

knowing	how	 Levana’s	message	was	being	received	across	Luna,	just	as	she	had

no	way	 of	knowing	  how	her	 video	 was	being	received.	 The	best	she	could	 do

was	move	forward.

     She	was	gathered	among	her	allies—Iko,	  Thorne,	Wolf,	 and	Scarlet.	Wolf’s

mother	was	there,	 too,	along	 with	 a	handful	 of	 sector	 residents	who	had	 been

nominated	to	represent	the	others.	They	 had	worked	 through	the	night,	 plotting

354
and	organizing,	too	energized	to	sleep.

     Two	 runners	had	returned	that	morning	from	 neighboring	mining	 sectors	and

were	reporting	  good	 news.	 The	 guards	had	 been	 restrained,	their	  weaponry

confiscated,	 and	the	 people	 would	  join	  Cinder	 on	 her	 march	 to	  Artemisia.

Additional	  messengers	had	 taken	 on	 the	 dangerous	assignment	 of	 traveling

through	 the	 mines,	 lava	 tubes,	 and	 maglev	 tunnels	 to	 confirm	  the	 truth	 of

Cinder’s	video	and	rally	 as	many	sectors	as	they	could	to	the	cause.

     It	 was	a	promising	start.

     The	rest	of	 the	sector	residents	had	been	sent	home	after	Cinder	encouraged

them	to	  get	 some	rest.	 In	 truth,	  she	needed	 space	from	 their	  curiosity	 and

awestruck	whispers.	Space	to	think.

     When	 they	 regathered,	she	would	 divide	 the	 people	into	 teams	and	assign

each	team	 a	 task.	Though	  some	volunteers	 had	 already	 been	 put	 on	 watch

guarding	the	 maglev	platforms,	 she	would	 soon	have	 to	establish	a	 rotation	 to

make	sure	they	stayed	alert.	Some	groups	would	 be	tasked	with	 gathering	what

food	and	medical	supplies	they	could	find,	 another	would	 watch	the	guardhouse,

and	still	 others	would	 be	 sent	to	 ransack	the	mines	 for	 potential	weapons	and

tools.	Wolf	  promised	 to	spend	time	 training	  any	able-bodied	 citizens	 in	basic

combat	techniques,	to	commence	that	afternoon.

     She	stared	 up	at	 the	 holographic	 map	of	 Luna,	 her	 brow	 drawn,	 as	Wolf

indicated	 what	 routes	 he	 thought	 they	 should	 take	 to	 the	 capital.	 Everyone

agreed	they	should	come	at	the	city	from	 as	many	directions	as	possible	to	force

Levana	to	divide	her	own	defenses	against	them.

     “We	 should	avoid	Research	and	Development,	and	also	Technical	Services,”

Wolf	 said,	pointing	 out	 two	 sectors	in	 Artemisia’s	 near	vicinity.	  “Most	 people

355
there	will	be	Levana	supporters.”

     “RD-1	  seems	easy	enough	to	get	around.”	 Cinder	 spun	the	holograph	 for	a

better	view.	 “But	 TS-1	 and	2	 are	right	 in	 our	 path	if	 we’re	 going	 to	 hit	 these

agricultural	sectors	on	the	way.”

     “Maybe	  we	 don’t	 avoid	 them,”	 said	 Thorne.	 “Is	 there	 some	way	 we	 can

blockade	the	 platforms	 under	those	 sectors,	trapping	 anyone	inside?	 It	 would

allow	us	safe	passage	through,	and	also	keep	anyone	from	sneaking	up	behind	us

afterward	and	trapping	us	in	these	tunnels.”

     Cinder	 tapped	a	finger	against	her	lower	 lip.	 “That	 might	work,	 but	 what	do

we	block	them	with?”

     “Doesn’t	   this	  sector	  manufacture	  building	   materials?”	   asked	 Scarlet,

gesturing	to	a	sector	labeled	 GC-6:	GENERAL	CONSTRUCTION.	“Maybe	they’ll	have

something	we	can	use.”

     Cinder	turned	to	one	of	the	miners.	“Can	 I	appoint	you	to	look	 into	that?”

     He	clapped	a	hand	to	his	heart	in	proud	salute.	“Of	course,	Your	 Majesty.	We

can	take	some	of	the	mining	carts	to	transport	the	materials	too.”

     “Perfect.”	  Trying	 not	 to	feel	 awkward	 about	the	Your	 Majesty	 part,	Cinder

turned	back	to	the	group.

     Wolf	 stiffened—a	 small	change	that	sent	an	alarm	through	Cinder.

     “What	 is	it?”

     He	started	to	 shake	his	head,	but	stopped,	his	frown	 deepening.	His	piercing

eyes	turned	toward	the	window.	 The	screens	on	the	dome	had	once	again	fallen

silent.

     “I	 thought	I	…	 I	smelled	something.”

     Hair	 prickled	 on	the	back	of	 Cinder’s	neck.	 If	it	 had	been	anyone	other	than

356
Wolf,	 she	would	 have	laughed.	But	 his	 senses	were	uncanny,	and	his	instincts

hadn’t	led	them	astray	yet.

     “What	 sort	of	something?”	 she	asked.

     “I	 can’t	 place	it.	There	are	a	lot	 of	bodies	here,	a	lot	of	 scents.	But	there	was

something…”	 His	fists	 tightened.	“Someone	is	 near.	Someone	who	was	also	on

the	rooftop	in	New	 Beijing.”

     Cinder’s	 heart	thumped—Kai!

     But,	no,	Wolf	 would	 have	recognized	Kai	for	 sure.

     It	 had	to	be	one	of	the	royal	guards	who	had	attacked	them.

     Iko	 grabbed	the	portscreen—a	device	that	had	stunned	and	awed	the	civilians

—and	shut	off	the	holograph.

     A	 shrill	scream	echoed	through	the	streets	outside.

     Cinder	ran	for	 the	window,	 pressing	her	body	against	the	wall,	 ready	to	duck

out	of	view.	 Thorne	plastered	himself	to	 the	wall	beside	her.	“You	 should	hide,”

he	whispered.

     “So	should	you.”

     Neither	of	 them	moved.

     She	watched	the	scene	below,	trying	to	make	sense	of	it	as	horror	built	 inside

her.	Countless	guards	were	marching	through	the	streets,	along	with	at	least	half

a	dozen	thaumaturges	that	she	could	see.

     A	 white	coat	drew	 her	attention	and	her	stomach	sank.	Thaumaturge	Aimery

stood	on	the	edge	of	 the	central	fountain,	 right	 where	Cinder	 had	stood	before.

He	carried	himself	like	 a	prince	with	his	beautiful	 face	and	proud	stance.

     More	 reinforcements	 kept	pouring	 in	 from	 the	narrow	 streets	that	stretched

out	from	the	square	like	spokes	on	a	wheel.	Far	too	many	reinforcements	to	quell

357
a	simple	uprising	in	a	nonthreatening	mining	 sector.

     Cinder’s	 gut	knotted.

     They	knew	she	was	here.

     The	guards	were	dragging	the	people	out	of	 their	homes,	corralling	 them	into

uniform	lines	 around	the	fountain.	She	recognized	the	man	who	had	been	beaten

by	the	guards,	still	bruised	and	limping.	 There	was	the	old	woman	who	 had	been

stockpiling	 what	she	could	of	 her	meager	rations	for	years	and	who	 had	already

offered	to	give	it	 up	to	those	who	would	 be	fighting	 in	Artemisia.	 And	 there	was

the	twelve-year-old	 boy	who	 had	trailed	 Iko	around	 all	morning	 with	 a	swoony

expression	on	his	face.

     “They’re	  rounding	up	everyone	 in	the	sector,”	 whispered	Maha,	 peering	out

of	 the	  next	 window.	   “No	  doubt	  they’ll	  search	 these	 buildings	  too.”	  Her

expression	was	fierce	as	she	stepped	back.	“You	 should	all	 hide.	The	rest	of	 us

will	 give	 ourselves	up.	 They	might	 not	 search	these	upper	floors	 if	 they	 think

everyone	is	accounted	for.”

     Cinder	gulped.	“They	 won’t	 stop	looking.”

     Maha	squeezed	her	hand.	“Then	hide	well.”

     She	 wrapped	 Wolf	  in	 a	 tight	  embrace.	 He	 bent	 down	 to	  accept	it,	  his

knuckles	going	white	as	he	held	her.

     They	heard	the	factory	 door	bang	open	on	the	first	floor.	 Cinder	jumped.	 She

wanted	to	grab	Maha	and	force	her	to	stay,	but	Maha	 extricated	herself	from	 her

son’s	 embrace	and	 walked	 away	 with	  her	 head	 up.	 The	 remaining	 citizens

followed.	 Without	 a	word	from	 Cinder,	 it	seemed	they	had	unanimously	 agreed

that	keeping	her	safe	was	the	priority.

     A	 chill	washed	down	her	spine	as	she	watched	them	go.

358
     It	 wasn’t	 long	 before	 she	heard	orders	shouted	by	 the	 guards,	and	Maha’s

calm	voice	  stating	that	 they	 were	 unarmed	and	 coming	 down	 voluntarily.	  A

moment	later	 she	saw	them	 being	shoved	 out	toward	 the	 crowd	 in	the	 square

with	guns	pointed	at	their	backs.

     Scarlet	gasped.	“What	about	Winter?”

     Cinder	 turned	wide	eyes	on	her.	They	 had	left	the	princess	at	Maha’s	 house,

thinking	it	 was	the	safest	place	for	her,	but	now	…

     “I	 can	go,”	said	Iko.	 “They	 won’t	 be	able	to	detect	me	like	they	would	 any	of

you.”

     Cinder	pressed	her	lips	in	a	firm	 line,	debating.	She	wanted	Iko	here	with	her,

as	her	only	 ally	 that	 couldn’t	 be	manipulated.	 But	 that	also	made	 her	the	best

choice	for	securing	the	princess.

     She	assented.	“Be	careful.	Sneak	out	through	the	loading	bay.”

     Iko	 gave	a	brief	nod	and	then	she,	too,	was	gone.

     Cinder	was	shaking	as	she	looked	around	at	Thorne,	Wolf,	 and	Scarlet.	From

this	far	up	she	wasn’t	 able	to	feel	the	bioelectricity	  of	the	thaumaturges	down	in

the	crowd,	so	she	was	confident	 they	 couldn’t	 feel	her	 and	her	friends	up	 here,

either,	but	that	did	little	 to	comfort	her.

     They	 had	come	 for	 her,	she	knew	 it.	 She	had	 nowhere	to	 go.	Nowhere	 to

hide.

     What	 was	more,	she	wasn’t	 sure	she	wanted	 to	hide.	 These	people	had	put

their	trust	in	her.	How	 could	she	abandon	them?

     Aimery’s	  voice	 reached	her	ears.	Though	 he	didn’t	  yell,	 the	sound	 carried

upward,	echoing	off	 the	 hard	surfaces	of	the	 factory	walls.	 Cinder	 adjusted	her

audio	interface	to	be	sure	she	caught	every	word.

359
     “Residents	 of	Regolith	 Mining	  Sector	9,”	 he	said,	“you	 have	been	gathered

here	to	 face	 the	 consequences	of	 your	 unlawful	  behavior.	 In	  harboring	 and

aiding	known	criminals,	 you	are	all	guilty	 of	 high	treason	against	the	crown.”	He

paused,	allowing	 the	full	  impact	of	 his	 words	 to	settle.	 “The	 sentence	for	this

crime	is	death.”

     Cinder’s	 body	was	wound	tight	as	she	peeked	through	the	window	again.	The

people	who	 had	been	gathered	into	 orderly	 groups	were	 forced	to	 their	 knees.

There	were	over	two	thousand	residents,	minus	only	 those	who	had	been	sent	as

messengers	into	the	 neighboring	 sectors.	 Their	 kneeling	 bodies	 filled	  up	 the

streets	as	far	as	she	could	see.

     He	wouldn’t	  kill	 all	 of	them.	He	 wouldn’t	 dare	reduce	Luna’s	labor	 force	so

severely.

     Would	he?

     Aimery	  studied	  those	gathered	 before	 him,	  while	  the	 statue	 of	  Levana

watched	over	them	like	 a	proud	 mother.	Two	 guards	stood	to	 either	side	of	 the

fountain.	Cinder	 recognized	the	 red-haired	guard	and	 wondered	if	 this	 was	the

one	Wolf	 had	 scented	before.	The	 rest	of	 the	 guards	were	spread	out	 in	 their

helmets	and	armor,	 boxing	 in	 the	 civilians	 with	  guns	at	 the	ready.	 The	other

thaumaturges	remained	 interspersed	throughout	  the	crowd,	  arms	 tucked	 into

their	sleeves.

     Cinder	 stretched	her	thoughts	out	as	far	as	she	could.	Reaching,	reaching	for

Aimery’s	 energy.	If	  she	could	take	control	 of	 just	 him,	she	could	 force	 him	 to

offer	mercy.	He	could	order	these	people	to	be	let	go.

     But	no.	He	was	too	far	 away.

     It	 frustrated	 her,	knowing	 that	 Levana	would	 have	been	able	 to	stretch	 her

360
gift	 that	  far.	 Levana	 could	  have	 easily	 controlled	  Aimery	  from	  up	 here—

probably	could	have	controlled	 all	of	 them	from	here.	Cinder	didn’t	 care	that	her

aunt	had	a	 lifetime	 of	 practice	 over	her.	 She	should	have	 been	as	strong.	She

should	have	been	capable	of	protecting	the	people	who	would	protect	her.

     Panting,	 she	 turned	 her	 attention	  to	 the	 nearest	 guards,	 those	 stationed

beneath	the	window.	She	could	detect	them,	at	least,	but	they	were	already	under

the	control	of	one	of	the	thaumaturges.

     Panic	simmered	through	her.	She	had	to	think.

     She	still	 had	 five	 bullets	in	 her	 hand.	Thorne	and	 Scarlet	were	both	 armed

too.	She	was	confident	she	could	hit	one	of	the	nearest	guards	and	maybe	even	a

thaumaturge,	but	the	attempt	would	give	away	their	location.

     Plus,	as	soon	as	Aimery	realized	they	were	under	attack,	he	would	start	using

the	sector	residents	as	shields.

     She	didn’t	 know	if	 she	could	risk	it.

     She	didn’t	 know	if	 she	had	a	choice.

     “However,”	  said	Aimery,	 his	dark	 gaze	fixed	on	 the	crowd,	“Her	 Majesty	 is

prepared	to	offer	  you	all	 amnesty.	 Each	one	 of	 you	will	  be	 spared.”	His	 lips

turned	upward	in	a	kind	 smile.	“All	  you	must	 do	is	tell	 us	where	you’re	keeping

the	cyborg.”

361
	




                                                   Forty







Cinder	shoved	a	 knuckle	into	 her	 mouth,	biting	  down	hard	 to	 keep	from

screaming.	She	could	feel	her	companions’	eyes	on	her,	but	she	dared	not	look	at

them.

     “You	cannot	go	out	there.”	Scarlet’s	whisper	was	harsh,	no	doubt	seeing	the

indecision	scrawled	across	Cinder’s	face.

     “I	can’t	let	them	die	for	me,”	she	whispered	back.

     A	 hand	grabbed	her	and	jerked	her	away	from	the	window.	 Wolf	 glared

down	at	her.	Sweet	and	vicious	Wolf,	whose	mother	was	down	there,	with	them.

     She	half	expected	him	to	 give	her	away	 himself,	but	instead	he	grabbed

Cinder’s	shoulders,	squeezing	tight.	“No	one	is	dying	for	you.	If	 anyone	dies

today	it	will	 be	because	they	finally	have	something	to	believe	in.	Don’t	you

even	think	about	taking	that	away	from	them	now.”

     “But	I	can’t—”

     “Cinder,	get	 yourself	together,”	said	 Thorne.	“You	 are	the	 heart	of	 this

revolution.	If	you	give	yourself	up	now,	it’s	over.	And	 you	know	what?	She’ll

probably	kill	all	those	people	down	there	anyway	just	to	make	sure	this	doesn’t

happen	again.”

362
     A	 gunshot	made	her	yelp.	 Wolf	 clamped	his	 hand	over	Cinder’s	 mouth,	but

she	ripped	herself	away	and	threw	herself	back	at	the	window.

     White	 spots	crowded	into	her	vision.	Then	red	as	fury	blinded	her.

     In	 the	square	below,	a	man’s	body	was	sprawled	 out	at	Aimery’s	 feet,	 blood

splattered	across	the	 ground.	Cinder	 didn’t	  know	 who	 it	 was,	 but	 that	 didn’t

matter.	Someone	was	dead.	Someone	was	dead	because	of	her.

     Aimery	 scanned	the	stricken	faces	of	those	closest	to	him,	smiling	pleasantly.

“I	will	  ask	you	again.	Where	is	Linh	Cinder?”

     They	all	 kept	their	 eyes	pinned	to	the	ground.	 No	one	looked	at	 Aimery.	 No

one	looked	at	the	growing	pool	of	blood.	 No	one	spoke.

     Inside	her	head,	Cinder	was	screaming.	The	gunshot	still	 echoed	in	her	skull,

her	audio	interface	repeating	it	again	and	again	and	again.	She	pressed	her	hands

over	her	ears,	shaking,	furious.

     She	would	kill	 Aimery.	 She	would	destroy	him.

     A	 body	 pressed	against	her	back.	Scarlet	wrapped	 her	arms	around	Cinder,

tucking	her	face	into	 the	crook	of	 Cinder’s	neck.	To	 restrain	her,	she	thought,	as

much	as	to	comfort	her.

     She	didn’t	 pull	away,	but	she	was	not	comforted.

     Below,	 Aimery	 signaled	to	a	woman	seven	rows	back,	a	strategically	random

choice	that	 would	 ensure	no	one	felt	 safe.	 Another	 shot	fired	 from	 one	of	 the

guards.	The	woman	convulsed	and	crumpled	against	the	person	beside	her.

     A	 shudder	pulsed	through	the	crowd.

     Cinder	sobbed.	Scarlet	held	her	tighter.

     How	 long	 would	 it	 go	on?	 How	 many	would	 he	kill?	  How	 long	 could	she

stand	to	wait	up	here	and	do	nothing?

363
     “All	  it	 takes	is	 one	person	to	 tell	 me	her	 location,”	 said	Aimery,	  “and	 this

will	 all	be	over.	We	will	 leave	you	to	your	 peaceful	lives.”

     Something	damp	fell	 on	Cinder’s	 neck.	Scarlet	was	crying,	 shaking	every	bit

as	hard	as	she	was.	But	her	arms	didn’t	loosen.

     She	wanted	to	look	away,	 but	she	forced	herself	not	to.	Their	 bravery	left	her

both	speechless	and	horrified.	She	found	herself	wishing	 someone	would	 betray

her	just	so	it	would	end.	Just	so	the	choice	would	no	longer	be	hers.

     Thorne	took	 her	hand	and	squeezed.	Wolf	formed	 a	barrier	to	her	other	side,

all	three	of	them	acting	both	as	her	jailers	and	her	life	 raft.	She	knew	they	shared

her	horror,	but	none	of	them	could	 understand	the	responsibility	she	felt	 clawing

at	her	from	the	inside.	 These	people	trusted	her	to	fight	 with	 them,	to	give	them

the	better	future	she’d	promised.

     Did	 it	 matter	that	 they	were	willing	  to	 die	for	 her	cause?	Did	 it	 matter	that

they	would	sacrifice	their	 own	lives	so	she	might	succeed?

     She	didn’t	 know.

     She	didn’t	know.

     All	  she	 saw	 were	 blinding	 sparks.	 All	  she	 heard	were	 gunshots	 pulsing

through	her	head.

     Aimery	 pointed	 at	another	 victim	 and	Cinder’s	 knees	weakened.	It	 was	the

young	boy	who	had	been	so	smitten	with	Iko.

     Cinder	sucked	in	a	breath,	prepared	to	cry	out,	to	stop	it,	to	scream—

     “No!”

     Aimery	 held	up	his	hand.	“Who	 was	that?”

     A	 girl	 a	few	rows	behind	 the	boy	had	begun	to	cry	 hysterically.	 “No,	 please.

Please,	leave	him	alone.”	She	was	about	Cinder’s	age.	A	sister,	she	guessed.

364
     New	 tension	 rolled	 through	 the	crowd.	 A	  few	 nearby	people	 cast	the	 girl

betrayed	looks,	 but	Cinder	 knew	 it	 wasn’t	 fair.	 This	 girl	  didn’t	 know	 Cinder.

Why	should	she	protect	her	over	someone	she	loved?

     Aimery	  raised	 an	 eyebrow.	 “Are	  you	  prepared	to	 give	  up	 the	 cyborg’s

location?”

     “Maha	 Kesley,”	 the	girl	 stammered.	“The	cyborg	was	being	housed	by	Maha

Kesley.”

     With	 a	flick	 of	Aimery’s	 fingers,	 the	guard	who	had	targeted	the	boy	lowered

his	gun.	“Where	is	this	Maha	Kesley?”

     Maha	 stood	 up	 before	 anyone	 was	 forced	 to	 betray	 her,	 a	 pillar	  in	 the

kneeling	crowd.	“I’m	  here.”

     Wolf	 took	in	 a	shaky	breath.

     “Come	 to	the	front,”	 said	Aimery.

     Maha’s	 slender	shoulders	were	 back	as	 she	walked	among	 her	friends	 and

neighbors.	A	 change	had	occurred	in	the	 short	time	 Cinder	had	known	 her.	On

that	first	day	 she	had	seemed	beaten,	heavy	shouldered,	afraid.	The	woman	who

stood	defiantly	before	the	queen’s	head	thaumaturge	was	someone	new.

     It	 made	Cinder	even	more	terrified	for	her.

     “What	 is	the	number	of	your	residence?”	Aimery	 asked.

     Maha	gave	it	with	 a	steady	voice.

     Aimery	 gestured	at	the	captain	of	 the	guard	and	a	female	thaumaturge.	They

stepped	away,	signaling	 for	 one	additional	  guard	to	 join	 them	 as	they	headed

toward	Maha’s	house.

     Aimery’s	  attention	 had	 returned	 to	Maha.	 “Have	  you	 been	sheltering	 the

cyborg	Linh	Cinder?”

365
     “I	 do	not	know	that	name,”	said	Maha.	“The	one	cyborg	I	know	is	named

Princess	Selene	Blackburn	and	she	is	the	true	queen	of	Luna.”

     The	crowd	rustled.	Chins	lifted.	Shoulders	squared.	If	anyone	had	forgotten

why	they	were	risking	 their	lives	 for	 a	stranger,	Maha’s	statement	reminded

them.

     Aimery	smirked.	Cinder’s	blood	iced	over.

     As	she	watched,	Maha	raised	both	of	her	hands	over	her	head	so	everyone

could	see.	Then	she	grabbed	her	right	thumb	and	yanked	it	back,	hard.

     Cinder	heard	the	pop	even	from	here,	followed	by	Maha’s	cry.	She	didn’t

know	if	Aimery	had	forced	her	to	break	her	thumb	or	merely	dislocate	it,	and	she

didn’t	care.	She	made	a	decision.

     In	another	moment,	she	had	slipped	into	the	minds	of	her	friends	and	forced

them	to	back	away	from	her.

     She	spun	around.	Scarlet,	Thorne,	and	Wolf	gawked	at	her,	dismayed.

     Wolf	recovered	first.	“Cinder,	don’t—”

     “It’s	 the	people’s	revolution	now,	not	mine.	Wolf,	you’re	coming	with	me.

I’ll	  keep	your	 mind	under	 control	but	 not	 your	 body,	just	 like	 we	 did	 in

Artemisia.	 Thorne,	 Scarlet,	stay	 here	 and	 target	 Aimery	  and	 the	 other

thaumaturges,	but	don’t	shoot	unless	you	have	a	clear	shot,	otherwise	you’re	just

giving	away	your	location.”

     “Cinder,	no,”	Scarlet	hissed,	but	Cinder	was	already	leaving	her	and	Thorne

behind,	forcing	Wolf	to	follow	in	her	tracks.

     He	growled.

     “I	 have	to,	Wolf,”	she	said	as	they	rushed	down	the	staircase	to	the	second

landing.	Outside,	muffled	by	thick	factory	walls,	she	heard	another	cry	of	pain

366
from	Maha.	“I	 can’t	do	nothing.”

     “He’ll	  kill	 you.”

     “Not	  if	 we	 kill	  him	  first.”	  She	raced	 down	 the	 last	staircase	 and	braced

herself.	 She	 checked	 that	  she	 had	 control	  of	  Wolf’s	   bioelectricity	  so	 no

thaumaturge	could	 claim	 him,	 then	pushed	through	 the	 factory	 doors.	A	 third

scream	from	 Maha	 felt	 like	 a	knife	  in	 Cinder’s	 chest.	One	 look	 told	 her	that

Maha’s	first	 three	fingers	were	bent	at	crippling	  angles.	Tears	were	on	her	pain-

clenched	face.

     “Here	 I	am,”	Cinder	 bellowed.	“You	 found	me.	Now	 let	her	go.”

     In	 one	uniform	movement,	 all	the	guards	swiveled,	 turning	their	 weapons	on

Cinder.	She	sucked	in	 a	breath,	prepared	to	be	 riddled	with	 bullets,	 but	 no	one

fired.

     Across	the	 sea	of	prostrated	laborers,	Aimery	 grinned.	 “So	the	impostor	 has

finally	 graced	us	with	her	presence.”

     She	clenched	 her	fists	 and	started	 toward	him.	 The	 guns	followed.	  So	did

Wolf,	 his	energy	crackling.	 “You	  know	very	 well	 that	my	 claims	are	true,”	 she

said.	“It’s	  the	 only	 reason	Levana	 is	 so	 determined	to	 have	 me	killed.”	   She

stretched	out	her	thoughts	to	the	people	surrounding	her,	but	none	of	their	minds

were	available	to	her.	She	had	expected	as	much.

     She	had	a	 trained	killer	  at	her	side	 and	two	 skilled	 shooters	at	her	back.	 It

would	have	to	be	enough.

     She	reached	the	front	row	 of	 the	gathered	civilians.	 “You	 came	here	for	me,

and	here	I	am.	Leave	these	people	alone.”

     Aimery	  cocked	his	 head.	His	gaze	swooped	 over	Cinder,	 from	 head	to	 toe

and	back	up,	making	 her	 feel	like	 easy	prey.	She	knew	 how	 she	looked	in	 her

367
drab	clothing,	 with	 her	 metal	hand	 and	clunky	 boots,	 her	messy	ponytail,	 and

most	likely,	 a	hearty	amount	of	dust	smudged	across	her	face.	She	knew	that	she

did	not	look	like	 a	queen.

     “Imagine	 how	differently	  this	could	have	gone,”	he	said,	stepping	down	from

the	fountain’s	  ledge,	“if	  you	 had	 chosen	to	 claim	 the	 minds	 of	 these	people

before	 our	 arrival.	 Instead,	 you	 left	  them	 adrift	  on	 the	 ocean	of	 their	  own

weaknesses.	You	turned	them	into	targets	and	then	did	 nothing	 to	protect	them.

You	are	not	suited	to	be	a	ruler	of	Luna.”

     “Because	  I	   would	   rather	  my	   people	  know	   freedom	  than	   constant

manipulation?”

     “Because	you	are	not	capable	of	making	the	decisions	a	queen	must	make	for

the	good	of	all	her	people.”

     She	gritted	 her	teeth.	 “The	 only	 people	who	 have	benefited	 from	 Levana’s

regime	are	the	 greedy	aristocrats	 in	 Artemisia.	 Levana’s	 not	a	 queen.	She’s	a

tyrant.”

     Aimery	 bowed	his	head,	almost	like	he	was	agreeing	with	 her.	“And	you,”	 he

whispered,	“are	nobody	at	all.”

     “I	 am	the	true	ruler	 of	Luna.”	 Though	she	put	as	much	conviction	 behind	the

words	as	she	could,	 they	 fell	 flat.	 Within	  moments,	the	 arrival	 of	 the	queen’s

head	thaumaturge	had	undone	all	the	progress	she’d	made	in	this	 sector.	With	a

flick	 of	 his	 fingers	 Aimery	  had	taken	 away	 all	 her	 power	and	 prostrated	the

people	before	him.

     “You	 are	a	child	 playing	 at	war	games,”	said	Aimery,	  “and	you’re	 too	naïve

to	see	you’ve	already	lost.”

     “I’m	  surrendering	 to	 you,”	 she	said.	 “And	 if	  that	means	I	 have	to	 lose	so

368
these	people	can	go	free,	so	be	it.	What	you	don’t	seem	to	realize	is	that	this	isn’t

about	me.	It’s	 about	 the	people	who	 have	lived	 in	 oppression	for	 far	too	 long.

Levana’s	rule	is	coming	to	an	end.”

     Aimery’s	 smile	 grew.	Behind	him,	the	fountain	 gushed	and	spat.

     Wolf’s	 energy	surged	behind	her,	hackles	raised.

     Aimery	 opened	his	arms	to	the	crowd.	 “Let	 it	 be	known	that	on	this	 day,	the

impostor	 princess	surrendered	to	 Her	 Majesty	 the	Queen.	 Her	 crimes	will	  be

dealt	with	 swiftly	  and	justly.”	  His	eyes	glimmered.	 “However,	  I	promised	 that

your	 lives	 would	 be	 spared	if	 any	 one	 of	 you	 were	to	 give	 up	 the	 cyborg’s

location.”	 He	 clicked	  his	tongue.	 “It	  is	 a	great	 shame	no	 one	 came	forward

sooner.	I	do	not	like	to	be	kept	waiting.”

     A	 shot	fired.	A	shock	wave	pulsed	through	Cinder’s	 body.

     She	didn’t	 know	 where	it	 came	from.	 She	saw	blood,	 but	didn’t	  know	 who

had	been	hit.

     Then	Maha’s	 legs	collapsed	and	she	fell	face-first	 onto	the	 hard	ground.	Her

three	deformed	fingers	remained	stretched	out	over	her	head.

     Still	  reeling	 from	 the	concussion	 of	 the	 gunshot,	Cinder	 stared	at	 Maha’s

body,	unable	to	breathe.	Unable	to	move.

     She	heard	 Wolf’s	  intake	of	 breath.	 His	 energy	crystallized	 into	 something

still	and	fragile.

     The	world	 stilled,	balancing	on	a	needle	point.	Silent.	Incomprehensible.

     Another	 gun	fired,	 this	 shot	from	 much	 farther	away,	 and	the	noise	shoved

the	world	 off	 its	axis.	Aimery	  crowed	and	stumbled	back	as	a	spot	on	 his	thigh

soaked	through	with	blood.	 His	eyes	blazed	up	toward	the	 factory.	Another	 shot

hit	the	fountain	behind	him.

369
     Wolf	 roared	and	leaped	forward.	The	nearest	guard	blocked	his	path,	but	was

too	slow	 to	shoot.	Wolf	  batted	him	 away	like	 an	annoying	 gnat	and	rushed	for

Aimery,	teeth	bared.

     A	 cacophony	 of	 noise	and	 bodies	erupted.	 Every	 citizen	 that	 should	have

been	on	Cinder’s	side	instead	surged	to	their	feet	and	grappled	for	her	and	Wolf.

Cinder’s	 body	  was	 slammed	 to	 the	 ground.	 She	 lost	 sight	  of	 Wolf.	  More

gunshots.

     Throwing	 a	punch	to	 someone’s	jaw,	she	rolled	 once	and	scrambled	back	to

her	feet.	 She	spotted	 a	red	 coat,	raised	 her	hand,	 and	fired.	 She	 waited	 long

enough	to	see	the	thaumaturge	buck	back	 before	she	was	searching	for	 another

target,	but	she	didn’t	get	off	 another	shot	as	dozens	of	hands	grabbed	her,	pulled

her,	wrestled	her	to	the	ground.

     Cinder	 thrashed	against	their	hold,	blowing	 a	lock	 of	hair	from	 her	face.	She

spotted	Wolf.	 He,	 too,	was	 pinned	to	 the	ground,	 though	it	 had	taken	 a	dozen

men	to	do	it.	 Every	limb	 was	held	in	 place,	his	cheek	pressed	into	the	dust.	The

bodies	of	two	guards	and	one	miner	lay	not	far	away.

     Aimery	 loomed	 above	him,	 panting,	his	 constant	smile	nowhere	 to	be	seen.

He	had	one	hand	pressed	over	the	wound	in	his	leg.	“The	shots	are	coming	from

that	 factory.	 Send	 a	 team	to	 search	 it,	 and	 bind	  these	two	 before	 they	  try

anything	else.”

     Cinder	strained	against	the	arms	holding	 her.	If	 she	could	raise	her	arm,	take

one	clean	shot—

     Her	 arms	were	 yanked	behind	 her,	her	 wrists	 bound.	She	screamed	as	her

shoulder	was	pulled	 just	 shy	 of	 dislocation.	 She	was	hauled	 back	to	 her	 feet,

coughing	on	dust,	her	entire	body	throbbing.

370
     She	glanced	around,	searching	for	an	ally,	but	only	blank	 faces	greeted	her.

     She	 sneered,	defiant,	 as	 she	and	 Wolf	  were	 forced	 to	 kneel	 in	  front	 of

Aimery’s	 livid	  face.	 She	was	dizzy	 with	  her	own	 hatred,	 but	as	 her	thoughts

settled,	she	was	hit	with	the	full	force	 of	Wolf’s	 agony	beside	her.

     He	was	in	anguish,	his	 emotions	splintering,	and	Cinder	 remembered	that	the

body	of	the	miner	beside	him	was	his	mother.

     Cinder	  shuddered	 and	 had	  to	  look	  away.	 She	  spotted	 the	 red-coated

thaumaturge	she’d	shot,	not	 moving,	 and	another	in	 a	black	uniform	 also	 lying

not	far	away.

     That	was	all.	 Two	thaumaturges	and	two	guards	killed,	 Aimery	 injured.	 That

was	all	she	had	gotten	from	 Maha’s	sacrifice,	 and	the	brave	deaths	of	two	 other

innocent	civilians.

     Cinder	 was	more	 angry	than	 afraid,	feeding	 on	 Wolf’s	 devastation	 and	the

horror	of	all	 the	blank	faces	around	her,	all	these	people	used	like	marionettes.

     She	believed	what	she’d	said	before.	Levana	could	kill	  her,	but	Cinder	had	to

believe	her	death	wouldn’t	be	the	end.	This	revolution	 no	longer	belonged	to	her.

371
	




                                               Forty-One







“They’re	 coming,”	 said	Scarlet,	snarling	 as	she	backed	away	from	 the	window.

Her	first	 shot	had	been	low,	hitting	 Aimery’s	  thigh	 when	she’d	been	aiming	 for

his	head.	Her	 second	shot	had	 hit	 the	fountain,	 useless,	before	the	 crowd	 had

been	too	thick	 to	 keep	firing.	  She	had	heard	 at	least	three	 shots	coming	 from

Thorne	but	didn’t	 know	if	 he’d	had	any	more	success.

     Cinder	and	Wolf	 were	like	 hogs	in	a	slaughterhouse	down	there,	and	she	and

Thorne	would	be	close	behind	if	they	didn’t	 get	out,	now.

     Thorne	grabbed	the	helmet	 he’d	stolen	from	 the	guard	and	pulled	 it	over	 his

head,	transforming	from	 her	friend	 to	her	 enemy.	She	hoped	the	transformation

was	as	convincing	 to	 the	Lunars.	 “Give	  me	your	 gun,”	 he	said.	 She	hesitated

only	briefly	  before	handing	it	 over.	 Thorne	pocketed	it	 and	grabbed	her	elbow,

dragging	her	toward	the	staircase.

     They	were	on	 the	first	landing	 when	footsteps	stampeded	through	the	bottom

level.

     “Found	 one!”	 Thorne	yelled,	 making	 her	jump.	He	 held	his	gun	 to	Scarlet’s

head	as	he	dragged	her	to	the	bottom	of	the	stairs.	Four	guards	surrounded	them.

“There	were	two	 gunmen.	The	other	might	 have	run,	but	check	 the	top	floors	 to

372
be	sure.	I’ve	got	this	one.”

     Scarlet	pretended	to	 thrash	against	his	 hold	as	Thorne	 dragged	her	past	the

guards,	oozing	authority.	The	guards	charged	up	the	stairs.	The	second	they	were

gone,	Thorne	 swiveled	 around	 and	released	 her.	They	 ran	 for	 the	 back	 exit,

dashing	into	the	alley	behind	the	factory.

     Already	 the	brawl	 was	over,	judging	 from	 the	dreadful	silence	that	filled	  the

dome.

     Thorne	turned	away	from	 the	factory,	but	Scarlet	grabbed	his	arm.	“Wait.”

     He	 looked	back,	 his	 gaze	harsh,	but	maybe	 that	was	 the	effect	 of	 the	face

mask.

     “We	 have	to	try	to	help	them,”	 she	said.

     His	 brow	wrinkled.	  “You	 saw	how	 easily	they	took	 down	Cinder	 and	Wolf,

and	you	think	we	can	do	something	to	help	them?”

     She	didn’t.	 She	honestly	didn’t.

     But	if	 she	didn’t	even	try	 …

     “Give	 me	my	gun,”	 she	said,	holding	out	her	hand.

     Thorne	stared	at	her.

     “Give	 me	my	gun.”

     With	 a	 huff,	 he	 pulled	 the	gun	 from	 his	 waistband	and	 shoved	it	 into	 her

palm.	Scarlet	spun	away,	not	sure	if	he	would	follow.	 He	did.

     When	they	 turned	the	first	 corner	she	could	see	the	square.	The	citizens	who

had	risen	up	to	attack	Cinder	 and	Wolf	 were	all	 kneeling	again,	placid,	 as	if	the

fight	hadn’t	 even	happened.

     Scarlet	wondered	how	 long	it	 would	 take	those	guards	to	search	the	factory.

She	wondered	if	she	was	crazy	not	to	turn	and	run.

373
     The	gun	was	warm	in	her	hand,	the	handle	leaving	imprints	 in	her	skin.	There

had	been	a	time	when	 holding	 a	weapon	had	offered	 a	sense	of	protection,	 but

that	 comfort	 was	 compromised	  knowing	  how	 easily	 Lunars	  could	 turn	 the

weapon	against	her.

     Still,	 if	 she	could	 get	close	enough	she	could	get	off	 a	 shot	or	two,	 and	this

time	she	wouldn’t	miss.

     How	 close	 could	 she	get	before	 they	 detected	her?	Would	  the	size	 of	 the

crowd	help	 to	 hide	her,	 or	 would	 she	be	caught	 up	in	 the	same	brainwashing

trick	 as	soon	 as	she	 got	too	 close?	 She	didn’t	  know	 how	 it	 worked	 or	 how

vulnerable	she	would	be.	She	was	wishing	 now	 that	she	had	asked	Cinder	more

about	it	when	she’d	had	the	chance.

     They	moved	stealthily,	 Thorne	silent	behind	her.

     She	stopped	when	she	could	pick	out	 Wolf	 and	Cinder	among	their	 enemies.

They	 both	 had	their	  hands	bound	 behind	 them	 now.	 Wolf’s	  shoulders	 were

hunched.	He	was	looking	at	the	ground.

     No,	she	realized	with	 a	shudder.	He	was	looking	at	Maha.

     Fury	 ignited	in	 her	gut.	They	 had	taken	everything	from	 Wolf.	 His	 freedom,

his	childhood,	his	entire	family,	 and	he	had	done	nothing,	nothing,	to	deserve	it.

     She	wanted	to	avenge	him.	To	take	him	 away	from	this	 horrible	dust-mottled

place.	To	offer	him	a	life	 of	blue	skies	and	tomatoes	and	peace.

     Scarlet	tightened	her	grip	on	the	gun,	feeling	 the	familiar	press	of	the	trigger.

     But	 she	was	too	far	away.	 She	had	a	better	chance	of	hitting	 an	ally	 than	an

enemy	from	here.

     Heart	 thumping,	 Scarlet	scrutinized	 the	narrow	 alley,	estimating	 how	 many

steps	she	could	 take	and	 still	 stay	 hidden.	 There	was	 a	doorway	 set	 into	 the

374
factory	wall	 she	could	duck	into,	 but	being	 seen	wasn’t	her	biggest	concern,	not

when	Lunars	could	sense	her.

     Letting	 out	a	slow	breath,	she	raised	the	gun	and	lined	up	the	sights,	targeting

Aimery’s	 heart.	She	held	her	aim	for	three	breaths	before	she	huffed	and	lowered

the	weapon	again.	She’d	been	right	before.	Too	far	away.

     Again,	 she	considered	moving	closer.	Again,	she	hesitated.

     Then	she	noticed	a	shift	in	Wolf’s	 posture.	His	 head	turned	in	her	direction.

     It	 was	a	subtle	change,	almost	unremarkable.	He	didn’t	look	 at	her.	He	didn’t

make	any	move	to	 suggest	he	had	picked	out	her	scent	among	all	 these	people,

but	Scarlet	knew	 he	had.	There	was	a	tension	 to	his	shoulders	that	 hadn’t	 been

there	moments	before.

     Her	heart	somersaulted.	She	imagined	being	caught.	Wolf,	  watching,	as	they

put	a	 gun	 to	 her	head.	Wolf,	  powerless,	 as	she	was	 handed	another	 hatchet.

Wolf,	 whose	 mother	 had	just	 been	killed	  in	 front	  of	 him	 while	 he	 could	 do

nothing	to	stop	it.

     Scarlet’s	body	 shook	as	the	memory	of	her	grandmother’s	death	hit	her	like	 a

hammer	to	her	skull.	 The	despair	that	had	engulfed	 her.	All	 the	 fury	and	hatred

and	the	certainty	 thumping	 into	her	 again	and	again	that	 she	should	have	been

able	to	stop	it.

     But	she	couldn’t	 have	stopped	it.

     Just	like	Wolf	 couldn’t	 have	protected	Maha.	Just	like	 he	wouldn’t	 be	able	to

protect	her.

     She	couldn’t	 do	that	to	him.

     Scarlet	scrunched	up	her	face,	choking	back	a	violent	scream.

     Don’t	 react,	Scarlet,	she	told	herself.	Don’t	 react.

375
     She	lowered	the	gun	and	stepped	back.	She	looked	up	at	Thorne,	and	though

there	was	pain	etched	into	his	brow,	too,	he	nodded	in	understanding.

     Aimery’s	  calm	voice	drifted	 toward	 them.	“Linh	 Cinder	 will	 be	tried	 and	no

doubt	executed	 for	 her	crimes	 against	 the	crown.	 It	 is	 by	 the	 queen’s	mercy

alone	that	I	 will	  spare	the	rest	of	 your	 lives.	But	 take	note	 that	anyone	caught

speaking	of	  the	 cyborg	 and	 her	 treasonous	plots	 or	 conducting	  any	sort	  of

rebellious	activity	 will	 receive	a	swift	punishment.”

     Scarlet	 glanced	back	 in	time	 to	 see	a	guard	 shove	Wolf	  hard	between	 the

shoulder	blades,	and	he	and	Cinder	were	led	away.


                                                          *			 *			*

“Princess!”	 Iko	said,	keeping	 her	volume	as	loud	 as	she	dared,	which	wasn’t	all

that	loud	 considering.	“Princess,	 where	are	you?”	 She	backtracked	through	 the

house,	scouring	each	room	for	the	third	 time.	 Winter	 was	not	in	any	 cabinets	or

closets.	She	was	not	under	Maha’s	bed.	She	was	not	in	the	tiny	shower	or	…

     Well,	 that	was	it.	Those	were	the	only	hiding	 places.

     It	 was	a	really	small	house	and	Winter	wasn’t	there.

     Iko	 returned	to	the	living	 room,	feeling	 the	rumble	of	 her	fan	in	her	chest,	air

escaping	through	the	porous	fibers	in	her	back.	She	was	still	overheated	from	the

run	through	the	sector,	dodging	 in	and	out	of	 abandoned	homes	in	an	attempt	to

be	discreet.

     Had	Winter	 already	been	found?	Was	she	too	late?

     She	didn’t	  have	the	answers.	She	 forced	herself	 to	 pause	and	organize	the

information	 she	did	have.

     Levana’s	minions	 were	in	 RM-9.	They	 had	rounded	up	every	citizen	and	she

376
was	relatively	certain	it	 wasn’t	to	throw	 them	a	party.

     Cinder	 and	the	others	were	still	  in	that	 factory,	 as	far	as	she	knew,	and	 she

would	have	no	way	of	knowing	 if	 they	were	safe	until	she	saw	them	again.

     She	did	not	know	where	Princess	Winter	 was.

     She	considered	 her	options.	 Sneaking	back	 to	 the	factory	 to	 rejoin	 Cinder

seemed	like	a	logical	 next	step,	but	 she	would	be	endangering	herself	 by	doing

so.	This	 didn’t	  bother	 her	so	 much	 as	her	 fear	 of	 falling	  into	 enemy	hands.

Lunars	 didn’t	  seem	to	 know	  much	 about	 android	 data	systems,	 but	 if	  they

managed	to	 dissect	 her	 programming	 they	  would	 find	  a	 lot	 of	  confidential

information	 about	Cinder	and	her	strategies.

     She	could	 wait	for	 her	 friends	to	 return,	safe	and	unharmed,	but	 this	option

went	against	her	most	basic	programming.	She	despised	being	useless.

     She	was	still	debating	when	 she	heard	heavy	footsteps	outside	the	front	door.

Iko	startled	and	ran	into	the	kitchen,	tucking	 herself	beneath	a	counter.

     The	 door	 banged	 open.	 Someone	entered	 and	 Iko	 picked	  out	 the	 slight

auditory	differences	in	the	footsteps.	Three	intruders	were	inside	the	house.

     They	stopped	in	the	main	room.

     A	 male	 voice	 said,	“The	 database	confirms	 this	 as	the	 residence	of	 Maha

Kesley.”

     A	 short	silence	was	followed	 by	 a	female	voice.	 “I	 sense	someone,	but	their

energy	is	faint.	Perhaps	muffled	behind	a	barrier	of	some	sort.”

     Iko	 frowned.	Surely	 they	couldn’t	 sense	her?	Cinder	had	always	insisted	that

Iko	 could	 not	 be	 detected	 by	 the	 Lunar	 gift,	  given	 that	 she	didn’t	  produce

bioelectricity.

     “In	 my	 experience	with	the	 cyborg,”	 said	a	third	voice,	 also	male,	“she	does

377
not	always	react	as	one	would	expect	to	mind	control	 and	manipulation.	 Perhaps

she	is	capable	of	disguising	her	energy	as	well?”

     “Perhaps,”	 said	the	 woman,	though	 she	sounded	doubtful.	 “Kinney,	  search

the	perimeter	and	neighboring	homes.	Jerrico,	check	the	bedrooms.”

     “Yes,	 Mistress	Pereira.”

     The	footsteps	scattered.	The	front	door	shut	again.

     It	 was	a	small	 house.	Only	 moments	had	passed	before	the	 woman	entered

the	tiny	kitchen	and	Iko	 saw	the	fluttering	 sleeves	of	a	red	thaumaturge	coat.	She

came	to	stand	in	 the	center	 of	the	 closet-size	kitchen,	 so	close	Iko	 could	 have

touched	her.	But	she	didn’t	look	down	 or	bother	to	open	any	of	the	cupboards.

     From	 her	crouched	position,	 Iko	 stared	up	at	the	woman’s	 profile.	 Her	 gray

hair	was	cut	in	a	bob,	and	though	she	was	one	of	the	older	thaumaturges	Iko	had

seen,	she	was	still	beautiful,	with	sharp	cheekbones	and	full	lips.	Her	 hands	were

tucked	into	her	sleeves.

     She	stood	still	  for	 a	long	 moment,	her	 brow	drawn.	 Iko	 suspected	she	was

searching	for	more	traces	of	bioelectricity,	 and	it	became	clear	she	was	not	about

to	notice	Iko	beside	her.

     Iko	 held	still,	 glad	she	didn’t	 have	to	stifle	 her	breathing—good	 stars	above,

when	she’d	been	trapped	in	the	spaceship	closet	with	 Cinder	and	the	others,	the

noise	of	their	combined	breaths	had	been	earsplitting.

     But	then	her	fan	kicked	 in	again.

     The	woman	glanced	down	and	started.

     Iko	 raised	a	hand	in	greeting.	“Hello.”

     The	thaumaturge	studied	her	for	a	long,	long	 moment,	before	she	stammered,

“A	 shell?”

378
     “Close.”	 Iko	 snatched	a	dish	towel	off	the	counter	and	lunged	for	the	woman.

A	yelp	escaped	before	Iko	pressed	the	towel	against	her	face,	stifling	the	scream.

The	thaumaturge	thrashed,	but	Iko	held	her	firm	 against	the	wall,	biting	 back	her

instinctive	 apology	 as	she	watched	 the	woman’s	 face	 pale,	her	eyes	 widen	 in

panic.

     “Just	pass	out,”	Iko	 said,	trying	to	sound	comforting,	 “and	I’ll	  let	you	go.”

     “Hey!”

     She	 snapped	her	head	 around	as	 a	royal	  guard	spotted	 them	 through	 the

kitchen	window.	 He	ran	for	the	back	door	and	swung	it	open	and	…

     Holy	 stars	almighty.

     She’d	 always	 thought	 Kai	 was	 the	most	 attractive	 human	specimen	 she’d

ever	seen,	but	 this	 man	was	 devastingly	 beautiful,	 with	  tan	skin	 and	 roguish

wavy	hair,	and	he	was	…

     He	was	…

     Pointing	 a	gun	at	her.

     Iko	 yanked	the	thaumaturge	in	front	 of	her	at	the	same	moment	he	pulled	the

trigger.	 The	bullet	 hit	  the	woman	 somewhere	in	 her	 torso	 and	she	collapsed,

already	weak	from	Iko’s	 suffocation.

     Iko	 dropped	the	woman	 and	hurled	 herself	over	 the	body,	grappling	 for	 the

guard’s	gun.	 He	 swung	 her	around,	 knocking	 her	 back	into	  the	counter.	 The

impact	reverberated	through	 Iko’s	 limbs.	 The	 guard	yanked	 the	gun	away	 and

swung	his	  opposite	fist	  toward	 Iko’s	  face.	 Her	 head	snapped	 back	 and	she

stumbled	two,	 three	 steps,	before	colliding	  with	  the	stove.	 The	guard	 cursed,

shaking	out	his	hand.

     Iko	  was	 just	 thinking	   that	 she	 should	 have	 installed	 some	 martial	  arts

379
programming	 when	a	 second	gunshot	jolted	  through	her	 audio	 receptors.	She

flinched	 and	clamped	 her	hands	over	 her	ears,	dialing	 down	 the	 volume	 even

though	it	was	too	late.

     When	 her	thoughts	 cleared,	she	saw	the	 guard	staring	 at	her	 with	 an	open

mouth	and	saucer-wide	eyes,	his	hands	still	gripping	the	gun.	“What	 …	what	 are

you?”

     She	looked	 down.	 There	was	 a	hole	 in	her	 chest,	revealing	 sparking	wires

and	frayed	synthetic	skin	tissue.	She	groaned.	“I	just	had	that	replaced!”

     “You’re…”	   The	guard	took	a	step	back.	“I’d	  heard	of	Earthen	machines	that

could	…	 that	were	…	 but	you…”	 His	 face	contorted,	and	Iko	 had	spent	enough

time	  analyzing	  facial	  muscles	 to	  recognize	  this	  expression	 as	 complete,

unbridled	disgust.

     Indignation	 flared	 inside	her,	 probably	seeping	out	 through	 the	new	hole	 in

her	chest.	“It’s	not	polite	 to	stare,	you	know!”

     A	 form	 appeared	in	the	door	 leading	to	 the	main	room.	 Another	 guard,	and

this	one	Iko	 recognized	as	one	from	 Levana’s	personal	entourage.	He	had	been

part	of	 the	team	that	had	 accosted	them	on	the	rooftop	 in	 New	 Beijing.	 “What

happened?”	he	barked,	taking	 in	 the	fallen	 thaumaturge	and	 the	pretty	 guard’s

lowered	weapon	and	Iko.

     Recognition	 flitted	  through	his	 eyes	and	he	 grinned.	 “Nice	 find,	 Kinney.	  I

guess	this	  trip	   wasn’t	  as	 pointless	  as	 I	  thought.”	   He	 stepped	  over	 the

thaumaturge’s	body.

     Iko	 raised	her	fists,	trying	 to	recall	all	 those	fighting	 pointers	Wolf	 had	given

Cinder.

     “Where’s	 the	cyborg?”	asked	the	guard.

380
     Iko	 snarled	at	him.	“Bite	 me.”

     He	raised	an	eyebrow.	“Tempt	me.”

     “Sir	 Solis,”	 said	the	other	guard,	Kinney,	“she’s	not	…	 it	isn’t	 human.”

     “Clearly,”	  he	drawled,	glancing	at	the	bullet	 hole	in	her	chest	cavity.	“I	 guess

we’ll	 have	to	get	creative	with	how	we	extract	information	 from	 her.	I	mean,	it.”

     He	 swung	for	 her.	 Iko	 ducked	and	 swung	back,	 but	he	 trapped	her	 easily.

Before	her	processor	could	 catch	up,	he	had	her	hands	locked	 behind	her	back.

Iko	 struggled,	 trying	 to	 stomp	 on	 the	 arch	of	  his	foot,	  but	 he	evaded	 every

attempt.	He	was	laughing	as	he	bound	her	hands	and	spun	her	back	to	face	him.

     “All	  that	Earthen	technology,”	 he	said,	pulling	 aside	the	fabric	of	 her	shirt	to

pick	  at	 the	  destroyed	 skin	  fibers,	  “yet	  you’re	   somehow	 still	   completely

worthless.”

     Hot	anger	turned	her	vision	red.	“I’ll	  show	you	 worthless!”

     Before	 she	could	show	 him	anything,	 though,	 a	banshee’s	scream	filled	 the

kitchen	and	 a	kitchen	 knife	 slashed	toward	 Jerrico’s	 shoulder.	 He	gasped	and

dodged.	 The	 blade	 cut	 through	  his	 sleeve,	 leaving	  a	 bright	 red	  gash.	Iko

stumbled	back.

     Jerrico	 spun	around	and	slammed	the	 attacker	against	the	wall,	 holding	 her

throat	in	one	hand	while	the	other	wrestled	for	her	wrist,	 securing	her	knife	hand.

     Winter	 didn’t	 let	 go	of	 the	knife	 or	her	 wild-eyed	 loathing.	She	brought	 her

knee	up,	right	 between	his	 legs.	Jerrico	 grunted	and	pulled	 her	 away	from	 the

wall,	just	 to	slam	her	back	again.	This	 time,	Winter	 wheezed,	the	air	pushed	out

of	her	lungs.

     “Kinney,	 watch	the	android,”	 Jerrico	said	through	his	teeth.

     Iko	 swiveled	 her	attention	from	 Princess	Winter	 to	the	 too-handsome-to-be-

381
such-a-jerk	guard,	but	Kinney	 no	longer	 cared	about	her.	His	face	was	horrified

as	Jerrico	held	the	princess	by	her	throat.	“That’s	Princess	Winter!	Unhand	her!”

     A	 humorless	laugh	erupted	from	 Jerrico.	“I	  know	who	 it	is,	 idiot.	 Just	like	 I

know	she’s	supposed	to	be	dead.”

     “I	 heard	she	was	dead	too,	but	clearly	she’s	not.	Release	her.”

     Rolling	 his	 eyes,	Jerrico	turned	and	dragged	Winter	 off	 the	wall.	 “No,	 she’s

supposed	to	 be	dead.	 The	 queen	ordered	 her	to	 be	 killed,	  but	 it	 seems	like

someone	didn’t	  have	 the	 stomach	 for	  it.”	  Winter	  slumped	 forward	  but	 he

dragged	her	back	 up,	holding	 her	 against	his	chest.	“What	  a	lucky	 catch.	 I’ve

been	waiting	to	have	you	alone	for	 years,	but	that	annoying	Sir	Clay	 was	always

hanging	around	like	 a	vulture	 on	 dead	meat.”	 Jerrico	dragged	his	 thumb	along

Winter’s	jaw.	 “Doesn’t	 look	like	 he’s	here	now,	does	it,	Princess?”

     Winter’s	  lashes	fluttered.	 Her	  eyes	were	 dazed	as	she	 looked	 at	 Kinney.

“You…”

     “Hey.”	   Jerrico	 forced	 her	  chin	 around	 to	  face	 him.	 “You’re	   my	 prize,

Princess.	So	what	reward	do	you	think	I’ll	 get	for	 bringing	 your	dead	body	to	the

queen?	I	don’t	 think	 she’ll	care	what	 state	it’s	 in,	and	as	an	added	bonus,	I	 can

prove	that	your	boyfriend	 is	a	traitor	after	all.”

     Iko	 yanked	at	her	hands,	trying	 to	 disconnect	her	thumbs	from	 their	 sockets

and	shimmy	out	of	the	cords,	but	she	couldn’t	get	enough	leverage	with	 her	arms

so	tightly	bound.

     She	was	about	to	throw	 herself	forward	 and	ram	into	 Jerrico’s	spine	with	 all

the	force	her	metal	 skull	 could	muster	when	 Winter	 collapsed,	as	limp	 as	a	rag

doll.

     Jerrico	 startled,	barely	able	 to	regain	 his	hold	 on	her.	 In	the	 same	moment,

382
Winter	plunged	the	forgotten	knife	 into	his	side.

     Jerrico	 yelled	 and	 released	her.	 Winter	  stumbled	 out	 of	 his	 grip,	 but	 he

grabbed	her	wrist	 and	 yanked	her	 back,	then	 backhanded	her	across	the	 face.

Winter	fell.	 Her	head	crashed	into	the	edge	of	the	counter.

     Iko	 screamed	as	the	princess’s	body	crumpled	to	the	floor.

     With	 a	stream	of	 curses,	Jerrico	wrapped	 his	hand	around	the	 knife	 handle,

but	didn’t	 pull	it	 from	 the	wound.	His	face	was	as	red	as	his	hair	as	he	snarled	at

the	princess.	“What	a	stupid,	crazy—”

     He	 hauled	back	his	foot	 to	 kick	 her,	when	Kinney	  raised	his	gun	and	 fired.

The	shot	knocked	Jerrico	against	the	wall.

     Iko	 recoiled.	No	matter	how	 many	brawls	and	fights	she	found	herself	in,	 she

was	always	 stunned	at	 how	 much	 more	horrible	  the	reality	  was	than	 the	net

dramas.	Even	 the	  death	of	  such	 a	 despicable	 guard,	 his	 face	 contorted	 in

disbelief	as	the	life	drained	out	of	it,	 made	her	grimace.

     The	silence	that	followed	  felt	like	 it	 had	taken	over	the	whole	sector	and	Iko

questioned	if	that	last	gunshot	had	permanently	damaged	her	audio.

     The	guard	was	 staring	at	the	gun	in	 his	hand	as	if	 he’d	 never	seen	it	before.

“That’s	 the	first	time	 I	pulled	the	trigger	 myself.”	 Inhaling	 deeply,	he	set	his	gun

on	the	counter	 and	crouched	over	Princess	Winter.	 He	 reached	back	to	 inspect

her	head.	His	fingers	came	away	bloodied.

     “She’s	 breathing,”	he	said,	“but	she	might	have	a	concussion.”

     Iko’s	 processor	stumbled.	“Whose	side	are	you	on?”

     He	looked	 up.	His	 nose	twitched	 as	he	took	in	 the	bullet	 hole	again,	but	his

gaze	didn’t	linger	 on	it.	 “We	 were	told	the	 princess	was	dead.	I	thought	another

guard	killed	her.”

383
     Iko	 arranged	the	folds	of	her	shirt	to	 cover	her	wound.	“A	 guard	named	Jacin

was	ordered	by	the	queen	to	kill	her,	but	he	helped	her	escape	instead.”

     “Jacin	Clay.”

     She	narrowed	her	eyes.	“Why	did	you	 help	us?”

     With	 a	tense	brow,	Kinney	 eased	the	princess	back	onto	the	floor.	There	was

blood	everywhere.	From	the	thaumaturge.	From	Jerrico.	From	Winter.

     “I	 helped	her,”	 said	Kinney,	as	if	 the	distinction	 was	important.	He	found	 the

dish	towel	 Iko	 had	started	to	suffocate	 Mistress	Pereira	with	 and	tied	 it	 around

Winter’s	 head,	bandaging	the	wound	as	well	 as	he	could.	When	 he	finished,	 he

stood	and	picked	up	the	bloodied	knife.

     Iko	 stepped	back.

     He	paused.	“Do	you	want	 me	to	cut	those	cords	or	not?”

     She	searched	his	face,	wishing	she	didn’t	feel	so	compelled	to	 keep	staring	at

it.	“Yes,	please?”

     She	turned	around	and	he	made	quick	work	 of	freeing	her.	She	half	 expected

to	find	 split	skin	 fragments	when	she	held	up	her	hands,	but	the	blade	hadn’t	 so

much	as	nicked	her.

     “Here’s	 what’s	 going	 to	happen,”	 said	Kinney,	 gesturing	to	 the	gun	still	  on

the	counter.	Iko	could	 tell	 he	didn’t	 like	 looking	 at	her.	He	kept	finding	 reasons

to	look	away.	 “I’m	 going	 to	make	up	a	report	 telling	 them	you	wrestled	the	gun

away	from	 me	 and	killed	 Mistress	 Pereira	and	 Sir	Solis,	 then	 managed	to	get

away.	I’m	 not	going	 to	tell	 them	anything	about	seeing	the	princess.	They	don’t

even	have	to	know	 she’s	still	 alive.”	 He	pointed	 at	her	nose,	daring	 to	hold	 her

gaze	for	longer	than	half	 a	second.	“And	you	 are	going	to	get	her	far	 away	from

here.	Keep	her	hidden.”

384
     She	planted	her	hands	on	her	hips.	“And	here	we	were	just	 keeping	her	holed

up	in	a	tiny	little	 house	in	a	completely	random	mining	 sector.	Why	didn’t	 it	ever

occur	to	us	to	try	and	keep	her	hidden?”

     Kinney’s	  face	 was	unreadable	for	  a	long	 moment	 before	 he	 asked,	“You

understand	sarcasm?”

     “Of	  course	I	  understand	sarcasm,”	 she	spat.	“It’s	   not	like	  it’s	 theoretical

physics,	is	it?”

     The	guard’s	 jaw	worked	 for	 a	moment,	before	he	shook	his	 head	and	turned

away.	“Just	 take	care	of	 her.”	 He	 checked	on	the	 princess	one	more	 time	and

then	he	was	gone.

385
	




                                           Forty-Two







Cinder	and	Wolf	were	taken	to	an	underground	cargo	port	crowded	with	battered

delivery	ships	and	three	royal	pods,	which	explained	why	the	arrival	of	 their

enemies	hadn’t	set	off	any	alarms.	Cinder	had	only	posted	watch	at	the	maglev

platform.

     She	berated	herself,	hoping	she	would	someday	have	a	chance	to	learn	from

this	mistake.

     With	her	wrists	shackled,	Cinder	felt	like	her	arms	might	come	out	of	their

sockets.	Though	Wolf	walked	behind	her,	she	could	sense	his	energy—ragged

and	lethal.	Shuddering	with	fear	for	Scarlet.	Hollow	and	devastated	over	what

they	had	done	to	Maha.

     A	royal	guard	was	waiting.	His	hair	was	disheveled	but	his	expression	was

empty.

     “Report,”	said	Aimery.	He	was	walking	with	 a	limp	 and	Cinder	fantasized

about	kicking	him	right	where	the	bullet	had	entered.

     “Mistress	Pereira	and	Sir	Solis	are	dead.”

     Aimery	lifted	an	eyebrow.	He	seemed	nothing	but	curious	at	this	unexpected

statement.	“How?”

386
     “We	 were	 ambushed	inside	the	 Kesley	house	by	 an	Earthen	 android,”	 said

the	guard.

     Cinder’s	 heart	leaped.

     “A	 brawl	 ensued.	The	android	was	 immune	to	 mental	manipulation,	 nor	did

bullets	do	much	to	affect	her.	She	…	it	 suffocated	Mistress	Pereira,	after	which	 I

engaged	it	in	 hand-to-hand	combat.	 It	 disarmed	me	and	used	my	 gun	 to	shoot

both	Sir	Solis	 and	our	thamaturge.	While	 the	android	was	distracted,	I	 managed

to	lodge	my	knife	 into	 its	back,	severing	its	 …	spine,	of	 sorts.	That	successfully

disabled	it.”

     A	 headache	pulsed	behind	Cinder’s	 eyes,	the	sign	of	 tears	that	would	 never

come.	First	Maha,	now	Iko	…

     “With	  the	threat	 removed,	I	 conducted	a	thorough	 search	of	 the	rest	of	 the

house	and	 surrounding	 properties,”	  the	 guard	 continued.	 “I	  found	  no	 other

accomplices.”

     It	 was	the	smallest	relief.	Winter,	 at	least,	had	not	been	discovered,	and	as	far

as	Cinder	could	tell,	neither	had	Thorne	or	Scarlet.

     Aimery	 stared	a	long	time	 at	the	guard,	as	if	 he	were	searching	for	a	flaw	 in

the	story.	“What	became	of	the	android?”

     “I	 found	 and	destroyed	what	I	believe	 was	its	power	source,”	 said	the	guard.

“I	threw	 what	was	left	into	the	public	 trash	compactor.”

     “No!”	  Cinder	staggered,	but	the	guard	behind	her	hefted	her	back	to	her	feet.

     The	 guard	cast	her	the	briefest	 of	 glances,	before	adding,	 “I	 left	 the	bodies

behind.	Shall	I	return	for	 them?”

     Aimery	 waved	a	careless	hand.	“We	will	 send	a	crew.”

     New	 clomping	 emanated	from	the	 stairwell.	 Still	 shuddering	from	 the	news

387
of	 Iko’s	  loss,	 Cinder	 barely	 managed	to	  lift	  her	 head.	She	 glimpsed	 Wolf,

watching	her.	Though	his	eyes	were	sympathetic,	his	jaw	was	tense	with	anger.

     They	had	both	lost	someone	dear	to	them	today.

     Cinder	 felt	like	 she	was	suffocating,	like	 her	ribs	 were	tightening	around	 her

lungs,	but	 she	pulled	strength	 from	 Wolf’s	 presence.	Her	 fury	 started	to	build.

Her	sorrow	became	dry	kindling,	 quick	to	ignite.

     She	found	 her	footing	 again,	and	though	 she	couldn’t	 extricate	herself	from

the	guard’s	hold,	she	made	herself	stand	tall.

     The	footsteps	turned	into	a	black-coated	male	thaumaturge	and	more	guards.

     “We	 have	not	 found	any	more	 accomplices,	or	discerned	who	 was	firing	 on

us	from	the	factory	 windows,”	  the	new	thaumaturge	said.	“It’s	  possible	they’ve

retreated	to	a	different	sector.	They	might	reattempt	the	insurgence	elsewhere.”

     Aimery	 dismissed	the	thaumaturge’s	concern	with	a	smile.	“Let	 them	try.	 We

are	not	afraid	 of	our	 own	 people.”	His	 dark	eyes	settled	 on	Cinder.	 “This	 little

rebellion	is	over.”

     Cinder	 lifted	 her	head,	but	a	 low	growl	  stole	Aimery’s	 attention	 away	from

her.	He	turned	 to	Wolf,	  whose	sharp	canines	were	 bared.	He	 looked	feral	 and

bloodthirsty,	ready	to	tear	their	captors	apart.

     In	response,	Aimery	 laughed.	Stepping	forward,	he	cupped	Wolf’s	 chin	in	his

fingers	 and	squeezed	until	 Wolf’s	  cheeks	 puckered.	“Besides,	 how	 could	 we

ever	lose	when	we	 have	beasts	such	as	this	at	our	 disposal?”	Releasing	Wolf’s

chin,	Aimery	 slapped	him	 tenderly	on	 the	cheek.	“Alpha	 Kesley,	 isn’t	 it?	I	 was

there	for	the	queen’s	tournament,	the	day	you	won	 your	position	 in	your	pack.	It

seems	you’ve	been	led	astray	by	these	Earthens.	What	shall	we	do	about	that?”

     Wolf	 watched	the	thaumaturge	with	 a	hatred	that	could	have	burned	the	skin

388
off	his	bones.

     Without	  warning,	 one	of	 his	knees	 gave	way	 and	he	knelt	 before	 Aimery.

Cinder	 flinched,	 feeling	 the	 shock	 as	if	 it	 were	 ricocheting	  through	her	 own

joints.	In	another	moment,	Wolf	 had	bowed	his	head.

     It	 was	sickening	to	watch.	All	 that	strength.	All	 that	fury.	 Reduced	to	nothing

more	than	 a	 marionette.	It	  was	even	 more	 sickening	 because	she	knew	 how

much	mental	 strength	 and	focus	 it	 took	 to	 force	 Wolf	  to	do	 anything.	 She’d

barely	begun	to	master	such	a	skill,	  yet	Aimery	 showed	no	 sign	of	 difficulty	  at

all.

     “There’s	 a	good	dog,”	 said	Aimery,	 patting	 Wolf’s	  head.	“We	will	  take	you

before	Her	 Majesty	 and	let	her	 decide	the	 punishment	for	 your	 betrayal.	Does

that	suit	you,	Alpha	Kesley?”

     Wolf’s	 voice	 was	throaty	and	robotic	as	he	answered,	“Yes,	Master.”

     “As	 I	thought.”	 Aimery	 cast	his	attention	to	the	rest	of	his	entourage.	“Should

there	be	any	lingering	 pockets	of	rebellion,	 ensure	they	are	swiftly	 stamped	out.

There	is	 to	be	 a	royal	 wedding	 tomorrow,	  and	we	 will	 not	 tolerate	 any	more

disturbances.”

     After	  the	other	 thaumaturges	had	bowed	 and	scattered,	Aimery	  tucked	his

hands	into	  his	 sleeves	and	 turned	 back	 to	 Cinder.	  “Which	  only	  leaves	the

question	of	what	shall	be	done	with	you.”

     She	held	his	gaze.	“You	could	 bow	before	me	as	your	true	queen.”

     Aimery’s	 lips	 curled	upward.	“Kill	  her.”

     It	 happened	so	fast.	One	of	the	guards	whipped	the	gun	from	his	holster,	held

it	against	Cinder’s	forehead,	released	the	safety,	squeezed	the	trigger—

     Cinder	sucked	in	a	final	 breath.

389
     “Stop.	 I’ve	changed	my	mind.”

     Just	as	quickly,	the	gun	was	stashed	back	at	the	guard’s	waist.

     Cinder	sagged,	her	head	spinning	from	the	rush	of	fear.

     “My	  queen	has	requested	the	pleasure	of	deciding	your	fate	herself.	I	 think	I

will	 suggest	she	offer	your	head	to	Emperor	Kaito	as	a	wedding	gift.”

     “Thaumaturge	Park?”

     He	turned	to	the	red-coated	woman	who	had	spoken.	She	had	her	palm	on	the

side	paneling	of	a	small	podship.

     “This	 is	 a	royal	 pod,”	 she	said,	“and	it	 looks	 to	have	arrived	 recently.”	 She

held	up	her	hand.	“Hardly	any	dust.	Odd	for	 it	to	be	way	out	here.”

     Aimery	  made	a	 disinterested	sound.	 “I	 am	 not	 surprised	there	 are	thieves

about,	but	it	could	help	 us	locate	the	missing	rebels.	Run	a	search	on	its	tracking

number	and	see	what	you	find.”

     He	gestured	to	 some	of	the	 guards.	Cinder	and	Wolf	  were	marched	into	 his

ship	and	forced	 onto	 separate	benches.	No	words	 were	spoken	 as	the	engines

started	to	rumble.

     Within	 moments,	they	were	heading	back	toward	Artemisia.

     Aimery	 kept	giving	 orders,	something	about	medical	care	and	bullet	wounds,

designating	a	new	captain	of	the	guard	and	informing	the	queen	of	casualties	and

prisoners.	Cinder’s	 thoughts	became	muddled	 and	she	found	 herself	 staring	at

the	profile	 of	the	guard	who	 had	killed	 Iko.	 “Disabled	  it,”	 he’d	 said.	Thrown	 it

into	a	trash	compactor.

     The	visions	 rolled	through	her	head	again	and	again.	A	knife	 ripping	 through

Iko’s	 spine.	Maha’s	 broken	 fingers.	The	 sector	residents	kneeling	 at	 Aimery’s

feet.

390
     Her	 hatred	 warmed.	 Simmered	 at	 first,	 low	  in	 her	 gut.	 But	 by	  the	time

Artemisia	came	into	view,	 she	was	boiling.

     The	ship	 dropped	into	Artemisia’s	 underground	 port.	The	ramp	was	lowered

and	a	guard	hauled	her	up	with	a	squeeze	so	painful	she	had	to	bite	back	a	cry	of

pain.	Wolf’s	 heavy	steps	labored	behind	her.

     She	 was	  greeted	 with	  a	 slew	  of	  new	  threats.	 A	  dozen	 guards,	 their

bioelectricity	  as	malleable	 as	 factory-new	  personality	 chips,	 and	 three	more

thaumaturges,	whose	mental	strength	always	had	a	certain	iron	rigidity	to	it.

     Her	 finger	 twitched	and	 she	wondered	how	quickly	  she	could	have	a	 bullet

loaded	in	her	finger	and	how	 long	it	would	 take	to	kill	 them	all.	 She	was	back	in

Artemisia.	If	 she	escaped,	she	could	go	rogue—a	lone	assassin	hunting	down	the

queen.

     It	 was	just	a	fantasy.	Her	hands	were	still	bound.

     She	squeezed	her	cyborg	hand	into	a	useless	fist	instead.

     “Thaumaturge	Park?”

     Cinder	peered	at	the	guard	who	had	killed	Iko.

     “Sir	 Kinney.”

     “Permission	 to	seek	immediate	medical	attention?”

     Aimery’s	  attention	darted	down	to	the	blood	 on	his	uniform.	 There	was	a	lot

of	it,	though	 Cinder	couldn’t	 tell	 where,	exactly,	he’d	 been	hurt.	“Fine,”	 he	said.

“Report	back	as	soon	as	you	are	cleared	for	service.”

     The	 guard	fisted	 a	 hand	 against	his	 chest,	then	 paced	off	 in	 the	 opposite

direction.

     Cinder	 and	 Wolf	  were	 shoved	away	 from	 the	 docks	 and	 into	 a	maze	 of

corridors.	Not	knowing	 what	else	to	do,	Cinder	tried	to	focus	 on	where	they	were

391
taking	her.	 She	counted	her	steps,	creating	a	 rudimentary	map	 in	her	 head	and

piecing	it	together	with	 what	she	knew	of	the	queen’s	palace.

     They	 were	 led	to	 an	elevator	 bank,	 flanked	 by	 more	guards.	 There	was	 a

pause	in	which	Aimery	 conversed	with	 another	thaumaturge,	and	though	Cinder

adjusted	her	audio	 interface,	 she	could	only	  pick	 up	a	 few	words—alpha	  and

soldier	at	first.	Then	insurgence	and	RM-9	and	cyborg.

     Aimery	  gestured	 and	 they	 started	 pulling	  Wolf	   away,	 down	 a	 separate

corridor.

     “Wait,”	  said	Cinder,	panic	flooding	 her	veins.	“Where	are	you	taking	him?”

     Wolf	  growled	 and	strained	against	his	 captors,	but	 any	fight	 was	 tempered

beneath	the	mind	control.

     “Wolf!	  No!”	 Cinder	 stumbled	forward,	 but	arms	held	her	back.	The	bindings

burned	against	her	wrists.	“Wolf!”

     It	 was	for	nothing.	 They	turned	 a	corner	and	Wolf	 was	gone,	leaving	Cinder

panting	and	shaking.	She	felt	wetness	on	her	right	 wrist	where	the	cords	had	cut

into	 the	skin.	 She	wasn’t	 so	 naïve	to	 think	 she	and	 Wolf	 could	 have	 made	a

successful	stand	against	 their	 enemies,	but	 she	hadn’t	 imagined	 being	 parted

from	him	 so	soon.	She	might	 never	see	him	 again.	She	might	 never	see	any	of

them	again.

     As	 she	was	forced	 into	the	 elevator,	it	 occurred	to	 Cinder	that,	 for	 the	first

time	since	this	had	all	begun,	she	was	alone.

     “I’m	  sorry	we	aren’t	able	to	give	you	 a	private	tour,”	said	Aimery,	 “but	 we’re

rather	preoccupied	with	wedding	preparations.	I’m	 sure	you	understand.”

     The	elevator	doors	shut	and	they	began	to	descend.	And	descend.	Cinder	felt

like	she	was	being	taken	to	her	tomb.

392
     When	 the	doors	 opened	again,	she	was	 prodded	forward	 with	 a	 jab	in	 her

back.	She	was	taken	through	a	 dim	corridor,	 with	 rough	 walls	and	 the	smell	of

stale	air	and	urine	and	bodies.	Her	nose	wrinkled	in	disgust.

     “I	 hope	you’ll	 find	 your	 accommodations	acceptable	for	such	a	distinguished

guest	as	 yourself,”	  Aimery	  continued,	 as	if	  the	 scent	 didn’t	  bother	 him.	 “I

understand	you’re	already	accustomed	to	prison	cells.”

     “I	 wouldn’t	  say	that,”	 said	 Cinder.	“The	 last	 one	could	 only	 hold	me	 for	 a

day.”

     “This	 one	will	 be	much	more	suited	to	you,	I’m	 sure.”

     This	prison	 of	rocks	and	caves	was	nothing	like	 the	modern	structure	in	New

Beijing.	  This	 was	 dreary	 and	 suffocating,	 and	 worst	  of	 all,	 Cinder	  had	 no

blueprint	 for	 it.	 She	had	 no	accurate	 map,	no	 plan,	 no	means	of	 judging	  her

location	in	relation	 to	…	well,	 anything.

     They	 paused	and	there	 was	the	 jangling	 of	 keys	 and	the	 creak	of	  ancient

metal	hinges.	An	old-fashioned	padlock.	How	 quaint.

     If	 she	could	reach	it	from	 within	 the	cell,	she	could	have	that	picked	in	 under

thirty	seconds.

     The	thought	offered	 a	twitch	of	hope,	at	least.

     As	 the	door	opened,	the	smell	intensified.	 Her	 lungs	tried	 to	expel	the	air	 as

soon	as	they	took	it	in.

     “You	 will	  remain	here	until	 Her	 Majesty	 the	Queen	has	time	to	 see	to	your

trial	and	execution,”	 said	Aimery.

     “Can’t	 wait,”	 Cinder	muttered.

     “Of	 course,	you’ll	 want	to	use	the	time	to	get	reacquainted.”

     “Reacquainted?”

393
     A	 guard	cut	 away	 the	bindings	 on	her	 wrists	 and	shoved	her	 forward.	 Her

shoulder	hit	 the	 edge	of	 the	iron	 door	 as	she	stumbled	 into	 the	cell,	 catching

herself	on	a	rough	wall.

     Someone	whimpered	and	she	froze.	She	wasn’t	alone.

     “Do	 enjoy	your	stay	…	 Princess.”

     The	door	slammed	shut,	the	noise	of	it	 vibrating	through	 Cinder’s	bones.	The

cell	was	 small	 with	 a	 high,	barred	 window	 in	 the	 iron	 door	 that	allowed	 just

enough	light	from	 the	hallway	that	she	could	make	out	a	bucket	on	the	floor.	The

source	of	the	rank	smell.

     Two	 people	were	huddled	together	in	the	far	corner.

     Cinder	 gaped	at	them,	willing	  her	eyes	to	 adjust.	She	turned	on	 the	built-in

flashlight	 in	 her	 hand.	 The	 two	 figures	 shuddered	and	 cowered	 behind	 their

arms.

     Recognition	 hit	her	like	a	right	 hook	and	she	fell	against	the	wall.

     Adri.

     Pearl.

     “You	 can’t	be	serious.”

     Her	 stepmother	and	stepsister	were	quaking	 with	 fear	 and	staring	up	 at	her

with	 wide	 eyes.	Cinder	 couldn’t	 begin	 to	 imagine	why	 they	 were	 here—what

Levana	wanted	with	them.

     Then	it	hit	 her.

     She	would	be	stuck	here,	with	them,	until	 her	execution.

     She	dragged	a	hand	down	her	face,	hating	Levana	so	very,	very	much.

394
	




                                            Forty-Three







In	 Winter’s	 dream,	 she	was	 standing	 in	 the	kitchen	 of	  a	little	  farmhouse	on

Earth,	or	what	 her	imagination	 thought	a	farmhouse	on	 Earth	must	be	like.	 She

knew	it	 was	Scarlet’s	home,	though	 she’d	never	been	there.	She	stood	at	a	sink

overflowing	 with	  dirty	 dishes.	 It	 was	vital	  that	she	get	 them	 all	 clean	before

everyone	came	home,	but	every	time	she	lifted	 a	plate	from	the	suds	it	 shattered

in	her	hands.	Her	fingers	 were	bleeding	from	 all	 the	shards,	turning	the	bubbles

red.

     When	the	seventh	plate	cracked	in	her	hands,	she	stepped	back	from	the	sink

with	an	overwhelming	 sense	of	failure.	 Why	 could	she	never	do	anything	 right?

Even	this	simple	task	turned	to	disaster	at	her	touch.

     She	fell	 to	her	knees	and	began	to	weep.	The	blood	 and	soap	puddled	in	her

lap.

     A	 shadow	 fell	 across	her	 and	she	looked	 up.	 Her	stepmother	 stood	in	 the

doorway,	acres	of	fields	 and	Earth’s	blue,	blue	 sky	laid	 out	behind	her.	She	was

holding	a	bejeweled	 comb	in	her	 hand,	and	though	she	was	beautiful,	 her	smile

was	cruel.

     “They	  love	  you,”	  said	 Levana,	  as	 if	  they’d	  been	 in	  the	 middle	  of	 a

395
conversation.	She	 came	into	 the	 kitchen.	 The	 hem	of	  her	regal	 gown	 trailed

through	the	 soapy	water	 on	the	 floor.	 “They	 protect	 you.	 And	 what	have	 you

ever	done	to	deserve	that?”

     “They	  love	 me,”	 Winter	  agreed,	though	  she	wasn’t	 sure	 who	 they	 were

talking	about.	The	people	of	Luna?	Cinder	and	her	allies?	Jacin?

     “And	 they	 will	 all	 pay	the	price	 for	their	 adoration.”	 Coming	around	 behind

her,	Levana	 began	brushing	 the	comb	 through	 Winter’s	 curls.	 The	 touch	was

gentle.	Motherly,	  even.	 Winter	  wanted	to	 weep	 with	  longing—how	  she	had

yearned	for	a	mother’s	 touch—but	 there	was	fear	 in	her	too.	 Levana	had	never

been	so	kind.	 “They	 will	  come	to	 know	 all	 your	 weaknesses.	They	will	  learn

how	flawed	 you	 truly	 are.	Then	 they	will	  see	how	 you	never	 deserved	any	of

this.”

     A	 sharp	 pain	 stitched	 into	 her	skull	  as	one	 of	 the	 comb’s	 tines	dug	 into

Winter’s	scalp.	She	gasped.	Her	head	started	to	throb.

     A	 growl	drew	 her	attention	back	to	the	door.	Ryu	was	standing	with	 his	paws

spread	in	defense,	his	teeth	bared.

     Levana	stopped	brushing.	“And	 what	do	you	care?	She	betrayed	you	too.	She

allowed	 that	 guard	  to	 sacrifice	  your	 life	  for	  hers.	 You	  cannot	 ignore	 her

selfishness.”

     Ryu	prowled	 closer.	His	yellow	 eyes	flashed.

     Levana	dropped	the	comb	and	stepped	back.	“You	 are	an	animal.	A	 killer.	 A

predator.	What	do	you	know	 of	loyalty	 or	love?”

     Ryu	 hushed	and	lowered	 his	head	as	if	 chastised.	Winter’s	 heart	 opened	to

him.	She	could	tell	he	missed	her.	He	wanted	to	play	 fetch,	not	be	berated	by	the

queen’s	cruel	words.

396
     Winter	 raised	her	hand	to	her	stinging	 scalp.	Her	hair	was	damp.	She	looked

down	at	 the	fallen	 comb	and	saw	 that	the	pool	 of	 dishwater	had	 become	thick

with	blood.

     “You	  are	wrong,”	 she	said,	 turning	 her	face	 up	to	 the	queen.	“You	 are	the

killer.	 You	are	the	predator.	You	 know	nothing	 of	loyalty	 or	 love.”	 She	held	her

hand	out	to	Ryu,	who	sniffed	it,	 before	settling	his	warm	 head	down	on	her	knee.

“We	may	be	animals,	but	we	will	 never	again	live	 in	your	cage.”


                                                          *			 *			*

When	she	opened	her	eyes,	the	farmhouse	was	gone,	replaced	with	shabby	walls

and	furniture	and	window	 curtains	covered	in	regolith	 dust.	Her	eyelids	flickered

as	she	tried	 to	ward	 off	 the	 heavy	drowsiness	 and	a	 throbbing	 headache.	She

could	still	 smell	the	pool	of	blood,	 and	her	scalp	still	ached	from	where	the	comb

had	punctured	it.

     No,	from	 where	she	had	hit	the	corner	of	the	table.

     Someone	had	laid	her	out	on	the	sofa.	Her	feet	dangled	off	the	edge.

     “Hey,	 crazy.”

     Winter	 pushed	her	hair	out	of	her	face	and	found	a	towel	wrapped	around	her

head.	She	looked	up	 at	Scarlet,	 who	 had	brought	 a	dining	 chair	 into	 the	front

room	and	was	sitting	 on	it	 backward	with	 her	arms	settled	on	its	 back.	She	was

wearing	her	 hooded	sweatshirt	again.	 Most	 of	 the	stains	were	 gone	but	 it	still

looked	worn	 and	ragged.	So	did	 she,	actually.	Her	 eyes	were	rimmed	 with	 red,

her	face	blotchy	and	flushed.	Her	usual	ferocity	had	dulled	to	 bitter	exhaustion.

     “Iko	 told	 us	what	happened,”	she	said,	her	voice	withered	 and	cracked.	“I’m

sorry	I	wasn’t	here,	but	I’m	 glad	she	was.”

397
     Winter	 sat	up.	 Iko	sat	cross-legged	on	 the	floor,	 picking	 at	 a	thread	of	 skin

fiber	 that	had	been	torn	 open	in	 her	chest.	Thorne	 was	standing	 with	 his	back

against	the	main	door.	He	was	wearing	the	partial	 uniform	 of	a	Lunar	 guard	and

she	had	to	 look	 twice	 to	 be	sure	it	 was	 him.	 She	listened,	but	 the	 house	was

otherwise	silent.

     Winter	 felt	a	flush	of	 dread.	“Where	are	the	others?”

     “The	 sector	 was	attacked,”	 said	Thorne.	 “They	 took	 Wolf	  and	Cinder	 and

they	…	they	killed	 Maha.”

     Scarlet	wrapped	her	arms	tighter	around	the	back	of	the	chair.	“We	 can’t	 stay

here.	We	  moved	 the	 bodies	 of	  that	 guard	 and	 thaumaturge	 into	  the	 back

bedroom,	but	I	bet	someone	will	come	for	 them.”

     “The	 guard	 who	 helped	us,”	 said	Iko,	 “told	  me	to	 take	 Her	Highness	 into

hiding.	I	 know	he	meant	to	take	her	out	of	this	 sector,	but	where	else	can	we	go?

I’ve	 been	reviewing	 the	maps	of	 Luna	 and	the	only	 places	that	 seem	like	they

might	 offer	 more	security	 are	 underground.	At	 least	 we	would	  be	away	 from

people,	and	surveillance	 isn’t	 as	strict	 in	 the	tunnels	 and	mines,	but	 it	 doesn’t

seem	like	a	perfect	solution,	either.”

     “There	 is	no	perfect	 solution,”	 said	Winter,	 sinking	 against	the	sofa’s	lumpy

cushion.	“The	  queen	will	  find	 me	 anywhere	 I	 go.	She	 finds	 me	 even	in	 my

dreams.”

     “You’re	  not	the	only	 one	having	nightmares,”	 Thorne	muttered.	“But	 there’s

still	a	chance	that	a	lot	of	 angry	civilians	 are	going	to	show	 up	in	Artemisia	 four

days	from	now,	demanding	a	new	regime.	Is	there	any	chance	Cinder	will	 still	be

alive	by	then?”

     They	traded	glances,	but	there	was	not	much	optimism.

398
     “Official	   executions	take	 place	in	 Artemisia	  Palace,”	said	 Winter.	 “That’s

where	they’ll	 take	her.”

     “Why	 not	just	kill	  her	here?”	asked	Scarlet.	“Why	go	through	the	trouble?”

     Thorne	shook	his	head.	“Levana	wants	to	execute	her	in	a	way	that	will	  show

the	futility	 of	this	uprising.”

     “You	 think	 she	plans	on	broadcasting	it?”	said	Iko.

     “I	 guarantee	she	does,”	said	Winter.	“The	queen	is	fond	of	 public	executions.

They	are	an	effective	way	 to	break	the	will	 of	any	 citizens	who	might	 be	feeling

rebellious.”

     Thorne	 rubbed	 his	 brow.	 “She’ll	  kill	  her	 soon,	 then.	Tonight,	  maybe,	 or

tomorrow.	Nothing	 like	an	execution	on	your	 wedding	day.”

     Winter	  drew	 her	 knees	to	 her	 chest,	 squeezing	them	 tight.	 The	 day	 had

started	so	hopeful	for	 her	companions.	 The	broadcast	had	gone	as	planned,	the

people	had	been	answering	her	call.	 But	 now	 it	was	 over.	Levana	was	 still	 the

queen,	dear	Selene	would	soon	be	dead,	and	Jacin	too,	if	he	wasn’t	already.

     “Stop	 it.”

     She	lifted	 her	head—not	so	much	at	Thorne’s	 command,	but	at	the	hardened

tone	beneath	it.	Scarlet	and	Iko,	too,	looked	up.

     “Stop	 acting	discouraged,	all	of	you.	We	don’t	 have	time	for	it.”

     “You	 are	not	discouraged?”	Winter	 asked.

     “It’s	  not	in	 my	 vocabulary.”	 Thorne	 pushed	himself	 off	 the	door.	 “Iko,	 did

we	break	 into	 that	 guardhouse	and	 broadcast	Cinder’s	 message	across	all	  of

Luna?”

     “Yes,	 Captain.”

     “And,	  Scarlet,	did	I	 rescue	you	 and	Wolf	 when	 the	entire	city	 of	 Paris	was

399
under	siege?”

     She	raised	an	eyebrow	at	him.	“Actually,	 I’m	 pretty	sure	Cinder—”

     “Yes,	 I	 did.”	  He	 pointed	 at	Iko.	  “Did	  I	 rescue	you	 and	Cinder	 from	 that

prison	cell	and	fly	 us	all	to	safety	aboard	the	Rampion?”

     “Well,	 at	the	time,	I	 wasn’t	exactly—”

     “Aces,	 Iko,	just	answer	the	question.”

     Scarlet	drummed	her	fingers.	“What’s	 your	 point?”

     “My	  point	is	that	 I	am	going	 to	figure	 this	out,	like	 I	 always	do.	First,	 we’re

going	to	find	 a	way	 to	get	into	 Artemisia.	 We’re	going	 to	find	 Cress	and	rescue

Cinder	and	Wolf.	 We’re	 going	to	 overthrow	Levana,	and	by	 the	stars	above,	we

are	going	to	 make	Cinder	 a	queen	so	she	can	 pay	us	a	 lot	of	 money	 from	 her

royal	coffers	and	we	can	all	retire	very	 rich	and	very	alive,	got	it?”

     Winter	 started	to	clap.	“Brilliant	  speech.	Such	gumption	and	bravado.”

     “And	 yet	strangely	lacking	 in	any	sort	of	actual	strategy,”	 said	Scarlet.

     “Oh,	  good,	I’m	  glad	 you	 noticed	 that	 too,”	 said	 Iko.	 “I	  was	 worried	 my

processor	might	be	glitching.”	 She	felt	for	the	back	of	her	head.

     “I’m	  working	 on	that	part,”	Thorne	 growled.	“For	 now,	we	need	to	get	out	of

this	 sector.	I’ll	   think	 better	 once	 I’m	  not	 worried	  about	more	 thaumaturges

surrounding	us.	Besides,	if	 we’re	going	 by	maglev	 tunnel,	it’s	 a	long	walk	 back

to	Artemisia.”

     “One	 flaw	 in	 this	not-really-a-plan?”	  said	Scarlet,	jutting	 her	 thumb	toward

Winter.	 “We’re	  not	taking	 her	 back	there.	 That’s	 the	opposite	 of	 keeping	her

hidden.”

     Winter	 untied	the	towel	 around	her	head.	There	was	a	spot	of	 blood,	but	 not

much.	She	wondered	if	 her	headache	would	 ever	ease.	“You’re	 right.	 I	 will	 go

400
underground,	as	Scarlet	suggested.”

     “You’re	  not	 a	mole,”	 said	Scarlet.	 “You	 can’t	 just	 go	underground.	 Where

will	 you	 go?	What	will	  you	do?	 Are	there	people	 down	there?	Do	 you	need	to

take	supplies?	What	if—”

     “Ryu	 was	in	 my	dream	 too.”	Winter	 folded	 the	towel	 on	her	 knee.	“He	was

trying	  to	 protect	  me	 from	  the	 queen.	 I	  think	  he’s	 forgiven	  me	 for	  what

happened.”

     Scarlet	 guffawed,	 a	 harsh	 and	delirious	  sound.	“Are	  you	 even	 listening?

Don’t	 you	get	 it?	Cinder	 and	Wolf	 are	 gone!	Levana	has	them.	 She’s	going	 to

torture	them	 and	kill	 them	 and…”	 Sobbing,	 Scarlet	lowered	 her	head	between

her	trembling	  shoulders.	 “No	 one	 cares	 about	your	  stupid	 dreams	and	 your

stupid	delusions.	They’re	 gone.”	She	wiped	 her	nose	with	the	back	 of	her	hand.

She	was	not	pretty	when	she	cried,	and	Winter	liked	this	about	her.

     Tipping	  forward,	 she	rested	her	 hand	on	 Scarlet’s	 shoulder.	Scarlet	 didn’t

shake	her	away.

     “I	  do	 understand,”	 she	 said.	 “It	  would	  not	 be	 safe	for	  me	 to	 return	 to

Artemisia,	but	 that	doesn’t	mean	I	can’t	 help	Selene	and	my	people.	I,	too,	 have

a	not-really-a-plan.”

     Scarlet	peered	up	at	her	with	bloodshot	eyes.	“I’m	 afraid	to	ask.”

     “Thorne	 and	Iko	 will	  go	to	 Artemisia	 and	try	 to	 save	Selene	and	Wolf	 and

Jacin	and	Cress,	while	you	and	I	 disappear	underground,	into	the	lava	tubes	and

the	shadows,	and	there	we	shall	raise	an	army	of	our	own.”

     “Oh,	 we’re	  going	 to	go	 underground	 and	raise	an	 army,	 are	we?”	 Scarlet

sniffed	and	threw	 her	hands	into	the	air.	 “Why	 do	I	 even	bother	talking	 to	you?

You	are	not	helping.	You	 are	the	capital	U	of	Unhelpful.”

401
     “I	 am	serious.	There	are	killers	 and	there	are	animals	and	there	are	predators

yearning	to	be	free.	You	 know	this,	Scarlet-friend.	 You	 have	already	freed	one.”

Winter	stood	and	placed	a	hand	on	 the	wall	 for	balance,	then	skirted	around	 the

small	table.

     Scarlet	rolled	 her	eyes,	but	 it	was	 Iko	who	 spoke.	“The	 barracks,”	 she	said.

“The	barracks	where	Levana	keeps	her	soldiers	are	in	the	lava	tubes.”

     Thorne’s	 gaze	swiveled	 from	 Iko	 to	Winter.	  “Her	 soldiers?	You	 mean,	her

mutant	wolf	soldiers?	Are	you	insane?”

     Winter	 started	to	 giggle.	 “I	 might	 as	well	 be,”	 she	said,	 placing	 a	hand	on

Thorne’s	cheek.	“For	everyone	tells	me	so.”

402
	




                                          Forty-Four







“The	queen’s	on	edge,”	Jacin	said	as	he	strapped	his	gun	holster	on	over	his

uniform.	 “She’s	 keeping	 quiet	 about	it,	  trying	  to	 pretend	like	  nothing’s

happening	so	the	families	won’t	panic.	But	you	can	tell	something’s	changed.”

     Cross-legged	on	the	cot,	Cress	was	cradling	her	portscreen	against	her	chest.

The	temptation	grew	by	the	hour	to	send	a	comm	to	Thorne	and	the	others.	Her

curiosity	was	killing	her,	and	the	separation	from	them	had	left	her	anxious	and

lonely.	But	she	wouldn’t	risk	the	signal	being	traced.	She	wouldn’t	put	them	in

any	more	danger	than	they	already	were—or	herself,	for	that	matter.

     Still.	Being	so	disconnected	was	agony.

     “You	don’t	know	if	the	video	played?”	she	asked.

     Jacin	 shrugged	and	 went	  through	 a	 process	of	  checking	 the	  gun’s

ammunition	and	safety	with	practiced	movements.	He	tucked	it	into	the	holster.

     “I	know	the	queen	recorded	an	impromptu	broadcast	of	her	own.	I	guess	she

dragged	the	emperor	out	for	it	too,	but	it	didn’t	broadcast	in	Artemisia,	so	I	don’t

know	what	it	said.	It	could	have	just	been	wedding	announcement	garbage.”

     Cress	licked	her	lips.	“If	I	 could	have	access	to	the	security	center	again,	I

could	find	out—”

403
     “No.”

     She	glared	at	 him,	and	 was	met	with	 a	finger	 jutting	 toward	 her	nose.	“We

already	risked	 enough.	 You’re	  staying	 here.”	 Turning	 away,	 he	 adjusted	 his

shoulder	armor,	looking	  once	again	like	 the	queen’s	 loyal	 servant.	“Long	 shift

tonight—I’m	  on	duty	 for	the	 entire	wedding	 and	celebratory	feast.	But	 most	of

us	are,	so	it	should	be	quiet	around	here	at	least.”

     Cress	sighed.	There	had	been	a	time	when	the	quiet	and	solitude	would	 have

been	comforting.	 That	was	what	 she’d	been	accustomed	to	aboard	the	satellite,

after	all.	But	now	 it	made	her	feel	even	more	like	a	prisoner.

     “Bye,”	  she	 muttered,	 before	 adding	 half-jokingly,	   “Bring	  me	 back	 some

cake.”

     Jacin	paused	with	his	hand	on	the	door.	His	face	softened.	“I’ll	 do	my	 best.”

     He	pulled	open	the	door,	and	froze.

     Cress’s	heart	leaped	into	her	throat.

     Another	 guard	stood	in	the	hall,	his	hand	raised	to	knock.	His	 attention	flitted

from	Jacin	to	Cress.

     Recovering	 faster	than	Cress,	Jacin	crossed	his	arms	and	 leaned	against	the

doorjamb,	blocking	 the	guard’s	view	of	her.	“What	 do	you	want?”

     “Who’s	 she?”	the	guard	asked.

     “That’s	 my	business.”

     “Oh,	 please.”	The	 guard	shoved	aside	Jacin’s	 arm,	forcing	 his	 way	into	 the

small	room.	Cress	pushed	her	back	against	the	wall,	squeezing	the	portscreen	so

hard	she	heard	the	plastic	creak	in	protest.	“Lots	of	guards	might	take	mistresses,

but	not	you.”

     The	door	shut	behind	him.

404
     Cress	was	watching	 the	stranger	when	she	heard	the	 click	 of	a	 gun’s	safety

releasing.

     The	 guard	froze,	 his	 back	to	 Jacin.	His	 gaze	turned	 surprised	as	he	 raised

both	hands	to	the	side	of	his	head.

     “Who	 said	anything	about	a	mistress?”	Jacin	growled.

     Cress	swallowed.	 This	guard	 was	unfamiliar,	 with	 dark	 eyes	and	wavy	 hair

cut	above	his	ears.	She	didn’t	 remember	him	from	 the	ambush	at	the	docks,	but

she	couldn’t	be	sure.

     “Not	 the	welcome	I	was	expecting,”	 said	the	guard.

     Jacin	 kept	 the	 gun	 aimed	at	 his	 back.	 “I	  don’t	 like	  people	 knowing	 my

business.”	His	 face	was	 calm.	So	 calm	 it	 terrified	 Cress	almost	 as	much	 as	a

stranger’s	presence.	“Kinney,	isn’t	 it?”

     “That’s	 right.”

     “I	 never	got	to	thank	you	for	 vouching	for	 me	at	the	trial.”

     “Don’t	  mention	it.”

     “Take	 his	weapons.”

     It	 was	 a	long	 moment	 before	Cress	realized	 Jacin	was	 talking	 to	 her.	She

gasped	and	scrambled	off	the	bed.	The	 guard,	Kinney,	 didn’t	 move	as	she	took

his	gun	and	knife	and	backed	away	again,	glad	to	set	the	weapons	down.

     “I’d	  rather	not	kill	  you,”	 said	Jacin,	“but	 you’re	 going	 to	have	to	 give	me	a

really	good	reason	not	to.”

     Kinney’s	  eyebrow	 twitched.	  He	 was	 looking	 at	 Cress	 again.	He	 seemed

curious,	but	not	as	afraid	as	he	should	have	been.	“I	saved	your	life.”

     “Covered	 that	already.”

     “How	 about	the	sound	from	the	gun	will	 bring	 every	guard	running?”

405
     “Most	 are	already	on	duty.	I’ll	 take	the	risk.”

     Cress	thought	 she	detected	a	smile,	 but	then	 Kinney	 turned	 around	to	 face

Jacin.	“Then	how	about	because	I	saved	Princess	Winter’s	life?”

     Jacin’s	eyes	narrowed.

     “There	 are	rumors	of	rebellion	in	 the	outer	sectors.	I	just	got	back	from	a	raid

on	RM-9,	 and	while	 searching	 the	house	of	 a	known	 rebel	sympathizer,	 I	 was

pretty	shocked	 to	run	 into	 none	other	 than	the	princess	 herself.	I	 believed	 her

dead	just	like	  everyone	else.”	 He	 cocked	his	 head.	“It	 must	 kill	  you,	 to	have

everyone	thinking	 you	killed	 her	out	 of	some	petty	 jealousy.	I	admit,	 I	 believed

it.	I’ve	 been	half-tempted	to	 kill	 you	myself,	 for	 retribution,	 and	I	know	 I’m	 not

the	only	one.”

     A	 muscle	twitched	in	Jacin’s	jaw.

     “Sorry	 I	 misjudged	 you.”	 Kinney	 lowered	 his	arms	and	 hooked	his	 thumbs

over	his	belt.	Jacin	didn’t	move.	 “I	know	 you	care	for	her	more	than	any	of	us.”

     When	the	silence	stretched	painfully	 thin	 between	them,	Cress	asked,	“So	…

she’s	alive?”

     Kinney	 glanced	back	at	her	and	nodded.	“I	 told	 her	to	go	 into	hiding.	 As	far

as	I	know,	everyone	else	still	thinks	she’s	dead.”

     Jacin	sounded	like	he	had	sand	in	his	throat	when	he	asked,	“Did	 she	look	all

right?”

     Kinney’s	 lips	 curved	 with	 amusement.	“I’d	 say	she	looked	 a	lot	 better	than

just	all	right,	 but	then	you’d	probably	 shoot	me	after	all.”

     Frowning,	 Jacin	 lowered	his	 gun,	but	 didn’t	 put	 it	 away.	“So	 you	 saw	her.

That	doesn’t	explain	how	you	saved	her	life.”

     “Jerrico	 was	there	 too.	I	 guess	he	knew	about	 the	queen	ordering	her	 to	be

406
killed.	He	wanted	to	kill	  her	and	drag	her	body	back	here,	so	I	shot	him.”

     Though	he	tried	to	 sound	nonchalant	about	it,	Cress	heard	his	tone	waver	just

a	bit.

     “Did	 you	kill	  him?”	Jacin	asked.

     “Yes.”

     They	stood	in	a	face-off	 for	a	long	time	 before	Jacin	said,	“I	hated	that	man.”

     “Me	 too.”

     Jacin’s	 muscles	 slowly	 began	 to	 unwind,	 though	 his	 expression	 was	still

suspicious.	“Thanks	for	telling	 me.	I’m	 …	I’ve	 been	worried	about	her.”

     “That’s	 not	 why	I’m	  here.	I	came	to	 warn	you.	We	 saw	a	royal	 podship	out

there	that	shouldn’t	have	been	there,	and	I’m	willing	  to	bet	it’ll	 be	traced	back	to

you.	If	 I	figured	 it	out,	 she	will	 too.	The	queen	might	 think	Winter	 is	dead	now,

but	she’s	going	 to	 find	 out	 the	truth	 soon	enough.”	 He	 paused.	“Who	 did	 she

threaten	to	kill	if	 you	didn’t	 do	it?”

     Jacin	gulped.	“No	 one.”

     “Yeah,	 right.”	 Kinney	  glanced	at	his	weapons	lying	 beside	Cress	but	 didn’t

move	to	 pick	 them	up.	 “She	 ordered	my	 little	  sister	to	 be	killed	  once,	after	 I

released	a	maid	who’d	stolen	a	pair	of	the	queen’s	earrings.”

     Cress’s	eyes	widened.	Jacin,	however,	looked	unsurprised.

     “Well,	  whoever	 it	 was,”	 Kinney	  continued,	“you’re	  both	 going	 to	 end	up

dead	if	you	 don’t	 stop	wasting	 time	and	get	 the	hell	 out	of	 here	before	Levana

finds	out	 you	 lied	to	 her.”	 He	turned	 to	 Cress.	“Can	I	 have	my	 weapons	back

now?	I	have	about	five	minutes	to	report	for	 duty.”

     After	  a	hesitation,	 Jacin	 nodded	and	 put	his	 own	 gun	 away.	 He	 was	still

frowning	 as	Kinney	  reclaimed	his	 gun	 and	knife.	 “Why	  are	 you	risking	  your

407
neck	for	me	…	again?”

     “It’s	 what	 the	princess	would	want.”	Kinney	 crossed	back	to	the	door,	careful

not	to	bump	into	 Jacin	as	he	passed	him.	“Her	Highness	persuaded	the	queen	to

give	my	sister	 the	maid’s	position	 instead	of	killing	  her,	so	I	 owe	her	a	lot.”	 He

tipped	his	head	toward	Cress.	“Whoever	you	are,	I	never	saw	you.”

     Jacin	didn’t	 try	to	stop	him	 as	he	slipped	out	the	door.

     Cress’s	 heart	 was	 still	  hammering.	 “I’m	   glad	 you	 didn’t	  kill	  him,”	   she

whispered.

     “I’m	  undecided,	 myself.”	 His	 gaze	slid	 around	 the	room,	 evaluating	 what,

Cress	couldn’t	 tell.	 “We’ll	  wait	 until	  the	wing	 is	 mostly	 cleared,	but	 then	it’s

time	to	leave.”

     She	 clutched	 the	portscreen,	 both	 excited	 and	 terrified	 to	 be	 leaving	 her

prison,	and	her	sanctuary.

     “Jacin,	did	 Levana	threaten	to	hurt	someone,	if	you	didn’t	 kill	 Winter?”

     “Of	 course	she	did.	That’s	how	she	operates.”

     Her	 heart	cracked,	 for	 him,	 for	 Winter,	 for	 victims	  she	didn’t	 even	 know.

“Who?”

     He	turned	 away	and	started	rummaging	 through	a	drawer,	but	 she	could	tell

the	action	was	just	to	occupy	himself.	“No	 one,”	he	said.	“No	 one	important.”

408
	




                                           Forty-Five







“Don’t	 they	have	any	newsfeeds	on	this	star-forsaken	rock?”	Kai	 grumbled,

sliding	his	fingers	along	the	base	of	the	holograph,	Luna’s	version	of	the	ever-

present	netscreen.

     “We	are	in	a	dictatorship,	Your	Majesty,”	said	Torin,	his	arms	folded	as	he

stared	out	the	window,	toward	the	sparkling	lake	below.	“Do	you	believe	the

newsfeeds	would	be	reliable	even	if	they	had	them?”

     Ignoring	him,	Kai	swiped	his	finger	again.

     He	had	sent	a	message	to	the	queen	that	morning	that	the	wedding	would,

unfortunately,	have	to	be	 postponed	if	he	 wasn’t	allowed	 to	meet	with	 his

adviser	prior	to	the	ceremony,	as	his	adviser	was	the	one	most	educated	on	the

vows	and	customs	that	would	cement	the	wedding	as	a	 recognized	political

union.

     Somewhat	to	his	surprise,	she	assented.

     It	was	a	relief	to	see	Torin	again	and	assure	himself	that	his	adviser	hadn’t

been	harmed,	but	that	relief	 was	matched	with	 his	 growing	frustration	 and

restlessness.	The	queen’s	broadcasting	networks	were	his	newest	cause	for

complaint.	They	seemed	to	contain	a	whole	lot	of	mindless	drivel	and	nothing

409
useful	at	all.

     “I	  want	 to	  know	 what’s	  going	 on	  out	 there,”	 he	 said,	 flipping	   off	  the

holograph.	“I	 know	it’s	 started.	I	know	Cinder’s	 done	something.”

     Torin	 shrugged,	somewhat	apologetically.	“I	 have	no	more	answers	than	you

do.”

     “I	 know.	 I	 don’t	expect	you	 to.	It’s	 just	 so	frustrating	to	 be	stuck	here	when

she’s—when	they’re	 all	 out	 there!	Doing	 …	 whatever	it	 is	 they’re	 doing!”	 He

joined	Torin	 at	the	window	and	clawed	a	hand	into	his	hair.	“How	 can	the	people

here	stand	to	be	cut	 off	 from	 the	rest	of	 the	country?	 Without	 any	media,	 they

have	no	way	of	 knowing	 what’s	happening	in	 the	other	sectors.	Doesn’t	it	 drive

them	crazy?”

     “I	 would	 think	not,”	 said	Torin.	 “Look	 at	the	splendor	they	are	able	to	enjoy,

thanks	to	the	labor	of	 the	outer	sectors.	Do	you	 think	the	people	 here	want	their

illusion	  of	 paradise	 destroyed	 by	 witnessing	 the	 squalor	 in	  the	 rest	 of	 the

country?”

     Kai	  scowled.	 He’d	 known	  that	 already,	 and	 he	 regretted	 how	 naïve	 his

question	sounded.	But	 he	couldn’t	  understand	it.	 He	still	  remembered	the	day

Nainsi	   told	   him	   the	  statistics	   of	   poverty	   and	   homelessness	 in	   the

Commonwealth,	 back	when	 he	was	ten	 years	old.	 Nainsi	 had	impressed	upon

him	 how	 good	 the	numbers	 were.	How,	  even	though	 the	 numbers	had	 crept

upward	since	the	 spread	of	 letumosis,	they	 still	 remained	 lower	 than	they	had

been	in	the	decades	following	World	 War	IV.	 Even	still,	 Kai	had	gone	a	week	of

near-sleepless	nights,	thinking	of	 all	those	people,	his	people,	who	 had	nowhere

to	sleep	and	no	 food	 to	eat,	while	  he	was	so	comfortable	 and	 cared	for	 in	 his

palace.	He	had	even	written	 up	a	proposal	about	how	 they	could	lease	out	parts

410
of	the	 palace	to	 the	 citizens	with	  the	most	 need,	offering	  up	half	 of	 his	 own

private	quarters	if	that	 would	help,	 but	while	 his	father	had	promised	to	read	the

proposal,	Kai	doubted	he’d	ever	taken	it	seriously.

     He	 could	 recognize,	now,	 how	 childish	 the	proposal	 had	been,	but	 he	still

couldn’t	  imagine	 not	  wanting	  to	 do	  anything	  to	 help	  the	 citizens	  of	 the

Commonwealth,	 just	 like	 he	couldn’t	  imagine	 how	 the	members	 of	 Levana’s

court	could	 lack	compassion	for	 the	people	who	 had	built	 the	paradise	they	got

to	enjoy.

     “Your	   face	 has	 healed	 well,”	   said	 Torin.	  “I’m	   sure	 it	  will	  be	  hardly

noticeable	in	the	wedding	photos.”

     It	 took	Kai	 a	moment	to	comprehend	him.	 “Oh—right.”	  Reaching	up,	he	felt

for	his	cheek,	where	 Wolf	 had	punched	him.	It	 was	only	 sore	to	the	touch	now,

and	without	any	mirrors	to	 see	himself,	he’d	forgotten	all	about	it.

     “I	 guess	that	ruse	didn’t	 do	me	much	good,”	 he	muttered,	shoving	 his	hands

into	his	pockets.

     “It	  was	a	 valiant	 effort,	 nevertheless,”	said	 Torin.	 “Speaking	 of	 your	 time

away,	have	you	 seen	the	report	from	 the	 American	 military	 that	 came	through

this	morning?”

     He	spun	around.	“Of	 course	not—she	took	my	portscreen.”

     Torin	 grimaced	sympathetically.	“Right.	 I	 will	 leave	you	with	 mine.”

     “Thank	 you,	Torin.	 What	report?”

     “It	  appears	they’ve	 found	 your	friends’	  ship	 orbiting	 in	 space,	abandoned.

They’re	towing	 it	 back	to	the	Republic	now	 to	begin	searching	it	for	 evidence	to

be	used	against	your	kidnappers.	Once	they’re	found,	of	course.”

     Kai	 rubbed	 the	 back	of	 his	 neck.	 “They	 knew	 it	  would	 happen,	but	 still,

411
Thorne	won’t	be	happy	when	he	finds	out.”

     “It	  was	a	stolen	 ship.	Regardless	of	 whose	side	he’s	 on	now,	 the	 man	is	a

thief	and	a	deserter.	I	find	it	difficult	  to	be	sympathetic	to	his	loss.”

     Kai	 couldn’t	  keep	down	 a	 wry	 smile.	 “I	 don’t	  disagree,	but	 when	we	 see

Thorne	again,	maybe	I	should	be	the	one	to	break	this	news	to	him.”

     He	let	 his	gaze	travel	 out	to	 the	edge	of	the	 lake,	where	the	water	 met	with

the	 encompassing	 dome.	 It	  looked	  like	  the	  end	 of	  the	 world	   out	 there.

Civilization	  inside	  a	 perfect	 capsule,	 all	 sparkling	  and	 pristine.	  Beyond	 it,

nothing	but	 wasteland.	On	 the	horizon	 he	could	 see	the	edge	of	 another	dome

and	he	wondered	which	it	was.

     He	 had	chosen	 his	 words	carefully.	  When	they	 saw	 Thorne	 again,	not	 if.

Because	that’s	how	he	had	to	think	about	all	of	 his	allies,	his	friends.	That’s	 how

he	had	 to	 think	  about	Cinder	  if	 he	 was	 going	 to	 make	 it	 through	  this.	 He

wondered	where	she	was	right	now,	how	far	she’d	gone.	Was	she	safe?

     A	 tap	at	the	door	startled	Kai,	but	the	surprise	was	suffused	with	dread.	“So	it

begins,”	he	muttered.	“Enter.”

     It	  wasn’t	 a	 wedding	  stylist,	  though,	 but	 one	 of	  his	 own	 guards	 in	  the

doorway,	holding	 a	small	 package	wrapped	in	strips	 of	colored	 velvet.	“Pardon

the	interruption.	 This	 was	 delivered	 by	 a	servant	as	a	 wedding	 gift	 from	 Her

Majesty	 the	 Queen.	 We’ve	  tested	 it	 for	  chemicals	 or	 explosives	  and	 have

deemed	it	safe	to	open.”	He	held	the	package	toward	Kai.

     “You	  mean	she	doesn’t	 intend	to	 blow	 me	 up	before	 the	ceremony?”	 said

Kai,	taking	the	box.	“How	  disappointing.”

     The	 guard	looked	 like	 he	wanted	to	 crack	a	smile,	 but	 he	resisted.	Bowing

again,	he	retreated	into	the	corridor.

412
     Kai	 made	quick	work	 of	the	 wrappings,	eager	to	be	done	with	whatever	 new

torment	Levana	had	devised	for	him.	He	 was	picturing	a	very	tiny	 ball	 and	chain

as	he	lifted	the	box’s	lid.

     He	froze.	 The	blood	 drained	from	 his	head,	seeping	all	the	way	 down	to	 his

feet.

     A	 cyborg	finger	 was	settled	onto	a	bed	of	white	 velvet.	Grease	was	smudged

into	the	knuckle	joints	 and	disconnected	wires	jutted	out	one	side.

     His	stomach	twisted.

     “She	has	Cinder,”	 he	said,	passing	the	box	to	Torin.	 Dazed,	he	paced	back	to

the	windows,	 his	thoughts	muddled	 with	 denial.	This	 gift	 answered	so	many	of

his	questions,	and	he	realized	that	Torin	was	right.

     Sometimes,	it	was	better	to	be	ignorant.


                                                          *			 *			*

It	had	been	ages	since	Levana	could	remember	feeling	such	contentment.

     Her	 bothersome	niece	was	 once	again	in	 captivity	  and,	soon,	would	 be	 no

more	bother	at	all.

     Her	 annoying	 stepdaughter	was	 dead	and	 she	would	 never	 again	 have	to

listen	to	her	mutterings	or	indulge	her	inane	wishes.

     In	  mere	 hours,	  she	 would	  be	 married	  to	 the	  emperor	 of	  the	 Eastern

Commonwealth,	and	 in	a	 few	 short	days	she	would	 be	 given	a	 crown	 and	the

title	 of	empress.	It	 would	 not	be	 long	before	 all	 of	Earth	 was	hers.	Resources.

Land.	A	 place	for	her	people	to	 enjoy	the	beauty	and	luxuries	 Earthens	took	for

granted.

     She	imagined	 the	history	 texts	 centuries	from	 now,	 telling	 the	 story	 of	the

413
Lunar	queen	who	 had	conquered	the	 blue	planet	and	 begun	a	new	 era.	An	 era

ruled	by	those	most	worthy.

     She	hardly	  felt	 the	 weight	 of	 the	jewels	 that	 were	 clipped	 to	 her	gown’s

sleeves	and	draped	across	her	 collar.	 She	hardly	 noticed	 the	 servants	as	they

shuffled	 around	 her,	 adjusting	 the	skirt	  of	 her	 wedding	 dress,	 flouncing	 the

crinoline,	making	 final	adjustments	to	the	bodice’s	fit.

     Without	 a	mirror,	Levana	knew	 she	was	beautiful.	She	was	the	most	beautiful

queen	Luna	had	ever	known,	and	Kaito	was	lucky	to	have	such	a	bride.

     She	was	smiling	to	herself	when	she	finally	 dismissed	the	servants.

     “Stunning,	 My	 Queen.”

     She	turned	to	see	Aimery	in	the	doorway.

     “What	 liberties	 you	take	to	enter	without	 announcing	yourself,”	 said	Levana,

though	there	 was	 little	 venom	 to	 her	 tone.	“I	  am	 preparing	 for	 my	 wedding

ceremony.	What	do	you	want?”

     “I	 do	not	wish	 to	be	a	distraction.	I	 understand	this	is	a	momentous	occasion,

for	all	of	 us.	But	I	wanted	to	put	your	 mind	at	ease	regarding	tonight’s	…	 special

guest.	The	 cyborg	  will	  be	 brought	 to	  the	 throne	 room	 during	  the	 feast	 as

requested.	Everything	is	arranged.”

     “I	  am	happy	to	 hear	it.	 What	 a	surprise	 her	presence	shall	 be	for	 my	 new

husband.”	She	rubbed	her	thumb	 over	the	base	of	 her	ring	 finger	 as	she	spoke,

feeling	 the	worn	 stone	 band.	It	 was	 a	constant	 memory	 of	 her	first	  husband,

Winter’s	 father.	He	would	 always	be	her	only	 love,	and	she	had	sworn	long	ago

that	this	ring	would	 never	be	removed	from	her	finger.

     Concealing	 it	was	 as	much	second	nature	to	her	 now	as	the	glamour	 of	 her

red	lips	and	serene	voice.

414
     “There	 is	one	other	bit	 of	news	I	 must	bring	to	 your	attention,”	 said	Aimery,

“though	it	 remains	under	investigation,	 and	I	 do	not	 wish	for	 it	 to	upset	you	 so

near	your	wedding	hour.”

     “As	  long	 as	the	 cyborg	 is	 in	 our	 custody,”	  Levana	 said	around	 a	 smile,

“nothing	more	can	upset	me.”

     “I	 am	glad	to	hear	it,	 My	 Queen.	For	we	discovered	something	suspicious	on

our	visit	 to	the	mining	 sector.	There	was	a	royal	podship	docked	there	and	upon

further	 inspection	we’ve	  found	 the	ship	 was	chartered	 to	 none	other	 than	Sir

Jacin	Clay.”

     Levana	turned	to	give	Aimery	 her	full	 attention.	“Go	 on.”

     “We	 have	documentation	of	 this	ship	 leaving	Artemisia	 forty-seven	 minutes

after	the	 death	of	 Princess	 Winter.	 Of	 course,	Sir	 Clay	  was	still	  here,	in	 the

palace,	at	that	 time,	 and	 we	do	 not	 know	 who	 was	 piloting	 it.	 It	  also	seems

suspicious	that,	no	matter	who	was	aboard	that	ship,	they	would	 find	 themselves

in	the	same	sector	as	the	cyborg	and	her	companions.”

     Though	  Aimery’s	   expression	 was	  neutral,	 it	  was	  easy	 to	  discern	 his

suspicions.

     “We	 have	video	footage	of	Winter’s	 death,	do	we	not?”

     “We	 do,	 My	 Queen.	 However,	 as	you	might	  recall,	we	 were	 experiencing

technical	difficulties	 that	day,	with	 sporadic	power	outages	affecting	surveillance

throughout	the	palace.	Allow	 me.”

     He	 approached	the	netscreen	Levana	had	long	 ago	commissioned	to	 be	put

into	 the	 stunning	 frame	 that	 had	once	 housed	her	 sister’s	 mirror,	  before	 all

mirrors	were	destroyed.	A	 moment	later,	Levana	was	watching	Jacin	and	Winter

inside	the	menagerie.	The	 wolf	 prowled	 behind	 them.	Winter	 kissed	 the	guard

415
with	such	passion	it	made	Levana	snarl.	Then	Jacin	raised	the	knife	 and	plunged

it	into	 her	back.	Winter’s	  body	slumped	and	he	lowered	 her	to	 the	ground	with

all	the	gentleness	of	a	man	in	love.	Blood	began	to	pool	beneath	her.

     The	video	ended.

     She	raised	an	eyebrow.	“She	is	dead,	then.”

     “Perhaps.	But	 I	 have	concerns	that	this	 death	might	 have	been	staged.	You

see,	this	is	 where	the	 video	 ends—we	have	no	 footage	of	 Jacin	 removing	 the

body	or	 killing	 the	 wolf	 to	cover	 his	tracks,	as	he	claims	 to	 have	done.	It	 does

seem	 a	 convenient	  time	  for	  this	  camera,	 in	  particular,	  to	  have	 stopped

functioning.”

     Levana	inhaled	 sharply.	“I	  see.	Detain	Sir	Clay	 in	 a	holding	 cell	 for	now.	 I

will	 question	him	after	tonight’s	 feast.”

     “I	 had	already	 taken	the	liberty	 of	 having	the	 guard	sent	for,	Your	 Majesty,

and	I’m	afraid	he	has	gone	missing.”

     This,	more	than	anything,	 gave	her	pause.	“Missing?”

     “He	 was	to	report	for	 duty	two	 hours	ago,	but	he	has	not	been	seen.	Of	those

guards	we	have	spoken	to,	no	one	claims	to	have	seen	him	since	he	finished	last

night’s	shift.”

     Levana’s	  gaze	unfocused	 as	 she	 glanced	 out	  her	 windows,	  toward	 her

beautiful	lake,	her	beautiful	 city.

     Jacin	had	run.

     Only	 guilty	 men	run.

     It	 had	to	mean	that	Winter	was	alive.

     Her	teeth	clenched	with	 loathing—not	  only	for	 her	stepdaughter’s	continued

existence,	but	at	the	audacity	of	a	weak-minded	guard	to	 play	her	for	 a	fool.	But

416
she	forced	herself	to	breathe	and	let	the	hatred	ebb	from	her	knotted	shoulders.

     “No	 matter,”	she	said.	“The	princess	is	dead	so	long	as	the	people	believe	she

is	dead.	This	changes	nothing.	I	have	much	more	important	matters	to	tend	to.”

     “Of	 course.”

     “Should	 Jacin	 Clay	be	 found,	 he	is	to	 be	killed	  on	sight.	 Any	 word	 of	 the

princess	and	I	wish	to	be	informed	immediately.”

     Aimery	  bowed.	 “Yes,	 My	  Queen.	 I	 will	  leave	 you	 to	 your	 preparations.

Congratulations	on	your	coming	happiness.”

     Levana’s	 smile	was	not	 forced.	Her	 coming	 happiness.	She	liked	the	 sound

of	that	very	much.

     Aimery	 turned	to	go.

     Levana	gasped.	“Wait,	one	more	thing.”

     Aimery	 paused.

     “Jacin	 Clay’s	parents	are	to	be	executed	for	treason—publicly,	 as	a	reminder

that	such	betrayals	 will	 not	 be	tolerated.	 Have	the	 guards	in	 their	 sector	do	 it

now,	so	their	deaths	won’t	 taint	tonight’s	 wedding	broadcast.”	She	smoothed	the

front	of	her	bodice.	“Jacin	 will	 know	that	the	fault	 of	their	deaths	lies	with	him.”

417
	




                                             Forty-Six







Kai	wasn’t	sure	how	he’d	ended	up	dressed	like	a	groom	again.	He	said	nothing

as	the	stylists	fidgeted	with	his	hair	and	clothes.	He	couldn’t	have	picked	any	of

them	out	of	a	lineup	once	they’d	gone.

     Cinder	was	dead.	That,	or	Levana	was	keeping	her	somewhere.	He	didn’t

know	which	would	be	worse.

     Cinder.

     Her	name	whispered	over	and	over	in	his	thoughts,	each	time	a	fresh	thorn	in

his	flesh.

     Brave,	determined	Cinder.	Smart,	resourceful,	sarcastic	Cinder.

     He	refused	to	believe	that	she	was	dead.	What	did	a	finger	indicate,	really?

He	trudged	through	every	faint	 possibility.	It	 was	a	 fake	finger	Levana	had

crafted	to	torment	him.	Or	Cinder	had	lost	it	in	a	battle	but	the	rest	of	her	had

gotten	away.	Or	…	surely	there	must	be	some	other	explanation.	She	couldn’t	be

dead.

     Not	Cinder.

     His	brain	was	muddled,	like	the	afternoon	had	been	spent	in	a	hazy	dream.	A

hazy	nightmare.

418
     Whether	 or	not	the	 finger	meant	what	 he	feared	it	 meant,	he	would	 soon	be

married	to	 Levana.	After	 everything—all	  their	planning,	 all	 their	 hopes.	It	was

all	ending	this	way,	just	as	Levana	had	intended	from	the	start.

     “What	 am	 I	 doing?”	 he	asked	when	Torin	  returned	from	 changing	into	 his

own	dress	clothes.

     Unless	it	was	a	thaumaturge	using	a	glamour	to	impersonate	Torin	…

     He	slammed	shut	his	eyes.

     He	hated	it	here.

     Torin	 sighed	and	came	to	stand	beside	him.	Earth	was	hanging	above	them—

almost	full	amid	 the	star-filled	sky.

     “You	 are	stopping	a	war,”	said	his	adviser,	“and	obtaining	 an	antidote.”

     Kai	 had	used	those	same	arguments	so	many	times	they’d	begun	to	lose	their

meaning.	“It	 wasn’t	 supposed	to	go	this	 way.	 I’d	 thought	…	 I’d	 really	 thought

she	stood	a	chance.”

     A	 hand	landed	on	his	shoulder.	Comforting	as	it	could	be.

     “You	 have	not	married	her	yet,	Your	 Majesty.	You	 can	still	say	no.”

     A	 wry	 laugh	 escaped	him.	“With	  us	all	 trapped	here?	She	would	 slaughter

us.”

     Coming	 here	 had	 been	a	 mistake.	 In	 the	 end,	his	 good	 intentions	  didn’t

matter.	He	had	failed.

     A	 thaumaturge	entered,	and	though	he	was	flanked	by	two	 of	 Kai’s	 personal

guards,	everyone	in	the	room	knew	the	guards	were	merely	ornamentation.

     “I	  am	 to	 escort	you	 to	 the	 grand	 ballroom,”	  said	 the	 thaumaturge.	“The

ceremony	is	about	to	begin.”

     Kai	 wiped	 his	hands	down	 the	front	 of	his	 silk	 shirt.	Rather	 than	damp	and

419
clammy,	they	 were	dry.	 Bone	dry	 and	freezing	 cold.	 “All	  right,”	 he	said.	 “I’m

ready.”

     Torin	  stayed	 at	his	  side	 as	long	  as	he	 could,	 following	   their	 entourage

through	the	palace’s	vast	corridors	 until	 he	was	forced	to	 go	join	 the	rest	of	 the

Commonwealth	 representatives	and	guests.	It	 happened	in	 a	blur,	  and	though

Kai	 felt	 as	if	  he	were	 walking	  with	 iron	 shoes	on	 his	 feet,	they	 reached	the

ballroom	too	quickly.

     He	sucked	in	a	breath,	his	disbelief	interrupted	by	 a	jolt	of	panic.

     When	they	 had	gone	over	the	rehearsal	the	day	before,	it	had	felt	like	 a	joke.

Like	he	was	playing	 a	game,	and	for	once,	he	had	the	winning	hand.	But	now,	as

the	thaumaturge	gestured	for	him	to	 take	his	place	at	the	altar	set	up	at	the	front

of	the	grand	ballroom,	 and	he	caught	sight	of	the	 hundreds	of	exotically	 dressed

Lunars	seated	before	him,	it	all	came	crumbling	down.

     This	wasn’t	 a	game	at	all.

     Prime	 Minister	  Kamin	 stood	 on	the	 dais	 behind	an	 ornate	gold-and-black

altar	that	was	 crowned	with	 hundreds	of	 small	glowing	  orbs.	She	caught	Kai’s

eye	as	he	made	his	way	onto	the	platform.	 Her	expression	was	sympathetic.	Kai

wondered	if	 she	realized	that	Levana	intended	to	 conquer	her	country	 too,	once

her	grasp	was	firm	around	the	Commonwealth.	 Levana	planned	to	conquer	them

all.

     Inhale.	Exhale.	He	turned	away	without	 returning	Kamin’s	 almost	smile.

     The	  crowd	  was	 larger	  than	 he’d	  imagined—easily	  a	  thousand	 people

gathered	in	their	evening	finest.	The	contrast	between	the	Earthens’	muted	colors

and	the	 Lunars’	 sparkles	 and	 fluorescents	 was	laughable.	 An	 aisle	 stretched

down	the	middle	 of	the	ballroom,	 defined	by	candelabras	topped	with	more	 pale

420
orbs,	their	light	 flickering	  like	 little	 flames.	 The	aisle	runner	 was	black	and	 set

with	rhinestones	in	 mimicry	 of	 the	night	sky.	 Or,	the	always	 sky,	as	it	was	here

on	Luna.

     A	 hush	fell	over	the	room,	and	Kai	 could	tell	 it	was	not	a	normal	hush.	It	was

too	controlled,	too	flawless.

     His	 heart	pounded,	uncontrolled	in	 its	cage.	This	was	the	 moment	he’d	been

dreading,	the	fate	he’d	fought	against	for	 so	long.	No	one	was	going	to	 interfere.

He	was	alone	and	rooted	to	the	floor.

     At	 the	 far	 back	 of	 the	 room,	 the	massive	 doors	opened,	 chorused	with	 a

fanfare	of	 horns.	At	 the	end	 of	the	 aisle,	two	 shadows	emerged—a	man	and	 a

woman	 in	 militaristic	   uniforms	 carrying	  the	 flags	 of	  Luna	 and	 the	 Eastern

Commonwealth.	After	 they	parted,	setting	 the	flags	into	 stands	on	either	side	of

the	altar,	 a	 series	of	  Lunar	 guards	marched	 into	 the	 room,	 fully	  armed	 and

synchronized.	They,	too,	spread	out	when	they	reached	the	altar,	like	a	protective

wall	around	the	dais.

     Next	down	 the	aisle	were	six	thaumaturges	dressed	in	black,	walking	in	pairs,

graceful	as	black	 swans.	They	 were	followed	  by	 two	 in	red,	 and	finally	  Head

Thaumaturge	Aimery	Park,	all	 in	white.

     A	 voice	dropped	 down	from	 some	hidden	speakers.	“All	  rise	for	 Her	 Royal

Majesty,	Queen	Levana	Blackburn	of	Luna.”

     The	people	rose.

     Kai	 clasped	his	shaking	hands	behind	his	back.

     She	 appeared	as	 a	 silhouette	 first	  in	  the	 lights	 of	  the	 doors,	 a	 perfect

hourglass	dropping	 off	  to	 a	full	  billowing	   skirt	 that	 flowed	 behind	 her.	 She

walked	with	 her	 head	high,	gliding	 toward	 the	altar.	 The	dress	was	scarlet	red,

421
rich	as	blood,	with	 dainty	 gold	chains	draped	around	her	 shoulders.	It	reminded

Kai	of	 a	bloodred	poppy,	the	petals	full	 and	drooping.	A	 sheer	gold	veil	 covered

her	face	and	billowed	like	a	sail	as	she	walked.

     When	 she	was	close	enough,	Kai	 could	 make	out	 hints	of	 her	face	through

the	veil.	Her	 lips	 had	been	painted	to	match	the	dress	and	her	eyes	burned	with

victory.	 She	 strode	onto	 the	 dais	 and	paused	 at	Kai’s	  side.	 The	 skirt’s	 hem

pooled	at	her	feet.

     “You	 may	be	seated,”	said	the	disembodied	voice.

     The	  crowd	 shuffled	  into	  their	  seats.	 Prime	 Minister	   Kamin	  lifted	  her

portscreen	from	 the	 altar.	 “Ladies	 and	 gentlemen,	Lunars	 and	Earthens,”	 she

began,	a	hidden	 microphone	 carrying	  her	voice	  over	the	 crowd.	 “We	  gather

today	to	 witness	a	 historical	 union	of	 Earth	 and	Luna—an	 alliance	 formed	 by

trust	and	mutual	 respect.	This	 is	 a	significant	  moment	in	 our	 history	 that	will

forever	symbolize	the	enduring	relationship	 of	the	people	of	Luna	and	the	people

of	Earth.”

     She	paused	to	let	her	words	sink	into	the	crowd.	Kai	 wanted	to	gag.

     The	prime	 minister	focused	on	the	bride	 and	groom.	“We	 are	here	to	witness

the	 marriage	 of	 Emperor	  Kaito	  of	 the	 Eastern	 Commonwealth	  and	 Queen

Levana	Blackburn	of	Luna.”

     Kai	 met	 Levana’s	gaze	 through	her	 veil.	 Her	 taunting	smile	 chased	all	 his

denial	away.

     Cinder	 was	 captured	or	 dead.	The	 wedding	 would	  go	 on	as	 planned;	the

coronation	would	take	place	in	two	 days’	time.

     It	 was	just	him,	now.	The	last	line	of	 defense	between	Levana	and	Earth.

     So	be	it.

422
     He	set	his	jaw	 and	returned	his	focus	to	 their	officiant.	 He	 gave	a	small	nod.

The	wedding	began.

423
	




                                         Forty-Seven







“The	groom	will	now	take	his	ribbon	and	tie	it	three	times	around	his	bride’s	left

wrist,	symbolizing	 the	love,	 honor,	and	respect	that	will	  forever	 bind	their

matrimony,”	said	Prime	Minister	Kamin,	unwinding	a	length	of	 velvet	ribbon

from	a	 spool.	She	picked	up	 the	polished	silver	 scissors	from	the	tray	 and

snipped	off	the	length	of	ribbon.

     Kai	tried	not	to	make	a	face	as	Kamin	laid	the	ribbon	across	his	palms.	It	was

shimmering	and	ivory,	the	color	of	the	full	moon,	as	opposed	to	the	silky	blue

ribbon	already	wrapped	around	his	own	wrist,	the	color	of	Earth.

     It	felt	like	his	consciousness	was	hovering	above	him,	watching	as	his	fingers

wrapped	the	ribbon	around	Levana’s	bone-thin	wrist—once,	twice,	three	times

—finishing	it	off	with	a	simple	knot.	There	was	no	grace	to	it	and	the	ribbon	was

probably	too	loose,	a	side	effect	of	his	unwillingness	to	brush	her	skin	with	his

fingertips.	When	she	had	tied	his,	she	had	practically	given	him	a	wrist	massage

that	had	made	him	squirm	on	the	inside.

     “I	 will	 now	knot	the	two	ribbons	together,”	said	Prime	Minister	Kamin,	in

her	measured,	serene	voice.	She	had	not	faltered	once	during	the	ceremony.

“This	is	to	symbolize	the	unity	of	the	bride	and	groom	and	also	of	Luna	and	the

424
Eastern	Commonwealth,	which	 represents	the	planet	of	Earth	on	this,	the	eighth

day	of	November	 in	the	 126th	year	of	 the	third	 era.”	She	took	 the	ends	of	each

ribbon	between	her	fingers.

     Kai	 watched	with	  detached	interest	as	her	dark,	 slender	fingers	 knotted	the

two	ribbons	together.	She	yanked	on	 the	ends,	tightening	the	knot.	 Kai	stared	at

it,	feeling	the	disconnect	in	his	mind.

     He	was	not	here.

     This	was	not	happening.

     His	 hateful	 gaze	betrayed	him,	 flickering	  toward	 Levana’s	face.	 It	 was	the

briefest	of	looks,	 but	she	somehow	managed	to	catch	it.	 She	smiled,	and	icicles

stabbed	at	his	spine.

     This	was	happening.	This	was	his	bride.

     Levana’s	 lips	twitched	 behind	her	 veil.	He	 could	hear	her	voice,	 though	she

didn’t	 open	her	lips,	accusing	him	 of	an	endearing,	bashful	 crush,	chastising	his

youth	and	innocence	at	such	a	moment.	He	couldn’t	tell	 if	the	voice	 was	his	own

taunting	imagination	or	something	she	was	injecting	 into	his	thoughts.

     And	 he	would	never	know.

     He	was	marrying	 a	woman	who	would	forever	 hold	this	power	over	him.

     How	 different	 she	was	from	Cinder.	Selene.	Her	niece,	though	it	 didn’t	 seem

possible	the	two	had	anything	in	common,	especially	their	 ancestry.

     Thinking	 of	 Cinder	brought	back	the	painful	 memory	of	 the	cyborg	finger	 on

a	bed	of	silk	and	Kai	shuddered.

     The	 officiant	 paused,	but	Kai	 was	 already	reconfiguring	 his	 expression.	He

let	out	a	steady	breath	and	gave	her	a	subtle	nod	to	continue.

     Kamin	 reached	for	her	portscreen,	and	Kai	 grasped	at	the	momentary	pause,

425
trying	 to	  compose	himself.	  He	 thought	  of	 the	 mutants	 murdering	  innocent

civilians.	 He	 thought	  of	 his	 father	 dying	  in	 the	 palace	 quarantine	while	  an

antidote	existed	 in	 Levana’s	 control.	 He	thought	 of	 all	 the	 lives	 he	would	 be

saving	by	stopping	this	war	and	obtaining	the	cure.

     “We	 will	  now	 commence	with	 the	exchanging	 of	vows,	 as	set	forth	 by	 the

council	 of	 leaders	 of	 the	 Earthen	Union,	  beginning	 with	  the	 groom.	 Please,

repeat	after	me.”	 Kamin	 glanced	up	to	make	 sure	Kai	 was	paying	attention.	 “I,

Emperor	Kaito	of	 the	Eastern	Commonwealth	of	Earth…”

     He	repeated,	as	accommodating	as	an	android.

     “…	 take	 as	my	wife	 and	the	future	 empress	of	the	 Eastern	Commonwealth,

Her	Royal	Majesty,	Queen	Levana	Blackburn	 of	Luna…”

     He	was	out	of	 his	body	again.	Looking	 down.	Listening	 to	the	words,	but	 not

understanding	them.	They	held	no	meaning.

     “…	 to	rule	at	my	 side	with	grace	and	justice,	to	honor	the	laws	of	 the	Earthen

Union	 as	laid	out	 by	 our	forefathers,	 to	be	 an	advocate	for	 peace	and	fairness

among	all	peoples.”

     Did	 anyone	believe	a	word	of	this	rubbish?

     “From	 this	 day	forward,	 she	will	 be	my	 sun	at	dawn	and	my	 moon	at	night,

and	I	vow	to	love	and	cherish	her	for	all	 our	days.”

     Who	 wrote	these	vows	anyway?	 He’d	 never	heard	anything	so	ridiculous	 in

his	life.

     But	 he	 said	them,	 with	 no	 emotion	 and	even	less	 interest.	Prime	 Minister

Kamin	 gave	him	 a	nod,	akin	 to	 a	well	 done,	and	turned	 to	Levana.	 “Now,	 the

bride	will	 repeat	after	me…”

     Kai	 tuned	out	Levana’s	voice,	 examining	their	bound	 wrists	instead.	Was	the

426
ribbon	around	 his	 wrist	 growing	 tighter?	 His	 fingers	 were	beginning	 to	 tingle

with	 numbness.	He	 was	 losing	 circulation.	  But	 the	 ribbon	 curled	 innocently

against	his	skin.

     Stars	above,	it	was	warm	in	here.

     “…	 and	I	vow	 to	love	and	cherish	him	for	all	 our	days.”

     Kai	 snorted.	Loudly.

     He’d	 meant	for	it	to	be	kept	inside,	but	it	 just	slipped	out.

     Levana	tensed	and	the	officiant	speared	him	with	a	sharp	look.

     Kai	 coughed	in	 an	attempt	 to	smooth	 over	the	 moment.	“Sorry.	  There	was

something	in	my—”	 He	coughed	again.

     Terse	 wrinkles	 formed	 around	 Kamin’s	  mouth	 as	she	 turned	 back	to	 the

queen.	“Your	 Royal	 Majesty,	 do	 you	 hereby	accept	the	 terms	of	 marriage	 set

forth	before	you	 on	this	day,	as	both	the	rules	of	matrimony	 between	two	beings

and	also	 as	 the	bond	 that	 will	  henceforth	 be	 forged	 between	 Luna	 and	 the

Eastern	Commonwealth,	resulting	 in	the	 political	 alliance	of	 these	two	entities?

If	you	accept,	say	‘I	do.’”

     “I	  do.”	 Levana’s	 voice	 was	clear	 and	 sweet	and	sent	 a	thousand	 piercing

needles	into	Kai’s	chest.

     His	head	was	throbbing.	From	exhaustion,	from	 disbelief,	from	 misery.

     “Your	 Imperial	 Majesty,	do	you	 hereby	accept	the	terms	of	marriage	set	forth

before	you	on	this	 day,	as	both	the	rules	 of	matrimony	 between	two	 beings	and

also	 as	  the	  bond	  that	  will	   henceforth	  be	  forged	  between	  the	  Eastern

Commonwealth	and	Luna,	resulting	in	 the	political	alliance	 of	these	two	entities?

If	you	accept,	say	‘I	do.’”

     He	blinked	 at	Prime	Minister	 Kamin.

427
     His	heart	was	pulsating	against	his	ribs,	and	her	words	were	hollow	 echoes	in

his	hollow	  head,	 and	he	 had	 only	 to	 open	 his	mouth	  and	say	 I	 do	 and	 the

wedding	would	be	over	and	Levana	would	be	his	wife.

     But	his	lips	 would	not	open.

     I	don’t.

     The	  muscles	 flexed	  in	  the	 prime	  minister’s	   jaw.	  Her	 gaze	 hardened,

prompting.

     I	can’t.

     He	 felt	 the	hush	 of	 a	thousand	guests	bearing	 down	on	 him.	 He	 imagined

Torin	 and	President	 Vargas	and	 Queen	Camilla	  and	all	 the	 others,	watching,

waiting.	 He	 pictured	 all	 of	 Levana’s	 guards	and	thaumaturges	 and	that	 smug

Aimery	Park	and	a	thousand	vain,	ignorant	aristocrats	hanging	on	his	silence.

     He	knew	Levana	could	 force	him	to	 say	the	words,	but	she	didn’t.	Though	he

imagined	a	blast	of	 icy	 air	rolling	  off	 her	with	 each	passing	second,	she	waited

with	all	 the	others.

     Kai	 pried	open	his	lips,	but	his	tongue	was	heavy	as	iron.

     The	officiant	 inhaled	 a	patient	breath	and	cast	a	worried	glance	to	the	queen,

before	fixating	on	Kai	 again.	Her	expression	grew	nervous.

     Kai	 looked	down	at	the	scissors	she’d	used	to	cut	the	ribbons.

     He	 moved	 fast,	before	 he	could	 question	 himself.	 His	 unbound	 hand	shot

forward,	snatching	the	scissors	off	 the	altar.	Blood	 rushed	in	his	ears	as	he	spun

toward	Levana,	arm	raised,	and	plunged	the	scissors	toward	her	heart.

     Cinder	 cried	 out,	 her	arms	flying	  up	 in	 defense.	The	 point	 of	 the	scissors

sliced	through	 the	fabric	 of	 her	 elbow-length	 gloves	 before	coming	 to	 a	swift

halt,	pressed	into	the	silver	bodice	of	her	ball	 gown.	Kai’s	 arm	trembled	with	 the

428
effort	 to	 push	through	 the	 control,	 but	 his	hand	 was	now	 carved	 from	 stone.

Breath	ragged,	he	looked	 up	into	 Cinder’s	 face.	She	looked	 like	she	had	at	 the

ball,	in	her	 tattered	dress	and	stained	gloves,	her	damp	hair	tumbling	around	her

face.	The	only	 difference	 was	the	blue	 ribbon	 tying	 them	together	and,	 now,	a

single	slit	cut	into	 the	silk	of	her	gloves.

     Slowly,	  like	 molasses,	blood	 began	 to	seep	 through	 that	cut,	 staining	 the

fabric.

     Cinder—no,	 Levana—saw	 the	 blooming	 cut	and	 snarled.	Her	 hold	 on	Kai

snapped	and	he	stumbled	back.	The	scissors	clattered	to	the	floor,	ringing	with	 a

tone	of	finality.

     “You	  dare	to	 threaten	 me	 here?”	Levana	 hissed,	 and	though	 she	tried	  to

mimic	 Cinder’s	  voice,	 Kai	  could	  tell	 the	 difference.	  “In	  front	 of	  both	 our

kingdoms?”

     Kai’s	 attention	was	still	 on	the	blood	leaking	from	 her	wounded	arm.

     He	had	 done	it.	 For	a	moment,	 he	had	gotten	through	 the	glamour,	 through

the	manipulation.	It	wasn’t	 much,	but	he	had	actually	hurt	her.

     “It	 wasn’t	 meant	to	be	a	threat,”	he	said.

     Her	eyes	narrowed.

     “We	 both	 know	 you	intend	 to	 kill	 me	 the	moment	 I’m	 no	longer	 useful	 to

you.	I	thought	it	 was	fair	to	let	you	know	 the	feeling	is	mutual.”

     Levana	glared,	and	it	was	unnerving	to	see	such	hatred	on	Cinder’s	face.

     Vibrating	  with	 adrenaline,	 Kai	 looked	 back	at	 the	audience.	 Most	 of	 their

guests	were	on	their	feet,	 their	expressions	a	mix	 of	shock	 and	confusion.	Near

the	front,	Torin	 looked	like	he	was	ready	to	hurtle	himself	 over	two	rows	 of	seats

to	be	at	Kai’s	side	the	instant	he	was	needed.

429
     Kai	 held	his	gaze	long	enough,	he	hoped,	to	convey	 that	he	was	all	right.	 He

had	hurt	her,	Kai	 wanted	to	say.	It	was	possible	to	 hurt	her.	Which	 meant	it	was

possible	to	kill	 her.

     Setting	his	jaw,	 Kai	turned	back	to	 face	Prime	Minister	 Kamin.	She,	too,	was

shaking,	both	hands	gripping	her	portscreen.

     “I	 do,”	 he	said,	listening	to	his	own	proclamation	echo	around	the	altar.

     The	officiant’s	  gaze	darted	between	him	and	his	bride,	like	she	wasn’t	sure	if

she	should	proceed	or	not.	But	then	Levana	straightened	her	wedding	 gown—or

Cinder’s	ball	gown,	 as	it	was.	Whatever	reaction	she	was	hoping	to	get	from	him

by	maintaining	the	glamour,	he	wouldn’t—couldn’t—give	   it	 to	her.

     When	the	silence	 had	hovered	for	too	long,	 Levana	growled,	 “Get	on	 with	it

then.”

     Kamin	 gulped.	“By	  the	power	given	 to	me	by	the	people	 of	Earth,	I	 do	now

pronounce	you	…	husband	and	wife.”

     Kai	 didn’t	 even	flinch.

     “We	 ask	 that	all	 video	 feeds	be	 discontinued	 so	the	groom	 might	 kiss	 his

bride.”

     Kai	 waited	 to	 be	hit	  by	a	 wall	 of	 dread,	 but	even	 that	was	 replaced	with

fervent	determination.	He	imagined	 all	the	holographs	on	Luna	fading	 away,	and

all	 the	Earthen	 newsfeeds	flickering	  to	 dead	air.	 He	 imagined	 all	  his	people

watching,	and	the	horror	they	must	be	feeling	as	those	feeds	were	silenced.

     He	turned	to	Levana.

     His	bride.

     His	wife.

     She	was	still	  impersonating	Cinder,	 but	 the	ball	 gown	 was	replaced	by	 the

430
vibrant	red	wedding	dress	and	sheer	veil.	She	smiled	deviously.

     Ignoring	 her,	he	mechanically	 took	her	veil	 between	his	fingers	and	pulled	 it

over	her	head.

     “I	 thought	you	might	 prefer	this	look,”	 she	said.	“Consider	it	a	wedding	gift.”

     Kai	 couldn’t	 bring	himself	 to	react,	no	matter	how	much	 he	wanted	to	reflect

that	haughtiness	back	 to	 her.	“In	  fact,	 I	do.”	  He	craned	 his	head	 toward	 her.

“Selene	is	more	beautiful	than	you	could	ever	be.”

     He	kissed	her.	An	 abrupt,	passionless	kiss	that	felt	 nothing	at	all	 like	 kissing

Cinder.

     A	 collective	breath	released	from	the	audience.

     Kai	 pulled	away,	putting	 a	full	 body	of	 open	air	between	them.	The	audience

started	to	 applaud,	politely	  at	first,	 then	 growing	 more	 enthusiastic	as	 if	 they

were	afraid	their	clapping	 might	not	be	polite	 enough.	Kai	held	out	his	elbow	 for

Levana	to	 take,	 their	 hands	still	  bound,	and	 together	they	 turned	 to	 face	 the

audience.	From	the	corner	of	his	eye,	he	saw	Cinder’s	image	melt	away,	her	face

replaced	with	Levana’s,	 and	he	was	glad	 she	looked	annoyed.	It	 was	the	tiniest

of	victories,	but	he	was	glad	for	it.

     They	stood	amid	the	thundering	cheers,	each	of	them	seething.

     Husband	and	wife.

431
	




                                             Forty-Eight







Cress	had	long	ago	 lost	track	 of	 where	they	 were	or	 what	direction	  they	were

going.	 Jacin	 had	 dragged	 her	 through	 some	 complicated	  labyrinth	  of	 halls

beneath	the	palace,	down	stairs	and	through	maglev	 tunnels.	Though	 it	felt	 like

they’d	 been	 walking	  for	  hours,	 she	 couldn’t	  even	 be	 sure	 they’d	  left	  the

boundaries	of	Artemisia	Central,	given	 how	circuitous	their	 route	had	been.

     They	were	sneaking	through	 a	tunnel,	staying	close	to	the	edges	to	avoid	any

shuttles,	which	had	a	tendency	to	sneak	up	too	fast	on	their	silent	magnets,	when

the	power	cut	 out,	 plunging	 them	into	 darkness.	Cress	gasped	and	reached	for

Jacin,	but	froze	with	her	fingers	 inches	away	from	where	she	expected	him	to	be.

Clenching	her	fist,	she	drew	her	hand	back	to	her	side.

     Brave.	She	was	brave.

     In	 the	 distance,	 they	 heard	 the	 scream	of	 a	 shuttle	 hitting	  the	 rails	 and

careening	to	a	stop.

     A	 moment	later,	 orange	emergency	lights	illuminated	 the	 tracks	at	their	feet

and	 a	 voice	 echoed	 from	  invisible	  speakers.	“This	   shuttle	 route	 has	 been

discontinued	until	further	 notice.	Please	proceed	to	the	next	platform	on	foot	 and

prepare	for	a	security	inspection.	The	crown	apologizes	for	any	inconvenience.”

432
     She	glanced	up	at	Jacin.	“What	does	that	mean?”

     “My	  guess?	That	whatever	Cinder’s	doing,	it’s	 working.”	 He	started	walking

again,	picking	their	way	 more	carefully	with	 the	reduced	lighting.	 “They	 must	be

limiting	 transportation	into	the	city.”

     Her	nerves	hummed.	“Will	  we	be	able	to	get	out?”

     “We’re	 almost	to	 the	station	that	receives	eighty	percent	of	our	supply	 trains.

They	should	still	 be	operational,	given	how	 many	guests	Levana	has	to	feed	this

week.”

     Cress	 trotted	 in	  his	  wake,	 hoping	  he	 was	 right.	  He	 hadn’t	  been	 very

forthcoming	 with	 his	plan	and	she	still	 had	no	idea	where	they	 were	going.	She

wondered	if	 he	 was	right.	  Had	Winter	  and	Scarlet	 gotten	her	 message	to	the

others?	Had	 they	 been	able	 to	 broadcast	the	 video?	 She	had	 no	 answers.	If

Levana	was	aware	 of	 a	potential	 uprising,	 she	was	 keeping	the	 knowledge	 to

herself.

     The	tunnel	 became	wider,	the	rails	merging	 with	 two	other	tracks,	and	Cress

was	hit	with	  a	pungent	smell	 that	reminded	her	 of	the	 caravan	she	and	Thorne

had	crossed	the	Sahara	with.	Dirt	and	animals.

     Around	 the	next	bend	in	the	tunnel,	 she	could	see	a	bright	glow	 and	hear	the

echoes	of	grating	machinery	and	rumbling	wheels.	Jacin	slowed	his	pace.

     A	  massive	 platform	  came	 into	 view.	  A	  holographic	  sign	 was	 showing

coverage	of	the	royal	wedding.

     A	 dozen	 maglev	tracks	 stretched	in	 multiple	 directions,	 loaded	 with	 cargo

trains.	Most	of	their	 cars	were	hidden	from	view	 in	the	darkened	tunnels,	waiting

to	 be	relieved	 of	  their	 goods.	Cranes	 and	pulleys	  filled	 the	 dock	 and	 Cress

imagined	it	 would	 have	taken	countless	laborers	 to	man	all	 the	 machinery,	but

433
the	only	  personnel	was	 a	contingent	 of	  uniformed	 guards	 sweeping	the	 cars

ahead.

     Jacin	pulled	 Cress	into	 the	 shadows	of	 the	nearest	train.	 A	 second	later,	 a

silhouette	passed	up	ahead	and	the	beam	of	a	flashlight	jotted	 in	 their	direction.

Jacin	and	Cress	ducked	 between	the	 nearest	cars,	watching	 as	the	 light	 beam

flickered	along	the	ground	and	disappeared.

     “A6	 is	clear,”	 someone	yelled,	followed	by	another:	“A7,	 clear.”

     There	was	a	pause,	then	the	hum	of	magnets.	The	train	swayed	forward.

     Jacin	jumped	onto	 the	axle	to	 keep	from	being	 caught	on	the	tracks,	hauling

Cress	up	beside	him.	This	time	she	did	grab	his	 arm	as	the	train	surged	forward,

then	came	to	another	stop.	Car	doors	thudded	open.

     Jacin	jumped	down	from	 the	axle,	dragging	Cress	with	him.	“Inspections,”	 he

whispered.	“Making	 sure	no	one	tries	to	sneak	into	the	city.”

     “What	 about	sneaking	out	of	the	city?”

     He	pointed	 toward	the	front	 of	the	train.	“We	 need	to	get	into	 one	of	the	cars

that	was	already	searched.	This	 train	should	 be	heading	back	to	 the	agriculture

sectors	from	here.”

     They	sneaked	over	the	axle	to	the	opposite	side	of	the	car.	Though	there	were

platforms	 on	both	 sides	 of	 the	tracks,	 the	 second	platform	 had	 only	 a	 single

guard,	pacing	the	perimeter	with	an	assault	rifle	at	the	ready.

     “All	  right,	 shortcake,	when	that	guard	 has	his	back	to	us	again,	we’re	 going

to	sneak	forward	as	fast	as	we	can.	Once	 he	starts	to	turn,	crawl	 under	the	train

and	hold	still.”

     Cress	glared	at	the	back	of	his	head.	“Don’t	call	 me	shortcake.”

     Up	ahead,	someone	yelled,	“A8,	clear!	 B1,	clear!”

434
     The	guard	turned	away.

     Jacin	and	Cress	darted	forward.	Her	 heart	was	thumping	as	she	kept	one	eye

on	the	guard’s	back	and	his	 threatening	gun,	the	other	on	the	tracks	 beneath	her

feet.	The	 guard	 started	to	 pivot.	  Cress	dropped	 to	 her	 hands	and	 knees	and

scurried	under	the	train	car.	Sweat	matted	her	hair	to	the	back	of	her	neck.

     “Over	 he—!”

     A	 yell	 was	 cut	off,	 followed	  by	 two	 loud	thuds	 and	the	clang	 of	 metal	on

metal.	The	 guard	with	 the	rifle	  turned	and	charged	toward	 the	 tracks,	vaulting

over	an	axle.	A	gunshot.	A	grunt.

     “Freeze!”

     Another	 gunshot.

     With	 the	platform	 unexpectedly	 clear,	Jacin	shimmied	 out	from	 beneath	the

train	and	waved	for	Cress	to	follow.	 Her	 elbows	scraped	against	the	hard	ground

as	she	pulled	herself	out.	Jacin	dragged	her	to	her	feet	and	they	took	off	 running

toward	the	front	 of	the	train.	 The	sounds	of	a	struggle	continued	on	the	opposite

platform.

     They	 reached	car	 A7	  and	plastered	 themselves	to	 the	 side	to	 catch	 their

breath.	Now	they	 only	 had	to	sneak	around	to	the	other	 side	and	climb	 into	 the

car	without	  being	 seen—or	shot,	 she	thought—as	 another	 gunshot	 made	her

jump.

     Cress	looked	back	and	her	heart	leaped	into	her	throat.

     A	 girl	  was	on	 the	ground,	 crawling	 beneath	one	of	 the	 train	 cars	just	 like

Cress	had	been	seconds	before.	Though	 Cress	could	see	very	 little	 of	 her,	she

couldn’t	mistake	the	abundance	of	silky	 braids	dyed	in	varying	shades	of	blue.

     “Iko!”

435
     Iko’s	 head	snapped	up.	Her	eyes	widened.	The	look	was	brief,	though,	as	she

turned	her	head	toward	 something	on	the	 other	side	of	 the	train.	 She	started	to

scuffle	forward,	 her	belly	pressed	against	the	ground.

     Jacin	cursed,	then	launched	himself	 past	Cress.	His	own	 gun	was	already	 in

his	palm	as	he	ran	into	the	fray.

     Cress	followed,	 though	with	 more	hesitation,	 having	no	weapon	of	 her	own.

She	crouched	down	against	the	train	car	and	inched	her	head	forward.

     Her	throat	dried.

     Thorne.

     He	 was	wearing	 the	uniform	 of	 a	Lunar	 guard,	but	 there	was	no	 mistaking

him.

     She	clapped	both	hands	over	her	mouth	 to	keep	from	 shouting	his	name.	He

was	grappling	 with	 the	 guard	from	 the	platform.	  The	rifle	  was	nowhere	to	 be

seen.	Four	other	 guards	and	 two	 flashlights,	 their	 beams	spotlighting	  random

spots	on	the	tracks,	were	scattered	across	the	platform.	Cress	noticed	a	spray	 of

blood	against	one	of	the	cars	at	the	same	moment	Iko	 charged	out	from	 beneath

the	car	and	threw	 herself	at	a	sixth	 guard	who	 was	trying	 to	 get	a	good	shot	at

Thorne.	It	was	an	awkward	 tackle,	though.	Something	 seemed	to	be	wrong	with

Iko’s	right	 arm.

     The	 guard	grabbed	Iko	  and	pinned	 her	to	 the	ground,	 wrapping	 his	 hands

around	her	throat,	oblivious	that	oxygen	intake	wasn’t	 an	issue.

     Spotting	 an	abandoned	handgun	a	few	 steps	away,	Cress	leaped	for	 it.	 But

the	moment	 she	picked	 it	 up	 and	 aimed	 it	 into	 the	 fight,	 her	 arms	began	 to

tremble.	She	had	never	fired	a	gun	before.

     She	was	attempting	to	still	 her	hand	enough	to	take	aim	when	two	successive

436
gunshots	echoed	through	 her	 skull.	 The	 first	  knocked	the	 guard	 off	 Iko;	  the

second	took	out	the	guard	wrestling	with	Thorne.

     The	 world	 seemed	to	 still,	  but	 for	 heavy	 breathing.	 The	 uncanny	 silence

made	her	panting	unbearably	loud.

     Upon	  confirmation	  that	  both	 guards	 were	  dead	 or	 incapacitated,	 Jacin

dropped	his	gun	back	into	its	holster.

     Thorne	 blinked	at	 Jacin,	shocked,	as	he	stood	and	straightened	his	shirt.	 He

looked	about	to	say	something	when	Iko	screamed,	“CRESS!”	 and	shot	forward,

wrapping	Cress	in	a	one-armed	embrace.

     Cress	 stumbled,	 letting	 herself	 be	 held,	 even	 while	  her	 gaze	sought	 out

Thorne.	His	 jaw	 hung	as	he	 stared	at	her.	He	 was	disheveled	 and	bruised	and

breathless.	He	  stumbled	 forward	  and	  engulfed	 both	  Cress	 and	 Iko	  in	  an

enormous	hug.	Cress	squeezed	her	eyes	shut	as	hot	tears	began	to	cloud	 them.

His	arm	 around	her	shoulders.	 His	bristled	 chin	 on	her	 forehead.	One	of	 Iko’s

braids	in	her	mouth.

     She	had	never	been	so	happy.

     Jacin	grunted.	“We	 need	to	go.”

     Iko	 stepped	back,	but	Thorne	filled	 the	space	she’d	left,	cupping	Cress’s	face

in	his	hands.	His	eyes	bored	into	her,	full	 of	disbelief.	 His	thumb	 caught	her	first

tear.

     Suddenly,	 Cress	found	  herself	 laughing	 and	 sniffling	  and	 laughing	 some

more.	She	ducked	her	head	and	swiped	at	the	tears.	“No	 crying,”	  she	said.	“It’s

dehydrating.”

     His	arms	wound	 around	her	again.	She	felt	the	rumble	of	his	voice	as	he	said,

“It	is	 you.	Thank	the	stars.”

437
     “When	 I	say	we	should	go,”	said	Jacin,	“I	 mean	now.”

     Thorne’s	 arms	tensed	and,	with	one	tight	squeeze,	he	let	her	go	and	turned	to

face	Jacin.	 A	 muscle	 twitched	 in	 his	 cheek.	 It	 was	 the	only	  warning	 before

Thorne’s	fist	collided	 with	 Jacin’s	jaw.	Cress	gasped.

     Jacin	stumbled	back,	his	hand	coming	up	to	feel	the	wound.

     “That’s	 for	 selling	us	out	on	Earth,”	 said	Thorne.	“And	 this	 is	for	taking	 care

of	Cress.”	He	pulled	Jacin	into	a	hug,	burying	 his	face	in	Jacin’s	shoulder.

     Jacin	rolled	  his	eyes	to	 the	cavernous	ceiling.	  “Don’t	  make	me	 regret	that

decision.”	 He	shoved	Thorne	 away.	“Your	 eyesight’s	 back.	Good.	 Let’s	 search

these	men	for	weapons	and	get	out	of	here.”

     With	 a	nod,	 Thorne	leaned	over	 one	of	the	 bodies	and	unstrapped	the	knife

from	the	 guard’s	belt.	 To	Cress’s	surprise,	he	 handed	it	to	 Jacin,	who	hesitated

only	briefly	  before	tucking	 it	through	 his	belt.	“How	  did	you	 know	 how	to	find

us?”	Thorne	asked.

     “We	  didn’t.	 We	 were	 on	 our	way	 out	 of	 here.”	 Jacin	 frowned.	 “Where’s

Winter?”

     “She	 and	Scarlet	 went	 into	 hiding,”	 said	 Iko.	 She	was	 poking	 at	her	 limp

right	arm,	then	tugging	at	her	deadened	fingers.	“Well,	 sort	of.	It’s	 complicated.”

     Thorne	peered	at	the	android.	“What	happened?”

     Her	lips	 bunched.	“One	of	 those	guards	stabbed	me	in	the	shoulder.	I	think	it

severed	something	important.”	  She	 turned	to	 show	 them	 a	jagged	 cut	 in	 her

upper	back	and	sighed.	“It’s	like	 this	is	‘Pick	 on	Iko’	 day	or	something.”

     Cress	pressed	her	lips	in	sympathy,	but	the	reminder	of	Iko’s	 cybernetic	parts

made	her	realize	…	“Where’s	Cinder?”

     Thorne’s	  face	became	 shadowed,	 but	 before	 he	 could	 respond,	 a	chime

438
blared	through	the	tunnel.	Cress	jumped.

     The	holographic	 screen	on	the	 wall	 brightened	with	 Thaumaturge	Aimery’s

face.

     “People	 of	Luna,	 I	 am	pleased	to	make	the	announcement	that	the	 wedding

ceremony	 is	 complete.	  Our	 honored	  ruler,	  Queen	 Levana,	 has	 sealed	 the

marriage	alliance	with	Emperor	Kaito	 of	Earth.”

     Iko	 grunted	in	a	most	unladylike	 way,	drawing	 everyone’s	gaze	to	her.	“I	 get

stabbed	and	she	gets	to	marry	Kai.	That	just	figures.”

     “The	 coronation	ceremony,”	 Aimery	  continued,	“in	 which	 we	will	  welcome

Emperor	Kaito	as	our	honored	king	consort,	and	Her	Majesty	 Queen	Levana	will

be	bestowed	with	 the	 title	 of	 empress	of	Earth’s	 Eastern	Commonwealth,	 will

take	place	two	days	hence	at	sunrise.”	 Aimery’s	 eyes	took	 on	an	arrogant	glint.

“Our	  illustrious	  queen	 asks	 that	  the	 people	 of	  Luna	  partake	 in	  tonight’s

celebration.	Tonight’s	 wedding	feast	shall	be	broadcast	across	all	sectors,	during

which	we	 have	a	special	trial	 planned	for	 the	festivities.	 This	 broadcast	will	 be

mandatory	viewing	 for	 all	citizens	 and	shall	commence	in	 twenty	minutes	 from

the	end	of	this	announcement.”

     The	video	cut	off.

     “Special	 trial?”	 said	Cress.

     “It’s	  Cinder,”	said	Thorne,	 glowering	 at	the	holograph.	“She	has	Cinder,	and

Wolf,	 too.	We	 expect	her	to	 have	them	publicly	  executed	as	a	way	of	 quelling

the	insurrection.”

     A	 chill	 swept	down	Cress’s	spine.	Twenty	minutes.	It	 would	take	longer	 than

that	to	get	back	to	the	palace.

     “We’re	 going	 to	rescue	her,”	 said	Iko,	as	if	 it	 were	the	most	natural	 thing	in

439
the	world.

     “Sorry,”	said	Jacin,	looking	like	he	actually	meant	it.	“But	if	 we	only	have

twenty	minutes,	we’re	already	too	late.”

440
	




                                           Forty-Nine







Cinder	jabbed	her	finger’s	screwdriver	into	 the	wall	 beside	the	cell	door.	A

thumbnail’s	worth	of	dust	and	rock	chipped	away,	joining	the	pile	at	her	feet.

The	lava	rock	was	hard,	but	her	titanium	tools	were	harder,	and	her	resolve	was

the	hardest	it	had	ever	been.

     She	was	angry.	She	was	frustrated.	She	was	afraid.

     She	was	distraught	over	Maha’s	death,	which	kept	replaying	in	her	memory,

making	her	want	to	jab	the	screwdriver	into	her	own	temple	to	make	it	stop.	She

had	looked	at	the	raid	on	RM-9	from	every	angle,	torturing	herself	with	what-ifs

and	implausible	scenarios,	trying	to	find	some	way	to	bring	Maha	back	to	life.

To	free	herself	and	Wolf.	To	protect	her	friends.	To	defeat	Levana.

     She	was	aware	of	how	futile	it	was.

     Maybe	Aimery	was	right.	Maybe	she	should	have	controlled	everyone	in	that

sector	from	the	start.	It	would	have	made	her	a	tyrant,	but	it	also	would	have

kept	them	alive.

     She	was	nauseated	from	the	rank	smell	coming	from	the	bucket	against	the

wall.	She	was	annoyed	that	Levana’s	goons	had	taken	her	best	weapon—her

cybernetic	pointer	finger	with	the	gun	attachment—and	locked	her	up	with	her

441
stepmother	and	stepsister,	who	had	barely	spoken	since	she’d	arrived.

     Rationally,	 she	knew	 there	was	no	way	 she	could	 dig	through	 to	the	door’s

hinges	before	the	guards	came	for	her.	She	knew	she	was	working	 herself	into	a

frenzy	 for	 no	 logical	 reason.	 But	 she	couldn’t	  bring	 herself	 to	 slump	 to	 the

ground,	defeated.

     Like	 they	were.

     Another	 rock	chip	crumbled	down	 the	wall.

     Cinder	blew	 a	lock	of	hair	out	of	 her	face,	but	it	fell	 right	back	down.

     According	 to	the	clock	 in	her	head,	she	had	been	in	this	cell	for	 over	twenty-

four	hours.	She	had	not	slept.	The	wedding,	she	knew,	would	be	over	by	now.

     The	thought	tied	her	stomach	into	knots.

     It	 occurred	to	 her	 that	if	 she	had	let	 Levana	 come	and	take	 her	from	 New

Beijing,	 this	was	where	she	would	 have	ended	up	anyway.	She	still	 would	 have

been	executed.	She	was	still	going	to	die.

     She’d	tried	 to	run.	She’d	tried	 to	fight.	 And	 all	she	got	for	 it	was	a	spaceship

full	of	 friends	who	she’d	now	 be	taking	down	with	 her.

     “Why	 did	he	call	 you	Princess?”

     Cinder	paused,	glaring	at	the	pathetic	scratch	marks	she’d	made.	It	 was	Pearl

who	had	spoken,	her	voice	fragile	 as	she	broke	their	 silence	for	the	first	 time	 in

hours.

     Pushing	 the	 miscreant	 hair	 back	 with	  her	 sweat-dampened	wrist,	 Cinder

glanced	at	Pearl	 and	Adri,	  not	bothering	 to	 hide	her	 disdain.	 She	had	already

hardened	herself	to	any	sort	 of	 sympathy	for	 them.	Every	 time	 a	twinge	 struck

her,	she	called	 up	the	 memory	 of	 Adri	 demanding	 that	Cinder	 hobble	 around

footless	for	an	entire	 week,	as	a	reminder	that	she	“wasn’t	 human.”	 Or	the	 time

442
Pearl	had	thrown	Cinder’s	 toolbox	 into	a	crowded	 street,	ruining	the	silk	 gloves

Kai	had	given	her.

     She	kept	reminding	 herself	that	whatever	 was	going	to	happen	to	them,	 they

deserved	it.

     It	 didn’t	 make	her	feel	 any	better.	In	 fact,	 thinking	 about	it	 was	making	 her

feel	cruel	and	petty,	and	also	giving	her	a	headache.

     She	shook	it	off.

     “I’m	  Princess	Selene,”	she	answered,	turning	back	to	her	work.

     Pearl	laughed,	a	short	hysterical	sound,	full	of	 disbelief.

     Adri	 stayed	silent.

     The	cell	 filled	  with	 Cinder’s	persistent	scrape	 scrape	clatter,	 scrape	scrape

clatter.	Her	pile	 grew	larger,	pebble	by	hard-earned	pebble.

     She	was	never	getting	out	of	here.

     “Garan	knew.”	 Adri’s	 voice	 was	brittle.

     Cinder	 froze	again.	Garan	had	been	Adri’s	 husband,	the	man	who	 had	made

the	decision	to	adopt	Cinder.	She’d	barely	known	him.

     She	 was	 annoyed	 when	  her	 own	  curiosity	  forced	  her	 to	  turn	 around.

Switching	  the	  screwdriver	  for	  her	  flashlight,	  she	  beamed	 it	  toward	  her

stepmother.	“Excuse	me?”

     Adri	 flinched,	 both	 arms	wrapped	around	her	 daughter.	They	hadn’t	 moved

from	their	corner.	“Garan	 knew,”	 she	said	again.	“He	never	told	me,	but	when	he

was	taken	away	to	the	quarantines,	he	told	me	to	take	care	of	you.	He	said	it	as	if

it	were	the	 most	important	 thing	in	 the	world.”	  She	fell	 quiet,	like	 the	presence

of	her	dead	husband	was	there,	hanging	over	them	all.

     “Wow,”	 said	Cinder.	“You	 really	 excelled	at	that	dying	request,	didn’t	 you?”

443
     Adri’s	gaze	narrowed,	full	of	a	disgust	Cinder	was	all	too	familiar	with.	 “I

will	not	tolerate	you	speaking	to	me	this	way	when	my	husband—”

     “You	won’t	tolerate	it?”	Cinder	yelled.	“Should	I	tell	 you	all	the	things	I’m

no	longer	going	to	tolerate?	Because	it’s	a	long	list.”

     Adri	shrank	back.	Cinder	had	wondered	if	Adri	might	be	afraid	of	her,	now

that	she	was	Lunar	and	a	wanted	felon.	Her	reaction	confirmed	it.

     “Why	wouldn’t	Dad	say	something?”	said	Pearl.	“Why	wouldn’t	he	tell	us?”

     “Maybe	he	knew	you’d	sell	me	for	ransom	the	first	chance	you	got.”

     Pearl	ignored	her.	“And	if	you	really	are	the	princess,	why	are	you	in	here?”

     Cinder	glared	at	 her.	Waited.	 Watched	as	understanding	dawned	across

Pearl’s	face.	“She	wants	to	kill	you,	so	she	can	stay	the	queen.”

     “Give	the	girl	a	treat,”	Cinder	said.

     “But	what	does	it	have	to	do	with	us?”	Tears	began	to	pool	in	Pearl’s	eyes.

“Why	are	we	being	punished?	We	didn’t	do	anything.	We	didn’t	know.”

     Cinder’s	adrenaline	and	anger	were	slipping,	exhaustion	crawling	into	the

spaces	they’d	left	behind.	“You	gave	me	your	invitations	to	the	royal	wedding,

which	allowed	me	to	kidnap	Kai,	which	drove	Levana	crazy.	Thanks	for	that,	by

the	way.”

     “How	 can	you	think	 only	of	 yourself	at	 a	time	like	 this?”	 Adri	 snapped.

“How	can	you	be	so	selfish?”

     Cinder’s	hands	curled	into	fists.	“If	I	don’t	take	care	of	myself,	nobody	will.

That’s	something	I	learned	early	on,	thanks	to	you.”

     Adri	pulled	her	daughter	closer	and	smoothed	down	her	hair.	Pearl	slumped

against	her	without	a	fight.	Cinder	wondered	if	she	was	in	shock.	Maybe	they

both	were.

444
     She	turned	back	to	 the	wall	 and	carved	a	C	into	 the	stone.	These	walls	were

scored	with	hundreds	of	 words,	names,	pleas,	promises,	threats.	She	considered

adding	a	“+	  K”	 but	 the	idea	 of	 such	whimsy	 made	her	 want	to	 beat	her	head

against	the	iron	door.

     “You’re	  a	monster,”	Adri	 whispered.

     Cinder	smirked,	 without	humor.	 “Fine.	I’m	 a	monster.”

     “You	 couldn’t	 even	save	Peony.”

     At	 the	 mention	of	 her	 younger	stepsister	a	 new	bout	 of	 rage	surged	like	 a

thousand	sparking	wires	 in	 Cinder’s	 head.	She	spun	back.	“You	  think	 I	 didn’t

try?”

     “You	 had	an	 antidote!”	 Adri	 was	screaming	now	 too,	her	eyes	wild,	 though

she	stayed	hunkered	over	Pearl.	“I	 know	 you	 gave	it	 to	that	little	  boy.	It	 saved

his	life.	 Chang	Sunto!”	 She	spat	the	name	like	 poison.	“You	 chose	to	 save	him

over	Peony.	How	 could	you?	 Did	 you	taunt	her	with	 it?	 Did	 you	give	 her	false

hope	before	you	watched	her	die?”

     Cinder	gaped	at	her	stepmother,	her	own	anger	eclipsed	with	a	surprising	 jolt

of	pity.	This	 woman	was	full	 of	so	much	ignorance	it	was	almost	like	 she	wanted

to	stay	 that	way.	 She	saw	 what	 she	wanted,	believed	 anything	 to	 support	her

limited	 view	of	 the	world.	Cinder	 could	still	 remember	how	she	had	felt	running

to	the	plague	 quarantines.	How	she’d	 desperately	clutched	the	 vial	 of	antidote.

How	she’d	been	so	hopeful	she	could	save	Peony’s	life,	 and	so	devastated	when

she	failed.

     She’d	been	too	late.	She	still	hadn’t	quite	 forgiven	herself.

     Adri	 would	 never	know,	 would	 never	understand.	To	her,	 Cinder	was	just	 a

machine,	incapable	of	anything	but	cruelty.

445
     Five	 years	 she	had	lived	  with	 this	 woman,	 and	 never	 once	had	 she	seen

Cinder	as	she	was.	As	Kai	 saw	her,	and	Thorne	and	Iko	 and	all	 the	people	who

trusted	her.	All	the	people	who	knew	her.

     She	shook	 her	 head,	finding	  it	 easier	 than	she’d	 expected	 to	 dismiss	her

stepmother’s	words.	“I’m	 done	trying	 to	explain	myself	to	 you.	I’m	 done	seeking

your	approval.	I’m	 done	with	you.”

     Kicking	 at	the	pile	 of	rock	 shavings,	she	jabbed	the	screwdriver	into	the	wall

at	the	same	moment	she	heard	footsteps.

     Her	 jaw	tightened.	Her	 time	was	up.	 Turning,	 she	reached	Adri	and	Pearl	in

three	long	strides.	They	both	shriveled	away.

     Cinder	grabbed	the	front	of	 Adri’s	 shirt	and	pulled	her	upward.

     “If	  you	even	 think	about	 telling	 them	my	 foot	 can	be	as	easily	 removed	as

that	finger,	I	will	  force	you	to	gouge	out	your	own	eyes	with	 your	fingernails	 if	it

is	the	last	thing	I	do—do	you	 understand	me?”

     Adri	 paled	 and	gave	a	trembling	 nod	before	a	 man’s	voice	 sounded	beyond

the	door.

     “Open	it.”

     Dropping	 her	stepmother	back	into	the	corner,	Cinder	spun	back.

     The	door	 opened	and	the	cell	filled	  with	 the	corridor’s	 light,	 a	single	 guard,

Thaumaturge	Aimery,	 plus	four	 additional	thaumaturges	dressed	in	a	mix	of	 red

and	black.	Five	of	them.	How	 flattering.

     “Her	 Majesty	has	requested	the	pleasure	of	your	company,”	said	Aimery.

     Cinder	 lifted	 her	chin.	 “I	 can’t	 promise	 my	company	 will	 be	 as	pleasant	as

she	expects.”

     She	strode	toward	 them	to	show	 she	wasn’t	afraid,	 but	suddenly	 felt	herself

446
being	thrown	 against	the	wall.	The	 pain	jolted	 down	her	spine,	knocking	 the	air

from	her	lungs.	 It	reminded	her	of	 all	 the	sparring	matches	she’d	had	with	Wolf

aboard	the	Rampion,	except	a	hundred	times	worse	because	Wolf	always	looked

guilty	afterward.

     The	 guard	who	 had	 thrown	 her	wrapped	 his	 hand	around	 Cinder’s	 throat.

Cinder	scowled	at	 him,	even	though	 she	knew	he	was	being	 controlled	 and	her

true	attacker	was	one	of	the	thaumaturges.	The	guard	glared	back.

     “That	 was	your	 first	 warning,”	 said	Aimery.	 “If	  you	try	 to	run,	 if	 you	try	 to

fight,	 if	 we	sense	you	trying	 to	use	your	 gift,	 we	will	  not	bother	 with	 a	second

one.”

     The	 guard	 released	her	 and	Cinder	 slumped,	 bracing	 herself	 with	  locked

knees.	She	rubbed	her	 neck	briefly	  before	her	 wrists	 were	yanked	 behind	 her

back	and	bound.

     The	guard	 shoved	her	toward	 the	door.	There	were	 four	 more	guards	in	 the

hallway,	weapons	drawn.	 Unfortunately,	 they	were	already	 under	the	control	 of

the	thaumaturges.	She	had	no	hope	for	turning	any	of	them	to	her	side.

     Yet.

     But	 if	 anyone	slipped	for	 a	moment,	 she	wasn’t	going	 to	bother	with	  a	first

warning.

     “Bring	 the	Earthens	too,”	Aimery	 said.

     Adri	  and	 Pearl	whimpered	 as	 they	 were	 hauled	to	 their	  feet,	 but	 Cinder

turned	down	  her	 audio	 interface	 to	 drown	 them	 out.	 She	 didn’t	  know	 why

Levana	wanted	 her	stepmother	 and	stepsister,	 but	if	  she	thought	 Cinder	 held

some	affection	for	them,	she	would	be	disappointed.

     “Where	 are	we	going?”	Cinder	asked	as	she	was	shoved	away	from	the	cell.

447
     There	 was	 a	long	  silence,	and	 she	was	 sure	 she	was	 being	 ignored,	 but

eventually	Aimery	 answered,	“You	 are	to	be	the	guest	of	honor	at	Her	Majesty’s

wedding	feast.”

     She	clenched	her	jaw.	Wedding	feast.	“But	I	 forgot	my	ball	 gown	on	Earth.”

     This	 time,	it	was	one	of	 the	females	who	snickered.	“Don’t	  worry,”	 she	said.

“You	 wouldn’t	 want	to	get	blood	all	over	 it	anyway.”

448
	




                                                    Fifty







Cinder	found	herself	before	a	pair	of	ominous,	ebony-black	doors.	They	stood

twice	her	height,	and	in	a	palace	made	almost	entirely	of	glass	and	white	stone,

standing	before	them	felt	like	standing	at	the	edge	of	a	black	hole.	They	were

minimally	accented	with	two	thick,	black	iron	handles	that	arched	halfway	to	the

floor.	The	 Lunar	insignia	 had	been	carved	into	the	 wood	in	 pristine	detail,

depicting	the	capital	city	of	Artemisia	and,	in	the	distance,	Earth.

     Two	guards	pulled	open	the	doors,	and	Cinder	was	facing	a	gauntlet	of	yet

more	thaumaturges	and	guards	and	now	wolf-mutant	soldiers	as	well.	The	sight

of	them	made	Cinder	shudder.	These	were	not	special	operatives	like	Wolf.

These	men	had	been	transformed	into	something	beastly	and	grotesque.	The

bones	of	their	jaws	were	misshapen	and	reinforced	to	fit	enormous	canine	teeth;

their	arms	hung	awkwardly	at	their	sides,	as	if	their	spines	were	unaccustomed	to

the	weight	of	their	new	muscles	and	extended	limbs.

     It	occurred	to	her	that	they	weren’t	unlike	cyborgs.	They	were	both	made	to

be	better	than	what	they’d	been	born	as.	They	were	both	unnatural.	Only,	instead

of	being	pieced	together	with	wires	and	steel,	these	creatures	were	a	jigsaw	of

muscle	tissue	and	cartilage.

449
     The	guard	yanked	on	Cinder’s	 elbow	and	she	stumbled	forward.	The	soldiers

watched	her	with	keen,	hungry	eyes.

     Wolf	 had	told	her	these	soldiers	would	 be	different.	Erratic	 and	feral,	craving

nothing	but	 violence	 and	blood.	 A	 powerful	 Lunar,	 like	 the	queen,	could	 trick

them	into	perceiving	 a	glamour,	but	 that	was	it.	Even	the	 thaumaturges	couldn’t

control	 their	 minds	 or	bodies,	 but	 instead	had	 to	train	 the	 soldiers	 like	 dogs.

Misbehave,	and	they	were	punished	with	pain.	Do	well,	 and	they	were	rewarded.

Only,	 the	  rewards	 Wolf	  had	 talked	  about	 didn’t	  strike	  Cinder	 as	 all	  that

appetizing.

     Evidently,	 on	 Earth,	 each	bloody	 kill	 made	for	 its	 own	 reward.	They	 were

eager	to	go	to	war.

     Cinder	 opened	her	 mind	 to	 them,	 trying	  to	sense	their	 bioelectric	  pulses.

Their	 energy	 burned	 white-hot	  and	 violent.	 Hunger	  and	 temptation	 writhed

beneath	their	skin.	She	was	dizzy	with	 the	mere	thought	of	 trying	 to	control	 this

much	raw	energy.

     But	she	had	to	try.

     Taking	 in	a	measured	breath,	Cinder	reached	for	the	mind	 of	the	last	soldier.

His	energy	 was	scalding	 and	ravenous.	She	imagined	 it	 cooling,	 calming.	 She

imagined	the	 soldier	 looking	  at	her	 and	seeing	 not	an	 enemy	but	 a	 girl	 who

needed	rescuing.	A	girl	who	deserved	his	loyalty.

     She	caught	 the	 soldier’s	 eye,	 and	his	 mouth	 curled	 into	 a	 sickening	 grin

around	his	jagged	teeth.

     Disheartened,	Cinder	pulled	her	attention	away.

     Nearing	  the	 end	 of	  the	 gauntlet,	  she	 tried	 to	  take	 in	  the	 rest	 of	  her

surroundings.	Lively	  chatter	 and	laughter	 and	the	 chaotic	 clinking	 of	 glasses.

450
The	aroma	of	food	 struck	her	like	 a	cloud	of	steam	released	from	a	covered	pot.

Her	mouth	filled	 with	 saliva.	Onions	 and	garlic	and	braised	meat	and	something

peppery	that	stung	her	eyes—

     Her	stomach	howled	 at	her.	Light-headedness	crept	over	her	brain	like	 a	fog.

She	hadn’t	eaten	in	over	a	day,	and	even	that	meal	had	been	unsatisfying.

     She	 gulped	 hard	 and	 tried	  to	 focus,	 surveying	  the	 room.	 To	 her	  right,

enormous	windows	 looked	 over	 a	lake,	 bordered	 on	each	 side	by	 the	 curved

wings	of	the	white	 palace,	like	an	enormous	protective	swan.	The	lake	continued

as	far	as	she	could	see.	The	floor	 of	the	room	 jutted	out	 like	a	balcony	 over	the

water.	 Although	 it	  made	for	  an	uninterrupted	  view,	 Cinder	 couldn’t	  deny	 a

feeling	of	dread	curdling	 in	her	stomach.	There	was	no	rail	to	keep	a	person	from

falling	off	 the	edge.

     The	swell	 of	 conversation	started	to	die	 out,	but	 it	was	not	 until	 Cinder	had

breached	the	line	of	soldiers	that	she	saw	the	audience	to	her	left.

     The	 orange	light	 flickered	  in	 Cinder’s	 vision	 and	 didn’t	 go	 off,	 no	 matter

where	she	looked.	There	were	a	lot	of	glamours	here.

     At	 the	center	was	 Levana,	seated	upon	a	massive	white	 throne,	the	 back	of

which	 was	 ornamented	 with	  the	phases	 of	 the	 moon.	 She	 was	 wearing	 an

elaborate	red	wedding	gown.

     Cinder’s	 retina	 display	began	to	 pick	 up	the	queen’s	underlying	  features.	It

was	like	being	 at	the	ball	 again,	the	first	 time	 she’d	laid	 eyes	on	the	queen	and

had	realized	it	might	 be	possible	for	her	optobionics	 to	see	beneath	the	glamour.

But	it	 wasn’t	an	easy	task.	Her	cyborg	 eyes	were	in	conflict	  with	her	 own	brain

and	the	 queen’s	manipulation,	  and	her	 mind	 couldn’t	  figure	 out	 what	 it	 was

seeing.	The	 result	was	 a	stream	 of	 confused	data,	 blurred	 colors,	fragmented

451
lines	trying	to	piece	together	what	was	real	and	what	was	an	illusion.

     It	 was	distracting,	and	already	giving	 her	a	headache.	Cinder	blinked	the	data

away.

     Five	  tiers	  of	  seats	 arced	 around	 the	  throne,	  a	 crescent	 of	  onlookers

surrounding	Cinder	 on	 every	side	except	 the	one	 that	dropped	off	  to	the	 lake.

The	Lunar	court.	Women	wore	 large	hats	shaped	like	peacocks	and	one	man	had

a	purring	 snow	leopard	 draped	over	 his	shoulders;	 dresses	were	made	of	 gold

chains	and	rubies,	platform	shoes	had	beta	fish	swimming	in	their	heels,	skin	had

been	painted	metallic	silver,	eyelashes	dotted	with	rhinestones	and	fish	scales	…

     Cinder	had	to	squint	against	the	dazzle	of	it	all.	 Glamour,	glamour,	glamour.

     A	 chair	was	pushed	back.	Cinder’s	heart	jumped.

     The	bridegroom	 stood	beside	Levana’s	throne,	wearing	a	white	silk	shirt	 with

a	red	sash.	Kai.

     “What	 is	this?”	he	said,	his	tone	somewhere	between	horrified	and	relieved.

     “This,”	  said	Queen	Levana,	her	eyes	full	 of	 mirth,	 “is	 our	entertainment	 for

the	evening.	Consider	it	my	wedding	 gift	to	 you.”	Beaming,	she	traced	a	knuckle

down	the	side	of	Kai’s	 face.	“Husband.”

     Kai	 ducked	away	 from	 her	touch,	 redness	climbing	 into	 his	cheeks.	Cinder

knew	it	 wasn’t	 embarrassment	or	 bashfulness,	though.	 That	was	 all	 fury.	 She

could	feel	it	in	 how	the	air	crackled	around	him.

     Levana	twirled	  a	fingernail	 through	 the	air.	 “Tonight’s	  proceedings	will	  be

broadcast	live,	so	my	people	can	witness	and	join	in	the	celebrations	of	this	most

glorious	day.	And	 also	so	they	may	 know	 the	fate	of	the	 impostor	who	 dares	to

call	herself	queen.”

     Ignoring	 her,	 Cinder	examined	 the	ceiling.	 There	were	 no	cameras	that	she

452
could	see,	but	she	knew	Levana	had	a	way	 of	creating	 surveillance	devices	that

were	practically	invisible.

     Given	 that	the	queen	wasn’t	wearing	 a	veil,	 it	was	safe	to	 assume	any	video

footage	would	be	focused	on	their	“entertainment.”	 Levana	wanted	the	people	to

see	Cinder’s	execution.	She	wanted	them	to	lose	hope	for	their	revolution.

     Levana	raised	her	arms.	“Let	us	begin	the	feast.”

     A	 line	 of	uniformed	 servants	traipsed	single	 file	 from	 behind	a	curtain.	 The

first	knelt	 at	the	queen’s	feet	and	whisked	a	dome	off	a	tray,	holding	 it	above	his

head.	The	queen’s	smirk	grew	as	she	selected	a	large,	pink	prawn	and	pulled	the

flesh	between	her	teeth.

     Another	 servant	knelt	before	 Kai,	 while	the	 others	surrounded	the	room	and

dropped	to	their	 knees	before	the	audience,	revealing	 trays	of	 orange	fish	 eggs

and	steamed	oyster	shells,	braised	tenderloin	 strips	and	stuffed	 peppers.	Cinder

realized	that	Kai	 was	not	the	only	 Earthen	in	 the	room	after	 all.	She	recognized

his	adviser,	Konn	 Torin,	 seated	in	the	 second	row,	and	the	 American	president

and	the	African	 prime	minister	 and	the	Australian	 governor-general	 and	…	She

stopped	looking.	They	were	all	there,	just	as	Levana	had	wanted.

     Heart	pounding,	 she	scanned	the	servants,	guards,	and	soldiers	again,	hoping

that	maybe	Wolf,	  too,	had	been	brought	 before	the	queen.	But	 he	wasn’t	 here.

Cinder,	Adri,	 and	Pearl	were	the	only	prisoners.

     Worry	 gnawed	at	her.	Where	had	they	taken	him?	Was	he	already	dead?

     She	swept	her	gaze	back	to	Kai.	If	 he	had	noticed	the	food,	he	ignored	it.	She

could	see	his	jaw	 working,	 wanting	 to	 question	her	presence,	wanting	to	 know

what	the	queen	was	planning.	She	could	see	him	trying	 to	reason	his	way	out	 of

this,	to	come	up	with	 some	diplomatic	 angle	he	could	 use	to	keep	the	inevitable

453
from	happening.

     “Sit	 down,	 my	love,”	 said	 Levana,	“or	 you’ll	 be	disrupting	 the	 view	for	 our

other	guests.”

     Kai	 sat	down	 too	quickly	  for	 it	 to	have	been	his	 own	 doing.	He	 turned	his

smoldering	glare	on	the	queen.	“Why	is	she	here?”

     “You	 sound	angry,	my	pet.	Are	you	 displeased	with	our	hospitality?”

     Without	 waiting	 for	 a	response,	Levana	tilted	 her	 chin	up	 and	swooped	her

gaze	from	Cinder	to	Adri	 and	Pearl.	“Aimery,	 you	may	proceed.”

     He	paced	to	the	front	 of	 the	room,	smirking	 at	Cinder	as	he	walked	 past	her.

Though	 his	 coat	 had	been	 washed	of	  blood,	 he	 was	still	  walking	  stiffly	  to

conceal	his	injured	leg.

     Aimery	  offered	  his	 elbow	 to	 Adri,	   who	 made	 a	 half-strangled,	 terrified

sound.	It	took	 her	a	long	 time	to	accept	it.	 She	looked	like	 she	was	going	 to	be

sick	as	Aimery	led	her	to	the	center	of	the	throne	room	floor.

     All	 around	 them,	the	sounds	of	chewing	 and	the	licking	 of	 fingers	persisted,

as	if	 the	delicacies	were	 every	bit	 as	interesting	 as	the	prisoners.	 The	servants

were	still	 on	their	 knees,	holding	 the	trays	above	their	 heads.	Cinder	grimaced.

How	heavy	must	those	trays	be?

     “I	  present	to	 the	 court	Linh	  Adri	  of	 the	Eastern	 Commonwealth,	 Earthen

Union,”	  said	 Aimery,	  releasing	Adri’s	   arm	 so	she	 stood	 alone	 on	 her	 own

trembling	  legs.	 “She	  is	  charged	 with	  conspiracy	  against	 the	 crown.	  The

punishment	for	 this	 crime	 is	 immediate	 death	by	 her	own	 hand,	 and	that	 her

child	 and	dependent,	Linh	  Pearl,	be	given	 as	 a	servant	to	 one	 of	 Artemisia’s

families.”

     Cinder’s	 eyebrows	 shot	upward.	 Until	 now	 she’d	 been	concerned	with	 her

454
own	fate,	and	it	hadn’t	occurred	to	her	that	Adri	 may	have	been	brought	there	for

any	reason	other	than	to	annoy	her.

     She	wanted	to	not	care.	She	wanted	to	feel	nothing	but	 disinterest	toward	her

stepmother’s	fate.

     But	 she	knew	 that,	for	 all	 her	 many	faults,	 Adri	  had	not	 done	anything	 to

warrant	a	 Lunar	 execution.	This	 was	 a	power	 play	 on	 Levana’s	part,	 nothing

more,	and	it	was	impossible	not	to	feel	a	tinge	of	pity	 for	the	woman.

     Adri	 fell	 to	her	knees.	“I	swear	to	you	I	haven’t	 done	anything.	I—”

     Levana	raised	a	hand	and	Adri	 fell	 silent.	An	 agonizing	 moment	followed	 in

which	Levana’s	expression	was	unreadable.	Finally,	she	clucked	her	tongue,	like

chastising	a	small	child.	“Aimery,	  continue.”

     The	  thaumaturge	 nodded.	  “An	   investigation	  has	  shown	 that	  the	  two

invitations	 with	  which	 Linh	  Cinder’s	 accomplices	 were	 able	 to	 invade	 New

Beijing	 Palace	and	kidnap	 Emperor	Kaito	  had	been	given	 them	by	 none	other

than	 this	 woman.	  The	 invitations	  were	 meant	 for	  herself	 and	 her	 teenage

daughter.”

     “No!	  She	stole	them!	 Stole	them!	 I	 would	 never	give	 them	to	 her.	I	 would

never	help	her.	I	 hate	her—hate	her!”	 She	sobbed	again,	her	shoulders	hunched

so	far	now	she	was	practically	a	ball	on	the	floor.	 “Why	 is	this	 happening	to	me?

What	have	I	done?	I	didn’t	 …	She	isn’t	mine…”

     Cinder	was	finding	 it	easier	not	to	care.

     “You	 must	calm	 yourself,	Mrs.	 Linh,”	 said	Levana.	“We	 will	 see	the	truth	of

your	loyalties	soon	enough.”

     Adri	 whimpered,	and	made	some	attempt	to	compose	herself.

     “That	 is	better.	 You	have	been	the	legal	 guardian	of	 Linh	 Cinder	for	 almost

455
six	years,	is	that	correct?”

     Adri’s	  whole	 body	was	shaking.	 “It—it’s	  true.	 But	 I	didn’t	  know	 what	she

was,	I	 swear.	 My	 husband	was	 the	 one	who	 wanted	 her,	not	 me.	 She	is	 the

traitor!	 Cinder	is	 a	criminal,	 and	a	 dangerous,	deceitful	girl—but	  I	 thought	she

was	just	a	cyborg.	I	 had	no	idea	what	 she	was	planning,	or	I	 would	 have	turned

her	in	myself.”

     Levana	 ran	a	 fingernail	 over	 the	arm	 of	 her	throne.	 “Were	 you	 with	 Linh

Cinder	when	she	underwent	her	cyborg	surgeries?”

     Adri’s	  lip	  curled	 in	 disgust.	 “Stars,	 no.	 Her	 operation	 was	 completed	 in

Europe.	I	did	not	meet	her	until	she	was	brought	to	New	Beijing.”

     “Was	 your	husband	present	for	the	operation?”

     Adri	 blinked,	 flustered.	“I	 …	I	don’t	 think	so.	We	never	spoke	of	it.	 Although

he	was	gone	for	a	couple	 of	weeks	when	he	went	 to	…	 to	claim	 her.	I	 knew	he

was	going	to	 see	about	a	child	 who	had	 been	in	a	hovercar	 accident.	Although

why	he	 saw	 fit	  to	 go	all	  the	 way	 to	 Europe	 to	 be	charitable	 I	  never	could

understand,	and	his	philanthropy	 was	rewarded	 with	 nothing	but	 heartache.	He

contracted	letumosis	on	that	 trip,	died	 within	 weeks	of	 returning,	leaving	 me	to

care	for	my	two	young	girls	 and	this	thing	he	left	in	 my	custody—”

     “Why	 did	you	 never	seek	to	capitalize	on	his	inventions	after	his	death?”

     Adri	 gawked	openmouthed	at	the	queen.	“Pardon,	Your	Majesty?”

     “He	 was	an	inventor,	was	he	not?	Surely	he	must	have	left	 you	something	of

value.”

     Adri	  pondered	 this,	  maybe	 wondering	 why	  the	 Lunar	  queen	 would	  be

interested	in	 her	 deceased	husband.	Her	  gaze	darted	 around	 the	guards	 and

Lunars.	“N-no,	  Your	 Majesty.	  If	 there	was	 anything	 of	 value,	 I	 never	 saw	a

456
single	micro-univ	 from	it.”	  A	shadow	fell	 over	her	face.	“He	left	 us	with	nothing

but	disgrace.”

     Levana’s	voice	 ran	ice	cold.	“You	 are	lying.”

     Adri’s	 eyes	widened.	“No!	 I’m	 not.	Garan	didn’t	 leave	us	with	anything.”

     “I	 have	evidence	to	the	contrary,	Earthen.	Do	you	think	I’m	 a	fool?”

     “What	   evidence?”	 Adri	   shrieked.	 “I	   haven’t—I	   swear	 to	  you—”	  But

whatever	she	meant	to	swear	was	drowned	out	by	a	flood	of	sobs.

     Cinder	 clenched	her	jaw.	 She	didn’t	 know	 what	 game	Levana	was	playing,

but	 she	 knew	  Adri’s	   hysteria	 wouldn’t	   make	  one	 bit	  of	  difference.	  She

considered	using	her	Lunar	gift	 to	stop	Adri’s	 uncontrolled	 sobbing	so	she	could

die	with	 a	bit	of	 dignity,	 but	she	hardened	her	heart	and	did	nothing.	 She	might

need	her	strength	when	it	came	time	for	 her	own	trial.	 When	it	was	her	turn,	 she

vowed	to	not	dissolve	into	a	trembling	 mess.

     “Aimery?”	  said	Levana,	her	words	cutting	over	Adri’s	 sobs.

     “One	 of	 our	regiments	 uncovered	a	box	 of	 paperwork	 in	 the	storage	space

leased	to	Linh	Adri	 in	her	apartment	building.”

     Levana	smirked.	 “Do	 you	still	  wish	to	 maintain	your	 defense	that	there	was

nothing	of	 value	left	 from	 your	 husband?	No	important	 paperwork	 still	 kept	in

storage?”

     Adri	  hesitated.	Started	to	 shake	her	head,	but	 stopped.	“I	  don’t	 …	 I	 don’t

know…”

     “The	  paperwork,”	 said	 Aimery,	  “indicated	  a	pending	 design	 patent	 for	 a

weapon	with	the	intended	purpose	of	neutralizing	 the	Lunar	gift.	 We	suspect	this

weapon	was	intended	to	be	used	against	you,	Your	Majesty,	and	our	people.”

     Cinder	 was	struggling	to	keep	up	 with	Aimery’s	  accusations.	A	weapon	with

457
the	intended	purpose	 of	neutralizing	  the	Lunar	 gift.	 She	barely	 refrained	 from

rubbing	 the	back	 of	 her	 neck,	where	 Linh	 Garan’s	 invention—a	  bioelectrical

security	device—had	 been	installed	 into	 her	 wiring.	 Was	 that	what	 they	 were

talking	about?

     “Hold	 on,”	 said	Kai,	 his	voice	thundering.	 “Do	 you	have	this	paperwork	 that

allegedly	proves	her	guilt?”

     Aimery	 cocked	his	 head.	“It	has	already	been	destroyed,	as	a	matter	of	royal

security.”

     Kai’s	  knuckles	  whitened	 on	 the	 arms	 of	  his	 chair.	  “You	  can’t	  destroy

evidence	and	then	try	 to	 use	it	 to	condemn	 somebody.	You	 can’t	 expect	us	to

believe	you	found	this	box	 of	paperwork,	during	 an	illegal	search,	mind	you,	and

it	held	 the	patents	 for	 a	Lunar-targeted	weapon,	 and	that	 Linh	 Adri	 had	 some

working	 knowledge	  of	 it.	 That	 is	 a	 lot	  of	 speculation.	 On	 top	 of	 that,	 you

violated	 a	  number	 of	  articles	  in	  the	 Interplanetary	  Agreement	 when	  you

apprehended	 an	 Earthen	  citizen	  without	   due	 cause	  and	 invaded	  private

property.”

     Levana	cupped	her	chin	with	 one	hand.	“Why	don’t	 we	argue	about	this	later,

darling?”

     “Oh,	 you	want	to	 argue	later?	Would	 that	be	before	or	after	you’ve	 killed	 an

innocent	Earthen?”

     Levana	shrugged.	“That	remains	to	be	seen.”

     Kai	 sneered.	“You	can’t—”	 He	abruptly	 cut	off,	forced	 to	hold	his	tongue.

     “You	 will	  soon	learn,	dear,	that	I	do	 not	like	 to	be	told	 that	I	can’t.”	  Levana

shifted	 her	attention	 on	 Adri	  again.	“Linh	  Adri,	  you	 have	 heard	the	 charges

against	you.	How	do	you	plead?”

458
     Adri	stammered,	“I-I’m	innocent.	I	swear	I	would	never	…	I	didn’t	know	…

I…”

     Levana	sighed.	“I	want	to	believe	you.”

     “Please,”	Adri	begged.

     Levana	ate	another	prawn.	Swallowed.	Licked	 her	 bloodred	lips.	“I	  am

prepared	to	offer	you	clemency.”

     A	rustle	of	curiosity	spread	through	the	crowd.

     “This	decision	is	contingent	on	your	disowning	all	legal	interest	to	the	orphan

child,	Linh	Cinder,	and	swearing	fealty	to	me,	the	rightful	queen	of	Luna	and	the

future	empress	of	the	Eastern	Commonwealth.”

     Adri’s	head	was	already	bobbing.	“Yes.	Yes,	I	do.	Gladly,	Your	Grace.	Your

Majesty.”

     Cinder	glared	at	the	back	of	Adri’s	head.	Not	because	her	decision	was	any

big	surprise,	but	because	she	couldn’t	imagine	it	was	going	 to	be	this	 easy.

Levana	was	planning	something	and	Adri	was	falling	right	into	her	hands.

     “Good.	 All	 charges	are	absolved.	You	 may	 pay	 your	 respects	to	your

sovereign.”	Levana	held	out	a	 hand,	and	Adri,	 after	a	 moment’s	hesitation,

scurried	forward	on	her	knees	and	placed	a	grateful	kiss	on	the	queen’s	fingers.

She	started	sobbing	again.

     “Does	the	child	not	show	any	gratitude?”	said	Levana.

     Pearl	squeaked,	but	slowly	shuffled	forward	and	kissed	Levana’s	hands.

     A	woman	in	the	front	row,	her	mouth	full,	clapped	politely.

     Levana	nodded	and	two	guards	stepped	forward	to	drag	Adri	and	Pearl	to	the

side	of	the	room.

     Cinder	had	already	put	thoughts	of	her	stepmother	aside,	bracing	herself,

459
when	Levana’s	 attention	landed	on	 her.	She	made	no	 attempts	to	withhold	  her

delight	as	she	said,	“Let	us	continue	with	our	second	trial.”

460
	




                                             Fifty-One







Cinder	lumbered	to	the	spot	where	Adri	had	been	groveling	moments	ago.	She

planted	her	feet	 and	readied	herself	with	  an	exhale	that	 was	meant	to	 be

steadying,	though	it	was	impossible	to	ignore	the	fluttering	of	her	pulse	or	the

list	of	 thirty	 different	hormones	her	retina	display	told	her	were	flooding	her

system.	Her	brain	was	acutely	aware	of	her	fear.

     Two	guards	flanked	her	on	either	side.

     “Our	second	prisoner,	Linh	Cinder,”	said	Aimery,	pacing	in	front	of	her,	“has

been	charged	 with	 the	  following	  crimes:	 unlawful	 emigration	 to	  Earth,

rebelliousness,	assisting	a	traitor	to	the	crown,	conspiring	against	the	crown,

kidnapping,	meddling	 in	 intergalactic	 affairs,	 obstruction	of	  justice,	theft,

evading	arrest,	and	royal	treason.	The	punishment	for	these	crimes	is	immediate

death	by	her	own—”

     “No,”	said	Queen	Levana,	smiling.	It	was	clear	she’d	thought	a	lot	about	this

moment.	“It	has	proven	to	be	too	difficult	to	manipulate	her,	so	an	exception	is

to	be	made.	Her	punishment	shall	be	immediate	death	by	…	oh,	what	shall	it	be?

Poison?	Drowning?	Burning?”

     Her	eyes	narrowed	with	the	last	word	and	Cinder	had	a	stark	memory—a

461
nightmare	she’d	dreamed	a	hundred	 times.	A	 bed	of	 red-hot	coals	charring	 her

skin,	her	hand	and	leg	crumbling	into	ash.

     “Dismemberment!”	    a	   man	  yelled.	   “Starting	    with	   those	  horrendous

appendages!”

     His	 suggestion	 was	met	 with	 a	 roar	 of	 approval	 from	 the	 crowd.	 Levana

allowed	the	tittering	 for	a	moment	before	she	raised	a	hand	for	silence.	“A	 rather

vile	suggestion,	for	a	rather	vile	girl.	 I’ll	  allow	it.”

     Cheers	exploded	through	the	room.

     Kai	 leaped	to	his	feet.	“Are	you	savages?”

     Levana	 ignored	 him.	 “Another	 idea	 comes	to	 mind.	 Perhaps	the	 honor	 of

enacting	this	 punishment	 should	 be	 none	 other	 than	 my	 newest,	 most	loyal

subject.	I	 do	 believe	she	is	 quite	 eager	to	 please.”	Levana	 curled	 her	fingers.

“Linh	 Adri.	 Won’t	 you	step	forward	again?”

     Adri	 looked	about	ready	to	faint.	She	took	two	 uncertain	steps	forward.

     “Here	  is	 an	 opportunity	 to	  prove	 that	 you	 are	 loyal	 to	 me,	 your	  future

empress,	and	 that	 you	 despise	your	  once-adopted	daughter	 as	much	  as	she

deserves.”

     Adri	 gulped.	She	was	sweating.	“You	…	 you	want	me	to…”

     “Dismember	 her,	Mrs.	 Linh.	 I	 suppose	you’ll	  need	a	weapon?	What	 would

you	like?	 I’ll	  have	it	 brought	up.	 A	hatchet	 perhaps,	or	an	axe?	A	 knife	 seems

like	it	could	 get	messy,	but	a	nice	sharp	axe—”

     “Stop	 this,”	said	Kai.	 “It’s	 revolting.”

     Levana	 leaned	 back	 in	 her	 chair.	 “I	  am	 beginning	  to	 think	 you	  do	 not

appreciate	your	wedding	gift,	 my	dear.	You	are	free	to	leave	if	these	proceedings

unsettle	you.”

462
     “I	won’t	let	you	do	this,”	he	hissed	between	his	teeth,	his	face	flushed.

     Levana	shrugged	at	Kai.	 “You	 can’t	 stop	me.	 And	 you	won’t	  stop	the

coronation.	There	is	far	too	much	at	stake	to	risk	it	all	for	 some	girl	…	some

cyborg.	I	know	you’ll	agree.”

     Kai’s	 knuckles	whitened	and	Cinder	imagined	him	striking	the	 queen,	or

attempting	some	equally	stupid	thing.

     “Wire	cutters,”	she	said,	the	tone	of	voice	and	the	random	declaration	enough

to	draw	everyone’s	attention	back	to	her.	Kai’s	brow	furrowed,	but	only	in	that

moment	between	confusion	and	when	her	manipulation	hit.	She	felt	 for	 his

energy,	crackling	and	heated,	and	did	her	best	to	soothe	it.	“It’s	all	right,”	she

said,	relieved	to	see	his	muscles	relax.

     He	would	probably	be	angry	about	this	later.

     Snarling,	Levana	shoved	away	the	tray	of	appetizers	and	stood,	knocking	the

servant	onto	his	side.	He	scrambled	away.	“Stop	manipulating	my	husband.”

     Cinder	laughed,	her	gaze	slipping	back	to	the	queen.	“Don’t	be	a	hypocrite.

You	manipulate	him	all	the	time.”

     “He	is	mine.	My	husband.	My	king.”

     “Your	prisoner?	Your	pet?	Your	trophy?”	Cinder	took	a	step	forward,	and	a

guard	was	there,	a	hand	on	her	shoulder,	holding	her	back,	while	another	half-

dozen	guards	jumped	to	attention.	Cinder	sniffed.	It	was	nice	to	know	she	could

make	Levana	jumpy,	even	with	her	hands	bound.	“It	must	be	so	rewarding	to

know	that	every	relationship	you	have	is	based	on	a	lie.”

     Levana’s	lip	 curled,	and	for	 a	moment,	a	scrambled,	inconsistent	picture

cascaded	over	Cinder’s	retina	display.	Something	was	wrong	with	the	left	side	of

Levana’s	face.	One	half-shut	eyelid.	Strange	ridges	along	her	cheek.	Cinder

463
blinked	rapidly,	 wondering	 if	 Levana’s	anger	was	causing	her	to	 lose	control	of

the	glamour,	 or	 if	 this	 was	 her	own	 optobionics	 trying	  to	 make	sense	of	 the

anomaly	before	them.

     She	flinched	  at	the	 overload	 of	 visual	 data,	trying	  to	 disguise	her	 loss	of

focus.

     The	guards	started	to	relax	as	their	queen	did.

     “You	 are	the	lie,”	 said	Levana,	her	voice	level.	“You	 are	a	fraud.”

     Cinder’s	 attention	was	 caught	on	the	queen’s	 mouth,	usually	 so	perfect	and

crimson	red.	 But	something	 was	off	 now.	 A	 weird	 downward	 curl	 to	one	 side

that	didn’t	fit	 the	queen’s	usual	apathetic	smile.

     There	was	damage	there	beneath	the	glamour.	Scarring	of	 some	sort.	Maybe

even	paralysis.

     Cinder	stared,	her	pulse	thundering	through	 her	head.	An	idea,	a	hope,	began

to	build	in	the	back	of	 her	thoughts.

     “Believe	  me,	I’ve	  been	called	 worse,”	  she	said,	 schooling	 her	expression

back	into	nonchalance,	though	she	could	tell	it	 was	too	late.	Levana	had	seen	the

change	in	  her,	 or	 perhaps	 felt	  it.	 The	 queen	 was	 instantly	  guarded	 again,

suspicious.

     Levana	could	 guard	herself	 all	 she	wanted.	She	could	 glamour	everyone	 in

this	room—everyone	in	her	kingdom.

     But	 she	couldn’t	 fool	 Cinder.	Or,	 rather,	she	couldn’t	 fool	 Cinder’s	 internal

computer.

     She	 stopped	fighting	  the	 onslaught	 of	 data	 being	pieced	 together	 by	 her

brain-machine	 interface.	  The	 glamour	  was	 a	 biological	  construct.	  Using	 a

person’s	 natural	 bioelectricity	  to	 create	 tiny	  electric	 pulses	 in	 the	 brain,	 to

464
change	what	 they	 saw	and	 thought	 and	felt	  and	did.	 But	  the	cyborg	 part	 of

Cinder’s	 brain	couldn’t	  be	influenced	 by	 bioelectricity.	 It	 was	 all	machine,	 all

data	and	programming	and	math	and	logic.	When	faced	with	 a	Lunar	glamour	or

when	a	Lunar	 tried	 to	manipulate	 her,	the	 two	 parts	of	 her	brain	 went	to	 war,

trying	to	figure	 out	which	side	should	be	dominant.

     This	time,	 she	let	the	cyborg	side	win.

     The	chaotic	 jumble	 of	 information	 returned	full	  force.	Pieces	scrambling	 to

right	themselves,	like	watching	 a	puzzle	made	up	of	pixels	and	binary	code	work

itself	out	 in	 her	head.	Like	 bringing	 a	camera	into	 focus,	every	 glamour	 in	the

room	 was	replaced	 with	 truth.	 The	 purring	  snow-leopard	 shawl	 was	nothing

more	than	a	 faux-fur	 drape.	The	 fishbowl	 shoes	were	nothing	 more	 than	clear

acrylic.	Levana	was	indeed	wearing	an	elaborate	red	gown,	but	there	were	places

where	it	clung	too	tight	 or	draped	too	loose,	and	the	skin	revealed	on	her	left	arm

was	…

     Scar	tissue.	Not	unlike	Cinder’s	 skin	around	her	prostheses.

     As	the	world	 righted	 itself	and	the	patchwork	 reality	 stopped	scrambling	and

flipping	 and	seaming	together,	Cinder	commanded	her	brain	to	start	recording.

     “I	 am	guilty	 of	 the	crimes	you	listed,”	 she	said.	“Kidnapping	  and	conspiracy

and	all	the	rest	of	it.	But	 these	are	nothing	compared	to	the	crime	you	committed

thirteen	years	ago.	If	there	is	anyone	in	 this	room	who	 is	guilty	 of	 royal	treason,

it	 is	 the	woman	 sitting	  on	that	 throne.”	 She	 fixed	 her	 eyes	on	 Levana.	 “My

throne.”

     The	 crowd	 stirred	 and	 Levana	 smirked,	 feigning	  indifference	  though	 her

hands	were	shaking,	 and	the	details	 of	 them	were	 flicking	  between	lithe,	 pale

fingers,	and	a	pinkie	that	was	shriveled,	and	the	constant	changes	were	making	it

465
hard	for	Cinder	to	focus.

     “You	 are	nothing	 but	a	criminal,”	  said	Levana,	her	voice	writhing,	  “and	you

will	 be	executed	for	your	crimes.”

     Cinder	 flexed	 her	 tongue,	testing	 it,	 and	 raised	her	 voice.	 “I	  am	Princess

Selene.”

     Levana	leaned	forward.	“You	 are	an	impostor!”

     “And	  I	 am	ready	 to	 claim	 what’s	 mine.	 People	of	 Artemisia,	  this	 is	your

chance.	Renounce	Levana	as	your	queen	and	swear	fealty	to	me,	or	I	 swear	that

when	I	 wear	that	 crown,	 every	 person	in	 this	room	 will	  be	punished	 for	 their

betrayal.”

     “That	 is	enough.	Kill	 her.”

     At	  first,	  the	 guards	did	  not	 move,	 and	 the	 brief	  hesitation	 was	 all	  the

information	 Cinder	needed.	Levana,	in	 her	hysteria,	had	lost	her	 mental	grip	 on

her	protectors.

     Before	 the	thaumaturges	could	 realize	it	 had	happened,	Cinder	 slipped	into

their	minds.	Twelve	 royal	guards.	Twelve	 men	who	were,	as	Jacin	had	once	told

her,	like	 brainless	 mannequins.	Puppets	for	  the	queen	to	 shuffle	 around	 as	it

pleased	her.	Twelve	armed	protectors,	ready	to	obey	her	every	whim.

     Cinder’s	 retina	 display	 flared	 with	 information—her	  accelerated	heart	rate,

the	offset	of	 bioelectrical	 manipulation,	 the	adrenaline	flooding	 her	veins.	Time

slowed.	 Her	  brain	  synapses	 fired	  faster	  than	 she	 could	  recognize	  them,

information	  being	 noted	 and	  translated	 and	 stored	 away	 before	  she	could

interpret	it.	 Seven	thaumaturges:	two	 in	black	 stood	behind	the	 queen,	the	four

who	 had	taken	 Cinder	 from	 her	 cell	 stood	 near	the	 doors,	and	 Aimery.	  The

nearest	guard	stood	 0.8	 meters	to	 her	 left.	 Six	 wolf	  soldiers:	 the	nearest	3.1

466
meters	away;	the	farthest,	6.4	meters.	Forty-five	Lunars	 in	the	audience.	Kai	and

his	  adviser	  and	  five	   Earthen	  leaders	  along	   with	   seventeen	 additional

representatives	from	the	Union.	Thirty-four	  servants	kneeling	like	 statues,	trying

to	sneak	glances	at	the	girl	who	claimed	to	be	their	queen.

     Twelve	 guards,	with	twelve	guns	and	twelve	knives,	all	 belonging	to	her.

     Threats	 were	  weighed,	  balanced,	 measured.	 Dangers	 turned	  into	  data,

running	through	 a	mental	calculator.	 The	stiletto	 knife	 emerged	from	 the	tip	 of

Cinder’s	finger.

     Every	  Earthen	 dived	 off	  their	 seats	 to	 take	 cover,	 including	  Kai.	  Only

afterward	did	she	realize	she’d	forced	them	to	do	it.

     Then	she	used	eleven	of	the	twelve	guards	to	open	fire.

     Eleven	 guns	went	 off,	 all	 aiming	 at	 the	six	 wolf	 mutants,	 while	 the	 guard

closest	to	Cinder	drew	his	knife	 and	hacked	through	the	binds	around	her	wrists.

In	her	hurry,	she	felt	the	blade	clang	against	her	metal	palm.

     Her	hands	burst	free.	Her	 body	and	mind	 were	in	harmony,	 just	as	Wolf	 had

taught	her.	Her	brain	ticked	down	the	list	 of	threats.

     The	wolf	 soldiers	lunged	 for	the	guards	as	another	round	of	bullets	 exploded

around	them.

     The	nearest	servant	leaped	to	 his	feet	and	 charged	at	Cinder,	 as	if	to	 tackle

her.

     Cinder	 grabbed	him	 and	 shoved	him	 toward	 a	thaumaturge.	They	 collided

with	a	series	of	grunts,	collapsing	to	the	floor.

     “Kill	  her!”	 Levana’s	voice	cracked.

     More	 gunshots	throbbed	 against	Cinder’s	 eardrums.	 Bodies	scrambled	 and

chairs	screeched	and	Cinder	lost	track	of	where	 the	guards	were	and	if	any	wolf

467
soldiers	had	fallen	 and	two	aristocrats	 were	running	at	 her	from	 either	side	and

she	urged	the	guards	to	focus	on	the	thaumaturges,	the	thaumaturges,	now.	There

was	another	volley	of	bullets	 and	the	aristocrats	cried	out	and	crumpled	and	tried

to	scurry	out	of	the	fray	as	soon	as	they	were	released.

     A	  wolf	  soldier	  grabbed	 Cinder	  from	  behind.	  Pain	 ripped	  through	 her

shoulder,	his	canine	teeth	tearing	at	her	 flesh.	She	screamed.	Hot	blood	dripped

down	 her	 arm.	 Lifting	   her	 cyborg	 hand,	 she	 stabbed	wildly	   and	the	 blade

connected	with	flesh.	The	 soldier	released	her	with	 a	roar	and	she	spun,	kicking

him	away.

     Shaking	from	 head	to	toe,	she	sought	to	reclaim	the	minds	 of	the	guards,	but

in	 that	  second	 of	 distraction	  the	  room	 had	  been	 emptied	 of	  the	 guards’

bioelectric	waves.	Ten	of	 them	were	dead,	ripped	to	 shreds	by	the	soldiers,	who

had	turned	on	them	with	 surprising	 ferocity,	 despite	the	bullet	 holes	puncturing

their	chests	and	stomachs.

     In	the	chaos,	Cinder	found	Kai,	 who	was	staring	at	her,	jaw	hanging	open.

     She	tore	 her	eyes	away	 and	found	 the	queen,	still	  screaming	and	trying	  to

cast	around	her	orders,	but	the	two	 remaining	guards	no	 longer	belonged	to	 her

and	the	wolves	 did	not	 care	who	 they	were	 attacking	and	the	 thaumaturges	…

dead.	All	  dead.	Cinder	 had	 killed	 them	 all.	 Except	 maybe	 Aimery,	  who	 she

couldn’t	find	 in	the	chaos.	She	wanted	him,	but	she	wanted	someone	else	more.

     Clearheaded,	Cinder	 bent	 down	 to	 retrieve	 a	 gun	 from	 one	 of	 the	 fallen

guards.	She	lifted	  her	 arm,	 gritting	 her	 teeth	 against	the	 searing	pain	 in	  her

shoulder,	and	aimed	for	the	spot	between	the	queen’s	eyes.

     For	a	split	second,	Levana	looked	terrified.

     Then	Kai	 was	between	them,	face	slack	from	manipulation.

468
     Sweat	dripped	into	Cinder’s	 eyes,	blurring	the	world	 around	her.

     The	heavy	 doors	crashed	open,	followed	 by	the	 sound	of	boots	pounding	 in

the	hallway.

     Reinforcements	had	arrived.

     Heartened,	 Levana	sent	 every	 remaining	 person	 in	 the	 room	 charging	 at

Cinder.	The	Earthens	and	the	aristocrats	may	not	have	weapons,	but	there	were	a

lot	of	 hands	and	a	lot	of	nails	and	a	lot	 of	teeth.	The	new	 guards	would	be	close

behind.

     What	had	her	sentence	been?	Death	by	dismemberment.

     Cinder	 lowered	 the	gun,	 pivoted,	 and	ran.	 Past	the	 puppet	Lunars	 in	 their

glittering	 clothes.	Past	the	mindless	servants	and	the	dead	thaumaturges	and	the

splatters	of	blood	and	the	fallen	 chairs	and	Pearl	and	Adri	 cowering	 in	a	corner.

She	sprinted	toward	the	only	 escape—the	wide-open	balcony	hanging	above	the

water.

     The	 pain	in	 her	shoulder	 throbbed	and	she	used	the	reminder	 to	 run	faster,

her	feet	pounding	against	the	hard	marble.

     She	heard	gunshots,	but	 she	had	already	jumped.	 The	black	 sky	opened	up

before	her	and	she	fell.

469
	




                                            Fifty-Two







Kai	was	 rooted	to	the	 ground,	a	statue	surrounded	by	turmoil.	 Levana	was

screaming—no,	screeching—her	normally	melodic	 voice	 turned	harsh	and

unbearable.	She	was	yelling	orders—Find	her!	Bring	her	back!	Kill	her!—but

no	one	was	listening.	There	was	no	one	left	to	listen.

     Nearly	all	 of	 the	 guards	were	dead.	The	 thaumaturges,	dead.	The	wolf

soldiers,	dead.	A	handful	of	servant	and	aristocrat	bodies	littered	the	floor	as

well,	tossed	among	the	blood	and	broken	furniture,	the	victims	of	hungry	hybrid

soldiers	let	loose	on	an	unsuspecting,	unarmed	crowd.

     Beside	him,	Levana	ripped	the	jeweled	necklace	off	some	Lunar	woman	and

threw	it	at	a	servant	girl	who	was	cowering	on	the	floor,	splattered	with	blood.

“You!	Bring	me	more	guards!	I	want	every	guard	and	thaumaturge	in	the	palace

in	this	room	at	once.	And	you—clean	up	this	mess!	What	are	you	all	standing

there	for?”

     The	servants	dispersed,	half	crawling,	half	slipping	toward	the	hidden	exits	in

the	walls.

     Awareness	began	to	burrow	its	way	 through	the	shock,	and	Kai	 glanced

around,	spotting	a	group	of	Earthen	leaders	clustered	in	a	corner.	Torin	was

470
among	them.	He	looked	stricken.	His	suit	was	disheveled.

     “Are	 you	hurt?”	 Kai	asked.

     “No,	 sir.”	  Torin	 made	his	way	 to	Kai,	 gripping	 the	 backs	of	 chairs	to	 keep

from	slipping	 on	the	bloody	floor.	 “Are	 you?”

     Kai	 shook	his	head.	“The	Earthens—?”

     “All	  accounted	for.	No	one	seems	to	be	injured.”

     Kai	 tried	to	swallow,	 but	 his	throat	was	too	dry	 and	the	saliva	got	stuck	until

he	tried	a	second	time.

     He	 spotted	Aimery	  emerging	 from	 one	 of	 the	 servants’	alcoves,	 the	 only

surviving	 thaumaturge	 from	  the	 trials,	  though	 more	 had	 since	 arrived.	 The

members	of	the	court	who	hadn’t	 yet	run	from	the	throne	room	 were	plastered	to

the	back	walls,	 sobbing	hysterically	 or	jabbering	 to	one	another	as	they	 tried	to

relive	the	traumatic	event,	piecing	 together	their	stories.	Who	 had	seen	what	and

which	 guard	had	 shot	whom	 and	 did	 that	girl	  really	 believe	 she	was	the	 lost

princess?

     Cinder,	  half-starved	  and	 surrounded	 by	  enemies,	 had	 caused	 so	 much

destruction	 in	 so	 little	  time,	  right	 in	  front	 of	  the	 queen.	 It	 was	 unnatural.

Impossible.	Sort	of	amazing.

     A	 laugh	 burbled	up	 Kai’s	 throat,	 trembling	 uncontrolled	 in	 his	 diaphragm.

His	emotions	were	shredded	with	fear	and	panic	and	awe.	Hysteria	hit	 him	like	 a

punch	to	the	gut.	He	pressed	a	hand	over	his	mouth	as	the	crazed	laughter	spilled

out,	turning	fast	into	panicked	breaths.

     Torin	 pressed	a	hand	between	his	shoulder	blades.	“Majesty?”

     “Torin,”	  Kai	stammered,	struggling	to	 breathe,	“do	you	think	she’s	all	 right?”

     Though	 Torin	 looked	 doubtful,	 he	answered,	“She	 has	shown	herself	 to	be

471
quite	resilient.”

     Kai	  started	to	 make	 his	 way	 across	the	 throne	 room,	 his	 wedding	 shoes

leaving	prints	 in	 the	sticky	 blood.	 Reaching	the	edge,	he	peered	down	 into	 the

water.	He	 had	not	 been	able	to	 tell	 from	 his	 seat	how	far	 the	 drop	was.	 Four

stories,	at	least.	His	 stomach	flipped.	 He	 couldn’t	 see	to	the	opposite	 shore.	In

fact,	the	lake	stretched	out	so	far	it	seemed	to	run	right	into	the	dome’s	wall.

     Though	the	air	 was	still,	the	water	was	choppy	 and	black	as	ink.	He	searched

and	searched	for	something	to	 indicate	a	 body,	a	girl,	 a	 sheen	of	a	metal	 limb,

but	there	was	no	sign	of	her.

     He	  shivered.	 Could	   Cinder	  swim?	 Was	  her	  body	  even	 designed	 for

swimming?	He	 knew	 she’d	taken	showers	aboard	the	Rampion,	 but	to	 be	fully

submerged	…

     “Could	 she	have	survived?”

     Kai	 jumped.	Levana	stood	a	few	feet	away	with	 her	arms	crossed	and	nostrils

flared.	Kai	  moved	away	 from	 her,	 spurred	by	 the	irrational	  fear	that	 she	was

about	to	  push	him	  off	  the	 ledge.	As	  soon	 as	he	 backed	 away,	 though,	 he

remembered	she	could	still	make	him	jump.

     “I	  don’t	  know,”	   he	 said.	 To	 provoke	  her,	 he	 added,	 “That	  was	 some

marvelous	entertainment,	by	 the	way.	 I	had	high	 expectations,	and	you	 did	 not

disappoint.”

     She	snarled	and	he	was	glad	he’d	backed	away.

     “Aimery,”	   she	 snapped.	“Have	 the	 lake	 combed	 by	 morning.	 I	  want	 the

cyborg’s	heart	served	to	me	on	a	silver	platter.”

     Aimery	  bowed.	 “It	  will	  be	 done,	Your	  Majesty.”	  He	 nodded	toward	  the

group	of	thaumaturges	that	had	arrived	after	all	the	action,	who	were	all	 trying	 to

472
look	like	 the	destruction	of	the	throne	room	wasn’t	as	shocking	as	it	was.	Four	of

them	departed.	“I	 am	afraid	 I	 must	inform	  Your	 Majesty	 that	there	has	been	a

disturb—”

     “Clearly	   there	 is	 a	  disturbance!”	  Levana	 bellowed.	  She	 jutted	 her	  red

fingernail	toward	 the	lake.	“You	 think	I	can’t	 see	that?”

     Aimery	 pressed	his	lips.	“Of	 course,	My	Queen,	but	there	is	something	else.”

     Her	gaze	burned.	“What	else	could	there	be?”

     “As	  you	 know,	  the	trial	  and	 execution	 tonight	  was	live-broadcast	  to	 all

sectors.	It	would	appear	that	as	a	result	of	the	cyborg’s	escape,	the	people	are	…

they	are	rioting.	In	 several	sectors,	it	seems.	SB-1	is	the	nearest	that	our	security

footage	indicates,	 and	 there	 also	 appears	to	 be	 a	sizable	 crowd	 of	  civilians

beginning	to	march	toward	Artemisia	 from	as	far	away	as	AT-6.”

     “She	did	 not	escape.”	Levana’s	voice	sounded	thin	and	taut,	about	to	splinter.

Kai	took	 another	step	away	from	 her.	 “She	is	 dead.	Tell	them	 she	is	dead.	She

could	not	have	survived	the	fall.	And	 find	 her!	Find	her!”

     “Yes,	 My	Queen.	We	will	 assemble	a	broadcast	informing	the	people	of	Linh

Cinder’s	death	immediately.	 But	we	cannot	guarantee	that	this	alone	will	 subdue

the	riots…”

     “Enough.”	  Levana	 shoved	 the	 thaumaturge	 out	 of	 her	 way	 and	 stormed

toward	her	 throne,	planting	 herself	 before	it.	 “Barricade	 the	maglev	 tunnels	 in

and	out	of	Artemisia.	 Shut	down	the	ports.	No	 one	is	to	enter	or	leave	this	dome

until	that	cyborg	has	been	found	and	the	civilians	of	 Luna	have	repented	for	their

actions.	If	anyone	tries	to	get	through	the	barricades,	shoot	them!”

     “Wait,”	   said	Europe’s	 Prime	 Minister	  Bromstad,	 stalking	 toward	  Levana.

The	throne	 room	  had	mostly	  emptied	 of	 Lunar	 aristocrats,	 leaving	 only	  the

473
servants	who	were	trying	 to	 rid	the	 room	of	 bodies	and	the	Earthens	who	 were

trying	not	 to	look	 as	shaken	as	they	were.	“You	 can’t	lock	 down	the	 ports.	You

invited	us	to	a	wedding,	not	a	war	zone.	My	 cabinet	and	I	are	leaving	tonight.”

     Levana	raised	an	eyebrow,	 and	that	simple,	 elegant	gesture	made	every	hair

on	Kai’s	 neck	 stand	on	 edge.	She	approached	the	prime	 minister,	 and	 though

Bromstad	held	his	ground,	 Kai	could	 see	him	regretting	 his	words.	Behind	 him,

the	other	leaders	drew	closer	together.

     “You	  want	to	 leave	tonight?”	  said	Levana,	the	 purr	 having	returned	 to	her

inflections.	“Well	  then.	Allow	 me	to	help	you	with	 that.”

     A	 nearby	 servant,	who	 had	been	attempting	 invisibility,	   stopped	scrubbing

the	floor	 and	instead	picked	up	a	stray	serving	 fork.	 On	her	knees,	head	bowed,

the	servant	handed	the	fork	to	Prime	Minister	Bromstad.

     The	second	his	hand	closed	around	the	fork’s	 handle,	fear	surged	through	his

face.	Not	just	fear.	But	a	fear	in	knowing	 that	he	was	now	holding	 a	weapon,	and

Levana	could	make	him	do	anything—anything—that	 she	wanted	to.

     “Stop!”	 said	Kai,	 grabbing	Levana’s	elbow.

     She	sneered	at	him.

     “As	 I	said	before,	I	will	  not	make	you	my	empress	if	you	attack	a	leader	of	an

allied	country.	 Let	him	 go.	Let	 them	all	 go.	There’s	been	enough	bloodshed	for

one	day.”

     Levana’s	 eyes	 burned	like	  coals,	and	 there	 was	a	 moment	 in	 which	  Kai

thought	 she	might	  kill	  them	 all	  and	 simply	 take	 Earth	 with	  her	 army,	 her

pathway	cleared	with	all	the	world	 leaders	gone.

     He	knew	the	thought	had	crossed	her	mind.

     But	 there	were	a	lot	 of	 people	on	Earth—far	 more	than	on	 Luna.	She	could

474
not	control	  them	 all.	 A	 rebellion	 on	 Earth	 would	  be	much	 more	 difficult	  to

secure	if	she	tried	to	take	it	by	force.

     The	fork	 clattered	to	the	floor	and	the	air	left	 Bromstad	in	rush.

     “She	 will	 not	 save	you,”	 Levana	hissed.	“I	  know	you	 think	 she’s	alive	 and

that	this	little	 rebellion	of	 hers	will	succeed,	but	it	won’t.	 Soon,	I	will	  be	empress

and	she	will	 be	 dead.	If	 she	isn’t	 already.”	 Schooling	 her	features,	she	slicked

her	hands	down	the	front	 of	her	 dress,	like	she	could	smooth	out	 the	disaster	of

the	past	hour.	“I	 do	 not	know	 that	I	 will	  see	you	again,	dear	husband,	until	 we

stand	together	for	our	coronations.	I	am	afraid	the	sight	of	you	is	 making	me	ill.”

     Thanks	to	a	warning	 look	from	 Torin,	 Kai	 managed	to	withhold	commentary

on	this	unexpected	disappointment.

     With	 a	snap	of	her	fingers,	Levana	ordered	one	of	the	servants	to	have	a	bath

drawn	in	her	chambers	and	then	she	was	gone,	blood	clinging	 to	 the	hem	of	her

gown	as	she	swept	from	the	throne	room.

     Kai	 exhaled,	dizzy	from	 it	 all.	The	queen’s	sudden	absence.	The	iron	tang	of

blood	mixed	 with	 sharp	cleaning	 chemicals	and	the	lingering	  aroma	of	 braised

beef.	The	way	his	 ears	still	echoed	with	 gunfire	 and	how	he	would	 never	forget

the	image	of	Cinder	launching	herself	off	 that	ledge.

     “Your	 Majesty?”	 said	a	shriveled,	frightened	voice.

     Turning,	 he	 saw	Linh	 Adri	  and	Pearl	 crouched	in	 a	corner.	 Tears	and	dirt

streaked	their	faces.

     “Might	  we…”	 Adri	 gulped,	and	he	could	see	the	fluttering	rise	and	fall	of	 her

chest	as	she	tried	to	gather	herself.	 “Might	  it	 be	possible	for	 you	to	 …	to	 send

my	daughter	and	me	home?”	She	sniffed	and	brand-new	tears	pooled	in	her	eyes.

Scrunching	up	her	face,	 she	let	her	shoulders	slump,	her	 body	barely	 supported

475
in	the	corner	of	the	room.	“I’m	ready	…	I	want	to	go	home	now.	Please.”

     Kai	clenched	his	jaw,	pitying	the	woman	almost	as	much	as	he	despised	her.

“I’m	 sorry,”	 he	said,	“but	 it	doesn’t	look	 like	 anyone	is	leaving	until	 this	is

over.”

476
	




                                          Fifty-Three







The	water	hit	her	like	concrete.	The	force	pounded	through	her	body.	Every	limb

vibrated,	first	with	the	hard	slap	of	the	water,	then	from	its	icy	cold.

     It	swallowed	her	down.	She	was	still	reeling	from	the	hit	as	the	air	left	her

lungs	in	a	burst	of	froth	and	bubbles.	Already	her	chest	was	burning.	Her	body

rolled	over	like	a	buoy,	her	heavy	left	leg	dragging	her	down.

     A	red	warning	light	filled	up	the	darkness.

     LIQUID	IMMERSION	DETECTED.	SHUTTING	DOWN	POWER	SUPPLY	IN	3	…

     That	was	as	far	 as	the	 countdown	got.	Blackness	pulled	at	 the	back	of

Cinder’s	brain,	as	if	a	 switch	had	been	turned	off.	Dizziness	rocked	her.	She

forced	her	eyes	open	and	looked	toward	the	surface,	only	able	to	orient	herself

because	she	could	feel	her	leg	pulling	her	down,	down.

     White	 sparks	were	creeping	into	  the	corners	of	  her	vision.	 Her	 lungs

tightened,	begging	to	contract.

     Slippery	weeds	reached	up	to	grasp	at	her,	sliming	her	right	calf	where	her

pants	had	bunched	around	her	knee.	Willing	herself	to	stay	conscious,	Cinder

aimed	her	finger’s	flashlight	into	the	blackness	at	her	feet	and	tried	to	turn	it	on,

but	nothing	happened.

477
     With	 just	enough	light	 from	 the	palace	filtering	 through	the	muck	 and	water,

Cinder	thought	she	detected	a	series	of	pale	bones	caught	among	the	grasses.	Her

metal	foot	sank	into	a	rib	cage.

     She	jolted,	surprise	clearing	her	thoughts	as	the	bones	crushed	beneath	her.

     Gritting	 her	teeth,	Cinder	 used	every	ounce	of	energy	left	 to	push	herself	off

the	lake	 bottom,	  struggling	 back	 toward	 the	 surface.	 Her	 left	  leg	 and	hand

weren’t	responding	 to	her	controls.	 They	had	become	nothing	 but	dead	weights

at	the	end	of	her	limbs,	and	her	shoulder	screamed	where	the	mutant	soldier	had

dug	his	teeth	into	her	flesh.	 It	took	 every	ounce	of	remaining	 energy	to	claw	her

way	upward.

     Her	 diaphragm	twitched.	 Overhead,	the	 glare	on	 the	surface	grew	 brighter,

lights	flickering	 like	 a	mirage	over	the	surface.	She	felt	 the	strength	draining	out

of	her,	her	waterlogged	leg	trying	to	 drag	her	back	down	…

     She	burst	through	 the	surface	with	 a	 sputter,	sucking	huge	 mouthfuls	 of	air

into	her	lungs.	She	managed	to	tread	water	for	one	desperate	moment	before	she

was	pulled	down	 again.	Her	 muscles	burned	as	she	kicked,	bobbing	 back	up	at

the	surface,	straining	to	keep	her	head	above	the	water.

     As	 the	flashes	in	 her	vision	 began	to	recede,	Cinder	 swiped	the	water	 from

her	eyes.	 The	palace	 towered	 above	her,	 ominous	 and	oppressive	 despite	its

beauty,	 stretching	 along	 either	  side	 of	 the	 lake.	  Without	  artificial	  daylight

brightening	 the	dome,	she	could	 see	the	spread	of	 the	 Milky	  Way	beyond	 the

glass,	mesmerizing.

     On	the	balcony	 far	above	her,	Cinder	 caught	shadows	moving.	 Then	a	wave

crashed	into	her	 and	she	was	 underwater	again,	 her	body	 battered	against	 the

current.	She	lost	 her	 sense	of	direction,	 up	 or	 down.	 Panic	burst	 again	in	 her

478
head,	her	arms	 flailing	  for	 control	 against	 the	 buffeting	 waves.	 Her	 shoulder

throbbed.	 Only	  when	 she	 felt	  herself	 sinking	  did	 she	 reorient	  herself	 and

flounder	back	to	the	surface.

     She	tried	to	swim	 away	from	the	palace,	toward	the	center	of	the	lake,	though

there	was	no	end	in	sight.	She	hadn’t	gone	far	before	her	muscles	started	to	burn,

and	every	joint	on	the	left	 side	of	her	body	 was	screaming	at	the	useless	weights

of	her	prosthetic	limbs.	 Her	lungs	felt	 scratched	raw,	but	she	had	to	survive.	She

couldn’t	 stop	 fighting—couldn’t	   stop	 trying.	  Kai	 was	 still	  up	 there.	 All	  her

friends	 were	 on	Luna	  somewhere,	needing	 her,	 and	the	 people	 of	 the	 outer

sectors	were	counting	on	her,	and	she	had	to	keep	pushing,	pushing	…

     Holding	  her	breath,	Cinder	 ducked	 beneath	the	surface	and	 tugged	off	 her

boots,	letting	  them	 sink.	  It	 wasn’t	  much,	 but	 she	 felt	  lightened	 enough	 to

scramble	against	 her	 body’s	 lopsided	 weight,	  propelling	  herself	 through	 the

waves.

     The	lake	seemed	never-ending,	but	every	time	she	glanced	back	and	saw	how

far	the	 Lunar	palace	had	 receded	into	the	 distance,	Cinder	 felt	 a	new	surge	 of

strength.	The	shore	was	lit	now	by	mansions	and	tiny	 boat	docks.	The	far	side	of

the	lake	had	disappeared	over	the	horizon.

     She	rolled	 onto	 her	 back,	panting.	 Her	 leg	was	 on	fire,	  her	arms	made	 of

rubber,	the	wound	 in	 her	shoulder	like	  an	ice	pick	 jammed	 into	 her	flesh.	She

couldn’t	go	any	farther.

     It	 occurred	 to	her,	 as	a	wave	crashed	over	 her	body	 and	she	almost	 didn’t

bother	to	 reach	for	 the	surface,	that	 she	didn’t	 know	 if	 she’d	 reserved	enough

energy	to	 make	it	 to	 the	shore.	 What	if	  they	were	 waiting	 for	 her	 there?	She

couldn’t	fight.	 Couldn’t	 manipulate.	She	was	done.	A	half-dead,	beaten	girl.

479
     Cinder’s	 head	collided	with	something	solid.

     She	gasped,	her	loss	of	propulsion	sending	her	beneath	the	surface	again.

     She	lashed	out	with	her	foot,	 forcing	herself	back	up,	and	spat	the	water	from

her	mouth.	Her	hands	slapped	against	the	hard,	slick	surface	she’d	run	 into.	The

dome.

     She’d	reached	the	edge	of	Artemisia.

     The	enormous	curved	wall	 acted	like	 a	dam,	holding	the	 lake	back,	while	 on

the	other	side	of	 the	glass	the	crater	continued	 for	miles	 in	 each	direction—dry

and	pocked	and	disturbingly,	horrifyingly	  deep.

     Bobbing	 against	the	glass,	Cinder	stared	at	the	bottom	of	the	crater	hundreds

of	feet	below.	She	felt	like	 a	fish	in	a	fishbowl.	 Trapped.

     She	 turned	 toward	 the	 shore,	 but	 couldn’t	  make	herself	  move.	 She	was

shivering.	Her	stomach	was	hollow.	 Her	weighted	leg	pulled	 her	down	again	and

it	 took	 the	strength	 of	 a	thousand	 wolf	 soldiers	 for	 her	 to	 climb	 back	 to	 the

surface.	Water	flooded	her	mouth	and	she	spat	as	soon	as	her	head	broke	through

the	waves,	but	it	was	useless.

     She	couldn’t.

     Dizziness	rocked	 over	her.	Her	arms	flopped	 against	the	water.	Her	right	 leg

gave	out	first,	 too	tired	 for	 one	more	kick.	 Cinder	 gasped	and	she	was	dragged

down,	one	hand	sliding	down	the	slimy	 glass	wall.

     There	was	 a	strange	release	as	blackness	engulfed	her.	A	 pride	 in	knowing

that	when	they	combed	the	lake	they	would	 find	her	body	 way	out	here	and	they

would	know	 how	hard	she	had	fought.

     Her	 body	went	 limp.	 A	 wave	pushed	her	 back	and	she	struck	 the	wall,	 but

hardly	felt	it.	 Then	something	was	gripping	her,	dragging	her	upward.

480
     Too	 weak	to	fight,	 Cinder	 let	herself	 be	carried.	Her	 head	broke	into	the	 air

and	her	 lungs	 expanded.	 She	 coughed.	Arms	  wrapped	 around	 her.	 A	 body

pressed	her	against	the	wall.

     Cinder	drooped	forward,	 settling	her	head	against	a	shoulder.

     “Cinder.”	  A	  man’s	voice,	 strained	 and	 vibrating	 through	 her	 chest.	“Stop

slacking	off,	  would	 you?”	 He	adjusted	 her	in	 his	 arms,	shifting	 her	 weight	 to

cradle	her	in	one	elbow.	“Cinder!”

     She	turned	her	bleary	eyes	up.	Catching	glimpses	 of	his	chin	 and	profile	 and

the	wet	hair	plastered	to	his	brow.	She	must	have	been	delirious.

     “Thorne?”	 The	word	stuck	in	 her	throat.

     “That’s	 Captain	…	to	 you.”	He	gritted	 his	teeth,	straining	to	pull	 them	toward

the	shore.	“Aces,	you’re	 heavy.	 Oh,	there	you	 are!	How	 nice	of	 you	…	 to	help

out…”

     “Your	  mouth	uses	up	 a	lot	 of	energy,”	 someone	growled.	 Jacin?	 “Roll	 her

onto	her	back	so	her	body’s	not	fighting	 against—”

     His	 words	turned	into	 a	sharp	yell	 as	Cinder’s	body	 slipped	out	 of	Thorne’s

hold,	sinking	into	 the	comforting	lull	 of	 the	waves.

481
	




                                               Fifty-Four







Cress	and	Iko	stood	gripping	 each	other	on	the	lakeshore,	watching	 Thorne	and

Jacin	dive	beneath	the	surface.	Cress	was	shivering—more	from	fear	than	cold—

and	while	Iko’s	 body	didn’t	 give	off	 natural	heat	like	a	human	being,	there	was	a

comfort	 that	came	from	  her	solidarity.	  They	waited,	 but	 there	was	 no	sign	 of

Thorne	or	Jacin	or	Cinder.	They’d	 been	underwater	for	a	long	time.

     Too	long.

     Cress	didn’t	 realize	she	was	holding	her	breath	until	 her	lungs	screamed.	She

gasped,	the	sensation	more	 painful	 because	she	knew	 her	 companions	 would

have	been	holding	their	breath	for	that	long	too.

     Iko	 squeezed	her	hand.	“Why	 haven’t	 they—”	 She	took	 a	step	forward,	 but

paused.

     Iko’s	 body	wasn’t	 made	for	swimming	and	Cress	had	never	been	in	a	body	of

water	larger	than	a	bathtub.

     They	were	useless.

     Cress	pressed	a	shaky	 hand	over	 her	mouth,	 ignoring	 the	 hot	 tears	on	her

face.	It	had	been	far	too	long.

     “There!”	  Iko	 cried,	pointing.	 Two—no,	 three	 heads	appeared	over	the	dark,

482
chopping	waves.

     Iko	 took	another	step.	“She	is	alive,	 isn’t	she?	She	…	she	doesn’t	seem	to	be

moving.	Do	you	 see	her	moving?”

     “I’m	  sure	she’s	alive.	I’m	sure	they’re	all	 fine.”

     She	glanced	at	Iko,	 but	 couldn’t	 bring	 herself	to	 ask	the	question	she	knew

they’d	 all	 been	thinking.	  The	live	  broadcast	of	 the	wedding	  feast	had	shown

them	everything.	 The	 trial.	 The	massacre.	Cinder	 jumping	 from	 the	ledge	 and

plunging	toward	the	lake	below.

     Could	Cinder	 swim?

     Everyone	had	thought	it,	but	 no	one	had	asked.

     Together,	the	four	 of	them	had	sneaked	through	the	city,	grateful	that	the	few

Lunars	they	saw	were	too	busy	celebrating	the	queen’s	marriage	to	pay	them	any

attention.	Jacin	had	 led	the	 way,	familiar	  with	 the	 city	 and	the	patterns	 of	the

lake,	 knowing	   where	 the	  bodies	 that	  fell	  into	  it	  from	   the	 throne	  room

occasionally	 surfaced.	There	 had	 been	no	 hesitation	 between	 them—they	 all

knew	they	had	to	find	Cinder	while	 Levana	was	reeling	from	 the	attack.

     When	 they	had	caught	sight	 of	 Cinder’s	 dark	form	 among	the	 waves,	there

was	a	resounding	gasp	of	joy	and	relief	 from	 the	whole	group,	 but	they	still	 had

no	idea	what	state	Cinder	would	be	in.

     Was	she	alive?	Was	she	injured?	Could	she	swim?

     When	the	 trio	in	 the	water	was	close	enough,	Cress	let	go	 of	Iko	 and	waded

out	to	join	 them.	Together	they	pulled	Cinder’s	 body	ashore,	laying	her	down	on

the	white	sand.

     “Is	 she	alive?”	Iko	asked,	half-hysterical.	 “Is	she	breathing?”

     “Let’s	 get	her	to	that	boathouse,”	Jacin	said.	“We	can’t	 stay	out	here.”

483
     Thorne,	 Jacin,	and	Iko	 shared	the	job	of	 carrying	 Cinder’s	 limp	 body	while

Cress	ran	ahead	to	 hold	 the	 doors.	Three	 rowboats	 were	stacked	on	 brackets

against	the	two	sidewalls,	with	 a	fourth	laid	out	 in	the	middle	and	covered	with	 a

tarp.	She	cleared	a	mess	of	oars	and	fishing	 equipment	from	 the	tarp,	making	 a

space	for	them	 to	 lay	 out	Cinder’s	 body,	 but	 Jacin	laid	 her	 on	the	 hard	floor

instead.	Iko	closed	the	 doors,	shrouding	the	room	 in	 darkness.	Cress	scrambled

to	switch	on	her	portscreen	for	its	ghostly	blue	light.

     Jacin	 didn’t	  bother	to	 check	 for	 breath	 or	 a	 pulse	before	 he	 leaned	over

Cinder	and	locked	 his	hands	together	on	top	 of	her	chest.	His	 eyes	hardened	as

he	started	to	pump	down	on	 her	sternum	with	 quick,	forceful	 movements.	Cress

winced	at	the	sound	of	popping	cartilage.

     “Do	 you	know	 what	you’re	 doing?”	 said	Thorne,	crouched	on	Cinder’s	other

side.	He	coughed	and	 wiped	his	 mouth	 with	 his	arm.	 “Do	 you	 need	help?	We

learned	this	in	boot	camp	…	I	remember	…	sort	of…”

     “I	 know	what	 I’m	 doing,”	said	Jacin.

     And	 he	did	seem	to	know,	 as	he	tilted	Cinder’s	 head	back	and	formed	a	seal

over	her	mouth	with	his	own.

     Thorne	didn’t	 look	 comforted,	but	he	didn’t	 argue.

     Kneeling	  at	 Cinder’s	 feet,	 Cress	 watched	 in	 silence	 as	Jacin	 started	 the

compressions	again.	She	remembered	net	dramas	where	the	heroine	was	revived

by	the	hero	with	mouth-to-mouth	 resuscitation.	It	 had	seemed	so	romantic.	Cress

had	even	had	fantasies	about	 drowning,	 dreams	in	which	 the	 press	of	a	 man’s

lips	could	breathe	life	back	into	 her	lifeless	form.

     The	 dramas	had	lied.	 There	was	a	 violence	to	 this	 they	hadn’t	 shown.	 She

grimaced	as	Jacin’s	 hands	flattened	 against	Cinder’s	 sternum	for	 a	 third	 time,

484
imagining	she	could	feel	the	bruises	on	her	own	chest.

     She	felt	 suspended	in	time.	Thorne	took	up	 sentinel	by	the	doorway,	 peering

out	through	a	small,	filthy	  window	 to	keep	watch.	Iko	 wrapped	her	arms	around

her	body	and	looked	about	ready	to	dissolve	into	impossible	tears.

     Cress	was	about	to	take	Iko’s	 hand	again	when	Cinder	 jerked.	She	started	to

gag.

     Jacin	eased	her	head	over	 to	 the	side	and	 water	burbled	 out	 of	her	 mouth,

though	not	as	much	 as	Cress	expected.	Jacin	held	Cinder	 in	place,	keeping	 her

airway	clear,	until	 she	had	stopped	hacking.	She	was	breathing	again.	Weak	and

shaky,	but	breathing.

     Cinder	 opened	her	eyes	and	Jacin	eased	her	into	a	sitting	position.	 Her	right

arm	flopped.	 Her	 hand	found	 Jacin’s	arm	 and	squeezed.	She	spat	a	 few	more

times.	“Good	timing,”	  she	croaked.

     Water	 was	 glistening	 on	 her	lips	  and	chin	 until	  Iko	 reached	forward	 and

wiped	 it	 away	with	  her	 sleeve.	Cinder	 looked	 at	her	 and	 her	eyes	lightened,

though	her	eyelids	still	drooped	with	 exhaustion.

     “Iko?	 I	thought…”	 With	 a	groan,	she	fell	onto	her	back.

     Iko	 squealed	and	made	to	collapse	onto	Cinder,	but	reconsidered.	Instead,	she

scurried	around	Jacin	so	she	could	lift	 Cinder’s	shoulders	and	cradle	her	head	in

her	lap.	Smiling	 wearily,	Cinder	 reached	up	to	pet	Iko’s	braids.	Her	 cyborg	hand

was	missing	one	of	its	fingers.

     “We	 can’t	 stay	 here,”	 said	Jacin,	rubbing	 water	 droplets	 from	 his	 cropped

hair.	“They’ll	   start	the	search	closer	to	 the	palace,	but	 it	 won’t	 be	 long	before

they	barricade	the	whole	lake.	We	need	to	find	someplace	for	her	to	recover.”

     “Any	 ideas?”	asked	Thorne.	“We’re	 not	exactly	in	 friendly	 territory.”

485
     “I	 need	medical	supplies,”	said	Cinder,	her	eyes	shut.	“A	 soldier	bit	 me.

Should	clean	the	wound	before	it’s	infected.”	She	sighed,	too	exhausted	to	go

on.

     “I	 wouldn’t	mind	a	warm	meal	and	a	clothes	dryer	so	long	as	we’re	making

demands,”	said	Thorne.	Leaning	forward,	he	stripped	off	his	soaking	wet	shirt.

     Cress’s	eyes	widened,	glued	to	him	as	he	wrung	the	lake	out	of	the	shirt,

water	splattering	on	the	concrete.

     Jacin	said	something,	but	she	didn’t	catch	what.

     Thorne	pulled	his	shirt	on	again,	a	little	 more	dry	and	wrinkled	 now,	and

Cress	was	able	to	breathe	again.

     “That	might	work,”	 said	Thorne,	nodding	at	Cinder.	“Think	you	can	make

it?”

     “No,”	said	Cinder.	“I	can’t	walk.”

     “It’s	not	far,”	said	Jacin.	“I	thought	you	were	supposed	to	be	tough.”

     Cinder	scowled	up	at	him.	“I	 can’t	 walk.	The	water	did	 something	to	my

interface.”	She	paused.	Wheezed.	“My	leg	and	hand	aren’t	functioning.	Lost	net

access	too.”

     Four	pairs	of	eyes	shifted	to	the	glistening	metal	foot.	Cress	was	not	in	the

habit	of	thinking	 of	Cinder	as	cyborg—as	something	other.	As	someone	who

could	just	…	stop	functioning.

     “Fine,”	said	Jacin,	turning	to	Thorne.	“You	want	to	carry	her	first,	or	 shall

I?”

     Thorne	raised	an	eyebrow.	“Do	you	know	how	heavy	she	is?”

     Cinder	kicked	him.

     He	huffed.	“Fine.	You	first.”

486
                                                      *			*			 *

“Are	we	sure	about	this?”	Cress	whispered.	She	was	crouched	behind	a	trellis

covered	in	ivy,	along	with	Cinder,	Thorne,	and	Jacin,	watching	as	Iko	lifted	the

shining	gold	door	knocker	for	the	third	time.

     “I	 told	 you,	they	 aren’t	home,”	said	 Jacin,	annoyed	at	the	precaution	of

having	Iko	scout	out	the	pillared	mansion	before	they	went	in.	“This	family	is

popular	at	court.	They’ll	be	staying	at	the	palace	all	week.”

     After	a	fourth	knock	bore	no	result,	Iko	turned	to	them	and	shrugged.

     Cress	wrapped	an	arm	around	Cinder’s	waist—she	was	a	good	height	to	act

as	a	crutch	for	her	as	they	hobbled	through	the	garden.	Cinder’s	dead	metal	foot

dragged	a	groove	into	the	pathway	of	tumbled	blue	glass.

     “What	if	 it’s	locked?”	asked	Cress,	glancing	down	the	street,	although	they

hadn’t	seen	a	single	person.	Perhaps	this	entire	neighborhood	was	made	up	of

popular	members	of	the	court.	Perhaps	this	whole	city	was	off	having	a	raucous

celebration	at	the	palace.

     “Then	I’ll	pick	it,”	 said	Thorne.

     The	door	wasn’t	locked.	They	 found	themselves	in	a	grandiose	entryway

with	a	curved	staircase	and	a	sea	of	gold	and	white	tiles.

     Thorne	let	out	a	low	whistle.	“This	place	is	ripe	for	plundering.”

     Iko	responded,	“Can	I	go	plunder	the	master	closet?”

     Jacin	found	an	enormous	vase	full	of	flowers	and	set	it	on	the	floor	inside	the

front	door,	so	anyone	who	opened	it	would	knock	it	over	and	shatter	the	vase

into	a	hundred	tiny	pieces.	Fair	warning	that	it	was	time	for	them	to	leave.

     It	 didn’t	 take	them	long	 to	 find	 a	kitchen	 that	was	bigger	 than	Cress’s

satellite.	Cress	and	Iko	maneuvered	Cinder	onto	a	stool	and	helped	her	prop	up

487
her	leg	while	 Jacin	rummaged	through	 the	pantry,	emerging	with	 an	assortment

of	nuts	and	fruits.

     “What	 do	you	think	 is	wrong	with	 you?”	Iko	 asked.

     Cinder	 smacked	her	palm	against	the	side	of	 her	head,	like	she	hoped	to	jog

something	back	 into	 place.	 “It’s	  not	 a	power	 issue,”	 she	said.	 “My	  eyes	are

working,	 at	least.	 It’s	 something	in	 the	 connection	between	 the	brain-machine

interface	and	my	prostheses.	It	affected	 both	my	hand	and	leg	 at	the	same	time,

so	 it	 must	  be	 a	 primary	  connection.	 My	  control	  panel	 could	 have	 gotten

waterlogged	or	something.	 Could	 be	a	few	 dead	wires.”	 She	sighed.	“I	 guess	I

should	feel	lucky.	If	 my	power	cell	 had	died,	I’d	be	dead	with	it.”

     They	mulled	 over	this	for	a	moment,	picking	 at	the	food.

     Thorne	glanced	back	at	the	pantry.	“Did	 you	see	any	rice	in	there?	Maybe	we

could	fill	 Cinder’s	 head	with	it.”

     Everyone	stared	at	him.

     “You	 know,	 to	…	absorb	the	moisture,	or	something.	Isn’t	that	a	thing?”

     “We’re	 not	pouring	 rice	in	my	 head.”

     “But	  I’m	 pretty	 sure	I	 remember	someone	putting	 a	portscreen	in	 a	bag	 of

rice	once	after	they’d	put	it	 through	a	clothes	washer	and—”

     “Thorne.”

     “Just	trying	 to	be	helpful.”

     “What	 do	you	 need	to	fix	 it?”	 asked	Cress,	then	hunched	down	between	her

shoulders	as	all	eyes	turned	toward	her.

     Cinder	  frowned,	   and	 Cress	 could	   see	 her	  working	  through	  different

possibilities.	 Then	 she	started	 to	laugh,	 dragging	 her	 good	 hand	through	 her

tangled,	still-damp	hair.	“A	 mechanic,”	 she	said.	“A	really	 good	one.”

488
     Iko	 beamed.	“That,	 we	 have.	Plus,	 we’re	 in	a	 mansion.	They	 have	tons	 of

technology	here.	We	 just	need	to	find	 you	 the	parts	and	tools	 and	you	 can	talk

me	through	fixing	 you.	Right?”

     Cinder	 pursed	 her	lips.	  There	were	 dark	 circles	 beneath	her	 eyes	and	 an

unhealthy	pallor	to	her	skin.	Cress	had	never	seen	her	so	worn	down.

     Iko	 cocked	 her	 head.	She	 must	 have	noticed	 it	  too,	 because	she	spent	a

moment	studying	 Cinder,	 then	 everyone	in	 their	 group.	 “You	  all	 look	 awful.

Maybe	you	should	rest	for	a	while.	 I	can	keep	watch.”

     They	mulled	 over	the	idea	for	 a	minute,	before	Thorne	 said,	“That’s	 actually

not	a	bad	idea.”

     Iko	 shrugged.	“Someone	has	to	stay	clearheaded	in	an	emergency	situation.”

Frowning,	she	added,	“Although	 I	never	thought	it	would	 have	to	be	me.”

     Thorne	turned	to	Cinder.	“You’ll	   think	more	clearly	 after	a	nap.”

     She	ignored	 him,	 staring	at	the	 counter.	There	was	 a	dejected	slump	to	 her

shoulders,	a	hollowness	in	her	gaze.

     “I	 don’t	 think	 a	nap	is	going	to	 fix	 this,”	 she	said,	lifting	 her	cyborg	hand.	It

hung	limply	 from	 her	wrist,	 a	hole	where	one	finger	had	been	removed.	“I	 can’t

believe	this	 is	 happening.	I	 can’t	 fight	 like	  this,	or	 start	 a	revolution,	 or	 be	a

queen.	I	can’t	do	anything	like	 this.	I’m	 broken.	I’m	 literally	 broken.”

     Iko	 settled	a	hand	on	Cinder’s	 shoulder.	“Yeah,	but	 broken	isn’t	 the	same	as

unfixable.”

489
	




                                            Fifty-Five







“This	was	a	bad	decision,”	said	Scarlet.

     Winter	peered	over	at	her.	There	was	discomfort	in	Scarlet’s	face,	a	deep-

etched	line	between	her	eyebrows.

     Reaching	over,	Winter	tugged	at	one	of	Scarlet’s	curls.	“You	have	not	turned

back	yet.”

     Scarlet	batted	her	away.	“Yeah,	because	I	no	longer	have	any	idea	where	we

are.”	Scarlet	glanced	over	her	shoulder.	“We’ve	been	wandering	around	these

caves	for	hours.”

     Winter	followed	her	look,	but	the	cave	was	so	dim	they	couldn’t	see	very	far

before	it	disappeared	into	shadows	lit	only	by	the	occasional	glowing	orb	on	the

ceiling.	Winter	 couldn’t	tell	 how	 far	 she	and	Scarlet	had	come	through	the

underground	lava	tubes	in	search	of	the	wolf	soldiers—in	search	of	an	army—

and	she	still	didn’t	know	how	much	farther	they	would	have	to	go.	Whenever

she	thought	of	turning	back,	though,	she	would	imagine	she	heard	a	faint	howl	in

the	distance,	compelling	her	to	go	on.	Her	dream	of	Ryu	and	Levana	clung	to	her

thoughts	like	sticky	pollen,	inciting	her	resolve	again	and	again.

     Levana	believed	she	could	control	everyone	on	this	moon.	The	people,	the

490
soldiers,	Winter	herself.

     But	 she	was	wrong.	Winter	was	sick	of	 being	manipulated,	and	she	knew	she

couldn’t	 be	the	only	 one.	She	would	 find	 soldiers	 to	fight	 for	 her	 and	together

they	would	rid	 themselves	of	her	stepmother	and	her	cruelty.

     They	 rounded	 another	 bend.	 The	 dark,	  gritty	 walls	  never	 changed.	 The

ceiling	was	 jagged,	but	the	ground	 was	worn	smooth	 from	years	of	 foot	 traffic.

And	 marching.	Did	 the	 soldiers	march?	 Winter	 wasn’t	 sure.	She	had	 not	paid

much	attention	 to	 her	stepmother’s	 army.	She	 wished	she’d	 taken	more	 of	 an

interest	in	what	Levana	was	doing	 with	 these	boys-made-soldiers.	What	she	had

been	planning	all	along.

     Otherwise,	 the	cave	looked	 like	 it	 had	since	it	 had	first	 been	carved	out	 by

molten	lava	billions	 of	 years	ago.	Back	then,	Luna	had	been	a	place	of	 heat	and

transformation.	It	 was	difficult	  to	fathom	now	 in	these	cold,	 barren	caverns,	left

to	exist	in	quiet	darkness.

     When	Earthens	had	first	 built	 their	 colony,	they	 had	made	temporary	homes

of	the	vast	 interconnected	lava	tubes	while	 the	domes	were	 under	construction,

and	afterward	converted	them	into	storage	and	shuttle	rails.

     Only	 recently	had	they	been	used	for	something	violent	and	grotesque.

     “Secret	barracks	for	a	secret	army,”	she	whispered	to	herself.

     “All	  right,	 time	out.”	 Scarlet	stopped	and	settled	her	hands	on	her	 hips.	“Do

you	even	know	where	we’re	going?”

     Winter	 tugged	on	a	lock	of	her	own	hair	 this	time,	like	 a	spring	curled	against

her	cheek.	There	was	still	a	bump	on	 her	scalp	where	she’d	hit	her	head,	though

the	headache	was	mostly	gone.	“Many	  of	the	lava	 tubes	that	were	not	 used	for

the	shuttles	were	 converted	into	 underground	 training	 facilities.	 That	 is	 where

491
the	soldiers	will	 be.	At	least,	those	who	have	not	been	sent	to	Earth.”

     Scarlet	blinked,	 slowly.	  “And	 how	 many	lava	 tubes	are	there	under	 Luna’s

surface?”

     Winter	 blinked,	slowly,	 back.	“I	 do	not	know.	 But	did	you	 know	Luna	started

its	life	as	a	giant	ball	of	magma,	liquid	 and	burning?”

     Scarlet	knotted	 her	lips	 to	one	 side.	“How	 many	 wolf	 regiments	are	 left	on

Luna?”

     This	time,	 Winter	did	 not	answer	at	all.

     Exhaling,	 Scarlet	rubbed	 at	her	brow.	 “I	 knew	 better.	I	 knew	 better	than	to

listen	to	you.	 Winter.	We	 could	be	wandering	 down	here	for	 days	and	not	see	a

single	person.	 And	 even	 if	 we	 do	 find	 one	 of	 these	regiments,	 or	 packs,	 or

whatever	they	 call	 themselves,	 they	 are	most	 likely	  going	 to	 eat	 us.	This	 is

suicide!”	 She	pointed	back	the	direction	they’d	come.	“We	 should	be	looking	 for

allies,	not	enemies.”

     “You	 go	back	then.”	Winter	 continued	down	the	endless	tunnel.

     Scarlet	let	 out	a	 bedraggled	groan	and	stomped	after	 her.	“Thirty	  minutes,”

she	said.	“We	are	going	 to	walk	 for	 thirty	 more	minutes	and	if	 we	haven’t	 seen

any	evidence	that	 we’re	 getting	 closer,	then	 we	 are	turning	 around	and	 going

back,	and	I	am	not	taking	 no	for	an	answer.	I’ll	  club	you	over	 the	head	and	drag

you	back	if	I	 have	to.”

     Winter	  fluttered	 her	 lashes,	amused	by	 the	 thought.	 “We	  will	  find	 them,

Scarlet-friend.	 They	 will	  join	 us.	 Your	 Wolf	  is	 proof	 that	 they	are	 men,	 not

monsters.”

     “I	 really	 wish	you	 would	 stop	comparing	them	with	 Wolf.	  Wolf	 is	different.

The	rest	of	them	…	they	are	monsters.	I	met	Wolf’s	  pack	in	Paris,	and	they	were

492
brutal	and	terrible.	And	 that	was	her	special	ops,	and	they’re	still	 mostly	human!

You	can’t	reason	with	these	monsters	any	more	than	you	could	a	…	a…”

     “A	 pack	of	wolves?”

     Scarlet	glared.	“Exactly.”

     “Ryu	 was	my	friend.”

     Scarlet	threw	 her	hands	into	 the	 air.	“What	 are	you	 going	 to	do,	 play	fetch

with	 them?	You	  are	thinking	  about	this	 all	 wrong.	  They	 are	under	 Levana’s

control,	or	whoever	their	 thaumaturge	is.	They	will	 do	what	they’re	told,	 and	that

will	 be	to	eat	us.”

     “They	 were	young	boys	forced	 into	a	difficult	  situation.	They	 did	not	ask	for

this	life,	just	 as	your	Wolf	 didn’t	 ask	for	it,	 but	they	have	done	what	they	needed

to	 do	 to	 survive.	 If	  they	 are	 given	 the	 opportunity	  to	 break	 their	 binds	 of

enslavement,	I	believe	they	will	 take	it.	I	believe	they	will	  side	with	us.”

     Winter	 heard	a	distant,	low	howl,	 and	shivered.	Scarlet	didn’t	seem	to	hear	it,

though,	so	she	said	nothing.

     “You	  have	no	idea	 whose	side	they’ll	  take.	 They’ve	 been	so	messed	with,

they’ll	  side	with	  whoever	 is	 offering	  them	a	 bigger	 piece	 of	 steak.”	 Scarlet

hesitated.	“What’s	wrong?	Are	 you	hallucinating	 right	now?”

     Winter	 forced	a	smile.	 “Not	 unless	you	are	a	figment	of	 my	imagination,	 but

how	could	I	 ever	be	sure	one	way	or	the	other?	So	I	will	 go	on	believing	 you	are

real.”

     Scarlet	 looked	 unimpressed	 with	  her	 logic.	 “You	  know	  what	 these	men

become,	don’t	you?	You	know	 they	can	never	be	normal	again.”

     “I	  would	 think	  that	 you,	 of	 all	  people,	 would	 believe	 in	  their	 ability	  to

change.	Wolf	 changed	because	of	 his	love	 for	 you.	 Why	 can	they	 not	change

493
also?”	She	started	walking	again.

     “Wolf	  is—it’s	  not	 the	 same.	Winter,	  I	 know	 you’re	 used	 to	 batting	 your

eyelashes	at	everyone	who	walks	by	and	expecting	them	to	fall	in	 love	with	 you,

but	that’s	 not	going	 to	happen	here.	They	 are	going	 to	laugh	 at	you	 and	mock

you	and	then	they	are	going	to—”

     “Eat	 me.	Yes.	I	understand.”

     “You	 don’t	 seem	to	be	 grasping	the	meaning	behind	 the	words.	This	 isn’t	 a

metaphor.	I’m	talking	 about	huge	teeth	and	digestive	systems.”

     “Fat	  and	bones	and	 marrow	 and	 meat,”	 Winter	 sang.	“We	 only	 wanted	 a

snack	to	eat.”

     Scarlet	grunted.	“You	 can	be	so	disturbing.”

     Winter	 hooked	 her	elbow	 with	  Scarlet’s.	 “Don’t	  be	afraid.	 They	 will	  help

us.”

     Before	 Scarlet	 could	 mount	 another	 argument,	 a	peculiar	 smell	  assaulted

their	 senses,	sharp	and	pungent.	An	  animal	 smell,	 like	 in	 the	 menagerie,	but

different.	 Sweat	and	salt	and	 body	odor	 mingling	 in	 the	cave’s	 stale	air,	 along

with	something	rank,	like	 old	meat.

     “Well,”	  said	Scarlet,	“I	 think	we	found	them.”

     A	 chill	  crawled	 down	 Winter’s	  neck.	 Neither	 of	 them	 moved	 for	  a	long

while.

     “If	 we	can	smell	them,”	 said	Scarlet,	“they	can	smell	us.”

     Winter	 raised	 her	chin.	 “I’ll	   understand	if	 you	 leave.	 I	 can	go	 on	without

you.”

     Scarlet	 seemed	to	consider	 it,	 but	 then	 she	shrugged.	Her	 expression	was

reckless.	“I’m	 beginning	to	think	 we’re	 all	going	to	 end	up	wolf	food	 anyway	by

494
the	time	this	is	over.”

     Facing	her,	Winter	 cupped	Scarlet’s	face	in	 both	hands.	“It	 is	not	like	 you	 to

talk	like	that.”

     Scarlet	 clenched	her	 jaw.	 “They	 took	  Wolf	 and	 they	 took	 Cinder,	 and	as

much	as	I	want	to	see	Levana	ripped	into	tiny	pieces	and	fed	to	her	own	mutants,

I	just	 don’t	 think	 we	have	a	 whole	lot	 of	 hope	without	 them.”	 She	gulped,	 her

resentment	clouding	 over.	 “And	  I	 …	 I	 don’t	 want	 to	 see	this	 place.	He	 was

trained	here	too,	 you	know.	 I’m	  afraid	 to	see	what	 he	came	from,	 what	 he	…

who	he	was.”

     “He	 is	your	Wolf	 now,	and	you	are	his	alpha.”

     Scarlet	laughed.	“According	 to	Jacin,	you	need	a	pack	to	be	an	alpha.”

     Jacin.	The	 name	brought	sunshine	and	blood	and	kisses	and	growls	rising	 to

Winter’s	 skin.	She	gave	it	 a	moment	to	 sink	back	 toward	her	bones,	before	she

tilted	 Scarlet’s	head	down	 and	 placed	a	kiss	 on	the	 top	 of	her	 flame-and-fury

hair.	“I	 will	 get	you	your	pack.”

495
	




                                              Fifty-Six







They	hadn’t	gone	much	farther	before	they	detected	noise	rumbling	through	the

caverns.	Low	and	thunderous,	like	a	distant	train.	They	came	to	another	fork	in

the	tunnel,	 and	 while	  one	path	 led	  into	 further	 darkness	and	 rock	 and

nothingness,	the	other	ran	into	a	set	of	iron	doors.	Hinged	into	the	regolith	walls,

the	doors	looked	ancient.	Their	sole	ornamentation	was	a	faded	label	painted	on

the	lower	corner	of	each	door—STOREROOM	16,	SECTOR	LW-12.

     A	tiny	 screen	had	been	embedded	into	the	wall	beside	the	doors.	It	was	old

and	outdated	and	the	text	kept	flickering.	LUNAR	REGIMENT	117,	PACKS

1009–1020.

     The	ground	and	walls	thrummed	with	activity	beyond	those	doors—laughter

and	shouting	and	thumping	footsteps.	For	the	first	time	since	she’d	embarked	on

this	quest,	Winter	felt	a	flutter	of	nervousness	in	her	stomach.

     Scarlet	glanced	at	her.	“It	isn’t	too	late	to	go	back.”

     “I	disagree.”

     Sighing,	Scarlet	studied	the	screen.	“Eleven	packs,	so	around	a	hundred

soldiers,	give	or	take.”

     Winter	hummed,	a	sound	without	commitment.	A	hundred	soldiers.

496
     Animals,	 killers,	 predators,	or	so	everyone	claimed.	 Had	she	truly	 gone	mad

to	think	she	could	change	them?

     Her	 eyes	began	to	mist,	surprising	 her.	She	had	not	realized	that	thinking	  of

her	own	 imbalance	would	 sadden	her,	but	 the	feel	of	 her	 ribs	crushing	 against

her	heart	was	unmistakable.

     “Why	  did	you	 follow	 me?”	 she	asked,	staring	at	the	 solid	doors.	“Knowing

what’s	wrong	with	 me.	Knowing	 that	I’m	 broken.”

     Scarlet	scoffed.	“That	 is	an	excellent	question.”

     A	 loud	thud	was	followed	 by	hollers.	The	walls	reverberated	around	them.

     They	 had	not	 been	noticed.	 Scarlet	was	right.	 They	 could	 turn	 around	and

leave.	Winter	 could	admit	 she	was	delusional	 and	no	 one	should	ever	listen	 to

her.	She	was	adept	only	at	making	the	wrong	decisions.

     “I	 couldn’t	  let	you	 go	on	 your	own,”	  said	Scarlet,	most	of	 the	venom	 gone

from	her	tone.

     “Why?”

     “I	 don’t	 know.	Call	me	crazy.”

     Winter	 shut	her	eyes.	“I	won’t.	 You	 are	not	damaged	like	I	am.	You	are	not	a

hundred	scattered	pieces,	blowing	farther	and	farther	away	from	each	other.”

     “How	 would	 you	know?”

     Listing	 her	head,	Winter	dared	to	look	up	again.

     Scarlet	leaned	against	the	 regolith	 wall.	 “My	  father	was	a	liar	 and	 a	drunk.

My	mother	 left	when	 I	was	a	kid	 and	never	looked	back.	 I	witnessed	a	man	kill

my	grandmother	and	then	rip	 out	 her	throat	with	 his	teeth.	I	 was	kept	in	 a	cage

for	six	 weeks.	I	was	forced	to	 cut	off	 my	own	finger.	 I’m	 pretty	 sure	I’m	 falling

in	love	with	 a	guy	who	 has	been	genetically	modified	and	mentally	 programmed

497
to	 be	a	 predator.	 So	all	  things	 considered,	I’d	  say	 I	 have	 a	 fair	 amount	 of

scattered	pieces	myself.”

     Winter	 felt	 her	 resolve	crumbling.	  “You	 came	with	  me	because	it	 was	the

quickest	path	to	death,	then.”

     A	 crease	formed	 between	Scarlet’s	 eyebrows.	“I’m	  not	 suicidal,”	 she	said,

the	sharpness	returning	to	her	tongue.	“I	came	with	 you	because—”	She	crossed

her	arms	over	her	chest.	“Because	ever	since	my	grandma	took	me	in,	I’ve	heard

people	tell	me	she	was	crazy.	A	 kooky,	 belligerent	old	 woman,	always	good	for

a	joke	 around	town.	 They	 had	 no	idea	 how	 brilliant	  she	was.	That	 crazy	 old

woman	risked	everything	 she	had	to	protect	Cinder	when	she	was	a	baby,	and	in

the	end,	she	sacrificed	her	own	life	 rather	than	give	 up	Cinder’s	 secret.	She	was

brave	and	strong,	and	everyone	else	was	too	 closeminded	to	 see	it.”	 She	rolled

her	eyes,	annoyed	with	her	own	frustration.	 “I	 guess	I’m	just	hoping	 that	despite

all	the	 absurd	things	 you	say,	you	 might	 also	be	 a	little	 bit	 brilliant.	  That	 this

time,	you	might	 be	right.”	 She	held	up	 her	finger.	“That	 said,	if	 you’re	 going	 to

tell	me	how	 stupid	this	idea	was	to	 begin	with	 and	we	should	run	 like	hell,	 then

I’m	right	 behind	you.”

     Beyond	 the	doors,	something	 crashed,	and	there	was	 a	round	of	 boisterous

laughter.	Then,	 a	howl.	 A	 chorus	 of	 a	dozen	 other	voices	 rose	up	 to	meet	 it,

sounding	victorious.

     A	 muscle	twitched	 in	 Winter’s	 jaw,	 but	 her	lip	 had	stopped	trembling.	 She

hadn’t	 cried.	 She’d	 been	too	 focused	 on	 Scarlet’s	 words	 to	remember	 to	 be

upset.	“I	believe	they	were	boys	once	and	they	can	be	boys	again.	I	believe	I	 can

help	them,	and	they	will	 help	me	in	return.”

     Scarlet	 sighed,	sounding	 a	little	  disappointed	and	 a	little	 resigned,	 but	 not

498
surprised.	“And	 I	believe	you’re	 not	as	crazy	as	you	want	 everyone	to	think	you

are.”

     Winter’s	  gaze	flitted	 toward	 Scarlet,	 surprised,	but	 Scarlet	didn’t	  return	it.

She	stepped	forward	and	placed	her	palm	on	one	of	the	heavy	doors.	“So,	do	we

knock?”

     “I	 do	not	think	 they	would	 hear	us.”	Another	 round	of	 howls	echoed	through

the	cavern.	Winter	swiped	her	fingers	across	the	screen,	and	the	text	changed.


     SECURITY	  CLEARANCE	   IDENTIFICATION	   REQUIRED

     She	 pressed	the	 pads	 of	 her	  fingers	 onto	 the	 screen	 and	 it	 brightened,

welcoming	 her.	 The	doors	 began	to	 open,	 creaking	on	 ancient	 hinges.	When

Winter	turned	back,	Scarlet	was	staring	at	her,	aghast.

     “You	 do	realize	you	just	alerted	the	queen	to	where	you	are,	right?”

     Winter	 shrugged.	“By	 the	 time	she	finds	 us,	either	we	 will	 have	an	army	 to

protect	us,	or	we	will	 have	already	become	meat	and	marrow	and	bone.”

     She	drifted	through	the	doors	and	instantly	froze.

     Scarlet	 had	 been	 right.	  There	 were	 about	 a	 hundred	 men	 in	 the	  117th

Regiment	of	 Levana’s	 army,	 though	 men	was	a	 general	term	 for	 what	 they’d

become.	Soldiers	 felt	 inadequate	too.	 Winter	 had	 been	hearing	 stories	of	  her

stepmother’s	army	for	 years,	but	 they	were	 far	more	 beastly	than	she	had	ever

imagined,	with	 malformed	bodies,	fur	 down	 the	sides	of	their	faces,	and	snarled

lips	curved	around	enormous	teeth.

     This	 storeroom,	which	 had	begun	life	 as	housing	for	 the	first	 colonists,	 was

equipped	to	hold	 many	more	 than	a	hundred	 people.	The	ceiling	 reached	three

stories	high	 and	was	 rough	 with	 divots	 and	 stalactites	where	 air	 bubbles	had

499
formed	 and	lava	 had	 dripped	 eons	ago.	 Though	 the	 cavern	was	 ancient	 and

impenetrable,	 someone	long	  ago	had	 had	 the	 foresight	  to	 reinforce	 it	  with

interspersed	stone	columns.	Countless	 alcoves	and	more	 corridors	 stretched	in

every	direction,	leading	to	additional	 barracks	or	training	grounds.

     Around	 the	exterior	 were	dingy	lockers	 and	open	crates,	many	of	which	 had

been	left	 wide-open	and	 neglected.	Benches	and	exercise	equipment	 filled	  the

remaining	space:	freestanding	 punching	 bags,	chin-up	 bars,	weights.	 Many	 of

them	had	been	 shoved	aside	to	 make	room	 for	 the	 main	 entertainment	in	 the

room’s	center.

     The	howls	dissolved	 into	cheering	and	whooping	again.	Canine	teeth	flashed.

Most	 of	  them	 were	 in	 some	 state	 of	 undress—missing	  shirts,	 bare	 feet,	 a

stunning	amount	of	hair	in	places	that	Winter	 wasn’t	certain	were	natural	or	not.

     A	 shudder	danced	over	her	skin.	Scarlet’s	 words	rang	back	to	 her:	They	will

do	what	they’re	told,	and	that	 will	 be	to	eat	us.

     Scarlet	was	 right.	 This	 had	been	a	mistake.	 She	was	not	 brilliant.	 She	was

losing	her	mind.

     The	doors	 slammed	shut,	making	 her	jump.	 One	man	jerked	 around	to	face

them.	His	 gaze	fell	 on	Winter,	 skipped	 to	 Scarlet,	then	returned.	 First	curious,

then—inevitably—ravenous.

     A	 sly	smile	curled	one	side	of	his	mouth.

     “Well,	 well,”	  he	mused.	“Feeding	time	already?”

500
	




                                             Fifty-Seven







The	man	who	had	spoken	grabbed	the	nearest	soldier	by	the	neck	and	tossed	him

toward	the	center	of	 the	circle.	 Shouts	of	 surprise	and	anger	rolled	 through	 the

gathered	men	as	a	few	toppled	beneath	their	 comrade’s	weight.	 Within	 seconds

there	was	a	furor	of	 flying	 fists	 and	snapping	jaws.	One	man	 slashed	at	the	one

who	had	noticed	 them,	sharpened	fingernails	 drawing	 lines	of	 blood	 across	his

chest.	A	second	later,	he	was	also	picked	up	and	hurled	into	the	turmoil.

     “Manners,”	  someone	yelled,	 loud	 enough	that	 his	voice	 shook	through	 the

walls,	 and	Winter	  had	a	 quick	 and	 searing	 vision	 of	 the	 dome	 of	 lava	 rock

crumbling	on	 top	of	them.	It	 would	 start	with	 a	quaking	of	the	 walls,	then	a	few

dribbles	of	 dust	 and	pebbles,	until	 a	 crack	drove	 its	way	 from	 one	 end	of	 the

cavern	to	the	other,	opening	wide	and—

     “There	 are	ladies	in	 our	presence,”	said	the	mutant	who	 had	first	 seen	them.

His	nose	crinkled	at	the	word	ladies.

     The	attention	 of	a	hundred	hybrid	 soldiers	landed	 on	Winter	 and	Scarlet.	As

eyebrows	rose	and	thorny	gazes	raked	over	them,	the	men	seemed	to	forget	their

brawl.	They	 started	to	spread	out.	Lithe,	 muscular	 bodies	creeping	between	the

mess	of	equipment	with	agonizing	patience.	Noses	twitching.	Tongues	tapping	at

501
sharp	teeth.

     Hair	 prickled	at	the	back	of	Winter’s	 neck	and	she	found	herself	rooted	to	the

floor,	shocked	by	the	sudden,	breathable	silence.

     Once	the	crowd	 had	dispersed,	she	could	see	that	their	 focus	had	been	on	 a

fight	between	two	 of	the	soldiers,	 both	of	whom	 were	bleeding	and	swollen	 and

grinning,	 as	intrigued	 as	the	rest.	 It	 was	impossible	 to	tell	 which	  of	them	 had

been	winning	the	fight	prior	 to	the	interruption.

     There	 was	 an	 abundance	of	 scars	 and	faded	 bruises	 on	 all	  of	 the	 men,

suggesting	that	such	brawls	were	a	common	occurrence.	A	 way	to	pass	the	time

while	waiting	 to	be	sent	to	Earth	and	take	part	in	Levana’s	war.

     Fear	pulsed	through	Winter.	What	 if	she	had	been	wrong?

     “Hello,	  pretty	 ladies,”	 said	one	of	 the	 soldiers,	rubbing	 his	 whiskered	jaw.

“Are	you	 lost?”

     Winter	 shrank	closer	to	Scarlet,	but	 Scarlet	pulled	away,	stepping	forward	 to

meet	them.	Scarlet	was	the	 brave	one,	the	resilient	 one,	proving	 it	 as	she	tilted

back	her	head	in	mock	defiance.

     “Which	 one	of	 you	is	 in	charge?”	said	Scarlet,	fisting	 her	hands	on	her	hips.

“We	want	to	speak	with	 your	alpha.”

     A	 dull	cackle	spread	through	them.

     “Which	 one?”	said	the	first	 mutant.	“Eleven	packs,	eleven	alphas.”

     “The	 strongest	one,”	said	Scarlet,	piercing	him	 with	a	glower	 as	fierce	as	any

Winter	had	ever	seen.	“If	 you’re	not	 sure	which	one	that	is,	we’ll	 wait	 while	you

fight	it	 out.”

     “Are	 you	sure	you	don’t	 want	to	take	your	pick,	pretty	 lady?”	one	asked	as	he

prowled	 behind	them,	 cutting	 off	 their	 exit—not	 that	 Winter	 had	any	 hope	of

502
running.	She	could	 tell	 they	 were	trying	 to	 intimidate	 her	and	Scarlet,	 and	she

could	feel	to	 her	bones	how	well	 it	 was	working.	 “I’m	  sure	any	of	 us	would	be

happy	to	satisfy	whatever	needs	you	might	have.”

     Scarlet	glared	 at	him	 from	 the	 corner	of	 her	 eye.	“I	 already	 have	an	alpha

mate	to	satisfy	my	needs,	and	he	could	slaughter	any	one	of	you.”

     The	man	barked	and	a	rough	chuckle	rumbled	through	the	rest	of	them.

     The	 first	 soldier	stepped	closer	 to	Scarlet	 and	his	 expression	was	intrigued

again.	“She’s	telling	  the	truth,”	 he	said,	silencing	 the	laughter.	“His	  scent	is	all

over	her.	One	of	us.”	His	eyes	narrowed.	“Or	 …	a	special	operative?”

     “Alpha	 Ze’ev	 Kesley,”	said	Scarlet.	“Heard	 of	him?”

     A	 beat.	A	smirk.	“No.”

     Scarlet	clicked	 her	 tongue.	“Too	 bad.	I	 can	already	 tell	 he’s	both	 twice	the

man	and	twice	the	wolf	 of	any	of	you.	He	could	teach	you	a	thing	or	two.”

     The	man	laughed	again,	amused.	“I	 didn’t	 realize	 they	were	letting	 our	pack

brothers	take	mates	on	Earth.	More	reason	to	anticipate	our	deployments.”

     Winter	 pressed	her	 sweating	 palms	against	 her	sides,	 grateful	 that	 Scarlet

held	their	attention.	If	 she’d	been	forced	to	speak,	her	mouth	would	have	spouted

incoherent	mutterings	and	they	would	 have	laughed	at	her	one	moment	and	sunk

their	teeth	into	 her	the	next.	Jaws	clamping	 around	her	limbs.	 Teeth	tearing	 her

muscles	from	the	bones.

     “We’re	 not	here	to	discuss	my	love	life,	 or	yours,”	 said	Scarlet.	“You	seem	to

be	the	most	chatty.	Do	you	nominate	yourself	as	the	leader	here?”

     He	tilted	 his	 head	in	a	manner	that	 reminded	Winter	 of	 Ryu,	how	 he	would

sometimes	cock	his	 ears	when	he	 heard	the	gamekeeper	arriving	 with	  a	meal.

“Alpha	 Strom,	 at	 your	 service.”	 He	 dipped	 into	 a	 mocking	 bow.	 Though	 he

503
wasn’t	larger	than	the	others,	he	moved	with	an	unnatural	grace.	Like	Wolf.	 Like

Ryu.	“And	 at	the	service	of	the	pretty	thing,	 back	there.	I	suggest	you	speak	fast,

pretty	lady.	I	can	hear	my	pack’s	stomachs	growling.”

     One	of	the	soldiers	ran	his	tongue	over	his	bottom	lip.

     Scarlet	turned	and	gave	Winter	a	look.

     Shivering	 from	head	to	toe,	Winter	reached	for	Scarlet,	using	her	shoulder	for

balance.

     The	soldiers	laughed.

     “Winter,”	  Scarlet	hissed.

     “I’m	  frightened,	Scarlet.”

     Scarlet’s	 expression	turned	to	 stone.	“Perhaps	you’d	 like	 to	 go	outside	 and

compose	yourself	 and	 we	 can	 come	back	 later,”	  she	said,	 speaking	 through

clenched	teeth.

     Winter	 shuddered	at	Scarlet’s	anger,	though	 she	knew	Scarlet	had	a	right	 to

it.	Coming	here	had	been	her	idea.	If	they	both	died	here,	it	would	 be	her	fault.

     But	 she	wouldn’t	 allow	 it.	These	were	men,	she	reminded	 herself.	Men	who

deserved	life	and	happiness	as	much	as	anyone.

     Holding	 firm	  to	that	thought,	 she	forced	herself	 away	from	 Scarlet	and	was

grateful	when	the	dizziness	receded.

     “I	 am	 Winter	 Hayle-Blackburn,	  Princess	of	Luna,”	  she	said,	and	could	 tell

even	in	her	 own	ears	how	 faintly	 her	voice	 carried.	Not	 at	all	 like	 Scarlet’s.	 “I

need	your	help.”

     Eyes	flashed,	delighted.

     “In	 return,	I	wish	 to	help	you.”

     Amusement.	Hunger.	Less	curiosity	 than	she	would	have	hoped.

504
     She	gulped.

     “Queen	Levana,	 my	stepmother,	has	treated	you	with	 cruelty	and	unfairness.

She	has	taken	you	from	your	families	 and	acted	as	though	you	are	nothing	to	her

but	scientific	 experiments.	She	has	locked	you	away	in	 these	caves,	for	no	other

purpose	than	to	be	sent	to	Earth	and	fight	in	her	war.	And	what	will	 you	 be	given

for	your	 service?”	They	 all	waited	 with	 their	hard	 and	sparkling	eyes,	watching

Winter	 like	 she	was	 their	 afternoon	snack,	 still	 cooking	 on	 a	spit.	 It	 was	 not

unlike	the	looks	she’d	received	from	 countless	men	in	Levana’s	court.

     “Nothing,”	  she	said,	shoving	her	fear	into	the	bottom	 of	her	stomach.	“If	 you

survive	your	 battles,	 you’ll	  come	back	 here	and	 be	enslaved	in	 these	caverns

until	 she	needs	you	again.	You	 will	  not	 be	allowed	 to	return	 to	 your	families.

You	will	  not	rejoin	 our	society	and	live	 what	lives	 you	may	once	have	dreamed

of	living,	 back	before	you	were	…	you	were…”

     “Monsters?”	 suggested	one	of	the	men,	grinning	around	the	word.

     “I	 do	 not	believe	you	 are	monsters.	I	believe	 you	have	been	given	 very	few

choices,	and	you	are	dealing	with	the	consequences	as	well	as	you	can.”

     A	 snort	 came	from	 Alpha	 Strom.	“Who	  knew	we	 would	 be	receiving	 such

counsel	from	 the	princess	herself	 today?	Tell	 me,	pretty	 highness	…	 does	this

therapy	session	come	with	refreshments?”

     “Your	 friend,	 perhaps?”	said	another.	“She	smells	delicious.”

     Scarlet	crossed	her	arms,	fingers	digging	into	her	elbows.

     Winter	 squared	her	 shoulders.	“We	 came	here	 to	give	 you	 another	choice.

The	people	of	 Luna	are	planning	 a	rebellion.	 In	 two	 days	we	will	  be	marching

into	the	 central	dome	 of	 Artemisia.	 We	 plan	to	 overwhelm	 the	queen	and	 her

court,	to	 overthrow	 her	and	 put	an	 end	to	 her	tyranny.	 I	 ask	that	 you	join	 us.

505
Fight	on	 our	behalf	 and	help	us	end	the	rule	 that	took	 you	from	 your	 lives	 and

turned	 you	 into	  soldiers.	 Ensure	 that	 you	 will	   never	 become	 prisoners,	 or

experiments,	or	…	animals	created	for	Levana’s	amusement,	ever	again.”

     A	 silence	settled	 over	them,	 as	if	 they	 were	waiting	 to	 make	sure	 she	was

finished.	Winter	 searched	for	some	indication	they	were	even	listening.

     She	felt	like	 a	lamb	in	their	den.

     “She	has	pretty	words.”

     Winter	  turned	 toward	 the	 voice.	  It	 was	 one	 of	 the	 men	 who	  had	 been

involved	in	 the	fight.	Fresh	blood	had	dried	at	the	corner	of	his	lip.

     He	tipped	his	 head	when	he	saw	that	he	had	her	attention,	his	eyelids	dipping

suggestively.	“Not	 quite	as	pretty	as	her	face.”

     “Except	 for	these	scars.”

     She	jumped	and	spun	around.	She	hadn’t	heard	this	soldier	 step	so	close	and

now	he	was	hovering	 over	her.	He	dragged	a	sharp-tipped	nail	 down	her	 cheek.

“Where’d	 these	come	from,	pretty	lady?”

     She	didn’t—couldn’t—answer.

     An	 arm	wrapped	around	Winter’s	 shoulders,	pulling	 her	back.	“Stop	 it,”	 said

Scarlet,	 tucking	   Winter	   behind	  her,	 though	  it	   was	  useless.	 They	  were

surrounded.	“Were	you	listening	 to	her?	You	can	call	yourselves	soldiers	or	wolf

packs	or	whatever	you	want,	but	the	truth	is,	you’re	 nothing	but	slaves.	Winter	 is

offering	you	 freedom.	She’s	giving	 you	a	choice,	which	is	more	than	Levana	has

ever	offered.	Will	 you	help	us	or	not?”

     “You’ll	  be	slaughtered,”	someone	whispered	against	Winter’s	ear.

     She	gasped	and	turned	again,	locking	her	back	against	Scarlet’s.	The	soldiers

crept	closer.	Predators	toying	 with	 their	catch,	luxuriating	  in	the	 anticipation	 of

506
the	meal.

     “A	  bunch	 of	 pathetic	 civilians	 are	 going	 to	 stand	up	 against	the	 queen?”

another	said.	“They	don’t	stand	a	chance.”

     And	 another.	“Don’t	 you	know	 who	the	queen	will	call	 on	to	hold	them	back,

if	there	are	too	many	to	manipulate?”

     “Us,”	 spoke	a	third.	“Her	 army.”

     “You	 mean	her	lapdogs?”	said	Scarlet,	and	though	her	tone	was	mocking,	her

back	was	pressing	against	Winter	just	as	forcefully.	“Her	 pets?”

     The	soldiers’	 faces	twitched.

     “If	 you	side	with	 us,”	said	Winter,	 “we	can	win.	 We	will	 win.”

     “What	  will	  happen	to	 us	if	  we	 side	with	  you	 and	you	 lose?”	 said	Alpha

Strom.

     One	of	them	brushed	a	finger	down	Winter’s	 throat.	Her	 heart	skipped.

     “With	  you	beside	us,”	 she	said,	her	voice	wavering,	 “we	 will	 not	 lose.”	Her

eyes	began	 to	 water	 from	  fear.	 “You	  can	 stop	 now.	 You’ve	  frightened	  us

enough.	I	know	 you	are	not	 the	vicious	 creatures	you’re	pretending	 to	be—that

you’ve	 been	 trained	 and	tormented	 and	 built	  to	 be.	 You	 are	 men.	 You	 are

citizens	of	Luna.	 If	 you	help	me,	 if	you	 fight	 for	me	 …	I	 can	help	you	get	 your

lives	back.	You	can’t	 tell	me	you	don’t	 want	that!”

     She	could	 feel	their	 breath	on	 her	now.	She	could	 see	the	colored	 flecks	in

their	eyes.	Smell	the	sweat	and	blood	on	their	 skin.	One	of	the	men	was	sucking

on	a	knuckle	as	if	he	couldn’t	wait	 to	taste	her	flesh.

     They	were	a	noose	growing	tighter.

     Pulse	hiccuping,	 Winter	 raised	her	hand	to	 her	throat	 where	the	soldier	 had

touched	her.	She	felt	a	prickly	  rope	there.	Tightening.	 Squeezing.	She	squeaked

507
and	tried	to	 wrap	her	 fingers	around	 it,	to	 form	 a	barrier	 between	the	rope	and

her	throat,	but	it	was	already	too	tight.

     “Spoiled	 little	  princess,”	 one	of	 the	 soldiers	hissed,	 stooping	down	 so	 she

could	 feel	his	 breath	 on	 her	cheek.	 Winter	 shivered	 and	knew	 her	 gaze	was

watery	and	pleading.	“We	don’t	 fight	 for	princesses.	We	play	with	them.”

     Alpha	 Strom	smirked.	“Ready	to	play?”

508
	




                                              Fifty-Eight







Scarlet	pushed	 Winter,	 hard,	 sending	 her	 sprawling	 to	 the	 floor	  with	 a	 cry.

Through	a	veil	of	 hair	she	watched	Scarlet	elbow	one	of	the	mutants	in	 his	nose.

She	reached	 for	 the	 gun	 beneath	her	 hoodie,	 but	  the	soldiers	  were	already

grabbing	her,	pinning	her	arms	to	the	side.	The	gun	fell	uselessly	to	the	ground.

     A	 dozen	enormous	hands	pulled	 Winter	 back	to	 her	feet.	 She	hung	limp	 in

their	hold,	 her	legs	 too	weak	to	 carry	 her.	She	was	shaking	 from	 head	to	foot,

and	the	men	were	flickering	in	 her	vision.	Engineered	soldiers	one	moment	and	a

pack	of	wild	 wolves	the	next.	Prowling	 and	baring	their	enormous	fangs.

     Scarlet	screamed	something.	 A	 battle	cry.	 She	was	 struggling	 like	 a	caged

tigress,	hair	 flying,	  teeth	 snapping,	while	  Winter	 hung,	 weak	 and	brittle	  and

trying	to	 block	out	the	vision	 before	it	 overwhelmed	her.	Her	head	was	heavy	as

moon	rock	and	spinning	 as	fast	as	an	asteroid	in	orbit.	 Burdened	with	the	 brutal

knowledge	that	 this	was	 real.	They	 were	going	 to	 die.	They	 were	 going	to	 be

devoured.

     The	 tears	came	on	 fast	and	 overflowed	 quickly,	 leaking	 down	 her	 cheeks.

“Why	 are	you	being	so	cruel?	Ryu	would	not	act	like	 this.	He	would	 be	ashamed

of	you.”

509
     “Hold	 it	 together,	Winter,”	 Scarlet	growled.

     The	 world	  hesitated.	 Dissolved	  into	  blackness	 before	 re-forming	  again.

Winter	 knew	  she	would	  collapse	 if	  they	 let	 her	  go,	 but	 she	 couldn’t	  find

grounding	in	her	own	strength.

     “Wait—I	  have	 an	idea!”	 she	said	 brightly,	 lifting	  her	 head.	“Let	 us	play	 a

different	 game.	Like	 when	Jacin	 and	I	 would	 play	house.	This	 one	can	be	 our

pet.”	Tipping	 forward,	she	tried	to	 put	her	palm	on	the	nearest	soldier’s	nose,	but

he	jerked	away	from	her,	surprised.

     She	blinked	 at	 him.	 Trying	 to	 remember	who	 he	was.	 What	he	was.	 “No?

Would	you	rather	play	fetch?”

     His	 face	turned	from	 baffled	to	 angry	in	half	 a	second.	He	sneered,	his	teeth

taking	up	half	his	face.

     “What’s	 wrong	 with	her?”	someone	spat.

     “Or	 I’ll	  be	the	 pet,	if	 you	 prefer	it.”	 She	swayed	 against	those	holding	 her.

“Sticks	and	bones,	sticks	and	stones.	We’ll	 play	for	 hours,	but	I’ll	  never	tire	and

I’ll	 always	 come	back,	I’ll	 always	 come	back…”	 Her	voice	 shattered.	“Because

Ryu	always,	always	came	back.	Sticks	and	bones.	Sticks	and	bones…”

     “Lunar	 sickness,”	 someone	murmured.	Winter	 sought	him,	 finding	 a	warm-

skinned	soldier	who	 could	have	been	handsome	before	he’d	 been	made	so	very

ugly.	He	looked	at	her	with	 the	same	hunger	as	any	of	them,	but	there	also	might

have	been	sympathy.

     Winter	 couldn’t	  remember	what	she’d	 said	that	 was	insane.	What	 had	they

been	talking	 about?	Leaving?	 Weren’t	 they	 leaving?	 She	wanted	to	 leave.	 Or

perhaps	they’d	been	making	dinner	plans,	hosting	a	cocktail	party.

     “That’s	  right,”	  said	Scarlet.	 She	 was	panting.	 “She	 refuses	to	 manipulate

510
anyone	or	to	use	her	glamour,	 even	when	 it	would	 be	highly	 beneficial.	 Unlike

the	people	you	serve,	obviously.”

     “It	 will	 not	affect	 how	she	tastes,”	someone	yelled.

     Winter	 started	to	giggle.	They	had	all	 become	animals	now.	Even	Scarlet	had

turned	wolfish,	with	 pointed	ears	and	a	fluffy	 tail	and	flaming	 red	fur.	She	turned

her	own	 muzzle	 up	to	 the	 cavernous	ceiling	 and	sang,	 “And	 the	Earth	 is	 full

tonight,	tonight,	and	the	wolves	all	 howl,	aa-ooooooooooh…”

     One	of	the	hands—paws?—on	her	forearm	loosened.

     She	howled	again.

     “A	  princess	of	 Artemisia,”	  Alpha	 Strom	 muttered,	 “who	 does	not	 use	her

gift?	By	choice?”

     “She	thinks	 it’s	wrong	 to	control	 people,”	said	Scarlet,	“and	she	doesn’t	want

to	end	up	like	the	queen.	You	can	see	the	toll	it’s	taking	on	her.”

     Winter’s	 voice	 cracked	and	she	stopped	howling.	 When	 she	slumped	again,

the	hands	released	her,	letting	 her	 crash	to	her	 knees.	She	gasped	in	 pain	and

looked	around.	 Scarlet	was	 once	again	 Scarlet,	and	 the	men	 were	once	 again

soldiers.	She	blinked,	and	was	grateful	when	the	hallucination	didn’t	 return.

     “I’m	  sorry,”	she	said.	“I	 did	not	mean	to	interrupt	your	meal.”

     Scarlet	groaned.	“When	 she	says	she’ll	 never	manipulate	you,	 she	means	it.

And	she	does	plan	on	giving	you	your	freedom	back.	I	 doubt	you’ll	 ever	get	such

a	promising	offer	again.”

     The	 grate	of	 ancient	hinges	 startled	Winter.	 The	 soldiers	pulled	 apart.	 The

huge	iron	 doors	creaked	open	and	 the	soldiers	 separated,	filing	 into	 neat	rows

fast	as	an	oiled	machine.	Scarlet	took	the	opportunity	to	snatch	up	her	gun	again,

tucking	it	against	her	side.

511
     Beyond	the	doors	stood	eight	thaumaturges,	one	in	second-tier	red,	the	rest	in

black.

     The	 red-coated	thaumaturge,	a	 man	with	  silver-gray	 hair,	 saw	 Winter	 and

Scarlet	and	smiled	viper-like	at	them.

     “Hello,	 Highness.	We	heard	you	might	 be	down	here.”

     Some	 of	  the	 soldiers	  shifted	  aside,	 making	  a	 clear	 aisle	  between	 the

thaumaturges	and	Winter.

     “Hello,	  Thaumaturge	Holt,”	  Winter	 answered,	rising	 onto	 her	wobbly	 legs,

though	they	 were	aching.	 She	felt	 like	 she	should	 be	afraid	 of	 these	men	and

women—normally	 the	sight	of	 their	coats	and	embroidered	runes	filled	 her	with

anxiety	and	dread	and	a	thousand	memories	of	people	dying	on	 the	throne	room

floor.	But	 all	her	fear	had	been	used	up.

     “When	 the	 system	picked	 up	on	 your	identification,	  I	 thought	 it	 must	be	a

mistake.	I	 did	 not	think	  even	you	 would	 be	crazy	 enough	to	 come	here.”	 His

gaze	cut	 over	  the	 soldiers.	 “Were	  you	 not	 hungry?	  Or	 were	 the	 girls	  not

appetizing	enough	for	your	tastes?”

     “Oh,	  they	were	 very	 hungry	 indeed,”	  said	Winter,	  struggling	 to	 her	 feet.

“Isn’t	 that	right,	alpha-friends,	 wolf-friends?”	 Her	 head	swayed	to	one	side.	“But

I	had	hoped	they	might	 protect	me	and	fight	for	 me,	if	 I	could	 remind	them	they

were	men	once,	men	who	did	not	wish	to	be	monsters.”

     “Turns	 out,”	said	Scarlet,	“they’re	 just	Levana’s	trained	 dogs	after	all.”

     A	 handful	of	the	soldiers	cast	them	cool	glares.

     Thaumaturge	 Holt	 scoffed.	 “I’d	  heard	about	your	 sharp	 tongue.”	 His	 gaze

dipped	toward	 the	stubbed	 finger	 on	Scarlet’s	 hand.	“Say	 and	think	  what	you

want,	Earth	child.	These	soldiers	know	their	 duty.	They	were	created	to	carry	out

512
Her	Majesty’s	bidding,	 and	they	will	 do	it	without	 complaint.”

     “Is	 that	so?”

     Winter	 wasn’t	 sure	which	of	 them	had	spoken,	but	the	words	were	so	full	  of

loathing	they	made	her	skin	crawl.

     Holt	 glowered	 at	the	surrounding	 men,	cocky	 and	hateful.	 “I	 trust	 this	isn’t

dissension	I’m	 detecting,	Regiment	 117.	Her	 Majesty	would	 be	disappointed	 if

she	heard	some	of	her	prized	soldiers	were	showing	disrespect	to	their	masters.”

     “Prized	 puppies,	 you	 mean,”	 muttered	Scarlet.	 “Will	   they	each	be	 getting

their	own	diamond	collar	 too?”

     “Scarlet-friend,”	  Winter	whispered,	“you	 are	being	inconsiderate.”

     Scarlet	 rolled	  her	 eyes.	“They	  are	 about	 to	 kill	  us,	 in	  case	you	 hadn’t

noticed.”

     “Yes,	 we	are,”	said	Holt.	“Men,	 you	may	 kill	 these	traitors.”

     Winter	 sucked	in	 a	breath,	but	Alpha	 Strom	raised	a	hand—and	 none	of	the

soldiers	moved.	“Interesting	 that	you	mentioned	our	masters	before,	as	you	seem

to	be	missing	a	few.”

     The	 seven	thaumaturges	behind	 Holt	 remained	 as	statues,	staring	 into	 the

ranks.	Winter	 counted.	There	were	 eleven	packs	in	 this	regiment.	 There	would

have	to	be	eleven	thaumaturges	to	control	them.

     “I	  will	  forgive	 your	 ignorance	in	 this	 matter,”	 Holt	  said	through	 clenched

teeth,	“as	you	could	not	have	known	that	our	country	 is	in	upheaval.	Some	of	our

highest-ranking	 thaumaturges	 and	 guards	and	 even	 soldiers,	 like	  you,	 were

murdered	today,	along	with	an	attempted	assassination	on	our	queen.	So	you	see,

we	do	 not	 have	time	 for	 discussions.	I	 ordered	you	 to	 kill	  these	girls.	 If	 you

refuse,	I	will	  do	it	 myself,	and	you	 will	 be	punished	for	 failing	 to	 obey	a	direct

513
order.”

     Winter	  felt	  the	  bodies	 around	 her	  shift,	  as	 they	 had	  when	 they	  first

surrounded	her	and	Scarlet.	 Moving	 almost	 imperceptibly	 closer.	 Tightening	 a

knot.

     “Too	  bad	you	 did	 all	 that	 tampering	 with	 our	 brains,”	 said	 Alpha	 Strom.

“Otherwise	 you	 could	 have	 manipulated	 us,	right?	 Forced	 us	 to	 follow	  your

command.	Instead,	you’ve	turned	us	into	a	bunch	of	wild	 animals.”

     “A	 pack	of	hungry	 wolves,”	someone	growled.

     “Killers,”	  Winter	 whispered	to	herself.	“Predators,	all.”

     They	 moved	 around	Winter	  and	Scarlet	 like	 water	 around	 a	rock.	 Winter

grabbed	Scarlet’s	wrist	and	tugged	her	close,	their	shoulders	tight	together.

     “You	  didn’t	 make	 me	to	 be	 good	at	 math,”	 Strom	 continued,	“but	  by	 my

count,	you	couldn’t	 punish	all	of	us,	even	if	you	 wanted	to.”

     They	  had	  half	  circled	   around	 the	  thaumaturges,	  who	  were	  showing

uncertainty	now.

     “Enough,”	 Holt	 snapped.	“I	order	you	to—”

     The	tension	exploded	before	he	could	 finish.	The	 soldiers	converged	on	their

masters,	mouths	snarling	and	enormous	hands	ready	to	shred	and	claw	and	tear.

     Like	  a	 sonic	 pulse,	 dozens	of	  soldiers	 fell	  to	 the	 ground,	 writhing	  and

grasping	their	heads.	Knuckles	 whitened	as	they	pressed	their	fingertips	 against

their	scalps,	screaming	in	 pain.	The	few	 left	 standing	bounded	over	 their	fallen

comrades	with	faces	twisted	in	rage.

     Winter	 flinched,	 watching	 as	Alpha	  Strom,	who	 had	fallen	 in	 front	 of	 her,

curled	into	a	fetal	 position	and	screamed.	But	it	was	cut	short,	and	replaced	with

retching	and	a	whimper,	his	eyes	shut	tight	as	he	tried	to	block	 out	whatever	was

514
being	done	to	him.

     That	 whimper	 cascaded	into	 Winter	 like	  a	memory.	 Ryu	 behind	 her.	 The

sound	of	Jacin’s	knife.	The	warm,	sticky	 blood.

     Winter	 dropped	to	the	 ground	and	crawled	toward	 Strom,	rubbing	 her	hands

over	his	 misshapen	face,	trying	 her	best	to	 soothe	him.	 The	tips	 of	her	 fingers

cracked,	devastatingly	cold.

     The	fight,	 if	 it	 could	be	 called	a	fight,	 was	over	in	 seconds.	Winter	couldn’t

recall	the	thaumaturges	even	having	the	time	to	cry	out.	 There	was	the	crunch	of

bones,	the	tearing	 of	 tissue,	and	it	 was	 over.	 A	 quick	 glance	confirmed	 eight

bloody	bodies	inside	the	cavern’s	entrance,	and	a	couple	dozen	soldiers	standing

over	them,	wiping	 the	blood	from	 their	chins	and	digging	 the	flesh	from	 beneath

their	fingernails.

     Winter’s	  breath	fogged	 in	 the	air.	 The	 cold	was	 in	 her	stomach	 too,	icing

over.

     Her	fingers	 were	still	in	 Strom’s	hair	when	he	suddenly	grabbed	her	hand	and

threw	it	back	at	her.

     Scarlet	 was	 there	in	  a	 second,	her	 elbows	 hooked	 under	 Winter’s	  arms,

pulling	 her	away.	All	  around	them,	those	who	 had	fallen	 were	recovering	from

whatever	torment	 their	masters	had	inflicted	  on	them.	 Their	 faces	were	glazed

from	 pain,	  but	 there	  was	 also	 a	 satisfaction	  when	 they	  noticed	 the	 dead

thaumaturges.

     Strom	pushed	himself	 into	 a	crouch	and	gave	his	head	a	shake.	His	piercing

gaze	found	Winter.	She	curled	against	her	fiery	friend,	shivering.

     Strom’s	  words	 were	 slurred	 when	 he	 spoke.	 “You	  have	 Lunar	 sickness

because	you	cannot	control	people	like	they	do?”

515
     Winter	  glanced	toward	  the	thaumaturges,	 or	 what	 was	 left	 of	  them,	and

immediately	regretted	it.	 She	looked	down	at	her	brittle	fingertips	 instead.	“Oh,	 I

c-could,”	 she	stuttered	through	her	numb	lips.	“But	 I	 know	what	it	 is	l-like	 to	be

controlled	as	m-much	as	you	do.”

     Strom	 stood,	gaining	 his	 strength	back	 faster	than	 many	 of	 the	others.	He

inspected	Winter	and	Scarlet	for	a	long	while.

     Finally,	  he	said,	“She	 will	  send	more	 of	 her	hounds	to	 punish	 us	for	 this.

They	will	 torture	 us	until	 we	are	all	 begging	before	them	like	 the	dogs	we	are.”

Though	his	 voice	 was	rough,	 a	smile	 crept	 across	his	vicious	  mouth.	“But	  to

know	the	taste	and	smell	of	thaumaturge	blood	is	worth	it.”

     One	soldier	 howled	in	 agreement	and	was	soon	joined	by	a	chorus	of	howls,

splitting	 through	 Winter’s	  ears	and	 making	 the	cavern	 tremble.	 Alpha	 Strom

faced	the	regiment	 and	there	was	a	moment	 of	 celebration—fists	 clasping	fists

and	howls	that	went	on	and	on.

     Winter	  forced	 herself	 to	 stand,	 though	 she	was	 still	  cold	 and	 trembling.

Scarlet	stayed	at	her	side,	a	pillar.

     Winter’s	 voice	was	strong	when	she	asked,	“Are	you	now	satiated?”

     Strom	 turned	back,	and	the	 raucous	congratulations	between	his	men	 began

to	fade.	Their	eyes	still	showed	hunger	as	they	raked	over	the	two	girls.

     “Are	 your	cravings	filled?”	  asked	Winter.	“Is	 your	hunger	abated?”

     “Winter,”	  Scarlet	hissed.	“What	are	you	doing?”

     She	whispered	back,	“I	am	thawing	 out.”

     Scarlet	 frowned,	 but	 Winter	 took	  a	step	 away	from	  her.	“Well?	  Are	 you

satisfied?”

     “Our	 hunger	is	never	satisfied,”	one	of	the	soldiers	growled.

516
     “I	thought	as	much,”	said	Winter.	“I	know	you	still	want	to	eat	my	friend	and

me,	for	what	a	juicy,	tasty	snack	we	would	be.”	She	smiled,	not	as	terrified	by

the	prospect	as	she	had	been	before.	“But	if	 you	choose	to	help	us	instead,

perhaps	you	will	soon	be	feasting	on	the	queen	herself.	And	won’t	her	flesh	be

more	satisfying	than	ours?	More	satisfying,	even,	than	your	dead	masters	in	the

doorway?”

     A	silence	hovered	over	them.	Winter	watched	the	calculations	behind	their

faces	and	listened	to	a	few	of	them	sucking	on	their	teeth.

     “Fight	with	me,”	she	said,	when	enough	time	had	passed	and	neither	she	nor

Scarlet	had	been	devoured.	“I	will	not	control	you.	I	will	not	torture	you.	Help

me	end	Levana’s	rule	and	we	will	all	have	our	freedom.”

     Alpha	Strom	met	the	eyes	of	a	handful	of	the	soldiers—the	other	alphas,	she

presumed—before	fixing	a	penetrating	look	on	her.	“I	cannot	speak	for	the	entire

regiment,”	he	finally	said,	“but	I	 will	 accept	your	offer.	If	you	 swear	to	never

control	us	as	they	have	done,	my	pack	will	fight	for	your	revolution.”

     Some	of	the	men	nodded.	Others	growled,	but	Winter	thought	it	was	a	growl

of	agreement.

     In	response,	she	lifted	her	nose	to	the	cavern	ceiling	and	howled.

517
	




                                            Fifty-Nine







Scarlet	waited	until	this	new	round	of	howls	abated,	echoing	off	the	cave	walls,

before	throwing	herself	in	front	of	Winter.	“You	understand,”	she	said,	shoving

a	finger	at	 Strom,	“that	 by	agreeing	to	help	 us,	you	can	only	 attack	Queen

Levana	and	the	people	who	serve	her.	No	civilians	whatsoever,	not	even	those

obnoxious	aristocrats,	unless	they	pose	a	threat.	Our	goal	is	to	dethrone	Levana,

not	slaughter	the	whole	city.	And	we’re	not	giving	 you	all	a	free	meal	ticket,

either.	We	expect	you	to	follow	orders	and	make	yourselves	useful.	That	could

mean	training	some	of	 the	people	from	 the	sectors	in	 how	 to	fight	 or	 use

weapons,	or	it	could	mean	carrying	injured	people	out	of	the	line	of	fire	…	 I

don’t	know.	But	it	does	not	mean	you	get	to	run	rampant	through	the	streets	of

Artemisia	destroying	everything	in	sight.	Can	you	agree	to	that?”

     Strom	held	 her	gaze,	his	 ferocity	 once	again	turning	 to	 amusement.	“I

understand	why	your	mate	chose	you.”

     “I’m	 not	looking	for	personal	commentary,”	she	spat.

     Strom	nodded.	“We	agree	to	your	demands.	And	when	Levana	is	gone,	we

will	be	free	men,	able	to	pursue	a	life	of	our	choosing.”

     “So	long	as	that	life	follows	the	laws	of	society—yes.	That’s	right.”

518
     Strom	 surveyed	the	crowd.	 If	 it	wasn’t	 for	 all	 the	blood,	it	 would	 look	 as	if

the	killings	 of	the	thaumaturges	had	never	happened.	“Alpha	Perry?	Alpha	Xu?”

     One	 by	 one,	he	 counted	 off	 the	 remaining	 Alphas,	 and	 one	 by	 one	they

accepted	Scarlet	and	Winter’s	terms.	When	it	was	done,	Winter	 turned	to	Scarlet

with	a	weary	yet	endearing	smile.	“I	 told	you	 they	would	join	 us.”

     Scarlet	 inhaled	 sharply.	 “We	  need	 to	 find	  out	 what’s	 happening	 on	 the

surface.	Is	there	 some	way	to	 communicate	 with	 the	sectors?	To	 tell	 them	the

revolution	is	going	 to	happen,	even	if	Cinder…”

     She	 couldn’t	  finish	 the	 sentence.	She	 had	 no	 idea	 what	 had	 become	of

Cinder,	or	Wolf.

     Wolf.	Ze’ev.	Her	 alpha	mate.

     Thinking	 of	 him	 cut	a	hole	in	 her	chest,	so	she	wouldn’t.	 She	would	believe

he	was	alive,	because	he	had	to	be	alive.

     “We	 have	 to	 head	to	 the	surface	 anyway,”	 said	 Strom.	 “These	lava	 tubes

don’t	connect	to	the	maglev	tracks.	Or—they	 do,	but	it	 will	 take	us	too	far	out	of

the	way.	 Better	to	 head	up	 to	the	 nearest	sector	and	infiltrate	  the	 tunnels	that

way.”

     “Which	 sector	is	that?”	asked	Scarlet.

     “LW-12,”	   someone	said.	“Lumber	  and	wood	 production.	 Dangerous	work,

lots	of	injuries.	 Doubt	they’d	be	too	sympathetic	to	Her	 Majesty.”

     “We	 might	have	luck	obtaining	 weaponry	there	too,”	said	another.

     “How	 far	is	it?”	 asked	Scarlet.

     “This	  used	to	be	 the	storeroom	 for	 LW-12.”	  Strom	 pointed	 at	the	 ceiling.

“It’s	 right	over	our	heads.”


                                                          *			 *			*

519
Once	they	were	back	in	 the	caves,	it	 took	fewer	 than	ten	minutes	 before	a	man

was	prying	 open	 a	metal	 door	 that	 led	 to	 a	thin	 stairwell.	  It	 seemed	like	 an

endless	amount	of	stairs.	The	confined	space	quickly	become	stifling	and	hot.

     “Scarlet-friend?”

     Winter’s	  fragile	 voice	 set	Scarlet	 on	edge.	Pausing,	 she	glanced	down	 the

steps	and	saw	 the	 princess	using	 the	 ancient	rail	  on	the	 wall	  to	 pull	 herself

forward	as	much	 as	her	legs	were	pushing	 her.	Her	breathing	 was	labored,	and

not	from	the	climb.

     “What’s	 wrong?”

     “I	  am	a	 girl	 made	up	 of	 ice	and	 snow,”	 whispered	 the	princess.	Her	 eyes

unfocused.

     Cursing,	 Scarlet	scrambled	around	a	group	of	 soldiers	to	get	 to	the	princess.

Everyone	came	to	a	stop,	and	Scarlet	felt	 oddly	 touched	at	the	concern	she	saw

in	a	few	of	the	soldiers’	 eyes.

     Leave	it	 to	Winter	 to	 make	a	bunch	of	 sadistic,	hot-headed	predators	get	all

swoony	over	her.	Though	Scarlet	didn’t	 like	 to	think	 that	what	she	and	Wolf	had

was	built	 on	Wolf’s	  animal	instincts,	 she	couldn’t	 help	 but	wonder	 if	 the	same

sort	of	instincts	 were	at	play	 here.	Now	that	they’d	 persuaded	these	men	to	join

their	cause,	were	they	shifting	away	from	 predator-killers	 to	predator-protectors?

Perhaps	they’d	lived	 with	 violence	 and	darkness	for	 so	long,	 a	single	 crack	 in

their	armor	was	all	it	took	 to	have	them	craving	something	more	meaningful.

     Or	 maybe	it	was	just	 Winter,	 who	could	 make	a	rock	fall	 in	 love	with	 her	if

she	smiled	at	it	the	right	way.

     “Are	  you	hallucinating?”	  Scarlet	asked,	 pressing	a	hand	to	 Winter’s	  brow,

although	she	wasn’t	 sure	what	 she	was	looking	  to	find	  there.	“You	  don’t	 feel

520
cold.	Can	you	walk?	Are	you	 still	breathing?”

     Winter’s	 gaze	dropped	downward.	“My	 feet	are	encased	in	ice	cubes.”

     “Your	 feet	are	fine.	Try	 to	walk.”

     With	 an	 absurd	amount	of	 effort,	 Winter	 hauled	herself	 onto	 the	next	step.

She	paused	again,	gasping	for	breath.

     Scarlet	 sighed.	“Fine.	 You’re	  a	girl	  of	 ice	 and	snow.	 Can	somebody	 help

her?”

     The	 nearest	 soldier	 took	  Winter’s	  wrist	  and	 pulled	  her	 arm	 across	 his

shoulders,	so	she	could	use	his	 body	as	a	support	 to	climb	 the	 stairs.	Soon,	he

was	carrying	her.

     They	 made	it	to	 the	top,	emerging	into	 a	steel	holding	 tank	that	 would	 have

been	used	to	 keep	 in	 the	 artificial	  atmosphere	 while	 the	 domes	 were	 under

construction.	Then	they	were	outside.

     Or,	 as	outside	as	one	 could	ever	 be	on	 Luna,	which	 Scarlet	 felt	 was	a	sad

representation.

     “Is	 this	 supposed	to	be	a	 forest?”	 she	muttered,	taking	 in	 the	short,	 skinny

trees	in	their	 perfect	 rows.	Through	 the	 trunks	in	 the	distance	 she	could	see	a

vast	area	that	had	been	recently	cleared	for	timber,	and	to	the	other	side,	acres	of

young	saplings.

     Straight	ahead,	in	the	direct	center	of	the	dome,	she	could	make	out	the	shape

of	a	 water	fountain,	 identical	  to	the	 one	from	 the	 mining	 sector,	situated	 in	a

clearing	among	the	trees.	The	grass	looked	untended	around	it.

     Alpha	 Strom	took	 the	lead,	 heading	away	from	 the	fountain	 and	toward	 the

residences	on	the	perimeter.	They	could	hear	people.	A	lot	of	people.	When	 they

reached	the	main	 residential	street,	Scarlet	 saw	dozens	of	 civilians	  holding	 an

521
assortment	of	weapons	(mostly	wooden	sticks),	 standing	in	neat	rows	 and	being

guided	through	a	series	of	attack	maneuvers.	A	barrel-chested,	bearded	man	was

walking	 through	 the	 rows,	 yelling	  things	like,	  “Parry!	  Jab!	There’s	 someone

behind	you!”

     Even	 Scarlet’s	 untrained	eye	 could	 see	that	the	 people’s	 movements	were

jerky	 and	uncoordinated,	 and	 the	 people	were	 a	 sad	lot—most	 as	 gaunt	and

hungry	looking	 as	those	in	the	mining	sector.	Still,	 it	was	heartening	to	know	 the

people	were	heeding	Cinder’s	call.

     Scarlet	 had	 the	 gut-wrenching	  thought	 that	 they	 could	 be	 sending	 these

people	to	their	deaths,	but	she	shook	it	off.

     A	 bewildered	scream	interrupted	the	training.	They’d	 been	spotted.

     Scarlet	 and	 a	 hundred	 mutants	emerged	 from	  the	forest’s	  shadows.	The

scream	turned	into	a	dozen	more	and	the	rows	broke	 apart,	pulled	back.	But	 the

people	didn’t	 run.	Instead,	as	Scarlet	and	the	mountainous	soldiers	came	nearer,

the	people	 lifted	 their	 weapons,	trying	  to	 disguise	their	 terror	 behind	 feigned

courage.	Or	perhaps	this	was	the	truest	courage	there	was.

     The	 people	had	 probably	 expected	something	 like	 this.	 It	 would	  not	be	 a

surprise	that	Levana	would	punish	 them	for	this	 blatant	show	of	rebellion.	 But	 a

hundred	soldiers	must	have	been	far	beyond	their	expectations.

     True	 to	their	 word,	 the	soldiers	 did	 not	attack,	 just	lumbered	 forward	 until

they	stood	twenty	paces	from	the	first	row	of	 citizens.

     Scarlet	kept	going,	separating	herself	from	the	crowd.

     “I	  know	 they’re	 scary	looking,”	  she	said,	“but	  we’re	 not	here	to	 hurt	 you.

We’re	 friends	 of	 Princess	Selene’s.	 And	 you	 might	 recognize	 Her	 Highness,

Princess	Winter.”

522
     Winter’s	 head	rolled	 against	the	 shoulder	of	 the	man	who	 was	holding	 her.

“It	 is	a	most	profound	 pleasure	to	meet	you	 all,”	 she	murmured,	sounding	 half-

drunk.	Scarlet	was	proud	of	her	for	making	 the	effort.

     The	 people	tightened	 their	grips	 around	their	 staffs,	 or	spears,	or	 whatever

those	were	supposed	to	be.

     The	 bearded	man	pushed	his	 way	 to	 the	front	  of	 the	crowd,	 looking	  both

tough	and	anxious	at	once.	“Princess	Winter	is	dead.”

     “No,	  she’s	not,”	 said	 Scarlet.	“The	 queen	tried	 to	 have	her	 killed,	 but	 she

failed.	Everything	 she’s	told	you	has	been	a	lie.”

     The	man	stared	at	Winter	for	a	long	time,	 his	face	contorted	with	suspicion.

     “It’s	  not	a	glamour,”	 said	Scarlet.	“It	 really	is	 her.”	She	hesitated,	rolling	 her

eyes.	“Not	that	 I	have	any	way	 to	prove	that.	But	 if	 we	wanted	to	 kill	 you,	why

bother	 with	  this	 charade?	Look,	  we’re	  here	 to	 join	  you	  in	 your	  siege	on

Artemisia.	These	men	have	agreed	to	fight	on	our	behalf.”

     The	man	studied	her.	“Who	 are	you?”

     “My	  name	is	 Scarlet	Benoit.	 I’m—”	  She	struggled	 to	think	 of	 what	 to	call

herself.	The	pilot?	The	alpha	female?

     “She’s	 an	 Earthen,”	 someone	said.	 It	 annoyed	her	 that	 they	 could	 tell	 so

easily,	like	she	was	branded	somehow.

     “I’m	  a	friend	 of	 Princess	Selene’s,”	she	said.	“And	 I’m	  a	friend	 of	Princess

Winter’s.	And	 not	very	long	 ago	I	was	a	prisoner	of	Queen	Levana.	She	took	my

finger”—she	 held	 up	 her	 hand—“and	 she	 took	 my	 grandmother,	 and	 now	 I

intend	to	 help	 Selene	take	everything	 from	 her.”	 She	gestured	at	 the	soldiers.

“These	men	have	chosen	our	side	over	Levana’s,	just	like	 you	 have,	and	they’re

the	best	assets	we’ve	got.	Maybe	they	can	help	with	 your	 combat	training.”	 She

523
turned	to	Strom.	“Right?”

     Strom’s	 expression,	though,	was	not	 appeasing	as	he	stepped	up	beside	her.

“We	 said	we	would	 help	and	we	 will,	 but	 we’re	not	 going	to	 stand	out	here	all

night	listening	to	 negotiations	with	a	bunch	of	 lumberjacks.	If	 they	don’t	want	us

here,	we’ll	find	 a	sector	that	does.”

     Scarlet	snorted.	“Good	luck.”

     He	growled	 at	her.	Scarlet	growled	back.

     Lips	 pressed	into	  a	thin	 line,	  the	bearded	man	 glanced	 from	 the	 nervous

civilians	with	 their	sharpened	sticks,	to	the	brawny,	fur-covered	soldiers.	“We’ve

been	sending	messengers	to	the	nearest	sectors	when	we	 can,	but	 it’s	 difficult

trying	 to	  coordinate	 the	 attack.	 The	  shuttles	 are	all	  down.	  And	 we	  aren’t

warriors.”

     “Clearly,”	  one	of	the	soldiers	grumbled.

     Someone	in	the	crowd	hissed,	“Tell	 them	about	the	guards.”

     Scarlet	 raised	her	eyebrows	 as	the	crowd’s	 fear	 was	replaced	 with	 puffing

chests	and	straightened	spines.	“Guards?”

     “We’ve	  had	a	regiment	of	 armed	guards	stationed	here	for	years,	and	we’ve

talked	about	 trying	 to	 overwhelm	 them,	 even	made	plans	 for	 it	 before,	 but	it

always	seemed	pointless	 when	Levana	 would	 just	 send	more.	 But	 as	soon	as

Selene’s	message	came	through…”	  He	 grinned	 back	 at	his	 peers.	“Our	  plan

worked.	We	 had	them	disarmed	 within	 minutes,	 and	now	 they’re	locked	 up	 in

one	of	the	storerooms	in	 the	mill.”	  He	 crossed	his	arms.	“There	were	 fatalities,

but	we	knew	 there	would	 be.	We’re	 willing	  to	do	 what	must	 be	done,	just	like

the	people	 in	 RM-9.	  I	 believe	 Selene	has	given	  us	what	 might	  be	our	 only

chance.”

524
     Scarlet	blinked.	“What	 about	the	people	in	RM-9?”

     “They	 say	Selene	was	there,	 and	there	was	a	woman	 housing	 her.	She	was

just	a	miner,	no	one	special,	like	us,	but	she	proved	how	brave	we	can	be.”

     “Maha	 Kesley,”	 whispered	Scarlet.

     The	man	 jolted	 in	surprise.	 “That’s	 right.”	 He	 glanced	back	at	 the	gathered

people,	his	jaw	set.	“She	was	killed	 for	 offering	 her	home	to	our	 true	queen,	but

her	death	won’t	  be	in	 vain,	 just	 like	 the	 deaths	of	 all	 those	who	 stood	 up	to

Levana	in	the	past.”

     Scarlet	nodded,	though	she	was	still	reeling.	Aimery	 had	intended	for	Maha’s

death	to	act	as	a	warning	to	 anyone	who	sided	with	 Cinder,	 but	here,	at	least,	it

had	the	opposite	effect.

     Maha	Kesley	had	become	a	martyr.

     “You’re	  right,”	  she	 said.	“Selene	 doesn’t	 need	you	 to	 be	 warriors.	 Maha

Kesley	 certainly	 wasn’t,	 but	 she	 was	brave	 and	 believed	 in	 our	 cause.	That

resolve	is	what	this	revolution	 needs.”

     “A	 few	 more	warriors	wouldn’t	 hurt,”	 Strom	muttered,	grabbing	 a	stick	away

from	 the	 nearest	civilian,	  who	 shrank	 away.	 “Everyone—back	  in	 formation!

Let’s	see	if	we	can’t	make	you	look	 a	little	 less	pathetic.”

525
	




                                                        Sixty







“The	residents	of	 GM-3	 have	overpowered	the	guards	sent	to	quell	 the	uprising

that	 began	in	  the	 factories	 yesterday	 afternoon,”	  said	 Aimery,	   reciting	 the

information	 from	 a	portscreen	as	if	this	were	 business	as	usual.	Levana	allowed

the	charade,	keeping	her	face	 calm	as	she	listened	 to	the	 report.	Only	 her	foot

tapped	against	the	glistening	tiles	of	her	solar,	shaking	with	 restrained	fury.	 “We

are	sending	a	new	regiment	 of	guards,	along	with	 a	 thaumaturge	this	time.	 The

uprising	in	 WM-2	  has	been	put	down,	 with	 sixty-four	 civilian	  casualties	and	a

loss	of	 five	  guards.	 We	 are	conducting	 a	 full	  census	on	 the	 sector,	 but	 we

estimate	close	to	two	 hundred	 civilians	 escaped	prior	 to	the	insurrection	 along

with	an	unknown	 amount	of	stolen	weaponry	 and	ammunition.	The	guards	in	all

neighboring	sectors	have	been	put	on	high	alert.”

     Levana	 downed	 a	 long,	 thin	  breath.	She	 paced	to	 the	 massive	 windows

overlooking	 the	 city.	 Her	 perfect,	pristine,	 tranquil	 city.	  It	 seemed	impossible

that	so	much	chaos	was	happening	on	her	planet,	not	when	 everything	here	was

so	calm,	so	normal.

     And	  all	 because	of	  that	 cyborg	 and	 her	 wretched	 video	 and	 her	 stupid

speeches.

526
     “Sixteen	 agriculture	 sectors	have	refused	to	load	the	 supply	trains	 that	were

brought	 in,”	 Aimery	  rambled	 on,	 “and	 we	 are	told	 that	 one	 unguarded	train

carrying	 dairy	  products,	  many	 intended	  for	  this	 week’s	  celebrations,	  was

boarded	by	a	 group	of	 civilians	  outside	Sector	AR-5	 and	 stripped	of	 supplies.

We	have	been	unable	to	retrieve	any	of	 those	goods	or	apprehend	the	thieves	at

this	time.”	 He	cleared	his	throat.	“In	 Sector	GM-19,	 the	citizens	 have	blockaded

two	 of	 the	three	 maglev	 platforms,	 and	 this	 morning	 they	 killed	 twenty-four

guards	sent	 to	 tear	 down	 the	 blockades.	 We	 are	 compiling	  a	 thaumaturge-

controlled	regiment	to	send	there	as	well.”

     Levana	rubbed	a	kink	from	 her	shoulder.

     “In	 Sector	SB-2—”

     The	 elevator	chimed	 in	 the	 center	of	 the	room,	 pulling	  Levana’s	 attention

away	from	the	city.	 Thaumaturge	Lindwurm	 swooped	in	and	dipped	into	 a	hasty

bow,	his	black	sleeves	scraping	the	floor.

     “Your	 Majesty.”

     “If	  you	are	here	to	tell	 me	that	the	 outer	sectors	are	in	chaos	and	the	people

are	in	 revolt,	 I	 am	afraid	 you	 are	sorely	 late.”	 She	snapped	her	fingers	 at	 the

servant	who	stood	beside	the	elevator	doors.	“Bring	wine.”

     The	servant	scurried	away.

     “No,	 My	 Queen,”	said	Lindwurm.	 “I	 have	news	from	 the	barracks,	Regiment

117.”

     “What?	 Are	they	in	 revolt	too?”	 Levana	cackled,	though	beneath	her	hysteria

lurked	a	growing	dread.	Could	that	cyborg	 have	turned	her	entire	country	against

her	with	such	ease?

     “Perhaps,	My	 Queen,”	said	Lindwurm.

527
     Levana	 spun	 toward	 him.	  “What	  do	 you	 mean,	 perhaps?	 They	 are	 my

soldiers.	They	cannot	revolt	against	me.”

     Lindwurm	  lowered	 his	gaze.	“Our	 security	 team	received	 notice	two	 hours

ago	that	 Princess	Winter’s	  identity	  had	been	 tracked	to	 the	 outside	 of	 those

barracks.”

     Levana’s	   smile	  vanished.	   “Winter?”	    She	  glanced	  at	   Aimery,	   who

straightened,	his	own	 interest	piqued.	 “So	she	is	 alive.	 But	 what	would	 she	be

doing	there?”

     “The	 system	picked	 up	on	her	fingerprints	  being	used	to	enter	the	 barracks.

After	 learning	  of	 the	 security	 breach,	 the	 eight	 remaining	 thaumaturges	 for

Regiment	117	were	sent	to	ascertain	if	the	princess	was	posing	a	threat.”

     “I	  suppose	it	 is	 too	much	 to	 hope	that	 they	 found	 the	dear	 girl	 ripped	 to

bloody	shreds.”

     That’s	 what	 they	should	 have	found.	 The	beasts	should	have	 killed	 Winter

without	hesitation—it	 was	what	they	were	designed	to	do.	But	she	suspected	that

was	not	the	case.

     “From	  what	 we	 can	 ascertain,”	 said	 Lindwurm,	  “when	 the	 thaumaturges

arrived,	the	soldiers	turned	on	them	and	attacked.	All	eight	are	dead.”

     Her	blood	 ran	hot,	pounding	at	her	temples.	“And	Winter?”

     “The	 princess	and	the	 soldiers	have	abandoned	the	barracks.	Security	 feeds

showed	them	entering	the	nearest	surface	sector—LW-12.	It	is	one	of	the	sectors

in	upheaval,	but	we	have	not	been	considering	them	a	high-priority	threat.”

     “You’re	  telling	me	that	my	soldiers	have	sided	with	the	girl?”

     Lindwurm	 dipped	his	head.

     The	servant	returned	carrying	 a	silver	 tray	with	 a	decanter	and	crystal	 glass.

528
Levana	could	hear	the	decanter	trembling	against	the	glass’s	lip	 as	her	wine	was

poured.	Levana	barely	felt	the	weight	of	 the	glass	in	her	hand	as	she	took	it.

     “Leave,”	 she	ordered,	and	the	servant	couldn’t	scramble	away	fast	enough.

     She	glided	 back	 to	 the	 window.	 Her	 city.	 Her	 moon.	 The	 planet	that	 she

would	someday	rule	hanging	off	the	horizon,	 nearly	full.

     When	 she	had	given	 Jacin	Clay	 the	 opportunity	 to	 earn	back	her	 favor	 by

killing	  the	princess,	she	 had	expected	him	 to	 try	 something	 stupid,	 but	 she’d

hoped	he	 would	 realize	 how	 futile	  it	 was.	 She’d	hoped	 he	 would	 choose	to

hasten	Winter’s	 death	as	 painlessly	 as	possible	rather	 than	risk	 a	 much	 more

brutal	sentencing.	That	was	mercy,	after	all.	Mercy.

     But	 he’d	 failed.	 Winter	 was	still	 alive	 and	she	was	trying	  to	take	Levana’s

army	away	 from	 her,	just	as	she’d	 taken	the	people’s	 adoration,	just	 as	Selene

was	ruining	everything.

     She	tried	to	picture	 the	scene.	Docile,	half-crazy	Winter,	 batting	 her	lashes	at

the	brutal	 beasts,	and	them	falling	  for	 it.	 Oh,	 how	they	 would	 fawn	 over	 her.

How	they	 would	fall	 to	 their	knees	and	beg	to	do	 her	bidding.	 How	they	 would

follow	 their	beloved	princess	anywhere.

     “My	 Queen,”	 said	Aimery,	 placing	a	fist	 against	his	chest,	“I	feel	responsible

that	we	failed	to	find	 the	princess	during	our	 raid	on	RM-9.	 Please	allow	me	this

chance	to	atone	for	the	error.	 I	will	  go	to	this	 sector	and	see	that	the	princess	is

dealt	with.	I	will	  not	fail	again.”

     She	turned	to	face	him.	“You	 intend	to	kill	 her,	Aimery?”

     A	 pause—a	slight	one,	but	there	all	the	same.	“Of	course,	My	Queen.”

     Laughing,	 Levana	took	 a	draft	 of	 the	wine.	 “It	 was	not	 long	ago	 when	you

asked	to	marry	her.	Do	you	think	she	is	beautiful?”

529
     He	chuckled.	 “My	 Queen.	Everyone	 thinks	the	princess	is	 beautiful,	 but	she

is	no	match	for	Your	Majesty.	 You	are	perfection.”

     “I	 have	begun	to	 wonder	if	 perfection	 might	be	its	 own	flaw.”	  She	smirked.

“Though	 perhaps	 a	 flaw	  can	 contribute	 to	 perfection.”	  She	 pinned	 Aimery

beneath	her	 glare	 and	 adjusted	 her	 glamour,	 drawing	  three	 sharp,	bloodied

scratches	down	her	right	cheek.

     He	gulped.

     “I’ve	  known	you	for	 many	years,	Aimery.	 I	know	 how	you	like	 them	broken.

You	would	 have	made	a	good	match	 after	all	 …	 you	are	as	pathetic	as	she	is.”

She	hurled	the	 goblet.	Aimery	  ducked,	blocking	  the	glass	with	 his	 forearm.	 It

crashed	to	the	floor,	 the	wine	spilling	 like	 a	mix	 of	 water	and	blood,	splattering

on	Levana’s	shoes.	“You	will	  have	your	chance	to	prove	yourself,	but	 not	where

Winter	is	concerned.	It	seems	no	one	has	the	stomach	to	do	what	must	be	done—

not	 you,	 not	 Jacin	 Clay,	 not	 even	 my	 beloved	 pets.	 I	 am	 sick	 to	 death	 of

disappointment.”

     She	turned	her	back.	Her	thoughts	reeled	with	 betrayal,	disgust,	and	jealousy

—yes,	even	jealousy.	All	over	 that	insignificant	 child.	The	weak,	fragile	 thing.

     If	 only	 she	had	killed	 her	years	ago,	before	she	became	so	beautiful.	Before

she	had	become	a	threat.	She	should	have	killed	her	the	first	time	she’d	 seen	her

sleeping	in	her	cradle.	 She	should	have	killed	 her	when	 she’d	ordered	Winter’s

hand	to	take	that	knife,	when	she’d	thought	for	 sure	a	slight	disfigurement	would

erase	all	  the	  whispers	 in	  the	  court,	 all	  the	  talk	  of	  her	 thirteen-year-old

stepdaughter	already	vying	for	most	beautiful	girl	 on	Luna.

     If	 only	 she	 hadn’t	 made	that	 stupid	promise	 to	 Evret,	 all	 those	years	ago.

What	were	promises,	anyway,	when	made	to	the	dying?

530
     As	 her	breathing	 evened	again,	she	erased	the	scars	from	 her	own	 flawless

complexion.

     Thaumaturge	Lindwurm	  took	in	 a	loud	breath	to	remind	 her	of	his	 presence.

“My	 Queen,	 we	shall	 compose	a	 task	force	 to	 deal	with	 the	 princess	and	 the

deserting	soldiers.	Shall	I	direct	them	to	kill	 the	princess	on	sight?”

     She	glanced	over	her	shoulder.	“I	am	a	good	queen,	am	I	not?”

     Lindwurm	 tensed.	“Of	 that,	there	is	no	doubt.”

     “I	  have	held	 this	 country	 together.	 I	 have	 waged	a	 war	 for	 them,	 so	my

people	might	have	access	to	all	 that	Earth	has	to	 offer.	 I	have	done	it	 for	 them.

Why	are	they	 doing	this?	Why	 do	 they	love	her,	 when	she	has	done	nothing	 to

deserve	it?	  If	  she	 wasn’t	 so	 pretty,	  they	 would	  see	 her	 for	  what	 she	 is.

Manipulative,	 conniving	…	 she’s	made	a	mockery	of	everything	we	stand	for.”

     Neither	Aimery	 nor	 Lindwurm	 responded.

     Drawing	 in	 a	shuddering	 breath,	Levana	 snapped,	“Find	 another	servant	to

bring	me	more	wine.”

     Lindwurm	 bowed	and	retreated.

     “Death	 is	not	good	enough	for	her,”	 Levana	murmured	to	herself,	pacing	past

Aimery.	 “Death	  was	 the	 merciful	 choice,	 because	I	  made	a	 promise	 to	 my

husband,	but	she	has	lost	her	right	to	mercy.	I	 want	them	all	 to	see	her	as	she	is.

As	weak	and	pathetic	on	the	outside	as	she	is	within.”

     Aimery’s	 lips	 tightened.	He	looked	smug,	even	when	he	was	groveling.	“Tell

me	how	best	I	can	serve	you.”

     “This	 rebellion	 has	gone	on	quite	long	enough.	No	food	 or	supplies	are	to	be

sent	to	the	outer	sectors	unless	they	are	prepared	to	beg	for	forgiveness.	It	is	time

the	citizens	of	 Luna	were	 reminded	how	 lucky	 they	are	to	have	me.”	 Her	 heart

531
fluttered	with	anticipation.	“And	send	for	Dr.	 Evans.	I	have	a	special	task	for

him.”

     “And	the	princess,	My	Queen?”

     “Do	 not	worry	 about	your	darling	 disfigured	princess.”	Sneering,	Levana

leaned	forward	 and	dragged	her	 thumb	 across	Aimery’s	 jaw,	 gathering	a

splattered	drop	of	wine.	“I	will	 deal	with	 her	myself,	as	I	should	have	done	a

long	time	ago.”

532
	



                                      BOOK
                                      Four

     “Are	 you	afraid	of	poison?”	asked	the	old	woman.

  “Here,	 I	will	 cut	the	apple	in	two.	You	eat	the	red	half,

                        and	I	shall	eat	the	white.”

533
	




                                                Sixty-One







Cinder	 was	  frustrated	  by	  her	 own	  helplessness.	 They’d	  moved	  into	  the

mansion’s	recreational	 room.	Until	  then,	Cinder	 hadn’t	 known	 mansions	came

with	 recreational	rooms.	 She	was	 doing	her	 best	to	 dictate	to	 the	 others	what

needed	to	be	done	in	order	to	 extract	the	video	 she’d	tried	 to	take	in	 the	throne

room,	and	how	 to	fix	 her	leg	 and	brain-machine	interface.	 But	 while	 they	were

running	 around	gathering	 supplies,	 she	was	 seated	on	a	 lavish	 sofa	 with	 her

useless	hunk-of-metal	 leg.	She	 hated	knowing	 she	could	 have	 had	everything

working	again	easily	 enough	if	she	was	back	in	her	workshop	in	 New	Beijing.	 If

she	had	the	right	tools.	If	she	wasn’t	the	machinery	that	needed	fixing.

     She	tried	 to	 be	grateful.	 She	had	survived	 the	queen’s	 attempted	execution

and	she	hadn’t	drowned	in	 Artemisia	 Lake.	She	was	with	 her	 friends	again	and

Iko	 hadn’t	  been	 destroyed	 after	 all—had,	  in	  fact,	 been	 helped	 by	  one	 of

Aimery’s	 own	guards,	which	confirmed	 what	Jacin	had	told	her	once	before.	Not

everyone	in	the	palace	was	as	loyal	to	Levana	as	she	wanted	to	think.

     On	top	of	 all	that,	she	might	 have	video	footage	of	Queen	Levana	that	would

show	what	lay	beneath	her	glamour.	It	could	be	the	best	weapon	they	had	against

her	and	her	mind	control.

534
     If	 the	footage	hadn’t	been	destroyed	in	the	water,	that	is.

     “Thorne,	 pry	 off	 the	back	panel	 of	that	 receiver,	but	gently.	 Jacin,	what	 did

you	find	in	 the	security	panel?”

     “A	 bunch	 of	wires.”	  Jacin	dumped	a	handful	 of	wires	 and	a	databoard	onto

the	floor.

     Cinder	nudged	at	the	wires	 with	her	good	foot.	 “A	 few	 of	these	should	work.

Help	me	turn	this	table	over.	It’s	 similar	 to	the	holographic	game	boards	we	have

on	Earth,	so	I	think…”	 She	grabbed	one	of	the	table	legs	with	her	good	hand,	but

her	injured	shoulder	resisted	when	she	tried	to	turn	it	 over.	Jacin	grabbed	it	from

her	and	did	 it	himself,	 and	 Cinder	felt	 a	twitch	 developing	 in	 her	left	 eye.	She

tried	not	 to	be	resentful.	 It	 wasn’t	his	 fault	 she	was	still	 tender	from	 where	the

wolf	soldier	 had	bitten	her,	and	at	least	the	numbing	pain	salve	they’d	found	 was

performing	miracles.

     “There’s	 not	going	to	 be	blood	when	we	open	you	up,	is	there?”	said	Thorne,

carrying	 the	  receiver	 over	 to	  Cinder	  so	 she	 could	 pick	  through	  its	 inner

workings.	“I	 mean,	we’re	talking	 strictly	 cybernetics,	right?”

     “Better	 be.”	She	scanned	the	inner	workings	of	the	receiver	while	 Thorne	and

Jacin	disassembled	the	VR	gaming	table.	The	setup	was	different	 from	anything

they	had	on	Earth—different-colored	  wires,	different-size	 plugs	and	connectors,

but	it	all	 functioned	 with	 similar	technology	 and	the	same	basic	principles.	“It’s

not	so	much	surgery	 as	…	maintenance.	Our	 biggest	concern	is	 whether	or	not

all	the	hardware	will	  be	compatible.	The	 technology	is	 similar,	but	 it’s	 changed

enough	since	Luna	 and	Earth	 stopped	trading	 with	 each	other	 that	…	 I	 guess

we’ll	 see.”	She	glanced	at	 the	gaming	table	 as	Thorne	pried	 off	 the	side	panel,

revealing	the	inner	 workings.	 “Oh,	 perfect!”	 Leaning	 forward,	 she	pried	up	 the

535
fiber	mode	converter.	“We	 can	use	this.”

     Iko	 and	Cress	strolled	into	the	room,	Cress	carrying	a	wooden	box.

     “They	 have	a	workshop	 out	back,”	 said	Iko.	 She	was	wearing	a	shimmering

pink	 shirt	she’d	 found	 in	 the	house,	mostly	 to	 cover	up	 the	bullet	 hole	 in	 her

torso	and	the	slash	in	the	back	of	her	right	 shoulder.	Cinder	 hoped	that	once	she

was	fixed,	she’d	be	able	to	at	least	make	Iko’s	arm	functional	again	too.

     “I	 found	everything	 on	your	list	 except	the	demagnetized	three-pronged	parts

retriever.	 But	 I	  did	 find	  some	 tweezers	in	  the	 bathroom?”	 She	 twirled	  the

tweezers	between	her	good	fingers.

     Twisting	  her	mouth,	 Cinder	took	 the	 tweezers	and	flicked	 a	 stray	eyebrow

hair	from	 their	tip.	 “We’ll	  make	them	work.”	 She	surveyed	the	pile	 of	tools	and

spare	parts	they’d	accumulated	 from	 technology	all	 over	 the	mansion.	Without

being	able	 to	see	inside	 her	own	 head	and	offer	 an	 accurate	diagnosis,	it	 was

difficult	  to	 know	 what	 they	 were	 going	  to	 need	to	 fix	  her,	 but	 if	 it	 wasn’t

included	in	 this	pile,	 they	had	little	 hope	of	 finding	 it	 here.	“We’ll	  need	a	lamp

so	you	can	see	what	you’re	doing.	 And	 what	about	a	hand	mirror?	 We	can	hold

it	up	so	I	can	see	inside.”

     Jacin	shook	his	head.	“Not	in	 this	city.”

     Cinder	scowled.	 “Right,	 fine.	We’re	 going	to	extract	the	data	off	 the	vid-chip

first,	 then	we’ll	  focus	 on	the	 retina	 display.	 My	 eyes	are	still	  communicating

with	 my	 optical	 nerve,	 so	my	 best	guess	is	 there’s	 been	a	 disruption	 of	 data

transfer	from	my	 control	 panel	to	the	display.	 Could	be	as	simple	 as	a	damaged

wire.	Once	we	have	that	working,	 I	should	be	able	to	run	my	internal	 diagnostics

and	figure	 out	 what’s	 wrong	 with	 my	 hand	and	leg.”	  She	pointed	at	 a	virtual

reality	viewing	 chair.	“Drag	 that	over	here.”

536
     Jacin	complied,	 and	Cinder	pulled	 herself	into	 the	chair,	facing	 backward	so

she	could	 drape	 her	 arms	over	  the	back.	 She	 rested	her	 forehead	 on	 them.

“Cress?”

     “Ready	when	you	 are.”

     “All	  right.	Let’s	 see	what	we	can	find.”

     Iko	 brushed	Cinder’s	hair	off	 to	one	side	and	dug	a	fingernail	into	the	latch	in

the	back	of	Cinder’s	skull.	 Cinder	felt	the	panel	swing	open.

     “Oh,	 sure,”	said	Thorne.	“When	 I	open	her	head	panel,	she	yells	at	me.	When

Iko	does	it,	she’s	a	hero.”

     Cinder	glared	at	him	 over	her	folded	arms.	“Would	 you	like	to	do	this?”

     He	grimaced.	“Not	 even	a	little	bit.”

     “Then	 back	 up	and	give	 them	space	to	 work.”	 She	laid	 her	 forehead	down

again.	“All	 right,	Iko.	 There’s	a	cable	insert	on	the	left	side	of	the	control	 panel.”

     Someone	turned	on	a	lamp	and	bright	light	edged	around	her	vision.

     “I	 see	it,”	said	Iko.	 “Cress,	you	have	that	port?”

     “And	 connector	cable,	right	here.”

     Cinder	heard	them	shuffling	  behind	her,	brushing	more	of	 her	hair	out	of	 the

way.	There	was	a	click,	muffled	 inside	her	own	head.	A	shudder	coursed	through

her.	It	 had	 been	a	 while	 since	 an	external	 device	 had	been	plugged	 into	 her

processor.	The	last	time	had	been	when	she’d	 drained	her	power	 source	getting

the	Rampion	 into	 space,	right	 after	 they’d	 escaped	from	 New	 Beijing	 Prison.

Thorne	had	had	to	recharge	her	with	a	podship	plug.

     The	time	 before	that	she’d	been	in	a	research	lab,	strapped	to	a	table	while	 a

med-droid	downloaded	the	statistics	of	her	cybernetic	makeup.

     She	really,	really	 hated	having	things	plugged	into	her	head.

537
     She	forced	herself	to	 take	deep	breaths.	It	was	only	Iko	 and	Cress.	She	knew

what	they	were	plugging	 into	her	 and	what	data	they	were	extracting.	It	 was	not

a	violation.	It	 was	not	an	invasion.

     But	it	 was	impossible	not	to	feel	that	way.

     “The	  connection	 worked,”	  said	 Cress.	 “There	 doesn’t	  appear	to	 be	 any

obvious	holes	in	 the	data,	so	this	 part	of	 your	programming	 wasn’t	 affected	by

whatever	cut	off	 power	 to	your	 limbs.	 I	just	 need	to	find	 where	 it	stores	visual

input	and	…	 here	we	go.	 Recordings	…	 chronological	 …	would	 it	 be	the	most

recent	…	 never	 mind,	 this	must	 be	 it.	 Video,	 encrypted,	one	 minute	 fifty-six

seconds	long.	And	…	transferring.”

     Cinder’s	 gut	 twisted.	 She	was	not	 squeamish	in	 general,	but	 whenever	her

panel	was	open	it	was	impossible	not	to	 think	about	nameless,	faceless	surgeons

hovering	 over	 her	 unconscious	form.	  Connecting	 wires	 and	 synapses	to	 her

brain,	 regulating	  her	 electrical	  pulses,	 replacing	  part	  of	 her	  skull	  with	  a

removable	metal	plate.

     She	squeezed	her	forearms	until	they	 began	to	hurt,	trying	 to	distract	 herself

from	 the	 humming	 of	  her	 own	 internal	 workings	  and	 the	 sound	of	  Cress’s

fingertips	padding	against	the	portscreen.

     “Eighty	 percent,”	 said	Cress.

     White	 spots	 flickered	  on	the	 blackness	of	  Cinder’s	 eyelids.	 She	breathed

deeply,	 chastising	 herself.	 She	 was	  fine.	 This	  would	  have	 been	 a	 routine

procedure	if	it	 had	been	her	working	 on	 an	android	or	another	cyborg.	 She	was

fine.

     The	humming	 stopped	and	Cress	said,	“Done.”

     “Check	 it	 before	you	 disconnect,”	said	 Cinder,	gulping	 down	 a	mouthful	 of

538
sour	saliva.	“Make	sure	it’s	 the	right	one.”

     “It’s	 showing	 …	a	lot	of	 people.”

     “There’s	 Kai!”	 squealed	Iko.

     Cinder	 jerked	her	head	up.	She	felt	the	pull	 of	 the	cord	still	 connected	to	the

portscreen.	“Show	 me,”	  she	said,	even	 as	brightness	 flooded	 her	 vision.	 She

cringed,	slamming	her	eyes	shut	again.

     “Wait,	 hold	still,”	  said	Cress.	“Let	me	disconnect—”

     That	was	the	last	Cinder	heard.


                                                          *			 *			*

     NEW	CONNECTIONS	FOUND

     REALITY	MANUFACTURING	CYBERHAND	T200–L–CUSTOM:	FIVE	UTILITIES

     UNRECOGNIZED:	STANDARD	APPLICATIONS	APPROVED

     REALITY	MANUFACTURING	CYBERFOOT	T60.9–L:	STANDARD	APPLICATIONS

     APPROVED

     REBOOTING	IN	3	…	2	…	1	…


Cinder	woke	up	on	the	sofa	with	the	softest	blanket	she’d	ever	felt	 tucked	around

her	shoulders.	She	squinted	at	 the	unfamiliar	 shadows	on	 the	ceiling,	 trying	 to

shake	off	the	 bewilderment	of	 waking	 up	in	 a	strange	place	and	not	 being	sure

how	she’d	gotten	there.	Sitting	 up,	she	rubbed	at	her	bleary	eyes.	The	room	was

in	disarray,	tools	and	parts	scattered	around	the	carpet	and	tables.


     DIAGNOSTICS	CHECK	COMPLETE.	ALL	SYSTEMS	STABILIZED.	TWO	NEW

     CONNECTIONS	FOUND:

     CYBERHAND	T200

     CYBERFOOT	T60.0

     RUN	APPLICATION	TEST	NOW?

539
     She	raised	her	left	hand	in	front	 of	 her	face.	The	shiny	finish	 it	had	when	Dr.

Erland	had	first	 given	it	 to	 her	was	gone	after	two	 months	of	 making	repairs	 to

the	Rampion	and	living	in	 a	desert	and	a	dip	in	Artemisia	Lake.

     Most	 baffling	 was	that	she	had	all	five	fingers,	although	 the	pointer—the	gun

finger	 Levana	 had	 removed—didn’t	  quite	 match	 the	 others.	 The	 finish	  was

different,	it	 was	too	slender,	and	the	angle	of	the	first	knuckle	was	crooked.

     Cinder	ran	the	application	 test	and	watched	as	her	fingers	curled	down,	one	at

a	time.	Flexed	back.	Tightened	into	a	fist.	The	wrist	 swiveled	from	 side	to	side.

     Her	 foot	  went	 through	 a	 similar	  range	of	  motions.	 She	pulled	  back	 the

blanket	to	watch.


     BASIC	APPLICATION	TEST	COMPLETE.	STANDARD	APPLICATIONS	APPROVED

     FOR	USE.	FIVE	UTILITIES	UNRECOGNIZED.


     Five	utilities.

     Inspecting	 her	hand,	Cinder	 sent	the	command	for	 the	tips	 of	her	 fingers	to

open,	which	  they	 did	  without	 problem.	  But	 when	 she	 tried	 to	  turn	 on	 the

flashlight,	 to	eject	the	knife	 or	 universal	connector	 cable,	or	to	 spin	the	built-in

screwdriver,	nothing	 happened.	She	didn’t	bother	trying	 to	load	 a	projectile	into

the	replacement	finger.

     Still,	 she	had	use	of	the	limb	again,	and	she	couldn’t	complain.

     “You’re	  awake!”

     Iko	 traipsed	into	 the	room	carrying	 a	tray	 one-handed,	with	a	glass	of	 water

and	a	plate	of	fried	eggs,	along	with	bread	and	jam.

     Cinder’s	 stomach	started	gnawing	through	its	lining.	“You	 cooked?”

     “Just	 some	 skills	  left	 over	 from	  my	 Serv9.2	 days.”	 Iko	  set	the	 plate	 in

540
Cinder’s	lap.	“But	I	don’t	want	to	hear	a	word	about	how	delicious	it	is.”

     “Oh,	I’m	 sure	it’s	awful,”	Cinder	said,	shoveling	a	spoonful	into	her	mouth.

“Tank	oo,	Iko.”	Her	gaze	landed	on	Iko’s	disabled	arm.	It	was	missing	a	finger.

She	swallowed.	“For	the	attachment	too.”

     Iko	shrugged	with	her	good	shoulder.	“You	have	a	few	escort-branded	wires

installed	now	too.	The	stuff	from	the	gaming	table	didn’t	work.”

     “Thank	you.	That	was	really	generous.”

     Iko	pushed	Cinder’s	feet	aside	and	sat	down.	“You	know	how	we	androids

are	programmed	to	make	ourselves	useful	and	all	that.”

     “Are	you	still	 an	android?”	Cinder	said	around	a	bite	of	toast.	“Sometimes	I

forget.”

     “Me	too.”	Iko	 ducked	her	head.	“When	we	saw	the	feed	of	you	jumping	off

that	ledge,	I	was	so	scared	I	thought	my	wiring	was	going	to	catch	fire.	And	I

thought,	I	will	do	anything	to	make	sure	she’s	all	right.”	She	kicked	at	a	pile	of

stray	screws	on	the	carpet.	“I	guess	some	programming	never	goes	away,	no

matter	how	evolved	a	personality	chip	gets.”

     Licking	  some	 jam	 from	  her	 fingertips,	  Cinder	 grinned.	 “That’s	  not

programming,	you	wing	nut.	That’s	friendship.”

     Iko’s	eyes	brightened.	“Maybe	you’re	right.”

     “About	time	 you	woke	up,	lazy.”	 Cinder	glanced	over	her	shoulder	to	see

Thorne	in	the	doorway.	Cress	and	Jacin	filed	in	behind	him.	“How’s	the	hand?”

     “Almost	fully	functional.”

     “Of	course	it’s	almost	fully	functional,”	said	Iko.	“Cress	and	I	are	geniuses.”

She	flashed	Cress	a	thumbs-up.

     “I	helped,”	said	Thorne.

541
     “He	 held	the	lamp,”	Iko	 clarified.

     “Jacin	did	 nothing,”	 said	Thorne,	pointing.

     “Jacin	 checked	your	pulse	 and	breathing	and	made	sure	you	 weren’t	 dead,”

said	Iko.

     Thorne	snorted.	“I	 could	have	done	that.”

     “Why	 did	I	 pass	out?”	Cinder	interrupted.

     Crouching	 beside	the	couch,	Jacin	felt	for	the	pulse	in	Cinder’s	 wrist.	 After	 a

short	silence,	 he	 let	 it	 drop	 down	  again.	“Stress,	 probably,	 along	 with	  your

physical	reaction	 to	 having	the	 portscreen	connected	to	 your”—he	 gestured	to

her	general	head	area—“computer	thing.”

     “And	 you	call	 me	squeamish,”	said	Thorne.

     Cinder	squinted.	“I	 passed	out	from	stress?	That’s	it?”

     “I	 believe	the	princess	term	is	fainted,”	 said	Thorne.

     Cinder	smacked	him.

     “With	   everything	  you’ve	  been	 through,”	  said	 Jacin,	 “it’s	   amazing	 you

haven’t	had	a	meltdown.	 Next	 time	 you	feel	 light-headed	or	 are	having	trouble

breathing,	tell	me	before	you	pass	out.”

     “The	 good	thing,”	 said	Iko,	 “is	 that	with	 you	 unconscious,	Cress	and	I	were

able	to	run	your	full	 diagnostics.	Two	 fixed	 connections,	a	new	data	cable,	some

reinstalled	software,	and	good	as	new!	Well,	except—”

     “My	  hand	tools,	I	 know.”	 Cinder	 smiled.	 “But	 that’s	fine.	 I	 went	five	 years

without	a	built-in	 flashlight,	 I’ll	 survive	 now.”

     “Yeah,	 that,	 but	I	 think	 there	 might	 be	some	problems	 with	 your	 interface

too.	 The	 diagnostics	  showed	 a	 few	  errors	 with	  net	 connectivity	  and	  data

transfer.”

542
     Cinder’s	 smile	 faded.	She’d	been	dependent	on	her	 cyborg	brain	 ever	since

she	could	  remember,	 relying	 on	  her	 ability	  to	 download	  information,	  send

comms,	monitor	 newsfeeds.	It	 was	 an	uncomfortable	 feeling	 to	 be	without	  it,

like	part	of	her	brain	had	been	erased.

     “I’ll	   just	 have	to	 make	do,”	 she	said.	 “I’m	  alive,	 and	I	 have	 two	 working

hands	and	two	working	feet.	I’ve	 been	in	worse	shape	before.”	She	glanced	from

Iko	to	Cress.	“Thank	you.”

     Cress	ducked	her	head,	while	 Iko	 tossed	her	braids	over	one	 shoulder.	“Oh,

you	know.	 I	 used	to	apprentice	for	 this	brilliant	  mechanic	in	 New	 Beijing.	 She

may	have	taught	me	a	thing	or	two.”

     Cinder	laughed.

     “Speaking	 of	brilliant	  mechanics,”	Iko	 said,	“do	 you	 think	you	 have	time	 to

look	at	my	arm	now?”

543
	




                                                Sixty-Two







Winter	 sat	on	a	rough-hewn	 bench,	watching	 the	last	chips	 of	 ice	thaw	 around

her	feet.	 She	 plunked	 her	 toes	against	 the	 shallow	 puddle	 that	 had	 formed,

amazed	at	how	everything	 about	it	 could	 be	so	real—the	 crackling,	 the	cold—

even	when	she	knew	it	wasn’t.

     Sighing,	 she	 raised	her	 head,	 weary	 as	she	was,	 to	 watch	 the	 haphazard

training	sessions	happening	all	 down	the	 dusty	street.	Maneuvers	and	 tactics,	a

hundred	trained	 soldiers	 doing	 their	 best	 to	 build	 an	 army.	 She	scanned	the

crowd	for	Scarlet’s	flaming	 hair,	not	sure	where	her	friend	had	gone	off	 to.

     Instead	of	seeing	Scarlet,	her	gaze	caught	on	something	else	entirely.	A	 head

of	pale	hair	near	the	back	of	the	crowd.

     Her	heart	lurched.

     Inhaling	  a	 shaky	 breath,	she	 pulled	 herself	 from	  the	 bench,	 but	 he	was

already	gone.

     Her	gaze	darted	over	all	the	faces,	searching.	Hoping.

     She	clenched	her	fists	at	her	sides,	willing	 away	the	sudden	rush	of	euphoria.

It	was	 her	desperation	causing	her	 to	see	phantoms.	She	missed	him	 so	much.

She	still	 didn’t	 know	 if	 he	was	even	alive.	 She	supposed	it	was	to	 be	expected

544
that	she	would	see	his	face	in	every	crowd,	around	every	corner.

     There—she	saw	 it	again.	 Sunshine-bright	hair	 tucked	 back	behind	 his	ears.

Broad	shoulders	disguised	 in	the	 clothes	of	 the	sector	 laborers.	Blue	 eyes	that

pinned	her	to	the	ground	 even	as	her	entire	body	tingled.	 Air	 flooded	her	 lungs.

He	was	alive.	He	was	alive.

     But	 Jacin	raised	a	finger	to	 his	lips,	 halting	her	before	 she	could	run	to	 him.

Ducking	his	 head	in	an	effort	 to	minimize	 his	 height,	he	skirted	 around	a	group

of	 laborers	and	 slinked	 toward	 the	forest.	 He	 glanced	back	 once	and,	 with	 a

subtle	jerk	of	his	head,	disappeared	into	the	shadows.

     Palms	damp,	 Winter	 looked	around	 for	 Scarlet,	but	 she	was	nowhere	to	 be

seen.	No	one	was	watching	her.	She	slipped	away,	newly	energized,	and	traipsed

in	between	the	slender	tree	trunks.

     She	would	  circle	 around	through	 the	 woods	 and	meet	 Jacin	halfway.	 She

would	 throw	 herself	 into	  his	 arms	and	 she	didn’t	  care	 if	 he	 thought	 it	 was

appropriate	or	not.

     Up	ahead	she	could	hear	the	bubble	of	the	central	fountain.

     “Princess.”

     Winter	 startled.	In	 her	haste,	she’d	walked	right	 past	the	old	woman	 without

even	seeing	her.	Though	she	was	 an	ancient	creature	with	 a	crooked	 back,	she

had	a	liveliness	to	her	expression.	She	was	holding	a	basket	filled	with	 twigs	and

bark	gathered	from	the	forest	floor.

     “Yes,	 hello,”	 Winter	said	in	 a	rush,	dipping	into	 a	quick	curtsy.	Her	gaze	was

already	traveling	  on,	 searching	for	  blond	 hair	 and	 a	teasing	 smile.	 She	saw

nothing.	The	trees	were	hiding	him	from	 her.

     “You’re	   looking	  for	 a	 handsome	 young	 man,	 I	  believe.”	  The	 woman’s

545
wrinkles	tightened	into	 something	like	a	smile.

     Winter	 started	to	nod,	but	stopped	herself.	“Did	  someone	come	through	here

just	now?”

     “Just	 your	 prince,	my	 dear.	No	 need	to	 be	shy.	 He’s	 very	handsome,	isn’t

he?”	She	herself	stood	no	taller	than	Winter’s	 collarbone,	 though	that	was	partly

due	to	the	crook	 in	 her	spine.	Winter	 wondered	 how	many	 years	of	 hard	work

weighed	upon	those	shoulders.

     “He	 asked	me	to	give	you	a	message.”

     “He	 did?	Jacin?”	Winter	 glanced	around	again.	“But	where	did	he	go?”

     “He	 said	not	to	follow	  him.	That	 it’s	too	 dangerous,	and	he’ll	find	 you	when

it’s	 safe	again.”	 She	tilted	 her	 head,	gazing	down	 the	 row	of	 orderly	 trees,	 to

where	the	alphas	were	yelling	their	orders.

     Winter	 tried	  to	stifle	  her	disappointment.	 He	 could	 not	 have	waited	 for	 a

smile,	a	kind	word,	a	quick	 embrace?	“Why	aren’t	you	with	 the	others?”

     The	 woman	 shrugged	her	 shoulders,	with	 some	 effort.	 “Someone	 said	we

could	use	wood	scraps.	I	cannot	do	much,	but	I	can	assist	in	that	way.”

     “Of	 course,”	 said	Winter.	 “We	 all	 must	 do	what	we	 can.	Allow	  me	to	 help

you.”	She	took	the	basket	from	the	woman.

     The	woman	 held	up	 a	finger,	her	 arm	no	longer	 burdened.	“I	 almost	forgot.

Your	prince	 left	 you	a	gift.”	  Digging	 through	the	 basket,	she	found	a	plain	 box

buried	beneath	the	twigs.	“He	said	these	are	your	favorites.”

     Winter’s	 heart	leaped	as	she	took	the	box	in	her	palm.	 She	knew	what	it	 was

without	 opening	 it	 and	her	 heart	expanded.	 She	couldn’t	  imagine	 the	trouble

Jacin	had	gone	 through	 to	 get	these	for	  her.	All	  so	she	 would	 know	 he	 was

thinking	about	her?

546
     Unless	there	was	more	to	it	than	that.

     Unless	there	was	a	message.

     Chewing	 the	 corner	of	 her	 lips,	 she	lifted	 the	 lid.	 There,	inside,	 were	 two

pristine	sour	apple	petites,	fresh	from	the	confectioner’s	window.

     “My,	  but	 those	look	 tasty,”	 said	 the	old	 woman,	 craning	 her	head	to	 peer

inside.	“I	 haven’t	had	one	of	those	since	I	was	a	little	girl.	 Apple,	aren’t	they?”

     “Yes.”	 Winter	 held	the	box	 toward	her.	“Please,	take	one.	With	 my	gratitude

for	delivering	 them.”

     The	 woman	 pondered	the	offer.	  “If	 you	 insist	 …	 I	 suppose	one	 little	 bite

won’t	kill	  me.	I’ll	 take	this	one,	if	you’re	 sure	you	don’t	mind.	 See,	it	has	a	crack

in	the	shell,	 not	fit	 for	 a	princess.”	 Her	eyes	were	daring	 as	she	took	the	candy

between	her	fingertips.	 “But	 only	 if	 you	 eat	the	other.	 It	would	 be	 the	greatest

honor	to	 share	this	bounty	 with	 Your	 Highness—the	beautiful	 Princess	Winter

herself.”

     “You	  are	 too	 kind.”	  Winter	  lifted	  the	 second	candy	 from	  the	 box.	 She

scanned	the	inner	lining,	 hoping	 for	some	clue	 Jacin	may	have	left	 for	 her,	but

she	saw	nothing.

     Still.	 It	 was	a	gift.	 Not	 only	the	candies,	but	 to	have	seen	him	from	 afar.	To

know	he	was	all	right.

     She	 placed	the	 candy	 between	 her	teeth.	 The	 woman	 was	 watching	 her,

mimicking	 her	movements,	and	together	they	 bit	down.	 Winter	 felt	the	crack	 of

the	brittle	shell	before	it	 melted	against	her	tongue.

     The	 old	 woman	 smiled,	 bits	 of	 crimson-colored	 filling	  stuck	 in	 her	 teeth.

“This	has	been	more	satisfying	than	I	could	have	imagined.”

     Winter	 swallowed.	“I’m	  glad.	It’s	been	my	pleasure	to	…	to…”

547
     She	blinked,	 catching	 a	tinge	of	 familiarity	  in	 the	way	 the	woman	 watched

her.	At	the	 particular	curve	 of	her	grin—something	 haughty	 and	brimming	 with

contempt.

     “Is	 something	wrong,	my	dear	child?”

     “No.	  No.	For	 a	 moment	you	 reminded	 me	of	 someone.	But	 my	 eyes	play

tricks	on	me	sometimes.	They’re	not	very	reliable.”

     “Oh,	 sweet,	stupid	child.”	 The	kink	 in	the	woman’s	 back	began	to	straighten.

“We	are	Lunars.	Our	eyes	are	never	reliable.”

     Winter	  shriveled	back.	 The	 basket	slipped	 from	  her	hold,	 crashing	 to	 the

ground.

     Before	 her,	Levana	 shed	the	guise	of	 the	 old	woman,	 a	snake	shedding	 its

skin.

     “My	  researchers	assured	me	the	disease	would	act	quickly,”	 said	the	queen,

her	cold	eyes	roving	over	Winter’s	 skin.	Curious.	Delighted.

     Winter’s	 thoughts	 spun,	puzzling	 out	the	truth	 from	 the	illusion.	  Her	whole

life	had	been	spent	puzzling	out	truths	from	illusions.

     Where	 was	Jacin?	 Why	 was	 Levana	here?	Was	 this	 another	nightmare,	 a

hallucination,	a	trick?

     Her	stomach	kicked.	She	felt	ill.

     “The	 infected	microbes	are	being	absorbed	into	your	bloodstream	even	at	this

very	moment.”

     Winter	 placed	a	 hand	over	her	 stomach,	feeling	 the	devoured	candy	roiling

inside	her.	She	pictured	her	 heart,	her	arteries,	her	platelet-manufacturing	 plant.

Little	 red	soldiers	marching	down	their	conveyor	belts.	“Microbes?”

     “Oh,	 don’t	 worry.	 Young	and	able-bodied	thing	 that	you	 are,	it	should	be	an

548
hour	or	 two	 still	 before	 you	 begin	 to	show	 symptoms.	 A	 rash	of	 blood-filled

blisters	will	  erupt	 on	your	 perfect	 skin.	 The	 tips	of	 your	 delicate	 fingers	 will

shrivel	and	turn	 blue…”	 Levana	grinned.	 “I	 do	 wish	I	 could	be	here	to	 witness

it.”

     Winter	 peered	through	the	forest,	toward	her	allies.	 Levana	would	stop	her	if

she	tried	 to	 run.	She	 wondered	if	  she	could	 get	 out	a	 scream	before	 Levana

sewed	shut	her	lips.

     “Thinking	  of	 warning	 your	 friends?	Don’t	  worry.	 I’m	  going	to	 let	 you	go,

little	 princess.	I	will	 let	 you	return	to	 them	and	infect	them	yourself.	 They	made

a	mistake	when	they	chose	you	over	me,	and	that	will	be	their	undoing.”

     She	faced	her	stepmother	again.	“Why	do	you	hate	me?”

     “Hate	  you?	Oh,	  child.	 Is	 that	 what	 you	 think?”	  Levana	 placed	 her	 cool

fingers	on	Winter’s	  cheek,	over	the	scars	she’d	given	 her	years	before.	“I	 don’t

hate	you.	I	am	merely	 annoyed	at	your	existence.”	Her	 thumb	caressed	Winter’s

cheek.	“From	 the	day	 you	were	born,	 you	 had	everything	 I	ever	 wanted.	Your

beauty.	Your	 father’s	love.	 And	 now,	 the	adoration	of	 the	people.	 My	people.”

She	drew	her	 hand	away.	“But	  not	for	 long.	 Your	 father	is	 dead.	Your	 beauty

will	 soon	 be	tarnished.	And	 now	 that	 you	 are	a	carrier	 of	 the	blue	 fever,	 any

citizen	who	comes	close	to	you	will	 soon	come	to	regret	it.”

     Winter’s	  stomach	dropped.	 She	imagined	 she	could	 feel	 the	disease	being

absorbed	through	the	lining	of	 her	stomach.	Seeping	into	her	veins.	Each	beat	of

her	 heart	 pushed	it	  further	  through	 her	 system.	 It	  was	 a	 detached	sort	 of

knowledge.	Of	 all	 the	 tortures	she	 had	seen	her	stepmother	 devise	for	 others,

there	was	something	merciful	about	this	death.	A	slow,	calm	acceptance.

     “You	  could	 have	 their	 adoration	  too,	 you	 know,”	  she	said,	 watching	  as

549
Levana’s	condescending	smile	hardened	to	her	face.	“If	  you	were	kind	 to	them,

and	fair.	 If	 you	didn’t	  trick	 them	into	 being	your	 slaves.	If	 you	 didn’t	 threaten

them	and	their	loved	ones	for	every	minor	crime.	 If	you	 shared	the	riches	and	the

comforts	we	have	in	Artemisia—”

     Her	tongue	stilled.

     “I	 am	queen,”	 Levana	whispered.	“I	 am	the	queen	of	Luna	 and	I	will	  decide

the	best	way	to	rule	my	people.	No	one—not	 you,	and	not	that	hideous	cyborg—

will	 take	this	 from	 me.”	She	lifted	 her	 chin,	nostrils	 flaring.	 “I	 must	 go	tend	to

my	kingdom.	Good-bye,	Winter.”

     Stumbling	 back,	Winter	 turned	 toward	the	 people.	If	 she	could	see	just	 one

person,	get	off	one	warning	…

     But	 then	the	forest	 closed	in	 around	her	and	 she	collapsed,	unconscious,	to

the	ground.

550
	




                                          Sixty-Three







“Have	you	seen	Winter?”

     Alpha	Strom	 finished	demonstrating	the	upward-stab	movement	with	the

staff	and	handed	it	back	to	a	young	woman,	before	turning	to	face	Scarlet.	“I

have	not.”

     Scarlet	scanned	the	hectic	crowd	for	the	thousandth	time.	“Me	either,	not	for

a	long	time.	She	has	a	tendency	to	wander	off…”

     Tilting	 his	head	back,	Strom	sniffed	a	few	times	at	the	air,	then	shook	his

head.	“It	seems	she	hasn’t	been	around	for	a	while	now.	Perhaps	she’s	found

somewhere	to	rest.”

     “Or	perhaps	she’s	poking	out	her	own	eye	with	a	stick.	I’m	telling	you,	it’s

not	good	for	her	to	be	left	alone.”

     Grumbling,	Strom	gestured	at	one	of	the	beta	members	of	his	pack,	then

shambled	toward	a	bench.	He	paused	to	sniff	again,	sending	his	keen	eyes	into

the	crowd,	before	turning	and	gazing	into	the	forest.

     “You’re	being	creepy,”	said	Scarlet.

     “You	asked	for	my	help.”

     “Not	technically.”

551
     When	 Strom	  headed	into	  the	 shadows	of	  the	 not-really-a-forest,	  Scarlet

followed,	 though	 she	couldn’t	  imagine	why	  Winter	 would	 have	left	  everyone

behind	and	wandered	off	all	by	her—

     Never	mind.	 She	could	imagine	it	after	all.

     “She	 came	this	way,”	 Strom	said,	 running	his	 fingers	over	 a	tree’s	bark.	He

turned	to	the	right	and	increased	his	speed.	“I’ve	picked	up	on	her	now.”

     Scarlet	trotted	along	beside	him.

     “There.”

     She	saw	her	at	the	same	moment,	and	broke	into	a	run	before	Strom	did.

     “Winter!”	  she	screamed,	dropping	to	her	knees.	Winter’s	 body	was	sprawled

out	in	the	patchy	grass.	Scarlet	rolled	the	princess	onto	her	back	and	checked	for

a	pulse,	relieved	to	find	one	fluttering	 at	Winter’s	 neck.

     A	 hand	grabbed	Scarlet’s	hood	and	dragged	her	back.	She	yelped,	flailing	 to

get	away,	 but	Strom	 ignored	 her	pummeling	 fists.	 “Let	  me	go!	 What	 are	you

doing?”

     “She	is	sick.”

     “What?”	 Unzipping	 her	hoodie,	 Scarlet	scrambled	out	of	the	 sleeves	and	fell

at	Winter’s	side	again.	“What	 are	you	talking	about?”

     “I	 can	smell	it	 on	her,”	Strom	growled.	 He	didn’t	 come	any	closer.	“Diseased

flesh.	Vile.”

     Scarlet	frowned	 up	at	 him	before	 refocusing	on	the	 princess.	“Winter,	 wake

up,”	she	said,	smacking	the	princess’s	cheek	a	few	times,	but	Winter	 didn’t	 even

flinch.	Scarlet	pressed	a	hand	to	her	forehead.	She	was	clammy	and	hot.	She	felt

the	back	of	her	head,	wondering	if	 the	princess	had	hit	 her	head	again,	but	there

was	no	blood	and	the	only	bump	was	from	the	fight	 at	Maha’s	house.	“Winter!”

552
     Strom	 kicked	  something	 and	 it	 skipped	  through	 a	 tuft	 of	  grass	and	 hit

Scarlet’s	knee.	Scarlet	blinked	 and	picked	 it	up.	 A	sour	 apple	petite,	one	of	 the

candies	Winter	 had	often	 brought	 to	 her	in	 the	 menagerie,	usually	 laced	with

painkillers.	It	 had	a	bite	taken	out	 of	it.	 Picking	up	Winter’s	  hand,	Scarlet	found

bits	of	melted	candy	shell	stuck	to	her	fingertips.

     “Poison?”

     “I	 don’t	 know,”	 said	Strom.	“She	isn’t	dead—just	dying.”

     “With	 some	sort	of	disease?”

     He	 gave	a	 curt	nod.	 “You	  should	not	 be	 so	close	to	 her.	 It	 smells—”	 He

looked	like	he	might	 be	sick.

     “Oh,	 pull	 yourself	together.	All	  those	muscles	and	teeth	and	you’re	afraid	 of

a	little	cold?”

     His	 expression	 darkened,	but	 he	 didn’t	  come	 any	 closer.	In	  fact,	 after	 a

second,	he	stepped	back.	“There	is	something	wrong	with	her.”

     “Obviously!	  But	what?	 And	how?”	 She	shook	her	head.	“Look,	 I	saw	a	little

med-clinic	 on	 the	main	 street.	Can	 you	 carry	 her	there?	 We’ll	  have	a	doctor

check	her	out.	She	might	need	her	stomach	pumped	or—”

     Scarlet’s	 gaze	landed	on	 Winter’s	 arm	 and	she	gasped.	She	skittered	away

from	 the	 princess’s	 unconscious	form,	  every	 instinct	 telling	  her	 to	 hold	 her

breath.	To	clean	the	skin	that	had	come	in	contact	with	the	princess.	To	run.

     “Now	 she	listens.”

     Ignoring	 him,	 Scarlet	 cursed,	loudly.	 “When	  you	said	 she	had	a	 disease,	I

didn’t	think	 you	meant	she	had	the	plague!”

     “I	 do	not	know	what	 this	is,”	said	Strom.	“I	 have	never	smelled	this	before.”

     Scarlet	hesitated	a	moment	more,	then	let	out	a	painful,	 frustrated	sound,	and

553
forced	herself	to	crawl	back	to	 Winter	again.	She	grimaced	as	she	lifted	Winter’s

arm	to	 inspect	the	dark	 spots	scattered	across	her	elbow.	 The	 red-tinged	rings

around	the	bruises	had	swollen	above	the	skin,	puffed	and	glossy	like	blisters.

     For	 as	long	 as	she	could	 remember,	the	 plague	had	 worked	 in	 predictable

stages,	though	how	long	they	took	to	manifest	varied	by	 victim.	 Once	the	rash	of

bruise-colored	rings	 marred	a	person’s	skin,	 they	may	 have	three	days	or	 three

weeks	still	 to	 live.	 But	 given	 that	 Winter	 hadn’t	 been	gone	 for	 more	than	 an

hour,	the	disease	seemed	to	be	working	especially	fast.

     She	scrutinized	Winter’s	  fingertips,	 relieved	to	 see	them	pink	and	healthy—

no	tinge	 of	 blue.	 Blood	 loss	to	 the	 extremities	 was	the	 final	 symptom	 of	 the

disease	before	death.

     She	 scowled.	 Hadn’t	 Cinder	  once	told	  her	 that	 Lunars	 were	 immune	 to

letumosis?	This	disease	shouldn’t	even	be	here.

     “It’s	 called	 letumosis,”	she	said.	“It’s	 a	pandemic	on	Earth.	It	acts	fast	and	no

one	survives.	But	…	 Levana	has	an	antidote.	It’s	half	 the	reason	Emperor	Kai	is

marrying	 her	in	 the	first	 place.	We	 just	 …	 we	need	to	 keep	Winter	 alive	 long

enough	to	 get	it.	 We	 have	 to	 keep	her	 alive	 until	 the	 revolution	 is	 over.	 All

right?”

     She	dragged	a	hand	through	her	hair,	but	it	got	caught	in	a	tangle	of	curls	and

she	gave	up	before	she’d	reached	the	ends.

     “That	 could	be	days,	even	weeks,”	said	Strom.	“She	does	not	smell	as	though

she	has	that	much	time.”

     “Stop	 talking	about	how	 she	smells!”	she	screamed.	“Yes,	the	disease	is	bad.

It’s—horrible.	  But	we	can’t	just	 leave	her	here.	We	have	to	do	something.”

     Strom	rocked	back	 on	his	heels,	eyeing	the	princess	with	disgust.	Which	 was

554
still	 better	 than	 the	  ravenous	glint	  his	 eyes	 had	 had	 before.	 “She	 needs	 a

suspension	tank.”

     “A	 what?”

     “We	 use	them	for	healing	after	surgeries	or	severe	injuries.”	 He	shrugged.	“It

may	slow	the	progression	of	the	disease.”

     “Where	 do	we	get	one?”

     “I	 expect	they’ll	 have	one	here.	Dangerous	work	in	this	sector.”

     “Great.	 Let’s	 go.”	 Pushing	herself	 to	her	feet,	 Scarlet	dusted	off	 her	 hands.

Strom	stared	at	her,	then	down	at	Winter.	He	didn’t	come	any	closer.

     “Ugh.	 Fine.”	 Crouching	again,	Scarlet	grabbed	Winter’s	 arms	and	was	about

to	 haul	her	 over	 one	 shoulder	 when	 Strom	 lumbered	 forward	 and	 lifted	  the

princess	into	his	arms.

     “Well,	   aren’t	 you	  a	 perfect	 gentleman,”	  Scarlet	 muttered,	 grabbing	  her

hoodie	instead.

     “Just	 hurry,”	 he	 said,	his	 face	already	strained	 in	 an	effort	 to	 take	shallow

breaths.

     They	practically	 ran	back	toward	the	residences.

     Scarlet	 burst	 out	 of	 the	 tree	 line,	 flushed	 and	 panting.	 Those	 who	 were

gathered	turned	to	watch	as	Strom	emerged	with	Winter	in	his	arms.

     “The	 princess	has	been	poisoned,”	said	Scarlet.	“She’s	ill	 with	a	fatal	 disease

called	letumosis.	 The	 queen	has	an	 antidote,	but	 Winter	 will	  likely	  die	 if	 we

don’t	 slow	the	spread	of	 the	disease	right	 away.”	 She	spotted	the	bearded	man

who	had	acted	as	the	leader	before.	“Is	there	a	suspension	tank	in	this	sector?”

     “Yes,	 at	the	clinic.	  I	don’t	 know…”	  He	glanced	 at	a	white-haired	 man	who

was	emerging	from	the	crowd.

555
     The	 white-haired	 man	 approached	Winter,	  felt	 for	 a	 pulse,	and	 lifted	  her

eyelids	one	at	 a	time.	 A	 doctor,	she	guessed.	“The	 tank	 isn’t	 in	 use,”	he	said,

following	 his	quick	 inspection.	“It	 will	 take	fifteen	 or	twenty	 minutes	to	prep	the

tank	and	the	girl	for	immersion.”

     Scarlet	nodded.	“Let’s	 get	on	it,	then.”

     The	 doctor	 led	 them	through	 the	 crowd.	 The	 people	parted,	 watching	 the

princess	with	distraught	expressions.

     “Who	 would	 do	such	a	thing?”	someone	whispered	as	Scarlet	passed.	“To	the

princess,”	another	voice	added.

     “Does	 this	mean	we	have	a	traitor	 among	our	people?”	 the	doctor	asked,	his

voice	low.

     Scarlet	 shook	 her	head.	 “I	 don’t	  think	 so.	 Whoever	 did	 this	 had	to	 have

access	to	the	disease,	somehow,	and	expensive	candy.	They	must	have	sneaked

in	for	Winter	 and	left.”

     “Or	 they	are	still	among	us,	wearing	a	glamour.”

     She	sniffed.	 Stupid	 Lunars	and	 their	 stupid	glamours.	 Anyone	 could	 be	an

enemy.	Anyone	  she	 passed	could	 be	 a	 thaumaturge	 or	 one	 of	 those	 lousy

aristocrats	 or	 the	  queen	herself,	  and	 Scarlet	 wouldn’t	   be	 able	 to	  tell	  the

difference.

     Still,	 why	 would	 anyone	come	all	the	way	 out	here	just	 to	attack	Winter	 but

leave	the	 rest	 of	 them	 alone,	 knowing	  they	 were	 planning	 to	  join	 Selene’s

revolution?	Was	this	a	warning?	A	 threat?	A	distraction?

     A	 sinking	 thought	occurred	 to	her.	 Perhaps	they	weren’t	 leaving	the	 rest	of

them	alone	at	all.	 Letumosis	was	highly	  contagious,	and	it	 acted	fast.	In	closed

quarters,	with	recirculating	 air	…

556
     “Here,”	  said	the	doctor,	 leading	them	 into	a	 building	 that	was	 only	slightly

larger	than	the	 neighboring	houses	and	just	 as	run-down.	 A	coffin-shaped	 tank

stood	against	one	wall,	 covered	in	dust	 and	piled	high	 with	 worn	 blankets.	The

doctor	shoved	the	linens	onto	the	floor.	 “There	are	beds	in	that	room	if	 you	want

to	lay	her	down	while	 I	get	it	ready.”

     Strom	 seemed	happy	to	 do	just	 that.	 His	 face	was	 still	 contorted	 when	he

returned.	“I	  am	going	  to	bring	  in	 some	of	 my	 men	 to	 have	the	 tank	 moved

outside.”

     The	doctor	glanced	up.	“Outside?”

     “The	 people	admire	her.	They	should	be	able	to	see	her—a	reminder	of	 what

we’re	fighting	 for.”

     The	doctor	 blinked	 rapidly,	 but	gave	a	small	 nod.	“All	  right.	 It	 won’t	 affect

the	treatment.”

     Strom	left	 the	clinic,	his	footsteps	pounding	on	the	short	wooden	porch.

     “I	  am	afraid,”	 said	 the	doctor,	 sounding	 very	 afraid	indeed,	 “that	 we	 have

only	the	one	tank.”

     Scarlet	held	his	gaze.	“So?”

     Lips	 tightening,	  he	gestured	at	 her.	 Scarlet	followed	  the	 look	 to	 her	 own

hands.	Nothing.	Nothing.	 Then	 she	saw	the	red-ringed	bruise	 on	her	upper	arm

and	cursed.

557
	




                                              Sixty-Four







He	dreamed	of	 Ran,	his	 younger	brother,	 after	 he’d	become	 a	monster.	In	 the

dream,	he	watched	as	Ran	prowled	around	his	prey,	his	muscles	flexing	 beneath

his	skin,	 saliva	gathering	at	 the	corners	of	 his	mouth.	 Ran’s	hand	curled	 into	 a

fist,	then	sprang	open,	revealing	 the	fingernails	 he’d	filed	 into	 sharp	points.	His

eyes	glinted	with	the	knowledge	that	his	prey	had	nowhere	to	run.

     With	 a	snarl,	Ran	dug	 his	claws	into	 the	victim’s	 sides	and	tossed	her—her.

The	dream	sharpened,	the	blurred	shadow	turning	 into	a	girl	 as	she	was	thrown

into	a	 statue	at	the	center	of	 a	dried	 fountain	 basin.	She	was	bleeding,	 her	red

hair	dark	with	grime,	 her	eyes	bloodshot	with	panic.

     Wolf	 watched,	but	 could	do	nothing.	 He	was	encapsulated	in	stone	and	only

his	thoughts	were	wild	and	alert,	telling	 him	again	and	again	that	he’d	failed	her.

     The	scene	switched,	and	he	was	a	boy	meeting	his	pack	for	 the	first	time.	 He

was	still	 trying	 to	 get	used	to	 the	fact	 that	they	had	 taken	his	Lunar	 gift	 away

from	 him	and	 turned	it	 into	 something	 unnatural.	Something	 that	would	 make

him	a	better	soldier	for	 their	 queen.	The	rest	of	the	boys	eyed	him	 with	loathing

and	distrust,	 though	 he	didn’t	  know	 why.	 He	 was	just	 like	  them.	A	  pawn,	a

mutant.

558
     Just	like	them.

     The	 sound	of	 a	 gunshot	ricocheted	 in	 his	 head	and	 he	was	 standing	 in	 a

crowded,	dusty	square.	His	mother	collapsed	beside	him.	Blood	pooled	under	his

feet.	But	 they	weren’t	 his	 feet.	They	 were	enormous	 paws,	prowling	 back	 and

forth,	and	the	scent	of	his	mother’s	blood	was	in	his	nostrils—

     The	 dream	 ended	the	 same	way	 it	 had	 begun.	 With	 the	 girl,	  beaten	and

covered	in	blood.	She	was	on	her	hands	and	knees,	scrambling	to	get	away.	She

rolled	onto	 her	back.	He	could	 smell	the	blood	 on	her.	He	 could	feel	 the	horror

rolling	 off	her	in	torrents.	He	could	 see	the	hatred	in	her	eyes.

     This	time,	 he	was	the	predator.	This	time,	she	was	looking	at	him.

     He	jolted	 awake.	Stop	Ran.	Kill	 the	alpha.	 Run	away.	Save	her.	Find	the	old

woman.	Kill	 Jael	and	rip	 his	still-beating	 heart	 from	his	chest.	Find	 his	parents.

Join	his	pack.	 Tear	their	 limbs	 from	their	 sockets.	Hide.	Be	brave.	 Protect	 her.

Find	her.	Save	her.	Kill	 her—

     “A	 little	 help	here!”

     His	 eyes	were	open,	but	he	couldn’t	see	beyond	blaring	lights.	 Someone	was

holding	 down	his	 arms.	Multiple	  someones.	Growling,	 he	snapped	his	 teeth	at

his	captors,	but	caught	only	air.

     “Stars	above,”	 someone	grunted.	“I’ve	  never	seen	one	of	them	wake	up	like

that	before.	Hand	me	that	tranquilizer.”

     “No.	 Do	not	tranquilize	 him.”	 This	 second	feminine	voice	was	soft	and	calm,

yet	spoke	in	demands.	“Her	Majesty	has	requested	his	presence.”

     Wolf	  got	 one	 arm	 loose.	Cords	 snapped	around	 him.	 Something	 scraped

beneath	the	skin	of	his	forearm,	but	he	was	too	frazzled	to	 pay	it	much	attention.

He	snagged	one	of	the	blurred	shapes	by	the	throat	 and	tossed	him	overhead.	A

559
scream	was	followed	by	a	crash	of	metal.

     “What—”

     Wolf	 found	 the	second	person	and	wrapped	 both	hands	around	their	 throat.

Just	a	snap	…

     A	 shock	of	 pain	tore	 through	his	 arms.	He	let	 go	and	the	stranger	stumbled

back,	gasping	for	air.

     Wolf	 collapsed	back	 onto	the	table.	Though	 the	pain	had	been	brief,	 his	left

hand	continued	to	twitch.

     It	 wasn’t	a	table	at	all,	 he	realized.	Shallow	walls	 surrounded	him.	Dozens	of

tubes,	many	of	 which	were	 still	 buried	in	 his	flesh.	 The	tugging	 sensation	he’d

felt	 before	 was	 from	 needles	still	  half-buried	  under	 his	 skin.	 Grimacing,	 he

turned	his	face	away,	the	sight	churning	his	stomach.

     Not	more	needles.	Not	another	tank.	Not	more	surgeries.

     Footsteps	approached	and	he	glanced	toward	his	feet.	A	form	was	silhouetted

in	the	 bright	 lights.	 A	 female	thaumaturge	in	 red,	 with	 pitch-black	 hair	 pulled

into	a	bun.	“Welcome	back,	Alpha	 Kesley.”

     Wolf	  swallowed,	  though	  the	 movement	 hurt	  his	 throat.	  Something	 felt

wrong.	Many	things	 felt	wrong.	Something	was	on	his	face.	A	 mask,	or—

     He	reached	for	his	mouth	but	the	cords	held	him	 back,	and	this	time	he	didn’t

fight	them.

     “Finish	  the	reconstitution	  procedures,”	 said	the	 thaumaturge.	“He	  is	quite

amicable	now.”

     Another	 woman	crept	into	 view,	 rubbing	 her	neck.	She	eyed	Wolf	 warily	 as

she	started	to	remove	the	needles	from	his	arms,	then	disconnected	some	probes

that	had	been	stuck	to	his	scalp.	He	flinched	at	each	one.

560
     “Can	you	 sit?”	asked	the	lab	technician.

     Wolf	  braced	his	 muscles	and	pushed	himself	 upward.	 The	 task	was	 easier

than	he’d	expected.	His	brain	 was	telling	 him	he	was	weak,	 confused,	delirious.

But	his	body	felt	 ready	to	fight.	His	 nerves	hummed	with	unspent	energy.

     The	technician	handed	him	a	cup	of	orange	liquid.	 He	sniffed	 it	first,	 his	nose

curling	in	distaste,	then	fit	 it	to	his	lips.

     He	paused.	Lowered	the	cup	again.

     Raising	his	free	hand,	he	pressed	it	against	his	mouth.	His	nose.	His	jaw.

     His	body	 convulsed	with	horror.

     It	 was	done.	 After	 years	of	 fighting	 to	 avoid	 becoming	 one	of	 the	queen’s

monsters,	it	had	happened.

     “Is	 something	wrong,	Alpha	 Kesley?”

     He	met	the	thaumaturge’s	 gaze.	She	was	watching	him	like	 one	might	watch

a	ticking	 bomb.	 Wolf	 knew	 he	had	 no	words	 to	express	all	 the	confusion	 and

bewilderment	and	the	savage	needs	pulsing	through	his	brains,	needs	he	couldn’t

name.	He	didn’t	think	 he	was	capable	of	speaking,	anyway.	He	drank	the	orange

liquid.

     The	dream	 came	back	to	him	 in	 sharp,	scattered	pieces.	The	girl’s	 red	hair.

His	brother’s	animalistic	 fury.	 His	mother	falling,	 dead,	out	of	his	reach.

     Always	 back	 to	 the	beautiful,	 quick-tongued	 girl.	  The	memory	 of	 her	was

sharpest	of	all,	because	he	so	clearly	remembered	how	she	loathed	him.

     Memories	 and	fears	crowded	 together,	shoving	 up	against	one	another,	and

he	could	no	longer	tell	truth	from	 fiction.	 His	head	ached.

     “What	  did	 you	  say	was	 different	  about	 him	  from	 the	 others?”	 said	 the

thaumaturge,	walking	around	to	Wolf’s	 side.

561
     The	 technician	  analyzed	 a	 screen	built	  into	  the	 tank’s	 side.	 “His	  brain

patterns	 were	  more	 active	  than	  they	  usually	  are	 in	  the	  final	  stages	 of

reengineering,	and	 usually	  when	 they	 wake	 up	 they’re	 just	 …	  hungry.	 Not

violent.	That	comes	later,	once	they’ve	gotten	their	strength	back.”

     “He	 seems	to	have	plenty	of	strength.”

     “I	  noticed.”	 The	technician	 shook	 her	head.	“It	  could	 be	from	 rushing	 the

process.	Normally	 we	have	them	 for	 at	least	a	week.	 His	 mind	 and	body	have

been	through	 a	 lot	  in	 a	 short	 period	  of	 time,	  which	 could	  be	causing	 the

aggression.”

     “Is	 he	fit	to	serve	the	queen?”

     The	technician	 peered	at	Wolf.	 He	 crumpled	the	 cup	in	 his	fist.	 She	gulped

and	slid	back	a	step.

     “As	 capable	as	any	other	soldier.	I	suggest	getting	some	food	into	him	 before

putting	him	 on	 active	duty.	 And	 of	 course,	usually	they	 spend	months	training

with	 a	thaumaturge	after	 the	surgeries	 are	complete,	so	 their	 master	can	learn

their	bioelectric	patterns	and	how	best	to	control	them—”

     “They	 are	not	made	to	be	controlled.”

     The	 technician	frowned.	 “I	  realize	 that.	But	 they	 can	be	taught	 obedience.

He’s	a	loaded	weapon.	I	 wouldn’t	 recommend	 bringing	 him	into	 a	room	full	  of

people	without	anyone	first	being	able	to	handle	him.”

     “Does	it	 not	look	like	 I	can	handle	him?”

     The	 technician’s	  attention	 danced	 from	 the	 thaumaturge	 to	  Wolf	  to	 the

crumpled	cup	in	 his	fist.	 She	lifted	 her	hands.	“I’m	  just	here	to	make	 sure	their

bodies	don’t	reject	the	modifications.”

     Wolf	 ran	a	tongue	along	the	sharp	point	 of	his	canine	tooth.	It	 had	taken	him

562
months	to	get	used	to	 the	implants	and	now	 they	felt	 all	 wrong	 again.	Too	big.

Too	sharp.	There	was	a	dull	ache	through	his	entire	jaw.

     The	thaumaturge	paced	around	the	tank.	“Alpha	  Ze’ev	 Kesley,	you	are	once

again	 a	 soldier	 in	  the	 queen’s	  army.	 Unfortunately,	  your	  pack	 of	  special

operatives	disbanded	after	the	first	 attack	 on	Paris	and	 we	do	not	 have	time	 to

get	you	 reacquainted	with	 a	new	 one.	For	 now,	 you	will	  be	serving	 as	a	lone

wolf.”

     She	smiled.	Wolf	 did	not.

     “I	  am	 Thaumaturge	 Bement,	 but	 you	 will	  refer	 to	 me	 as	Mistress,”	  she

continued.	“You	 have	been	granted	a	great	honor.	The	queen	wishes	you	to	be	a

part	of	  her	personal	 entourage	during	  her	coronation,	  in	 which	 she	 is	to	 be

crowned	empress	of	the	Eastern	Commonwealth	of	Earth.	As	 you	have	a	history

of	rebellious	 tendencies,	she	feels	your	presence,	serving	as	a	loyal	soldier,	will

send	a	message	to	any	who	would	dare	threaten	the	crown.	Can	you	 guess	what

that	message	is?”

     Wolf	 said	nothing.

     Thaumaturge	Bement’s	 tone	turned	 to	a	 whispered	threat.	“Once	 the	 queen

has	claimed	you,	you	are	forever	hers.”	She	tapped	her	fingers	against	the	rim	of

the	tank.	“Let’s	 see	if	you	can	remember	that	this	time.”

     She	waited	for	 a	response.	When	there	wasn’t	one,	her	eyes	narrowed.	“Have

you	forgotten	your	 training?	When	you	 are	addressed	by	your	thaumaturge,	your

proper	response	is?”

     “Yes,	 Mas—Mistress.”	 It	 felt	like	 the	words	 were	being	pulled	up	 from	him,

the	words	a	reflex	drilled	 into	him	from	 years	and	years	under	Thaumaturge	Jael.

Rip	his	still-beating	 heart	from	his	chest.

563
     Wolf	 cringed	and	his	mouth	started	to	water.	He	was	hungry.

     “Who	 do	you	serve,	Alpha	Kesley?”

     Who	did	 he	serve?

     The	 queen’s	beautiful	 face	rose	up	 in	 his	memory,	 seated	upon	her	throne.

Watching	the	 packs	fight	 to	gain	 favor.	He	 had	desired	to	 impress	her.	He	had

killed	for	 her.	He	had	been	proud.

     “I	 serve	my	queen,”	he	said,	his	voice	stronger.

     “That’s	  correct.”	 Bement	leaned	over	 the	tank,	 but	Wolf	  didn’t	 look	 away.

He	was	salivating	now.	 He	could	smell	the	blood	 pumping	beneath	the	woman’s

skin,	but	a	memory	of	pain	darted	down	his	spine	when	he	thought	of	tasting	her.

     “I	 am	told,”	  she	said,	“that	 you	took	 for	yourself	 a	mate	while	 you	 were	on

Earth.”

     He	tensed.	Her	red	hair	flashed	through	his	thoughts.

     “What	 would	you	 do	if	you	saw	her	today?”

     He	watched	 her	being	thrown	 against	the	statue.	Crawling	 on	her	hands	and

knees.	Staring	at	him	with	terrified,	 hate-filled	 eyes.

     A	 growl	rumbled	 deep	in	his	throat.	“Earthens	have	the	sweetest	flesh.”

     The	thaumaturge’s	 lips	 turned	upward.	 “He’ll	  do	fine.”	  Pushing	away	from

the	tank,	 she	strode	 past	the	 technician	 and	 her	fallen	  companion.	“Get	  him

cleaned	up.	You	know	how	Her	Majesty	 likes	to	maintain	 appearances.”

564
	




                                               Sixty-Five







Jacin,	Cress,	and	Thorne	 had	gone,	leaving	 Cinder	 to	 cobble	her	way	 through

Iko’s	 repairs.	She	knew	 immediately	 that	she	couldn’t	  get	Iko	 back	to	 normal.

Not	only	 had	Iko	 given	 up	her	 finger	 and	some	of	 the	wires	 required	for	 hand

dexterity,	but	they	 also	didn’t	have	the	replacement	parts	or	skin	fibers	 to	fix	 the

tear	in	her	shoulder	 or	bullet	 hole	in	 her	chest.	But	Cinder	 managed	to	wrangle

together	a	temporary	 skeletal	patch	and	reconfigure	 the	joints	 so	 she	would	be

able	to	 move	 her	 elbow	 and	 wrist,	 at	 least.	 When	 Iko	 swooned	 with	 relief,

Cinder	knew	exactly	 what	she	was	feeling—having	 complete	loss	of	 a	limb	was

a	difficult	 thing	to	get	used	to.

     While	 Cinder	 worked,	 Iko	 explained	 to	 her	how	 they’d	 managed	to	 sneak

into	Artemisia	 aboard	a	supply	 train,	how	 most	of	 the	shuttle	system	was	down

and	the	trains	were	 being	searched,	how	Levana	was	nervous,	 if	 not	downright

terrified.

     When	  she	was	  done,	 Cinder	 told	  her	 about	 being	  transported	 back	 to

Artemisia	 and	how	 they’d	 separated	her	and	Wolf.	 How	 he	hadn’t	 been	at	 the

trial,	and	how	she	had	no	idea	where	they’d	taken	him.	She	told	Iko	 about	seeing

Kai	in	the	throne	room	and	how	he	looked	unharmed,	so	far.

565
     She	asked	if	the	broadcast	had	also	shown	Adri’s	trial.

     “Adri?”	  Iko’s	 lashes	fluttered,	for	 a	beat,	two	beats,	three,	before	she	said,	“I

don’t	compute.”

     “Adri	   and	Pearl	 are	 here,	 on	 Luna.	 Adri	  was	 put	 on	 trial	  before	 me—

something	about	how	she’s	been	keeping	design	patents	for	a	weapon	that	could

neutralize	the	Lunar	gift.	 I	think	Levana’s	 found	out	about	Garan’s	invention,	 the

one	that	was	installed	on	my	spine.”

     Iko	 pressed	her	fingertips	together	in	 imitation	 of	thoughtfulness.	 “I	 suppose

it	makes	sense	that	Levana	wouldn’t	want	such	a	thing	to	exist.”

     “I	 know.	 It	hadn’t	occurred	to	 me	before,	but	such	a	device	would	change	the

balance	of	power	between	Luna	and	Earth,	if	 it	 could	be	manufactured.	If	 we’re

ever	going	to	 have	an	alliance	 with	 Luna,	a	 device	like	 this	 would	 be	the	only

way	for	Earthens	to	be	sure	they	aren’t	being	manipulated.”

     “That’s	  genius,”	Iko	 said.	 “I	 always	 liked	 Garan.	He	was	 nice	to	 me,	even

after	they	 discovered	my	 personality	 chip	 was	 faulty.	 He	 at	least	kept	 all	 my

software	updated.	 You	 know,	 until	  Adri	  had	me	 disassembled.”	 She	paused.

“The	first	 time.”

     Cinder	 smiled	 to	herself.	 The	first	  time	she’d	 seen	Iko	 she’d	been	nothing

more	than	a	jumble	 of	 android	parts	 thrown	into	 a	box,	 waiting	 to	be	 put	back

together.	Iko	had	been	her	first	project,	an	attempt	to	 prove	her	worth	to	her	new

stepfamily.	She’d	had	no	idea	at	the	time	 that	Iko	 would	also	become	one	of	her

dearest	friends.

     Her	 smile	 faded,	turning	 to	 suspicion.	“Iko,	  they	 stopped	making	 software

updates	for	Serv9.2s	over	a	decade	ago.”

     Iko	 tugged	on	one	of	her	braids.	“I	 never	thought	about	that.	You	 don’t	 think

566
he	was	trying	to	fix	 the	bug	that	made	me	…	me.	Do	you?”

     “I	 don’t	 know.	 I	 don’t	 think	 so.	He	designed	android	 systems,	after	all.	I’m

sure	if	he	wanted	to	 reprogram	you	to	 be	a	regular	android,	he	could	 have	done

it.”	 She	hesitated.	If	Linh	Garan	hadn’t	 been	updating	Iko’s	software	 or	trying	 to

fix	 her,	what	had	he	been	doing?	“I	 guess	it	doesn’t	 matter.	Garan	invented	this

device,	but	 it	 sounds	like	 Levana	destroyed	 all	his	 notes.	If	 my	 own	 software

wasn’t	already	damaged	enough	by	Dr.	Erland,	 I	doubt	that	dip	 in	the	lake	did	 it

any	good…”	She	trailed	off,	 squinting	at	Iko.

     “What?”

     “Nothing.”	  Cinder	shook	her	head.	There	were	too	many	problems	to	fix,	 too

many	puzzles	to	 solve.	The	 mystery	 of	Garan’s	 device	would	 have	 to	wait.	 “I

just	can’t	 imagine	how	 Levana	would	 have	even	known	about	the	 device	in	the

first	place,	that’s	all.”

     “I	 told	her.”

     Cinder	 snapped	her	head	toward	the	door,	 where	Jacin	was	standing	 as	still

and	quiet	 as	 the	door	 frame	 itself,	  sporting	 a	decent-size	 bruise	 on	his	 jaw,

compliments	of	Thorne.	“You	 told	her?”

     “Information	  has	value.	I	traded	that	piece	for	my	life.”

     It	 was	always	difficult	  to	 read	Jacin’s	emotions,	 but	if	 Cinder	 had	to	guess,

she	would	  have	 thought	  he	 was	 incensed	 over	 making	  such	 a	 trade.	 She

remembered	telling	 Jacin	about	the	device,	ages	ago,	in	 the	little	 oasis	town	 of

Farafrah.	His	 face	had	 taken	on	 a	curiosity	  that	bordered	 on	hunger	 when	he

learned	there	was	an	invention	 that	could	 prevent	a	Lunar	 from	 using	their	 gift

and	prevent	their	gift	from	 driving	 them	mad.

     She	stifled	a	gasp.

567
     Winter.

     Of	course.

     Jacin	jerked	 his	chin	 toward	the	hallway.	 “I	 hate	to	 rush	you,	but	 the	crown

just	 released	a	new	 video	  that	 you	 might	 be	 interested	in	  seeing.	Evidently

you’re	dead.”

     He	and	 Iko	led	 her	to	 the	mansion’s	home	 theater,	with	 enormous	lounging

chairs	that	each	had	a	built-in	 beverage	dispenser	on	its	side.	 Thorne	and	Cress

were	standing	 beside	a	 larger-than-life	  holograph	 depicting	 Levana.	 She	was

wearing	her	 veil,	 but	 the	 sound	was	 muted.	The	 enormity	 of	  it	 made	Cinder

recoil.

     “Jacin	says	they	found	my	 body?”

     Thorne	 gave	her	a	passing	glance.	 “That’s	 the	word,	 corpse	girl.	 You	 were

dredged	up	from	the	lake	last	night.	They	 even	have	this	mannequin	thing	with	 a

painted	metal	hand	 and	they	keep	showing	 a	grainy	 photo	 of	it.	 Stay	 around	a

while—you’ll	  see.	It	keeps	looping	with	 this	speech	from	Levana.	They	have	the

most	boring	entertainment	on	this	rock.”

     “What	 is	she	saying?”

     Thorne’s	 voice	pitched	 high	in	 imitation	 of	 the	queen.	“The	impostor	 of	 my

beloved	niece	is	vanquished	…	Let	 us	put	this	messiness	behind	us	while	we	go

forward	with	 the	coronations	 …	I	 am	a	psychotic,	power-hungry	 nut	basket	and

my	breath	smells	really	bad	under	this	veil.”

     Cinder	 snickered.	She	tried	to	 check	the	time	 with	 her	internal	 clock	 before

remembering	it	no	longer	worked.	“How	  long	until	 the	coronation?”

     “Nine	 hours,”	said	Iko.

     Nine	 hours.	 They’d	 been	in	 this	 mansion	 for	 an	entire	 day	 and	night	 and

568
Cinder	had	been	asleep	for	most	of	it.

     “There’s	 also	 the	ticker…”	  Cress	pointed	 to	the	 holograph,	where	 a	list	 of

sectors	was	trekking	 across	the	bottom,	making	 a	constant	floating	 ring	 around

Levana.

     “That’s	  the	interesting	 part,”	 said	 Thorne.	“She’s	 passed	an	 edict	that	 any

sector	found	in	 violation	 of	curfew	 or	 suspected	of	assisting	‘the	impostor’	 will

be	barricaded,	to	be	dealt	with	on	a	case-by-case	basis	after	the	coronation.	Then

she	goes	on	some	spiel	about	repentance	and	begging	their	queen	for	mercy.”

     “It	 seems	a	lot	of	people	were	motivated	 by	your	stunt	 at	the	wedding	feast,”

said	Jacin.	“The	number	of	barricaded	sectors	keeps	growing.”

     “How	 many?”

     “Eighty-seven	 at	last	count,”	said	Cress.

     “Including	   RM-9,”	   added	 Thorne,	  “and	  every	 sector	 in	  its	  immediate

surroundings.	Rather	 than	 discouraging	the	 rebellion,	 the	 raid	 there	 seems	to

have	angered	people	even	more.”

     Eighty-seven	at	last	count.

     “And	  you	think	  they’ve	 all	 …	 that	all	 these	sectors…”	 Cinder	 swallowed.

Her	head	still	felt	foggy.	 “What	 do	we	think	this	 means?”

     “It	 means	the	queen	is	having	a	bad	day,”	said	Jacin.

     Thorne	 nodded.	“Some	of	 it	 could	be	her	 own	paranoia,	but	 even	when	Iko

and	I	  were	trying	  to	 get	 into	 Artemisia	  there	 were	 rumors	 of	 some	 sectors

blockading	 their	own	 tunnels	 to	keep	 supplies	out	 of	 the	city,	 or	 looting	 their

factories	for	  weapons,	that	 sort	 of	 thing.	 And	 that	 was	 before	your	  trial.	 Of

course,	we	don’t	know	 if	 the	people	believe	you’re	 really	dead,	but	I’m	 not	 sure

it	matters	at	this	point.	 If	you’re	 alive,	 then	you’re	one	hell	 of	a	revolutionary.	 If

569
you’re	dead,	then	you’re	one	hell	of	a	martyr.”

     “It	 sort	of	matters	to	me,”	 Cinder	said,	watching	the	ticker	scroll	 by.

     Eighty-seven	 sectors	had	been	ready	to	fight	 for	 her—for	 themselves.	From

what	she’d	seen,	each	sector	housed	at	least	a	thousand	civilians,	and	sometimes

many	times	that.	That	should	be	more	than	enough	to	overwhelm	 the	capital	and

overthrow	Levana	…

     Except	all	 those	people	were	trapped.

     “Don’t	  faint,”	 said	Thorne.

     She	looked	at	him.	“What?”

     “You	 look	 stressed	out.”

     Glowering,	  Cinder	  started	 to	 pace.	 “Can	 we	  do	 something	 about	 these

barricades?	The	people	can’t	 come	to	 our	 aid	if	 they’re	 confined	 to	 their	 own

sectors.”

     “Oh,	 sweetheart,”	said	Thorne,	“we	are	so	far	ahead	of	you.	Cress?”

     Cress	pulled	 up	the	 holograph	 of	Luna	 they’d	 spent	a	 lot	 of	time	 studying

aboard	the	Rampion—all	 the	domes	and	subway	tunnels	laid	out	 on	the	moon’s

rocky,	cratered	surface.	She	had	been	tagging	the	barricaded	sectors	as	they	were

listed	on	 Levana’s	 broadcast.	It	 was	still	  only	 a	fraction	  of	 all	 the	sectors	on

Luna,	but	 then,	it	 was	possible	there	 were	plenty	 more	sectors	in	 uprising	 that

Levana	didn’t	know	 about	yet.

     Levana	 was	 focusing	 on	 those	 sectors	closest	 to	 Artemisia,	 which	  made

sense.	No	wonder	she	was	nervous—the	revolution	  had	already	crept	up	to	 her

doorstep.

     Cress	adjusted	the	holograph,	zooming	in	on	Artemisia,	 then	the	palace.

     “The	 barricade	controls	are	a	part	of	 the	main	security	 network	that	 operates

570
out	of	the	palace’s	security	center,”	 said	Cress.	“I	could	hack	them	 remotely,	but

not	without	 raising	alarms.	At	 least,	not	with	 the	amount	of	 time	I	 have	to	do	it.

So…”

     “We	 thought	we’d	 break	in,”	 said	Thorne.	He	had	claimed	 one	of	the	lounge

chairs	and	kicked	up	his	feet.

     “Of	 course	you	did,”	 said	Cinder.

     “We	 got	into	New	 Beijing	 Palace,	we	can	get	into	this	one.	From	there,	Cress

undoes	the	barricades	on	 the	outer	 sectors	and	 schedules	the	security	 barriers

around	the	 central	 dome	to	 open	 at	the	 end	of	 the	 coronation.”	  He	filled	  an

expensive-looking	goblet	with	 a	blue	drink	 from	the	chair’s	 dispenser	and	took	a

big	 gulp.	 “It’s	  the	 best	 way	 to	 coordinate	  a	surprise	 attack	 and	 make	 sure

everyone	is	 entering	Artemisia	  at	the	 same	time,	 even	if	  we	have	 no	way	 of

communicating	with	 one	another.”

     Cress	 pulled	 back	  the	 holograph’s	 focus,	  highlighting	  the	 eight	  maglev

tunnels	 that	 were	 the	 only	 passages	in	  and	 out	 of	 the	 city—excepting	   the

spaceship	ports.

     Cinder	 massaged	her	wrist.	 “It’s	  too	risky	 to	 send	you	 in.	 I’d	 rather	 Cress

remove	the	barricades	remotely,	even	if	it	does	raise	alarms.”

     “That	 makes	two	of	us,”	 said	Thorne,	“but	that’s	 not	the	only	reason	we	need

to	get	into	 the	palace.	We	also	need	access	to	the	queen’s	broadcast	room	if	we

want	to	do	anything	 with	 that	video	of	 yours.	Levana	disabled	all	outside	access

to	the	 system	after	 your	last	 stunt,	so	 if	 we	 want	to	 project	 it	 over	the	 whole

system,	we	have	to	do	it	from	inside.”

     Cinder	inhaled	sharply.	 “Is	the	video	…	 is	it	worth	 it?”

     “Oh!”	  Iko	clapped	her	hands	to	her	face.	“It’s	horrifying!”

571
     Thorne	grinned.	“It’s	  a	jackpot.”

     “I’ll	  load	it	 on	the	projector,”	said	Cress,	turning	toward	the	holograph	node.

     “Please,	no,”	said	Iko,	 “we	don’t	 need	to	see	it	that	big	again.”

     Cinder	tapped	her	foot.	“How	 are	you	proposing	 we	get	into	the	palace?	I	can

glamour	all	four	 of	us	as	coronation	guests	if	we	wanted	to	sneak	in—”

     “Cool	 those	engines,	jet	plane,”	said	Thorne.	“You	 already	have	a	job.	While

Cress	and	I	are	clearing	the	passages	into	the	city,	you,	Iko,	 and	Jacin	are	going

to	be	 stationed	 in	 these	three	sectors”—he	 indicated	 them	 on	 the	 holograph,

three	of	 the	 domes	adjacent	to	 Artemisia	 Central—“or	  at	 least	in	 the	 tunnels

underneath	them,	welcoming	 all	 those	rebels	 you’ve	 stirred	up	 and	organizing

what	last-minute	battle	plan	we	 can.	In	approximately	 nine	hours,	with	 any	luck,

this	city	is	going	 to	be	under	siege	by	a	whole	lot	of	angry	Lunars.	They’re	 going

to	need	someone	to	lead	them.”

     “That’s	 you,”	 Iko	clarified.

     “But	 I	 thought	this	dome	was	cordoned	off?	 How	are	we	supposed	to	get	out

to	those	sectors	if	we’re	stuck	in	here?”

     “There	 are	storage	units	not	 far	 from	 here,”	said	Jacin,	 “where	some	of	 the

families	keep	recreational	vehicles,	including	 terrain	speeders.”

     “Terrain	 speeders?”

     “Vehicles	  made	  for	 going	  outside	 the	  domes.	 They	 can	  adjust	 to	  the

unmodified	 gravity	  and	 atmospheric	 conditions	  and	 handle	 difficult	   terrain.

Dunes.	Craters.	Rich	people	use	them	for	sport.	They’re	 not	as	fast	as	ships,	but

we	can	bypass	the	shuttles	and	cut	a	direct	route	to	the	nearest	sectors,	anywhere

that	has	external	dock	access.	Levana	won’t	care	about	a	couple	nobles	out	for	a

joyride.”

572
     “We’re	 splitting	 up,”	 said	Cinder.

     Iko	 wrapped	an	arm	around	Cinder’s	waist.	“Only	 temporarily.”

     “It’s	  our	best	hope	for	 coordinating	 an	attack,”	 said	Thorne,	“and	 getting	as

many	people	in	front	of	 that	palace	as	possible,	which	is	the	whole	point,	isn’t	it?

Strength	in	numbers?”

     Cinder’s	 heart	was	galloping	again,	but	she	managed	a	nod.	She	was	studying

the	holograph	again	when	an	anomaly	 caught	her	eye.	“What’s	 wrong	 with	 that

sector?”	she	asked,	pointing	to	one	that	was	tinged	red	on	the	map.

     Cress	spun	the	holograph	and	brought	the	sector	into	 focus.	“LW-12,	 lumber

and	wood	manufacturing.	Quarantined?”

     “Like	 a	disease	quarantine?”	Cinder	asked.

     “That’s	 all	we	need,”	 Thorne	muttered.

     But	 Jacin	 was	shaking	 his	 head.	“It’s	   been	a	long	  time	 since	we	 had	 an

outbreak	of	  any	 sort	 of	 disease	on	 Luna.	 There	 aren’t	  many	 environmental

influences	that	we	can’t	control.”	 He	 crossed	his	arms.	“We	do	have	measures	in

place	in	case	something	happens,	though.	With	the	domes	confined	like	they	are,

it	wouldn’t	  take	 much	to	 take	down	 a	whole	 community	 if	  a	disease	was	bad

enough.”

     “Could	 it	be	letumosis?”	 Iko	asked,	a	tinge	of	fear	vibrating	 in	her	voice.

     “That’s	 an	Earthen	disease,”	said	Jacin.	“We’ve	never	had	any	cases	here.”

     “It’s	  not	 just	 an	Earthen	 disease,”	said	 Cinder.	 “Not	 anymore.	 Dr.	 Erland

discovered	a	mutated	 strain	in	 Africa,	 remember?	Lunars	 may	 not	be	 immune

anymore,	and…”	She	gulped.	“And	 a	whole	lot	 of	Earthens	just	arrived	on	Luna.

Anyone	could	 be	a	carrier.	 One	of	 the	diplomats,	or	 even	one	of	 us.	We	might

not	even	know	it.”

573
     Jacin	gestured	to	the	holograph.	“Have	 any	of	 you	gone	into	 a	lumber	sector

lately?”

     Cinder	pressed	her	lips.

     “That’s	 what	I	 thought.	I	 doubt	any	of	 your	political	 friends	 have,	either.	It’s

probably	a	coincidence.”

     “Actually,”	  said	Cress,	pulling	 her	wide-eyed	gaze	away	from	her	portscreen,

“one	of	 us	has	been	there.”	She	input	a	new	command,	transferring	 the	feed	she

was	watching	up	to	the	holograph.

     It	 was	 a	collection	  of	 the	queen’s	 surveillance	 videos,	all	 labeled	 LW-12.

They	were	dark	and	grainy,	 but	as	Cinder’s	 eyes	adjusted	she	could	see	rows	of

trees	in	the	outside	shots	and	wood-paneled	 walls	 on	the	interiors.	 She	focused

on	one	 of	 the	 more	 crowded	 feeds,	 which	 appeared	to	  be	inside	 a	 medical

building,	 although	  it	 was	 nothing	 like	  the	 sleek,	 shiny	 laboratories	 of	 New

Beijing.

     There	were	so	many	people,	taking	up	what	few	 beds	there	were	while	others

curled	against	walls	or	collapsed	in	corners.

     Stepping	closer	to	 the	image,	Jacin	enlarged	one	of	the	feeds,	zooming	in	 on

a	rash	of	blue-and-red	rings	across	one	patient’s	throat,	 then	to	the	bloodstained

pillow	 beneath	another	patient’s	head.

     “It	 does	look	like	 letumosis,”	Cinder	 said,	gut	spasming	with	instinctive	 fear.

     “Are	 those	what	I	think	 they	are?”	asked	Iko,	pointing.

     “Lunar	  soldiers,”	 Cress	confirmed,	 enlarging	 one	of	 the	 outside	feeds	 that

showed	dozens	 of	 mutant	  men	 standing	 among	 the	 citizens.	 Many	  seemed

caught	up	 in	 a	 fervent	 conversation.	Cinder	 had	 never	 seen	them	when	 they

weren’t	 in	 attack	mode,	and	 if	 it	 wasn’t	 for	 their	 deformed	 faces,	they	would

574
have	looked	just	like,	well,	 really	big,	 scary	men.

     Then	she	spotted	someone	who	was	even	more	shocking	than	the	mutants.	A

girl	 with	 red	hair	 and	a	hooded	sweatshirt	 and	hands	settled	stubbornly	 on	her

hips.	“Scarlet!”

     Very	 much	alive	and	very	much	 unafraid	of	the	predators	surrounding	her.	In

fact,	as	she	 watched,	Scarlet	seemed	to	 be	bossing	 them	around,	 pointing	 her

finger	toward	the	main	doors	of	 the	clinic.	 Half	a	dozen	of	the	soldiers	nodded	at

her	and	left.

     “I	 don’t	 compute,”	said	Iko.

     Thorne	laughed,	 as	jovial	 as	Cinder	felt.	 “What’s	 to	compute?	They	 did	 say

they	were	going	to	build	an	army.”

     “Yes,	 but	Scarlet	wasn’t	 with	 us	in	the	desert.	How	 could	she	be	a	carrier	of

the	new	strain	of	the	disease?”

     Cinder	 started.	“You’re	  right.	 She	could	 have	…	 picked	 it	 up	from	 one	 of

us?”

     “None	 of	you	are	sick.”

     She	had	no	 answer.	She	wished	Dr.	 Erland	 was	here,	but	he	had	 died	from

the	same	disease	he’d	been	trying	to	eradicate.

     “What’s	 that	they’re	 carrying	out	of	the	clinic?”	  asked	Thorne.

     Jacin	crossed	his	arms.	“A	suspended-animation	tank.”

     Four	 soldiers	had	the	tank	 hefted	between	them,	while	 others	propped	 open

the	main	doors	of	the	med-clinic	 for	 them	to	 pass	through.	Outside,	hundreds	of

civilians	 had	 gathered—those	who	 weren’t	 already	 sick.	 The	 soldiers	 pushed

them	back	to	make	room	for	the	tank.

     Jacin	inhaled	sharply	 and	stepped	up	beside	the	holograph,	bringing	the	feed

575
into	focus.	He	paused.	Scrolled	back.	Zoomed	in	closer.

     “Oh,	 no,”	Cinder	 whispered.	Another	familiar	  face	was	encapsulated	beneath

the	tank’s	glass	lid.	Princess	Winter.

576
	




                                              Sixty-Six







There	were	no	mirrors	in	the	lab,	not	even	in	the	tiled	room	with	the	sterilizing

shower	Wolf	had	been	taken	to	in	order	to	wash	the	sticky	gel	out	of	his	hair.	He

didn’t	 need	a	mirror,	 though,	to	know	 what	they’d	 done.	He	could	 see	the

difference	in	his	bone	structure	when	he	looked	at	his	hands	and	feet.	He	could

feel	the	difference	in	his	protruding	mouth,	his	enlarged	teeth,	his	malformed

jaw.	They’d	 altered	 his	facial	 bone	structure,	making	 way	 for	 the	row	  of

implanted	canine	teeth.	There	was	a	new	curvature	to	 his	shoulders	and	an

awkward	flex	of	his	feet,	which	looked	more	like	paws	now,	made	for	running

and	bounding	at	 great	speeds.	His	 hands	were	enormous,	now	fixed	  with

reinforced,	claw-shaped	fingernails.

     He	 could	 even	smell	 it	  inside	himself.	 New	 chemicals	and	 hormones

pumping	 through	 his	  veins.	  Testosterone.	Adrenaline.	 Pheromones.	He

wondered	when	the	new	fur	would	start	sprouting	over	his	skin,	completing	the

transformation.

     He	was	miserable.	He	was	everything	he	had	never	wanted	to	be.

     He	was	also	starving.

     A	 uniform	had	been	left	 for	 him,	similar	 to	the	 uniform	he’d	 worn	as	a

577
special	 operative.	 A	  formality	  for	  his	 role	  at	 the	 coronation.	  Most	 of	  the

bioengineered	 soldiers	 received	 far	  less	distinguished	  clothing,	  being	 more

animal	than	man.

     And	 now	he	was	one	of	 them.	He	 tried	to	temper	 his	disgust.	After	 all,	 who

was	he	to	pass	judgment	on	his	brothers?

     Yet	 his	emotions	 continued	 to	fluctuate.	 Furious	 and	burning	 one	moment.

Devastated	and	full	of	self-loathing	 the	next.

     This	was	his	fate.	This	 had	always	been	his	fate.	He	couldn’t	imagine	 how	he

had	ever	thought	differently.	 Had	 he	honestly	believed	he	 could	be	better?	That

he	deserved	more?	He	was	destined	to	kill	 and	eat	and	destroy.	That	 was	all	he

was	entitled	to.

     Suddenly,	his	nose	twitched.

     Food.

     Saliva	 rolled	  onto	 his	 tongue	 and	 he	 wicked	  it	 against	 his	 sharp	 teeth.

Something	in	his	stomach	roiled,	angry	at	its	own	hollowness.

     He	shuddered,	remembering	this	 hunger	from	 back	when	he	 had	first	begun

training	as	an	operative.	He	had	both	craved	and	hated	the	slabs	of	barely	cooked

meat	they	were	 presented,	and	the	 way	they	 had	to	 fight	 for	 their	 own	 piece,

confirming	 the	pack’s	 pecking	 order	in	 the	process.	Even	then,	the	 hunger	had

not	been	this	bad.

     He	swallowed,	 hard,	and	finished	dressing.

     His	 body	had	begun	to	shake	when	he	opened	the	door	and	the	aroma	of	 the

food	burst	in	his	nostrils.	He	was	almost	panting.

     Thaumaturge	 Bement	 and	 the	lab	  technician	 were	 still	 there,	 though	 the

unconscious	man	had	been	removed.	The	technician	shrank	back	 when	she	saw

578
Wolf’s	 expression.	 She	situated	herself	 behind	 another	suspension	tank,	 filled

with	some	other	victim.

     “That	 look	must	mean	there’s	food	in	the	building,”	  she	said.

     “Indeed.”	   The	  thaumaturge	 was	  leaning	 against	  a	 wall,	   perusing	  her

portscreen.	“They	are	in	the	elevator	with	it	 now.”

     “I	 didn’t	  realize	you	 were	going	 to	have	 him	eat	here.	 Have	you	 ever	seen

one	of	them	when	they’ve	first	 eaten?”

     “I	 will	 handle	him.	Go	about	your	 business.”

     Casting	one	 more	hesitant	glance	at	 Wolf,	 the	woman	 returned	to	 checking

the	diagnostics	screens	on	the	tank.

     There	 was	 a	 chime	 down	 the	 hallway	  and	 the	 aroma	of	  food	 wafted	 a

hundred	times	stronger	still.	  Wolf	 gripped	 the	door	frame.	 His	 legs	were	weak

with	lust,	his	knees	ready	to	give	out	beneath	him.

     A	  servant	 arrived,	  pushing	 a	  wooden	 cart	 draped	 with	   a	 white	  cloth.

“Mistress,”	 he	said,	bowing	to	the	thaumaturge.	He	was	dismissed.

     Wolf’s	  senses	were	being	pummeled.	His	 ears	pricked	at	 the	hiss	of	 steam.

His	stomach	spasmed	with	desire.	Lamb.

     “Are	 you	hungry?”

     He	snarled,	growling	 at	the	thaumaturge.	He	could	lunge	at	her	now,	have	the

woman	torn	 to	bits	 before	she	even	knew	 what	was	 happening.	But	 something

held	 him	  back.	 Some	 deep-seated	fear.	  Memories	 of	  another	 thaumaturge

breaking	his	will.

     “I	 asked	you	a	question.	I	know	 you’re	 nothing	but	an	animal	 now,	but	I	 still

think	you’re	 smart	enough	to	answer	with	a	simple	yes	or	no.”

     “Yes,”	 Wolf	 grunted.

579
     “Yes,	 what?”

     Rage	 nearly	 blinded	 him,	 but	 it	  was	 shoved	back	 down.	 Wolf	  grimaced

against	the	uprise	of	hatred.	“Yes,	Mistress.”

     “Good.	  We	 do	 not	 have	 time	 to	 get	 to	  know	 each	 other	 and	 build	 the

relationship	of	understanding	a	thaumaturge	would	normally	 form	 with	her	pack.

But	I	 did	want	to	 illustrate	for	 you	two	 main	principles,	 in	 a	way	that	your	 little

animal	 brain	 can	 understand.”	 She	whisked	 off	  the	 white	 cloth,	 revealing	  a

platter	overflowing	 with	 seared	meat	and	bones,	cartilage	and	marrow.

     Wolf	 shuddered	with	 hunger,	but	also	with	 disgust.	Disgust	 at	the	meat,	and

disgust	at	his	own	cravings.	 An	odd	 memory	eclipsed	this	new	 urge.	Something

glossy	and	red	and	bursting	with	juice—tomatoes.

     They’re	the	best	part,	and	they	were	grown	 in	my	own	garden	…

     “The	 first	thing	 you	need	to	know	as	a	member	of	Her	Majesty’s	 army	is	that

a	good	dog	will	 always	be	rewarded.”	 The	thaumaturge	waved	her	arm	over	 the

food.	“Go	ahead.	Take	a	bite.”

     He	flapped	his	head,	willing	  away	the	unfamiliar	 voice.	It	was	that	girl	 again.

The	red-haired	girl	who	was	so	repulsed	by	him.

     Wolf’s	  legs	moved	 of	 their	 own	 accord,	drawing	 him	 toward	 the	cart.	 His

stomach	yearned.	His	tongue	lagged.

     But	 as	soon	 as	he	 reached	a	clawed	 hand	 toward	 the	platter,	 pain	 lanced

through	his	gut.	He	doubled	over	in	 agony.	His	legs	gave	out	and	he	crumpled	to

the	floor,	his	 shoulder	smacking	the	edge	of	the	cart	and	sending	it	crashing	into

the	nearby	wall.	 The	pain	dragged	on	 and	on,	arcing	through	 every	limb,	 like	 a

thousand	daggers	burying	themselves	in	his	flesh.

     The	thaumaturge	smiled.

580
     The	pain	 relented.	Wolf	 was	 left	trembling	  on	the	ground,	 his	cheeks	damp

from	sweat	or	tears	or	both.

     The	torture	 wasn’t	 new	to	 him.	 He	remembered	it	 from	 his	training	 before,

with	Jael.	But	he	had	not	felt	 it	since	he’d	 become	the	alpha.	A	prized	soldier.	 A

good,	loyal	pup.

     “And	 that,”	 said	the	thaumaturge,	“is	what	will	 happen	should	you	disappoint

me.	Do	we	have	an	understanding?”

     He	nodded	shakily,	his	muscles	still	 twitching.

     “Do	 we	have	an	understanding?”

     He	coughed.	“Yes.	Mistress.”

     “Good.”	  Taking	 the	 tray	off	  the	cart,	 the	thaumaturge	 dropped	it	 onto	 the

floor	beside	him.	“Now	 eat	your	meal	like	 a	good	dog.	Our	queen	awaits.”

581
	




                                          Sixty-Seven







Kai	 was	 beginning	to	  understand	why	 Levana	had	 set	the	 time	  for	 the

coronations	as	she	had.	The	ceremony	was	coming	at	the	end	of	Artemisia’s	long

night—two	weeks	of	darkness,	broken	up	only	with	artificial	light.	This	would

be	the	first	real	sunrise	Kai	had	seen	since	he’d	been	on	Luna.	A	new	dawn,	a

new	day,	a	new	empire.

     It	was	all	very	symbolic.

     He	simultaneously	longed	for	this	day	to	be	 over,	and	wanted	it	to	never

come	at	all.

     Standing	amid	the	lapping	waves	of	Artemisia	Lake,	staring	at	the	blue-black

water	that	spanned	as	far	as	he	could	see,	Kai	hoped	Levana’s	new	dawn	would

be	very	different	than	she	expected,	although	his	hope	was	spread	thin.	He	didn’t

know	if	Cinder	had	survived	the	fall	into	the	lake,	or	if	the	people	of	Luna	would

heed	her	call,	or	if	they	would	succeed	even	if	they	tried.

     At	least	he	knew	with	certainty	that	the	video	footage	of	Cinder’s	reclaimed

body	was	fake.	Even	from	the	distant,	blurry	footage,	Kai	could	tell	it	 wasn’t

her,	but	some	dummy	or	an	actor	or	some	other	poor	victim	dragged	from	the

lake	bottom	and	made	to	look	like	Cinder.

582
     If	 they	were	faking	her	death,	she	hadn’t	been	found.

     She	was	alive.	She	had	to	be	alive.

     At	 least,	with	  the	coronation	 drawing	 closer,	the	 queen	had	begun	to	 relax

some	of	the	restrictions	on	Kai	 and	the	other	Earthen	guests.	He	was	finally	 free

to	roam	the	 palace	and	even	venture	down	 to	 the	lakeshore,	though	 every	step

was	trailed	by	a	pair	of	matching	Lunar	 guards.

     He’d	 spent	his	whole	 life	 surrounded	by	guards,	though.	It	 had	gotten	easier

to	ignore	them.

     She’d	even	let	him	have	his	portscreen	back	so	he	could	check	on	the	Earthen

newsfeeds	and	confirm	for	them	that	all	was	well	 up	here	on	Luna.

     Ha.

     The	 sand	slipped	out	 from	 beneath	his	feet	as	the	 surf	pulled	 back	into	 the

lake.	The	world	 disintegrating	 beneath	him.	He	was	mildly	 curious	 whether	this

was	moon	rock	pulverized	to	 fine	sand,	or	if	 it	had	long	 ago	been	imported	from

some	white	Earthen	beach.	So	many	times	since	coming	here	he	had	wished	that

he’d	 spent	 more	 time	 researching	 the	 history	 between	 Earth	 and	 Luna.	 He

wanted	to	know	 what	the	 relationship	had	been	like	 when	Luna	 was	a	peaceful

colony,	 and,	later,	 an	allied	 republic.	 For	 years	Earth	 had	supplied	 Luna	with

building	  materials	 and	  natural	 resources,	 and	 Luna	  had	 returned	 valuable

research	in	the	fields	of	 space	exploration	and	astronomy.	 Knowing	 it	 had	once

been	a	beneficial	relationship	suggested	it	could	be	again.

     But	not	 with	Levana.

     Scanning	the	shore	on	 either	side	of	 the	lake,	 Kai	 watched	the	royal	 guards

still	 searching,	waiting	  for	 a	bedraggled	cyborg	 to	 wash	ashore.	Kai	  had	also

seen	them	patrolling	the	city	 streets	from	his	window,	 and	if	 they	thought	it	 was

583
possible	Cinder	 had	survived	 and	gone	 into	 hiding,	 then	Kai	 would	  believe	it

was	possible	too.

     Meanwhile,	   the	  palace	 was	  bustling	   with	  final	   preparations	  for	  the

coronation.	   The	   aristocrats—or	    families—were	   very	    good	   at	   faking

unadulterated	merriment.	 Even	 the	havoc	 from	 Cinder’s	  failed	 execution	 had

been	swept	 away	like	  a	minor	  mishap,	 bound	to	 happen	 from	 time	 to	 time.

Everyone	 seemed	 happy	 to	  leave	 the	  manhunt	 to	  the	 guards	 while	   they

commenced	with	their	drinking	 and	eating	and	revelries.

     If	 they	were	at	all	 concerned	over	Cinder’s	 calls	for	 revolution,	 they	weren’t

showing	it.	 Kai	 wondered	if	 a	 single	member	of	 the	court	 would	 take	up	 arms

against	the	 people	if	  it	 came	 to	 that,	 or	 if	 they	 would	 cower	 in	  their	 fancy

mansions	and	wait	for	it	 to	be	over,	happy	to	 claim	allegiance	to	whoever	 sat	on

the	throne	once	the	chaos	had	ended.

     Thinking	 it,	 Kai	shut	his	eyes	and	bit	his	tongue	against	a	smirk,	knowing	 the

fantasy	was	 petty.	But	 oh,	 how	 he	 would	 love	 to	 see	their	 faces	if—when—

Cinder	became	queen	and	informed	the	 families	that	 their	indulgent	 way	of	 life

was	coming	to	an	end.

     A	 throat	 cleared	behind	Kai,	 drawing	 his	attention	 over	 his	shoulder.	Torin

stood	in	a	formal	 tuxedo,	already	dressed	for	the	coronation	though	it	 was	hours

away.

     “His	 Imperial	 Majesty,	 Emperor	 Rikan,”	 Torin	 said.	It	 was	a	code	they	 had

devised	 with	  the	  rest	 of	  the	  Earthen	 guests—to	  begin	 each	 meeting	  by

mentioning	 some	 other	 person	 who	  had	 been	 present	when	  they	 had	 first

formally	 met.	It	 had	been	Kai’s	idea,	so	they	could	 always	make	sure	they	were

speaking	to	the	person	they	believed	they	 were	speaking	to,	rather	than	a	 Lunar

584
using	a	tricky	glamour.

     Kai	 smiled	at	 the	mention	of	 his	father.	 He	didn’t	 remember	meeting	 Torin,

who	had	been	a	permanent	fixture	in	the	palace	since	before	Kai’s	birth.

     “My	 mother,”	 he	said,	by	way	of	reply.

     Torin’s	 gaze	dropped	down	to	Kai’s	 bare	feet	and	rolled-up	slacks,	but	didn’t

linger.	“Any	 news?”

     “Nothing.	 You?”

     “I	  spoke	briefly	 with	  President	Vargas	earlier.	 He	 and	the	 other	American

representatives	feel	threatened.	They	feel	we’re	all	being	held	hostage.”

     “Smart	 man.”	 A	 wave	crashed	into	 Kai,	 and	he	swayed	 with	 it,	 curling	 his

toes	into	the	wet	sand.	“Levana	believes	she	has	us	right	where	she	wants	us.”

     “Is	 she	wrong?”

     Kai	 frowned,	and	didn’t	 respond.	His	silence	was	followed	by	a	sigh.

     Glancing	 back,	 Kai	  saw	Torin	  untying	 his	 dress	shoes	and	 removing	 his

socks.	He	rolled	up	his	pant	hems	before	coming	to	stand	beside	Kai	in	the	surf.

     “I	 told	 President	Vargas	that	 once	Levana	has	the	title	 of	 empress,	she	will

feel	less	 defensive	and	we’ll	  be	 able	to	 set	rational	 boundaries	around	 a	new

Earthen-Lunar	 alliance.”	 He	 hesitated,	 before	 adding,	 “I	  didn’t	 say	 anything

about	Princess	Selene.	I	 felt	 he	 would	 see	any	hope	 placed	in	 her	as	 nothing

more	than	a	fairy	tale.”

     Kai	 bit	 the	inside	of	 his	cheek	and	hoped	that	 wasn’t	the	 case.	He	had	been

putting	his	faith	 in	Princess	Selene	even	before	he’d	found	her.	Even	before	he’d

known	she	was	the	most	capable,	resourceful,	determined	person	he’d	ever	met.

Even	before	he’d	started	having	fantasies	of	a	royal	Earthen-Lunar	 marriage	that

didn’t	involve	 Levana	at	all.

585
     “Your	  Majesty,”	 said	Torin,	 with	 a	 tone	that	said	he	 was	about	to	broach	 a

subject	Kai	 wasn’t	 going	 to	 like.	 Kai	  braced	himself	 accordingly.	 “Have	  you

given	thought	to	what	 your	next	move	will	  be	should	our	hoped-for	outcome	not

come	to	pass?”

     “You	  mean	 if	 Cinder	  is	 dead	and	 the	 people	 don’t	 rebel	 and	 tomorrow

morning	 I	 find	 myself	 stuck	 with	 an	 empress	who	wants	 to	 kill	 me	 and	take

control	of	 my	military	  and	wage	war	on	 my	allies	 until	 they	all	 succumb	to	her

will?”

     Torin	 made	a	derisive	 sound	in	 the	back	of	 his	throat.	 “I	 suppose	you	have

been	thinking	about	it.”

     “It’s	  crossed	my	mind	a	time	 or	two.”	 He	peered	at	Torin	 from	the	corner	 of

his	eye,	surprised	to	find	 that	looking	 at	his	adviser	felt	 like	 looking	 at	an	older,

wiser	version	of	himself.	 Not	that	they	looked	much	alike—Torin	  had	neat,	gray-

flecked	 hair,	a	 longer	 nose,	and	 thin,	 stern	lips.	 But	 standing	 barefoot	 in	 the

water,	each	with	 their	 hands	in	their	 pockets	and	 their	faces	turned	 toward	 the

lake,	Kai	  thought	it	  wouldn’t	 be	 a	bad	 thing	 to	 grow	 up	 to	be	 as	stable	and

capable	as	Konn	Torin.	Or	as	thoughtful	and	intelligent	 as	Kai’s	father	had	been.

     He	checked	that	the	Lunar	guards	were	out	of	earshot	before	asking,	“What’s

the	status	of	the	bombs	that	could	weaken	these	biodomes?”

     “I’m	  told	 we	 have	a	 dozen	built	  and	ready	for	  deployment,	but	 it	 will	  be

weeks	before	a	 second	batch	is	complete.	 The	most	 we	could	 hope	 for	at	 this

point	is	 to	weaken	them,	 but	I	 don’t	 think	 it	 would	 be	enough	to	 deter	Levana

completely.”

     “Unless	we	 target	the	dome	that	she’s	in,”	said	Kai.

     Torin’s	 lips	twitched	 downward.	“That	 is	also	the	dome	that	we	are	in.”

586
     “I	 know.”	With	a	sigh,	Kai	curled	his	toes	into	the	silt.	“Prepare	the	fleet.	I

want	a	regiment	of	armed	ships	positioned	in	neutral	space,	as	close	to	Luna	as

they	can	get	without	warranting	concern.	After	the	coronation,	if	Levana	doesn’t

allow	the	other	leaders	to	leave,	we	might	be	able	to	threaten	her	into	consenting.

I’d	like	everyone	else	off	this	moon	as	soon	as	possible.”

     “Everyone	else?	What	about	you?”

     Kai	shook	his	 head.	“I	have	to	 make	sure	Levana	gives	up	the	letumosis

antidote.	I	don’t	know	where	she’s	keeping	it,	but	if	it’s	here	in	Artemisia,	we

can’t	risk	it	being	destroyed.	I	need	to	make	sure	we	retrieve	it	and	get	it	to	Earth

as	quickly	as	possible.	I	have	to	succeed	at	that,	if	nothing	else.”

     “And	 once	the	antidote	is	secured,”	Torin	said,	“our	priority	must	be	your

own	safety.	If	she	does	mean	to	have	you	killed	so	she	can	assume	control	of	the

Commonwealth,	we	need	to	take	steps	to	make	sure	it	doesn’t	happen.	We	will

have	increased	security	around	you	at	all	times.	And	physical	separation	from

the	queen	will	  be	 mandatory.	I	 will	  not	 have	her	 brainwashing	you	 into

committing	self-harm.”

     Kai	smiled,	heartened	somewhat	by	the	protectiveness	in	Torin’s	voice.	“All

sound	suggestions,	Torin,	but	it	won’t	be	necessary.”

     Torin	turned	toward	him,	but	Kai	 was	looking	at	the	horizon,	where	black

water	met	black	sky.	Sunlight	was	glinting	 off	some	of	 the	domes	in	the	far

distance,	but	the	change	from	night	 to	day	 had	been	so	gradual	Kai	 barely

noticed.	Lunar	sunrises	were	an	agonizingly	slow	affair.

     “I	almost	killed	her	at	the	wedding.	I	was	so	close.	I	could	have	ended	it	all,

but	I	failed.”

     Torin	gave	a	frustrated	snort.	“You	are	not	a	murderer.	I	find	it	difficult	 to

587
think	of	that	as	a	personality	flaw.”

     Kai	 opened	his	mouth,	but	Torin	 continued,	“And	 if	 you	had	managed	to	kill

her,	it	 would	 have	brought	down	 the	wrath	 of	 every	thaumaturge	and	 guard	in

that	room.	You	 would	 have	gotten	 yourself	 killed,	 and	no	doubt	 every	Earthen

guest	as	well.	 I	 understand	where	 the	impulse	 came	from,	 but	 I	 am	 glad	you

failed.”

     “You’re	  right.	Even	so,	it	won’t	 happen	next	time.”	 Kai	tucked	his	 hands	into

his	pockets	and	found	the	medallion	there.	The	one	Iko	 and	Cress	had	given	him

aboard	the	Rampion,	forever	claiming	 him	 as	a	member	of	their	crew,	no	matter

what	happened.	He	tightened	his	fist	 around	it.	 “I’m	  not	leaving	 Luna	with	 this

unresolved.	She	can’t	be	 allowed	to	 rule	Earth.	 If	 Cinder	 …	if	 Princess	Selene

fails,	I	won’t.”

     “What	 are	you	saying?”

     Kai	 faced	Torin,	though	it	 was	difficult	 to	pull	 his	feet	from	the	sucking	 sand.

“I	 can	make	myself	useful	 to	her	long	 enough	to	obtain	 the	antidote.	She	won’t

kill	 me	 right	 away,	not	 if	 I	 can	 convince	her	 I	 have	information	  she	wants—

knowledge	about	our	military	  procedures,	resources	…	Then,	when	the	antidote

has	been	safely	relocated,	I	will	order	our	military	 to	bomb	Artemisia.”

     Torin	 stepped	back.	“With	you	 in	it?”

     He	 nodded.	“It’s	 the	 only	 way	I	 can	be	 sure	Levana	will	  be	here	when	the

attack	happens.	She	won’t	 be	suspicious.	As	 long	 as	I’m	 here,	she’ll	 think	 she

has	control	over	us.	With	 a	single	 attack,	we	can	remove	her,	the	thaumaturges,

and	the	most	powerful	 members	of	her	court.	 They	won’t	  be	able	to	stop	it.	 No

brainwashing.	No	manipulation.	 There	will	  be	a	lot	of	 casualties,	but	we	can	try

to	keep	the	destruction	to	the	central	sectors,	and	once	Luna	is	in	disarray,	 Earth

588
can	offer	assistance	for	reconstruction.”

     Torin	 had	started	shaking	his	head.	His	eyes	were	shut,	as	if	he	couldn’t	stand

to	listen	to	Kai’s	 plan	anymore.	“No.	 You	cannot	sacrifice	yourself.”

     “I’m	  already	sacrificing	 myself.	 I	 won’t	 let	 her	have	my	country.	 There	has

been	peace	between	 the	 Earthen	Union	  for	 over	 a	 century—I	  won’t	  let	 my

decisions	be	the	end	of	that.”	 He	 peeled	back	his	shoulders.	“Which	 is	 why	it’s

so	important	that	the	Commonwealth	be	ruled	by	someone	who	is	smart	and	fair.

The	Articles	  of	 Unification	  state	that	 in	 the	event	 that	 the	last	 in	 line	 to	 the

empire	has	reason	to	 expect	their	 death	without	 first	 procuring	 an	 heir	for	 the

throne,	they	are	to	nominate	one	person	to	become	the	new	emperor	or	empress,

and	the	people	shall	nominate	their	choices	and	it	 will	 be	put	to	 a	vote.”	He	met

Torin’s	 gaze.	“I	nominated	you	 before	we	left.	 Nainsi	has	my	 official	 statement.

So…”	He	gulped.	“Good	 luck	with	 the	election.”

     “I	 cannot	…	I	won’t…”

     “It’s	 already	done.	If	 you	come	up	with	 a	better	plan,	I’d	love	 to	hear	it.	But	I

will	 not	 let	that	 woman	rule	 the	Commonwealth.	 I	 would	 be	honored	to	 die	in

service	of	  my	 country.”	  Kai	 glanced	 up	 at	 the	 palace	and	 the	 throne	 room

balcony	jutting	 out	 over	their	 heads.	“Just	as	long	 as	I	can	take	 her	down	 with

me.”

589
	




                                          Sixty-Eight







“Why	does	Cress	always	get	to	wear	the	best	clothes?”	Iko	whined,	crossing	her

arms	while	 Cress	practiced	walking	back	 and	forth	 in	 the	 ridiculously	tall

platform	shoes.	“Cress	gets	to	go	to	a	 royal	wedding.	Cress	gets	to	go	to	 a

coronation.	Cress	has	all	the	fun.”

     “I’m	 not	 going	to	 the	coronation,”	said	Cress,	trying	 to	look	 at	 her	feet

without	falling	over.	“We’re	 just	impersonating	guests	so	we	can	hack	into	the

palace	broadcast	system.”

     “Cress	gets	to	hack	into	the	palace	broadcast	system.”

     “Cress	is	risking	 her	life	 to	 do	this.”	 Cinder	threw	a	 pile	of	 shimmering

accessories	onto	the	bed.	“Do	any	of	these	match?”

     Iko	flopped	onto	 the	bed	and	started	pawing	through	the	accessories	with

desire-filled	eyes.	“I	 think	these	gloves	attach	to	the	wing-things,”	 she	said,

followed	by	a	pitiful	sigh.	“I	wish	my	outfit	came	with	fingerless	orange	elbow-

length	gloves.”

     “These	shoes	are	like	stilts,”	said	Cress,	wobbling.	“Isn’t	 there	something

more	practical?”

     “I	don’t	think	practical	is	in	the	Lunar	vocabulary,”	said	Cinder,	diving	back

590
into	the	closet,	“but	I’ll	  look.”

     They’d	 managed	to	find	a	new	pair	of	 boots	for	Cinder,	at	least,	who	had	lost

hers	in	  the	 lake.	 They’d	 found	  them	 stacked	in	  a	 utility	  closet	 along	 with

miscellaneous	 sporting	   equipment,	  or	  what	  Cress	  thought	  was	  sporting

equipment.	Unfortunately,	 there’d	been	nothing	 small	enough	to	fit	 her,	and	Iko

had	insisted	they	wouldn’t	have	matched	her	aristocratic	outfit	 anyway.

     “Tell	  me	 I	  don’t	  look	 as	 ridiculous	  as	I	  feel.”	  Thorne	 appeared	in	  the

doorway,	fidgeting	 with	his	cuffs.

     Startled,	Cress	tripped	and	crashed	into	Iko,	sending	them	both	tumbling	 onto

the	floor.

     Cinder	poked	 her	head	out	of	the	closet,	surveyed	the	scene,	and	bunched	up

her	 lips.	 She	 disappeared	 again,	 muttering,	 “I’d	   better	 find	  some	 different

shoes.”

     Thorne	 helped	Cress	 and	Iko	 back	 to	 their	 feet.	 “Maybe	 ridiculous	  is	the

theme	of	the	 day,”	he	 said,	tilting	 his	 head	to	survey	Cress’s	 outfit,	 which	 was

part	cocktail	 dress,	part	 butterfly	  costume.	An	 orange	tutu	 barely	 reached	her

mid-thigh	 and	was	gaudy	enough	when	paired	with	 a	glitz-covered,	 form-fitting

bodice.	Two	sheer	swaths	of	material	had	been	sewn	onto	the	bodice’s	 back	and

did	in	fact	connect	to	the	fingerless	orange	elbow-length	 gloves	Iko	relinquished,

so	when	Cress	spread	her	arms	it	 gave	the	effect	 of	a	 pair	of	 black-and-yellow

butterfly	 wings	opening	 up	behind	her.	 To	top	 it	off,	 Iko	 had	found	 a	tiny	 blue

hat	in	the	accessories	chest	that	had	a	pair	of	 springs	and	feathered	balls	on	top

—what	Cress	assumed	were	meant	to	be	the	antennae.

     “I	 do	feel	a	little	 better	now	that	I	 see	what	you’re	wearing.”	 Thorne	adjusted

his	bow	tie.	 He	was	in	a	lean	plum-toned	 suit	that	was	surprisingly	 flattering	 on

591
him	despite	having	been	dragged	out	of	a	stranger’s	closet.	The	bow	 tie	had	tiny

threaded	lights	running	 through	 the	fabric,	 making	 the	collar	 of	 his	white	 shirt

glow	in	different	 shades	of	neon.	He’d	left	on	his	own	black	 military	 boots.

     He	looked	absurd	and	sexy,	and	Cress	had	to	force	herself	to	look	away.

     “You’ll	  fit	 right	 in,	from	 what	I	 could	tell	 at	the	feast.”	Cinder	 emerged	with

a	pair	of	more	user-friendly	 shoes.	“They	 were	all	wearing	 crazy	things	like	 this

at	the	feast.	I	 don’t	 doubt	that	 a	lot	 of	the	 clothing	 was	glamour-made,	but	 the

fewer	elements	of	your	 appearance	you	have	to	glamour,	 the	easier	it	is	to	 hold

the	illusion.”

     “Hey,	 Captain,”	said	Iko,	 “stop	checking	out	her	legs.”

     Cress	 turned	 in	  time	  to	 see	 Thorne’s	  appreciative	 grin.	  Shrugging,	 he

adjusted	the	cuffs	 of	 his	 jacket.	“I’m	  a	 connoisseur,	Iko.	 Look	 how	 tall	 those

shoes	make	her	look.”	He	hesitated.	“Well,	tall-ish.”

     Flushing,	Cress	inspected	her	bare	legs.

     Cinder	rolled	 her	eyes.	“Here,	Cress,	try	these	on.”

     “Hm?	 Oh,	 right.”	 She	removed	 the	torture	 devices	and	tossed	them	 to	Iko,

who	was	all	too	thrilled	 to	slip	them	onto	her	feet.

     Within	  seconds,	Iko	 was	waltzing	 around	 the	room’s	 perimeter	 as	if	 she’d

been	designed	with	those	exact	shoes	in	mind.	“Oh,	yes,”	she	said.	“I’m	  keeping

these.”

     When	 Cress	had	fitted	 the	replacement	 shoes	onto	her	feet,	 Thorne	flicked

one	of	her	antenna	puff	balls	and	draped	an	arm	over	her	shoulders.	“How	do	we

look?”

     Cinder	 scratched	the	back	of	 her	neck.	Iko	 tilted	 her	 head	from	 one	side	to

the	other,	as	if	their	appearance	might	improve	from	a	different	 angle.

592
     “I	 guess	you	look	Lunar?”	 Cinder	ventured.

     “Nice.”	  Thorne	held	up	a	hand	for	a	high	five.	Cress	awkwardly	 complied.

     Cinder	 adjusted	her	ponytail.	 “Of	 course,	any	 Lunar	who’s	 paying	 attention

will	 be	able	to	tell	you’re	an	Earthen	and	she’s	a	shell.	So	be	careful.”

     Thorne	scoffed.	“Careful	 is	my	 middle	name.	Right	after	Suave	and	Daring.”

     “Do	 you	even	know	what	you’re	 saying	half	the	time?”	 asked	Cinder.

     Thorne	 picked	 up	the	 chip	that	 they’d	 transferred	 Cinder’s	 video	onto	 and

handed	it	to	Cress.	“Put	this	somewhere	safe.”

     She	stared,	not	sure	what	 constituted	safe.	She	had	no	 pockets,	no	bag,	and

very	little	  clothing	 in	 which	 to	 hide	anything.	 Finally	  she	tucked	it	 inside	 her

bodice.

     Grabbing	Cress’s	portscreen	off	the	vanity,	 Thorne	slid	it	 into	a	pocket	on	the

inside	of	his	jacket,	where	she	could	also	see	the	outline	of	his	handgun.	A	 small

knife	they’d	 taken	 from	the	 kitchen	vanished	 in	his	 hands,	so	quick	she	wasn’t

sure	where	he’d	put	it.

     “I	 guess	that’s	 it,”	  said	Cinder,	 scanning	over	Thorne’s	 and	 Cress’s	outfits

again.	“Are	we	ready?”

     “If	 anyone	answers	no	to	that	question,”	 said	Jacin,	appearing	in	the	hallway

with	a	scowl	and	tapping	fingers,	“I’m	  leaving	without	 you.”

     Cress	 cast	 her	 gaze	 over	 her	  friends,	 realizing	  they	 were	  about	 to	 be

separated.	Again.	Trepidation	curled	in	the	pit	of	 her	stomach.

     She	and	Thorne	would	go	off	 to	the	palace,	while	Cinder,	 Iko,	and	Jacin	tried

to	 save	 Winter	  and	 Scarlet	 and	 organize	  the	 people	 who	  would	  soon	 be

infiltrating	 Artemisia.

     She	didn’t	 want	to	leave	them.	She	didn’t	want	to	say	good-bye.

593
     But	 Thorne’s	 arm	was	over	 her	shoulders,	comfortable	 and	 solid.	When	 he

tugged	on	his	lapel	with	 his	free	 hand	and	told	the	others,	“We’re	  ready,”	Cress

didn’t	argue.


                                                          *			 *			*

“There’s	 the	back	entrance,”	 said	Jacin,	pointing	 at	a	near-invisible	 door	 in	the

back	 of	  the	  medical	  and	  research	 clinic,	   half-hidden	  behind	  overgrown

shrubberies.	Iko	popped	 up	beside	him	 in	 an	attempt	to	 see,	but	he	flattened	 a

hand	on	her	head	and	forced	her	to	 duck	down	 as	two	men	in	 lab	coats	strolled

by,	both	of	them	with	 their	attention	stuck	to	their	 portscreens.

     Jacin	scanned	the	yard	one	more	time	before	darting	out	from	 their	cover	and

ducking	into	 the	building’s	  shadow.	Through	 the	dome’s	wall	  he	could	see	the

desolate	landscape	of	Luna	stretching	into	the	distance.

     He	waved	his	 arm,	and	Cinder	and	Iko	 scurried	after	him,	 crowding	 together

in	the	shadows.

     The	door	opened	easily—no	 reason	to	lock	doors	in	a	building	 that	was	open

to	the	public—but	  Jacin	refused	 to	feel	 relieved.	 There	would	 be	no	 relief	 for

him	until	 he	knew	Winter	was	safe.

     They	 scurried	into	a	dim	 corridor,	 the	walls	 in	need	of	 a	coat	of	paint.	 Jacin

listened,	but	 all	 he	 heard	was	a	 squeaky	wheel	 and	 a	clattering	 cart	 in	 some

distant	hallway.

     “There’s	 a	maintenance	room	down	there,”	he	said,	pointing,	“and	a	janitorial

closet	on	each	floor.	That	door	takes	you	to	the	main	part	of	the	building.”

     “How	 do	you	know	 all	this?”	 Cinder	whispered.

     “I	 interned	 here	for	a	few	 months	before	 the	queen	decided	I	would	 make	a

594
decent	guard.”

     He	felt	 Cinder	peering	up	at	him,	but	he	didn’t	 meet	the	look.

     “That’s	 right,”	 she	murmured.	“You	 wanted	to	be	a	doctor.”

     “Whatever.”	 He	 paced	to	the	screen	beside	the	maintenance	room	and	pulled

up	a	 mapped	diagram	 of	 the	clinic.	  A	 few	 red	 exclamation	 points	 glowed	 in

different	areas,	with	 inserted	notes.	PATIENT	 RM	 8:	 NON-TOXIC	  SPILL	 ON

FLOOR.	 LAB	 13:	 FAULTY	 LIGHT	 SWITCH.

     “Here,”	  said	Cinder,	pointing	  at	the	fourth	 floor	 of	 the	diagram.	 DISEASE

RESEARCH	  AND	 DEVELOPMENT.

     There	was	a	back	staircase	on	the	opposite	side	of	the	building—it	 would	 get

them	to	the	right	 floor,	at	 least.	Jacin	hoped	the	research	team	had	taken	the	day

off	 to	enjoy	 the	coronation	 festivities.	 He	didn’t	 want	 any	more	 complications,

and	he’d	like	to	avoid	killing	  anyone	else	if	he	could.

     That	didn’t	 stop	him	from	 loosening	his	gun,	though.

     The	climb	 to	the	fourth	 floor	 came	with	 no	surprises.	Jacin	cracked	open	the

door	and	scanned	the	well-lit	  corridor.	 He	could	 hear	the	gurgle	of	 water	tanks

and	the	hum	of	computers	and	the	constant	growl	of	machinery,	but	no	people.

     Indicating	 for	 the	others	to	 stay	close,	he	slipped	 out	of	 the	stairwell.	 Their

shoes	squeaked	and	thumped	on	the	hard	floors.	Beside	each	door	a	screen	lit	up

as	they	passed,	indicating	the	purpose	for	each	room.


     AGRICULTURE:	   GEN	 MOD	 DEVELOPMENT	   AND	 TESTING

     BIOELECTRICAL	   MANIPULATION:	   STUDY	  #17	(CONTROL	   AND

     GROUPS	  1–3)

     GENETIC	  ENGINEERING:	   CANIS	 LUPUS	 SUBJECTS	   #16–20

     GENETIC	  ENGINEERING:	   CANIS	 LUPUS	 SUBJECTS	   #21–23

595
     GENETIC	  ENGINEERING:	   SURGICAL	  ALTERATION

     “…	 increased	manufac…”

     Jacin	froze.	The	feminine	 voice	was	from	 somewhere	down	the	hallway,	 and

was	followed	by	the	slamming	 of	a	door	or	cupboard.

     “…	 be	possible	to	sustain	…	resources…”

     Another	 door	opened,	followed	by	footsteps.

     Jacin	grabbed	 for	 the	nearest	door,	 but	it	 was	 locked.	 Behind	 him,	 Cinder

tested	another	handle,	sneering	when	it	didn’t	open	either.

     “Here,”	 Iko	 whispered,	pulling	  open	a	door	down	 the	hall.	Jacin	 and	Cinder

ducked	in	after	her	and	shut	the	door,	careful	to	not	make	a	sound.

     The	 lab	 was	empty—or	 at	 least,	 empty	of	 people.	 Conscious	 people.	The

walls	were	lined	 with	shelves	of	 suspended-animation	tanks,	filling	 up	the	space

from	floor	 to	ceiling.	 Each	tank	hummed	 and	gurgled,	their	insides	lit	 with	 faint

green	lights	that	made	the	bodies	look	 like	frozen	 corpses.	The	far	wall	 was	full

of	 even	more	 tanks	 layered	 like	  shut	drawers,	 making	 it	  a	 checkerboard	of

screens	and	statistics,	glowing	lights	and	the	soles	of	feet.

     Cinder	and	Iko	 ducked	behind	two	 of	the	tanks.	Jacin	backed	himself	against

the	wall	 so	he	would	 be	hidden	 if	 the	door	opened	and	able	 to	take	anyone	by

surprise.

     The	first	 voice	was	met	with	 another,	male	this	time.	 “…	 plenty	in	 stock,	but

it	would	be	nice	if	 they	gave	us	some	indication	that	this	was	going	to…”

     Jacin	inhaled	as	the	voice	 grew	louder,	 until	footsteps	 were	right	outside	 the

door.	But	the	footsteps	and	voices	soon	faded	in	the	other	direction.

     Iko	 peeked	 around	the	 base	of	 the	 tank,	 but	he	 held	 a	finger	  to	 his	lips.

Cinder’s	face	appeared	a	second	later,	questioning.

596
     Jacin	gave	 a	cursory	 glance	to	 the	 rest	of	 the	lab.	 Each	 of	the	 suspension

tanks	had	a	small	tube	that	connected	it	 to	a	row	 of	holding	 containers.	Though

most	of	 the	 tubes	were	 clear,	 a	few	 of	  them	were	 tinted	 maroon	 with	 slow-

flowing	 blood.

     “What	 is	 this	 place?”	Cinder	 whispered.	 Her	face	 was	twisted	 with	 horror.

She	was	staring	at	the	unconscious	form	of	a	child,	maybe	a	few	years	old.

     “They’re	  shells,”	 he	 said.	“She	 keeps	them	 here	for	  an	endless	supply	 of

blood,	which	is	used	in	producing	the	antidote.”

     When	 a	shell	 was	born	and	 taken	away,	their	 families	 were	 told	 they	were

being	killed	  as	part	of	 the	 infanticide	 laws.	 Years	ago	 they	had	 actually	 been

kept	in	captivity—secluded	 dormitories	 where	they	 were	regarded	as	little	more

than	useful	prisoners.	But	one	day	those	imprisoned	 shells	had	raised	a	riot	and,

unable	to	  be	controlled,	  managed	to	 kill	   five	 thaumaturges	 and	 eight	 royal

guards	before	they’d	been	subdued.

     Since	then	they’d	 been	considered	both	useful	and	dangerous,	which	had	led

to	the	decision	to	keep	them	in	a	permanent	comatose	state.	They	were	no	longer

a	threat	and	their	blood	could	more	easily	be	harvested	for	the	platelets	that	were

used	for	the	letumosis	antidote.

     Few	people	 knew	the	infanticide	  laws	were	fake	 and	that	their	 lost	children

were	still	alive,	 if	barely.

     Jacin	had	never	been	in	this	 room	before,	though	he’d	 known	 it	existed.	The

reality	 was	more	appalling	 than	 he’d	imagined.	 It	 occurred	to	 him	 that	if	 he’d

succeeded	in	becoming	a	doctor	and	escaped	his	fate	as	a	palace	guard,	he	may

have	ended	up	in	 this	same	lab.	Only,	 instead	of	 healing	people,	 he’d	be	using

them.

597
     Iko	 had	gone	back	to	the	door.	“I	don’t	 hear	anyone	in	the	hallway.”

     “Right.	  We	should	 go.”	 Cinder	 brushed	her	fingertips	  over	the	 tank	of	 the

young	child,	 her	 eyes	crinkled	 with	 sadness,	but	also—if	 Jacin	knew	 anything

about	her—a	touch	of	determination.	 He	suspected	she	was	already	planning	the

moment	when	she	would	come	back	here,	and	see	them	all	freed.

598
	




                                               Sixty-Nine







The	two	people	they’d	 heard	in	the	hallway	were	nowhere	to	be	seen.	They	soon

found	 the	door	 labeled	 DISEASE	RESEARCH	AND	DEVELOPMENT,	right	where	the

diagram	had	told	them	it	would	 be.

     The	lab	 was	filled	  with	 designated	stations—each	one	with	 a	stool,	a	 metal

table,	a	series	of	 organized	vials	 and	test	tubes	and	petri	 dishes,	a	microscope,

and	a	stand	of	 drawers.	Impeccably	 clean.	 The	air	 tasted	sterile	 and	bleached.

Holograph	nodes	hung	on	the	walls,	all	turned	off.

     Two	 lab	stations	showed	evidence	of	recent	work—spotlights	blaring	 on	petri

dishes	and	tools	abandoned	on	the	desks.

     “Spread	out,”	 said	Cinder.

     Iko	 took	 the	 cabinets	on	 the	 far	 side	of	  the	room;	 Cinder	 started	 pawing

through	open	shelving;	 Jacin	started	in	on	the	 nearest	workstation,	scanning	the

labeled	drawers.	 In	 the	 top	 drawer	 he	found	  an	outdated	 portscreen,	a	 label

printer,	a	 scanner,	and	a	set	of	 empty	vials.	 The	rest	 were	full	 of	 syringes	and

petri	dishes	and	microscope	lenses,	still	in	protective	wrapping.

     He	moved	on	to	the	second	station.

     “Is	 this	it?”

599
     Jacin’s	attention	 snapped	to	Iko,	who	 was	standing	in	front	 of	 a	set	of	floor-

to-ceiling	 cabinets	with	 their	 doors	 thrown	 open,	revealing	 row	 upon	row	 and

stack	upon	stack	of	small	vials,	each	filled	with	 a	clear	liquid.

     Jacin	joined	 her	in	front	 of	the	cabinets	and	lifted	 one	vial	 from	 its	tray.	The

label	  read	 EU1	 PATHOGENIC	BACTERIA—“LETUMOSIS”	STRAIN	B—POLYVALENT

VACCINE.	It	was	identical	to	the	lid	on	the	next	vial,	and	the	next.

     Jacin’s	gaze	traveled	over	the	hundreds	of	trays.	“Let’s	 get	a	rolling	 cart	from

maintenance	and	fill	  it	 up	with	  as	many	trays	 as	we	 can.	We	 probably	 won’t

need	all	this	for	one	sector,	but	I’d	rather	it	 be	in	our	possession	than	Levana’s.”

     “I’ll	  get	the	cart,”	said	Iko,	 rushing	for	the	door.

     Cinder	ran	a	finger	 across	a	row	of	vials,	listening	to	them	clink	 in	their	 trays.

“This	right	 here	is	half	the	reason	Kai	is	going	through	with	 this,”	 she	whispered,

then	clenched	her	jaw.	“This	could	have	saved	Peony.”

     “This	 is	going	 to	save	Winter.”	 When	 he	heard	the	cart	in	the	hallway,	 Jacin

started	pulling	trays	 off	the	shelves,	and	together	they	loaded	the	 cart	as	high	as

they	could,	stacking	tray	upon	 tray	of	antidote.	His	 pulse	was	racing.	Every	time

he	shut	his	 eyes	he	could	 see	her	in	 that	tank,	 clinging	 to	 survival.	 How	 long

would	the	immersion	protect	her?	How	 long	did	he	have?

     Iko	 had	brought	a	heavy	drop	cloth	from	the	maintenance	closet	too,	and	they

draped	it	over	the	cart,	 tucking	it	 around	the	edges	of	the	trays	to	 stabilize	them

for	their	journey.

     They	were	 pushing	the	cart	toward	 the	door	when	they	heard	the	ding	 of	the

elevator.	They	 froze.	 Jacin	planted	his	 hands	across	the	 covered	vials	 to	 keep

them	from	clinking.

     “You	  don’t	  seem	to	 understand	 the	predicament	 we’re	  in,”	  said	a	 sharp

600
feminine	 voice.	“We	  need	those	guards	returned	to	 active	duty	 immediately.	  I

don’t	care	if	they’re	 fully	 healed	or	not.”

     “Thaumaturge,”	 Cinder	 whispered.	Her	eyes	were	closed,	her	face	tense	with

concentration.	 “And	  two	  …	  I’m	  going	  to	 guess,	 servants	 maybe?	 Or	 lab

technicians?	And	one	other.	Really	weak	energy.	Possibly	a	guard.”

     “No	 offense	taken,”	Jacin	muttered.

     “These	 orders	have	come	 from	 the	queen	herself,	 and	we	 have	no	 time	 to

waste,”	continued	the	thaumaturge.	“Stop	making	excuses	and	do	your	jobs.”

     Not	 trusting	his	own	 body	if	 there	was	a	thaumaturge	nearby,	Jacin	drew	his

gun	and	pushed	it	into	Cinder’s	hand.

     She	 looked	  confused	 at	  first,	  but	  comprehension	 came	 fast.	 Her	  grip

tightened.

     Footsteps	approached	and	 Jacin	 wondered	if	  the	thaumaturge	 had	already

sensed	them,	frozen	and	waiting	inside	 this	laboratory.	 Maybe	she	thought	 they

were	just	researchers.

     That	ruse	would	 be	up	as	soon	as	she	saw	them.	If	 she	walked	past	this	 lab.

Or	if	she	was	coming	to	this	lab.

     But,	 no,	a	door	 opened	down	the	hallway.	 He	 didn’t	 hear	it	 shut	again,	and

there	were	no	other	exits.	 To	get	to	either	 the	stairs	or	the	elevator,	 they’d	 have

to	go	back	the	way	they’d	come.

     “Maybe	 we	can	wait	it	 out?”	suggested	Iko.	“They	have	to	leave	eventually.”

     He	scowled.	Eventually	 wasn’t	soon	enough.

     “I’ll	   take	 control	 of	 the	 guard	 and	the	 other	 two,”	  said	Cinder,	 knuckles

whitening.	 “I’ll	   kill	  the	thaumaturge,	 and	wait	  until	 you’re	 all	  clear	before	 I

follow	 you.”

601
     “You’ll	 raise	a	lot	of	alarms,”	said	Jacin.

     Her	gaze	turned	icy.	“I’ve	already	raised	a	lot	of	alarms.”

     “I’ll	  go,”	said	Iko.	Her	chin	 was	up,	her	face	resolute.	“They	can’t	control

me.	I’ll	draw	them	off	and	find	a	place	to	hide	until	you	come	back.	You	have	to

get	this	antidote	to	Her	Highness.”

     “Iko,	no,	we	should	stay	together—”

     Iko	cupped	Cinder’s	face.	Her	fingers	still	weren’t	functioning,	so	the	touch

looked	awkward,	like	 being	petted	by	an	oversize	doll.	 “Like	 I	 said,	I’d	 do

anything	to	keep	you	safe.	Besides,	if	anything	happens	to	me,	I	know	you	can

fix	it.”

     Iko	winked,	then	marched	bravely	out	into	the	hallway.	Jacin	shut	the	door

after	her.

     They	heard	Iko’s	measured	footsteps	beating	down	the	hallway,	then	a	pause.

     “Oh,	 hello,”	 came	her	 cheery	voice,	followed	 by	 the	 sound	of	 a	 chair

screeching	across	the	floor.	“Oops,	I	didn’t	mean	to	startle	you.”

     “What	are—”	The	thaumaturge’s	voice	cut	out,	then	turned	vile.	“A	shell?”

     “Close,”	said	Iko.	 “In	 case	you	don’t	recognize	me,	I	 happen	to	be	good

friends	with	Princess	Selene.	I’m	willing	to	guess	you’ve	heard	of—”

     “Apprehend	her.”

     “I	guess	you	have.”

     There	was	a	rush	of	footsteps,	a	crash	of	furniture,	two	gunshots	that	made

Cinder	flinch.	“Stop	her!”	screamed	the	thaumaturge,	farther	away	now.

     A	door	slammed	shut.

     “That	sounded	like	the	stairwell,”	said	Jacin.

     Cinder’s	jaw	was	tight,	her	muscles	taut,	but	she	drew	in	a	shaking	breath

602
and	squared	her	shoulders.	“We’d	better	get	out	of	here	before	they	come	back.”

603
	




                                                    Seventy







Cress	was	relieved	to	find	that	 she	and	Thorne	were	not	the	only	 crazily	clothed

guests	milling	 around	 the	palace	gates	hours	 before	the	 royal	 coronation.	 The

entire	city	had	come	to	partake	in	the	festivities,	 as	if	Artemisians	 had	nothing	at

all	to	fear	from	 a	possible	insurgence	or	the	crazed	claims	of	a	cyborg	girl.

     The	palace’s	main	entrance	was	surrounded	by	an	imposing	wall	 topped	with

sharp	finials.	The	main	 gate	was	open,	revealing	a	lush	courtyard.	The	 walkway

was	lined	 with	 an	assortment	of	 sculptures	depicting	 mythical	 beasts	and	half-

dressed	moon	gods	and	goddesses.

     No	 one	gave	Cress	or	 Thorne	 a	second	glance	as	they	 strolled	through	 the

open	gates,	joining	 the	 crowd	 of	gathered	 aristocrats	who	 were	drinking	  from

jeweled	 flasks	 and	promenading	 between	 the	 statues.	Between	 Cress’s	frilly

orange	skirt	and	Thorne’s	light-up	 bow	tie,	they	fit	 right	in.

     Trying	 to	avoid	eye	contact	with	 the	other	guests,	Cress	let	her	gaze	travel	up

the	gilded	 arched	doors	 of	 the	palace.	 Like	 the	 gates,	they	were	 swung	 wide

open,	inviting	 the	 queen’s	guests	to	enter,	although	 palace	guards	did	stand	on

either	side.

     Her	heart	hammered.

604
     It	 felt	like	 she	and	Jacin	had	only	just	escaped.

     She	had	been	inside	 the	palace	 a	handful	 of	times	 in	 her	youth	 to	 perform

different	 programming	 tasks	for	 Sybil.	  She	had	been	 so	eager	to	 please	back

then.	Can	you	track	 the	arrivals	 and	departures	between	Sectors	TS-5	and	GM-

2?	Can	 you	create	 a	program	 that	 will	  alert	 us	to	 specific	 phrases	picked	up

from	the	recorders	 in	 the	holograph	 nodes?	Can	you	track	 the	ships	that	 come

and	go	from	the	 ports	and	ensure	their	 destinations	match	the	itineraries	 in	 our

files?

     With	 each	success,	Cress	had	grown	 more	 confident.	 I	 think	 so.	I	 will	 try.

Yes,	Mistress,	I	can	do	that.

     That	 had	 been	 back	 when	 Cress	still	  harbored	 hopes	 of	 one	 day	 being

welcome	here,	 before	her	 imprisonment	 aboard	the	 satellite.	 She	should	 have

known	 better	when	 Sybil	 refused	 to	 ever	bring	  her	through	 this	 breathtaking

main	entrance,	 instead	smuggling	  her	in	 through	 the	 underground	 tunnels	 as

something	shameful	and	secret.

     At	 least	this	time	 she	was	entering	the	palace	beside	an	ally	 and	a	friend.	 If

there	was	anyone	in	the	galaxy	she	trusted,	it	was	Thorne.

     As	if	 hearing	her	thoughts,	Thorne	pressed	a	hand	against	her	lower	back.

     “Pretend	you	 belong	here,”	he	murmured	 against	her	ear,	“and	everyone	else

will	 believe	it.”

     Pretend	you	belong	here.

     She	let	 out	a	slow	 breath	and	tried	 to	mimic	 Thorne’s	 swagger.	Pretending.

She	was	good	at	pretending.

     Today,	 she	was	Lunar	 aristocracy.	 She	was	a	guest	of	 Her	 Royal	 Majesty.

She	was	on	the	arm	of	the	most	handsome	man	she	had	ever	known—a	man	who

605
didn’t	even	have	to	use	a	glamour.	But	most	important	…

     “I	 am	 a	criminal	 mastermind,”	 she	murmured,	 “and	 I’m	 here	 to	take	down

this	regime.”

     Thorne	grinned	at	her.	“That’s	 my	line.”

     “I	 know,”	 she	said.	“I	stole	it.”

     Thorne	 chuckled	 and	strategically	 placed	 them	 behind	a	 group	 of	 Lunars,

close	enough	that	they	 would	 appear	part	of	 the	group,	 and	they	glided	 up	 the

white	stone	stairs.	 The	doors	loomed	 larger	and	larger	 as	they	stepped	into	 the

palace’s	shadow.	 The	chatter	 of	 the	courtyard	 was	 replaced	with	  the	echo	 of

stone	floors	and	the	resounding	laughter	of	people	with	nothing	to	fear.

     She	and	Thorne	 were	inside	 the	palace.	As	far	 as	she	could	tell,	 the	 guards

hadn’t	even	looked	at	them.

     Cress	 released	 her	  breath,	  but	 it	   snagged	 again	 as	  she	 took	  in	  the

extravagance.

     More	 aristocrats	loitered	 in	droves	in	 the	grand	entrance,	picking	 at	trays	 of

food	that	 floated	 in	 the	 basins	of	 crystal-blue	 pools.	 Everywhere	 were	gilded

columns	and	marble	statues	and	flower	 arrangements	that	stood	twice	 as	tall	 as

she	was.	Most	breathtaking	of	 all	was	a	statue	at	the	center	of	the	hall	 depicting

the	ancient	moon	goddess,	Artemis.	It	 towered	three	stories	tall	 and	showed	the

goddess	wearing	a	thorny	crown	 atop	her	 head	and	holding	an	arched	bow,	 the

arrow	pointing	toward	 the	sky.

     “Good	 day,”	 said	 a	man,	stepping	 forward	 to	 greet	them.	 Thorne’s	 fingers

dug	into	Cress’s	back.

     The	man	wore	the	uniform	 of	 a	high-ranking	servant,	though	his	dreadlocked

hair	 was	 dyed	in	  variegated	 green—pale	foam	  green	at	 the	 roots	 and	 deep

606
emerald	at	the	tips.	Though	Cress	was	on	guard,	waiting	for	suspicion	or	disgust,

the	man’s	face	was	pure	joviality.	 Perhaps	servants,	like	the	guards,	were	chosen

for	having	 little	 talent	with	 their	gift,	 and	he	wasn’t	able	to	 sense	that	Cress	was

nothing	but	a	shell.

     She	could	hope.

     “We	 are	glad	you	 have	come	to	enjoy	 the	festivities	 on	this	 most	celebrated

day,”	the	man	 said.	“Please	enjoy	the	comforts	 our	generous	queen	has	laid	out

for	her	 guests.”	He	gestured	to	 his	left.	 “In	 this	 wing	 you	are	free	to	 enjoy	 our

menagerie,	full	 of	 exotic	 albino	 animals,	or	 listen	 to	an	assortment	of	 musical

performances	that	will	 be	taking	place	in	 our	grand	theater	throughout	 the	day.”

He	lifted	 his	right	 arm.	“This	 way	 there	is	an	assortment	of	game	rooms	should

you	care	to	test	the	providence	of	 luck,	 as	well	as	our	renowned	companionship

rooms—not	that	the	gentleman	is	in	need	of	further	 companionship.	Of	 course,	a

variety	 of	 refreshments	 are	 available	 throughout	 the	 palace.	 The	 coronation

ceremony	will	  begin	at	 sunrise	and	we	 ask	that	all	 guests	begin	 to	make	 their

way	to	the	great	hall	 at	half	before.	For	the	safety	 of	all	our	 guests,	there	will	be

no	continued	 access	to	 the	 corridors	  once	the	 coronation	 has	 begun.	If	  you

require	anything	 to	 make	your	 day	more	 pleasurable,	please	let	me	 or	another

courtier	know.”

     With	 a	tilt	of	 his	head,	he	walked	off	to	welcome	another	guest.

     “What	 do	you	suppose	he	meant	by	‘companionship	rooms’?”	Thorne	 asked.

     When	Cress	shot	him	a	glare,	 he	stood	straighter	and	ran	a	finger	in	 between

his	throat	and	his	shirt	collar.	“Not	 that	I’m	 tempted	to	…	or	…	 this	way,	right?”

     “You	 two	seem	lost,”	 someone	purred.

     Thorne	 spun	 around,	tucking	  Cress	behind	 him	 as	 he	 did.	 A	 man	 and	a

607
woman	were	standing	not	far	 away,	eyeing	Thorne	as	if	 he	were	on	display	 in	a

candy	shop	window.	Both	of	 them	wore	rhinestone-studded	suits.

     The	man	dropped	a	pair	of	thick-framed	 glasses	to	the	end	of	his	nose,	letting

his	gaze	swoop	over	Thorne	from	head	to	foot	and	back	up.	“Maybe	 we	can	help

you	find	your	 way?”

     Thorne	was	quick	 to	draw	on	his	signature	grin.	“Flattered,	 ladies,”	he	purred

right	back.

     Cress	frowned,	but	then,	realizing	 the	man	must	have	glamoured	himself	as	a

woman,	schooled	her	face	 into	indifference.	 She	couldn’t	  let	on	 to	anyone	that

she	wasn’t	affected	by	mind	control.

     “We’re	  on	something	 of	 a	covert	 mission	 right	 now,”	  Thorne	was	 saying,

“but	we’ll	 keep	our	eye	out	for	you	 at	the	coronation.”

     “Ooh,	 a	covert	mission,”	 swooned	the	woman,	chewing	on	her	pinkie	 nail.	“I

will	 want	to	hear	that	story	later.”

     Thorne	 winked.	 “I	  will	  want	 to	tell	  it.”	 Wrapping	  an	arm	 around	 Cress’s

shoulders,	he	led	her	away	from	the	couple.	When	they	had	gone	far	enough	that

he	was	sure	they	 wouldn’t	  be	overheard,	Thorne	 let	 out	 a	low	 whistle.	 “Holy

spades.	The	women	in	this	place.”

     Cress	bristled.	 “You	 mean,	 the	glamours	 in	 this	place.	 One	of	 them	was	 a

man.”

     Stumbling,	 Thorne	looked	down	at	her.	“You	 don’t	 say.	Which	one?”

     “Um	 …	the	one	wearing	glasses?”

     He	glanced	back	over	his	 shoulder,	scanning	the	crowd	for	the	couple.	 “Well

played,	Lunars,”	 he	murmured,	duly	 impressed.	He	faced	forward	 again.	“Jacin

said	to	take	the	third	hallway,	right?”	 He	tugged	her	toward	a	curving	 hall,	where

608
floor-to-ceiling	 windows	 offered	a	breathtaking	view	 of	the	front	gardens.

     “Try	 to	 keep	in	mind	that	they	 can	make	themselves	look	however	they	want

to,”	said	 Cress.	“No	one	in	 this	palace	is	 as	beautiful	as	you	think	 they	 are.	It’s

all	just	mind	control.”

     Thorne	 grinned	and	squeezed	her	closer	against	his	 side.	“I’m	  fairly	 certain

there’s	at	least	one	exception	to	that	rule.”

     Cress	rolled	her	eyes.	“Yeah.	Thaumaturges.”

     He	laughed	and	dropped	his	arm,	though	she	wasn’t	sure	what	was	funny.

     They	 passed	by	a	group	of	 young	men,	 and	Cress	watched,	baffled,	as	they

stumbled	across	the	hallway.	One	of	 them	shoved	open	a	glass	door	and	headed

toward	the	lakeshore	and	expansive	gardens.	He	nearly	tumbled	off	 the	staircase

that	led	down	to	the	sprawling	lawn.

     Shaking	her	head,	Cress	faced	forward	again—and	realized	she	was	alone.

     Every	 muscle	tensed	as	she	swiveled	around,	relieved	 to	spot	 Thorne	a	few

paces	away.	Not	 relieved	 to	 see	he’d	 been	accosted	by	 another	girl	 who	 was

quite	pretty	even	to	Cress’s	untrickable	 eyes.	She	was	smiling	at	Thorne	through

her	long	lashes	in	a	way	that	was	both	sultry	and	vicious.

     For	his	part,	Thorne	just	 looked	surprised.

     “I	 thought	I	sensed	an	Earthen	boy,”	said	the	girl.	Reaching	up,	she	traced	the

glowing	lights	 on	Thorne’s	 bow	tie,	then	trailed	 her	finger	down	 his	chest.	“And

a	well-dressed	one	at	that.	What	a	lucky	find.”

     Pulse	thumping,	 Cress	surveyed	 the	corridor.	 The	 crowd	 was	beginning	 to

trickle	toward	 the	great	hall,	but	plenty	 of	guests	were	still	 fluttering	 around	one

another	in	  no	apparent	 hurry.	 No	  one	was	 paying	 them	 any	 attention.	 This

woman,	too,	 seemed	to	have	eyes	only	 for	 Thorne.	 Cress	racked	her	brain	 for

609
some	way	 to	  get	 him	 away	 from	  her	 without	 raising	  suspicion	 or	 drawing

attention	to	herself.

     Then	the	woman	 wrapped	her	arms	around	Thorne’s	neck	and	every	thought

flew	 out	 of	 Cress’s	head.	Dumbfounded,	 Thorne	 offered	 no	 resistance	as	she

pulled	him	into	 a	kiss.

610
	




                                           Seventy-One







Cress’s	spine	stiffened	 indignantly,	 at	 the	same	time	 a	group	of	 Lunar	 women

chortled	 not	 far	 away.	 “Good	 eye,	 Luisa,”	  one	of	  them	 called,	 followed	 by

another:	“If	  you	 spot	 any	more	 pretty	 Earthens	 like	 that	 one,	send	 them	my

way!”

     Neither	 Thorne	 nor	Luisa	 seemed	to	 hear	them.	In	 fact,	 as	Cress	watched,

aghast,	Thorne	slid	his	arms	around	Luisa’s	body	and	drew	her	closer.

     Cress	clenched	her	 fists,	 her	shoulders,	her	 entire	body.	 She	was	 appalled.

Then	annoyed.	Then	 logic	 began	to	 creep	in	 and	she	realized	that,	 while	 they

were	probably	just	 toying	with	 Thorne,	 they	would	 not	be	so	kind	 to	her	if	 they

figured	out	she	was	immune	to	their	glamours	and	manipulation.

     Shaking	 with	 contempt,	Cress	backed	into	 an	alcove	 behind	a	 pillar.	 There

she	waited,	arms	crossed	and	red	sparks	in	her	vision,	as	Thorne	kissed	the	girl.

     And	 kissed	her.

     And	 kissed	her.

     Cress’s	fingernails	 had	left	painful	 crescent	moon	imprints	 in	her	skin	 by	the

time	they	finally	 pulled	apart.

     Luisa	 fluttered	  her	lashes,	 breathless.	“You’ve	  been	 wanting	 that	 awhile,

611
haven’t	you?”

     Cress	rolled	her	eyes	skyward.

     And	 Thorne	said	…

     Thorne	said	…

     “I	 think	 I’m	 in	love	with	 you.”

     A	 nail	 pierced	Cress’s	heart,	and	she	gasped,	actually	gasped	from	 the	pain

of	it.	 Her	 jaw	 fell,	 but	 she	quickly	 lifted	  it	 again.	The	 puncture	wound	 in	 her

chest	quickly	filled	 with	 resentment.

     If	 she	had	to	 watch	him	 swoon	 over	anyone	else	she	was	 going	to	 scream.

How	was	it	 possible	that	she	was	the	only	girl	 in	 the	galaxy	he	didn’t	 try	 to	kiss

and	woo	and	flirt	with?

     Well,	 he	 had	kissed	her	 that	one	time	 on	 the	rooftop,	 but	 it	 had	been	as	a

favor	to	her	and	hardly	counted.

     She	withdrew	  farther	 into	 the	alcove,	 seething,	but	 also	 hurt.	That	 was	 it,

then.	He	never	would	 desire	her,	 not	like	 these	other	girls	 who	 caught	his	 eye.

Cress	had	 to	 accept	 the	 fact	 that	 their	 kiss—the	  most	 passionate,	romantic

moment	of	her	life—had	 been	nothing	more	than	a	gesture	made	out	of	pity.

     “Oh,	 aren’t	you	 just	darling?”	 said	the	woman.	“And	 not	 a	bad	kisser,	either.

Maybe	we	can	enjoy	 more	of	each	other’s	 company	later?”	 Without	 waiting	 for

a	response,	she	patted	Thorne	 on	the	 chest	and	winked,	 before	 swaying	 away

down	the	hall.

     The	adoring	peanut	gallery,	too,	 meandered	off,	leaving	Thorne	in	the	middle

of	the	corridor,	 stunned.	His	cheeks	were	flushed,	his	eyes	dark	with	 what	Cress

assumed	was	lust,	and	his	hair	 was	messed	where	Luisa	 had	clawed	her	 hands

into	it.

612
     Luisa.	Who	 he	loved.

     Cress	squeezed	her	arms	tight	over	her	chest.

     After	 a	long,	bewildered	minute,	 Thorne	shook	off	the	lingering	 effects	of	the

manipulation	 and	looked	 around,	 turning	 in	 a	 full	  circle.	 His	 hand	smoothed

down	his	unkempt	hair.

     “Cress?”	 he	 asked,	not	 too	 loudly	 at	 first,	 but	 then,	 with	 growing	  worry,

“Cress!”

     “I’m	  here.”

     He	 spun	toward	 her	and	his	 body	sagged	with	 relief.	 “Spades.	 I’m	 sorry.	 I

don’t	know	 what	happened.	That	was—”

     “I	 don’t	  want	to	 know.”	 Pushing	 herself	away	 from	 the	wall,	 Cress	started

down	the	hallway.

     Thorne	chased	after	her.	“Whoa,	hey,	hold	on.	Are	 you	mad?”

     “Why	 would	 I	 be	mad?”	She	swung	her	 hands	in	a	wild	 gesture.	“You	 have

the	right	to	 flirt	 with	 and	kiss	and	proclaim	 your	 love	for	 whoever	you	 want	to.

Which	is	good,	because	you	do.	All	the	time.”

     Thorne	kept	 pace	easily	beside	her,	which	irritated	 her	even	more	 given	that

she	was	already	winded	from	walking	so	fast.

     “So…,”	 Thorne	 said,	his	tone	teasing.	“You’re	jealous?”

     Cress	bristled.	“You	 do	realize	 that	all	she	wanted	was	to	get	a	laugh	at	your

expense,	right?”

     He	chuckled,	 annoyingly	 good-natured	when	Cress	was	so	furious.	 “Yeah,	 I

get	that	now.	Cress,	wait.”	 Thorne	grabbed	her	 elbow	and	forced	 her	to	stop.	“I

know	they	can’t	 do	it	 to	you,	but	the	 rest	of	us	can’t	choose	not	to	 be	controlled

by	them.	She	manipulated	me.	It	wasn’t	my	fault.”

613
     “And	I	suppose	you’re	going	to	say	that	you	didn’t	enjoy	it?”

     He	opened	his	mouth,	but	hesitated.	“Er.	Well…”

     Cress	ripped	her	arm	away	from	him.	“I	know	it	wasn’t	your	fault.	But	that

doesn’t	excuse	everyone	else.	I	mean,	take	Iko!”

     “What	about	Iko?”

     She	dropped	her	voice	to	mimic	Thorne.	“‘I	really	know	how	to	pick	them,

don’t	I?’”

     He	chuckled,	his	eyes	glinting	at	her	mockery.	“It’s	the	truth,	isn’t	 it?	Her

new	body	is	gorgeous.”

     Cress	fixed	one	moment’s	worth	of	intensive	glaring	on	him.

     “That	was	clearly	not	the	right	 thing	to	say.	Sorry.	But	I’d	 just	gotten	my

eyesight	back.”

     “Yeah,	and	all	you	wanted	to	look	at	was	her.”

     Thorne	blinked,	and	sudden	comprehension	dawned	in	his	eyes,	but	Cress

stormed	away	before	he	could	reply.	“Never	mind.	Let’s	just—”

     “Pardon	me.”

     A	palace	guard	blocked	their	path,	one	arm	held	out,	stopping	Cress	in	her

tracks.	She	gasped	and	backed	into	Thorne,	who	latched	on	to	her	elbow.	Her

mouth	ran	dry.	 She’d	been	so	 incensed	she	hadn’t	noticed	the	 two	 guards

stationed	in	the	hall.

     “We	are	asking	that	all	guests	begin	to	make	their	way	to	the	great	hall	so	the

coronation	ceremony	can	begin	 without	 delay.”	 The	 guard	nodded	in	  the

direction	they’d	come.	“Please	proceed	this	way.”

     Cress’s	heart	was	hammering,	but	Thorne,	calm	as	ever,	pulled	her	away

with	a	casual	smile.	“Of	course,	thank	you.	We	must	have	gotten	turned	around.”

614
     As	soon	as	they	turned	a	corner,	Cress	yanked	her	arm	out	 of	Thorne’s	 hold.

He	let	his	 hand	fall	 without	 argument.	They	 were	in	a	hallway	 that	 was	quieter

than	the	main	corridor,	though	there	were	still	 a	handful	of	guests	drifting	about.

     “Stop	 here,”	Thorne	said,	and	she	did,	letting	him	 back	her	against	a	wall.	He

towered	too	 close	to	 her,	and	to	 anyone	it	 would	 look	 like	 they	 were	in	 some

intimate	conversation,	which	 only	 served	to	make	Cress’s	anger	flare	again.	She

clenched	her	fists	and	stared	resolutely	at	his	shoulder.

     Thorne	sighed.

     “Cress.	I	know	 you’re	upset,	but	could	you	 pretend	not	to	be	for	a	second?”

     She	shut	her	 eyes	and	took	a	 deep	breath.	She	was	not	 angry.	She	was	not

hurt.	She	was	not	heartbroken.

     When	she	opened	her	eyes	again,	she	morphed	her	expression	into	 what	she

hoped	looked	like	cheerful	flirtation.

     Thorne	raised	an	eyebrow.	“That’s	 uncanny.”

     Her	 voice	still	 had	a	sting	 to	it,	 though,	 when	she	said,	“I’m	  a	girl	 too,	you

know.	I	may	not	be	as	pretty	as	Iko,	or	brave	like	 Cinder	or	bold	like	 Scarlet—”

     “Wait,	 Cress—”

     “And	  I	don’t	 even	 want	to	 know	 what	dumb	 thing	 you	said	 when	you	 met

Princess	Winter	for	the	first	 time.”

     Thorne	 clamped	his	 mouth	shut,	 confirming	 her	 suspicion	that	 he	had	said

something	dumb	indeed.

     “But	  I’m	  not	invisible!	  And	  yet	 you	 flirt	  with	 every	 single	 one	of	 them.

You’ll	 flirt	 with	 anyone	who	so	much	as	looks	at	you.”

     “You’ve	   made	your	  point.”	  The	 teasing	glint	  in	  his	 eye	was	 gone,	 and

Cress’s	contrived	smile	 had	left	 her	too.	Though	 he	had	one	hand	near	her	hip,

615
he	was	no	longer	touching	her.

     “This	 is	what	 you	were	trying	 to	 tell	me,	wasn’t	 it?”	 Her	voice	 wavered.	“In

the	desert.	When	you	 were	going	 on	and	 on	about	how	 I’m	 so	 sweet	and	how

you	didn’t	 want	 to	hurt	 me	and	…	 You	 were	trying	 to	 warn	me,	 but	I	 was	too

much	of	a	…	a	naïve,	hopeless	romantic	to	even	listen	to	you.”

     His	eyes	softened.	“I	didn’t	 want	 to	hurt	you.”

     She	crossed	her	 arms	 defensively	 over	her	 chest.	Tears	 were	blurring	  her

vision.	“I	 know.	It’s	 my	own	 fault	I’ve	 been	this	stupid.”

     Thorne	flinched,	 but	the	movement	was	coupled	with	 a	glance	around,	which

prompted	Cress	to	do	the	same,	swiping	at	her	eyes	before	the	tears	could	gather.

The	hallway	 had	almost	cleared,	and	the	 few	remaining	 guests	weren’t	 looking

their	way.

     Reaching	 around	 Cress,	Thorne	 pulled	 open	 a	door	 that	 she	 hadn’t	 even

noticed	 and	within	  half	  a	 blink	  ushered	her	 inside.	 She	 stumbled	 from	 the

quickness	of	 it,	 catching	 herself	on	 a	plant	 stand	 beside	the	door.	 They	 were

surrounded	by	 flowers	 and	greenery	 of	 every	imaginable	 color,	 their	 perfume

thick	and	 steaming	in	 her	throat.	The	 ceiling	 rose	several	stories	high	 and	was

made	of	the	same	leaded	glass	as	the	windows	 in	 the	main	 corridor.	 Sofas	and

reading	chairs	 were	 set	in	 small	 groupings	 throughout	 the	 room	 and	straight

ahead	they	faced	a	series	of	desks	overlooking	the	lake	beyond.

     “Good,”	  said	Thorne.	 “I	 thought	 I	 remembered	seeing	something	 about	an

atrium.	We’ll	 wait	 here	until	the	halls	 clear.	I’m	 hoping	we	can	cross	into	one	of

the	servant	halls	and	avoid	any	more	run-ins	with	guards	for	a	while.”

     Cress	filled	  her	lungs	 to	near	bursting	 and	let	 it	 all	 out,	 but	the	 breath	did

nothing	to	 refresh	her.	 She	stepped	into	 the	room,	 putting	 much-needed	space

616
between	her	and	Thorne.

     She	was	 an	idiot.	  He	had	 never	once	 given	 her	any	 indication	 that	 a	real

relationship	could	 be	in	their	 future.	He’d	 given	her	every	 chance	to	get	used	to

this	fact.	 But	 despite	all	 his	attempts	to	 dissuade	her	from	 falling	 in	 love	 with

him,	her	heart	was	still	shattered.

     What	 was	worse,	 a	kiss	 from	 a	Lunar,	 of	 all	 things,	 had	shattered	it—and

Thorne	really	couldn’t	 be	blamed	for	that.

     “Cress	…	listen…”

     His	 fingers	brushed	her	 wrist,	 but	she	jerked	 away.	“Don’t.	  I’m	 sorry.	 That

wasn’t	fair	of	 me.	I	shouldn’t	 have	said	anything.”

     She	wiped	her	nose	with	the	flimsy	 wing	material	 of	her	ridiculous	 costume.

     Thorne	sighed	and	from	 the	corner	of	her	eye	she	caught	him	running	 a	hand

through	his	 hair.	She	could	 feel	his	 gaze	burning	 into	the	 back	of	 her	neck,	so

she	turned	away	and	pretended	to	inspect	an	enormous	purple	blossom.

     He	knew	 now,	of	course.	She	had	given	all	 her	feelings	away—had	probably

given	them	away	a	long	 time	ago,	but	he’d	 been	too	concerned	with	hurting	 her

to	let	on	that	he	knew.

     She	 could	 tell	  he	wanted	 to	  talk	 more.	 She	 could	 feel	 unspoken	 words

hovering	 in	 the	 air	 between	 them,	suffocating	  her.	 He	 would	 apologize.	 He

would	tell	 her	how	much	he	cared	for	her—as	a	friend.	As	a	member	of	his	crew.

     She	didn’t	 want	to	 hear	it.	Not	 now.	Not	 ever,	but	especially	 not	now,	 when

there	were	more	pressing	issues	to	deal	with.

     “How	 long	 are	we	waiting	here?”	 she	asked,	and	though	her	voice	was	tinted

with	emotion,	it	 had	stopped	shaking.

     She	heard	a	rustle	 and	a	quiet	 click	 of	 a	portscreen.	“A	  few	more	 minutes,

617
just	to	make	sure	they’ve	rounded	up	the	slower	guests.”

     She	nodded.

     A	 second	later,	she	heard	another	sigh.	“Cress?”

     She	shook	her	head.	The	little	antenna	balls	bounced	in	the	corner	of	her	eyes

—she’d	forgotten	 she	was	wearing	them.	She	dared	to	face	him,	hoping	her	face

didn’t	 convey	 the	misery	 underneath.	 “I’m	  all	 right.	 I	 just	 don’t	 want	 to	 talk

about	it.”

     Thorne	 had	situated	himself	 against	the	 closed	door,	his	 hands	stuck	in	 his

pockets.	His	expression	was	tumultuous.	 Shame,	maybe,	mixed	 with	 doubt	and

nerves,	and	something	else	that	was	dark	and	heady	and	made	her	toes	tingle.

     He	 considered	her	for	 a	long	 moment.	“All	  right,”	  he	said,	finally.	  “I	 don’t

want	to	talk	about	it,	either.”

     She	started	to	 nod,	 but	was	 surprised	when	 Thorne	pushed	away	 from	 the

door.	Cress	blinked	and	stumbled	back,	startled	by	the	sudden	movement.	Three,

four	steps.	The	backs	of	her	thighs	hit	one	of	the	desks.

     “What—?”

     In	 one	 movement,	 Thorne	 lifted	 her	 onto	 the	 desk	and	 pressed	her	 back

against	an	enormous	potted	fern	and—oh.

     Cress	had	built	 a	 thousand	fantasies	around	their	 rooftop	 kiss,	but	 this	kiss

was	something	new.

     Where	 before,	  the	 kiss	 had	 been	 gentle	 and	 protective,	 now	  there	 was

something	 passionate.	Determined.	 Cress’s	 body	  dissolved	 into	 nothing	  but

sensation.	His	hands	burned	her	waist	through	 the	skirt’s	 thin	 fabric.	 Her	knees

pressed	against	his	hips,	and	he	pulled	her	closer,	closer,	like	he	couldn’t	 get	her

close	enough.	A	whimper	 escaped	her	mouth,	only	 to	be	swallowed	 by	his.	She

618
heard	a	moan,	but	it	could	have	come	from	either	of	them.

     And	 where,	 on	 the	rooftop,	  the	kiss	 had	 been	cut	 too	 short	by	 the	 battle

raging	on	around	them,	this	kiss	went	on,	and	on,	and	on	…

     Finally,	  when	Cress	was	 starting	 to	feel	 faint,	 the	 kiss	 was	broken	 with	 a

needy	inhale.	Cress	was	trembling	and	she	hoped	he	wasn’t	about	to	set	her	back

on	her	feet	 and	inform	 her	 it	 was	time	 to	get	 on	with	 their	 work,	 because	she

doubted	she	could	walk	for	two	steps,	much	less	to	the	other	side	of	the	palace.

     Thorne	 didn’t	 pull	 away.	 Rather,	he	slipped	 his	arms	around	 her	back,	and

here	was	the	gentle	protectiveness	she	remembered.	His	breathing	was	as	erratic

as	hers.

     “Cress.”	 He	said	her	name	like	a	vow.

     Cress	shivered.	 Licking	  her	 tender	 lips,	 she	forced	 her	 hands	 to	 un-bury

themselves	from	his	hair	and	moved	them	instead	to	his	chest.

     Then	she	forced	herself	to	push	him	away.

     Not	 enough	to	break	 out	of	 his	embrace,	but	 enough	that	she	could	 breathe

and	think	and	brace	for	the	lifetime	of	 regret	she	was	about	to	bring	on	herself.

     “This…”	  Her	voice	caught.	She	tried	again.	“This	 isn’t	what	I	 wanted.”

     It	 took	 Thorne	a	moment,	 but	then	 his	dazed	look	 hardened	and	he	pushed

himself	back	even	farther.

     “I	 mean,	it	is,”	 she	amended.	“Obviously,	it	is.”

     His	 relief	  was	obvious,	  and	warmed	 every	 inch	 of	 her	 body.	 The	 quick,

teasing	grin	 spoke	volumes.	Of	 course	this	 was	what	 she	wanted.	Of	 course	it

was.

     “But	  …	 not	 to	be	 just	 another	girl,”	  she	said.	 “I	  never	wanted	 to	 be	just

another	one	of	your	girls.”

619
     The	smile	 vanished	again.	 “Cress…”	 He	seemed	torn,	 but	also	hopeful	 and

unguarded.	He	took	a	deep	breath.	“She	looked	like	you.”

     She	hadn’t	realized	she	was	watching	 his	mouth	until	 her	eyes	snapped	up	to

meet	his.	“What?”

     “The	 girl	in	 the	hallway,	the	one	that	kissed	me.	She	looked	like	you.”

     The	kiss	with	 the	Lunar	girl	 felt	like	 eons	ago.	The	memory	caused	a	surge	of

envy,	but	Cress	did	her	best	to	stomp	it	back	down.

     “That’s	 ridiculous.	 She	was	brunette,	and	tall,	and—”

     “Not	 to	me.”	 Thorne	tucked	a	strand	of	Cress’s	hair	behind	an	ear.	“She	must

have	 seen	us	 walking	   together.	 Maybe	 she	 saw	 how	  I	  looked	 at	  you	 or

something,	I	don’t	know,	 but	she	knew	…	she	made	her	glamour	look	like	you.”

     Lips	 parting,	Cress	envisioned	herself	 hidden	in	that	alcove	 again.	Watching

Thorne’s	expression	of	 bewilderment.	 Of	 desire.	The	way	 he’d	 kissed	her,	and

held	her	…

     “I	 thought	I	 was	kissing	you,”	 he	confirmed,	brushing	her	lips	 with	his	 again.

And	again.	Cress’s	fingers	found	his	lapels	and	she	pulled	him	closer.

     It	 didn’t	last	long,	 though,	as	another	memory	resurfaced.

     She	yanked	away.	“But	…	 you	told	her	you	loved	 her.”

     His	 expression	 froze,	 desire	 giving	  way	 to	 alarm.	  They	 hovered	 in	 that

moment	for	an	eternity.

     Finally,	 Thorne	 gulped.	“Right.	  That.”	 He	 shrugged.	“I	 mean,	I	 was	…	 we

were—”

     Before	he	could	finish,	 the	door	swung	open	behind	him.

620
	




                                           Seventy-Two







They	both	froze.

     Jaw	tightening,	Thorne	 whispered,	“To	be	continued?”

     She	nodded,	having	some	difficulty	 trying	 to	remember	where	they	were.

     Thorne	 spun	back	to	 the	door,	 his	body	 shielding	 Cress	from	 whoever	had

entered.	Peering	around	his	elbow,	she	caught	sight	of	a	palace	guard	outlined	in

the	hallway’s	light.

     The	guard	was	scowling	as	he	raised	a	device	to	his	mouth.	“It’s	 just	a	couple

of	guests,”	he	said,	his	voice	gruff.	He	nudged	his	chin	toward	 Thorne	and	Cress.

“I	 need	to	 ask	you	to	 move	 along.	All	  corridors	 and	public	 spaces	need	to	be

cleared	prior	to	the	start	of	the	ceremony.”

     Clearing	 his	throat,	Thorne	tugged	down	 his	jacket	 and	adjusted	his	bow	tie.

“So	sorry.	I	guess	we	just	…	got	carried	away.”

     Cress	plucked	a	fern	 leaf	off	 Thorne’s	 sleeve.	Heat	singed	her	cheeks,	but	it

was	only	part	from	 mortification,	 and	mostly	 from	the	lingering	 feel	of	 his	arms,

his	kisses,	the	hazy	reality	of	the	past	few	minutes.

     “We’ll	  just	be	moving	 along,	then.”	 Thorne	grabbed	the	bug-antenna	hat	that

had	ended	up	on	the	floor	 and	handed	it	to	Cress,	then	helped	her	back	down	 to

621
the	floor.

     Her	shaking	hands	fumbled	to	strap	the	antennae	back	onto	her	head.

     “Thanks	 for	letting	 us	borrow	 the	place,”	 Thorne	said	to	the	guard,	winking,

as	they	scooted	into	 the	hallway.	 Only	 once	the	guard	was	behind	 them	did	 he

show	the	slightest	 crack	in	 his	composure,	releasing	 a	slow	breath.	 “Try	 to	 act

natural.”

     The	words	 echoed	in	Cress’s	head	for	a	long	moment	before	she	could	make

sense	of	them.	Act	 natural?	Act	 natural?	 When	her	legs	 were	made	of	 noodles

and	her	heart	was	 about	to	 pound	right	 out	 of	 her	chest	and	 he’d	said	 that	he

loved	her,	at	 least,	in	a	sense.	What	 did	it	 even	mean	to	 act	natural	in	 the	first

place?	When	had	she	ever	in	her	life	known	how	to	act	natural?

     So	she	started	to	laugh.	A	 stifled	snort,	first.	 Then	a	rush	of	 giggles	crawling

up	her	throat,	until	 she	was	half	falling	 over	herself	 in	an	effort	 to	walk	 straight.

The	laughter	nearly	choked	her.

     Thorne	kept	an	arm	locked	 around	her	waist.	“Not	 quite	what	I	 had	in	mind,”

he	muttered,	“but	sort	of	charming	all	 the	same.”

     “I’m	  sorry.”	She	gasped	out	the	words,	coughed	a	little,	and	tried	to	 mold	her

face	into	natural,	 but	 another	giggle	fit	 was	rumbling	 her	stomach,	spasming	in

her	chest.	She	buckled	over	again.

     “Um.	  Cress.	You’re	 adorable,	but	 I	need	you	 to	 focus	for	 a	second.	We’re

lucky	that	guard	didn’t	 recognize	either	of	us,	but	if	 he—”

     “Hey!	 Stop!”

     Thorne	cursed.

     Cress’s	laughter	was	doused	with	panic.

     “Run!”

622
     She	did,	 gripping	 Thorne’s	 hand.	Around	  one	corner,	then	 another.	He	 led

them	to	an	inconspicuous	alcove	with	a	small	door	and	shoved	her	through—into

the	servants’	halls.

     “Left!”	  he	ordered,	yanking	the	door	shut	and	grabbing	a	service	tray	that	had

been	left	in	the	corridor.	 He	wedged	it	 into	place	while	 Cress	ran,	past	pallets	of

supplies	and	 maintenance	equipment,	 storage	cabinets	and	 broken	 sculptures.

Thorne	caught	 up	 to	 her	 easily.	 He	had	 pulled	 the	 handgun	 from	 inside	 his

jacket.	“Still	 have	that	chip?”

     She	pressed	a	hand	against	her	bodice,	detecting	the	small	chip	with	Cinder’s

video	tucked	against	her	skin.	She	nodded,	running	too	hard	to	speak.

     “Good.”

     Without	 warning,	 Thorne	slammed	into	 Cress,	pushing	them	both	 behind	an

enormous	wheel	of	electrical	cording.	She	hit	the	wall	 hard,	panting.

     “Two	  corridors	back	 there	was	an	elevator,”	 he	said.	“Find	  a	place	to	 hide,

then	get	to	the	security	 center.	I’ll	 draw	 them	off	 and	circle	back	around	to	 find

you.”

     Cress	started	to	shake	her	head.	“No.	 You	 can’t	leave	me,	 not	again.	I	 can’t

do	this	without	you.”

     “Sure	you	 can.	It	won’t	 be	as	much	fun,	but	you’ll	 figure	it	 out.”

     Footsteps	thundered	in	the	distance.	She	squeaked.

     “I’ll	  find	 you,”	 Thorne	whispered.	He	pressed	a	hasty	kiss	against	her	mouth,

wrapping	her	hand	around	something	heavy	and	warm.	“Be	heroic.”

     He	took	off	 running	again,	just	as	she	heard	the	footsteps	catching	up.

     “There!”	 someone	yelled.

     Thorne	disappeared	around	a	corner.

623
     Cress	stared	at	the	gun	he’d	given	her.	This	small	 contraption,	so	solid	 in	her

grip,	terrified	  her	more	than	 the	guards.	She	ached	to	put	 it	 down	 on	the	floor

and	step	away.

     Instead,	 she	flattened	 herself	 against	 the	 electrical	 cording	 and	 pried	 her

finger	from	 the	 trigger,	where	 it	had	 landed	instinctively.	 Just	 like	a	 computer,

she	told	herself.	Computers	only	 do	what	you	 tell	them	to	 do.	The	gun	will	 only

fire	if	you	pull	 the	trigger.

     It	 wasn’t	particularly	 comforting.

     Two	 guards	ran	past,	not	even	glancing	in	her	direction.

     She	considered	staying	where	she	was,	out	in	the	open	as	it	may	be.	She	was

shaking	from	head	to	toe	and	every	fiber	of	her	body	told	 her	that	to	move	would

be	to	get	caught.

     But	 logic	 told	 her	 that	her	 body	 was	lying.	 They	 would	 come	 back.	They

would	send	reinforcements.	She	would	be	seen.

     Distant	 gunshots	made	her	 jump,	 spurring	 her	into	 action.	 The	 shots	were

followed	by	 grunts	and	the	sounds	of	a	struggle.

     Cress	pushed	herself	out	 of	 the	corner	and	 turned	back	in	 the	direction	 she

and	Thorne	had	come	from.	Two	corridors	back,	he’d	 said.	An	elevator.

     She	went	quietly	 this	 time,	pressing	her	free	 hand	into	the	stitch	 in	her	 side.

She	passed	one	 corridor	  and	 heard	more	 footsteps,	 but	  couldn’t	  tell	 which

direction	 they	 were	 coming	 from.	  She	froze,	 scanned	 her	surroundings,	 and

yanked	open	one	of	the	storage	cabinets.

     Rolls	 of	 decorative	fabric	 were	stood	 on	end,	many	 of	 them	taller	 than	she

was,	and	all	of	them	lush	and	glistening	in	metallics	 and	jewel	tones.

     Cress	climbed	 inside,	 squeezing	her	 body	 into	 the	 space	created	from	 the

624
fabric	bolts	that	had	toppled	to	one	side.	Pulling	 the	door	shut,	she	set	the	gun	on

the	cabinet’s	floor.	She	was	very	careful	to	aim	it	 away	from	her.

     The	 footsteps	grew	 louder	 and	 she	was	sure	 she’d	been	 seen,	but	no	 one

yelled.

     Until—

     “Stop!”

     Another	 gunshot,	 this	one	 followed	  by	an	 instantaneous	grunt	 and	a	body

crashing	onto	the	floor.	 It	sounded	close.	Cress	squeezed	her	eyes	shut,	pressing

her	chin	onto	her	knees.	Not	Thorne.	Please	not	Thorne.

     A	 heavy	sigh	was	followed	 by	 a	soothing	male	voice.	 “All	  this	over	a	pesky

Earthen?	You	guards	are	pathetic.”

     Cress	pressed	her	hands	against	her	mouth	to	keep	any	sounds	from	escaping.

She	stared	into	 the	darkness,	attempting	 to	 shallow	 her	 breathing,	though	 she

worried	she	might	pass	out	if	she	didn’t	get	more	air	 soon.

     Someone	groaned.	Not	far	away	from	where	she	was	hiding.

     “He	 is	 definitely	  one	of	 the	cyborg’s	 allies.	 The	 question	is,	 what	are	 you

doing	in	the	palace?”

     A	 beat,	then	Thorne’s	voice.	“Just	kissing	my	 girl,”	 he	said,	wheezing	a	little.

Cress	scrunched	up	her	whole	face	and	buried	it	against	her	knees,	choking	back

a	sob.	“I	didn’t	 realize	that	was	a	…	a	capital	offense	around	here.”

     The	man	sounded	unamused.	“Where	is	the	girl	you	were	with?”

     “I	 think	 you	scared	her	off.”

     Another	 sigh.	“We	 don’t	 have	time	for	this.	 Put	him	in	 a	holding	 cell—we’ll

deal	with	 him	after	 the	coronation.	I’m	  sure	he’ll	 make	a	delightful	 Earthen	pet

for	one	of	the	families.	 And	keep	looking	 for	that	girl—alert	  me	the	moment	you

625
find	her.	Increase	security	around	the	great	hall.	They’re	 plotting	 something,	and

Her	Majesty	will	 kill	 us	all	 if	the	ceremony	is	interrupted.”

     There	was	a	thud	 and	another	grunt.	Cress	flinched,	 her	head	filling	 with	 all

the	things	 they	could	 have	done	 to	Thorne	 to	 cause	that	grunt—all	  the	things

they	could	still	 do	to	him.

     She	bit	her	lip	 until	 she	tasted	blood,	the	pain	alone	keeping	her	 from	crying

as	she	listened	to	them	drag	him	away.

626
	




                                      Seventy-Three







“Jacin.”	Cinder’s	tone	was	full	of	warning.	“Iko	did	not	sacrifice	herself	so	you

could	crash	us	into	a	crater	and	kill	us	both.”

     “Calm	down.	I	know	what	I’m	 doing,”	he	responded,	pretending	to	be	calm

while	his	heart	was	a	hammer	pounding	against	his	chest.

     “I	thought	you	said	you’ve	never	driven	one	of	these	before.”

     “I	haven’t.”	He	banked	hard	and	the	terrain-speeder	careened	to	the	left,	fast

and	smooth.

     Cinder	gasped	and	reached	for	a	bar	overhead.	A	hiss	of	pain	followed—

probably	her	shoulder	wound	acting	up	again—but	she	didn’t	say	anything	and

Jacin	didn’t	slow	down.

     The	vehicle	was	by	far	the	slickest	Jacin	had	ever	piloted.	Little	more	than	a

risky	toy	to	some	rich	Artemisian,	it	hovered	close	to	the	rocky,	uneven	surface

of	Luna,	soaring	so	fast	the	white	ground	blurred	beneath	them.	The	roof	was

see-through,	making	it	feel	as	if	they	were	out	in	the	airless	terrain	rather	than	in

a	protective	vehicle.

     Though	protective	was	a	subjective	word.	Jacin	had	the	feeling	that	if	he

clipped	any	rocks,	this	thing	would	crumple	around	them	like	an	aluminum	can.

627
     Hell,	 maybe	it	was	aluminum.

     They	launched	off	 a	cliff	 and	the	speeder	engaged	antigravity	mode,	keeping

them	 on	 a	 smooth	 trajectory	  as	 they	 sailed	 over	  the	 crater	 below,	  before

descending	toward	the	other	side	and	continuing	 on	as	if	nothing	 had	happened.

Jacin’s	stomach	flipped—a	 product	of	 both	the	high	 speed	and	not	quite	having

adjusted	to	the	weightlessness	outside	of	the	gravity-controlled	domes.

     “Just	 an	observation,”	 Cinder	 said	through	 her	teeth,	“but	 we	 have	a	lot	 of

fragile	 and	important	 vials	 in	 the	back	 of	this	 thing.	 Maybe	 we	don’t	  want	to

crash?”

     “We’re	  fine.”	   His	 attention	  dropped	 to	 the	 holographic	  map	 above	 the

controls.	Any	 other	day	this	would	 have	been	a	daring	game,	but	now	they	were

on	a	mission.	 Every	 spare	corner	of	 the	speeder	was	full	  of	antidote	 vials	 and

every	moment	that	passed	meant	people	were	dying.

     And	 one	of	them	was	Winter.

     A	 dome	appeared	on	the	horizon.	 Even	 from	 here	he	could	see	the	lines	 of

tree	trunks	on	one	side	and	the	clear-cut	stumps	on	the	other.

     Jacin	 maneuvered	the	 speeder	around	a	 series	of	 jagged	 rock	 formations.

Cinder	adjusted	the	holograph,	repositioning	 the	map	so	Jacin	could	see	the	best

route	to	their	destination.	Most	 of	the	domes	were	clumped	together	in	 groups—

both	because	they	had	been	easier	to	build	that	way	 back	when	Luna	was	being

colonized,	but	also	so	they	 could	share	ports	that	connected	them	to	 the	outside

terrain	of	 Luna	and	allow	 for	 supply	deliveries	 independent	of	the	 underground

shuttle	system.

     The	barrenness	of	the	 landscape	made	distances	deceptive.	It	felt	 like	 hours

had	gone	by	since	the	lumber	sector	had	first	come	into	view,	 and	every	moment

628
that	ticked	by	 drowned	 Jacin	in	anxiety.	 He	kept	 seeing	those	soldiers	carrying

the	suspended-animation	tank	 between	 them	 like	 pallbearers.	He	 tried	 to	 tell

himself	that	 he	wasn’t	 too	late.	 Surely	they’d	 put	 Winter	 into	 the	tank	because

they	believed	there	was	a	chance	to	save	her.	Surely	 the	tank	would	 slow	down

the	disease	enough	to	keep	her	safe	until	he	got	there.	It	had	to.

     “Whoa,	 whoa,	whoa—wall!”	 Cinder	 screamed,	bracing	for	impact.

     Jacin	 swerved	 at	 the	 last	 moment,	 tilting	  the	 speeder	 on	 its	 side	 as	he

careened	along	  the	 dome’s	 exterior	  curve.	  The	 holograph	  magnified	  their

destination—the	 dock’s	 entry	  flickering	  in	  the	corner	  of	 Jacin’s	 vision.	  He

considered	his	 timing.	  Straighten	 the	ship,	 reduce	 the	propulsion,	  toggle	 the

hoverblades.	He	jolted	forward	against	the	harness	as	the	speeder	slowed.

     Slowed.

     Slowed.

     And	 dropped.	A	rock	plummeting	 from	a	cliff.

     Cinder	yelped.

     The	  dome	  and	 the	  rocky	  landscape	 disappeared	 as	  dark	  cave	 walls

surrounded	them.	  Jacin	 resumed	auto-power	  and	 their	 descent	 turned	 from

death-defying	 to	 gradual,	 bringing	 them	 to	 a	 steady,	 controlled	 hover.	 A	  lit

landing	 strip	 and	holding	 chamber	 opened	before	 them	 and	Jacin	 coaxed	the

speeder	inside.

     “I’m	  never	getting	into	a	vehicle	with	 you	again,”	Cinder	 said,	panting.

     Jacin	ignored	 her,	his	 nerves	still	 electrified,	  and	not	from	  the	fall.	 Behind

them,	the	holding	  door	slammed	 shut,	and	another	 door	opened,	an	 enormous

iron	beast.	Jacin	coaxed	the	speeder	forward,	relieved	when	there	was	no	sign	of

opposition	to	stop	them.

629
     The	holographic	 map	changed	from	 the	exterior	 layout	 of	Luna	 to	a	map	of

this	port	and	the	 surrounding	sectors.	Jacin	gripped	the	flight	  controls,	mentally

tracing	their	route	up	to	the	clinic	 where	Winter	was	waiting.

     This	 was	where	they	were	supposed	to	get	out	and	go	the	rest	of	 the	way	on

foot,	hauling	as	many	trays	of	antidote	as	they	could	up	into	the	sectors.

     Tearing	his	attention	from	 the	coordinates,	he	eyed	the	emergency	evacuation

stairwell	that	 led	to	the	surface.	A	 sign	indicated	the	nearest	domes.	LW-12	was

the	third	 on	 the	list,	 complete	 with	 a	helpful	  arrow	indicating	  which	 stairwell

would	take	them	there.

     Jacin	calculated.	His	thumb	caressed	the	power	switch.

     “Jacin,”	 said	Cinder,	following	  his	gaze.	“I	don’t	 think	we	can—”

     Her	warning	 dissolved	into	a	scream.

     She	was	 wrong.	 The	 terrain-speeder	did	 fit	  up	 the	stairwell,	  and	 he	only

nicked	the	 walls	 a	few	 times	as	they	 soared	upward	 and	emerged	beneath	the

biodome	of	 LW-12.	  By	 the	time	 he	leveled	 out,	 Cinder	 had	slumped	into	 the

copilot	seat	with	 her	hand	over	her	 eyes	and	her	opposite	knuckles	tight	 around

the	bar.

     “We’re	 here,”	 he	said,	adjusting	the	holograph	again.	It	 guided	them	beneath

the	canopy	of	 trees	toward	the	 outer	edge	of	the	 dome	where	a	single	 street	of

residences	and	supply	shops	encircled	the	forest.

     He	noticed	the	thinning	 of	the	trees	first,	then	the	staggered	shapes	of	people.

     A	 lot	of	people.

     An	 entire	 crowd	 of	  people	was	 gathered	at	 the	 forest’s	 edge.	They	 were

gawking	 at	the	 neon-yellow	 terrain-speeder	as	it	 emerged	 from	 their	 peaceful

woods.	The	crowd	 retreated,	making	 space,	or	maybe	afraid	 of	being	 hit.	Jacin

630
lowered	the	speeder	to	the	ground	and	cut	the	power.

     His	finger	 reached	for	the	release	button.

     “Wait.”	  Cinder	 reached	toward	her	feet	and	drew	 two	vials	 from	 a	rack	that

was	secured	there.	“We’re	 no	longer	 immune,	either,”	 she	said,	handing	 one	to

him.

     They	each	tossed	back	the	antidote	without	 ceremony.	Jacin	was	opening	the

vehicle	 before	he	 could	 swallow.	 There	 was	a	 whoosh	 of	 air	 as	the	 bubbled

ceiling	 of	 the	 terrain-speeder	 split	 down	 the	 middle	 and	 peeled	 open	like	  a

cracked	nutshell.

     Unsnapping	 his	 harness,	Jacin	hauled	himself	  over	the	 top	 of	 the	vehicle,

landing	on	a	 squishy	patch	of	 moss.	Cinder	climbed	 out	not	 quite	as	gracefully

on	the	other	side.

     Jacin	hadn’t	given	 much	thought	to	this	moment.	No	 doubt	there	were	people

in	this	sector	who	 needed	the	antidote,	but	to	tell	 them	they	had	entire	pallets	of

it	could	lead	to	a	brawl.

     Snatching	 a	 single	  vial	  from	  a	 tray	 that	 was	  padded	against	 the	  back

floorboards,	Jacin	tucked	it	into	his	 palm	and	strode	toward	the	crowd.

     He’d	  gone	 four	 steps	 when,	 suddenly,	 he	 was	 not	  facing	 a	 bedraggled

assortment	of	lumberjacks,	but	a	wall	 of	spears	and	slingshots	and	a	whole	lot	of

sticks.

     He	froze.

     Either	 he’d	 been	far	too	 distracted	to	 notice	they	 were	all	 armed,	or	 they’d

been	practicing	for	a	moment	like	 this.	A	man	stepped	out	of	the	crowd,	gripping

a	wooden	club.	“Who	are—?”

     Recognition	 was	already	pooling	in	 their	eyes,	though,	as	Cinder	wobbled	up

631
to	Jacin’s	side.	She	held	up	both	hands,	showing	the	metal	plating.

     “I	 have	no	way	 of	proving	 to	you	 that	I’m	 not	using	a	glamour,”	 she	started,

“but	I	 am	Princess	Selene,	and	we’re	not	here	to	hurt	 you.	Jacin	here	is	a	friend

of	 Princess	Winter’s.	  He’s	 the	 one	 who	 helped	 her	escape	the	 palace	 when

Levana	tried	to	have	her	killed.”	 She	paused.	“The	first	time.”

     “No	 friend	 of	ours	 has	Artemisian	toys	 like	that,”	 said	the	man,	pointing	 his

club	at	the	speeder.

     Jacin	snarled.	“She	didn’t	 say	I	was	a	friend	of	yours.	Where’s	the	princess?”

     “Jacin,	 don’t	  try	 to	 help.”	  Cinder	 cast	him	  an	annoyed	 look.	 “We	  know

Princess	Winter	is	ill,	 along	with	many	of	 your	friends	and	family—”

     “What’s	 going	on	out	here?”

     A	 familiar	 face	emerged	from	 the	crowd,	 her	cheeks	dirty	 and	her	red	 curls

limp	 with	 grease.	There	 were	dark	 circles	 beneath	her	eyes	and	 an	unhealthy

pallor	to	her	skin.

     Scarlet	froze.	“Cinder!”	  But	as	soon	as	she	started	to	smile,	suspicion	crept	in

and	she	held	up	a	finger.	“Where	did	you	and	I	first	 meet?”

     Cinder	hesitated,	but	only	 for	a	moment.	“In	 Paris,	outside	the	opera	house.	I

tranquilized	Wolf	 because	I	thought	he	was	attacking	you.”

     Scarlet’s	grin	 was	back	before	 Cinder	had	finished	 speaking.	She	pulled	 her

into	 a	 hug,	 then	 cursed	 and	stepped	 back.	 Half	  a	dozen	 wolf	  soldiers	 had

followed	 in	 her	 wake	 and	were	 crowding	  around	her	 like	 overeager	 security

guards.	They	looked	 tame,	for	 the	 moment,	but	 also	like	 they	 could	tear	 apart

every	person	in	this	crowd	in	all	 of	ten	seconds	if	they	chose	to.

     “Sorry—you	  shouldn’t	 be	here.	Levana—”	 Scarlet	started	to	 cough	into	 her

elbow,	 nearly	 doubling	  over	 with	  the	 cough’s	 unexpected	 force.	 When	 she

632
caught	her	breath,	there	 were	dark	 spots	of	 blood	on	 her	sleeve.	“It’s	  not	 safe

here,”	she	finished,	as	if	it	wasn’t	 obvious.

     “Is	 Winter	alive?”	 Jacin	said.

     Scarlet	crossed	her	arms,	but	 not	in	 a	defiant	 way.	More	 that	she	wanted	to

hide	the	evidence	of	the	disease.	“She’s	alive,”	said	Scarlet,	“but	sick.	A	 lot	of	 us

are	sick.	Levana	poisoned	her	with	letumosis	 and	it	spread	fast.	We	have	Winter

in	a	suspended—”

     “We	 know,”	 said	Cinder.	“We	 brought	the	antidote.”

     Jacin	held	up	the	vial	he’d	 grabbed	from	the	speeder.

     Scarlet’s	 eyes	 widened,	  and	 those	clustered	  around	 them	 stirred.	 Many

weapons	had	lowered	once	Scarlet	and	Cinder	had	embraced,	but	not	all.

     Jacin	jerked	 a	thumb	 over	 his	shoulder.	 “Get	 some	of	 your	muscle	 to	help

empty	the	speeder.”

     “And	  take	one	 for	 yourself,”	  added	Cinder.	 “There	 should	 be	 enough	for

every	person	who’s	showing	 symptoms,	and	we’ll	 make	sure	to	ration	extras	for

anyone	who	might	still	 become	ill.”

     Squeezing	the	 vial,	 Jacin	neared	Scarlet	 and	lowered	 his	 voice.	 “Where	 is

she?”

     Scarlet	turned	to	 the	soldiers	surrounding	 her.	“Let	 him	 see	the	princess.	He

won’t	hurt	 her.	Strom,	let’s	organize	a	team	to	distribute	the	antidote.”

     Jacin	had	 stopped	listening.	 As	the	 crowd	 parted	he	could	 see	the	daylight

glinting	  off	 the	 glass	 of	 the	 suspended-animation	tank,	 and	 he	 was	 already

forcing	his	way	toward	 it.

     Here,	in	 the	dirt	 pathway	that	 separated	the	nondescript	medical	clinic	 from

the	shadowed	forest,	 they	had	 created	a	shrine	around	 her.	Crisscrossed	twigs

633
and	branches	formed	 a	 lattice	 around	 the	metal	 base	of	  the	tank,	 hiding	  the

chamber	that	contained	all	 the	life-giving	  fluids	 and	 chemicals	that	were	 being

recycled	in	 and	out	of	 her	system.	Daisies	and	buttercups	were	 strewn	over	the

glass	top,	though	many	had	slid	off	and	now	littered	the	ground	around	her.

     Jacin	 paused	to	take	 in	 the	sight,	 thinking	 maybe	 Levana	wasn’t	 paranoid

after	all.	Maybe	the	people	really	 did	love	Winter	 enough	that	she	was	a	threat	to

her	stepmother’s	crown,	despite	not	having	royal	blood.

     The	vial	 grew	warm	 in	his	 palm.	All	 the	voices	muffled	 in	 his	ears,	replaced

with	the	tinny	 ring	 of	the	tank’s	machinery,	 the	constant	hum	of	the	life	 support,

a	beep	from	the	screen	that	displayed	her	vitals.

     Jacin	swiped	his	arm	across	the	top,	scattering	the	flowers.	Beneath	the	glass,

Winter	looked	like	 she	was	sleeping,	except	the	preservation	liquid	gave	her	skin

a	bluish	tinge,	making	her	appear	sickly	and	drawing	attention	 to	the	scars	on	her

face.

     Then	there	was	the	 rash.	Raised	rings	of	 darkened	flesh	scattered	across	her

hands	and	up	her	arms	and	neck.	A	few	had	appeared	on	her	chin	and	around	her

ears.	Jacin	focused	again	on	her	hands,	and	though	it	was	difficult	to	tell	with	 her

brown	skin	 and	the	tinted	 liquid,	 he	could	see	a	shadow	around	her	fingernails.

The	last	fatal	mark	of	the	blue	fever.

     Despite	everything,	 she	still	looked	 like	 perfection,	at	least	to	him.	 Her	curly

hair	was	buoyant	 in	the	tank’s	 gel	and	 her	full	 lips	 were	turned	upward.	 It	 was

like	 she	was	going	 to	 open	her	eyes	and	 smile	 at	him,	 any	minute	 now.	 That

teasing,	taunting,	irresistible	smile.

     “The	 tank	has	slowed	down	her	biological	 systems,	including	the	progression

of	the	disease.”

634
     Jacin	started.	An	elderly	 man	stood	on	the	other	side	of	 the	tank	with	 a	mask

over	his	mouth	and	nose.	At	 first	Jacin	assumed	the	mask	was	to	keep	him	from

catching	the	disease,	but	then	he	saw	the	bruises	creeping	out	 from	 beneath	the

man’s	sleeves	and	realized	it	was	to	keep	himself	from	contributing	 to	its	spread.

     “But	 it	hasn’t	 stopped	the	disease	entirely,”	the	man	added.

     “Are	 you	a	doctor?”

     He	 nodded.	“If	 we	 open	the	tank,	 and	your	 antidote	doesn’t	 work,	 she	will

die,	probably	within	 the	hour.”

     “How	 long	will	  she	live	if	we	leave	her	in	there?”

     The	doctor’s	 eyes	fell	 down	 to	the	princess’s	face,	then	 darted	to	the	screen

embedded	at	the	foot	of	the	tank.	“A	week,	optimistically.”

     “Pessimistically?”

     “A	 day	or	two.”

     Clenching	 his	 teeth,	Jacin	held	 up	the	 vial.	 “This	 is	 the	 antidote	from	 Her

Majesty’s	own	labs.	It	 will	 work.”

     The	man’s	 eyes	crinkled	 and	he	glanced	past	Jacin.	Turning,	 Jacin	saw	that

Cinder	and	 Scarlet	had	 followed	 him,	 though	 they	 were	standing	 a	respectful

distance	back.

     “Winter	 would	 trust	him	with	 her	life,”	 said	Scarlet.	“I	 say	we	open	it.”

     The	doctor	 hesitated	a	moment	longer	before	 moving	 to	the	foot	 of	the	 tank

and	tapping	some	commands	into	the	screen.

     Jacin	tensed.

     It	 took	 a	moment	to	 notice	 any	difference,	 but	then	 he	saw	a	bubble	 of	 air

form	against	the	glass	encasement	as	the	liquid	drained	 out	through	the	 bottom,

complete	with	 the	quiet	sound	of	it	 being	sucked	through	 some	invisible	tubing.

635
Winter’s	  profile	  emerged	 above	 the	 blue-tinted	  liquid.	  The	 difference	  was

striking,	to	see	the	lingering	redness	in	her	lips	and	the	occasional	flutter	 beneath

her	eyelids.

     She	was	not	a	corpse.

     She	was	not	dead.

     He	was	going	to	save	her.

     Once	the	liquid	 had	drained,	the	doctor	tapped	at	the	screen	again	and	the	lid

opened,	sliding	off	 the	base	on	skinny	rails,	leaving	 a	shallow	bed	where	Winter

lay.

     Her	hair,	 damp	from	the	gel,	 had	settled	in	limp	 clumps	around	her	face,	and

her	skin	  glistened	 where	 the	 light	  struck	 her.	 Jacin	 reached	for	  her	 hands,

unlacing	her	fingers	 so	he	could	 slip	 his	own	 palm	beneath	hers.	Her	 skin	was

slick	and	the	blue	tinge	around	her	fingernails	was	obvious	now.

     The	 doctor	started	to	 remove	the	 needles	and	tubes	from	 her	body,	 the	life

forces	that	had	kept	her	blood	oxygenated	without	breath,	that	had	kept	her	brain

and	heart	functioning	while	 she	slept	in	peaceful	stasis.	Jacin’s	gaze	followed	his

deft,	wrinkled	  hands,	ready	to	 knock	 the	 old	 man	away	 if	 he	thought	 he	was

doing	something	wrong.	But	his	 hands	were	steady	and	practiced.

     Slowly,	  Winter’s	  body	  began	to	  recognize	 that	 it	  was	 no	 longer	 being

assisted.	Her	chest	started	to	rise	and	fall.	Her	cold	fingers	twitched.	Jacin	set	the

vial	 beside	 her	 body	 and	 lowered	  himself	 to	  his	 knees	 amid	 the	 scattered

branches	and	flowers.	 He	placed	 two	 fingers	against	 her	wrist.	 The	 pulse	was

there,	growing	stronger.

     His	 gaze	 returned	to	 her	 face,	 waiting	 for	  the	 moment	when	 her	 eyelids

would	open.	 When	she	would	 be	awake	and	 alive	and,	 once	again,	completely

636
unattainable.

     He	 flinched.	  It	  was	 all	  too	 surreal,	 and	 he’d	 almost	  forgotten.	 Winter,

crowned	with	 flowers	and	resting	upon	 a	bower	of	tree	branches.	She	was	still	a

princess,	and	he	was	still	nothing.

     The	reminder	 haunted	him	 as	he	waited.	 Memorizing	 her	sleeping	 face,	the

feel	of	 her	hand	in	his,	 the	fantasy	of	 what	it	 would	 be	like	 to	witness	her	 still,

sleeping	form	each	day.

     A	 footstep	padded	behind	him	and	he	remembered	that	they	had	an	audience.

The	crowd	was	 pushing	in,	not	 so	close	as	to	be	suffocating,	 but	closer	 than	he

would	have	liked,	given	 that	he’d	forgotten	they	were	there	at	all.

     And	 here	he’d	been	thinking	of	bedrooms	and	daybreaks.

     Scrambling	 to	his	feet,	 Jacin	waved	his	hand	at	 the	crowd.	“Don’t	  you	 have

an	uprising	to	plan	or	something?”

     “We	 just	 want	 to	 know	 she’s	 all	 right,”	  said	Scarlet.	 She	was	holding	  an

empty	vial	in	 one	hand.

     “She’s	 waking	up,”	 said	the	doctor.

     Jacin	swiveled	back	around	in	time	 to	see	her	eyelashes	twitch.

     The	doctor	had	one	hand	on	Winter’s	shoulder,	the	other	holding	 a	portscreen

over	her	 body	 to	 monitor	 her	 systems.	“Organs	 are	 reacting	 normally	 to	 the

reanimation	process.	Her	throat	and	lungs	will	  be	sore	for	a	while,	 but	I	 suggest

we	go	ahead	and	give	her	the	antidote	now.”

     Winter’s	 eyes	opened,	her	pupils	dilated.	 Jacin	gripped	the	 edge	of	the	tank.

“Princess?”

     She	blinked	rapidly	 a	few	times,	as	if	trying	 to	shake	the	remnants	of	oil	from

her	lashes.	She	focused	on	Jacin.

637
     Though	 he	tried	 to	 stifle	 it,	 Jacin	grinned,	 overwhelmed	 with	 relief.	 There

had	been	so	many	moments	when	he’d	been	sure	he	would	never	see	her	again.

     “Hey,	 Trouble,”	 he	whispered.

     Her	 lips	stretched	into	 a	tired	 smile.	Her	 hand	bumped	into	 the	walls	 of	the

tank	as	if	 she	wanted	to	 reach	for	 him,	 and	Jacin	scooped	it	 up	 and	squeezed.

With	his	other	hand,	he	lifted	 the	vial	of	antidote.	His	 thumb	unscrewed	the	top.

     “I	 need	you	to	drink	this.”

638
	




                                          Seventy-Four







Winter	 vaguely	recalled	 Jacin	helping	 her	sit	 up	and	 tipping	 a	vial	 against	her

mouth	 and	a	 tasteless	liquid	 spilling	  in.	 It	  was	difficult	   to	 swallow,	 but	 she

squeezed	Jacin’s	hand	and	 forced	her	 throat	 muscles	to	 cooperate.	The	world

smelled	like	 chemicals	 and	her	 skin	 felt	 oily	 and	she	 was	sitting	 on	 a	bed	 of

some	sort	of	slimy	gel.

     Where	 was	she?	She	remembered	the	regolith	 caves	and	 the	wolf	 soldiers,

the	thaumaturges	and	 Scarlet.	She	 remembered	the	people	 and	the	 trees.	She

remembered	a	crooked	old	woman	and	a	box	of	candies.

     “Princess?	How	do	you	 feel?”

     She	slumped	against	Jacin’s	arm.	“Hungry.”

     “Right.	  We’ll	  get	you	 some	 food.”	 It	 was	 strange	to	 see	him	 showing	 so

much	concern.	Usually	 his	emotions	 were	written	 in	a	code	she	couldn’t	 break.

But	now	he	looked	past	her	and	asked,	“What	does	it	say?”

     Following	 the	look,	 Winter	 saw	an	old	man	wearing	a	face	mask	and	holding

a	portscreen.	“Her	vitals	are	returning	to	 normal,	but	it’s	 too	early	to	tell	 if	this	 is

a	result	of	being	awoken	from	stasis	or	because	of	the	antidote.”

     It	 occurred	 to	 her,	 like	 a	 muddled	 puzzle	 fitting	  together,	that	 they	 were

639
outside	and	surrounded	by	people.	Winter	listed	her	head	and	a	curl	of	damp	hair

slithered	across	her	 shoulder.	There	 was	vivacious	 Scarlet	 and	there	 were	the

wolf	 soldiers	that	had	 failed	to	 eat	them	and	there	were	 many,	many	 strangers,

all	curious	and	worried	and	hopeful.

     And	 there	was	her	cousin,	her	metal	hand	gleaming.

     “Hello,	 friends,”	 she	whispered,	to	no	one	in	particular.

     It	 was	Scarlet	who	smiled	first.	“Welcome	 back,	crazy.”

     “How	 long	before	we	know	 for	sure	if	 it	worked?”	 asked	Jacin.

     The	 doctor	 glided	 the	portscreen	back	 and	 forth	 above	Winter’s	  arm.	She

followed	 the	device,	noting	how	 it	seemed	to	be	scanning	the	rash	of	bumps	and

blisters	on	her	skin.	“It	 shouldn’t	be	long	now.”

     Running	her	tongue	around	her	parched	mouth,	Winter	lifted	 her	hand	toward

the	 false	 daylight.	  False	 now—but	  not	  for	 long.	  Sun	 rays	 could	  be	 seen

brightening	the	horizon.	Sunrise	was	upon	them.

     The	 rash	was	 thick	 on	 her	skin,	 rings	 of	 raised	flesh	 piled	 on	 top	 of	 one

another,	some	ready	to	burst.	It	was	horrifying	and	grotesque.

     If	 her	lungs	had	been	functioning,	she	might	have	laughed.

     For	the	first	 time	in	her	life,	 no	one	could	say	she	was	beautiful.

     Her	 attention	caught	on	 a	particularly	 large	spot,	 as	wide	as	her	thumb	 was

long,	situated	between	her	 wrist	 and	the	base	of	her	 palm.	It	 was	wiggling.	  As

she	stared,	it	grew	little	legs	and	crawled	up	her	arm,	dodging	its	brethren	like	 an

obstacle	course,	skittering	over	 the	tender	skin	 of	her	 inner	elbow.	 A	 fat	spider

scurrying	up	her	flesh.

     “Winter.”

     She	jumped.	 Scarlet	had	 moved	closer	 and	was	standing	 at	the	 foot	of	 the

640
tank,	arms	akimbo.	She,	too,	had	dark	spots,	and	though	there	were	not	as	many

of	them	as	Winter	had,	they	stood	out	more	on	her	pale	skin.

     “The	 doctor	asked	you	a	question.”

     “Don’t	  snap	at	her,”	said	Jacin.

     “Don’t	  coddle	her,”	snapped	Scarlet.

     Winter	 glanced	down	 to	check	 that	the	rogue	spot	had	 returned	to	her	wrist

before	looking	up	at	the	masked	doctor.

     “I	 apologize,	Your	 Highness.	May	I	take	a	sample	of	your	blood?”

     She	nodded,	and	watched	 with	 interest	as	he	inserted	a	needle	into	 her	arm

and	drew	out	a	sample.	Her	manufacturing	plant	had	been	busy	while	she	slept.

     He	put	 the	sample	into	a	specialized	plug	 on	the	side	of	the	portscreen.	“Oh,

and	drink	 this,”	  he	said,	as	 an	afterthought,	 gesturing	 to	a	 paper	cup	 with	 an

orange	liquid	in	it.	 “It	 should	help	with	your	 throat.”

     Jacin	tried	 to	 hold	 the	cup	 for	 her,	but	 she	took	 it	 from	 him.	 “I’m	  getting

stronger,”	she	whispered.

     He	did	not	look	 comforted.

     “Yes.	 Excellent,”	  said	the	doctor.	 “The	 pathogens	appear	to	be	neutralized.

Your	 immune	  system	is	 rebounding	  at	 an	impressive	  rate.”	 He	 grinned.	 “I

believe	it’s	 safe	to	say	the	 antidote	worked.	 You	should	 be	feeling	 much	better

within	 …	 oh,	an	hour	or	 two,	I	 think,	 will	  make	a	notable	difference,	 though	it

may	take	a	few	days	to	feel	entirely	yourself	 again.”

     “Oh,	 do	 not	worry,”	  Winter	 said,	 her	voice	 faint	 even	in	 her	own	 head.	“I

never	feel	entirely	myself.”	 She	held	up	her	arm.	“Will	 I	 forever	be	a	leopard?”

     “The	 spots	will	fade	with	 time.”

     “Will	  they	leave	scars?”

641
     He	hesitated.	“I	 don’t	know.”

     “It’s	  all	  right,	 Winter,”	  said	 Scarlet.	 “The	 important	  thing	 is	 that	 you’re

alive.”

     “I	 am	not	sad	about	it.”	 She	traced	a	finger	over	the	raised	flesh.	How	alien	it

felt.	How	 imperfect.	She	could	get	used	to	imperfection.

     “That’s	  proof	 then,”	 said	 Cinder,	 appearing	at	 Jacin’s	 side.	“The	  antidote

works.	I	 need	two	 volunteers	to	assist	with	 the	rest	 of	the	distribution.	  Anyone

who’s	 showing	  symptoms	 can	 form	 a	 line	  over	 there—if	  anyone	 has	 blue

fingers,	they	move	to	 the	front	of	 the	line.	 No	running,	 and	help	people	who	are

too	weak	to	help	themselves.	Let’s	move.”	 She	clapped	her	hands	and	the	people

hurried	to	obey.

     Jacin	pulled	 some	of	 the	gunk	 out	of	 Winter’s	 hair,	 his	gaze	absent	like	 he

wasn’t	aware	 he	was	doing	 it.	 In	response,	Winter	 reached	up	and	tugged	 at	a

clump	of	his	own	blond	 hair.

     “Are	 you	real?”	 she	asked.

     He	smiled,	but	only	 a	little.	 “Do	I	 seem	real?”

     She	shook	her	head.	“Never.”	 Her	attention	darted	to	the	crowd.	 “Has	Selene

had	her	revolution?”

     “Not	 yet.	 The	coronation	 is	this	 evening.	But	 we’re…”	  He	paused.	“Things

are	happening.”

     She	chewed	her	lip,	fighting	 off	 the	disappointment.	This	 was	not	over.	They

had	not	yet	won.

     “Is	 there	somewhere	we	can	go	to	get	this	stuff	off	her?”	Jacin	asked.

     “There	 are	two	 washrooms	inside	 the	clinic,	 one	 down	each	hallway,”	  said

the	doctor.

642
     Scooping	Winter	 into	his	 arms,	Jacin	carried	her	inside	the	clinic.	 She	tucked

her	head	beneath	his	chin,	even	though	she	was	leaving	slimy	goop	all	over	him.

It	felt	good	to	be	together,	for	 a	moment	at	least.

     He	found	 the	washroom,	which	 contained	a	toilet	 and	a	large	utilitarian	 sink

and	a	shallow	bathtub.	Jacin	 paused	in	the	doorway,	surveying	 his	options	 with

an	unhappy	look.

     “Your	 face	is	bruised.”	 She	brushed	a	knuckle	against	the	wound.	“Were	you

in	a	brawl?”

     “Thorne	 hit	me.”	 His	lips	twitched.	 “But	 I	guess	I	deserved	it.”

     “It	  makes	you	 look	 very	 tough.	 No	 one	would	  ever	suspect	you’re	  just	a

gentle	goose	on	the	inside.”

     He	snorted	and	held	her	gaze.	Suddenly	she	was	feeling	his	heartbeat,	but	she

didn’t	 know	if	 it	 was	beating	harder,	or	if	 she’d	just	become	attuned	to	it	 in	that

moment.	She	started	to	feel	shy.

     The	 last	time	 she’d	seen	Jacin,	she’d	 kissed	him.	 She’d	confessed	her	love

for	him.

     She	flushed.	Losing	 her	courage,	she	looked	away	 first.	“You	  can	put	me	in

the	bathtub.	I’m	strong	enough	to	wash	myself.”

     He	 reluctantly	 settled	her	on	 the	edge	of	 the	metal	tub	 and	began	fidgeting

with	 the	water	controls.	 The	water	 had	a	sulfuric	  smell.	When	 the	temperature

was	right,	he	searched	through	a	cabinet	and	found	a	bottle	of	liquid	soap.	He	set

it	within	 reaching	distance.

     Winter	 pulled	 at	her	hair,	 gathering	 a	handful	of	 chemical-scented	grime	 in

her	palm.	“You	 don’t	see	the	disease	when	you	look	at	me.”

     Dipping	  his	 fingers	 into	 the	 tub,	Jacin	 adjusted	 the	waterspout	 again.	 He

643
helped	steady	Winter	 with	 one	hand	as	she	spun	on	the	tub’s	 edge	and	dunked

her	feet	into	the	water.

     “Have	 I	ever	seen	the	disease	when	I	looked	at	you?”

     She	knew	he	was	talking	 about	Lunar	 sickness,	not	some	engineered	plague.

The	disease	in	her	head	came	with	its	own	scars.

     Scars,	 scars.	She	 was	coming	  to	have	 so	 many.	 She	wondered	 if	 it	 was

wrong	to	be	proud	of	them.

     “How	 does	it	 feel?”	 Jacin	asked,	and	it	took	her	 a	moment	to	realize	he	was

asking	about	the	water.

     She	inspected	 the	pocked,	darkened	 base	of	 the	tub	 and	the	 cloudy	 water.

“Am	 I	to	bathe	fully	 dressed?”

     “Yes,	 you	are.	I’m	not	 leaving	you	alone.”

     “Because	you	 can’t	stand	to	be	 parted	from	me?”	 She	fluttered	her	 lashes	at

him,	 but	the	 teasing	suggestion	was	 quickly	 replaced	 with	 a	 realization.	 “Oh.

Because	you	think	I’ll	 have	a	vision	and	drown.”

     “It	 can’t	be	both?	Come	on,	slide	in.”

     She	held	 his	neck	 while	 he	lowered	 her	 into	 the	water,	 just	a	 few	 degrees

above	lukewarm	 and	 stinging	 against	 her	raw	 skin.	 An	 oily	  film	  rose	to	 the

water’s	surface.

     “I’ll	  get	a	wash—”

     Jacin	paused,	stuck	in	place	when	her	arms	didn’t	 unwind	 from	 his	neck.	He

was	kneeling	on	the	other	side	of	the	tub,	his	arms	elbow	deep	in	water.

     “Jacin.	I’m	 sorry	 that	I’m	not	 sort	of	pretty	anymore.”

     One	eyebrow	lifted	 and	he	looked	like	he	might	laugh.

     “I	 mean	it.”	 Her	stomach	tightened	with	 sadness.	“And	I’m	sorry	 you	have	to

644
worry	about	me	all	the	time.”

     His	 almost-smile	faded.	“I	 like	 worrying	 about	you.	It	gives	 me	something	to

think	about	during	those	long,	boring	 shifts	in	the	palace.”	Tilting	 her	chin	 down,

Jacin	pressed	a	kiss	on	top	of	Winter’s	head.	Her	arms	fell	away	from	him.

     He	 stood,	 giving	 her	 an	illusion	  of	 privacy	  while	 he	 scrounged	for	 more

towels.

     “Will	  you	stay	a	royal	guard	after	Selene	becomes	the	queen?”

     “I	 don’t	 know,”	 he	said,	tossing	a	washcloth	at	her.	“But	 I’m	  pretty	sure	that

as	long	as	you’re	a	princess	in	need	of	 protecting,	you’re	 going	to	 be	stuck	with

me.”

645
	




                                        Seventy-Five







It	had	grown	hot	inside	the	cabinet	and	Cress’s	left	leg	was	tingling	from	too

little	blood	flow	 when	she	finally	 forced	herself	to	move.	She	didn’t	want	to.

Uncomfortable	as	the	cabinet	was,	it	felt	safe,	and	she	was	convinced	that	the

moment	she	moved	someone	would	shoot	her.

     But	she	couldn’t	stay	there	forever,	and	time	was	not	going	 to	move	any

slower	to	accommodate	her	failing	 courage.	Wiping	her	nose	with	 the	faux

butterfly	wing,	she	forced	herself	to	nudge	open	the	door.

     The	hallway	light	blinded	her	and	Cress	shrank	back,	hiding	behind	her	arm.

She	was	drained	of	emotions	as	she	crawled	out	of	the	cabinet,	peering	each	way

down	the	servants’	hall.

     Her	eye	caught	on	a	smear	of	blood	not	far	from	the	cupboard.	Thorne.	She

flinched	away	and	tried	to	erase	the	sight	from	her	memory	before	it	paralyzed

her.

     Cress	pounded	life	back	into	her	leg	and	slowly	stood.	She	listened,	but	heard

nothing	but	distant	machines	and	the	hum	of	whatever	heating	and	water	systems

were	working	in	these	walls.

     Steeling	herself,	she	checked	that	the	chip	was	still	tucked	in	her	dress	before

646
she	picked	up	the	gun.	The	antennae	had	fallen	off	again	and	she	left	them	in	the

bottom	of	the	cabinet.

     Her	stomach	was	in	 ropes,	her	heart	in	tatters,	but	she	managed	to	backtrack

to	the	corridor	Thorne	had	mentioned.	She	paused	at	the	corner,	peeked	her	head

around,	and	drew	back,	her	heart	pummeling	her	rib	cage.

     A	 guard	was	there.

     She	should	have	expected	it.	Would	 all	of	 the	elevators	be	under	guard	now?

The	stairwells	too?

     Hopelessness	seeped	into	her	already-delirious	thoughts.	 They	were	looking

for	her,	and	she	was	vulnerable	without	Thorne,	and	she	had	no	plan.

     This	 wouldn’t	  work.	 She	couldn’t	 do	 it	alone.	 She	was	going	 to	 be	caught

and	imprisoned	and	killed,	  and	Thorne	would	 be	killed,	 and	Cinder	 would	 fail,

and	they	would	all—

     She	balled	her	fists	 into	her	eyes,	pressing	them	there	until	 she	felt	the	panic

subside.

     Be	heroic,	Thorne	had	said.

     She	had	to	be	heroic.

     Hardly	 daring	to	breathe	for	fear	of	drawing	 attention,	she	strained	to	think	of

another	way	to	get	to	the	fourth	floor.

     Footsteps	approached.	She	scrambled	behind	a	statue	with	a	missing	arm	and

curled	into	a	ball.

     Be	heroic.

     She	had	to	focus.	She	had	to	think.

     The	coronation	 would	begin	 soon.	She	had	to	be	in	the	control	 center	before

it	was	over.

647
     When	 the	guard	had	 gone,	and	she	was	relatively	 sure	 she	wasn’t	going	 to

hyperventilate,	 Cress	lifted	  her	head	 and	peeked	 around	 the	statue.	 The	hall

wasn’t	wide	but	it	 was	crammed	full	of	 stuff,	from	 cabinets	and	framed	paintings

to	rolled	area	rugs	and	cleaning	buckets.

     An	 idea	forming,	 she	used	the	wall	 for	 support	as	she	stood	and	took	 a	few

steps	away	from	the	statue.	She	braced	herself,	then	ran	at	the	statue	and	shoved

her	shoulder	into	it	as	hard	as	she	could.

     Her	 foot	slipped	 from	the	 force	and	she	landed	hard	on	one	 knee,	clenching

her	teeth	against	a	grunt.	The	statue	tilted	on	its	base.	Back.	Forth.	Back—

     Cress	covered	her	 head	as	the	statue	toppled	toward	 her,	 hitting	 her	on	 the

hip	before	shattering	on	the	floor.	 She	pressed	a	silent	scream	into	her	knuckles,

but	forced	 herself	to	 hobble	back	 toward	 the	elevator	bank,	 crawling	 behind	 a

stack	of	rolled-up	area	rugs.

     It	 wasn’t	 long	 before	 the	guard	 came	running,	 darting	 past	Cress’s	 hiding

space.

     She	shoved	down	the	pain	in	 her	bruised	knee	and	hip	and	scurried	out	 from

behind	the	rugs.	She	ran	as	hard	as	she	could	toward	the	abandoned	elevators.	A

yell	 of	 surprise	echoed	behind	 her.	She	 collided	 into	 the	wall	  and	jabbed	 her

finger	into	the	call	 button.	The	doors	slid	open.

     She	stumbled	inside.	“Door,	 close!”

     The	doors	drew	shut.

     A	 gun	fired.	Cress	screamed	as	one	bullet	buried	itself	in	the	wall	 behind	her.

Another	pinged	off	 the	closing	doors	before	they	clamped	shut.

     She	fell	 against	the	wall	 and	groaned,	pressing	her	 hand	against	her	injured

hip.	She	could	already	tell	it	was	going	to	 leave	one	enormous	bruise.

648
     The	elevator	 started	to	rise	 and	she	realized	after	 a	moment	that	 she	hadn’t

selected	a	floor.	No	doubt,	the	 guard	below	would	 be	monitoring	 it	to	see	which

floor	she	arrived	at,	anyway.

     She	had	to	be	strategic.	She	had	to	think	like	a	criminal	mastermind.

     Cress	tried	to	prepare	herself	for	 whatever	she	would	be	faced	with	 when	the

doors	 opened	again.	 More	  guards.	 More	 guns.	 More	  endless	corridors	  and

desperate	hiding	places.

     Squeezing	 her	 eyes	shut,	 she	 struggled	 to	 picture	 the	 palace	 map	 she’d

studied	back	at	the	mansion.	She	could	envision	the	throne	room	 easily,	situated

in	the	 center	of	 the	 palace,	its	 balcony	 overhanging	 the	lake	 below.	 The	 rest

started	to	fill	 in	as	she	focused.	The	private	quarters	for	the	thaumaturges	and	the

court.	A	banquet	hall.	Drawing	 rooms	and	offices.	A	music	 room.	A	library.

     And	  the	 queen’s	 system	control	  center,	 including	  the	 broadcasting	 suite

where	the	crown	recorded	their	propaganda	in	comfort	and	security.

     The	elevator	 stopped	at	the	third	 floor.	 Trembling,	  Cress	hid	the	gun	 in	the

frilly	 folds	of	 her	skirt.	The	doors	opened.

     A	 crowd	 of	 strangers	stood	before	 her.	Cress	squeaked.	Her	 feet	 itched	to

run,	her	brain	screamed	at	her	to	hide—but	 there	was	no	space	to	disappear	into

as	the	men	and	women	eyed	her	with	 contempt	 and	suspicion.	Those	closest	to

the	elevator	hesitated,	like	 they	 were	considering	waiting	  for	another.	 But	then

one	person	grumbled	something	and	filed	in,	and	the	others	followed.

     Cress	pressed	her	back	 against	the	far	 wall,	 but	 the	crush	 of	 bodies	didn’t

come.	Despite	how	crowded	the	elevator	was,	everyone	was	being	careful	 not	to

get	too	close	to	her.

     Her	anxiety	 began	to	shrivel	up.	These	people	weren’t	Lunar.	 These	were	the

649
Earthen	guests	and,	judging	from	their	 formal	 attire,	they	were	heading	down	 to

the	coronation.

     The	last	 thing	she	wanted	was	to	 be	caught	in	a	crowd	 of	 people	heading	to

the	coronation.

     As	 the	doors	started	to	 close,	Cress	cleared	her	throat.	 “Pardon	 me,	but	I’d

like	to	get	out	here.”

     She	squeezed	through,	her	crinkled	  skirt	 catching	against	the	fine	 suits	 and

gowns.	Though	there	were	many	frowns	 cast	in	her	direction,	 they	gladly	 parted

for	her.

     Because	they	  thought	 she	was	 Lunar.	  A	 real	 Lunar,	  with	  the	ability	   to

manipulate	them,	not	just	a	shell.

     “Thank	 you,”	 Cress	muttered	to	the	 person	who	had	stopped	the	doors	from

closing.	She	slipped	into	the	elevator	bank,	pulse	thumping.

     Another	 beautiful	 hall.	 More	 striking	 views.	 A	 dozen	pedestals	showcasing

statues	and	painted	vases.

     Cress	found	herself	yearning	for	the	rugged	interior	 of	the	Rampion.

     She	tucked	herself	 against	a	wall	 and	waited	until	 she	was	sure	the	elevator

had	gone	before	calling	for	 a	new	one.	She	needed	to	go	up	one	more	floor.	She

had	to	find	some	stairs,	or	escape	back	into	the	servants’	halls.	She	felt	too	out	in

the	open	here.	Too	exposed.

     A	 chime	announced	the	arrival	of	a	new	elevator,	 and	Cress	spooked,	darting

out	of	sight.	 When	the	doors	opened,	they	were	filled	 with	 laughter	and	giggles,

and	Cress	held	her	breath	until	the	doors	had	closed	again.

     At	 the	sound	of	 voices	coming	from	 her	left,	 Cress	turned	and	headed	right.

She	passed	a	series	of	black	doors,	their	darkness	sharply	contrasted	against	the

650
white	 walls.	 Each	one	was	 marked	 with	 a	name	 and	affiliation	  in	 gold	 script

letters.	 REPRESENTATIVE	MOLINA,	ARGENTINA,	AMERICAN	REPUBLIC.	PRESIDENT

VARGAS,	AMERICAN	REPUBLIC.	PRIME	MINISTER	BROMSTAD,	EUROPEAN	FEDERATION.

REPRESENTATIVE	ÖZBEK,	SOUTH	RUSSIA	PROVINCE,	EUROPEAN	FEDERATION.

     A	 door	 swung	open	and	a	 woman	with	 gray-blonde	 hair	 and	a	floor-length

navy	gown	stepped	out—Robyn	 Gliebe,	Australia’s	 speaker	of	the	house.	When

Cress	had	worked	for	 Levana,	she’d	 spent	hours	listening	 to	Gliebe’s	 speeches

regarding	 trade	agreements	 and	 labor	 disputes.	 They	 had	 not	 been	exciting

hours.

     Gliebe	paused,	startled	to	see	Cress	standing	there.	Cress	hid	the	gun	behind

her	back.

     “Can	I	 help	you?”	she	said,	asserting	herself	with	narrowed,	scolding	eyes.

     Of	 course,	 Cress	would	 have	 to	 run	 into	 the	 only	 Earthen	 diplomat	 who

wasn’t	intimidated	 by	a	dodgy	Lunar	girl	 sneaking	around	her	wing.

     “No,”	  said	Cress,	ducking	her	head	in	apology.	 “You	 startled	me,	that’s	all.”

She	moved	past	the	woman,	eyes	lowered.

     “Are	 you	supposed	to	be	up	here?”

     Hesitating,	Cress	glanced	back.	“I’m	 sorry?”

     “Her	 Majesty	 guaranteed	we	would	 not	be	 pestered	during	our	 stay.	I	think

you	should	leave.”

     “Oh.	 I’m	 …	 I	 have	a	message	to	deliver.	 I’ll	  just	be	a	minute.	 I’m	 sorry	 to

have	bothered	you.”

     Cress	 scooted	backward,	  but	 the	 woman	 persisted,	 pulling	  her	 penciled

eyebrows	into	a	 tight	frown.	 Stepping	 forward,	 she	held	out	her	 hand.	“Who	 is

your	message	for?	I	will	see	that	he	or	she	receives	it.”

651
     Cress	stared	down	at	the	open	palm,	soft	and	wrinkled.	“It’s	 …	confidential.”

     The	  woman	  pursed	  her	  lips.	  “Well,	   I’m	   afraid	  if	   you	  don’t	   leave

immediately,	 I	  will	  have	 to	  call	 a	 guard	 to	 confirm	  your	  story.	 We	  were

promised	our	privacy	and	I	don’t—”

     “Cress?”

     Her	heart	hiccuped.

     Kai.

     He	stood	there	blinking	 at	her	as	if	he	thought	she	might	be	a	trick.

     An	 ocean’s	worth	 of	 relief	 crashed	into	 Cress,	nearly	 knocking	 her	off	 her

feet.	She	braced	herself	with	 one	hand	against	the	wall.	 “Kai!”	  Shaking	herself,

she	amended,	“I	 mean,	Emperor—Your	  Majesty.”	 She	 dipped	into	 a	flustered

curtsy.

     Brow	 drawn,	 Kai	  looked	 at	the	 speaker.	“Gliebe-dàren,	 you	 haven’t	 gone

down	yet?”

     “I	 was	just	 on	my	 way,”	 said	the	woman,	 and	though	Cress	didn’t	 meet	her

gaze,	she	could	sense	her	distrust.	“But	 I	saw	 this	girl	 and	…	 as	you	know,	 we

were	guaranteed	privacy	on	this	floor,	and	I	don’t	 think	she	should—”

     “It’s	 all	 right,”	 said	Kai.	“I	 know	 this	girl.	I’ll	  take	care	of	it.”

     Cress	studied	the	floor,	listening	 to	the	crinkle	of	the	taffeta	 skirt.

     “With	   all	  due	  respect,	 Your	   Majesty,	  how	  can	  I	  be	 sure	  she	 isn’t

manipulating	you	into	 siding	with	 her?”

     “With	  all	  due	respect,”	 said	 Kai,	  sounding	 exhausted,	“if	  she	 wanted	 to

manipulate	someone,	why	 wouldn’t	 she	have	manipulated	 you	into	 leaving	 her

alone?”

     Cress	 chewed	on	 the	 inside	 of	 her	 cheek	 while	  a	moment	 stretched	 out

652
between	them.	Finally,	  the	woman	 bowed.	“Of	  course,	you	 would	 know	 best.

Congratulations	on	your	forthcoming	 coronation.”

     The	 woman’s	 footsteps	 clipped	 toward	 the	 elevator	 bank.	 When	 she	had

gone,	Cress	waited	three	whole	seconds	before	launching	herself	into	Kai’s	arms

with	a	sob	she	hadn’t	known	she’d	been	holding	in.

     Kai	 stumbled	back	in	 surprise,	but	returned	the	 embrace,	letting	her	cry	 into

his	very	fine	silk	 shirt.

     The	adviser	 made	a	strangled	noise	 and	Cress	felt	 the	handgun	being	lifted

from	her	hand.	She	was	glad	to	let	it	go.

     “Calm	 down,”	 Kai	said,	stroking	 her	hair.	“You’re	 all	right	 now.”

     She	shook	her	 head.	“They	 took	 Thorne.	They	 shot	him	 and	they	took	 him

and	I	don’t	 know	 if	 he’s	 alive	and	 I	don’t	 know	 …	 I	 don’t	 know	 what	they’re

going	to	do	to	him.”

     Cress	gave	up	on	 speaking	until	 the	flood	 of	 sobs	started	to	wane.	Ducking

her	head,	she	pulled	her	hands	back	and	swiped	 at	her	hot	cheeks.	“I’m	  sorry.”

She	sniffed.	“I’m	 sorry.	It’s	 just	…	really,	 really	good	to	see	you.”

     “It’s	  all	 right.”	 Kai	 gently	 held	Cress	away	so	 he	could	see	her	face.	 “Start

from	the	beginning.	Why	 are	you	here?”

     She	was	trying	 to	rein	 in	 the	stampede	of	emotions	when	 she	saw	the	damp

spot	she’d	left	 on	his	shirt.	 “Oh—aces.	I’m	  so	sorry.”	 She	swiped	at	it	 with	 her

fingers.

     He	gave	her	a	little	shake.	“It’s	 fine.	 Cress.	Look	at	me.”

     She	 looked	 at	him,	  rubbing	 her	 wrist	 across	 her	eyes	 again.	Despite	 the

splotch	she’d	 left,	 Kai	 was	 quite	dapper	 in	 a	cream-colored	 silk	 tunic.	 It	 was

fastened	with	  gold	 frogs	 and	 a	 sash	striped	 with	  the	 colors	 of	  the	 Eastern

653
Commonwealth	flag:	  sea-foam	green,	teal	blue,	 sunset	orange.	If	 the	sash	had

been	red,	it	 would	 have	been	an	 exact	replica	 of	 the	outfit	 he’d	 been	wearing

when	Cinder	and	the	others	had	kidnapped	him.

     But	 no.	He	was	already	 married.	He	was	Queen	Levana’s	 husband	now,	the

man	who	was	on	his	way	to	be	crowned	king	consort	of	Luna.

     Her	focus	 darted	to	the	side.	Royal	Adviser	 Konn	 Torin	 was	wearing	a	basic

black	tuxedo	and	Cress	could	 sense	his	concern	despite	his	composure.	He	was

holding	  the	 gun’s	  handle	 between	 two	  pinched	 fingers,	  looking	  about	  as

comfortable	with	 it	as	Cress	had	been.

     “Cress?”	said	Kai,	 stealing	back	her	attention.

     She	licked	her	lips.	 “Thorne	 and	I	were	supposed	to	get	to	the	system	control

center,	but	he	was	captured.	They	said	something	about	taking	 him	 to	a	holding

cell?	And	I	got	away,	but	 now	I—”

     “Why	 are	you	trying	 to	get	to	the	control	center?”

     “To	  play	 another	 video	  Cinder	 recorded.	 It	  shows	the	 queen—oh!	  You

probably	don’t	know	 that	Cinder	is	alive!”

     Kai’s	 expression	froze	 for	 a	moment,	before	 he	tilted	 his	head	back	 and	let

out	a	long,	 slow	 breath.	His	 eyes	had	a	new	 light	 in	 them	when	he	 glanced	at

Konn	Torin,	  but	the	 adviser	was	watching	 Cress,	unwilling	  to	 be	relieved	 just

yet.

     “Cinder’s	 alive,”	 Kai	 repeated	to	himself.	“Where	is	she?”

     “She’s	 with	 Iko	and	 Jacin	and	…	it’s	 a	long	 story.”	 Scrunching	up	her	 face,

Cress	felt	the	weight	 of	 time	pressing	down	 on	her.	She	started	to	 speak	faster.

“Jacin	was	going	to	see	if	he	could	find	 the	letumosis	antidote	and	distribute	it	 to

the	outer	sectors,	because	a	lot	of	people	are	sick,	including	Princess	Winter,	and

654
Scarlet	too.	Oh,	and	Levana	took	Wolf	 and	we	don’t	 know	where	he	is,	and	now

they	have	Thorne—!”	 Cress	hid	her	face	behind	her	 hands	in	an	effort	to	 refrain

from	sullying	  Kai’s	 shirt	 any	more	than	she	already	 had.	Kai	 rubbed	her	arms,

but	even	in	this	sympathetic	touch	she	could	tell	he	was	distracted.

     Konn	 Torin	 cleared	his	throat.	Sniffling,	  Cress	lowered	her	hands	and	found

a	handkerchief	being	held	 out	to	 her,	extended	at	arm’s	length	 as	if	 Torin	 were

afraid	that	her	hysteria	would	rub	off	 on	him	if	 he	got	much	closer.

     Cress	took	the	handkerchief	and	held	it	to	her	nose.	“Thank	you.”

     “What	 do	you	need?”

     She	dragged	her	attention	back	to	Kai.	 “To	rescue	Thorne,”	 she	said,	without

thinking.	 But	then	she	remembered	his	last	words	to	her.	Be	heroic.	 She	gulped.

“No,	 I	 …	 I	 need	 to	get	 to	 the	control	  center.	I	 need	to	 play	 this	 video	 over

Levana’s	broadcasting	system.	Cinder’s	counting	on	it.”

     Kai	 ran	a	hand	through	his	hair.	Cress	flinched	as	he	went	from	neat-and-tidy

emperor	to	concerned	teenage	boy	 with	 that	one	movement.	 She	could	 see	his

indecision.	How	 badly	 he	wanted	 to	help,	 in	 contrast	to	 how	much	 danger	his

involvement	could	put	 his	country	in.

     Cress	felt	time	ticking	 away.

     “Your	 Majesty.”

     Kai	 nodded	at	his	adviser.	“I	 know.	 They’ll	 probably	 send	a	search	party	if	I

don’t	show	up	soon.	But	I	just	 need	a	minute	to	…	to	think.”

     “What	 is	 there	 to	think	 about?”	 said	 Torin.	 “You	  asked	this	girl	  what	 she

needed,	and	she	gave	you	a	very	concise	answer.	We	 all	 know	you’re	 going	 to

help	her,	so	it	 seems	like	 a	waste	of	time	 to	 argue	the	pros	and	cons	of	 such	a

decision.”

655
     Cress	fidgeted	 with	 her	gloves,	 feeling	 the	butterfly	  wings	 graze	her	arms.

The	adviser	looked	both	stern	and	kind	as	he	handed	the	gun	back	to	her,	handle

first.

     Cress	shuddered.	“You	can	keep	it,	if	you	 want.”

     “I	 don’t,”	 said	Torin.	 “Neither	 do	I	intend	 to	put	myself	into	 any	situations	in

which	I	might	 want	it.”

     With	  a	  resigned	 sigh,	  Cress	 took	 it	  from	   him.	  She	 spent	 a	 moment

considering	where	 she	might	be	 able	to	store	 it,	 but	her	outfit	  didn’t	 offer	 any

good	solutions.

     “Here.”	   Torin	  removed	 his	 tuxedo	  jacket	 and	 handed	 it	  to	  her.	 Cress

hesitated,	hearing	Iko’s	 voice	 in	 her	head—that	 doesn’t	 match	at	 all!—before

casting	the	voice	 away	and	allowing	  him	to	 help	her	 into	the	 sleeves.	She	was

drowning	in	the	jacket,	but	 already	she	felt	more	composed,	less	vulnerable.

     “Thank	 you,”	  she	said,	finding	 an	inside	 pocket	 and	sliding	 the	gun	 into	 it

with	an	enormous	sense	of	relief.

     “His	 Majesty	 is	expected	to	be	in	the	main	hall	within	 the	next	two	 minutes,”

Torin	said,	then	passed	his	attention	to	a	baffled	 Kai.	 “I’m	 confident	 I	can	delay

them	for	at	least	fifteen	more.”

656
	




                                          Seventy-Six







Kai	wasn’t	 sure	if	 he	or	 Cress	was	in	 the	lead	as	they	 rushed	through	the

abandoned	corridors,	their	footsteps	loud	and	brisk.	When	Cress	started	to	fall

behind,	struggling	to	keep	up,	he	forced	himself	to	slow	his	pace.

     “We’re	going	to	try	to	accomplish	this	without	the	gun,”	he	said,	as	if	they’d

been	discussing	it,	although	they’d	hardly	spoken	since	parting	ways	with	Torin.

“We’re	going	to	take	care	of	this	diplomatically.	Or	…	at	least,	sneakily.	If	we

can.”

     “I	 have	no	problem	with	that,”	said	Cress.	“However,	I	don’t	think	that	just

because	you’re	an	emperor	and	you’re	about	to	become	their	king	they’re	going

to	let	 you	 waltz	 into	 their	 broadcasting	room	and	start	fiddling	  with	 their

equipment.”

     Each	door	they	 passed	had	a	different	 design	carved	into	 the	wood.	A

beautiful	woman	holding	up	a	long-eared	rabbit.	A	falcon-headed	man	with	a

crescent	moon	balanced	on	his	head.	A	young	girl	dressed	in	the	mantle	of	a	fox

and	carrying	a	hunting	spear.	Kai	knew	they	were	symbolic	of	the	moon	and	its

importance	in	Earthen	cultures,	many	of	them	lost	and	forgotten.	Even	Kai	no

longer	recognized	the	significance.

657
     They	 turned	 down	 another	hallway	  and	passed	over	 a	skybridge	 made	 of

glass.	A	silver	stream	passed	beneath	their	feet.

     “You’re	  right,”	  said	 Kai,	 “but	  I	 think	  I	 can	 at	least	 get	 you	 inside.”	 He

hesitated,	before	adding,	 “Cress,	I	 won’t	 be	 able	to	stay.	 If	 I’m	 absent	for	 too

long,	Levana	 will	  get	suspicious,	and	 that’s	 the	last	thing	 we	 need	right	 now.

You	understand,	right?”

     “I	 understand.”	She	dropped	her	voice,	 although	the	hallways	 were	empty—

every	guest,	every	 guard,	every	servant	 waiting	 for	 the	coronation	 to	begin.	 “I

suspect	the	door	locks	will	be	coded.	The	plan	was	to	hack	them,	but	Thorne	had

the	portscreen	with	him…”

     Kai	 unclipped	his	portscreen	from	his	belt.	“Can	 you	use	mine?”

     She	stared	at	the	device.	“You	won’t	 …	need	it?”

     “Not	 like	 you	will.	 I	 couldn’t	 have	brought	it	into	 the	ceremony,	anyway.	All

recording	devices	are	prohibited.”	 He	rolled	 his	eyes	and	handed	the	port	to	her.

Though	it	once	would	 have	felt	like	 giving	 up	one	of	his	limbs,	 he’d	gotten	used

to	being	without	it	 after	Levana	had	it	confiscated.

     Besides,	a	part	of	 him	was	giddy	 with	 the	knowledge	 that	he	was	helping	 to

undermine	the	queen.

     “How	  do	you	know	 where	we’re	 going?”	 Cress	asked,	tucking	 the	port	into

one	of	the	pockets	in	Torin’s	jacket.

     Kai	  scowled.	  “I	  had	 the	  great	 experience	 of	  partaking	 in	  one	 of	  her

propaganda	videos	a	while	back.”

     As	 they	 neared	the	palace	wing	  on	the	 opposite	side	 of	 the	lake	 from	 the

great	hall,	where	the	coronation	was	set	to	start,	oh,	six	minutes	ago,	Kai	held	up

a	hand,	bringing	them	to	a	stop.

658
     “Wait	 here,”	he	whispered,	holding	 a	finger	to	his	lips.

     Cress	 pressed	herself	 against	 a	 wall.	  She	 looked	 tiny	  and	 terrified	  and

preposterous	in	that	poufy	orange	skirt,	 and	some	chivalrous	instinct	told	 Kai	 he

shouldn’t	 abandon	her	 here,	of	 all	  places.	But	 he	 shoved	that	 instinct	 down,

reminding	 himself	 that	she	was	 also	the	 genius	who	 had	single-handedly	 shut

down	the	entire	security	system	of	New	Beijing	 Palace.

     Straightening	 his	 patriotic	 sash,	Kai	 stepped	around	 the	corner.	 This	 wing

was	sealed	off,	and	as	far	as	Kai	 knew,	there	was	only	 this	one	door	in	 and	out.

As	expected,	 a	guard	 stood	in	 front	  of	 the	door	 at	 mute	attention.	 The	 same

guard,	Kai	 thought,	who	 had	been	on	duty	 when	Levana	had	dragged	him	 here

before.

     The	guard’s	eyes	narrowed	upon	seeing	Kai	in	his	white	 silk	tunic.	 “This	area

is	not	open	to	the	public,”	he	said	in	a	bored	tone.

     “I’m	  hardly	 ‘the	 public.’”	  Kai	  tucked	his	 hands	into	 his	pockets,	 trying	 to

look	both	accommodating	 and	defiant.	“My	 understanding	is	 that	the	coronation

regalia	are	held	in	this	wing,	are	they	not?”

     The	guard	squinted	suspiciously.

     “I’ve	  been	sent	to	obtain	the	Brooch	 of	 …	Eternal	 Starlight.	 I’m	 sure	you’ll

understand	that	I’m	rather	short	on	time.”

     “I’m	  sure	you’re	 used	to	getting	 your	way	 on	Earth,	Your	 Emperorship,	 but

you	will	 not	 be	permitted	past	these	doors,	and	to	see	the	crown	jewels,	no	less,

without	official	  documentation	from	the	queen.”

     “I	 understand,	and	I	 would	 gladly	 obtain	that	documentation	 if	 Her	Majesty

wasn’t	at	 this	very	 moment	 in	the	 opposite	wing	 of	 the	palace,	dressed	in	 full

coronation	 garb,	 having	 already	 been	 anointed	 with	 a	 concoction	  of	 sacred

659
Eastern	Commonwealth	oils	in	order	to	 purify	 her	for	the	ceremony	in	which	 she

will	 become	 empress	of	 my	 country.	 So	she’s	 just	a	 little	 preoccupied	 at	 the

moment,	and	 I	need	 to	find	  that	brooch	 before	the	 ceremony	is	 delayed	 even

more	than	it	already	is.”

     “Do	 you	think	 I’m	 an	idiot?”

     “I’m	   beginning	  to,	  actually.	  Only	  an	 idiot	  would	  stall	  Her	  Majesty’s

coronation.	Would	  you	like	 me	 to	 go	to	 her	now	 and	explain	 how	 we	 cannot

proceed	because	of	your	obstinacy?”

     “I’ve	 never	even	heard	of	this	‘Brooch	 of	Eternal	Starlight.’”

     “Of	 course	you	 haven’t.	It	 was	designed	specifically	 to	represent	an	alliance

between	Luna	and	Earth	and	gifted	 to	one	of	 the	queen’s	great	ancestors	over	a

century	ago.	Unfortunately,	 as	you	 may	be	aware,	there	hasn’t	 been	an	alliance

between	us	in	that	time,	so	the	brooch	hasn’t	been	necessary.	Until	tonight—and

the	moron	who	was	in	charge	of	preparing	the	regalia	forgot	about	it.”

     “And	 they	sent	you	to	pick	 it	up?	Shouldn’t	 you	be	getting	anointed	with	 oils

yourself?”

     Kai	 let	out	a	slow	breath	and	dared	to	put	himself	in	arm’s	 reach	of	the	guard.

“Unfortunately,	  I	seem	to	 be	the	 only	 person	on	this	 little	 moon	 who	 has	any

clue	what	it	looks	 like.	Now—by	 the	end	of	this	 night,	I	will	  be	your	king,	and	if

you	want	 to	 still	  have	your	 job	 by	 tomorrow	  morning,	 I	 suggest	you	 let	 me

through.”

     The	guard’s	jaw	 clenched.	He	still	didn’t	 move.

     Kai	 threw	 his	arms	up.	 “Stars	 above,	I’m	 not	 asking	you	 to	open	the	 door,

close	your	eyes,	and	count	to	ten.	Obviously,	 you’ll	  come	in	 with	 me	and	make

sure	I	don’t	steal	anything.	 But	time	is	 running	out.	I’m	 ten	minutes	late	already.

660
Perhaps	you’d	like	to	comm	Her	Majesty	 and	explain	the	delay?”

     With	 a	huff,	 the	guard	stepped	back	and	yanked	open	the	door.	“Fine.	 But	if

you	touch	 anything	 other	than	 this	 supposed	brooch	of	 yours,	 I	 will	  chop	off

your	hand.”

     “Fine.”	  Kai	  rolled	 his	 eyes	 in	 a	 way	 he	hoped	 indicated	 a	 total	 lack	 of

concern	and	followed	 the	 guard.	Not	 that	the	 guard	was	traveling	 far	 from	 his

post—the	vault	that	 housed	the	crown	jewels,	when	they	 weren’t	being	 used	for

a	coronation,	was	immediately	on	the	left,	behind	an	enormous	vault	door.

     Kai	 averted	his	eyes	while	the	guard	pressed	a	code	into	a	screen	and	scanned

his	fingerprints,	then	twisted	the	unlock	 mechanism.

     The	door,	when	it	 opened,	was	as	thick	as	the	guard’s	skull.

     The	  vault	 was	  lined	  with	  velvet	 and	  spotlights	 that	  shined	 on	  empty

pedestals.	Most	of	the	crowns	and	orbs	and	scepters	that	usually	lived	there	were

already	down	in	the	great	hall.

     But	it	 wasn’t	empty,	either.

     Kai	 took	 in	a	deep	breath	and	started	pacing	 around	the	vault.	 He	inspected

every	ring,	  scabbard,	coronet,	 and	 cuff,	 all	 the	 pieces	 the	 Lunar	 crown	 had

collected	over	the	years	to	be	used	in	a	variety	of	ceremonies.	Most	of	 them,	Kai

knew,	had	 been	gifts	 from	 Earth	 a	long,	 long	 time	 ago.	A	 show	 of	 goodwill,

before	the	relationship	between	Earth	and	Luna	had	been	severed.

     He	heard	a	padded	footstep	outside	 the	vault	door	 but	he	dared	not	look	 up.

“Here!”	 he	yelled,	turning	 his	back	on	the	guard,	his	heart	lodged	in	his	throat,	as

he	imagined	 Cress	scurrying	 past	the	 door.	He	 pulled	 the	 medallion	 from	 his

pocket,	the	one	Iko	 had	given	him	 aboard	the	Rampion,	what	felt	 like	 ages	ago.

He	 rubbed	his	 thumb	  over	 the	tarnished	 insignia	  and	the	 faded	 words.	 The

661
American	 Republic	 86th	  Space	Regiment.	 “Found	  it,”	  he	 said,	 holding	  the

medallion	up	so	the	guard	could	see	he	was	holding	something	without	 getting	 a

very	good	look	 at	it.	Cress	was	gone,	and	Kai	wasn’t	faking	 his	relief	 as	he	said,

“Whew.	 Great.	We	 couldn’t	 have	done	 the	coronation	 without	 it.	 Her	 Majesty

will	 be	thrilled.	 I’ll	  see	if	 we	can’t	 get	you	 a	promotion,	 all	right?”	 He	 slapped

the	guard	on	 the	arm.	 “I	 guess	that’s	it,	 then.	 Thanks	for	 your	 help.	I’d	  better

hurry	back.”

     The	 guard	 grunted,	and	 Kai	 knew	 he	 was	anything	  but	 convinced,	 but	it

didn’t	matter.

     When	 he	and	 the	guard	 stepped	back	into	  the	corridor,	 Cress	had	 already

disappeared.


                                                          *			 *			*

Cress	hurried	around	the	first	 corner	 and	pressed	her	back	against	the	wall,	 her

heart	in	her	throat.	She	waited	 until	 she	heard	the	guard	shutting	the	vault	 door,

then	she	started	to	run,	hoping	the	noise	of	the	vault’s	locking	 mechanism	would

cover	the	sound	of	her	footsteps.

     She	remembered	this	 hall	from	 when	 Sybil	 used	to	bring	 her	before,	 and	it

was	easy	to	find	 the	 door	to	 the	control	 center	once	she	had	her	 bearings.	She

slid	to	a	stop	and	hesitantly	tested	the	handle.	She	was	relieved	to	find	 it	locked,

a	good	indication	that	 no	one	was	inside.	She’d	been	confident	the	security	 staff

would	have	located	themselves	to	a	satellite	control	room	 nearer	the	great	hall—

that	had	been	the	procedure	during	important	 events	when	she	worked	for	 Sybil

—but	 being	confident	 wasn’t	  being	certain.	 The	 gun,	heavy	 in	 Torin’s	 jacket

pocket,	offered	no	comfort	at	all	 should	she	run	into	more	opposition	now.

662
     Cress	crouched	before	the	security	panel	and	retrieved	 Kai’s	 portscreen.	She

unwound	the	universal	connector	cable.

     It	  took	 her	 twenty-eight	  seconds	to	 break	 into	 the	 room,	 which	  was	 an

eternity,	 but	 she	 was	distracted,	 jumping	  at	 every	 distant	 noise.	 Sweat	 was

snaking	down	her	spine	by	the	time	she	heard	the	door	unlatch.

     Her	breath	was	shaky	but	 relieved.	No	 one	was	inside.	The	door	shut	behind

her.

     Cress’s	 adrenaline	 was	 pumping	  like	  jet	 fuel	  through	 her	 veins	 as	 she

scanned	the	room.	 She	was	 surrounded	by	 invisi-screens	 and	holographs	 and

programming,	and	the	familiarity	  of	 it	 all	made	the	knot	 in	her	stomach	loosen.

Instinct	and	habit.	She	formed	a	checklist	in	her	mind.

     The	room	 was	big,	but	crowded	with	 desks	and	chairs	and	equipment,	panels

that	switched	from	 video	footage	of	 the	outer	sectors	to	the	underground	shuttle

map	 to	 surveillance	  feeds	 of	  different	  sections	 of	  the	 palace.	 A	  separate

recording	suite	 was	accessed	through	a	soundproof	 door.	Lights	 and	 recording

equipment	surrounded	a	replica	 of	the	queen’s	 throne.	A	 sheer	veil	was	 draped

over	a	mannequin	head	and	the	 sight	gave	Cress	a	chill	  down	her	 spine.	It	 felt

like	it	was	watching	 her.

     She	turned	 away	 from	  the	mannequin	 and	 settled	herself	 into	 one	 of	 the

controller’s	chairs.	She	removed	the	gun	from	the	jacket	pocket	and	set	it	and	the

portscreen	on	the	 desk,	both	 within	  easy	reach.	She	 felt	 the	press	 of	 time	 as

keenly	as	Kai	 had.	She’d	already	 wasted	too	much	 of	it.	 Kissing	 Thorne	in	 the

atrium.	Hiding	 in	that	cabinet.	Dodging	in	 and	out	of	corridors	like	 a	lost	rabbit.

     But	she	was	here.	She’d	made	it.	She’d	been	heroic—almost.

     Her	objectives	spooled	through	her	thoughts.

663
     Placing	 her	 fingertips	 across	the	 nearest	invisi-screen,	 she	began	to	 count

them	off,	one	by	one.

     First,	  she	 reconfigured	 the	  security	 codes	 for	  the	 queen’s	 broadcasting

transmitter.	 She	 put	 the	 palace’s	 armory	 under	 lockdown.	  She	 scheduled	a

retraction	for	the	tunnel	barricades	surrounding	Artemisia.

     Breaking	  through	   the	 codes,	  navigating	  the	  protocols—it	   felt	  like	   a

choreographed	 dance,	  and	  though	  her	   muscles	 were	   weary,	  they	  still

remembered	the	steps.

     Finally,	 she	pulled	 the	chip	 from	 her	bodice.	She	envisioned	 the	transmitter

on	top	 of	the	 palace,	sending	the	crown’s	 official	  feed	 to	receivers	throughout

the	dome.	A	 closed	feed,	protected	by	 a	complex	labyrinth	 of	 internal	 firewalls

and	security	codes.

     Five	minutes	could	 have	passed.	Eight.	Nine,	at	the	most.

     Check.	Check.	Check—

     She	 heard	 footsteps	 in	 the	 hallway	  as	 she	 was	 inserting	 the	 chip	  with

Cinder’s	video	into	 the	port.	She	felt	the	satisfying	click.

     Download,	 data	transfer,	translate	 the	encryption.

     Her	fingers	 danced	over	the	screens,	daring	the	coding	to	keep	up.

     Boots	outside,	pounding	faster	now.

     Her	hair	clung	 to	the	back	of	her	neck.

     Check.	Check.

     Done.

     Cress	 cleared	  the	  screens,	 disguising	  her	  motives	  with	  a	  few	  hasty

commands.

     The	door	crashed	open.	Guards	filed	in.

664
     Confused	silence.

     Squeezed	into	the	 alcove	between	the	bank	 of	 screens	and	the	transmitter’s

mainframe,	Cress	held	her	breath.

     “Spread	out—and	get	tech	up	here	to	find	out	what	 she	did!”

     “She	left	 a	portscreen,”	said	someone	else,	and	she	heard	a	subtle	clacking	on

the	desk	as	they	picked	it	 up.	Trembling,	 Cress	looked	down	 at	the	gun	cradled

in	 her	hands.	Her	 stomach	 was	knotted	 again.	 She	couldn’t	  help	feeling	  like

she’d	grabbed	the	wrong	thing.	They	 would	know	 the	portscreen	was	Kai’s	 easy

enough.	They	  would	 know	  he’d	 helped	 her.	  “Maybe	  she	was	 planning	  on

coming	back.”

     “You,	 stay	here	and	wait	for	 tech.	And	I	want	 a	guard	posted	at	every	door	in

this	wing	until	 she’s	found.	Go!”

     The	door	 slammed	shut	and	Cress	released	a	shaky	breath,	wilting	  from	the

surge	of	adrenaline.

     She	was	trapped.	Thorne	was	captured.

     But	they	had	been	heroic.

665
	




                                         Seventy-Seven







Jacin	had	gone	back	 outside	by	 the	time	 Winter	 finished	 cleaning	the	 slippery

gel-like	substance	out	of	her	hair.	She	changed	into	the	dry	 clothes	someone	had

brought	for	her.

     She	could	not	stop	smiling.	 Jacin	was	back	and	he	was	alive.

     And	 yet,	at	the	same	time,	her	heart	ached.	People	were	going	to	die	today.

     She	checked	her	arms.	The	rash	was	already	 receding.	At	 least,	some	of	the

bruises	looked	not	quite	as	dark,	and	the	blue	 had	disappeared	from	beneath	her

fingernails.

     When	 she	left	 the	security	 of	the	 washroom,	she	found	 the	clinic	 crammed

full	 of	 people—the	 one	doctor	 and	a	dozen	 civilians	 checking	 on	 the	patients

who	had	been	too	ill	to	 line	up	for	 the	antidote	outside.	Seven	deaths,	she’d	been

told.	In	 the	 short	time	 since	Levana	 had	infected	 Winter,	 seven	people	in	 this

sector	had	died	from	letumosis.

     It	 would	have	been	many	more	if	Jacin	and	Cinder	hadn’t	 arrived,	but	Winter

was	hardly	comforted.	 Seven	deaths.	Seven	people	who	could	 have	been	in	the

suspension	tank	if	they	hadn’t	given	it	 to	her.

     Winter	  passed	the	 patients	 slowly,	 taking	  the	 time	 to	 smile	 and	 offer	  a

666
comforting	 squeeze	of	a	shoulder	as	she	made	her	way	to	the	exit.	She	emerged

on	the	little	wooden	step.

     A	 whooping	cheer	swelled	up	in	the	dome,	hundreds	of	voices	buffeting	 her.

     Winter	  froze,	then	 backed	 into	 the	building’s	  overhang	 again.	 The	crowd

continued	to	cheer,	shaking	their	 makeshift	weapons	over	 their	heads.	The	wolf

soldiers	started	to	howl.	Winter	 wondered	if	 she,	too,	should	cheer.	Or	howl.	 Or

if	they	 expected	her	to	speak—though	her	throat	still	 felt	 chapped	and	her	brain

was	still	muddled.

     Scarlet	 appeared	beside	her,	 waving	  her	arms	 in	 an	 attempt	 to	 quiet	 the

crowd.	She	looked	both	pleased	and	annoyed	as	she	faced	Winter.	The	evidence

of	the	 plague	still	 lingered	 on	Scarlet’s	 pale	skin—freckles	 mixed	 with	 bruises

and	irritated	 flesh.	Though	 there	were	 still	 a	few	 dark	blisters,	 the	disease	had

not	escalated	as	quickly	  on	Scarlet	 as	it	 had	on	 Winter	 and	 those	seven	poor

residents.	They	all	knew	she’d	gotten	lucky.

     “What’s	 happening?”	Winter	 asked.

     “Cinder	 and	the	alphas	are	discussing	strategy,”	said	Scarlet.	“The	coronation

is	scheduled	to	begin	any	minute	now.	People	are	getting	restless.	Plus,	everyone

loves	you—surprise,	 surprise—and	they’ve	 been	 waiting	 to	see	that	 you’re	 all

right.”

     Winter	 risked	 a	smile,	and	the	people	cheered	again.	Someone	whistled	 and

another	soldier	howled.

     Winter	 caught	sight	 of	a	 figure	 in	the	corner	 of	her	 eye—Jacin	was	leaning

against	the	 clinic’s	 wall,	  watching	 her	 with	 a	 knowing	 smirk.	 “They	  haven’t

started	composing	ballads	in	 your	 honor	yet,”	 he	said,	 “but	 I’m	 sure	it’s	 just	 a

matter	of	time.”

667
     “Cress	did	it!”	  Cinder	yelled.	She	came	charging	through	the	crowd,	a	cluster

of	soldiers	in	tow.	 The	people	parted	for	her.	“The	 barriers	in	the	maglev	tunnels

are	down.	There’s	 nothing	 else	to	bar	our	 way	 into	Artemisia.	 There’s	 nothing

stopping	us	from	demanding	that	Levana	be	brought	to	justice!”

     Another	 cheer,	twice	as	loud	as	before,	billowed	 up	and	vibrated	through	 the

ground	and	echoed	off	the	dome.

     Winter	 cast	her	gaze	over	the	crowd,	her	heart	expanding	like	 a	balloon.	The

people	stared	at	Cinder	with	 awe	 and	clarity	 and	the	faint	 glow	 of	 hope.	She’d

never	seen	that	 before	 in	 the	eyes	 of	 the	citizens	 of	  Luna.	 Their	 faces	were

always	 obscured	 by	  fear	 and	  uncertainty.	 Or,	  even	 worse,	  gazing	 at	  her

stepmother	with	  dazed	adoration.	 Love	  for	 their	 ruler	  forced	 upon	 them—a

reminder	that	they	had	no	freedom,	not	even	in	their	own	minds	or	hearts.

     This	was	different.	 The	people	weren’t	 blinded	by	Cinder’s	 glamour	or	 being

manipulated	into	seeing	her	as	their	rightful	  queen.	They	were	seeing	her	as	she

truly	was.

     “Alpha	 Strom,	the	map,”	 said	Cinder,	with	an	excited	gesture.

     Strom	 handed	her	 a	 holograph	 node	and	 Cinder	 pulled	 up	 an	image	 that

everyone	could	see,	outlining	the	path	they	would	take	into	the	capital.

     “We’re	  going	to	 divide	 into	 two	groups	 to	allow	 for	 faster	passage	through

the	tunnels,”	she	said,	indicating	 the	 routes	on	the	map.	“When	 we	 reach	AR-4

and	AR-6,	  we’ll	   divide	 our	  numbers	further	  to	 disperse	 between	 the	 eight

entrances	into	Artemisia.	At	 every	sector	we	pass,	we’ll	 need	volunteers	to	rally

as	many	people	to	our	cause	as	possible.	Gather	weapons	and	supplies,	then	keep

moving.	Remember,	our	safety	lies	in	numbers.	She	keeps	the	sectors	divided	for

a	reason.	She	knows	 that	 she’s	powerless	 if	 we	 all	 stand	together,	 and	that’s

668
exactly	what	we’re	going	 to	do!”

     Another	 roar	 from	 the	crowd,	 but	Cinder—wild-eyed	  and	exhilarated—had

already	turned	toward	the	steps.

     Winter	 straightened,	for	once	proud	to	be	standing	before	her	queen.

     “We’ve	 seen	evidence	that	at	least	eighty-seven	other	sectors	have	joined	our

cause,	and	I	have	every	reason	to	believe	that	number	has	continued	to	increase.

With	 the	 shuttles	down,	  that	terrain-speeder	 is	 the	best	 method	 we	have	 for

spreading	our	news	 quickly	 and	 ensuring	that	 all	 civilians	 are	joined	 into	 one

solid	force	moving	 into	Artemisia.	 Jacin,	I’ve	made	a	list	of	 sectors	I	want	you	to

go	to—those	that	showed	 evidence	of	rebellion	 already	and	should	 have	access

to	weapons.	Also	those	closest	to	Artemisia	that	offer	 a	solid	hope	for	increasing

our	numbers	fast.	Hit	 as	many	as	you	can	in	the	next	two	 hours,	then	meet	us	in

the	tunnels	beneath	AR-4	at—”

     “No.”

     Cinder	blinked.	 Her	 lips	stayed	half-wrapped	around	 an	unspoken	word.	She

blinked	again.	“Excuse	me?”

     “I	 won’t	 leave	Winter.”

     A	 shiver	coursed	over	Winter’s	skin,	 but	Jacin	didn’t	look	 at	her.

     Mouth	 still	 open,	Cinder	 looked	 at	Winter,	 then	Scarlet,	then	 back	at	Jacin.

She	shut	her	mouth	with	a	scowl	and	turned	to	Scarlet	again.	“Can	you	fly	it?”

     “I’ve	   never	 even	 seen	 one	 of	  those	 things	 before.	  Does	 it	  fly	  like	  a

spaceship?”

     Cinder’s	 withering	 glare	 returned	to	Jacin.	“I	  need	you	to	 do	it.	 I	trust	 you,

and—”

     “I	 said	no.”

669
     She	shook	her	head,	disbelieving.	 Then	 angry.	“What	 do	you	 think	 is	going

to	happen	to	Winter,	to	any	of	us,	if	 we	lose?”

     Jacin	crossed	his	arms,	ready	to	 argue	again,	when	Winter	 placed	a	hand	on

his	shoulder.

     “I’ll	   go	with	 him,”	 she	said	lightly,	  so	her	words	 might	 defuse	some	of	 the

tension.

     It	 didn’t	  work.	 Jacin’s	 glower	 turned	 on	her.	 “No,	 you	 will	  stay	here	 and

recover	from	almost	dying.	 Besides,	Levana’s	been	given	enough	chances	to	kill

you.	You’re	 not	going	anywhere	near	Artemisia.”

     She	fixed	 her	eyes	on	him,	 feeling	 the	stir	of	 determination	 she’d	had	when

she	decided	to	find	her	stepmother’s	army	and	bring	them	to	her	side.	“I	 may	not

be	able	to	fight,	 but	 I	can	 be	useful.	I’ll	  come	with	 you	 and	talk	 to	the	people.

They’ll	 listen	to	me.”

     “Princess,	we	don’t	 have	to—”

     “I’ve	 already	made	my	decision.	I	 have	as	much	to	lose	as	any	of	them.”

     “She	makes	some	good	points,”	said	Cinder.

     “Surprisingly,”	  added	Scarlet.

     Jacin	pushed	 Winter	 out	 of	 their	little	  circle,	 into	 a	 semblance	of	privacy.

“Look,”	  he	whispered,	gripping	  her	elbows.	She	 could	feel	 the	calluses	on	 his

hands,	more	poignant	than	she’d	ever	felt	them	before.	Her	 pulse	galloped	at	the

unexpected	intimacy.	“If	 you	 want	me	to	do	this	 thing	for	 Cinder,	then	I’ll	  do	it.

For	you.	But	I	won’t—I	  can’t	lose	you	again.”

     Winter	 smiled	 and	pressed	her	palms	against	his	 cheeks.	“There	is	 no	safer

place	for	me	than	at	your	side.”

     His	 jaw	tightened.	She	could	see	the	war	in	his	thoughts,	but	she	was	already

670
resolved.

     “I	have	lived	in	fear	of	her	my	entire	life,”	she	continued.	“If	this	is	the	only

chance	I’m	given	to	stand	against	her,	then	I	have	to	take	it.	I	don’t	want	to	hide.

I	don’t	 want	to	 be	afraid.	And	 I	 don’t	 want	to	be	 separated	from	you,	ever

again.”

     His	shoulders	started	to	droop,	the	first	indication	she’d	won.	He	raised	a

finger	between	them.	“Fine.	We’ll	 go	together.	But	you	are	not	to	touch	any

weapons,	understand?”

     “What	would	I	do	with	a	weapon?”

     “Exactly.”

     “Jacin,	Winter.”	 Cinder	was	tapping	her	foot,	her	eyes	wild	with	 growing

impatience.	“We’re	sort	of	on	a	tight—”

     As	if	 the	sky	itself	 were	listening,	the	dome	overhead	darkened,	and	three

enormous	screens	lit	up	against	the	black	backdrop.

     “People	of	Luna,”	said	a	feminine	voice,	“please	give	your	full	attention	now

to	this	mandatory	broadcast,	live	from	Artemisia	Palace.	The	royal	coronation

ceremony	is	about	to	begin.”

     A	wicked	grin	 pulled	at	Winter’s	lips.	She	stepped	away	from	Jacin,	faced

the	people,	and	raised	her	arms	to	her	sides.	“People	of	Luna,”	she	said,	echoing

the	broadcast	and	pulling	the	crowd’s	attention	away	from	the	dome,	“please

give	your	full	attention	now	to	the	true	heir	to	the	Lunar	throne,	Princess	Selene,

live	from	 your	 very	own	 sector.”	Her	 eyes	flashed	as	she	swooped	an	arm

toward	Cinder.	“Our	revolution	is	about	to	begin.”

671
	



                                      BOOK
                                       Five

The	mirror	answered:	“You,	my	queen,	are	fair;	it’s	true.

       But	the	young	queen	is	far	more	fair	than	you.”

672
	




                                         Seventy-Eight







Kai	barreled	down	 the	hallway,	 glad	no	 one	was	around	to	see	him	sprinting	 in

his	 coronation	  finery,	  though	  his	 thoughts	  were	 too	  full	  to	  worry	  about

appearances.	Cinder	was	alive.	Thorne	was	captured.	Cinder	was	going	to	invade

Artemisia.

     Today.	Now.

     He	 still	 felt	 guilty	 for	 leaving	 Cress	alone.	He	 should	have	 done	more.	He

shouldn’t	have	cared	how	 late	he	was	to	 this	coronation,	 a	ceremony	he	had	no

desire	to	 be	a	 part	of	 to	 begin	 with.	 He	 should	 have	taken	 more	 pleasure	in

making	Levana	wait.	He	should	have	faked	another	kidnapping.

     He	cursed	inside,	wishing	he	would	 have	thought	of	that	sooner.

     But,	 no—his	going	missing	 would	set	off	 alarms	and	the	last	thing	Cress	and

the	others	needed	were	 alarms.	The	 best	thing	 he	 could	do	 to	 quell	 Levana’s

suspicions	was	to	go	forward	as	if	nothing	had	changed.

     The	best	thing	he	could	do	was	crown	her	empress	of	his	country.

     It	 made	him	sick	to	think	 it,	but	he	would	 stick	to	the	plan.	He	would	 play	his

part.

     He	 spun	around	 a	corner,	 nearly	toppling	  a	statue	of	 some	chisel-muscled

673
moon	god.	Kai	 grabbed	the	 statue,	righting	 it	 while	 his	heart	launched	into	 his

throat.	When	both	he	and	the	statue	had	calmed,	he	shoved	his	way	 through	the

double	doors	that	led	into	a	series	of	private	waiting	chambers.

     Two	 guards	flanked	 the	doorway	 into	 the	great	hall.	 Torin	 was	seated	on	a

cushioned	bench	beside	a	woman	with	gold,	 poufed	hair,	who	 gasped	with	such

fervor	Kai	 thought	she	might	pass	out.

     “Oh,	 thank	 you,	 Artemis!”	  she	said,	pressing	 a	cloth	 to	 her	brow.	 “Where

have	you	been?”

     “I	 told	you	 he	was	on	his	way,”	said	Torin.

     The	woman	ignored	him,	 already	speaking	into	a	device	attached	to	her	wrist.

“The	 emperor	 has	 arrived.	 Ceremony	 to	 commence	 in	 thirty	  seconds.”	 She

shoved	the	port	 onto	her	belt	 and	focused	on	 Kai,	 scanning	him	 with	 a	mix	 of

anxiety	 and	  disgust.	 “Earthens,”	   she	muttered,	  straightening	  his	 sash	 and

brushing	 his	 hair	 away	 from	  his	 face.	 “You	  never	 take	 any	  pride	 in	 your

appearance.”

     He	 gulped	back	 a	quick	 retort	 involving	  gold	 hair	and	 accepted	a	glass	of

water	from	a	servant.

     Torin	 stood	from	the	bench	and	slipped	his	hands	into	his	pockets.	He	looked

alarmingly	 casual	without	  a	jacket,	 and	Kai	 wondered	 if	 he,	 too,	had	 already

been	criticized	 by	this	 woman,	whoever	she	was.	“Is	 everything	 all	 right,	 Your

Majesty?”

     The	 words	  were	 said	 with	  calm	  indifference,	  but	 Kai	  could	  see	tense

curiosity	beneath	Torin’s	 expression.

     Although	  he	 didn’t	 know	  whether	 it	 was	 true,	 he	 nodded.	“Everything’s

fine.”

674
     Beyond	the	double	 doors	he	could	hear	the	chatter	of	hundreds	of	voices	and

he	wondered	what	rumors	 were	already	circulating	  as	to	the	ceremony’s	 delay.

“I’m	 ready.”

     “So	 is	 Her	 Majesty,”	  said	 the	 woman.	 She	shoved	 Torin	 toward	 another

entrance.	“You—go	take	your	 seat!	Your	Majesty,	follow	 me.”

     Kai	 followed	 her	between	the	guards,	through	 the	double	doors,	into	 a	short

hallway	lined	with	 ornamental	pillars.

     Levana	was	waiting,	 outfitted	 in	a	dress	that	matched	Kai’s	 sash—the	colors

of	the	Eastern	Commonwealth.	She	looked	 like	a	giant	 walking	 flag,	with	 a	row

of	stars	along	the	 base	of	her	gown’s	 hem	and	a	white	 lotus	 blossoming	across

her	side.	She,	too,	wore	 a	sash,	this	in	burnt	 orange—on	Earth,	the	color	 of	 the

rising	sun.

     The	 sight	of	 her	 showing	 so	much	 fake	patriotism	  for	 the	Commonwealth

made	him	want	to	tear	off	that	sash	and	strangle	her	with	it.

     She	held	her	hands	toward	him	as	he	approached.	Though	he	bristled,	he	had

no	choice	but	to	take	them.	Her	fingers	were	icy	cold.

     “My	 dear	husband,”	she	cooed.	“I	feel	we	were	parted	for	 too	long.”

     He	 scowled.	  “How	  long	 are	 you	  planning	 on	 keeping	  up	 this	 charade,

exactly?”

     “‘Charade’?”	   Levana	 tittered.	 “Surely	  a	wife	  is	 allowed	  to	 long	 for	  her

husband	without	her	emotions	being	considered	suspect?”

     “Unless	 you	want	me	to	 be	physically	 ill	 during	these	proceedings,	I	suggest

we	change	the	topic.”

     Her	expression	hardened.	“Our	marriage	union	 is	final	 and	binding.	It	 is	your

choice	how	you	react	to	the	situation.”

675
     “You’re	   giving	  me	  a	 choice	 about	  something?”	  Kai	  flashed	 his	  most

diplomatic	smile.	 “How	 generous	of	you.”

     Levana	 matched	the	 look.	  “There.	 That	 wasn’t	 so	 difficult,	  was	 it?”	 She

turned	so	they	were	facing	the	great	hall,	arm	in	arm.	Kai	caught	a	glimpse	of	 the

scratch	on	 her	 forearm	 where	 he	 had	cut	 her	 with	  the	 scissors	during	 their

wedding.

     The	sight	strengthened	him	as	the	horns	blared.

     The	 doors	were	pulled	 back,	revealing	 masses	of	onlookers.	 Kai	 found	 it	a

strain	on	his	 eyes	to	look	 at	the	vibrant	 colors	and	sparkling	 lights	 and	flouncy

materials	spilling	out	 of	the	audience	and	into	the	aisle.

     “All	  rise	 for	 Her	 Royal	Majesty,	 Queen	 Levana	Blackburn	 of	 Luna,	 direct

descendant	of	First	King	 Cyprus	Blackburn,	 and	His	Imperial	 Majesty,	 Emperor

Kaito	of	the	Eastern	Commonwealth	of	 Earth.”

     The	Lunar	 anthem	began	to	play.	Kai	 and	Levana	paced	down	the	aisle.	If	 it

weren’t	for	 the	gaudy	clothing	in	the	pews,	the	mood	would	have	felt	 somber.

     “I	  was	given	 an	interesting	 piece	 of	 information	 before	 you	 arrived,”	 said

Levana,	keeping	her	expression	pleasant	for	 the	crowd,	“involving	  a	traitor	 that

was	recently	detained	in	our	underground	holding	cells.”

     Kai’s	 stomach	tightened.	“Do	go	on.”

     “It	 seems	they	found	one	of	 Linh	 Cinder’s	accomplices	prowling	  around	our

palace.	That	Earthen	criminal—Carswell	 Thorne,	I	believe	is	his	name.”

     “That	 is	interesting.”

     “I	 don’t	 suppose	you	know	what	he	was	attempting	to	accomplish	here?”

     “Perhaps	he	felt	slighted	at	not	receiving	 an	invitation.”

     Levana	 nodded	to	the	 crowd.	 “No	 matter.	 We	caught	 him	 before	he	 could

676
cause	too	much	trouble.”

     “I’m	  glad	to	hear	it.”

     “I	 thought,	as	you	will	 soon	be	Luna’s	 king	consort	and	he	was	your	prisoner

before	he	was	mine,	I	might	allow	 you	to	decide	how	best	to	execute	him.”

     He	set	his	jaw.	“How	 my	 wife	does	honor	me.”

     Though	 in	reality,	 while	 Levana	was	trying	  to	goad	his	temper,	 she’d	given

him	a	gift.	It	 was	a	relief	to	hear	that	Thorne	wasn’t	already	dead.

     As	 they	 neared	the	end	of	 the	 aisle,	he	 spotted	his	 Earthen	peers	near	the

front.	 Torin	 was	already	 there—they	must	 have	sneaked	him	 in	 through	some

other	entrance—along	with	 dozens	of	 representatives	from	 the	Commonwealth

and	the	other	 nations.	 He	even	 saw,	with	  some	surprise,	Linh	  Adri	 and	 Linh

Pearl	standing	beside	an	American	representative.	They	both	wore	frozen	smiles,

and	though	Kai	had	a	particular	kind	 of	hatred	for	 those	two	women,	he	also	felt

a	sting	of	 sympathy.	 Levana	had	been	toying	 with	  them	like	 a	cat	 toys	with	 a

mouse	before	devouring	 it.	Offering	  favors,	then	punishing	 them,	then	 offering

favors	again.	No	wonder	they	 both	looked	stricken	 with	fear,	afraid	 to	make	any

sudden	movements.

     A	 dozen	people	 stood	on	 the	raised	dais,	 a	mix	 of	 thaumaturges	and	royal

guards	and	one	bioengineered	soldier	dressed	up	in	a	pretty	uniform	  that	was	at

odds	with	his	malformed	face	and	body.

     Kai	 grimaced,	 wondering	 what	 Levana	was	thinking	  to	 bring	 one	of	 those

creatures	to	the	coronation.	Their	 presence	hadn’t	worked	 out	 for	either	 side	at

the	wedding	feast.

     Then	the	light	 caught	on	the	creature’s	eyes,	blazing	green,	and	Kai	frowned.

If	he	didn’t	 know	better—

677
     He	jolted,	 his	feet	stumbling	on	the	first	 step.	He	caught	himself,	successfully

navigating	the	rest	of	the	steps	without	falling	 on	his	face.	His	 heart	continued	to

thump	inside	his	chest	and	he	remembered	Cress	telling	him	 they’d	 taken	Wolf,

but	she	didn’t	know	what	 had	become	of	him.

     Now	 he	knew.

     This	 creature	was	Wolf,	  but	 not.	His	 eyes	were	 turbulent	 and	dark,	boring

into	Kai,	hinting	 at	the	ferocity	 that	simmered	beneath	the	surface.

     With	 a	snarl,	Wolf	 looked	away	first.

     “You	 recognize	my	prized	 soldier?”	said	Levana	as	they	reached	the	altar	full

of	regalia.	“I	 should	think	he’s	changed	a	great	deal	since	last	you	saw	him.”

     Kai’s	 fury	 writhed	 inside	him.	 She	only	wanted	 a	reaction.	She	only	 wanted

him	to	know	that	she	was	in	control—of	 his	fate,	of	 the	fate	of	his	country,	of	 the

fate	of	his	friends.

     Kai	 braced	himself	 as	he	and	Levana	turned	 to	face	the	 audience.	This	was

the	moment	 in	 which	 he	would	  be	handing	 Levana	half	 his	 power.	 This	 was

when	he	would	 tell	 his	country	 that,	 should	he	die,	 this	woman	 would	 become

their	sole	ruler.

     His	 body	throbbed	with	 refusal,	but	he	knew	 there	were	no	more	options	left

to	him.

     Please	let	Cinder	 come,	a	voice	 repeated	in	the	back	of	 his	head.	Please	let

her	come.

     “People	 of	 Luna	and	of	 Earth,”	 said	 Levana,	holding	 her	hands	toward	 the

crowd.	“You	  are	here	to	witness	 a	momentous	event	in	 our	history.	 Today,	 we

shall	crown	an	Earthen	as	our	king—my	 husband,	Emperor	Kaito	 of	 the	Eastern

Commonwealth.	And	 today,	I	shall	be	crowned	an	empress,	the	first	of	 our	royal

678
bloodline	to	form	 a	binding	alliance	with	 our	Earthen	brethren.”

     The	people	cheered.

     Well,	 the	Lunars	cheered.	The	Earthens	clapped	sort	of	politely.

     “I	 ask	that	you	be	seated,”	said	Levana.

     As	 the	people	took	 their	 seats,	Kai	and	Levana	 paced	to	the	two	 bejeweled

cases	set	upon	the	altar.	Kai	 released	a	slow	 breath	and	undid	 the	latch	 on	the

case.

     Inside,	settled	on	a	bed	of	silk,	was	the	empress	crown,	molded	into	the	shape

of	a	phoenix	and	studded	with	flaming	 jewels.

     His	 heart	caught,	overwhelming	 him	 with	 emotion	 he	hadn’t	 been	prepared

for.	The	last	time	 he’d	seen	this	crown	 it	had	been	worn	by	 his	mother.	She	had

worn	 it	 during	 the	 annual	 ball	 celebrating	 world	  peace	every	 year.	 She	had

always	been	so	beautiful.

     He	shivered	at	the	memory,	and	at	the	blasphemy	he	was	about	to	commit.

     On	 the	 other	 side	of	  the	altar,	 Levana	 emerged	 with	 her	 own	 crown.	 In

comparison	to	the	Earthen	jewels,	the	crown	 for	 Luna’s	king	 was	simple.	Seven

spindly	  tines	 carved	  of	  moon	  rock,	  the	 white	   stone	 shimmering	  in	  the

candlelight.	It	 was	ancient.	The	monarchy	of	 Luna	had	been	formed	long	 before

the	Fourth	World	  War	had	 led	to	 the	formation	 of	 the	Eastern	Commonwealth

and	its	own	royal	family.

     Steeling	himself,	 Kai	 lifted	 his	 mother’s	 crown	from	 its	 protective	box,	 and

together,	he	and	Levana	faced	 the	crowd	 again,	holding	 their	 symbolic	 crowns

overhead.	Kai	found	 Torin	 and	saw	sadness	mirrored	in	his	expression.	Perhaps

he,	too,	was	thinking	of	Kai’s	 mother.

     Before	 Levana	could	 launch	into	 her	speech	about	the	symbolic	 importance

679
of	this	 crown	 and	how	 it	 symbolized	 the	sovereign’s	 power	 and	so	on	 and	so

forth,	the	doors	at	the	back	of	the	room	crashed	open.

     The	gold-haired	 woman	marched	down	 the	aisle,	and	though	 her	expression

was	horrified,	  her	 movements	were	 robotic,	  keeping	her	 heading	 toward	 the

queen.

     Kai	 lowered	  the	crown,	  his	palms	 growing	  warm.	 Hope	 expanded	in	 his

chest.	As	 the	 crowd	 turned	 to	 watch	 the	 woman’s	  approach,	a	 titter	 spread

through	them.	Something	was	happening.	Kai	 did	not	sense	fear	from	the	crowd

so	much	as	excitement,	like	this	was	nothing	but	a	fictional	 drama	to	them.

     The	woman	 arrived	at	 the	stairs	and	dropped	to	one	knee.	“Forgive	  me,	My

Queen,”	she	stammered.	“We	have	received	notice	 that	there	is	a	disturbance	in

several	nearby	sectors,	including	the	outlying	domes	of	Artemisia	 City.”

     Kai	 risked	 a	glance	at	 Wolf,	 but	 Wolf	 was	 still	 twitching	 and	 snarling.	He

looked	ready	to	 snap	his	enormous	jaws	 around	the	 first	 throat	that	passed	too

close.

     “What	 sort	of	disturbance?”	Levana	growled.

     “We	 don’t	 know	 how,	 but	the	barricades	around	the	 rebellious	sectors	have

been	lifted,	 and	the	people	are	…	 they	are	 coming	here.	Swarming	 the	maglev

tunnels.	There	is	word	that	…	that	Princess	Winter	is	among	them.”

     Levana’s	face	reddened.	“That	is	not	possible.”

     “I	 …	 I	 do	 not	know,	 My	 Queen.	That’s	 only	 what	 I	was	 told.	 And	…	 and

also,	supposedly,	the	cyborg	is	with	them	as	well.”

     Kai	 grinned.	He	 couldn’t	 help	it,	 and	he	did	nothing	 to	hide	 it	when	 Levana

turned	a	scowl	on	him.	With	 a	shrug,	he	told	her,	“She	did	warn	you.”

     Levana’s	 jaw	clenched.	She	turned	back	to	 the	woman.	“The	 cyborg	is	 dead

680
and	I	will	 not	tolerate	any	rumors	to	the	contrary.”

     The	woman’s	mouth	 hung.

     “Are	 the	barricades	holding	around	Artemisia?”

     “Y-yes,	 My	 Queen.	To	my	knowledge	they’ve	 been	unable	to	breach—”

     “Then	 we	are	not	under	any	immediate	threat,	are	we?”

     “I	 …	I	 suppose	not,	My	Queen.”

     “Then	 why	 are	you	 interrupting	 this	 ceremony?”	 Levana	 flicked	 her	wrist.

“Guards,	escort	this	woman	to	a	prison	cell.	I	will	  suffer	no	more	interruptions.”

     Her	 eyes	were	flaming,	 merciless,	 as	the	woman	 stood	and	stumbled	 back.

Two	of	the	guards	caught	her.

     The	crowd	 was	trying	  to	stifle	 their	 enthusiasm,	but	was	failing.	  Kai	 saw	a

number	of	mocking	looks	 cast	toward	the	woman	as	she	was	dragged	away,	even

though	surely	 it	  had	not	 been	 her	 idea	to	 bring	  news	of	 the	 insurrection	  to

Levana.

     Kai’s	  own	 thoughts	were	 teeming.	 He	bit	 down	 hard	 on	 the	inside	 of	 his

cheek,	while	Levana’s	face	untwisted,	transforming	 back	into	pleasant	serenity.

     “Now	  then,”	  she	 said,	raising	  the	 Lunar	 crown	  over	 her	 head.	 “Let	  us

proceed.”

681
	




                                          Seventy-Nine







Cinder	stayed	 at	the	 front	 of	 their	 small	 army,	 along	 with	 Alpha	 Strom.	 The

subway	tunnels	were	wide	 enough	to	walk	 in	rows	 of	five	 and	Strom	 had	made

sure	everyone	knew	this	was	to	 be	their	formation—to	  deviate	in	such	confined

quarters	could	 lead	to	 panic	and	 confusion.	 They	tried	 to	 be	quiet,	 but	 it	 was

impossible.	They	 progressed	like	a	roll	 of	 thunder.	Thousands	of	feet	 pounding

against	the	rocky	terrain	inside	the	lava	tubes.

     The	mutant	 soldiers	stayed	near	the	front,	the	 first	line	 of	 defense,	while	the

people	from	the	outer	sectors	followed	behind.

     It	 had	 become	a	 numbers	game,	 and	their	  numbers	were	 growing.	 Every

sector	they	passed	through	had	new	civilians	 joining	 their	cause,	many	who	had

been	preparing	from	the	moment	Cinder’s	first	 message	had	broadcast.

     Cinder	 kept	 running	 the	calculations	 over	 and	 over	in	 her	 head,	but	 there

were	 still	  too	 many	  variables	 to	  factor.	 They	  needed	 enough	 civilians	  to

overthrow	the	queen	and	her	thaumaturges,	and	enough	un-manipulated	fighters

left	to	 take	on	the	guards	and	any	 wolf	 soldiers	Levana	brought	 to	her	defense.

She	was	relying	on	Jacin	and	Winter	 to	spread	the	word,	and	fast.	If	 they	failed,

it	would	become	a	massacre,	and	not	in	their	favor.	If	they	succeeded	…

682
     The	tunnels	were	pitch-black	 but	 for	the	lanterns	scavenged	by	the	people	in

the	outer	sectors	and	a	handful	 of	 flashlights.	 Cinder	 wished	she	had	a	map	 in

her	head	telling	 her	how	far	 they’d	 gone	and	how	 much	farther	they	 had	to	go.

She’d	become	accustomed	to	 having	infinite	  data	within	  her	grasp,	and	it	 was

disconcerting	now	 to	 be	 without	 it.	 After	  five	 years	 of	 wishing	 she	was	 like

everyone	else,	now	she	missed	all	those	conveniences	that	had	come	with	being

cyborg.

     Four	 times	 they	 came	across	 stalled	trains	 and	 shuttles	that	 filled	  up	 the

confined	 space	of	 the	 tunnel.	 These	had	 at	first	  seemed	like	 insurmountable

obstacles,	but	the	soldiers	went	forward	 with	 zeal,	prying	 off	 the	panels,	tearing

up	the	interior	 seats,	trampling	their	 way	through	 the	other	side.	They	 made	for

an	efficient,	 destructive	 machine,	and	their	 makeshift	 army	 was	given	 passage

through.

     Although	 the	maglev	system	had	been	shut	down,	power	 was	still	 being	sent

out	on	the	grid	 and	the	platforms	 they	passed	were	well	 lit	 with	 a	holograph	 of

the	 mandatory-viewing	  video	 feed	 of	  the	 coronation.	 Unable	  to	 record	 the

ceremony	itself,	 as	the	queen	would	not	 be	donning	her	veil,	 a	broadcaster	was

relaying	a	moment-by-moment	breakdown	of	 the	event.

     As	 they	entered	into	AR-4,	 one	of	 the	sectors	adjacent	to	Artemisia	 Central,

Cinder	heard	Kai’s	 voice	 and	paused.	He	was	reciting	 the	 vows	to	 become	the

king	consort	of	Luna.

     Their	 army	divided	into	 four	regiments.	Each	would	 enter	the	capital	through

a	different	 tunnel.	 As	 the	 alphas	led	 their	 packs	and	the	 civilians	 in	 opposite

directions,	Cinder	caught	sight	of	Strom,	watching	 her.

     “We	 should	 keep	moving,”	  he	said.	“My	  men	are	hungry	 and	restless,	and

683
you’ve	put	us	in	a	confined	space	with	a	lot	of	 sweet-smelling	flesh.”

     Cinder	 raised	an	eyebrow.	“If	  they	need	a	snack,	tell	 them	to	 chew	on	each

other	for	 a	while.	 I	 just	 want	 to	make	 sure	Jacin	has	enough	 time	to	 reach	as

many	sectors	as	possible.”

     Strom	 smirked,	as	if	 impressed	at	Cinder’s	 inability	 to	 be	bullied.	 “It’s	 time

to	move,”	 he	repeated.	“Our	 people	 are	almost	in	 position.	 The	queen	and	 her

entourage	are	all	in	 one	place.	We	may	 be	sitting	 down	here	for	 weeks	waiting

for	more	civilians	 that	never	show	up.”

     Cinder	 believed	they	would	 come.	They	 had	to	come.	But	 she	also	knew	he

was	right.

     The	coronation	was	almost	over.

     They	 started	creeping	 through	 the	tunnels	 again.	Hands	 tightened	on	 their

weapons.	Paces	slowed	with	mounting	 anxiety.	 They	hadn’t	 gone	much	 farther

when	Cinder’s	 flashlight	  caught	on	iron	 bars	 in	the	 distance.	Strom	 held	up	 a

hand,	signaling	for	everyone	to	stop.

     “The	 barricade.”	Cinder	sent	her	flashlight	 beam	into	the	wall	around	the	iron

grate.	It	would	take	weeks	to	dig	around	it.

     “There’s	  no	 way	 through,”	 said	 Strom.	 He	 was	 snarling	 as	he	 looked	 at

Cinder,	as	if	this	were	her	fault.	 “If	 this	is	 a	trap,	it’s	a	good	one.	They	could	 kill

us	all	in	a	heartbeat	while	we’re	stuffed	like	 sausages	in	these	tunnels.”

     “Cress	was	supposed	to	open	them,”	she	said.	“They	 should	have	been	down

by	now.	  Unless…”	 Unless	 Cress	and	 Thorne	had	 failed.	 Unless	 they’d	 been

caught.	“What	time	is	it?”

     She	looked	at	Strom,	 but	he	had	no	idea.	He	didn’t	 have	a	clock	 in	his	 head,

either.

684
     Cress	was	supposed	to	set	all	of	the	barricades	surrounding	the	city	to	open	at

once,	to	keep	enthusiastic	 revolutionaries	 from	 sneaking	into	 the	city	 too	 soon

and	winding	 up	 dead	or	giving	  away	their	 surprise.	Had	 Cress	failed,	 or	were

they	early?	Kai	was	still	 reciting	his	vows.	Cinder	 shoved	down	her	rising	panic.

     Strom	started	to	growl.	 “I	 smell	something.”

     The	surrounding	soldiers	turned	their	 noses	up,	sniffing	the	air.

     “Something	 synthetic,”	said	Strom.	“Something	 Earthen.	A	machine.”

     Cinder	 pressed	a	 hand	against	the	 bars,	but	 the	 soldiers	 pulled	 her	away,

forming	 a	protective	 wall	 between	her	 and	the	barricade.	 As	if	  she	was	worth

protecting.

     Cinder	tried	 not	to	be	annoyed.

     Footsteps	thumped	in	 the	tunnel	beyond	 the	gate,	growing	 louder.	A	 kicked

pebble	skittered	 along	 the	 ground.	 A	  flashlight	  came	into	  view,	 though	 the

carrier	was	still	cast	in	shadow.

     The	beam	darted	over	the	gathered	soldiers	and	the	figure	froze.

     The	soldiers	snarled.

     “Well,”	  she	said.	“What	a	menacing	bunch	you	are.”

     Cinder’s	 heart	sputtered.	“Iko!”	  she	cried,	 trying	 to	shove	 her	way	through,

but	the	bodies	blocking	her	were	unshovable.

     Iko	 moved	closer	 and	Cinder	was	 able	to	catch	her	 in	the	beam	of	 her	own

light.	She	gasped	and	stopped	struggling.	Iko’s	right	arm	was	hanging	limp	 again

and	there	were	bullet	 holes	and	ripped	 synthetic	 tissue	and	dead	wires	all	 over

her	body.	Her	left	ear	was	missing.

     “Oh,	 Iko	…	 what	happened?”

     “More	  stupid	 Lunar	 guards,	that’s	 what	 happened.	He	cornered	 me	in	 the

685
basement	of	the	med-clinic	and	did	this.	I	had	to	play	 dead	until	he	left	me	alone.

Good	thing	they	have	no	idea	how	to	kill	 an	android	here.”

     “Iko.	 I’m	 so	sorry.”

     Iko	 waved	 her	away	with	  her	good	arm.	 “I	 don’t	 feel	 like	 talking	 about	 it.

Are	you	being	held	prisoner	right	 now,	or	are	these	bullies	on	our	side?”

     “They’re	 on	our	side.”

     Iko’s	 attention	swooped	over	the	wolves	again.	“Are	 you	sure?”

     “Not	  entirely,”	   said	 Cinder.	  “But	  they’re	  the	 army	 Scarlet	  and	 Winter

recruited	and	they’re	the	best	we’ve	got.	They	haven’t	eaten	anybody	yet.”

     Strom	smirked	at	her	around	his	protruding	 fangs.

     “Iko,	 what	time	 is	it?	Shouldn’t	 the	gates	be	open	by	now?”

     “We’re	 right	 on	schedule.	T	minus	seventeen	seconds,	by	my—”

     The	 sound	of	 machinery	 groaned	and	 creaked	inside	 the	 stone	walls.	 The

grate	began	to	descend	into	the	rocky	ground.

     Iko’s	 lips	puckered.	“Cress’s	timing	 is	off,	 not	mine.”

     Cinder	exhaled	with	 relief.

     While	 the	grate	disappeared,	the	wolves	returned	to	 formation,	hands	locked

behind	their	 backs,	chins	 lifted.	 It	 was	 the	most	 professional	Cinder	 had	 seen

them,	making	them	look	more	like	 men	than	monsters.	And	very,	very	 much	like

soldiers.

     As	 soon	as	the	grate	was	low	enough,	Iko	 hurled	herself	over	 it	and	fell	 into

Cinder’s	arms,	her	good	 hand	flopping	 against	Cinder’s	 back.	“You	 will	 fix	  me

again,	won’t	you?”

     Cinder	 squeezed	her	 back.	 “Of	  course	 I	  will.	  Broken	 isn’t	  the	 same	as

unfixable.”

686
     Pulling	 away,	 Iko	 beamed,	and	the	smile	 was	punctuated	by	 a	spark	flying

out	of	her	empty	ear	cavity.	“I	 love	you,	Cinder.”

     Cinder	grinned.	“I	 love	 you	too.”

     “Why	  are	 we	 not	 moving?”	  said	 Strom,	 his	 voice	 rumbling	  through	 the

tunnel.	“We	 grow	 impatient	 to	 shred	Levana	 and	her	court	 into	 tiny,	 bite-size

pieces.	We	will	 suck	the	 marrow	from	 their	 bones	and	drink	 their	blood	 as	if	it

were	fine	wine.”

     Iko	 fixed	an	uncomfortable	look	 on	Cinder.	“Good	 thing	they’re	 on	our	side.”

687
	




                                                  Eighty







Wolf	had	been	straining	throughout	the	coronation	ceremony.	His	head	ached

with	the	effort,	the	constant	struggle	to	control	his	hunger,	but	he	felt	like	it	was

gnawing	at	him	from	the	inside	out.	Though	he	had	devoured	the	meat	given

him,	it	still	raged	on.	A	thousand	scents	filled	his	nostrils.	Every	Earthen.	Every

Lunar.	Every	guard	and	every	thaumaturge,	each	one	smelling	delicious	enough

that	he	couldn’t	help	but	envision	sinking	his	teeth	into	their	flesh,	tearing	their

muscles	off	their	bones,	gorging	himself	on	their	fat—

     The	only	instinct	stronger	than	his	ravenous	hunger	was	the	fear	of	what	the

thaumaturge	would	do	to	 him	 if	 he	misbehaved.	He	could	not	 stand	to	 be

subjected	to	that	agony	again.	The	knife-sharp	pain	that	 shot	through	every

muscle	and	ripped	at	every	tendon.

     His	mouth	watered,	but	he	swallowed	the	saliva	back.	He	did	not	move.

     His	attention	locked	on	the	queen.	Already	Emperor	Kaito	had	knelt	before

her	and	accepted	the	Lunar	crown	and	the	title	of	king	consort,	to	enthusiastic

applause,	although	by	the	emperor’s	expression	he	could	have	been	accepting	a

vial	of	poison.

     Now	it	was	the	queen’s	turn.

688
     The	 emperor	raised	the	 crown	 of	the	 Eastern	Commonwealth	 and	repeated

the	queen’s	speech,	ruminating	on	 the	political	 power	 held	by	 this	position,	 the

obligations	and	 duties,	the	honors	and	 expectations,	the	symbolism	 and	history

contained	within	that	hunk	of	 metal	and	a	hundred	glittering	jewels.

     Levana	 knelt.	  She	 glowed	  with	  anticipation.	  Her	 lips	  trembled	  with	  a

restrained	smile.	Her	eyes	were	feasting	on	the	crown	as	Kai	turned	toward	her.

     Wolf	 swallowed	 another	mouthful	 of	saliva.	 The	queen’s	flesh	was	the	most

tempting	of	 any	of	them,	 sweetened	by	the	knowledge	that	she	was	his	mistress

and	his	enemy.	She	had	commanded	that	Wolf	be	taken	from	his	family.	She	had

ordered	that	he	become	this	 monster.	It	 was	at	 her	word	 that	the	thaumaturges

tortured	him.

     He	would	 devour	her	heart	if	ever	he	had	the	chance.

     “Do	   you	  swear,”	  said	  Kai,	   “to	  govern	  the	  peoples	  of	  the	  Eastern

Commonwealth	according	 to	the	laws	and	customs	as	laid	 down	by	 generations

of	 past	rulers,	 to	use	 all	 the	power	 bestowed	on	 you	 to	 further	 justice,	 to	be

merciful,	to	 honor	the	inherent	rights	of	all	 peoples,	to	respect	the	peace	between

all	 nations,	to	 rule	 with	  kindness	and	 patience,	and	 to	 seek	the	 wisdom	 and

council	of	our	peers	and	brethren?	Do	you	promise	all	this	to	 do	today	and	for	all

the	days	of	your	 reign	as	empress	of	the	Eastern	Commonwealth,	 before	all	 the

witnesses	of	the	earth	and	heavens?”

     She	was	watching	the	crown,	not	the	emperor.	“I	 do,”	she	breathed.

     Kai’s	 expression	was	 dark.	He	 hesitated,	holding	 the	crown	 aloft.	 His	arms

were	shaking.

     Wolf	 watched	as	Kai	 forced	himself	 to	set	the	crown	 on	Levana’s	 head.	She

shut	her	eyes,	her	expression	tantamount	to	euphoria.

689
     “By	 the	power	given	 to	me	by	the	citizens	of	the	Eastern	Commonwealth	and

our	allies	in	 the	Earthen	Union,	as	the	emperor	of	 the	Eastern	Commonwealth,	I

do	proclaim	 you—”	  He	 paused.	Waited.	 Wolf	 could	 hear	the	 hope	shriveling

inside	him	 and	he	thought	he	understood	the	temptation	 to	wait	 a	second	more,

one	second	more	…

     The	second	passed,	and	Kai	set	his	face	in	stone.

     “—Empress	 Levana	of	 the	Eastern	Commonwealth.	 From	 this	day	until	  the

day	that	one	or	 both	of	 us	shall	die,	you	 are	my	 wife	 and	I	will	  share	with	you

my	throne.”

     His	 voice	cracked	on	the	last	word.	 Kai	 tore	his	hands	away	from	 the	crown

as	if	it	had	burned	him.

     The	 crowd	  erupted,	 streamers	 and	 flower	  petals	 emerging	 from	  hidden

pockets,	turning	 the	 somber,	sacred	affair	  into	 a	cacophony	 of	 noise.	Levana

stood.	Arms	  outstretched,	 she	paced	 to	 the	 edge	of	  the	 dais,	 accepting	 the

torrential	praise	of	the	Lunar	aristocrats.

     Before	 she	could	 speak,	the	triumphant	 cheers	were	 interrupted	 by	a	 shrill

screech,	the	sound	stabbing	at	Wolf’s	ears	like	 needles	burrowing	into	 his	brain.

He	crouched	 down,	 snarling.	 The	 audience	cowered.	The	 noise	 erupted	from

everywhere	at	once.

     Wolf	 lifted	 his	 head.	This	was	his	 chance.	Though	the	sound	had	turned	his

vision	 white,	 his	oversensitive	 ears	making	 him	 want	 to	 fall	 to	 the	ground	 in

convulsions,	his	hatred	for	the	queen	was	stronger	than	the	pain.

     He	 lunged	 forward,	 his	 vision	 full	  of	 her	and	 her	most	 fragile	 spots.	 Her

throat.	Her	stomach.

     He	 heard	a	war	cry.	 A	 guard	dove	in	 front	 of	 him,	 blocking	 his	path.	Wolf

690
slashed	at	him	 with	 his	 newly	 sharpened	nails	 and	grabbed	 the	guard’s	 knife

from	the	scabbard	at	his	side.	He	raised	the	knife	over	his	shoulder.

     The	 guard’s	yell	 had	drawn	 attention,	 even	over	the	 screeching.	The	queen

spun	as	Wolf’s	hand	whipped	forward.

     Agony	 locked	 down	 on	 him	all	 at	 once,	like	 searing	 metal	vises	 clamping

around	his	fingers,	 his	wrist,	 his	 arm.	He	released	the	knife	 half	 a	moment	 too

soon,	knowing	it	was	wrong	 the	second	his	frozen	fingers	were	empty.	The	blade

grazed	the	queen’s	neck	when	 it	should	 have	lodged	into	 her	 heart,	and	buried

itself	in	the	heavy	draperies	behind	the	altar.

     Wolf	 crumpled	 to	the	ground,	blinded	 by	the	torrent	 of	pain	 that	cut	through

his	flesh,	ripping	his	mind	 apart.

     The	noise	stopped	and,	with	it,	the	torment.

     The	sudden	absence	was	like	a	vacuum	 sucking	out	 every	other	sound	from

the	 great	 hall.	  They	 were	  left	  in	 crystallized	  silence,	  hundreds	 of	 bodies

paralyzed	from	shock.

     Wolf	 lay	gasping	on	the	ground,	wishing	 he	were	dead.

     He	 knew	 the	chance	would	 not	 come	again.	 He	knew	 his	 punishment	had

only	begun.

     Levana	 was	also	 panting,	 her	eyes	ablaze.	 Her	 lips	 looked	 more	red	 than

usual,	matched	 by	 the	 blood	 that	 was	 beading	 up	 on	 the	 side	of	  her	neck.

“Control	 him!”

     “Yes,	  My	  Queen,”	 said	 Mistress	  Bement.	 “It	  won’t	   happen	again,	  My

Queen.”

     Then,	cutting	 through	the	heady	silence,	came	a	voice.	 The	palace	paused	to

listen.	 Wolf	  focused	 on	 the	  ceiling,	 wondering	  if	  the	 pain	 had	 made	 him

691
delirious.

     It	 was	Cinder’s	voice.

     “Hello,	  dearest	Aunt	 Levana,”	  she	said,	her	 tone	 light	 and	 taunting.	 “I’m

sorry	to	interrupt,	but	 I	wanted	to	make	sure	I	had	your	full	 attention.	First,	allow

me	to	 congratulate	 you.	 It	 seems	you	 finally	  have	everything	  you’ve	 always

wanted.	Now,	it’s	 my	turn.”

     There	was	a	long	pause.	The	speakers	crackled.

     Cinder’s	 voice	was	no	longer	jovial	 when	she	said,	“You	 have	ten	minutes	to

come	to	the	front	gates	of	your	palace	and	surrender.”

     That	was	all.

     The	people	waited	 for	more.	More	 taunting.	More	 threats.	More	explanation.

But	the	message	was	over.

     Levana	looked	 visibly	  shaken,	while	 the	emperor	looked	 ready	to	 burst	out

laughing.

     Then	 Kai’s	 gaze	landed	on	 Wolf	 and	the	 grin	 fell.	 His	brow	 twitched	 with

concern.

     Wolf	  glowered	  and	 moved	 to	  stand	 on	 his	  weak	 legs,	 glad	 when	  the

thaumaturge	didn’t	prevent	it.

     “It’s	  a	trick!”	  Levana	screamed,	her	voice	fragmented.	 “She	can	do	nothing

to	me!”

     A	 patter	of	 hurried	footsteps	broke	 through	the	 queen’s	outrage.	They	came

through	one	of	 the	side	 entrances,	Head	Thaumaturge	Aimery	 Park	flanked	 by

two	guards.

     A	 snarl	tried	to	rip	out	of	 Wolf’s	 throat	and	he	barely	slammed	it	down	again.

This	man	had	killed	his	mother.

692
     “What?”	 snapped	the	queen.

     “We’ve	  been	informed	 that	 since	the	 security	breach	 occurred,	our	 system

has	been	neglecting	to	relay	information	from	 the	tunnels—”

     “Quickly,	 Aimery.”

     His	 mouth	turned	 down.	 “They	 are	inside	the	 city,	 My	 Queen.	All	  eight	of

our	barricades	are	down.”

     “Who	 is	inside	the	city?”

     “The	 cyborg.	Civilians	 from	 the	outer	sectors.	Even	some	of	our	own	soldiers

have	joined	them.”

     Levana	was	hyperventilating,	 burning	 with	 rage.	“The	 next	person	who	uses

the	word	 cyborg	 in	 my	 presence	will	  be	losing	 a	 limb.”	  She	took	 in	 a	sharp

breath.	“Why	haven’t	 they	been	stopped?”

     “Our	 resources	are	thin,	Your	 Majesty.	So	many	of	 our	men	were	sent	to	the

outer	sectors	to	tame	the	uprisings.	We	cannot	send	reinforcements	to	meet	these

rebels	without	weakening	our	position	 here	in	the	palace.”

     Gathering	 her	skirt	 in	her	hands,	Levana	 drew	her	shoulders	so	close	 to	her

neck	that	a	spot	 of	blood	 was	left	 in	 the	crease.	“Fine,”	 she	hissed.	“This	 little

rebellion	will	 end	here.”

     “Also,	  My	  Queen,	 we	 found	 this	  in	 the	 system	 control	 center	 after	 we

discovered	 that	 our	 security	  had	 been	 tampered	 with.”	  Aimery	   held	 up	 a

portscreen.	“It	would	 appear	that	it	belongs	to	 none	other	than	our	honored	king

consort.”

     Levana’s	gaze	spoke	of	murder	as	she	turned	to	Emperor	Kaito.

     “I	 was	wondering	 where	that	had	gotten	off	to,”	 he	said,	his	mouth	 twitching

with	a	challenge.	“And	 here	I	spent	all	morning	looking	 for	it.”

693
     Levana’s	nostrils	 flared,	her	 expression	vicious	and	calculating.	 She	grabbed

the	portscreen	from	Aimery	and	threw	it	 at	the	altar.	The	plastic	casing	shattered.

     “This	 celebration	 is	over,”	 she	said,	her	voice	 amplified	 by	speakers	around

the	great	hall	as	she	faced	the	audience.	“It	appears	that	some	of	my	subordinates

have	chosen	this	 night	 to	 incite	 what	 they	 see	as	a	 rebellion.	 But	 do	 not	 be

alarmed—I	am	sure	it’s	 little	  more	than	a	silly	 demonstration.”	 She	was	slowly

claiming	control	 over	her	emotions	again.	“For	 your	safety,	I	 must	ask	that	all	of

you,	as	my	distinguished	guests,	remain	seated	while	I	see	to	the	disturbance.”

     A	 rustle	passed	through	the	crowd.

     “Wait,”	  said	a	man’s	voice,	 speaking	from	 the	rows	of	 Earthens.	“You	 can’t

expect	us	to	stay	in	this	room	 while	 the	palace	is	under	attack.	This	is	your	 war,

not	ours.	I	demand	to	be	allowed	to	return	to	my	ship	at	once.”

     The	man	had	an	Earthen-European	accent,	and	a	vision	of	 the	red-haired	girl

flashed	through	 Wolf’s	   thoughts.	 He	 frowned,	 searching	 for	 the	 man	 in	 the

crowd	as	a	thrum	of	agreement	rose	up	from	the	other	Earthens.

     Levana’s	lips	 drew	back.	“You	  will	 stay	here,”	she	said,	each	word	hard	and

cold	as	an	ice	cube,	“until	I	give	 you	permission	to	leave.”

     All	 at	 once,	the	Earthen	dissent	hushed.	Levana	directed	her	attention	 to	the

guards.	“Bar	 all	 the	doors.	 No	one	 is	to	 leave	this	 room	 until	 I	 allow	 it.”	 She

glanced	at	Wolf	  and	snapped	her	fingers.	 “That	 one	stays	at	 my	 side.	He	will

make	the	perfect	shield	should	I	need	one.”

     “My	  Queen,”	 said	one	of	 the	 guards,	“we	 must	insist	 that	 you	allow	 us	 to

escort	you	to	safety.	The	lava	tubes	beneath	the	city—”

     “Absolutely	   not,”	  Levana	 seethed.	 “These	  are	 my	 people.	  This	 is	  my

kingdom.	I	will	  not	abandon	them	now.”

694
     She	started	 marching	 toward	 the	 main	 exit,	 but	 Kai	 followed	  beside	 her.

“These	Earthens	aren’t	yours	to	lock	up.	We	aren’t	hostages.”

     “Are	 you	 sure	about	that,	 Husband?”	Levana	 snapped	her	fingers	at	 two	of

the	nearest	guards.	“Take	him	back	to	the	others.”

     They	 hastened	to	obey,	dragging	 Kai	 away	 from	 the	queen	and	toward	 the

group	of	brainwashed	Earthens.	“Release	me!”	Kai	 yelled.	“I	 have	as	much	right

to	give	orders	now	as	you	do,	to	any	Lunar	guard	or	soldier.”

     Levana	 laughed,	and	she	would	 have	sounded	entertained	 if	 it	 hadn’t	 been

borderline	hysterical.	“I	 hope	you	don’t	 believe	that.”

     Wolf	 was	standing	 right	next	 to	Kai	 as	he	was	pulled	 away	from	 the	queen,

but	the	knowledge	 of	 the	thaumaturge	watching	 his	movements	 kept	him	 from

stepping	forward	 in	 the	emperor’s	 defense.	A	shudder	rumbled	 through	 him	 at

the	mere	thought	of	earning	her	disapproval	again.

     When	the	queen	beckoned	him	to	follow,	 he	did.

695
	




                                             Eighty-One







They	sent	scouts	ahead	to	confirm	 there	wasn’t	 an	ambush	waiting	 for	 them	 at

the	 maglev’s	 platform.	  It	  was	Strom’s	  idea,	 and	 while	  Cinder	 was	 a	 little

annoyed	to	 see	someone	else	taking	 charge,	 it	 also	 felt	 nice	 to	have	 another

leader	considering	 strategy	 and	making	  sure	Cinder	 wasn’t	  about	to	 make	 a

stupid	tactical	error.	 It	was	the	sort	of	 thing	Wolf	 would	 have	done,	if	he’d	 been

there.

     No,	 she	didn’t	want	 to	think	 about	Wolf.	 She’d	had	to	tell	 Scarlet	about	how

they	were	separated	as	soon	as	they	were	brought	back	to	Artemisia	and	how	she

didn’t	 have	any	idea	what	had	become	of	him.	The	 memory	opened	up	a	wound

that	was	still	too	fresh,	one	she	didn’t	have	time	to	let	 heal.

     She	tried	to	still	 her	thrumming	 pulse,	focusing	on	the	allies	she	still	 had.	Iko

was	by	 her	side	again.	 Scarlet	was	 off	 in	 one	of	 the	other	 tunnels	 along	with

another	group	of	soldiers	and	civilians.	 Thorne	and	Cress	were	in	the	palace	and,

if	 the	removal	 of	the	 barricades	was	an	indication,	 they	 were	still	 safe.	Winter

and	Jacin	were	making	their	 way	through	the	nearby	sectors,	recruiting	 as	many

reinforcements	as	they	could.

     She	felt	 like	 she	was	playing	 one	of	 Cress’s	strategy	games.	All	  her	pawns

696
were	in	place	and	her	final	attack	was	about	to	begin.

     A	 hand	slipped	into	hers.	Iko,	offering	 one	last	moment	of	comfort.

     A	 low	howl	 echoed	down	the	stifling	tunnel.

     The	signal.

     Cinder	gave	Iko’s	 hand	a	squeeze,	then	waved	her	arm.	Time	to	move.

     They	 slipped	 forward	 onto	 the	empty	 platform,	 where	 the	netscreens	were

announcing	that	the	coronation	had	ended.	Levana	was	empress.

     They	   entered	  the	   stairwell,	   pushing	   toward	   the	  daylight.	    Though

manufactured	evening	would	soon	be	forced	upon	the	domes,	real	daylight	could

be	seen	off	the	horizon,	a	faint	sliver	of	their	 burning	sun.

     Sunrise.

     It	 was	beautiful.

     Their	  footsteps	pounded	 against	 the	 stone	 streets	of	 Artemisia.	  She	 had

expected	the	streets	to	be	as	empty	as	they	had	been	before,	but	as	the	sound	of

their	march	 echoed	off	 the	mansion	 walls	and	 through	the	 manicured	gardens,

silhouettes	were	drawn	to	the	windows.

     She	tensed,	readying	for	 a	 surprise	attack.	But	 one	of	 the	wolves	 muttered,

“Servants.”

     Looking	 closer,	 she	saw	that	he	was	right.	 Dressed	in	 simple	clothing,	 eyes

overflowing	 with	 fear,	these	were	the	lower	classes	who	lived	 in	the	shadows	of

the	white	city	and	attended	to	the	needs	and	whims	of	their	masters.

     Cinder	 hoped	some	of	 them	might	 be	brave	enough	to	 fight.	 After	 all,	 now

was	the	 time	  to	 show	 it.	  But	 to	  her	 disappointment,	 most	 of	  the	 servants

disappeared	back	into	seclusion.	She	tried	 not	 to	be	resentful.	 No	doubt	 they’d

suffered	from	years	of	punishments	and	brainwashing.

697
     It	 occurred	to	her	that	this	might	 be	the	first	they’d	 heard	of	the	insurgence	at

all.

     The	palace	came	into	view,	shimmering	 and	majestic.

     “Alphas!”	   yelled	 Strom,	 his	  voice	 carrying	 over	 the	 clomping	  footsteps.

“Spread	out	and	surround	the	palace.	We’ll	come	at	it	from	 every	open	street.”

     They	 were	a	well-oiled	  machine,	and	watching	 the	certainty	with	 which	 the

packs	divided,	each	leading	their	regiment	of	 civilians	 down	various	side	streets,

gave	Cinder	a	chill.	 Though	the	people	looked	 afraid,	they	 also	took	confidence

from	the	beastly	men	leading	them.	It	was	the	type	of	 confidence	she	wasn’t	sure

she	could	have	inspired	on	her	own.

     As	they	reached	the	gates	of	the	palace,	the	clomp	of	their	footsteps	halted.

     No	 one	was	in	sight.	Even	the	 guard	tower	was	empty.	The	 heavy	iron	gates

were	wide	 open,	beckoning	them	 forward.	 It	was	 as	if	Levana	 had	no	idea	 she

was	under	siege—or	like	she	was	too	confident	to	heed	Cinder’s	threats.

     Or	maybe	it	 was	a	trap.

     The	gilded	doors	of	 the	castle	were	shut	tight.

     Cinder	 emerged	from	 the	 front	 line	 of	 her	army,	 stepping	before	 the	open

gates.	There	was	an	energy	coursing	through	her,	an	impatience	humming	across

her	skin.	Strom	and	Iko	 stayed	at	her	side,	ready	to	protect	her	if	 an	attack	came

from	one	of	the	palace	windows.

     Cinder	 scanned	the	sparkling	windows	 but	 saw	no	sign	of	 life.	 Anticipation

wrapped	around	her	body	like	a	rope,	growing	 tighter	by	the	moment.	She	felt	 as

if	she	were	teetering	on	the	edge	of	a	cliff,	waiting	 to	be	pushed	off.

     Glancing	 down	 the	front	 line,	 she	watched	 as	the	groups	 that	had	split	 off

emerged,	filling	 up	 the	intersections	of	 every	city	 street.	The	soldiers	 waited	in

698
perfect	military	  formation.	 Training	  and	willpower	  turned	them	 into	 ferocious

statues,	but	she	noticed	the	 twitch	 of	 a	muscle,	the	 flexing	 of	 a	fist,	 eagerness

sizzling	beneath	their	skin.

     Behind	 them,	thousands	of	civilians	 waited.	Less	intimidating,	 less	prepared,

but	no	less	determined.	She	saw	Scarlet’s	red	hair	in	the	crowd.

     Not	 everyone	who	had	joined	 them	had	come	from	 LW-12.	 Some	had	come

on	faith,	 because	of	 a	couple	 videos	 and	a	 promise	that	 their	 true	 queen	had

returned.	Some	had	been	encouraged	by	the	messengers	Cinder	had	sent.	Some,

she	hoped,	were	still	coming.

     Inhaling	  deeply,	 Cinder	 stretched	 her	 thoughts	 thin,	 reaching	 for	  all	 the

electrical	pulses	within	 her	reach,	and	slipped	her	will	into	 her	allies.	It	was	what

she	should	 have	done	 in	 RM-9,	  before	Aimery	  had	 seized	control.	  She	told

herself	it	 was	a	 protection	against	 Levana	and	her	 thaumaturges.	So	long	 as	a

civilian	 was	under	her	control,	then	the	queen	could	not	have	them.

     But	she	also	knew	that	she	would	use	them,	if	she	had	to.

     She	would	sacrifice	them,	even.	If	 she	had	to.

     She	had	 ordered	the	strongest	 of	her	 allies	 to	do	 the	same	thing—to	  seize

control	 of	 their	 comrades	now,	 before	 Levana	and	 her	 court	had	 the	 chance.

They	 couldn’t	  control	  everyone,	 but	 she	 had	 to	 believe	 that	  neither	 could

Levana.	Cinder	needed	enough	people	to	 overwhelm	 her	defenses.	It	had	to	 be

enough.	They	had	to	be	enough.

     “If	 Levana	does	not	surrender,”	 Cinder	yelled	 into	the	eerie	silence,	“we	 will

take	the	palace	by	force.	 There	are	multiple	  entrances	on	this	main	 floor.	 Take

them	all.	Break	the	windows.	 But	do	 not	forget	that	the	queen	and	her	entourage

are	inside.”	She	scanned	the	windows	again,	unnerved	that	there	was	still	no	sign

699
of	opposition.	A	 feeling	of	dread	stirred	in	 the	pit	of	her	stomach.

     She	was	confident	 in	their	 plan,	but	 not	that	 confident.	They	 had	made	it	 to

the	queen’s	doorstep	without	 a	hint	of	 resistance	beyond	the	barricaded	tunnels.

Something	should	have	happened	by	now.

     “Thaumaturges	will	  try	to	 manipulate	you,”	 she	continued.	“Kill	  them	if	 you

have	the	chance,	as	they	will	not	hesitate	to	kill	 you,	 or	use	you	to	kill	 your	 own

friends	and	neighbors.	 The	queen’s	guards	are	trained	 soldiers,	but	 their	minds

are	weak.	Use	 that	to	 your	 advantage.	Above	all	 else,	remember	 why	 you	are

here	today.	 By	 this	 night,	  I	 will	  be	 your	 queen,	and	 you	 will	  no	 longer	 be

slaves!”

     A	 cheer	pulsed	through	the	courtyard,	coupled	with	 a	bone-chilling	 howl	that

coursed	through	Cinder’s	body.	 She	raised	an	arm,	telling	her	allies	to	 hold.	She

prepared	herself	to	 let	it	 fall—the	  signal	 to	charge.	She	watched	 Iko	 from	 the

corner	of	her	eye,	waiting	for	 her	to	say	that	the	ten	minutes	were	up.

     Her	eye	caught	on	movement.

     The	palace	doors	were	opening.

     The	soldiers	dropped	into	 fighting	 stances.	A	low	growl	 rumbled	 through	the

ground,	shaking	 the	soles	of	 Cinder’s	  stolen	boots.	 As	the	 doors	spread,	they

revealed	a	glowing	silhouette.	Not	a	long-coated	thaumaturge	or	even	the	slender

figure	of	the	queen.

     A	 mutant.	One	of	the	queen’s	soldiers.

     A	 hand	grabbed	Cinder’s	elbow	and	hauled	her	back	behind	the	front	line.

     The	soldier	 stepped	onto	the	palace	steps.	His	movements	were	graceful	and

precise.	There	was	a	familiarity	 to	him	that	Cinder	 struggled	to	place,	something

different	from	 the	soldiers	surrounding	 her	now.	The	same	malformed	 face.	The

700
same	protruding	teeth.	Angry	 eyes	flashing	at	the	 crowd.	He	was	dressed	not	in

the	drab,	utilitarian	uniforms	 of	the	regiment,	 but	in	a	uniform	 more	fitting	 to	the

royal	guard—all	 decorum.

     Her	breath	caught.

     It	 was	Wolf.	  Wolf,	  repugnant	and	beastly,	 who	stopped	 at	the	edge	of	 the

steps.

     Her	 thoughts	  darted	to	  Scarlet,	 but	 she	 dared	 not	 turn	 to	  see	Scarlet’s

reaction.

     Another	 form	 emerged	from	the	castle.	Queen	Levana	herself.	 Thaumaturge

Aimery	 followed	 and,	spilling	 out	 behind	them,	 thaumaturges	in	red	and	black,

forming	 a	 line	 of	 haughty	 expressions	and	amused	sneers,	hands	tucked	 into

their	belled	 sleeves.	The	embroidered	runes	glinted	 in	 the	first	 natural	 daylight

they	had	seen	in	weeks.

     For	 the	 first	 time,	 Cinder	 had	 no	 lie	 detector	to	 tell	  her	that	 the	 queen’s

glamour	was	an	illusion.	  She	had	no	evidence	that	this	 was	really	 Wolf,	 either,

and	not	someone	glamoured	to	look	like	him.

     But	she	also	had	no	reason	to	doubt	it.

     She	felt	again	for	 the	strings	of	 power	connecting	her	to	the	men	and	women

she	had	taken	control	of.	She	had	never	controlled	so	many	at	once,	and	her	grip

felt	delicate	and	weak.

     “‘By	  this	 night,	I	 will	  be	your	 queen,’”	 Levana	quoted,	smiling	 her	 wicked

smile,	“‘and	  you	will	  no	 longer	 be	slaves.’	 What	spirited	 words	 from	 the	 girl

who	causes	death	and	chaos	everywhere	she	goes.”	Levana	held	out	 her	hands,

like	 a	peace	offering	  that	 meant	nothing.	 “Here	  I	 am,	girl	  who	 claims	 to	 be

Princess	Selene.	I	will	 not	make	you	 go	in	 search	of	me.	Go	ahead.	Try	 to	take

701
my	crown.”

     Cinder’s	 eye	twitched.	 Her	 pulse	was	 racing	beneath	the	 surface,	but	there

was	calmness	at	the	center	of	 her	mind.	 Maybe	 because,	for	the	first	 time,	 her

cyborg	brain	 wasn’t	 breaking	down	 the	statistics	 of	 the	world	 around	 her.	She

could	guess	that	her	adrenaline	levels	 were	spiking	 and	her	blood	 pressure	was

worrisome,	but	without	 the	red	stream	of	warning	text,	she	didn’t	 care.

     Arm	 still	 raised,	she	spread	her	fingers,	indicating	that	her	people	should	hold

their	attack.

     Levana	 was	 betting	 on	 Cinder’s	  loyalty	  to	 Wolf.	  She	 must	 believe	 that

Cinder	would	 not	attack	so	long	as	he	could	get	caught	in	the	crossfire.	That	 she

would	not	dare	to	put	her	friend	in	 danger.

     But	 she	couldn’t	even	be	sure	he	was	her	friend	anymore.	 Was	he	still	Wolf,

or	was	he	something	else	now?	A	monster,	a	predator?

     She	clenched	her	jaw,	recognizing	 the	hypocrisy	of	 her	thoughts.	He	was	the

same	now	as	the	soldiers	who	 stood	beside	her,	ready	to	 fight	 and	die	for	 their

freedoms.	Whatever	Wolf	had	become,	she	had	to	believe	he	was	still	her	ally.

     The	true	 question	was	whether	or	not	 Wolf,	 her	friend,	 her	ally,	 her	teacher,

was	a	worthwhile	sacrifice	to	 win	this	war.

     “Princess,”	 Strom	growled,	 “she’s	brought	reinforcements.”

     Cinder	dared	not	take	her	gaze	from	Levana,	though	curiosity	 twitched	 inside

her.

     “I	  smell	them	 approaching.	 A	 dozen	packs,	maybe	 more,	 along	with	  their

masters.	We’ll	soon	be	surrounded.”

     Cinder	 kept	her	 expression	composed.	“This	 is	 your	last	 chance,”	she	said,

holding	  her	 aunt’s	  gaze	 across	 the	 courtyard.	  “Proclaim	   before	 all	  these

702
witnesses	that	I	am	Selene	Blackburn,	the	rightful	 heir	to	 the	Lunar	throne.	Give

me	your	crown,	and	I	will	  let	you	and	your	followers	 live.	 No	more	lives	 have	to

be	lost.”

     Levana’s	 lips	 curved,	bloodred	 against	her	pale	skin.	 “Selene	is	 dead.	I	 am

the	queen	of	Luna,	and	you	are	nothing	but	an	impostor.”

     Cinder	waited	 one	full	 breath	before	she	returned	the	smile.	“I	 thought	you’d

say	that.”

     Then	she	let	her	arm	fall.

703
	




                                             Eighty-Two







Cinder’s	 army	 surged	 forward,	 the	 civilians	  pooling	  through	 the	 open	gates

while	 the	soldiers	 ran	for	 the	fence,	 scaling	to	 the	top	 and	hurling	  themselves

into	the	gardens	on	the	other	side.

     The	queen	did	not	flinch.	 Her	thaumaturges	did	not	stir.

     They	had	reached	the	base	of	the	marble	steps	when	Levana	raised	her	hand.

Her	thaumaturges	closed	their	eyes.

     It	 was	a	moment	of	contrasts.

     The	 mutant	soldiers,	 their	 first	 line	 of	 attack,	 fell	 as	 one.	Their	 enormous

bodies	crumpled	to	 the	ground	 like	 forgotten	 toys,	and	a	 hundred	men	howled

from	what	 pain	Cinder	could	 only	 imagine.	She	had	heard	such	inhuman	noises

only	once,	when	 she	herself	had	tortured	Thaumaturge	Sybil	 Mira—driving	   her

to	insanity.

     The	 civilians	 whose	 minds	 were	protected	 by	Cinder	 and	 those	who	 were

strongest	with	  their	 gift	  pushed	 forward,	 heaving	 themselves	 over	 the	 wolf

soldiers	as	well	 as	they	could.	 But	 the	others	began	to	 stumble	and	halt	 as	the

queen	claimed	 them.	Many	  collapsed,	their	 weapons	 thudding	 to	 the	ground.

Those	under	 Cinder’s	 control	 swarmed	 around	 them	and	 over	 them,	tripping

704
over	fallen	bodies,	charging	forward	 with	weapons	raised.

     The	 thaumaturges,	  Cinder	  thought,	 mentally	   coaxing	 them	  toward	  the

distinctive	 red	and	 black	 coats.	Every	 dead	thaumaturge	would	 equal	 a	dozen

soldiers	or	citizens	returned	to	their	side.

     But	the	rush	of	 civilians	 was	met	with	resistance	as	the	queen’s	palace	guards

formed	 a	wall,	 dividing	  the	 queen	and	her	 entourage	from	  the	attackers	who

barreled	toward	them.

     They	 crashed	into	one	 another	like	 a	river	 into	 a	dam.	 Steel	rang.	Wooden

spears	thumped	and	 splintered.	Cries	 of	 war	 and	 pain	 reverberated	down	 the

streets.

     Cinder	 shuddered	and	moved	to	step	forward,	 to	 join	 the	melee	and	cut	 her

own	path	through	to	the	queen—but	her	body	wouldn’t	  move.	Her	limbs	seemed

stuck	in	mud.

     Her	pulse	skipped.

     No.

     She	had	not	expected—had	not	thought—

     Clenching	 her	teeth,	she	tried	 to	 shake	off	 the	manipulation	 that	 was	being

pressed	into	 her	thoughts.	 She	 imagined	 the	sparks	 of	 electricity	  lighting	 up

inside	her	brain,	the	twist	 of	energy	as	Levana	turned	her	own	 mind	against	her.

She	had	always	shaken	it	 off	 before.	She	had	always	managed	to	escape,	to	be

stronger.	Her	cyborg	brain	could	override	the	effects	of—

     A	 shiver	raced	down	her	brain.

     Her	cyborg	 brain	was	broken.

     No.	No.	 How	could	she	defend	the	minds	of	others	when	she	couldn’t	 protect

her	own	thoughts	from	the	queen?

705
     She	gritted	 her	 teeth.	If	 she	could	 free	one	 limb,	 prove	 to	her	 body	that	 it

could	be	done	…

     She	groaned	and	fell	 to	one	knee.	Her	 body	pulsed	with	 unspent	energy	and

she	felt	 the	sudden	snap.	Her	 tenuous	control	 over	 the	citizens	 dissolved.	The

surrounding	howls	of	pain	burrowed	 into	Cinder’s	 ears.

     Within	 seconds,	those	allies	were	taken	from	her	too.

     The	battle	ended	before	it	had	truly	begun.

     Cinder	sat	panting	from	 the	exertion	of	trying	 to	rid	 herself	of	Levana’s	 mind

control,	and	 even	still	 her	limbs	 felt	 heavy	 and	uncoordinated.	The	 screams	of

her	soldiers	 dwindled	 into	 whimpers	 and	groans	of	 the	dying.	 Even	 from	 that

brief	collision,	 the	iron	smell	of	 blood	tainted	the	air.

     Levana	 started	to	 laugh.	Delighted	 and	 shrill,	 the	 sound	was	 as	painful	 to

listen	to	as	the	screams	of	a	hundred	warriors.

     “What	  is	this?”	 said	 the	queen,	 clapping	 her	hands	together.	 “Why,	  I	 had

been	looking	forward	 to	 a	battle	of	 skill,	 young	princess.	 But	it	 seems	you	will

not	put	up	the	fight	 I’d	 been	expecting.”	 She	laughed	again.	Raising	a	hand,	she

stroked	her	fingernails	  through	Wolf’s	  hair,	 a	gesture	that	 was	both	 endearing

and	possessive.

     “There	 is	an	easy	treat	for	you,	my	pet.	Already	caught	in	a	snare.”

     He	 growled,	his	 enlarged	teeth	flashing	 as	he	prowled	 down	 the	steps.	The

guards	parted	for	him	 and	he	stepped	over	the	collapsed	citizens	 as	if	 he	didn’t

even	see	them.

     Cinder	 shivered.	She	 had	lost	 count	of	 how	 many	 times	she’d	 faced	those

vibrant	green	eyes,	both	as	an	enemy	and	as	a	friend.	 But	 never	before	had	she

been	helpless.

706
     She	tried	to	 shake	her	head.	To	plead	with	 Wolf,	 or	 whatever	piece	of	 Wolf

was	left	inside	the	creature.

     “Hey,	 your	queenliness!	Over	here!”

     Cinder’s	 eyes	widened.	Iko.

     A	 gunshot	ricocheted	 through	the	 crowd.	Levana	 stumbled.	Cinder	 saw	the

blood	spray	on	the	massive	golden	doors	and	there	was	a	moment—the	tiniest	of

moments—in	which	 she	was	overjoyed.	She’d	been	shot—the	queen	was	shot!

     But	 it	was	Wolf	 who	 roared.	Levana	had	ducked	behind	him.	 The	bullet	 had

hit	near	his	hip	and	already	his	fine	uniform	 was	darkening	with	blood.

     Iko	 cried	out,	horrified.

     Levana	snarled	and	her	 anger	tightened	around	Cinder	 and	the	crowd	 like	 a

noose.	Her	control	was	strangling.	Suffocating.

     Wolf	 charged,	 not	toward	 Cinder,	but	 Iko.	 She	could	 see	it	in	 his	eyes,	the

animal	instinct.	Attacking	 his	attacker.

     Cinder’s	 stomach	 roiled.	 She	couldn’t	 move.	 Couldn’t	  do	anything.	 Could

hardly	even	breathe.	Her	lungs	burned,	but	she	was	trapped.

     Wolf	 reached	Iko	 while	 she	stood	gripping	 the	 gun,	unsure	what	to	 do.	His

claws	 swiped	  at	 her,	 tearing	  more	 skin	  fibers	  from	  her	 already-shredded

abdomen.	She	shrieked	and	scrambled	backward,	unwilling	  to	shoot	him	 again.

He	tackled	her	to	 the	ground.	His	 jaws	sank	into	 her	synthetic	 arm	and	the	gun

clattered	beside	her.	A	wire	sparked	in	his	mouth	and	he	let	go.

     Cinder	 pleaded	 with	  her	 control	 panel	 to	 wake	 up,	 to	 fight	  back,	 to	 be

stronger	than	her,	to	win—

     “I	 am	Princess	Selene.”

     The	disembodied	voice	fell	 over	the	crowd.	Determined.	Familiar,	 yet	not.

707
     The	dome	above	them	 darkened.	Like	a	 storm	moving	 in,	the	glass	tinted	 to

near	blackness.	On	the	surface,	a	series	of	squares	brightened.	Blue	light	at	first,

before	the	video	began	to	crystallize.

     Levana’s	voice	 screeched	all	around	them.	“You	are	an	impostor!”

     Levana	looked	up.	Her	guards	and	thaumaturges	tensed.

     “And	  I	 am	ready	 to	 claim	 what’s	 mine.	 People	 of	Artemisia,	  this	 is	your

chance.	Renounce	Levana	as	your	queen	and	swear	fealty	to	me,	or	I	swear	that

when	I	 wear	that	 crown,	 every	person	 in	 this	room	 will	  be	punished	for	 their

betrayal.”

     The	 throne	 room	  came	 into	 view,	  seen	from	  Cinder’s	  perspective.	 The

servants	and	the	thaumaturges	had	not	changed	position.	Neither	had	Kai,	in	 the

front	row,	terrified	 and	desperate.

     “That	 is	enough.	Kill	 her.”

     Then	 there	was	Levana,	but	 not	Levana.	 She	was	recognizable	 only	 by	the

red	wedding	gown.

     Beneath	the	glamour,	 her	face	was	disfigured	 from	 ridges	and	scars,	sealing

shut	 her	 left	  eye.	 The	 destroyed	 skin	  continued	 down	  her	 jaw	  and	 neck,

disappearing	beneath	the	collar	of	 her	dress.	Her	 hair	was	thinner	 and	a	lighter

shade	of	brown,	 and	 great	chunks	 were	 missing	where	 the	 scars	had	reached

around	to	the	back	of	 her	head.	More	scars	could	be	seen	on	her	left	 arm	where

her	silk	sleeve	didn’t	hide	them.

     Burns.

     They	were	scars	created	from	burns.

     Cinder	knew	 it	with	 absolute	certainty.

     A	 wretched	scream	sent	a	shock	of	cold	water	over	Cinder’s	body.

708
     “Turn	 it	 off!	 Turn	it	 off!”	 Levana	 shrieked.	She	spun	away	from	the	video	in

the	sky,	grasping	the	arms	and	faces	of	the	thaumaturges	nearest	her	and	forcing

them	to	 turn	away.	 “Don’t	  look!	 Stop	looking!	  I’ll	  have	your	 eyes	ripped	 out,

every	one	of	you!”

     Cinder	realized	 she	was	no	longer	paralyzed	from	Levana’s	 mind	control—it

was	her	own	shock	keeping	her	rooted	to	the	ground.

     It	 was	working.	 The	 queen	was	losing	control.	 She	was	being	 forced	to	 see

the	truth	beneath	her	own	glamour,	and	she	could	do	nothing	to	stop	it.

     The	video	dissolved	into	 a	chaos	of	bullets	and	screams,	blood	and	bodies.

     Levana	stared	out	 at	the	people	 who	were	no	 longer	under	 her	control.	 Her

glamour	was	gone.	She	was	wretched	and	disfigured	and,	in	that	moment,	afraid.

     A	 gun	 fired,	  but	missed.	 The	 bullet	 embedded	itself	  in	 the	palace	 doors.

Someone	behind	Cinder	cursed.	Eyes	widening,	she	swiveled	her	head	around.	It

was	Scarlet,	her	red	hair	like	 a	spotlight	in	 the	crowd.	 She	reloaded	her	gun	and

took	aim	again.

     Levana	stumbled	back	two,	 three	steps,	then	she	turned	and	ran	back	into	her

palace,	leaving	 her	entourage	of	 shocked	 thaumaturges	behind.	 Leaving	 Wolf

too,	still	 hunkered	over	Iko’s	 body,	though	she	was	no	longer	moving.	 His	focus

was	on	Scarlet,	his	deformed	face	twisted	in	recognition	and	horror.

     For	 a	 moment,	 Cinder	  found	 herself	 immobilized	   by	 her	 own	 scattered

thoughts.	She	didn’t	 know	 what	 to	do.	 Iko	 wasn’t	 moving.	 She	didn’t	 know	 if

she	could	trust	 Wolf.	  The	queen	had	 run,	but	 her	 path	to	 the	palace	was	 still

blocked,	and	there	were	still	enough	thaumaturges	to	control	most	of	 the	soldiers

and	the	civilians,	 but	everyone	was	shocked,	motionless,	reeling	 from	 the	video

—

709
     A	howl	silenced	her	racing	thoughts.

     Cinder	gasped,	unable	to	tell	where	it	had	come	from.	She	didn’t	know	if	it

was	one	of	the	soldiers	who	had	joined	her	side,	or	if	it	was	one	of	the	other

packs	Strom	had	mentioned	would	soon	be	surrounding	them.

     The	howl	was	joined	by	another,	and	another.	Then	everything	dissolved	into

chaos.

710
	




                                          Eighty-Three







Standing	on	the	dais	on	which	he’d	 been	crowned	the	king	of	 Luna,	Kai	 crossed

his	arms	 and	scowled	 into	 the	 audience.	The	 leaders	and	diplomats	 from	  the

Earthen	Union	were	stone-faced	in	an	attempt	to	hide	the	anger	lurking	under	the

surface.	Levana	had	 locked	 them	in	 the	 great	hall	 with	 guards	posted	 outside

each	door	along	with	 hundreds	of	Lunar	 aristocrats,	who	smirked	and	tittered	 at

the	Earthens	as	though	they	were	exotic	 animals—adorable	and	fascinating	 and

harmless.

     He	 could	hear	 the	distant	sounds	of	 fighting	  and	stampeding	feet,	 but	they

were	muffled	by	the	thick	 stone	walls.

     The	threat	 of	revolt	 and	the	massacre	of	thousands	of	their	 countrymen	 was

not	enough	to	taint	the	Lunars’	 revelry.	They	 were	acting	as	though	they	were	at

a	circus.	Cheering	when	 the	sounds	of	fighting	  got	louder	 outside.	Placing	bets

on	different	 thaumaturges	and	who	would	 have	the	highest	death	count	 when	it

was	done.	Making	 crude	jokes	about	who	 among	them	would	 be	going	 without

cashmere	wraps	and	blueberry	 wine	next	 season	if	 the	laborers	from	 the	 outer

sectors	didn’t	stop	playing	at	war	games	and	get	back	to	work,	lazy	buffoons	 that

they	were.

711
     Listening	 to	it	 had	Kai’s	 vision	 blazing	 red.	He	 didn’t	 realize	his	hands	had

been	tightened	into	trembling	fists	 until	Torin	 settled	a	hand	on	his	shoulder.	Kai

started,	then	forced	his	 fists	open	and	took	 in	 a	calming	 breath.	“They	 have	no

idea,”	he	said.	“They	have	no	clue	what	it’s	 like	 in	the	outer	sectors,	no	gratitude

at	all	for	 the	workers	that	allow	 them	to	 have	the	luxuries	they	do.	 They	believe

they’re	entitled	to	everything	 they’ve	been	given.”

     “I	 agree,	it’s	 sickening	 and	perhaps	even	unforgivable,”	 said	Torin,	 “but	 we

should	consider	that	 they	have	been	kept	 in	ignorance	 as	much	as	those	in	 the

outer	sectors	have.”

     Kai	 snarled.	He	was	not	in	the	mood	to	feel	sympathetic	toward	 these	people.

“It	would	 appear	the	honeymoon	is	over.”

     “I	 must	 say,	the	queen	does	have	a	flair	  for	 the	dramatic.”	 Torin	 cast	a	sly

grin	toward	Kai.	 “So,	it	seems,	does	her	niece.”

     He	 smothered	a	 twitch	 of	  pride.	 Cinder	 did	 have	a	 knack	 for	 making	 an

entrance.	“What	have	we	learned?”

     “All	  of	the	exits	have	been	bolted	shut	from	the	outside,	and	if	 the	Lunars	are

to	be	believed,	there	are	two	guards	posted	at	each	exit.”

     “Guards	  are	 easily	 manipulated,	  aren’t	 they?”	  Kai	  gestured	 toward	 the

audience.	“These	Lunars—do	 you	 think	 they	could	 control	 the	 guards	through

the	doors?	Cinder	always	said	she	could	detect	people	through	doors,	but	I	don’t

know	 if	 she	could	 also	 manipulate	 them.	But	  if	 we	 could	 get	some	 of	 these

Lunars	to	 manipulate	 the	 guards	into	 unlatching	 the	 doors,	 then	clear	 a	 path

down	to	the	docks	…	maybe	we	could	get	everyone	to	safety.”

     “The	 docks	 would	 offer	  shelter	and	 the	potential	 for	 escape	should	 Linh-

dàren	fail,”	  said	Torin,	 “but	 I	 can’t	 imagine	 these	Lunars	choosing	 to	 help	us

712
anytime	soon.”

     Kai	 blinked.	 It	was	the	first	 time	 he’d	heard	anyone	refer	to	 Cinder	as	Linh-

dàren—a	title	of	high	honor.

     “You’re	  right,”	 he	said.	“They	 won’t	  help	us,	and	they’re	 idiots	for	 it.	 Have

they	even	 stopped	to	think	  why	 Levana	locked	 them	 in	 here	too?	They	 think

they’re	invincible	  because	they’re	under	her	protection,	but	Levana	doesn’t	 care

about	them.	She’ll	use	them	as	quickly	 as	anyone	if	she	thinks	it	 will	 further	 her

cause.”

     A	 distant	rumble	 shook	the	palace,	followed	 by	 yelling,	 throaty	and	furious,

from	 what	 could	 have	 been	 thousands	of	 voices.	 Then	 there	 was	 a	 rain	 of

gunfire.

     Kai	 shuddered.	Even	knowing	Levana	had	gone	to	meet	Cinder	and	whatever

allies	she’d	persuaded	to	join	her,	it	hadn’t	 seemed	real.	A	revolution,	a	battle	…

it	was	 incomprehensible.	But	 now	 there	were	guns	and	people	 were	dying	 and

they	were	trapped.

     “That	  was	  a	 bomb!”	   screamed	 a	 representative	 from	  Eastern	 Europe.

“They’re	 bombing	the	palace!	They’re	going	 to	kill	 us	all!”

     A	 group	 of	nearby	 Lunars	started	to	 titter	 and	cry	 out	 in	 mocking	 fear,	“A

bomb,	oh	stars,	not	a	bomb!”

     Kai	 narrowed	his	 eyes.	He	didn’t	 know	 if	 the	sound	had	been	caused	by	an

explosive	or	not,	but	his	companion’s	fear	had	given	him	 an	idea.

     The	portscreen	Levana	had	thrown	 was	still	 on	the	floor	 beside	the	altar.	He

marched	toward	it	and	gathered	together	the	pieces.	A	 couple	plastic	panels	had

snapped	off	and	there	was	a	permanent	dent	in	the	corner,	but	it	 hummed	to	life

when	he	turned	it	on.

713
     As	 the	screen	brightened,	though,	it	was	jumbled	 and	pixilated,	 full	 of	 black

spots	and	broken	icons.	He	cursed,	sweeping	his	fingers	over	the	screen,	jabbing

at	the	controls.	Nothing	changed.

     “Your	 Majesty?”	 Torin	 crouched	beside	him.

     Kai	 held	up	the	broken	portscreen.	“What	 would	 Cinder	do?	How	 would	 she

fix	it?”

     A	 crease	formed	across	Torin’s	brow.	“You	 want	to	comm	for	 help?”

     “Sort	 of.”	 He	buried	a	hand	in	his	hair,	thinking,	 thinking.	 He	pictured	Cinder

at	her	booth	at	the	market.	 She	would	have	been	surrounded	by	 tools	and	spare

parts.	She	would	have	known	what	to	do.	She	would	have—

     He	 hopped	 to	 his	 feet,	 his	 pulse	 racing,	 and	whapped	 the	 corner	 of	 the

portscreen	hard	on	the	top	of	the	altar.	Torin	jerked	back.

     Kai	 looked	again	and	let	out	an	excited	whoop.	Half	the	screen	had	cleared.

     He	opened	a	comm.

     “How	 did	you	 do	that?”	said	Torin.

     “I	 don’t	 know,”	  he	said,	typing	 in	a	hasty	 message,	“but	you’d	 be	surprised

how	often	that	works.”

     A	 bout	 of	 laughter	 pulled	 his	 attention	 back	 to	the	 audience.	A	  group	of

Lunars	had	 formed	 a	circle	 around	 one	of	 the	 servants	who	 had	been	locked

inside	with	 them.	 The	servant	girl	  was	dancing,	but	 with	 jerky,	 uncomfortable

movements.	There	were	tears	on	 her	face,	even	though	 her	eyes	were	shut	and

her	expression	was	twisted	in	an	attempt	to	 imagine	herself	elsewhere.	The	look

made	Kai’s	heart	shrivel	in	his	chest.

     Somehow	 he	 knew	 this	 was	 not	 an	 unusual	 occurrence	for	  the	 girl.	  He

wondered	if	 she	had	ever	gone	an	entire	day	without	 someone	else’s	will	  being

714
forced	upon	her	limbs.

     “That’s	  not	 a	waltz	 at	 all!”	  a	 Lunar	 cried,	 smacking	his	 companion	 on	 a

shoulder.	“Let	me	have	a	try	at	it.	I	 can	make	her	much	more	graceful	than	that.”

     “She	 needs	a	partner,	 doesn’t	 she?”	 someone	else	said.	 “Let’s	 get	 one	 of

those	Earthens	up	 here	 and	have	 ourselves	a	 bit	 of	 puppet	 theater	while	  we

wait.”

     “Hey—how	  about	 that	sweet	young	 girl	 from	 the	 Commonwealth,	 the	one

that’s	related	to	the	cyborg?	Remember	her	from	the	trial?	Where	is	she?”

     Kai	 heard	a	 whimper.	 Cinder’s	 stepmother	and	stepsister	were	kneeling	 on

the	floor	 between	two	 rows	of	 chairs,	clutching	  each	other	in	 an	attempt	to	 go

unnoticed.

     He	 ripped	 his	 gaze	 away	 and	 clipped	 the	 port	 back	 to	 his	 belt.	 “That’s

enough,”	he	said,	stalking	toward	the	group.	“Release	the	servant	at	once!”

     “Ah,	 it	 looks	as	though	the	pretty	emperor	wants	to	dance	too.”

     The	 cheers	that	 greeted	Kai	 sounded	 cruel,	but	 to	 his	 relief,	 no	 one	 took

control	of	his	body,	 even	as	he	put	an	arm	around	the	servant	girl	and	hugged	her

against	his	 side.	She	 stopped	dancing	 at	once	 and	slumped	 against	his	 body,

exhausted.

     “You	 are	addressing	your	king,”	 he	said,	enunciating	each	word.	He	was	glad

that	he	still	 wore	the	 spindly	Lunar	 crown,	 even	though	king	 consort	was	not	 a

title	 that	 carried	 much	 power.	 He	 could	  hope	that	 not	 everyone	 knew	 that,

though.	“You	  don’t	 seem	to	comprehend	the	 situation.	We	 are	all	 prisoners	in

this	room,	each	and	every	one	of	us.	That	also	makes	us	allies,	whether	we	like	it

or	not.”	 He	 jabbed	a	finger	 toward	 the	back	wall.	 “Once	 Levana	realizes	she’s

overpowered—and	she	is—she	will	 retreat.	And	where	do	you	 think	she’s	going

715
to	come?”

     He	fixed	 his	gaze	on	those	closest	to	him.	 They	were	smirking.	 Humored	 by

Kai’s	outrage.

     “She	didn’t	 lock	 us	in	here	for	our	protection,	 or	because	she	wanted	us	to	go

on	having	 a	big	 party.	She’s	keeping	 us	here	as	her	 reserves.	Once	her	guards

fall,	 you	are	going	 to	 be	her	next	 line	 of	 defense.	She	will	 use	your	 bodies	as

shields.	She	will	 turn	 you	into	 weapons.	She	will	  sacrifice	every	 person	in	this

room	and	she	won’t	feel	a	hint	 of	remorse	so	long	as	she	survives.	Don’t	you	get

it?	She	doesn’t	care	about	you.	All	 she	cares	about	is	having	more	 bodies	at	her

disposal	when	she	needs	them.”

     The	eyes	around	 him	still	  glimmered.	It	 was	 impossible	to	 tell	 if	 his	words

were	having	an	impact,	but	he	continued,	“We	 don’t	have	to	sit	here	and	wait	for

her	to	come	back.	 With	 your	help,	 we	can	get	out	 of	this	 room.	We	 can	all	 get

down	to	 the	royal	port	 where	we’ll	  be	safe	and	where	Levana	won’t	  be	able	to

use	us	to	fight	her	battles.”

     A	 man	standing	not	far	 away	clicked	 his	tongue.	“Oh,	 poor	pathetic	 Earthen

king,	talking	 to	us	as	if	we	are	powerless	little	 children	who	 will	 bow	to	him	 just

because	he	wears	a	crown.	 We	are	not	 allies,	 Your	 Grace,	nor	would	 we	 ever

stoop	to	consider	ourselves	equals	with	your	kind.	 Our	queen	may	have	seen	the

benefit	of	making	 you	her	husband	and	crowning	 you	our	king,	 but	in	truth,	 you

and	your	 companions	 are	 hardly	 worthy	 of	 washing	 the	 spaces	between	 our

toes.”

     The	 room	erupted	 into	 laughter.	The	 man	who	 had	spoken	 smirked	at	 Kai

while	his	words	were	rewarded	with	 shouted	suggestions	of	all	sorts	of	other	vile

things	the	Earthens	were	not	worthy	of.

716
     “Fine,”	 Kai	 growled,	his	tone	icy.	 “Allow	  me	to	persuade	you.”

     Unlatching	 his	portscreen,	he	pulled	up	a	holographic	map	of	Luna,	enlarging

it	to	 hang	over	their	 heads.	The	image	filled	 up	 the	space	within	 the	great	hall,

the	moon’s	cratered	surface	touching	the	lofted	ceilings.	 Kai	adjusted	the	map	so

everyone	had	 a	 good	 view	  of	 Artemisia	  Central	 and	 the	 eight	 city	  sectors

surrounding	it.	  Then	he	 lit	 up	 the	space	fleet	 that	 he	 had	ordered	to	 take	 up

position	in	 neutral	space	earlier	that	day—sixty	 ships	that	had	reacted	swiftly	 to

his	comm.	Sixty	ships	that	were	making	their	 way	toward	Luna’s	 capital.

     “Each	 of	these	Earthen	spaceships	is	carrying	weapons	capable	of	destroying

your	biodomes.	 We	have	enough	 ammunition	 to	reduce	 your	entire	 country	 to

rubble.”

     It	 was	a	lie.	 Not	 every	ship	was	 armed,	but	there	was	enough,	 he	hoped,	to

still	  do	 significant	  damage.	To	  make	 them	 afraid.The	  energy	 in	 the	 room

changed.	The	smiles	became	hesitant.	The	laughter	uncertain.

     “While	  you	 were	 busy	 taunting	 this	 poor	 servant,	 I	 sent	 a	comm	  to	 my

military	 with	 the	 order	to	 open	fire	 as	soon	as	they’re	 within	 range.	But	 I	 will

revoke	that	command	once	my	people	have	been	safely	relocated	to	the	ports.”

     A	 woman	giggled,	but	it	 was	high-pitched	and	anxious.	“You	  would	not	dare

risk	an	 attack	while	 you	 yourself	 are	in	 the	 palace!	You	 and	all	 your	 Earthen

friends	would	be	dead.”

     Kai	 grinned.	 “You’re	  right.	 I	wouldn’t	  attack	Artemisia	 Central.	 But	 if	 I’m

not	mistaken,	most	of	 your	homes	aren’t	 in	the	central	 dome,	are	they?	Most	of

them	are	in	one	of	these	outlying	city	sectors,	right?”

     The	glowing	 ships	in	the	holograph	ticked	closer.	Closer.

     The	 aristocrats	exchanged	looks,	 showing	 the	first	 signs	 of	nervousness.	It

717
was	as	if	  they	 were	silently	  daring	 one	another	 to	call	  his	bluff,	  but	 no	 one

wanted	to	be	the	one	to	do	it.

     “If	 I’m	 not	mistaken,”	 Kai	said,	“we	 have	less	than	twenty	minutes	before	the

ships	arrive.	If	you	ever	want	to	see	your	homes	again,	I	suggest	we	move	fast.”


                                                          *			 *			*

“This	is	 not	good,”	 said	the	nasally	voice	Cress	had	come	to	think	 of,	somewhat

unoriginally,	 as	Sinus,	the	queen’s	moronic	computer	technician.

     Honestly.	 If	Sybil	 had	let	 her	stay	on	Luna,	Cress	could	have	taken	over	this

guy’s	job	when	she	was	ten.

     “This	 is	 very,	very	 bad,”	 he	continued,	 his	voice	 trembling	 with	 impending

doom.

     “Just	make	it	 stop,”	yelled	 a	deeper	masculine	voice.	Cress	was	pretty	sure	it

was	the	same	guard	who	had	been	stationed	outside	the	hall	before.

     “I	  can’t!	 The	 video	already	 played.	 Do	 you	want	 me	 to	unplay	 it?”	  Sinus

groaned.	“She	…	 she’s	going	 to	kill	  me.	The	queen	will	  have	me	executed	for

this.”

     Withholding	  a	 sigh,	 Cress	tried	 her	 best	 to	 roll	 her	 ankle.	 A	 cramp	 was

starting	to	develop	in	 her	left	calf	 and	she	had	a	feeling	it	was	going	 to	come	on

quick	if	  she	didn’t	 have	a	 chance	to	stretch	 the	muscle	soon.	 She	managed	to

move	her	ankle	a	little,	 but	the	small	movement	only	 reminded	her	muscles	how

enclosed	they	were	in	this	tiny	alcove.

     The	technician	knew	it	 was	too	late.	He	knew	he	couldn’t	 stop	the	video	from

playing.	Why	 didn’t	 he	leave	already?

     “Well?”	  said	the	guard.	“Did	she	set	up	any	more	surprises	for	us?”

718
     “What	  more	 do	 you	 need?	That	 video—the	  queen	will	  be…”	  He	 didn’t

finish,	but	Cress	sensed	the	shudder	in	his	voice.

     Having	  seen	 the	 video	  herself	 at	 the	 mansion,	  Cress	 knew	 the	 vision

wouldn’t	 soon	leave	them.	Levana’s	scarred	face,	her	empty	eye	socket,	her	nub

of	an	ear.	It	was	not	a	face	one	looked	away	from,	no	matter	how	they	wanted	to.

It	was	not	a	face	one	forgot.

     And	 now	 they’d	  all	 seen	it.	 Cress	hoped	 Levana	herself	 had	seen	 it.	 She

suspected	it	wouldn’t	be	easy	to	recover	her	glamour	after	a	shock	like	that.

     Maybe	 not,	 though.	 Levana	had	 been	practicing	 her	 deception	for	 a	 long,

long	time.

     “Have	 they	caught	 her?”	Sinus	asked.	“The	 girl	 who	 did	this?	 She’s	…	 she

really	knew	what	she	was	doing.”

     The	   comment	  might	   have	  flattered	   Cress	  if	   she	  hadn’t	   been	  so

uncomfortable.	As	 it	was,	 she	just	wanted	them	to	 go	talk	 about	her	elsewhere.

She	was	still	gripping	 the	handle	of	 the	gun	Thorne	had	given	 to	her,	and	it	 had

imprinted	her	palm	with	 painful	 red	grooves.

     “That’s	 not	 your	 problem,”	 the	guard	 growled.	 “Just	get	 it	 back	to	 normal.

And	get	rid	of	 that	video	before—”

     He	didn’t	 finish.	 There	was	no	before.	They	were	already	in	the	after.

     “I’m	  trying,”	 said	Sinus,	“but	 the	crossfeeds	have	all	been	restructured	and	it

could	take	days	to…”

     Cress	stopped	listening,	 her	 attention	stolen	 by	the	 cramp	in	 her	right	 calf.

She	gasped,	wrapping	her	hands	around	the	muscle	in	an	attempt	 to	rub	out	 the

tightness.

     “What	 was	that?”	Sinus	asked.

719
     Cress	flinched	and	crawled	out	of	 the	alcove.	The	second	she	was	on	her	feet,

she	aimed	the	gun	at	the	technician,	then	the	guard,	 then	back	at	the	technician.

For	as	puny	 as	his	voice	 sounded,	she’d	been	imagining	 a	guy	 not	much	 older

than	her,	but	he	looked	like	he	might	be	in	his	fifties.

     The	technician	pushed	back	his	chair.	The	guard	reached	for	his	weapon.

     “Don’t	  mo—ah!”	  Cress	grimaced	as	 the	muscle	in	 her	 leg	tightened	 again

and	she	fell	 into	 the	desk.	The	corner	 dug	into	 the	hip	 that	was	 still	 sore	from

where	the	statue	had	fallen	 on	her	in	 the	servants’	halls.	 Groaning,	she	reached

down	to	knead	the	muscles.

     Remembering	 the	gun,	 she	started	to	lift	  it	 again,	at	 the	same	moment	 the

guard	snatched	it	from	 her	hand.	Cress	cried	out	and	grabbed	for	 it,	but	 the	gun

was	already	out	of	reach.	Whimpering,	 she	went	back	to	rubbing	 the	muscle	and

raised	the	now-empty	hand	in	exhausted	surrender.

     The	guard	kept	his	own	weapon	pinned	on	her.

     “I’m	  unarmed,”	she	said	meekly.

     He	didn’t	 seem	to	care.

     “Are	 you…”	 Sinus	looked	from	 her	to	the	screens.	“Did	you	do	this?”

     “Yes,	 sir.”	 She	breathed	a	sigh	 of	relief	 as	the	 pain	began	to	 recede.	“And,

can	I	make	a	suggestion?	Because	I’ve	 been	listening	 to	you	talk	 and	I	 have	to

wonder,	if	 you’re	 sure	Levana	is	going	 to	have	you	 executed	for	failing	  to	stop

the	video	…	have	you	considered	joining	the	other	side?”

     They	both	stared	at	her.

     Fisting	 her	hands,	Cress	pounded	at	 the	sides	of	 her	leg.	 She	was	going	 to

have	to	start	 working	 on	her	 exercise	regimes	again	after	 this.	Or	 at	least	 stop

hiding	in	such	confined	spaces.

720
     “I	 mean	it,”	 she	said.	“I	happen	to	know	Princess	Selene	and	she’s	really

nice.	She	wouldn’t	have	you	executed,	especially	for	something	that	wasn’t	your

fault.”

     “I’m	 taking	you	into	custody,”	said	the	guard,	grabbing	her	elbow.

     “Wait!”	 she	cried,	unable	to	tug	away	from	his	grip.	“You’re	not	even	going

to	think	about	it?	You	would	choose	execution	at	the	hands	of	Levana	over	…

not	execution?”

     The	guard	smirked	as	he	pulled	her	away	from	the	bank	of	invisi-screens.

“This	rebellion	is	not	going	to	succeed.”

     “Yes,	it	is.	Levana	will	be	overthrown	and	Selene	will	be	our	new	ruler	and

—”

     She	was	interrupted	by	an	alarm	blaring	from	a	screen	on	the	other	side	of

the	control	center.	The	guard	swiveled	toward	the	sound,	pinning	Cress	against

his	chest,	as	if	she	were	a	threat	with	her	cramping	leg	and	puffy	orange	skirt.

     “Now	what’s	happening?”	the	guard	yelled.

     Sinus	was	 already	at	 the	warning	 screen.	He	 stared	slack-jawed	for	 a

moment,	before	he	muttered,	“I	think	…	I	think	we’re	under	attack.”

     “Obviously	we’re	under	attack!”

     Sinus	shook	his	head	and	enlarged	a	holograph.	Above	the	glittering	domes

of	Artemisia,	a	 regiment	of	spaceships	had	breached	neutral	space	and	were

moving	fast	toward	the	city.	“Not	from	the	civilians,”	he	said.	A	drop	of	sweat

fell	down	his	temple.	“These	are	militarized	Earthen	ships.”

     They	all	 stared	at	the	ships,	watching	their	 blinking	 lights	draw	 steadily

closer.	It	was	Cress	who	managed	to	gather	her	thoughts	first.	She	tried	to	stand

straighter,	but	the	guard	had	too	firm	of	a	grip	on	her.

721
     “That’s	  right,”	 she	said,	 relieved	 when	her	 voice	 didn’t	 tremble.	 “Princess

Selene	has	allied	herself	with	Earth.	If	 Levana	doesn’t	surrender,	we’re	prepared

to	destroy	you	all.”	 She	ran	her	tongue	over	her	parched	lips	and	craned	her	neck

to	look	at	the	 guard.	She	hoped	she	was	convincing	when	she	said,	“But	 it’s	 not

too	late	for	you	to	join	 the	winning	 side.”

722
	




                                         Eighty-Four







Iko	was	beginning	to	 comprehend	why	humans	curled	into	the	fetal	position

when	they	were	afraid.	On	the	ground,	on	her	side,	with	her	nose	tucked	against

her	knees	and	her	one	good	arm	flopped	over	her	head,	she	never	wanted	to

move	again.	Wolf	had	bitten	her	already-damaged	arm	and	she	could	tell	he’d

done	a	fair	amount	of	damage	to	her	abdomen	and	thighs	too,	not	that	they	were

in	great	shape	to	begin	with.

     What	was	it	about	her	that	attracted	razor-sharp	claws	and	teeth?	Bullets	too,

for	that	matter.	This	was	an	android	injustice	that	needed	to	be	dealt	with	as	soon

as	this	whole	revolution	thing	was	behind	them.

     A	 boot	stomped	inches	from	her	head	and	she	cringed,	bundling	 herself

tighter.	She	didn’t	want	to	 get	up.	She	didn’t	want	to	 move.	She	wanted	her

power	cell	to	wind	on	down	so	she	could	wake	fully	formed	once	again,	after

Cinder	had	fixed	her	and—

     Cinder.

     Cinder	didn’t	  have	the	option	 of	 lying	  comatose	in	the	 middle	 of	 her

revolution.	Cinder	was	out	there,	now,	in	danger.

     Whimpering,	Iko	 dared	to	lower	 her	arm	and	scan	her	surroundings.	All

723
around,	war	 cries	 and	screams	barraged	 her	audio	 sensor,	and	 the	rumble	 of

charging	footsteps	thundered	 into	her	 limbs.	 She	peered	through	the	 torrent	 of

legs	and	weapons—first	 the	 wolf	 soldiers,	 then	the	 men	and	women	 from	 the

outer	sectors,	gripping	their	 spears	and	knives.	All	 crashing	toward	the	castle	as

the	thaumaturges	tried	to	take	control	again.

     But	 there	were	too	many,	and	the	wolves	were	too	difficult	  to	control.	 That’s

what	Wolf	  had	been	telling	 them	 from	 the	beginning,	 hadn’t	 he?	The	 soldiers

were	meant	to	be	unleashed	on	Earth—a	scourge	of	death	and	terror.	They	were

not	meant	to	be	prim,	proper,	well-organized	soldiers.

     And	 there	were	so	many	of	them.	More	 than	Cinder	had	brought	 through	the

tunnels.	Iko	grimaced	 as	a	new	regiment	of	 soldiers	charged	into	 the	fray,	teeth

gnashing.	Grabbing	 at	 anyone	who	 moved.	 All	  around	her,	 mutants	 wrestled

with	one	another.	Blades	slashed	across	throats.	Spears	bit	into	flesh.

     “All	  right,	Cinder,”	 she	whispered,	forcing	herself	to	sit	 up.	“I’m	 coming.”

     Her	  internal	  systems	 were	 frayed,	  her	  processor	 a	 mix	   of	 scrambled

messages,	and	she	could	feel	 at	 least	two	 disconnected	wires	 sparking	 in	 her

stomach.	She	picked	her	gun	off	the	ground.

     It	 took	forever	 to	find	 Cinder	as	Iko	weaved	in	 and	out	of	the	chaos	with	 her

bad	arm	dangling	at	her	side.	She	held	the	gun	ready,	shooting	when	she	thought

she	could	 save	someone,	 ignoring	 the	 countless	 scratches	that	 appeared	like

magic	on	her	clothes	and	synthetic	skin.	 What	were	a	few	 more	scratches	at	this

point,	anyway?	For	once	she	was	glad	not	to	have	nerve	endings.	She	just	hoped

her	body	didn’t	shut	down	 on	her	with	all	the	sustained	injuries.

     By	 the	time	 she	made	it	 to	Cinder,	 she	was	out	 of	bullets.	 Thank	 the	stars,

Cinder	was	staying	out	of	 the	fight	for	 once.	Some	of	the	stone	statues	lining	the

724
courtyard	 had	  been	 knocked	 over	  and	 Cinder	  was	 hunkered	  behind	 one,

watching	the	battle	like	she	was	waiting	for	 the	right	opportunity	 to	move	into	 it.

     Iko	 slipped	 down	  beside	her,	 pressing	her	 back	 against	the	 statue.	“Nice

speech	earlier.”

     Starting,	 Cinder	 whipped	 her	 head	around,	 nearly	 taking	 out	 Iko’s	 button

nose	with	an	instinctive	  punch.	She	froze	just	 in	time.	 Relief	 clouded	her	 eyes.

“You’re	 all	right,”	 she	gasped.	“Wolf?”

     “May	 have	anger	management	issues.	Scarlet?”

     Cinder	shook	her	head.	“I	 lost	her.”

     An	 enemy	soldier	came	from	 nowhere.	Cinder	 pushed	Iko	aside	and	shoved

the	soldier’s	head	into	the	statue	with	 her	metal	fist.	The	 statue	cracked,	a	chunk

of	stone	clattering	to	the	ground,	and	the	soldier	collapsed	unconscious.

     “Cinder,	 you’re	bleeding,”	 said	Iko.

     Cinder	 glanced	down	at	her	 shoulder,	where	the	wound	 they’d	 bandaged	up

at	the	mansion	 had	bled	 through.	She	looked	 unbothered	by	 it	 as	she	grabbed

Iko’s	 elbow	 and	tugged	 her	into	 what	 protective	 cover	 the	statue	could	 offer.

“Levana	went	back	in	the	palace.	I	need	to	get	in	there.”

     “Do	 you	think	 Kai’s	 in	there	too?”

     “Probably.”

     Iko	 nodded.	“Then	I’m	 going	with	 you.”

     A	 trembling	scream	drew	Iko’s	 attention	back	into	the	skirmish	 in	time	 to	see

a	woman	from	the	lumber	 sector	turn	her	own	knife	 on	herself	and	plunge	it	into

her	chest.	Iko’s	eyes	widened.	She	couldn’t	 look	away	as	the	woman	dropped	to

her	knees,	staring	openmouthed	at	her	own	traitorous	hands.

     Beside	her,	Cinder	 let	out	a	battle	cry	 and	rushed	toward	a	thaumaturge.	She

725
grabbed	a	knife	 out	 of	 a	guard’s	 hand	right	 before	he	 swung	and	 in	the	 same

movement—

     Iko	 recoiled.	She’d	 witnessed	enough	death	already,	even	if	 this	one	was	an

enemy.

     “Iko,	 come	on!”

     Lifting	  her	head	again,	she	saw	Cinder	leap	over	the	 fallen	thaumaturge	and

keep	running,	 straight	for	 the	 palace	doors.	She	 was	still	 gripping	 the	 guard’s

knife,	but	Iko	 wasn’t	sure	how	much	of	the	blood	on	it	 was	new.

     “Right.	 We’ll	  just	kill	  all	 the	bad	guys.”	 Iko	looked	 down	 at	her	limp	 hand,

shook	it	out	a	little,	 and	watched	her	fingers	wobble	uselessly.	“Good	plan.”

     Bracing	 herself,	she	rushed	into	 the	melee,	weaving	 her	way	 between	those

fallen	 and	 fighting.	  She	caught	 up	 with	  Cinder	 as	she	 sprinted	 through	 the

yawning	doors	of	 the	palace.	Iko	followed	  her,	then	skidded	to	a	stop.	Her	 gaze

traveled	up	and	up	and	up,	to	 the	top	of	 the	massive	goddess	sculpture	centered

in	the	main	hall.	“Whoa.”

     “Iko.”

     She	found	Cinder	panting	 on	the	other	side	of	the	statue,	her	attention	darting

one	way	and	then	the	other.	The	bloodied	knife	 was	still	gripped	in	 her	whitened

knuckles.

     “Which	 way	 do	you	think	she	went?”	Cinder	asked.

     “Down	  to	 the	 spaceship	ports	 so	 she	 could	 run	 away,	 never	 to	 be	 seen

again?”

     Cinder	cut	her	an	unamused	look.

     “Or	 maybe	to	call	for	 backup?”

     “Maybe.	 We	need	to	find	Kai.	 Levana	will	 use	him	against	me	if	she	can.”

726
     Iko	 tugged	on	a	braid,	glad	that,	 no	matter	how	bad	of	 a	shape	her	body	was

in,	her	hair	still	 looked	 good.	“The	 coronation	was	supposed	to	take	place	in	the

great	hall.	We	could	start	there.”

     Cinder	 nodded.	“I	 don’t	 have	access	to	the	 palace	blueprints	anymore.	 Can

you	lead?”

     Iko’s	  internal	 synapses	fired	 for	 a	 few	 moments	 before	 they	 managed	to

compute	Cinder’s	 words.	She	recalled	all	 of	 their	planning	 and	plotting,	 all	 the

diagrams	and	maps	and	 strategies	they’d	 drawn	up.	 She	raised	her	 good	hand

and	pointed.	“The	great	hall	is	that	way.”


                                                          *			 *			*

Scarlet	could	hear	her	 grandmother’s	voice,	 gentle	yet	 firm,	 as	the	battle	raged

around	her.	She’d	already	 gone	through	two	 magazines	and	she	had	seen	more

claw-torn	 abdomens	and	 tooth-ripped	 throats	than	 even	her	 nightmares	 could

have	shown	her.	Still,	the	soldiers	kept	coming.	 She	knew	they	had	one	regiment

on	their	 side,	but	 she	couldn’t	  begin	to	 guess	how	 many	of	 the	 soldiers	were

fighting	 with	her	and	how	 many	against	her,	and	no	matter	how	many	fell,	 more

were	always	there,	ready	to	replace	them.

     Afraid	 she	might	 shoot	an	ally	when	every	 blood-soaked	civilian	 looked	like

an	enemy,	 Scarlet	focused	 on	 the	obvious	 targets.	 The	thaumaturges	 in	 their

maroon	and	black	jackets	were	easy	to	spot	even	in	 the	fray.	Every	 time	Scarlet

felt	her	conscience	creeping	up	on	her—it	 was	a	life,	a	human	life	she	was	about

to	take—she	would	 see	one	of	the	civilians	 put	 a	gun	to	their	 own	 head	or	stab

one	of	their	family	  members	to	death,	and	she	would	pick	 a	thaumaturge	whose

face	was	tight	with	concentration	and	all	her	qualms	would	 disappear.

727
     Hold	 the	gun	with	 both	hands,	her	grandma	would	 tell	her.	I	 know	they	do	it

differently	 in	the	dramas,	 but	they’re	 idiots.	 Line	up	your	 target	 using	the	front

and	back	sights.	Don’t	pull	 the	trigger—squeeze	it.	It	will	 fire	 when	it’s	ready.

     The	 thaumaturge	in	her	 sight	line	 stumbled	 back,	a	dark	 spot	appearing	on

her	red	coat.

     Click.	 Click.

     Scarlet	reached	for	her	back	pocket.

     Empty.

     She	cursed.	Shoving	the	gun	 into	her	waistband,	 she	spun	around,	searching

the	 ground	 for	  another	 weapon.	 Having	  been	so	 focused	 on	  targeting	 her

enemies,	she	was	surprised	to	find	herself	in	a	sea	of	bodies	and	blood.

     A	 drop	of	sweat	slid	down	her	temple.

     How	 many	 had	they	lost?	 It	seemed	like	 the	fighting	  had	just	started.	How

were	there	so	many	already	dead?	Dismay	filled	her	lungs.

     This	was	a	battlefield.	 A	massacre.	And	she	was	caught	in	the	middle	of	it.

     She	released	a	shaky	breath,	wishing	 she	could	release	her	terror	along	with

it.	Her	 grand-mère’s	voice	 had	disappeared	as	soon	as	she’d	put	away	the	 gun.

Now	there	was	only	 the	sound	of	 killing.	  Screams	and	war	cries.	The	stench	of

blood.

     Spotting	 an	axe,	 she	bent	to	 pick	 it	 up,	 and	didn’t	  realize	 until	 she	found

resistance	that	the	blade	 was	buried	 in	 a	body.	 Grimacing,	 she	 shut	her	 eyes,

gritted	 her	 teeth,	and	 pulled	 it	  free.	 She	didn’t	  check	 to	 see	who	  the	body

belonged	to.

     She	 was	 exhausted	 in	  every	 way,	  exhausted	halfway	  to	  delirium.	  Her

attention	 fell	 on	 a	 middle-aged	 woman	 who	 at	 first	 glance	 reminded	 her	 of

728
Maha,	but	older.	The	woman	was	trembling	 from	shock	and	her	arm	was	cut	and

torn—by	 teeth,	Scarlet	guessed—and	she	was	using	 her	good	 hand	to	 drag	an

injured	man	to	safety.

     Scarlet	stumbled	forward,	 gripping	the	axe	handle.	She	should	help	her.

     She	went	to	 drop	the	axe,	but	 then	her	fingers	 twitched,	which	 was	her	 first

warning.	Eyes	 widening,	 she	looked	down	 at	her	hand.	Her	 knuckles	 whitened

on	the	axe	handle,	gripping	it	tighter.	A	 shudder	ripped	through	her	body.

     Someone	else	had	control	of	her	hands.

     But	they	hadn’t	 thought	to	take	her	tongue,	at	least.

     “Get	 away	from	 me!”	she	screamed,	to	no	one	in	particular.	 To	anyone	close

enough	to	hear.	“Run!”

     The	 woman	 paused	and	 looked	 up.	 There	 wasn’t	  enough	time.	 Scarlet’s

disjointed	 legs	stumbled	 toward	 her	 and	she	 took	 the	axe	 in	 both	 hands	and

raised	it	overhead,	her	muscles	flexing	under	its	weight.	“Run!”	  she	yelled	again,

panic	clawing	at	her	throat,	her	mind	 overcome	with	 the	horrible	reality	 of	being

under	a	thaumaturge’s	control.

     Comprehension	filled	  the	 woman’s	 face	and	she	scrambled	 backward.	She

turned	to	run,	but	tripped.

     Scarlet	 screamed	in	 anguish.	 The	 woman	 threw	  her	hands	 up	 to	 protect

herself.	Scarlet	slammed	her	eyes	shut,	pushing	out	tears	she	hadn’t	known	were

there,	and	her	arms	swung	the	axe	toward	the	woman’s	stomach.

     The	axe	came	to	a	jarring	stop,	halting	mid-swing.

     Gasping	around	her	own	heartbeat,	Scarlet	dared	to	look	up.

     A	 form,	 massive	and	 dark	and	covered	 in	blood,	 towered	 over	her.	 Scarlet

whimpered.	In	 relief,	 in	 gratitude,	in	 a	thousand	feelings	that	 didn’t	 come	with

729
words.	“Wolf.”

     His	 eyes	 were	as	 vibrant	 green	 as	ever,	 despite	being	 more	 sunken	 than

before—a	result	of	his	protruding	 nose	and	jaw.

     Scarlet’s	arm	tried	 to	pull	the	axe	away,	but	he	tore	it	from	 her	grip.

     Her	mindless	fingers	changed	tactics,	scrabbling	for	 a	weakness,	though	there

weren’t	many.	Her	thumbs	dove	for	 his	eye	sockets.

     Wolf	 caught	her	easily,	 still	 gripping	 the	axe	while	 his	arms	came	around	to

smother	Scarlet,	pinning	 her	 arms	to	 her	sides.	She	screamed	with	 frustration,

and	she	 wasn’t	 sure	 if	 it	  was	her	 own	  frustration	 or	 that	 of	 a	 thaumaturge

screaming	through	  her.	Her	  legs	jostled	  and	kicked	  and	 stamped,	her	 body

writhing	 against	Wolf’s	 iron	grip.	 He	was	immovable	and	merciless,	bending	his

body	around	her	like	a	cocoon.

     The	thaumaturge	gave	up,	moving	 on	to	control	 an	easier	victim.	 Scarlet	felt

the	release	like	a	rubber	 band	snapping	inside	her	 limbs.	She	shivered,	 melting

into	Wolf’s	 embrace	with	a	sob.

     “Oh	 stars,	oh	 stars,”	 she	cried,	burying	  her	face	 in	his	 chest.	“I	  almost—I

would	have—”

     “You	 didn’t.”

     His	voice	 a	little	rougher,	but	still	 his.

     Planting	her	hands	on	his	chest,	Scarlet	pushed	herself	away	and	peered	up	at

him.	Her	 breaths	were	 still	 rattling	 inside	 her	lungs,	 the	sounds	of	 battle	were

still	 echoing	in	her	 ears,	but	she	hadn’t	felt	 less	afraid	in	 days.	She	reached	up,

hesitant	at	first,	  and	brushed	her	 fingers	 over	the	 prominent	 new	cheekbones,

along	the	unfamiliar	 ridge	of	his	brow.	 Wolf	 grimaced.	It	was	the	same	face	he’d

made	when	she’d	first	discovered	his	fangs.

730
     She	found	 the	scar	on	his	left	 eyebrow,	and	the	 scar	on	his	mouth,	 and	they

were	right	where	she	remembered	them	on	the	night	she’d	kissed	him	aboard	the

train	heading	to	Paris.

     “It	 is	still	 you,	isn’t	 it?	They	haven’t	…	 changed	you?”

     She	saw	 his	jaw	 working.	 “Yes,”	  he	choked.	 Then,	“I	  don’t	 know.	 I	 think

so.”	His	 face	crumpled,	as	if	 he	might	 start	crying,	but	 he	didn’t.	 “Scarlet.	 I	am

so	sick	of	the	taste	of	blood.”

     She	dragged	the	pad	of	 her	thumb	 along	his	lower	 lip,	 until	 it	 collided	 with

one	of	the	sharp	canine	teeth.	“That’s	 good,”	 she	said.	“We	don’t	 serve	a	whole

lot	 of	 blood	 on	 the	 farm,	 so	 we	 were	going	  to	 have	to	 work	  on	 your	 diet,

anyway.”	Noting	 a	smear	of	dried	blood	 on	his	cheek,	she	tried	to	scrub	it	away,

but	quickly	 gave	up.	“Have	you	seen	Cinder?	We	should	find—”

     “Scarlet.”	  His	voice	 trembled	 with	 desperation	and	 fear.	“They	 did	 change

me.	I’m	dangerous	now.	I’m—”

     “Oh,	 please.	We	don’t	have	time	 for	this.”	 Digging	 her	hands	into	 his	hair—

the	same	soft,	wild,	 unkempt	hair—she	pulled	 him	toward	 her.	She	wasn’t	quite

sure	what	a	kiss	 would	 be	like,	 and	it	 was	different	 and	awkward	 in	that	 hasty

stolen	moment,	 but	 she	was	 confident	 they	 could	 perfect	 it	 later.	 “You	 have

always	been	dangerous.	But	you’re	my	alpha	and	I’m	 yours	and	that’s	 not	going

to	change	because	they	gave	you	a	new	jawline.	Now	come	on.	We	should—”

     Behind	 Wolf,	  a	soldier	 let	 out	 a	cry	 of	 pain	 and	crumpled	 to	 the	 ground,

bleeding	from	a	dozen	different	wounds.	Wolf	  pulled	Scarlet	back,	shielding	her.

There	was	blood	coating	his	side,	and	she	remembered	that	Iko	had	shot	him,	but

he	hardly	seemed	to	notice	the	wound.

     She	looked	again,	scouring	the	weapons,	the	limbs,	the	bodies.

731
     Less	chaos	than	before.	The	battle	was	beginning	to	dwindle.

     There	 were	 not	 so	many	 people	 left	  to	 fight	 and	 still	  she	could	 see	 the

thaumaturges	gathered	in	  the	 distance.	Some	 had	 fallen,	 certainly,	  but	 their

numbers	were	holding.	 It	was	too	 easy	for	them	to	 take	control	 of	the	civilians,

and	with	the	wolf	 soldiers	keeping	one	another	occupied	…

     Was	it	possible	they	were	losing?

     A	 controlled	 civilian	 came	running	 at	her,	 a	spear	held	over	his	 head.	Wolf

swiped	 him	 away	 and	 snapped	the	 spear	in	 half	  before	Scarlet	 could	 react.

Turning,	 he	growled,	 and	 yanked	Scarlet	 to	one	 side	moments	 before	a	 knife

slashed	through	  the	  empty	  air.	 With	   a	 single	  throw	  of	  Wolf’s	   fist,	  the

unsuspecting	man	fell	 unconscious.	Though	 he	was	still	 holding	 the	 axe,	Wolf

didn’t	raise	it.	 After	all,	 these	were	their	allies,	even	if	they	had	become	weapons

for	the	enemy.

     The	 more	 that	 fell,	  the	 easier	it	  would	 be	 for	  the	 thaumaturges	to	 take

control	…

     “Stay	 down!”	 Wolf	 yelled,	pushing	 Scarlet	to	the	ground	and	hunkering	over

her	body.	 A	 living	  shield.	 His	 instinct	 was	 still	 there,	 at	 least.	The	 desire	to

protect	her	above	all	else.

     That	was	all	the	confirmation	 she	needed.

     Feeling	 more	safe	than	she	should	have,	Scarlet	stayed	low	 and	scanned	the

chaos	for	any	sign	of	Cinder	or	Iko	 or	Alpha	Strom	or—

     She	spotted	a	wolf	  soldier,	one	 she	didn’t	 recognize,	about	ready	 to	launch

himself	at	them.	“Wolf!”

     Wolf	 snarled,	baring	his	teeth.

     The	soldier	hesitated.	He	sniffed	 once	at	the	air,	looking	from	 Wolf	 to	Scarlet

732
and	back	again.	Then	he	turned	and	rushed	off	to	find	some	other	victim.

     Wetting	 her	chapped	lips,	 Scarlet	placed	 a	hand	on	Wolf’s	  elbow.	 “Are	 we

losing?”	she	said,	trying	 to	count,	 but	it	 was	impossible	to	tell	 how	 many	of	the

wolf	 soldiers	were	 theirs	and	 how	many	 Levana’s.	 She	did	know	 the	 civilians

were	falling	faster	and	faster	as	the	scales	tipped	in	the	thaumaturges’	favor.

     “Not	 for	long,”	 said	Wolf.

     She	craned	her	 head	up.	His	 eyes	were	still	 flashing	 dangerously,	scanning

for	immediate	threats.	“What	 do	you	mean?”

     His	  nose	  twitched.	  “Princess	  Winter	  is	  close,	  and	 …	  she’s	  brought

reinforcements.”

733
	




                                             Eighty-Five







“We’re	 almost	there,”	 said	Iko,	as	she	and	Cinder	crept	 down	the	main	 corridor

of	the	palace.	They	could	still	 hear	the	sounds	of	the	battle	raging	in	the	distance,

but	the	palace	was	quiet	in	comparison.	There	had	been	no	sign	of	 Levana	since

they’d	 entered	and	 Iko	 almost	 expected	 the	 crazed	queen	 to	 jump	 out	 from

behind	a	corner	and	try	to	stab	them	with	her	pointy-heeled	shoes.

     Seeing	Levana	on	 the	palace	steps	was	the	first	  time	Iko	 had	ever	 seen	the

Lunar	 queen,	 and	 her	 scarred	 face	 made	 Iko	 wish	  she	 wasn’t	 immune	  to

glamours.	After	 years	of	hearing	about	the	queen’s	famous	beauty,	the	truth	 had

been	something	of	a	letdown.

     But	 the	truth	 was	out.	 Thanks	to	 Cinder’s	 video,	now	 everyone	knew	 what

lurked	beneath	the	illusion.	Hopefully	 they	would	 be	able	to	find	the	queen	while

she	was	still	shaken	from	it.

     Cinder’s	 grip	tightened	on	her	bloody	knife.	 “Two	 guards	up	ahead.”

     They	rounded	a	corner,	and	she	was	right—two	 guards	stood	in	front	 of	a	set

of	ornate	doors,	huge	guns	already	trained	on	them.

     Iko	 froze	and	raised	her	good	hand	in	a	show	of	innocence.	She	tried	to	smile

sweetly,	but	 with	 her	 missing	 ear	and	a	 twitching	 cheek	 muscle,	she	was	 not

734
performing	at	the	height	of	her	abilities.

     Then	 recognition	  sparked	 through	  her	 processor.	 “You!”	   she	 screamed.

“He’s	…	 that’s	the	guy	that	saved	Winter.”

     Though	the	guard	was	immobile,	 probably	thanks	to	Cinder,	his	face	was	free

to	twist	 with	disgust	 as	his	eyes	traveled	the	length	of	Iko’s	 battered	body,	 dead

wires,	loose	parts,	and	all.

     “And	 you’re	 that	disturbing	robot.”

     Iko	 bristled.	 “The	 correct	 term	 is	escort-droid,	  you	 ignorant,	inconsiderate

—”

     “Iko.”

     She	clamped	her	mouth	shut,	though	her	synapses	were	still	firing.

     Cinder	 cocked	her	head	to	the	side.	“So	 you’re	 the	one	who	killed	 Levana’s

captain	of	the	guard?”

     “I	 did,”	 he	said.

     The	 second	 guard	snarled,	 casting	 his	 glare	 between	 his	 companion	 and

Cinder.	“Traitor.”

     A	 low,	humorless	laugh	echoed	through	the	first	 guard’s	throat—Kinney,	 Iko

remembered.	“You’re	 wasting	your	energy	controlling	 me.	I	have	no	intention	 of

shooting	you.”

     “Fine,”	  Cinder	drawled,	though	 Iko	could	 tell	 she	didn’t	 fully	 trust	him.	 “So

long	as	you	don’t	 try	to	 harm	us,	I	have	no	reason	to	manipulate	you.”	 It	 wasn’t

a	real	concession.	If	he	tried	anything,	Iko	knew	Cinder	 could	stop	him.

     The	 muscles	in	 Kinney’s	  arms	relaxed.	 “So	 you’re	 the	cyborg	 that’s	 been

causing	so	much	trouble.”

     “Wow,”	  Iko	mused.	“He’s	 pretty	and	smart.”

735
     His	 wrinkling	  nose	made	her	wonder	if	 she	was	starting	 to	overdo	it	 on	 the

sarcasm,	but	 her	 smarting	 ego	 made	her	 irate.	 She’d	 gotten	 used	 to	 people

looking	at	 her	like	she	was	human.	Not	 only	 human,	but	beautiful.	 But	now	 she

was	stuck	with	a	flopping	 arm	and	shredded	skin	tissue	and	a	missing	ear,	and	all

this	guard	saw	was	a	broken	machine.

     Not	that	his	opinion	 mattered.	He	was	clearly	a	jerk.

     Except	for	 the	whole	saving-Winter’s-life	  thing,	which	 was	probably	a	fluke.

     “Is	 Levana	in	there?”	Cinder	asked,	gesturing	to	the	barred	doors.

     “No,	 just	 the	coronation	guests.	Our	orders	were	to	 contain	them	until	 either

the	 queen	 or	 a	  thaumaturge	 retrieves	 them—I	  suspect	 she’s	  preparing	 to

slaughter	all	the	Earthens	if	you	don’t	surrender.”

     “Sounds	like	 her,”	 said	Cinder,	 “but	 I	doubt	she	has	the	strength	to	 glamour

so	many	 people	at	 once	right	  now.	 Otherwise,	I	  think	 she	would	 have	 come

straight	here.”

     Kinney	 frowned,	  speculative.	He	 wouldn’t	  have	seen	the	 video.	He	 didn’t

know	that	the	truth	beneath	Levana’s	glamour	had	been	revealed.

     “Where	 else	 would	 she	go?”	 asked	Cinder.	 “If	  she	was	 trying	 to	 lure	 me

somewhere,	somewhere	she	feels	safe	and	powerful.”

     He	shrugged.	“The	throne	room,	I	 guess.”

     Cinder’s	 jaw	 flexed.	 “That’s	 where	the	 feast	was	the	 other	night?	 With	 the

balcony	over	the	lake?”

     Kinney	 had	started	to	 nod	when	 the	second	guard	reeled	his	head	back	 and

spat.	Literally	spat	on	this	gorgeous	tile	floor.

     “Oh!”	  Iko	cried.	“You	 heathen!”

     “When	 she	catches	you,”	 the	 guard	snarled,	“my	  queen	will	 eat	your	 heart

736
with	salt	and	pepper.”

     “Well,”	   said	  Cinder,	 unconcerned,	 “my	  heart	 is	  half	  synthetic,	 so	 it’ll

probably	give	her	indigestion.”

     Kinney	  looked	 almost	 amused.	“We	 guards	 tend	 to	 be	treated	 well	 here.

You’ll	 find	 that	a	lot	 of	 us	will	 stay	loyal	 to	Her	 Ma—to	 Levana.”	 The	queen’s

given	name	was	awkward	and	Iko	wondered	if	he’d	 ever	said	it	before.

     “Why	 aren’t	you?”	 Cinder	asked.

     “Something	 tells	 me	 I’m	 going	 to	 like	 your	 offer	 more.”	 His	 gaze	slipped

toward	Iko.	“Even	 if	you	 do	keep	strange	company.”

     She	huffed.

     Stepping	forward,	 Cinder	disarmed	the	second	guard,	taking	 his	handgun	for

herself.	“Maybe	 when	this	is	 over	I	can	convince	 them	that	I	 intend	to	treat	you

pretty	well	too.”

     Cinder	 turned,	and	Iko	 could	make	out	the	 conflict	 warring	 across	her	facial

muscles.	“Stay	with	 Kai.	In	 case	she	does	send	a	thaumaturge	after	them,	I	want

someone	there	who	 can’t	 be	controlled.	 And	 try	 to	 get	him	 and	 any	Earthens

away	from	here.”	She	inhaled	sharply.	“I’m	  going	after	Levana.”

     “No,	 wait,”	 said	Iko.	“I	 should	come	with	 you.”

     Ignoring	 her,	 Cinder	jutted	 a	finger	 toward	 Kinney.	 “If	  you’re	 loyal	 to	me,

then	you’ll	 be	loyal	to	the	Earthen	emperor.	Protect	him	with	 your	life.”

     The	guard	hesitated,	but	then	brought	a	fist	to	his	heart.

     Her	new	gun	in	 one	hand	and	her	knife	in	the	other,	Cinder	turned	and	started

running	back	the	direction	they’d	 come	from.

     “Cinder,	 wait!”	 Iko	 yelled.

     “Stay	 with	Kai!”

737
     “But	 …	be	careful!”

     When	Cinder	 turned	the	corner,	Iko	 swiveled	 back	to	the	two	 guards,	just	as

the	second	guard	realized	he	had	control	 of	his	 body	again.	Gaze	darkening,	he

lifted	the	gun,	aiming	 for	Iko.

     Kinney	 clubbed	him	 over	the	head	with	the	butt	 of	his	own	 rifle.	 Iko	jumped

back	as	the	guard	sprawled	face-first	on	the	ground.

     “I	 feel	like	 I	should	be	going	with	 her,”	said	Kinney.

     Snarling,	Iko	 stepped	over	the	fallen	guard	and	jabbed	a	finger	at	his	chest.	“I

have	known	her	a	lot	 longer	than	you	have,	mister,	 and	if	 there’s	one	of	us	who

should	be	going	with	her,	it’s	 me.	Now	open	these	doors.”

     One	eyebrow—dark	 and	 thick—shot	 upward.	She	could	 see	him	 struggling

to	say	something,	or	 not	say	 something.	He	gave	 up	and	turned	away,	 shoving

the	wooden	board	through	the	handles.	He	hauled	open	the	door.

     Iko	 took	two	steps	into	the	great	hall	and	froze.

     The	 room	 was	 not	 filled	  with	 hundreds	 of	 Lunar	 aristocrats	 and	Earthen

leaders	and	her	handsome	emperor.	In	fact,	 only	a	 few	dozen	vibrantly	  dressed

Lunars	stood	at	the	 far	end	of	 the	room.	 The	rest	of	 the	floor	 was	 littered	with

chairs,	many	of	 them	 on	their	 sides	so	there	was	 hardly	 any	space	to	walk	 in,

making	it	difficult	  to	traverse.

     “He	 made	us!”	  a	Lunar	 woman	 cried,	drawing	 Iko’s	  attention.	“We	  didn’t

want	to	 help	the	Earthens	but	 he	threatened	to	bomb	the	 city.	 Oh,	please	don’t

tell	the	queen.”

     Iko	 glanced	back,	but	judging	from	 the	way	Kinney’s	 mouth	 had	fallen	open,

he	was	as	surprised	 as	she	was.	She	 started	forging	 a	 path	through	 the	fallen

chairs,	and	it	occurred	to	Iko	 that	whoever	 had	scattered	them	had	likely	done	it

738
intentionally,	 to	slow	down	anyone	who	tried	 to	pursue	them.

     As	 they	 got	 closer,	 Iko	  saw	an	 open	 door	 behind	 an	 enormous	altar—a

curtain	pulled	across	it	would	normally	 have	kept	it	hidden.

     “That	 door	leads	into	the	servants’	halls,”	 said	Kinney,	“but	 they	should	have

been	guarded	too.”

     “Oh,	 you	 look	 terrible!”	  the	 first	 woman	screamed,	covering	 her	mouth	 as

she	took	in	Iko’s	 injuries.	 “Why	 would	 anyone	glamour	 themselves	to	look	like

that?”

     Before	 Iko	  could	 process	 an	indignant	  response,	Kinney	  said,	 “Emperor

Kaito	is	taking	 the	other	Earthens	to	the	ports?”

     The	 Lunars	nodded,	a	 few	pointing	  to	the	open	 door.	“That	 way,”	  said	the

offensive	woman.	“You	 can	catch	them	if	you	 hurry.	And	 don’t	forget	 to	tell	Her

Majesty	that	we	stayed	behind!”

     They	ignored	her	and	barreled	toward	the	door.

     Iko	 started	to	look	up	the	most	direct	route	to	the	ports,	but	it	became	obvious

that	Kinney	 knew	 which	 way	 to	 go,	so	 she	allowed	 him	 to	lead.	 They	hadn’t

been	running	for	long	before	her	audio	sensor	picked	up	on	voices	echoing	down

the	corridor.

     They	 turned	a	 corner	and	 Iko	 saw	the	source	 of	 the	noise	up	 ahead—here

were	the	hundreds	of	Lunar	aristocrats,	staggered	in	a	messy	line,	waiting	to	pass

through	a	 doorway	 into	 a	 stairwell	 that	 would	 lead	 them	down,	 down	 to	 the

sublevels	beneath	the	palace.

     Among	 the	chatter,	her	audio	input	recognized	a	voice.

     Kai.

     She	picked	 up	her	 speed.	The	Lunars,	 who	 didn’t	 notice	 her	until	 she	was

739
right	behind	them,	cried	out	with	 surprise,	many	throwing	 themselves	against	the

walls	to	let	her	pass.

     “Kai!”

     The	 crowd	  shifted.	 Kai	  and	 his	  adviser,	 Konn	  Torin,	 stood	  beside	the

stairwell	door,	urging	 the	crowd	to	move	faster,	to	keep	pace.

     His	eyes	collided	 with	her.	Relief.	 Happiness.	“Iko?”

     She	 threw	 herself	 into	 Kai’s	  arms,	 for	 once	 not	 caring	 about	the	 singed

paneling	on	the	side	of	 her	face	or	the	holes	in	her	torso.	 He	squeezed	her	back.

“Iko.	 Thank	the	stars.”

     Just	as	fast	as	he	had	embraced	her,	he	pushed	her	back	to	arm’s	distance	and

glanced	past	her	shoulder,	but	his	joy	 fell	 when	he	saw	only	 Kinney	at	 her	side.

“Where’s	Cinder?”

     Iko,	 too,	 glanced	back.	Kinney	 was	 sneering	contemptuously	at	 Kai’s	 hand

on	Iko’s	broken	 arm.	She	pressed	her	lips	into	her	own	sneer.	“She’s	looking	 for

Levana.	We	think	she	went	to	the	throne	room.”

     “Alone?”

     She	nodded.	“She	wanted	me	to	make	sure	you	were	all	right.”

     Heaving	 a	frustrated	 breath,	 Kai	 nudged	Iko	 and	 Kinney	 against	the	 wall,

clearing	a	path	for	those	Lunars	still	waiting	 to	descend.

     “We’re	  moving	 everyone	down	 to	the	 spaceship	ports.	It	 will	  be	the	safest

place	while	 the	fighting	 continues	 and	keep	any	more	 puppets	out	of	 Levana’s

hands.”	He	squeezed	Iko’s	 hand,	and	her	 wiring	 buzzed	with	 delight.	 “Do	 you

think	 you’d	 be	 able	to	 open	the	 ports	 to	 let	the	 ships	 out	if	  I	 got	you	 down

there?”

     Kinney	 answered	before	she	could.	“I	know	the	access	code.”

740
     Iko	turned	to	him.

     “I’ve	had	pilot	training,”	he	said,	with	a	nonchalant	shrug.

     Kai	gave	him	an	appreciative	nod,	and	if	he	was	stunned	that	a	royal	guard

was	helping	them,	it	didn’t	show.	“Then	let’s	finish	this,	and	go	find	Cinder.”

741
	




                                               Eighty-Six







Jacin	was	holding	 her	hand,	his	fingers	 strong	and	tense,	like	he	was	 afraid	she

would	vanish	if	 he	loosened	his	grip.	They	emerged	with	 the	flood	 of	people	out

of	the	maglev	 tunnels	into	Artemisia	 Central.	 Winter’s	 childhood	 home.	Jacin’s

too.	She	felt	like	a	ghost.	She	felt	like	a	conqueror.

     It	 had	taken	hours	for	 them	to	traverse	Luna’s	 terrain,	visiting	 dozens	of	 the

nearest	sectors,	spreading	the	word	of	Selene’s	survival	and	the	call	 to	arms	and

asking	the	 people	 to	 stand	with	  them.	 It	 had	taken	 less	 coercing	than	 she’d

expected.	Already	  spurred	 on	 by	 the	 first	  video	  Cinder	 had	 broadcast	 and

incensed	by	Levana’s	attempt	to	have	the	princess	murdered—again—the	people

were	in	 a	frenzy	 by	the	 time	Jacin	 and	Winter	 arrived	 to	tell	 them	 their	news.

Many	were	already	on	their	way	to	the	capital.

     No	sooner	had	she	and	Jacin	broken	onto	the	surface	than	the	people	took	off

sprinting	toward	 the	palace,	roaring	and	gripping	 their	 weapons.	Winter	 tried	to

keep	pace	 with	 them,	 but	 Jacin’s	 grip	 tightened	 and	 pulled	 her	 to	 the	 side,

keeping	her	sheltered	from	the	teeming	crowd.

     The	 courtyard	in	 front	 of	 the	palace	was	 already	a	graveyard,	 though	there

were	still	 people	struggling	 to	 go	on	 fighting.	 A	 battalion	 of	thaumaturges	and

742
countless	wolf	soldiers	wasted	no	time	 launching	themselves	at	the	new	arrivals,

and	those	brave	war	cries	from	the	front	 lines	were	 quickly	 turned	into	screams.

There	were	more	coming	still,	 pouring	out	of	 the	tunnels	and	into	the	streets,	and

Winter	recognized	many	of	 her	own	soldiers	trying	 to	rip	the	mutants	away	from

their	 allies.	 Confusion	  reigned.	 Thaumaturge-controlled	 civilians	  turned	 into

enemies,	and	it	was	sometimes	impossible	to	tell	which	of	 the	wolf	soldiers	 were

on	their	side.

     Claws	ripping	 open	a	person’s	chest.

     A	 bullet	tearing	through	the	side	of	a	woman’s	face.

     A	 spear	impaling	a	man’s	abdomen.

     Howls	 of	pain	 and	victory,	 indistinguishable.	 The	tangy	smell	 of	blood.	 Still

the	people	came	and	came	and	came.	The	people	she	had	brought	there.

     Winter’s	 head	rang	with	 it	 all.	 Her	feet	 were	rooted	to	 the	ground.	 She	was

glad	Jacin	had	stopped	her.

     “The	 palace	will	 be	soaked	through	with	blood,”	 she	whispered.	“The	 waters

of	Artemisia	 Lake	will	 run	red,	and	even	the	Earthens	will	see	it.”

     Jacin’s	eyes	flashed	with	alarm.	“Winter?”

     She	barely	heard	Jacin	over	the	din	inside	her	skull.	Prying	herself	away	from

him,	 she	stumbled	 forward	  and	collapsed	 over	 the	 body	 of	 one	 of	 the	 wolf

soldiers.	There	 was	a	 familiarity	  to	 the	 set	of	 his	 jaw,	 the	 dead	eyes	staring

upward.

     Brushing	 a	 lock	 of	 bloodstained	 hair	 away	 from	 the	 man’s	 brow,	 Winter

began	to	wail.

     It	 was	Alpha	Strom.

     And	 it	was	her	fault,	her	fault	 he	was	here.	She	had	asked	him	to	fight	for	her

743
and	now	he	was	dead	and—

     Jacin	took	her	elbow.	“Winter,	  what	are	you	doing?”

     She	 collapsed,	sobbing	 over	 Strom’s	 body.	  “I’m	  dying,”	  she	whimpered,

digging	her	fingers	into	 the	filth-crusted	fabric	 of	Strom’s	 shirt.

     Jacin	cursed.	“I	 knew	 this	was	a	bad	idea.”	 He	tugged	at	her,	but	 she	ripped

her	arm	away	and	scanned	the	raging	battle	around	them.

     “I	  am	destroyed,”	 she	said.	Tears	were	 on	her	 cheeks,	mixing	 with	  all	 the

blood.	“I	 do	not	 know	 that	even	a	sane	person	could	recover	from	 this.	So	how

can	I?”

     “Precisely	 why	 we	should	 leave.	Come	 on.”	This	 time	 he	didn’t	 give	 her	a

choice,	just	hooked	his	 hands	under	her	arms	and	hauled	her	to	her	feet.	Winter

slid	against	him,	 allowing	  him	to	 fit	 her	to	 his	body.	 A	 surprising	cheer	 called

her	attention	  toward	 the	 palace	and	 she	 saw	the	 thaumaturges	 fleeing	 back

inside.	Many	had	fallen	 and	were	lying	 dead	or	dying	 on	the	palace	stairs.	They

were	overwhelmed.	There	were	too	many	people	now	for	 the	queen’s	minions	to

hold	their	own,	just	as	Cinder	had	hoped.

     Armies	 were	falling—on	 both	sides.

     So	many	deaths.

     Spurred	 on	 by	 their	  victory,	  the	 people	rushed	 the	 palace,	 streaming	 in

through	the	enormous	doors,	chasing	the	thaumaturges.

     Winter	 spotted	a	flash	of	vivid	 red	hair	and	her	heart	leaped.

     “Scarlet!”	  she	screamed,	struggling	 against	Jacin,	 though	he	held	 her	firm.

“No,	 Scarlet!	Don’t	 go	 in	there!	 The	walls	 are	bleeding!”	 Her	word	 turned	into

shudders,	but	it	worked.	 Scarlet	had	frozen	 and	turned.	She	searched	the	crowd

for	the	source	of	her	name.

744
     Jacin	dragged	Winter	 beneath	the	overhang	of	 a	dress	shop	and	pressed	her

into	the	alcove.

     “It’s	  not	safe!”	  Winter	 screamed,	reaching	past	him	 for	 her	friend,	 but	 she

could	no	longer	see	Scarlet	in	the	swarm.	She	met	Jacin’s	panicked	eyes.	“It	isn’t

safe	in	there.	The	walls	…	the	blood.	 She’ll	 be	hurt	and	she’ll	die	and	they’re	 all

going	to	die.”

     “All	   right,	 Winter.	  Calm	 down,”	  he	 said,	smoothing	 back	 Winter’s	  hair.

“Scarlet	is	strong.	She’ll	 be	all	right.”

     She	whimpered.	 “It	 isn’t	 just	 Scarlet.	Everyone	is	 going	to	 die,	and	nobody

knows,	nobody	 sees	it	 but	me—”	  Her	 voice	 cracked	and	she	started	 sobbing.

Hysterical.	She	started	to	collapse,	but	Jacin	caught	her	and	held	her	against	him,

letting	her	cry	 against	his	chest.	“I’m	 going	to	lose	them	all.	 They’ll	 be	drowned

in	their	own	blood.”

     The	sounds	of	fighting	 were	distant	and	muffled	 now	within	 the	palace	walls,

replaced	in	 the	 streets	and	 courtyard	 with	  the	 moans	of	 death	 and	bloodied

coughing.	 Winter’s	  vision	 was	 blurred	 as	 she	peered	 over	 Jacin’s	 shoulder.

Mostly	 bodies	and	blood,	but	also	some	stragglers.	A	 few	dozen	people	picking

their	way	 through	the	 destruction.	Trying	 to	 tend	to	 those	who	were	 still	 alive.

Pulling	 bodies	off	 other	bodies.	A	 girl	 in	 an	apron—surprisingly	 clean—pulled

the	buttons	off	one	of	the	thaumaturges’	black	coats.

     “I	 should	have	left	you	with	 the	lumberjacks,”	 Jacin	muttered.

     The	girl	 in	 the	apron	noticed	 them,	startled,	then	 scampered	off	to	the	 other

side	of	 the	 courtyard	 to	rifle	  through	 some	other	 victims’	  pockets.	A	 servant

from	the	city,	Winter	 guessed,	though	she	didn’t	recognize	her.

     “I	 could	have	been	you,”	 Winter	whispered	after	 her.	Jacin’s	fingers	dug	into

745
her	back.	“The	 lowly	 daughter	of	 a	guard	and	a	seamstress.	I	should	have	been

her,	scavenging	for	scraps.	Not	royalty.	Not	this.”

     Sandwiching	 Winter’s	  face	in	 both	hands,	Jacin	 forced	 her	gaze	up	 to	his.

“Hey,”	  he	 said,	 somehow	 stern	 and	 gentle	 at	 the	 same	 time.	 “You’re	   my

princess,	right?	You	 were	always	 going	to	 be	my	princess,	 no	matter	what	 you

were	born,	no	matter	who	your	dad	married.”

     Her	 eyes	misted.	Reaching	up,	she	folded	 her	fingers	over	 Jacin’s	forearms.

“And	 you	are	always	my	guard.”

     “That’s	  right.”	 The	 faintest	touch.	 His	 calloused	thumb	 against	her	temple.

Winter’s	whole	 body	quivered.	“Come	 on.	I’m	getting	 you	out	of	here.”

     He	started	to	 pull	away,	 but	she	dug	her	fingertips	 into	 his	arms.	“You	 need

to	help	Selene	and	Scarlet	and	the	others.”

     “No.	 Either	 she’s	winning	 or	she’s	losing.	My	 presence	won’t	 sway	it	at	this

point.	But	you—I	 can	take	care	of	you.	For	once.”

     “You	 always	take	care	of	me.”

     His	lips	 tightened	and	his	attention	dipped	toward	 her	scars,	before	he	looked

away	altogether.	 He	 was	about	 to	 speak	again	 when	Winter’s	  eye	caught	 on

movement.

     The	servant	in	her	apron	had	sneaked	up	on	them	and	now	had	an	empty	look

in	her	face.	She	raised	a	bloodied	knife	over	her	head.

     Winter	 gasped	and	 yanked	 Jacin	to	 the	 side.	The	 tip	 of	 the	 knife	 slashed

through	the	back	of	 his	arm,	ripping	 through	 his	shirt.	 Snarling,	he	spun	to	face

the	attacker	and	grabbed	her	wrist	before	she	could	swipe	at	him	again.

     “Don’t	  hurt	her!”	 Winter	screamed.	“She’s	being	manipulated!”

     “I	 noticed,”	 he	growled,	 prying	 the	woman’s	 fingers	 back	until	 she	dropped

746
the	knife.	It	landed	with	 a	clatter	on	the	stone	ground.	Jacin	shoved	her	away	and

she	fell,	collapsing	on	her	side.

     In	the	same	movement,	Jacin	yanked	the	shoulder	straps	that	held	his	gun	and

knife	 over	 his	head	 and	threw	 them	 as	hard	 as	he	could	 toward	 the	 obstacle

course	of	fallen	 bodies.	Before	they	 could	be	used	against	him.	 Before	his	 own

hands	could	turn	the	weapons	against	him.

     “I	 hope	you	don’t	think	 that	will	 make	a	difference.”

     Whimpering,	 Winter	 pressed	herself	back	into	the	doorway.

     Aimery.	  He	 was	 standing	in	  the	 street—not	 smiling.	 For	 once,	 not	 even

pretending	to	smile.	Not	smug	or	cruel	or	taunting.

     He	looked	unhinged.

     The	servant	girl,	 released	from	his	control,	scrambled	away	on	 her	hands	and

knees	and	 escaped	as	fast	 as	she	 could	 into	 an	 alleyway.	  Winter	 heard	 her

crawling	turn	 into	the	hurried	 beat	of	running.	Aimery	 let	her	go.	 He	didn’t	 even

look	at	her.

     Jacin	placed	 himself	 between	Winter	 and	 Aimery,	 though	 she	didn’t	 know

why.	Aimery	  could	 have	forced	Jacin	 to	move	 aside	with	 a	tiny	 little	  thought.

Aimery	could	 toy	with	 them	as	easily	as	pawns	on	the	queen’s	game	board.

     “As	 you	are	useless	with	your	own	gift,”	  Aimery	 drawled,	dark	eyes	burning,

“perhaps	you	 do	not	 understand	that	we	 do	not	 require	guns	 and	knives	 to	do

damage.	When	you	have	 been	given	the	 power	that	 I	have,	 all	the	 world	 is	an

armory,	and	everything	in	it	 a	weapon.”

     Aimery	 tucked	his	hands	into	his	sleeves,	although	he	was	lacking	his	normal

composure.	His	expression	was	frazzled	and	angry.

     “You	  could	 be	strangled	with	  your	own	 belt,”	  he	continued,	 still	 speaking

747
slowly.	 “You	 could	impale	 yourself	with	 a	serving	 fork.	You	 could	plunge	 your

own	thumbs	into	your	eye	sockets.”

     “You	  think	 I	don’t	 know	 the	 sort	of	 things	you	 can	do?”	 Jacin’s	 body	was

taut,	but	Winter	didn’t	 think	 Aimery	 had	taken	control	of	him.

     Not	yet.

     But	he	would.

     There	was	Aimery’s	  nightmare	smile,	 but	it	 was	crossed	with	 a	snarl.	“You

are	as	inferior	to	me	as	a	rat.”	His	 attention	switched	to	 Winter.	His	 lip	curled	 in

disgust.	“Yet	she	still	 made	her	choice,	didn’t	she?”

     Winter’s	  heart	 pummeled	 against	 her	 rib	 cage,	 Aimery’s	  words	 echoing

inside	her	frazzled	skull.	Strangle.	Impale.	 Plunge.

     He	would.	 Not	yet.	But	he	would.

     A	 chill	crawled	 over	her	skin	from	the	pure	hatred	she	saw	in	Aimery’s	 face.

     “You	 should	have	accepted	me	when	you	had	the	chance,”	he	said.

     She	tried	 to	swallow,	 but	her	 saliva	felt	 like	 paste.	“I	 could	have,”	 she	said,

“but	it	 would	have	been	no	more	real	than	the	visions	that	plague	me.”

     “So	you	 chose	a	pathetic	guard.”

     Her	lips	 quivered.	“You	 don’t	understand.	He	is	the	only	thing	that	is	real.”

     Aimery’s	  expression	darkened.	“And	  soon	he	will	  be	dead,	little	 princess.”

He	spat	the	title	like	 an	insult.	“Real	 or	not,	I	 will	 have	you.	If	 not	as	a	wife	or	 a

willing	 mistress,	then	as	a	possession	to	be	displayed	in	a	pretty	bejeweled	case.”

His	eyes	took	on	a	hint	 of	madness.	“I	have	waited	too	 many	years	to	let	you	go

now.”

     Jacin’s	 back	was	 to	 Winter,	 his	 shoulders	knotted.	 A	 line	 of	 blood	 curled

down	his	elbow	 and	dripped	along	his	wrist.	 Splattered	to	the	ground	below.	 He

748
was	powerless	to	do	anything	but	stand	there	and	say	cold	and	callous	things	and

hope	no	one	detected	how	afraid	and	frustrated	he	really	was.

     But	Winter	 knew.	She	had	lived	her	life	 with	that	fear	too.

     Aimery	 looked	pleased	as	he	focused	again	on	Jacin.	“I	have	been	waiting	for

this	since	you	 were	brought	 before	the	court.	 I	should	 have	watched	you	 bleed

on	the	throne	room	floor	that	day.”

     Winter	 convulsed.

     “That	 must	have	been	such	a	disappointment	for	you,”	said	Jacin.

     “It	  was,”	 agreed	Aimery,	  “but	  I	 do	 think	 I	 will	  enjoy	 this	 moment	 even

more.”	His	 cheek	twitched.	“How	 shall	it	 be	done?	By	my	hand?	By	your	own?”

His	eyes	glistened.	 “By	 hers?	Ah—how	  inconsolable	she	would	 be	then,	to	 be

the	instrument	of	 her	own	beloved’s	 death.	Perhaps	I	will	 have	her	bash	in	your

skull	with	 a	rock.	Perhaps	I	will	have	her	choke	you	with	 her	pretty	fingers.”

     Nausea	rolled	over	her.

     Jacin—

     Jacin.

     “I	 rather	like	that	idea,”	 Aimery	 mused.

     Winter’s	  hands	stirred.	 She	 did	 not	 know	 if	  they	would	  be	 strangling	 or

choking	or	bashing	or	impaling.	 She	knew	Aimery	 had	her	now	and	Jacin	was	in

danger	and	this	was	 the	end.	There	 was	no	gray	 area.	There	were	 no	winners.

She	was	a	fool,	a	fool,	a	fool.

     Winter	 kept	her	eyes	open	against	the	hot	tears.

     Jacin	turned	 to	face	her	as	her	hands	wrapped	 around	his	neck.	Her	 thumbs

pressed	into	the	flesh	of	 his	throat.	 There	was	a	gasp,	and	if	 he	wanted	to	push

her	away,	Aimery	wouldn’t	  let	him.

749
     Winter	 couldn’t	 look.	Couldn’t	 watch.	 She	was	crying	uncontrollably	 and	the

awful	feel	of	 Jacin’s	throat	under	her	thumbs	was	too	awful,	too	fragile,	 too—

     A	 flash	of	red	sparked	through	the	pooling	tears.

     Scarlet,	creeping	 behind	Aimery.	 Inching	 over	 the	fallen	 bodies.	A	 knife	 in

her	hand.

     Seeing	that	Winter	had	spotted	her,	Scarlet	raised	a	finger	to	her	lips.

     Aimery	 turned	his	head.

     Not	toward	 Scarlet,	but	toward	an	enormous,	roaring	figure.

     Aimery	  laughed,	waving	  one	hand	 through	 the	air.	 Wolf	  was	 steps	away

when	 he	collapsed,	 howling	  in	 pain.	 “I	  am	 the	 queen’s	 own	 thaumaturge!”

Aimery	 yelled,	eyes	blazing	as	he	snarled	down	at	Wolf’s	 twitching	  body.	“You

think	 I	 cannot	 feel	 you	 sneaking	up	 on	 me?	You	 think	  I	 cannot	 handle	one

pathetic	mutant	and	a	weak-minded	guard	and	an	Earthen?”

     He	pivoted	 to	 face	Scarlet.	She	was	still	 half	 a	dozen	paces	away	from	 him

and	she	froze,	her	knuckles	clenched	around	the	knife	handle.

     Aimery’s	 smile	 faded.	His	brow	twitched	 as	he	realized	that	the	bioelectricity

around	Scarlet’s	body	was	already	claimed.

     His	 eyes	narrowed	 and	he	searched	the	graveyard	 they	stood	 on,	but	 there

was	no	one	there	to	be	controlling	  Scarlet.	No	one	who	 could	have	undermined

his	own	powers.	Except	…

     Scarlet	lumbered	closer	 to	him.	 Her	gait	was	stunted	and	awkward.	 Her	arm

trembling	as	she	raised	the	knife.

     Aimery	 stepped	back	and	his	attention	turned	and	locked	on	to	Winter.	 In	the

moment	he’d	 been	distracted	 by	 Wolf—poor,	  tortured	Wolf—he	  had	 released

Winter’s	 hands	and	mind.	 Jacin	was	 still	 rubbing	 his	throat	 and	struggling	 for

750
breath	and	Winter	…

     Winter	 was	staring	at	Scarlet.	Horrified.	 Trembling.	But	 fierce.

     Jacin’s	hand	 whipped	out,	 backhanding	Winter	 across	her	face.	She	crashed

against	the	building	wall,	 but	didn’t	 feel	the	force	of	it.	 Her	focus	was	on	Scarlet,

only	Scarlet,	Scarlet	and	her	knife.

     Winter	 was	 crying	 and	hating	 herself.	She	was	wretched	 and	cruel	 but	 she

didn’t	 relent	as	she	forced	 Scarlet	into	battle.	 Aimery	 stumbled	 back	again	and

raised	his	 hands	 to	 his	 own	 defense.	 Scarlet	hurled	  herself	 at	him.	  Aimery

tripped	 over	 the	leg	 of	 a	 dead	civilian	  man	 and	 sprawled	 backward.	 Scarlet

landed	on	her	knees	beside	him	and	scrambled	forward.	Her	eyes	were	confused,

her	mouth	 slack	with	  disbelief,	 but	her	 body	 was	vicious	 and	determined	 and

sure	as	she	plunged	the	knife	into	his	flesh.

751
	




                                          Eighty-Seven







Reality	 disintegrated.	 The	 world	  was	a	 thousand	 cumbersome	pixels	 tearing

apart,	leaving	black	 spaces	in	between,	then	smashing	back	together	in	blinding

sparks.

     Winter	  had	 made	 herself	 as	 small	 as	 she	could,	  huddled	 in	 the	 shop’s

doorway	off	 the	 main	thoroughfare	 of	 Artemisia.	 Her	own	 shaking	 arms	made

for	a	protective	 shield	around	 her	body	and	her	 feet	were	pulled	 in	tight.	 She’d

lost	a	shoe.	She	didn’t	know	how	or	when.

     Aimery	 was	dead.

     Scarlet-friend	 had	stabbed	him	nine	times.

     Winter	 had	stabbed	him	nine	times.

     Dear	Scarlet.	Vicious,	 stubborn,	weak-minded	Scarlet.

     Once	she	had	started,	Winter	 couldn’t	 make	 it	stop.	Nine	 times.	It	 had	been

years	since	she’d	manipulated	anyone	and	never	with	violent	intentions.	Aimery,

in	his	 determination	to	 subdue	them	all	 with	 his	gift,	 had	not	 tried	 to	get	away

until	 after	the	 second	stab.	By	that	 time	 Winter	 was	already	lost.	 She	couldn’t

make	it	stop.	She	thought	 only	 of	erasing	forever	 that	awful,	 charming	 grin.	Of

destroying	his	mind	so	she	would	not	be	forced	to	wrap	 her	hands	around	Jacin’s

752
neck	again	and	finish	what	she’d	started.

     Now	 Aimery	 was	dead.

     The	streets	were	full	of	 his	blood.	They	reeked	with	the	stench	of	it.

     “What’s	  wrong	with	 her?”	 some	far-off	  voice	shrieked.	 “Why	 is	 she	acting

this	way?”

     “Give	  her	 some	space.”	 This	 command	 was	 followed	  by	 a	grunt.	 Jacin?

Could	it	be	her	guard,	so	near,	always	so	near?

     Jacin	had	been	the	one	to	tackle	Scarlet	and	rip	 the	knife	away,	 snapping	the

hold	 Winter	 had	 taken	 over	 her.	 Otherwise	 she	 knew	 she	would	  have	 kept

stabbing	and	stabbing	and	stabbing	and	stabbing	and	stabbing	until	 Aimery	 was

nothing	but	chopped	bits	of	flesh	and	smiles.

     Winter’s	 head	was	 full	 of	 distraction,	too	 much	to	 comprehend.	The	shop’s

sign	overhead	swung	on	its	hinges.	There	was	a	torn	curtain	behind	broken	glass.

Bullet	holes	in	the	walls.	 Roofs	caving	in.	Glass	shattered	beneath	her	feet.

     “We	 have	to	find	Cinder.”	 The	voice	 was	insistent,	but	terrified.	 “We	 have	to

make	sure	she’s	okay,	but	I	can’t	…	I	don’t	 want	to	leave	Winter…”

     Winter	 arched	her	back	and	clawed	her	hands	into	 her	hair,	gasping	from	 an

onslaught	of	sensation.	Every	inch	of	her	skin	was	a	hive	of	stinging	 bees.

     Arms	 circled	around	her.	Or	 maybe	they	had	been	there	for	a	long	 time.	She

could	hardly	 feel	them	 outside	of	the	 cocoon	she’d	erected,	even	though	it	 was

covered	in	hairline	fractures.	“It’s	 all	 right.	I’ve	 got	Winter.	 Go.”

     A	 cocoon.

     An	 encasement	of	ice.

     A	 spaceship	harness	strangling	her,	the	belt	cutting	into	her	flesh.

     “Go!”

753
     Winter	 clawed	 at	the	straps,	struggling	 to	 get	out.	 Those	same	strong	arms

tried	to	 hold	her	still.	 Tried	 to	 secure	her	thrashing.	She	snapped	her	teeth,	and

the	body	 shifted	 out	 of	 her	reach.	 She	was	pulled	  away	from	  the	door,	 their

bodies	repositioned,	 so	 the	 arms	could	  restrain	 her	without	  being	 in	 danger

themselves.	She	struggled	harder.	Kicked	and	writhed.

     And	 screamed.

     stabbing	and	stabbing	and	stabbing	and	stabbing	and	stabbing	 and

     Her	throat	was	hoarse.

     Maybe	she’d	been	screaming	for	a	long	time.

     Maybe	 the	sound	was	 imprisoned	inside	 this	 cocoon,	trapped	like	 she	was.

Maybe	no	 one	would	 ever	hear	 her.	Maybe	 she	would	 scream	until	 her	 throat

bled	and	no	one	would	ever	know.

     Her	heart	split	in	 two.	She	was	an	animal.	A	killer	 and	a	predator.

     The	screams	turned	to	howls.

     Sad	and	broken	howls.

     Haunting	 and	furious	howls.

     “Winter?	 Winter!”

     The	arms	 around	her	were	unrelenting.	 She	thought	 there	might	 be	a	voice,

familiar	 and	kind,	  somewhere	far	 in	the	 distance.	She	thought	 there	 might	 be

good	intentions	in	 that	voice.	 She	thought	that	 if	she	could	 follow	 the	 sound,	it

would	 lead	 her	 to	  somewhere	safe	 and	 calm,	 where	  she	was	 no	 longer	  a

murderer.

     But	she	was	already	suffocating	beneath	the	weight	of	her	crimes.

     Animal.	 Killer.	 Predator.	And	the	wolves	all	howl,	 aa-ooooooooooh	…

754
	




                                        Eighty-Eight







Cinder	checked	the	gun’s	ammunition,	counting	the	bullets	while	she	ran.	She

was	breathing	hard,	but	she	 didn’t	 feel	tired	 or	 even	sore.	Adrenaline	was

pumping	hot	through	her	veins	and	for	once	she	was	aware	of	it	only	because

she	could	feel	herself	trembling	 with	 the	surge	of	 it,	 not	because	her	brain

interface	was	telling	her	so.

     The	sounds	of	battle	were	echoing	in	the	palace,	dim	and	far	away.	Many

floors	below.	They	were	inside,	she	could	tell.	There	would	be	a	lot	of	casualties,

she	knew.

     She	felt	like	they	might	be	winning.	She	could	win.

     But	it	 would	fall	 apart	if	 she	didn’t	 finish	what	she’d	come	to	 do.	If	 she

didn’t	find	a	way	to	 end	Levana’s	tyranny	for	good,	the	people	would	be	back

under	her	control	by	morning.

     She	took	the	stairs	two	at	a	time.	Her	hair	prickled	on	the	back	of	her	neck	as

she	arrived	in	the	fourth	floor	corridor.	She	peered	down	the	empty	hall	with	its

artwork	and	 tapestries	and	shimmering	white	tiles,	 listening	for	 any	 sound

indicating	an	ambush.

     Not	that	ambushes	came	with	warning	sounds.

755
     Everything	 was	eerie	and	haunted	after	the	chaos	of	the	courtyard.

     It	 was	no	 comfort	 to	 Cinder	that	 she	had	reached	the	throne	 room	 without

incident.	It	 wasn’t	 like	  Levana	to	 make	things	 easy	for	 her,	which	 meant	 that

either	Levana	 was	 so	 distraught	 from	 the	 video	 she	was	 no	 longer	 thinking

straight,	or—more	likely—Cinder	  was	walking	into	 a	trap.

     She	held	the	gun	with	 one	hand,	the	knife	 in	 the	other,	and	tried	to	 calm	her

stampeding	heart.	She	did	her	best	to	come	up	 with	 some	sort	of	plan	 for	when

she	reached	the	throne	room,	 assuming	Levana	was	in	 there,	probably	 with	 an

entire	envoy	of	guards	and	thaumaturges.

     If	 the	guards	weren’t	 already	under	someone’s	control,	she	would	 steal	them

away	and	form	 a	protective	 barrier	around	herself.	 The	moment	 an	opportunity

presented	itself,	she	would	shoot	Levana.	No	hesitation	allowed.

     Because	Levana	wouldn’t	hesitate	to	kill	 her.

     She	found	herself	standing	outside	the	throne	 room	doors,	the	Lunar	insignia

carved	across	their	 surface.	 She	gulped,	 wishing	  she	could	 sense	how	 many

people	were	 inside,	 but	the	 room	 was	 too	 well	 sealed.	Whatever	 lay	 beyond

these	doors	was	a	mystery.

     An	ambush,	common	sense	whispered	to	her.	A	trap.

     Licking	 the	salt	from	 her	lips,	 she	braced	herself	and	kicked	one	of	the	doors

open,	wedging	 inside	 before	it	 could	 slam	 back	 on	her.	 Her	 body	 was	tense,

braced	for	 an	impact,	 a	 punch,	a	 bullet,	 anything	 other	than	 the	 stillness	that

greeted	her.

     Only	 two	people	were	in	 the	room,	making	it	 feel	infinitely	  larger	than	it	had

during	the	wedding	feast.	The	audience	chairs	were	still	 there,	but	many	of	them

had	been	shoved	against	the	walls	or	crushed	in	the	destruction	she	had	wreaked.

756
     The	throne,	though,	 had	not	moved,	and	Levana	was	seated	on	it	like	before.

Rather	than	looking	smug	and	cruel	 as	usual,	she	was	slumped	on	the	enormous

throne	with	  an	air	 of	  defeat	around	 her.	She	 wore	 the	 colors	of	  the	Eastern

Commonwealth	flag	 in	 her	gown,	a	mockery	 of	 everything	Kai	 and	his	country

stood	for.	Her	glamour	 had	returned.	She	had	her	face	turned	away	from	Cinder,

hiding	behind	 her	wall	 of	 glossy	hair,	 and	Cinder	 could	see	only	 the	tip	 of	 her

nose	and	a	hint	of	ruby	lips.

     The	second	person	in	the	room	was	Thorne.	Her	heart	sank,	but	was	lifted	 by

a	slim	 hope.	Perhaps	it	 was	only	 a	Lunar	 glamoured	 to	look	 like	 Thorne.	 She

narrowed	her	eyes	in	suspicion,	not	daring	to	go	any	farther	into	the	room.

     “Well,	  it’s	 about	time,”	 said	Thorne,	 his	voice	 comfortingly	  sardonic.	“You

have	no	idea	how	awkward	these	last	few	minutes	have	been.”

     Cinder’s	 heart	 squeezed,	her	hope	fading.	 It	 was	 definitely	 Thorne	 and	he

was	standing	precariously	close	to	 the	ledge	of	the	throne	 room,	the	one	Cinder

had	jumped	 from.	  His	 hands	were	 behind	 his	 back,	 most	likely	  bound.	 The

glowing	bow	 tie	was	gone	and	his	purple	suit	reduced	to	just	the	dress	shirt,	now

unbuttoned	at	the	 collar.	 There	was	 a	hole	 in	the	 thigh	 of	 his	pants	and	 dried

blood	above	his	knee.	A	lump	beneath	the	fabric	suggested	hasty	bandaging.

     Cinder	 reached	for	 him	with	  her	thoughts,	but	 Levana	had	already	 claimed

him,	holding	his	 feet	as	tight-gripped	as	iron	shackles.

     Thorne’s	 gaze	 swooped	down	 over	 Cinder’s	 bloodstained	 clothes	 and	the

weapon	in	each	of	her	hands.	One	eyebrow	tilted	up.	“Rough	day?”

     Cinder	 didn’t	 respond.	She	was	still	 waiting	 for	 that	 surprise	attack.	A	 shot

through	the	heart.	A	 guard	appearing	out	of	the	 shadows	and	tackling	her	to	 the

ground.

757
     Nothing	 happened.

     No	sound	but	her	own	heavy	breathing.

     “Your	 leg?”	 she	asked.

     Thorne	 shrugged.	“Hurts	 like	 hell,	 but	 it	 won’t	 kill	  me.	Unless	 the	prisons

were	full	 of	 grimy	 bacteria	and	the	wound	 gets	infected,	 which,	let’s	 face	it,	 is

entirely	plausible.”

     Glancing	 behind	her	to	make	sure	no	one	was	sneaking	up	from	the	corridor,

Cinder	took	a	hesitant	step	forward.

     Thorne	took	a	step	back.	One	step	closer	to	the	edge.

     Cinder	paused.

     “Do	 not	come	any	 closer,”	said	Levana.	Her	 voice	was	meek	and	tired,	 a	far

cry	from	the	haughty	glee	with	 which	 she’d	ordered	Cinder’s	execution.	She	still

did	not	 lift	 her	 head.	“I	 suggest	you	do	 not	raise	 your	weapons,	either.	 Unless

you	think	he	is	as	lucky	as	you	are.”

     “I’m	  pretty	sure	he’s	luckier.”

     Thorne	 nodded	 in	 agreement,	but	 said	 nothing,	 and	 Cinder	 didn’t	  move.

Peering	at	him,	she	mouthed	a	single	word—Cress?

     His	 indifference	 dissolved	 and	he	gave	the	smallest	 shake	of	 his	head.	She

didn’t	 know	 if	 this	 meant	that	he	didn’t	  know	 where	she	was,	or	 if	 something

bad	had	happened	and	he	didn’t	want	to	discuss	it	at	the	moment.

     Cinder	 was	 distracted	from	  her	curiosity	  by	 her	 hand	twitching.	  She	was

lifting	 the	gun	toward	her	own	head.

     It	 was	halfway	 there	when	she	gritted	 her	teeth	and	forced	 her	limb	 to	stop.

To	her	relief,	it	 did.

     Snarling,	she	lowered	the	weapon	back	to	her	side.

758
     Levana	 laughed,	but	 the	 sound	came	off	  as	more	 brittle	 than	 charmed.	“I

thought	that	 might	 be	the	case,”	 she	said,	rubbing	 her	 forehead.	“I	 am	 …	 not

myself	at	the	moment.	Though	it	seems,	neither	are	you.”

     Cinder	 frowned,	 wondering	why	 Levana	 could	control	 her	in	 the	courtyard,

but	failed	 now.	 Was	 it	 because	her	own	 mental	 strength	had	been	 too	fragile

then,	while	  trying	 to	 maintain	 control	  of	 so	many	 people,	 or	 was	the	 queen

growing	 weak?	Perhaps	the	 video	 showing	 her	 true	 face	had	 fragmented	her

abilities.

     It	 did	 not	seem	to	 be	affecting	 her	ability	  to	manipulate	 Thorne,	 but,	to	 be

fair,	Cinder	was	pretty	sure	a	Lunar	toddler	could	 have	manipulated	Thorne.

     Levana	 sighed.	“Why,	  Selene?	Why	 do	you	 want	 to	 take	everything	 from

me?”

     Cinder	 narrowed	her	eyes.	“You’re	 the	 one	who	tried	 to	kill	 me,	remember?

You’re	the	one	sitting	 on	my	throne.	You’re	 the	one	who	married	my	boyfriend!”

The	word	 was	out	before	 she’d	contemplated	 it,	and	Cinder	 thought	 it	 was	the

first	time	 she’d	ever	said	it	 aloud.	She	wasn’t	even	sure	if	 it	was	true.	But	 it	 felt

sort	of	right,	except	for	 the	whole	being-married-to-her-aunt	thing.

     But	Levana	didn’t	 seem	to	be	listening.

     “You	  don’t	 understand	how	hard	I	 worked	 for	 all	 this.	How	 many	 years	of

planning,	 of	 laying	 the	 foundation.	  The	disease,	the	 shells,	 the	 antidote,	 the

soldiers,	the	operatives,	 the	carefully	 orchestrated	attacks.”	 She	pressed	a	pale

hand	against	her	temple.	She	looked	miserable.	“It	 was	done.	It	 was	perfect.	He

would	have	announced	our	engagement	at	the	ball,	but,	no—you	had	to	be	there.

Back	from	 the	dead	to	haunt	me.	And	you	come	here,	and	you	ask	my	 people	to

hate	me,	and	you	 show	that	 …	that	 horrid	 video,	 and	fill	 their	 head	with	 your

759
lies.”

     “My	  lies!	 You’re	 the	 one	 who	 brainwashes	them.	I	 just	 showed	 them	 the

truth.”

     Levana	flinched,	 turning	 her	head	even	farther	 away	like	 she	couldn’t	 stand

to	be	reminded	of	what	she	was	hiding	underneath	the	illusion	of	beauty.

     Exhaling	 sharply,	Cinder	stepped	forward.

     Thorne	stepped	back.

     She	grimaced.	So	much	for	hoping	 Levana	was	caught	up	enough	in	her	own

delusions	to	stop	paying	attention.

     “What	 I	 can’t	 understand,”	Cinder	 said,	easing	her	tone,	“is	 how	 you	 could

have	done	that	to	 me.	I	 was	just	a	 kid,	and	 you…”	 Her	 heart	twisted.	“I	  know

those	are	burn	scars	you	have.	I	 have	the	same	scar	tissue	where	I	 lost	my	 leg.

Knowing	 what	it’s	like,	 living	 with	 that—how	could	 you	do	it	to	someone	else?”

     “You	 weren’t	 supposed	to	survive,”	Levana	snapped,	as	if	that	made	it	better.

“At	 least	I	would	have	had	the	mercy	to	kill	 you,	to	be	done	with	it.”

     “But	 I	didn’t	 die.”

     “Yes,	 I’ve	 noticed.	 It	 is	not	 my	fault	 someone	thought	 you	might	 be	 worth

saving.	 It	 is	  not	 my	 fault	  they	 turned	  you	 into	  …	 into	  that.”	  She	 cast	a

halfhearted	gesture	toward	Cinder.

     Cinder	clenched	her	teeth,	wanting	 to	argue	the	point,	but	 she	bit	her	tongue.

Levana	had	been	living	with	her	excuses	for	a	long	time.

     She	stole	a	glance	at	 Thorne.	He	was	 sucking	on	his	 teeth	and	staring	up	 at

the	ceiling.	He	looked	bored.

     Cinder	tried	 taking	a	step	backward,	like	 a	show	of	 peace,	but	Thorne	stayed

where	he	was.

760
     “Who	 did	 it	 to	you,	 anyway?”	 she	asked,	aiming	for	 gentle.	“Who	 hurt	 you

like	that?”

     Levana	sniffed	 and,	finally,	 dared	to	look	at	Cinder.	 There	was	all	the	beauty

glistening	on	 the	surface,	but	now	 that	Cinder	had	seen	beneath	it,	she	couldn’t

unsee	the	 truth.	 Whether	 it	  was	her	 cyborg	  programming	 or	 Levana’s	  own

weakness,	she	could	see	her	as	she	was	now.	Scarred	and	deformed.

     There	was	a	twinge	of	sympathy	in	 her	stomach,	but	only	a	twinge.

     “You	 don’t	 know?”	 Levana	asked.

     “Why	 should	I?”

     “You	 stupid	 child.”	 A	 lock	 of	 hair	fell	 over	 Levana’s	face.	“Because	 it	was

your	mother.”

761
	




                                         Eighty-Nine







The	word	mother	was	foreign	to	Cinder’s	ear.	Mother.	A	woman	who	had	given

birth	to	 her,	but	 that	was	all.	 She	had	no	 memories	of	her,	 only	rumors—

horrifying	tales	that	said	Queen	Channary	was	more	cruel	even	than	Levana,

though	her	reign	had	been	much	shorter.

     “My	 own	 sweet	sister,”	Levana	purred.	“Would	 you	like	 to	 hear	how	it

happened?”

     No.

     But	Cinder	couldn’t	form	the	word.

     “She	was	thirteen	and	I	was	six.	She	was	learning	how	to	use	her	gift,	taking

great	amounts	of	pleasure	in	manipulating	those	around	her—though	I	 was

always	her	favorite	target.	She	was	very	good.	As	I	am.	As	you	are.	It	is	in	our

blood.”

     Cinder	shivered.	It	is	in	our	blood.	She	hated	to	think	that	she	shared	blood

with	anyone	in	this	family.

     “At	 that	age,	it	 was	her	favorite	 trick	to	 convince	me	that	she	loved	me

dearly.	Having	never	felt	love	from	our	parents,	it	was	not	a	hard	thing	to	get	me

to	believe.	And	then,	when	she	was	sure	I	would	do	anything	for	her,	she	would

762
torture	me.	On	 this	particular	 day,	she	told	 me	to	 put	my	 hand	into	a	 fireplace.

When	I	 refused,	 she	made	me	 do	 it	 anyway.”	 Levana	 smiled	 as	she	told	 the

story,	a	deranged	look.	 “As	 you’ve	 seen,	by	the	 time	she	let	 me	go,	it	 was	not

only	my	hand	that	suffered.”

     Bile	 was	filling	 Cinder’s	 mouth.	A	child	 so	young,	so	impressionable.

     It	 would	have	been	so	easy.

     Yet	a	cruelty	 too	impossible	to	fathom.

     Her	mother?

     “After	  that,	 they	started	to	 call	 me	the	 ugly	 princess	of	 Artemisia,	 the	 sad

little	 deformed	 creature.	 While	 Channary	 was	 the	 beautiful	 one.	 Always	 the

beautiful	one.	But	 I	 practiced	my	glamour,	 and	I	 told	myself	 that	someday	they

would	 forget	 about	 the	fire	 and	 the	 scars.	Someday	I	 would	  be	queen	and	 I

would	make	sure	the	people	loved	me.	I	would	 be	the	most	beautiful	queen	Luna

had	ever	known.”

     Cinder	 tightened	her	 grip	 on	her	weapons.	“Is	  that	why	 you	 killed	 her?	So

you	could	be	queen?	Or	was	it	because	she	…	did	that.	To	you.”

     One	of	Levana’s	perfect	eyebrows	lifted.	 “Who	 says	that	I	killed	 her?”

     “Everyone	 says	it.	 Even	 down	on	 Earth	we’ve	 heard	 the	rumors.	 That	you

killed	your	 sister,	and	your	own	husband,	and	me,	all	for	your	own	ambitions.”

     A	 coolness	passed	over	Levana’s	face	and	she	leaned	slowly	back	against	her

throne.	“What	 I	 have	done,	I	 have	done	for	 Luna.	My	 struggles,	 my	sacrifices.

Everything	has	been	for	Luna.	All	  my	life	 I’ve	 been	the	only	one	who	cared,	the

only	 one	 who	  could	 see	 the	 potential	 of	  our	 people.	 We	 are	 destined	 for

something	so	much	greater	than	this	rock,	but	all	Channary	cared	about	were	her

dresses	and	her	conquests.	She	was	a	horrible	queen.	She	was	a	monster.”	 She

763
paused,	nostrils	 flaring.	  “But	   no.	 I	 did	  not	 kill	  her,	 though	 I’ve	  wished	  a

thousand	times	that	I	had.	I	should	 have	killed	 her	before	she	ruined	everything.

Before	she	had	you,	a	healthy	baby	girl	who	would	grow	 up	to	be	just	like	her!”

     Cinder	 snarled.	“I	  don’t	 know	 who	 I	 would	 have	become	 if	 I’d	 grown	 up

here,”	she	said,	“but	I	am	not	like	 her.”

     “Oh,	 yes,”	 Levana	 mused,	skipping	 from	 word	 to	 word	 like	 a	stream	over

rocks.	“On	that	 note,	I	believe	you	are	correct.	When	 I	first	 saw	your	glamour	 at

the	Commonwealth	ball,	 I	 was	surprised	at	how	 much	you	resembled	her,	 once

the	dirt	and	grime	 and	awful	 metal	extremities	were	removed.	 But	that	seems	to

be	where	 the	 similarities	  end.”	 Her	 lips	 stretched,	 bloodred,	 curving	  around

perfect	pearl	teeth.	“No,	 little	 niece.	You	 are	much	more	 like	me.	Willing	  to	 do

anything	to	be	admired.	To	be	wanted.	To	be	queen.”

     Cinder’s	 body	 went	rigid.	 “I’m	  not	 like	 you,	either.	 I’m	 doing	 this	 because

you’ve	given	 me	no	choice.	 You	had	your	 chance.	You	couldn’t	  have	just	been

fair.	 Been	a	 good	 ruler	 who	 treats	her	 people	 with	 respect.	And	  Earth!	 You

wanted	an	alliance,	Earth	wanted	peace	…	why	 couldn’t	 you	just	…	 agree	to	it?

Why	the	disease?	Why	the	attacks?	Did	you	honestly	believe	that	was	the	way	to

get	them	to	love	you?”

     Levana	 peered	at	her,	 furious	 and	 hateful.	But	 then	 her	 lips	 twitched	 into

something	resembling	 a	grin.	  A	 furious,	 hateful	 grin.	 “Love,”	  she	whispered.

“Love	is	 a	conquest.	Love	is	a	war.	That	is	all	it	is.”

     “No.	 You’re	 wrong.”

     “Fine.”	  Levana	dragged	her	fingers	along	 the	arm	of	 her	throne.	“Let	 us	see

how	much	your	 love	is	 worth.	Relinquish	 all	 rights	to	 my	throne,	and	I	 will	 not

kill	 your	friend.”

764
     Cinder’s	 lips	  tightened.	 “How	 about	 we	 put	 it	 to	 a	 vote?	 Let	 the	people

decide	who	they	want	to	rule	them.”

     Thorne	took	 a	step	back.	His	left	heel	was	on	the	edge	now,	and	there	was	an

expression	of	dismay	as	he	glanced	down	at	the	lake	below.

     Cinder	 flinched.	 “Wait.	 I	 could	promise	 to	relinquish	 my	 throne	to	you,	 but

there	are	still	going	to	 be	tens	of	thousands	of	people	outside	demanding	for	you

to	abdicate.	The	secret	is	out.	They	know	I’m	Selene.	I	can’t	 take	that	back.”

     “Tell	 them	you	lied.”

     She	exhaled	sharply.	“Also,	 the	second	you	kill	him,	 I’m	 going	to	kill	 you.”

     Levana	cocked	her	head	to	one	side,	and	though	she	had	her	glamour,	Cinder

was	seeing	the	woman	from	the	video.	That	was	her	good	eye,	she	realized.

     “Then	 I	will	  change	the	terms	of	my	offer,”	 said	Levana.	“Sacrifice	 yourself,

and	I	will	 not	kill	 him.”

     Cinder	 glanced	 at	 Thorne,	 who	 seemed	indifferent	  to	 the	 fact	 they	 were

negotiating	with	 his	 life.	 He	clicked	 his	tongue	 at	her.	“Even	 I	 can	see	that’s	a

bad	deal.”

     “Thorne…”

     “Do	 me	a	favor?”

     She	frowned.

     “Tell	 Cress	I	meant	it.”

     Her	gut	tightened.	“Thorne—”

     He	met	Levana’s	gaze.	“All	 right,	 Your	 Queenliness.	I’ll	call	 your	bluff	 if	 she

won’t.”

     “I	 am	not	negotiating	with	 you,”	Levana	snapped.

     “If	  you	kill	  me,	you’ve	  lost	your	 last	 bargaining	chip	 and	Cinder	 wins.	 So

765
let’s	talk	 about	 your	options.	 You	 can	either	accept	 that	your	 time	as	queen	is

over	and	let	 us	both	 go,	and	 maybe	Cinder	 will	  take	mercy	 and	not	have	 you

executed	as	a	traitor.	Or	you	can	throw	me	off	this	ledge	and—”

     “Fine.”

     Thorne’s	eyes	widened.	He	stepped	off	the	overhang.	With	 a	cry,	he	threw	up

his	arms—one	 wrist	 still	 bound,	 the	opposite	 hand	gripping	  the	kitchen	 knife

he’d	 swiped	 from	  the	mansion.	 Gasping,	 his	 arms	 cartwheeled,	 his	 balance

precarious.

     Cinder	dropped	her	weapons	and	rushed	toward	him.

     Thorne	fell—throwing	  his	body	forward	 at	the	last	minute.	One	hand	grabbed

the	ledge.	He	grunted.	Cinder	dove.

     Levana	leaned	forward.

     Thorne’s	 fingers	 let	go,	 just	 in	time	 for	 Cinder	 to	 reach	over	the	 edge	and

latch	on	to	his	arm.	Her	injured	shoulder	screamed,	but	she	held	tight.

     Thorne	 looked	up	 at	her,	and	it	 was	by	 far	 the	most	fear	 she’d	ever	known

him	to	reveal.	“Thanks,”	 he	panted.	Then	his	free	hand	swung	upward,	punching

Cinder	on	the	jaw.	She	flinched,	ducking	 away	without	letting	 go.

     “Sorry!	 That’s	 not	me.”

     “I	  know,”	  she	grunted.	 Planting	 her	 other	 hand	on	 the	 floor,	 she	 pushed

herself	backward,	dragging	Thorne	 with	her	until	 his	 torso	was	on	the	ledge,	his

feet	scrabbling	for	 purchase.	She	dared	not	 let	go,	 even	as	he	shoved	his	body

onto	the	floor.

     Cinder	 knew	 that	 the	 second	she	let	 go	 of	 him,	 Levana	 would	  send	him

careening	to	his	death	again.

     Too	 late,	 it	 occurred	 to	 her	that	 he’d	 actually	  managed	to	 get	out	 of	 his

766
bindings.	He	must’ve	 spent	the	whole	 time	she	was	arguing	 with	 Levana	trying

to	work	 himself	free.	 The	fall	 might	not	 have	killed	 him,	and	with	 his	arms	free

he’d	have	been	able	to	swim.	But	now	he	was—

     Thorne	jabbed	the	knife	into	 her	thigh.

     Cinder	screamed.

     “Still	  not	me,”	 he	 said,	breathless,	as	his	fist	 ripped	 the	knife	 back	out.	 He

raised	his	arm	overhead,	preparing	to	stab	her	again.

     Cinder	tackled	him,	 knocking	the	knife	 out	of	his	grip.

     Thorne	threw	 his	elbow	 into	her	throat.	 The	air	left	 her,	white	 spots	flecking

her	vision.	Thorne	scrambled	away,	but	he	didn’t	 run	back	to	the	ledge.

     Wrapping	 a	 hand	around	 her	throat,	 Cinder	 massaged	the	muscles,	urging

them	to	take	in	 air	again.	Still	 dizzy,	 she	forced	herself	 onto	her	wobbling	 legs,

ready	to	lunge	at	Thorne	again.

     She	heard	the	click	of	a	gun’s	safety	being	released.

     She	froze.	Thorne	had	gone	a	lot	farther	than	she’d	expected	and	now	he	was

standing	near	 the	room’s	  entrance,	holding	 the	 knife	 and	 gun	 she’d	 dropped

when	she’d	tried	to	save	him.	The	barrel	of	the	gun	was	aimed	at	her	head.

     Cinder	swayed.	Stumbled	once.	Regained	her	footing.

     A	 gunshot	echoed	off	  the	room’s	 stone	walls.	 Cinder	 recoiled,	expecting	 a

jolt	of	 pain,	but	instead	she	heard	a	bellowed	curse.	The	gun	Thorne	had	grabbed

skittered	across	the	floor.	 Cinder	 shook	away	the	 light-headedness	and	gawked

at	Thorne,	 who	 was	 in	 turn	 staring,	horrified,	  at	 his	 hand.	His	 arm	 was	still

raised,	but	his	hand	was	now	empty	and	covered	in	blood.

     “I’m	   sorry!”	   Cress	 cried.	 She	 was	  on	 the	  floor	  against	 the	 doorway,

struggling	to	get	back	up.	The	kickback	 had	knocked	her	off	balance.	“I’m	 sorry,

767
Captain!”

     Thorne	cursed	again.	Sweat	was	beading	on	his	brow.	But	 when	he	looked	at

Cress,	jaw	hanging,	he	bit	back	the	pain	and	shouted,	“Nice	shot!”

     “Cress,”	 Cinder	croaked.	“The	queen,	Cress.	Shoot	the	queen!”

     Though	 Cress	 whimpered,	 she	 did	  change	her	 aim,	 leveling	  the	 gun	 at

Levana.

     Cinder	ran	for	 the	gun	that	had	been	shot	from	Thorne’s	hand.

     Thorne	ran	too,	 yanking	Cress’s	attention	 back	to	him.	 In	one	movement,	he

knocked	 Cress’s	  arm	 up	  with	  his	  elbow	  while	   simultaneously,	  with	  his

noninjured	hand,	driving	 the	knife	into	her	stomach,	burying	 it	to	the	hilt.

     Cinder	 snatched	her	 gun	 off	 the	 floor.	 Cress	 dropped	hers.	 Blood	 seeped

through	her	dress.	She	gaped	up	at	Thorne	and	it	was	impossible	to	tell	which	 of

them	was	filled	 with	  more	horror.	 Thorne’s	hand	 was	still	 wrapped	around	 the

knife’s	hilt.

     Turning	 toward	the	throne,	Cinder	fired,	 but	Levana	threw	herself	to	the	floor

and	the	bullet	 ricocheted	 off	 the	carved	 back	of	 the	 throne.	As	 Cinder	 loaded

another	bullet	into	 the	chamber,	Levana	scrambled	off	 the	floor,	 slipping	 on	her

billowing	 skirt	 as	she	pulled	herself	behind	the	throne.	Cinder	fired	again,	barely

missing	the	queen’s	leg	as	she	disappeared.

     “No,”	 Cress	gasped.

     A	 searing	pain	 sliced	 through	 Cinder’s	 side.	She	collapsed	 onto	her	 hands

and	knees.	Flopping	onto	 her	back,	she	pushed	herself	away,	 one	hand	pressed

against	 the	 wound.	 Thorne	  stood	 over	 her,	  gripping	  the	 knife.	  Cress	was

dangling	from	 his	arm	in	an	attempt	to	pull	 him	away,	 but	he	was	too	strong	and

she	was	trying	 to	 keep	one	hand	on	 her	stomach	 wound.	Her	 entire	 front	 was

768
already	covered	in	blood.

     “I’m	  sorry,”	  Thorne	sobbed.	 All	 signs	 of	 his	usual	 confidence	 were	gone.

“I’m	 sorry,	I’m	 so	sorry—”

     Cress	bit	him	 then,	digging	 her	teeth	into	 the	flesh	of	 his	hand	in	an	attempt

to	get	him	to	release	the	knife.	He	stifled	 a	scream	behind	his	teeth,	but	didn’t	let

go.

     Snatching	 the	 gun	again,	 Cinder	 launched	 herself	 off	 the	 floor,	  trying	 to

wrestle	the	knife	 out	 of	 Thorne’s	 grip.	With	  a	grunt,	 she	planted	a	foot	 on	his

chest	and	 kicked,	 ripping	 the	 knife	  away.	He	 fell	  back,	 catching	 one	of	 the

audience	chairs	between	his	shoulders.	His	 face	barely	 registered	the	pain.	 His

actions	were	becoming	less	graceful,	more	stilted.

     Maybe	 because	of	his	injuries,	but	 more	likely	 because	Levana	was	growing

too	tired	to	go	on	controlling	 him.

     Cress	 collapsed	 to	 her	  knees,	clutching	  her	 stomach.	 Her	  cheeks	 were

streaked	with	tears.	“Cinder…”

     Cinder	 stood	over	them,	the	gun	in	 her	left	 hand	and	the	blood-slicked	 knife

in	her	right,	every	muscle	trembling.

     “Stars…”

     She	whipped	her	head	toward	the	doorway.	Scarlet	and	Wolf	had	arrived.

     “No.	 Run!	Get	out	of	 here!”

     Scarlet	met	her	gaze	and	started	to	shake	her	head.	“Wha—?”

     More	 weapons.	More	potential	 enemies.	More	people	she	loved	 that	Levana

could	take	from	 her.	Gritting	 her	 teeth,	Cinder	reached	out,	trying	 to	 lock	on	 to

their	bioelectricity.

     Too	late.	Wolf	 could	no	longer	 be	controlled,	and	Scarlet	was	already	taken.

769
	




                                                     Ninety







Cinder	glanced	toward	 Levana,	who	was	 peering	at	the	newcomers	over	one	 of

the	throne’s	carved	arms.	Then	Levana	looked	at	the	second	gun,	lying	forgotten

near	the	doorway.

     Scarlet	gasped	as	her	body	lurched	forward	of	its	own	accord.

     Cinder	 dove	for	 it	 too,	 sliding	 across	the	slick	 floor.	 There	 were	too	 many

weapons,	too	many	threats,	and	she	did	not	have	enough	hands.

     Instead	of	 grabbing	the	gun,	she	shoved	it	 and	watched	as	it	 went	careening

past	Scarlet,	toward	  the	audience’s	 raised	dais.	 A	 second	later	 the	 weight	 of

Scarlet’s	body	landed	on	 top	of	her.	 Scarlet	grabbed	her	by	the	hair	 and	yanked

her	head	back,	nearly	 snapping	her	neck.	 Cinder	cried	 in	 pain	and	rolled	 over,

shoving	Scarlet	off	 her.	 Maintaining	 her	grip	 on	 the	gun,	she	whipped	 her	arm

around,	sending	the	back	of	her	metal	hand	into	Scarlet’s	temple.

     She	 grimaced	 at	 the	 impact,	 but	  it	 worked.	  Letting	 go,	 Scarlet	 skidded

halfway	across	the	room	and	lay	sprawled	across	the	floor.

     The	guilt	 didn’t	  have	time	to	 sink	in—when	 she	heard	a	roar,	fear	 drew	her

attention	back	toward	 Wolf.	 Snarling,	 furious.	 He	was	already	charging	 toward

her.

770
     The	gun.	 The	knife.	It	 was	Wolf	 but	 it	 wasn’t	Wolf	  and	she	didn’t	 have	the

strength	to	fight	him	 off,	not	now,	 not	again	…

     Cinder	scrunched	up	her	face	as	a	drop	of	 sweat	slid	into	her	eyes	and	raised

the	gun.

     But	 Wolf’s	   focus	was	 on	 Scarlet’s	 fallen	  body,	 and	when	 he	 leaped,	he

cleared	Cinder	entirely.	 She	spun	around,	stunned,	as	Wolf	scooped	Scarlet	into

his	arms	and	cradled	her	against	him.

     Wolf,	  who	  was	 a	 monster,	 who	 was	 one	 of	 the	 queen’s	 uncontrollable

beasts	…

     He	was	still	 Wolf	 after	all.

     Gulping,	 choking,	 gulping	 again,	Cinder	 raised	herself	up.	 She	lost	balance

and	fell	  onto	 one	knee.	 “Wolf,”	   she	stammered.	“Please	 …	 help	 Cress,	and

Thorne	…	Please…”

     He	 raised	his	head,	green	 eyes	burning	 at	first,	 but	 then	he	looked	 over	 to

where	Cress	was	 clutching	 her	 stomach,	deathly	 pale.	 To	 where	 Thorne	was

crumpled	against	a	fallen	 chair,	 looking	 like	 he	wanted	to	 go	to	 Cress	but	was

terrified	that	his	own	 body	couldn’t	 be	trusted	if	he	got	close	enough.

     Wolf	 gave	an	understanding	nod.

     Relieved	 that,	if	 nothing	 else,	she	could	trust	 Wolf	 to	get	 her	friends	out	 of

here	and	start	tending	to	their	wounds,	Cinder	tried	 again	to	stand.	This	time	 she

succeeded.	She	stumbled	toward	the	 throne,	gripping	 the	 gun	in	 one	hand	and

the	knife	in	 the	other.	When	she	rounded	the	dais,	she	saw	Levana	on	her	knees,

one	hand	dug	into	the	folds	of	her	dress	while	she	clung	to	the	back	of	the	throne

with	  the	  other.	 Her	  coronation	   gown	  billowed	  around	  her,	  elegant	 and

distinguished,	a	sharp	contrast	to	her	grotesque	face.	She	had	given	up	on	trying

771
to	use	her	glamour.

     Cinder	hated	her	own	mind	 for	labeling	 the	queen	as	grotesque.	She	had	once

been	a	victim,	 as	Cinder	 had	once	 been	a	victim.	  And	how	 many	 had	labeled

Cinder’s	own	metal	limbs	 as	grotesque,	unnatural,	disgusting?

     No.	 Levana	 was	 a	monster,	 but	 it	 wasn’t	 because	of	 the	 face	 she’d	kept

hidden	all	these	years.	Her	monstrosities	were	buried	much	deeper	than	that.

     Another	 drop	of	 sweat	fell	 into	Cinder’s	 lashes	and	she	swiped	it	away	 with

the	back	of	her	wrist.	Then	she	lifted	the	gun,	aiming	 at	Levana’s	heart.

     At	  the	same	 time,	 Levana	 lifted	  the	hand	 that	 had	 been	tucked	 into	 the

luxurious	fabric.	 She	held	 the	gun	that	Cinder	 had	shoved	toward	 the	dais.	Her

arm	trembled	as	if	 the	weapon	were	impossibly	 heavy	and	it	was	clear	 from	the

way	she	held	it	that	 she	had	never	held	a	gun	before.	She	was	a	queen,	after	all.

She	had	minions	to	do	the	killing	 for	her.

     The	queen	locked	 her	teeth	in	 concentration,	and	Cinder	 felt	 the	muscles	in

her	right	 arm	pull	 in	 tight	 against	her	bones.	The	tendons	started	to	 cramp,	the

ligaments	tightened.

     She	grimaced	and	looked	at	the	gun	in	her	hand.	At	her	finger	on	the	trigger.

     She	tried	to	pull	 the	trigger.

     Urged	her	finger	 to	pull.	Begged	it.

     Pull	the	trigger.

     Pull	 it.

     Her	hand	began	to	shake,	the	gun	wobbling	at	the	end	of	her	arm.	Her	breaths

came	in	short,	stifled	gasps	as	the	trigger	dug	into	the	pad	of	her	finger.

     But	she	couldn’t	 pull	it.	 She	couldn’t.

     Levana’s	 terror	 began	to	melt	 away.	 Her	 lips	twitched	  in	what	 could	 have

772
been	relief	 if	 her	brow	 hadn’t	 been	furrowed	 with	 so	much	 concentration.	She

kept	a	firm	hold	of	 Cinder’s	arm,	the	finger,	 the	gun.

     Levana’s	tongue	snaked	out	of	her	mouth,	wetting	 her	parched	lips.

     “Ah,”	  she	whispered,	gaze	flashing	with	pride.	“You	 are	tired	too,	I	see.”

     Cinder	snarled.	An	 earthquake	rumbled	inside	her	body.	She	settled	her	focus

on	the	queen’s	trembling	hand	and	lashed	out	with	her	thoughts.

     Levana’s	 eyes	widened.	 Her	hair	 clung	 to	 the	scar	tissue	 on	her	 face.	She

looked	down	at	her	own	hand,	as	much	a	traitor	as	Cinder’s.

     Cinder	 forced	 Levana’s	 arm	 to	 bend.	 She	guided	 the	 gun	 upward,	 every

centimeter	a	battle.	Every	moment	a	struggle.

     Levana	 flushed	 red.	She	 pinched	 her	teeth	 in	 renewed	concentration,	 and

Cinder	felt	 her	own	 arm	following	  suit.	Her	 traitor	of	 a	hand	lifted	 the	gun	 and

pressed	the	barrel	against	her	own	temple.	She	was	the	mirror	image	of	her	aunt,

each	of	them	primed	to	shoot.

     “This	 is	 how	it	 should	have	ended	the	night	 of	the	ball,”	  Levana	whispered.

“This	 is	how	 it	 should	be.”	 She	smiled	a	mad	woman’s	 smile	 and	stared	at	the

place	where	the	gun	pressed	against	Cinder’s	damp	skin.

     Cinder	 remembered	the	 night	 clearly,	 like	 a	nightmare	 she’d	 never	forget.

Levana	had	 controlled	  her	arm,	 forcing	  her	 to	 take	 Jacin’s	 gun	 and	hold	 it

against	her	temple.	Cinder	 had	been	sure	she	was	going	 to	die,	 but	her	 cyborg

programming	had	saved	her.

     It	 would	not	save	her	this	time.

     “Good-bye,	 niece.”

     Cinder	 could	not	 take	back	her	own	 arm,	but	her	 body	burned	with	 resolve.

She	would	keep	her	finger	from	 squeezing	the	trigger.	She	would	 not	let	Levana

773
pull	it.	She	would	 not.

     The	finger	 twitched.	 Throbbed,	torn	 between	two	masters.	Such	a	tiny	 limb.

A	tiny,	 tiny	finger.

     The	 rest	of	 her	willpower	  tightened	around	 Levana’s	own	 hand.	She	 could

feel	the	bioelectricity	 sizzling	in	 the	air	between	them.	She	listened	to	the	crackle

of	energy.	 There	was	an	ebb	 and	flow	 to	 their	strengths	and	 their	weaknesses.

Cinder	would	 think	 she	was	 making	 progress,	curling	 Levana’s	 finger	 inward,

only	to	feel	her	own	finger	 twitch	 against	her	control.	A	drop	of	 sweat	tickled	the

inside	of	her	elbow.	A	 stray	hair	clung	to	her	lips.	The	smell	 of	iron	assaulted	her

nostrils.	 Every	 sense	was	a	 distraction.	 Every	 moment	 she	could	 feel	 herself

growing	weaker.

     But	  Levana’s	 brow	 was	 drawn	  too.	 Levana	 was	 sweating	 too,	 her	 face

contorted	with	the	strain.	They	were	both	struggling	 for	breath,	and	then—

     A	 snap	cracked	loud	inside	Cinder’s	head.

     She	gasped,	and	her	hand	dropped	to	 her	side.	Her	 muscles	ached	from	 the

strain,	but	they	 were	her	muscles	again.	 She	gulped	down	a	 breath,	dizzy	from

the	effort.

     Levana	sobbed	with	 frustration.	 Her	 body	sagged.	“Fine.	 Fine.	I	 surrender.”

She	spoke	so	quietly,	Cinder	wasn’t	 sure	she’d	heard	right.	Though	she	was	still

controlling	 Levana’s	 hand	and	still	 had	the	gun	 poised	at	Levana’s	 temple,	the

queen	seemed	to	 have	 forgotten	 it	  was	there.	 Her	 face	 crumpled,	 her	 body

wilting	 into	the	enormous	gown.	“I	 relinquish	 my	crown	 to	you,	my	 country,	my

throne.	Take	it	all.	Just	…	just	let	 me	be.	Let	me	have	my	beauty	again.	Please.”

     Cinder	 studied	her	 aunt.	Her	 scars	and	her	matted	 hair	and	 her	sealed-shut

eyelid.	Her	trembling	 lip	and	defeated	shoulders.	She	was	too	exhausted	for	even

774
her	glamour.	Too	weak	to	fight	 anymore.

     A	 shock	of	pity	stole	through	her.

     This	 miserable,	 awful	 woman	 still	  had	no	 idea	 what	 it	 meant	to	 be	 truly

beautiful,	or	truly	 loved.

     Cinder	doubted	she	ever	would.

     She	gulped,	though	it	was	difficult	  around	her	parched	tongue.

     “I	 accept,”	 Cinder	said,	 dazed.	She	kept	hold	of	 Levana’s	 trigger	finger	 but

allowed	Levana	to	lower	 the	gun.	Cinder	held	 out	her	hand	and	Levana	stared	at

it	for	a	moment	before	reaching	forward	 and	setting	the	gun	into	Cinder’s	palm.

     In	 the	same	movement,	she	grabbed	the	forgotten	knife	and	lurched	forward,

driving	the	blade	into	Cinder’s	 heart.

     The	breath	left	her	all	 at	once,	like	her	lungs	imploding	 on	themselves.	Like	a

lightning	 bolt	striking	 her	from	her	head	to	her	toes.	Shock	exploded	through	her

chest	and	she	fell	backward.	 Levana	fell	 with	 her,	her	face	tight	 with	 rage.	She

had	both	hands	on	the	knife	handle	now	 and	when	she	twisted	it,	 every	nerve	in

Cinder’s	head	exploded	with	agony.	The	world	 went	foggy,	 vague,	blurred	in	her

vision.

     Instinct	 alone	prompted	her	to	raise	the	gun	and	fire.

     The	blast	knocked	Levana	away.	Cinder	didn’t	 see	where	the	bullet	had	gone,

but	she	saw	a	line	of	blood	arc	across	the	back	of	the	throne.

     Her	 vision	glazed	 over,	all	 white	 and	dancing	stars.	Her	body	 was	pain	and

blackness	and	hot	and	 sticky	 with	 blood.	Stars.	 It	 wasn’t	 just	in	 her	head,	she

realized.	Someone	had	painted	stars	on	the	throne	room	ceiling.	A	galaxy	 spread

out	before	her.

     In	 the	 silence	of	  space,	she	heard	a	 million	  noises	at	 once.	 Faraway	and

775
inconsistent.	A	 scream.	A	 roar,	like	 an	 angered	animal.	Pounding	 footsteps.	A

door	crashing	against	a	wall.

     Her	name.

     Muddled.	 Echoing.	 Her	 lungs	 twitched,	 or	 maybe	 it	 was	her	 whole	 body,

convulsing.	She	tasted	blood	on	the	back	of	her	tongue.

     A	 shadow	passed	in	front	of	her.	Brown	 eyes,	filled	 with	 terror.	Messy	black

hair.	Lips	that	every	girl	 in	the	Commonwealth	 had	admired	a	thousand	times.

     Kai	 looked	at	her,	the	wound,	the	knife	handle,	the	blade	still	 buried.	She	saw

his	 mouth	 forming	  her	 name.	 He	 turned	 and	 screamed	something	 over	 his

shoulder,	but	his	voice	was	lost	to	her—so	loud,	but	far,	far,	 far	away.

776
	




                                          Ninety-One







“I	told	you,	I’m	fine,”	Scarlet	insisted,	though	her	tone	was	weary.	“It’s	just	been

a	really	long	few	months.”

     “‘Fine’?”	 Émilie	screeched.	By	the	way	her	eyes	blurred	and	her	blonde	curls

took	up	the	screen,	Scarlet	could	tell	that	the	waitress—the	only	friend	she	had

back	in	Rieux—was	holding	her	port	far	too	close	to	her	face.	“You	have	been

missing	for	weeks!	You	were	gone	during	the	attacks,	and	then	the	war	broke

out,	and	I	found	those	convicts	in	your	house	and	then—nothing!	I	was	sure	you

were	dead!	And	now	you	think	you	can	send	me	a	comm	and	ask	me	to	go	throw

some	mulch	on	the	garden	like	everything	is	…	is	fine?”

     “Everything	is	fine.	Look—I’m	not	dead.”

     “I	 can	see	you’re	not	dead!	But,	Scar,	you	are	all	over	the	news	down	here!

It’s	 all	anyone	will	  talk	about.	This	 …	 this	Lunar	 revolution,	and	our	little

Scarling	in	the	center	of	it	all.	They’re	calling	 you	a	hero	in	town,	you	know.

Gilles	is	talking	about	putting	up	a	plaque	in	the	tavern,	about	how	Rieux’s	own

hero,	Scarlet	Benoit,	stood	on	this	very	bar	and	yelled	at	us	all,	and	we’re	so

proud	of	her!”	Émilie	craned	her	head,	as	if	that	would	allow	her	to	see	more	in

Scarlet’s	background.	“Where	are	you,	anyway?”

777
     “I’m…”	   Scarlet	 glanced	 around	the	 lavish	 suite	 of	 Artemisia	 Palace.	The

room	was	a	thousand	times	more	 extravagant	than	her	little	 farmhouse,	and	she

hated	it	with	a	great	passion.	“I’m	 still	 on	Luna,	actually.”

     “Luna!	 Can	I	see?	Is	it	even	safe	up	there?”

     “Ém,	 please	stop	screaming.”	Scarlet	rubbed	her	temple.

     “Don’t	  you	 tell	 me	 to	stop	 screaming,	Mademoiselle	 Too-Busy-to-Send-a-

Comm-and-Let-Me-Know-You’re-Not-Dead.”

     “I	 was	a	prisoner!”	Scarlet	yelled.

     Émilie	 gasped.	“A	prisoner!	 Did	they	hurt	 you?	Is	that	a	black	eye	or	is	it	just

my	 port,	 because	my	 screen’s	been	 acting	 up	lately…”	   Émilie	 scrubbed	 her

sleeve	over	the	screen.

     “Listen,	  I	 promise	 I	 will	 tell	  you	 the	whole	 story	 when	 I	 get	home.	 Just,

please	tell	me	you’re	still	 watching	 the	farm.	Please	tell	me	I	 have	a	home	to	go

back	to?”

     Émilie	 scowled.	Despite	her	hysteria,	she’d	been	a	welcome	sight.	Pretty	 and

bubbly	and	 so	far	removed	 from	 everything	Scarlet	 had	been	through.	Hearing

her	voice	reminded	Scarlet	of	home.

     “Of	 course	I’m	 still	 watching	the	farm,”	 said	Émilie,	 in	 a	tone	that	suggested

she	was	hurt	 Scarlet	had	doubted	 it.	 “You	 asked	me	 to,	after	 all,	 and	I	 didn’t

want	to	think	 you	were	 dead,	even	though	…	even	though	everyone	believed	 it,

and	I	did	too	for	a	while.	 I’m	 so	glad	you’re	not	dead,	Scar.”

     “Me	 too.”

     “The	 animals	are	fine	 and	your	android	 rentals	are	still	 coming	…	 you	must

have	paid	them	very	far	in	advance.”

     Scarlet	smiled	tightly,	  recalling	something	about	how	 Cress	had	set	up	a	few

778
payments	in	her	absence.

     “Scar?”

     She	raised	her	eyebrows.

     “Did	 you	ever	find	 your	grand-mère?”

     Her	 heart	had	built	 up	 a	strong-enough	wall	  that	the	question	 didn’t	 knock

the	breath	 out	 of	 her,	 but	 Scarlet	still	  felt	 the	 pang	 of	 remembering.	 It	 was

impossible	to	 keep	away	the	memories	 of	the	 prisons	beneath	the	opera	house.

Her	grandmother’s	 broken	body.	 Her	murder,	 as	Scarlet	watched	and	 could	do

nothing.

     This	and	this	 alone	was	the	one	thing	she	dreaded	about	returning	home.	The

house	wouldn’t	  be	 the	 same	without	  her	 grandmother’s	  bread	rising	  in	 the

kitchen	or	her	muddy	boots	left	in	 the	entry.

     “She’s	 dead,”	Scarlet	said.	“She	died	in	the	first	attacks	on	Paris.”

     Émilie’s	 face	pinched.	“I’m	  so	sorry.”

     A	 silence	crept	in,	that	moment	when	there	was	nothing	appropriate	to	say.

     Scarlet	 straightened	 her	 spine,	 needing	 to	  change	the	 subject.	 “Do	  you

remember	that	street	fighter	who	was	coming	into	the	tavern	for	 a	while?”

     Émilie’s	  expression	lit	 up.	 “With	  the	eyes?”	she	 asked.	“How	 could	 a	 girl

forget?”

     Scarlet	laughed.	“Yeah,	well.	 It	turns	out	he’s	Lunar.”

     Émilie	 gasped.	“No.”

     “Also,	 I’m	 kind	 of	dating	him.”

     The	 view	 on	 the	screen	 shook	as	 Émilie	 clasped	a	 hand	over	 her	 mouth.

“Scarlet	 Benoit!”	  She	 stammered	for	 a	 moment,	 before—“It’s	  going	  to	 take

weeks	for	you	to	explain	this	all	 to	me,	isn’t	it?”

779
     “Probably.”	   Scarlet	 brushed	 her	 hair	 over	  one	 shoulder.	 “But	  I	  will.	  I

promise.	Look,	I	 should	go.	I	just	wanted	you	to	know	 I’m	 all	right,	 and	to	check

on	the	farm—”

     “I’ll	  tell	 everyone	you’re	safe.	But	when	are	you	coming	home?”

     “I	  don’t	 know.	 Soon,	 I	 hope.	 And,	 Ém?	 Please	don’t	 let	 Gilles	 put	 up	 a

plaque	about	me.”

     The	 waitress	shrugged.	 “I	 make	 no	 promises,	Scarling.	 You	  are	our	 little

hero.”

     Scarlet	 clicked	 off	 the	 portscreen	and	tossed	it	 onto	 the	 bed.	Sighing,	 she

glanced	out	the	window.	  Below,	 she	could	see	the	destruction	 of	the	 courtyard

and	hundreds	of	people	trying	to	put	it	back	together.

     Artemisia	 was	beautiful	 in	 its	 own	way,	 but	 Scarlet	was	ready	for	 fresh	 air

and	home-cooked	food.	She	was	ready	to	go	home.

     A	 knock	sounded	at	the	door	and	it	opened,	just	a	bit	at	first,	Wolf	 hesitant	on

the	other	side.	Scarlet	smiled	and	he	dared	to	 come	in,	shutting	 the	door	behind

him.	He	was	holding	a	bouquet	of	blue	daisies	and	looking	immensely	 guilty.

     “I	 was	eavesdropping,”	he	confessed,	hunching	his	shoulders	beside	his	ears.

     She	 smirked,	 teasingly.	 “What’s	  the	 point	 of	 superhuman	 hearing	if	  you

don’t	eavesdrop	once	in	a	while?	Come	in.	I	didn’t	 expect	you	back	so	soon.”

     Wolf	 took	 another	step	and	paused.	He	had	a	slight	limp	from	 the	bullet	 that

had	hit	 his	side,	but	 it	 was	healing	 fast.	That	 was	one	thing	 to	 be	said	for	 the

alterations—Wolf	 had	certainly	been	made	to	be	tough.

     On	the	outside,	at	least.

     He	frowned	 at	the	flowers,	his	ferocious	teeth	digging	into	 his	lower	lip.

     He’d	 left	to	go	back	to	 the	house	that	morning—his	childhood	 home.	Though

780
his	mother’s	 body	had	already	been	taken	out	 to	one	of	 the	great	graveyards	in

the	wasteland	of	 Luna,	it	 had	been	important	 to	 him	that	 he	see	the	house	one

last	time.	To	see	if	there	was	anything	worth	 saving	there,	anything	to	remember

his	parents	by,	or	even	his	brother.

     Scarlet	had	offered	to	go	with	 him	but	he	wanted	to	do	it	alone.

     She	understood.	Some	things	had	to	be	done	alone.

     “Did	 you	…	 find	anything?”

     “No,”	  he	said.	“There	was	 nothing	I	 wanted.	Everything	 from	 my	childhood

was	gone,	and	…	she	didn’t	have	much,	you	know.	Except	these.”

     He	approached	her,	unable	 to	hold	 eye	contact,	and	handed	her	the	bouquet

of	 flowers.	 Over	 half	 of	 their	 delicate	stems	had	 been	crushed	or	 snapped	in

Wolf’s	 indelicate	fists.

     “When	 I	was	a	kid,	I	 used	to	pick	wildflowers	 for	 my	grand-mère.	She	would

keep	them	in	a	jar	until	 they	 started	to	wilt,	 then	press	them	between	parchment

paper	so	they’d	 last	 forever.	 I	 bet	she	has	 an	entire	 box	full	  of	 dried	 flowers

somewhere.”	She	trailed	 a	finger	 around	some	 of	the	 soft	petals.	“That’s	  what

we’ll	 do	with	 these.	In	 honor	of	 Maha.”	 She	arranged	the	flowers	 in	a	half-full

water	glass	that	had	been	brought	with	her	breakfast.

     When	 she	turned	back,	 Wolf	 had	nudged	 aside	the	portscreen	and	lowered

himself	onto	the	edge	of	the	enormous	bed.	Scarlet	was	pretty	sure	the	linens	had

been	made	by	slave	labor,	 and	the	thought	made	her	 uncomfortable	 every	time

she	crawled	into	them.

     As	 soon	as	he	was	sitting,	Wolf’s	  leg	started	bouncing	with	 anxious	 energy.

Scarlet	squinted	at	it.	This	wasn’t	mourning.

     He	was	nervous.

781
     “What	 is	it?”	 she	said,	sinking	beside	him.	She	set	her	hand	on	his	knee	and	it

froze.

     His	bright	 eyes	found	her.	“You	 told	your	friend	 we’re	dating.”

     Scarlet	 blinked,	  and	  a	 sudden	 laugh	 tickled	  her	  throat,	 but	  at	 Wolf’s

distraught	face	 she	held	 it	 back.	 “It	  seemed	easier	than	trying	  to	 explain	 the

whole	alpha	mate	system.”

     He	looked	 down	at	his	fidgeting	 hands.	“And	 …	you	told	 her	you’ll	 be	going

back	to	the	farm.”

     “Of	  course	I’m	 going	 back	 to	 the	farm.”	  She	cocked	her	 head,	starting	 to

grow	 anxious	 herself.	 “I	  mean,	not	 tomorrow,	  but	 once	things	 have	 calmed

down.”

     Wolf’s	 opposite	knee	started	to	bounce	instead.

     “Wolf?”

     “Do	 you	still—”	  He	scratched	behind	his	ear.	“Do	 you	still	 want	me	to	 come

back	with	you?	Now	 that	I’m	 …	 that	I…”	 He	sucked	in	a	quick	 breath.	“Do	 you

still	want	me?”

     Wolf	 seemed	like	he	was	in	pain.	Actual	pain.	Her	 heart	softened.

     “Wol—”	  She	paused	and	swallowed.	“Ze’ev.”

     His	  eyes	snapped	 to	 her,	 surprised.	 The	 portscreen	 chimed,	 but	  Scarlet

ignored	the	comm.	She	shifted	on	the	 bed	so	she	could	face	him	and	tucked	one

foot	beneath	his	thigh.	She	said	firmly,	“I	 still	 want	you.”

     His	 jogging	 leg	slowly	 stilled.	 “It’s	  just	…	 I	know	 I’m	 not	 what	you	 had	in

mind.”

     “Is	 that	so?	Because	I	was	envisioning	 a	big	 strapping	fellow	 who	 can	chop

firewood	and	master	the	post-hole	digger,	and	you	certainly	 fit	 that	description.	I

782
mean,	my	 grandma	 and	 I	 got	  along	 just	 fine,	 but	 honestly	 …	  I’m	  looking

forward	to	having	the	help.”

     “Scarlet—”

     “Ze’ev.”	 She	tilted	 his	face	toward	 her.	She	didn’t	 flinch	 when	she	looked	at

him.	Not	at	his	enormous	teeth	or	his	monstrous	hands.	Not	at	the	inhuman	slope

to	his	 shoulders	or	the	 way	 his	jaw	 protruded	 from	 his	cheekbones.	It	 was	all

superficial.	 They	 hadn’t	  changed	him.	 “You’re	   the	 only	 one,	 Ze’ev	 Kesley.

You’ll	 always	be	the	only	one.”

     His	eyebrows	rose	in	recognition	 of	the	words	he’d	once	said	to	her.

     “I’m	  not	going	 to	say	it	 won’t	 take	some	getting	 used	to.	And	 it	 might	be	a

while	before	 we	can	convince	the	neighbor	 kids	not	 to	be	terrified	 of	 you.”	 She

smoothed	down	a	lock	 of	 his	hair.	It	 popped	right	 back	up.	 “But	 we’ll	 figure	 it

out.”

     His	body	 sagged.	“I	love	you,”	 he	whispered.

     Scarlet	slipped	her	hands	through	his	crazy	hair.	“Really?	 I	couldn’t	 tell.”

     The	 portscreen	chimed	 again.	Scowling,	  she	reached	over	 and	silenced	 it,

then	leaned	into	 Wolf,	  nudging	 his	nose	 with	 hers.	Wolf	  hesitated	for	 only	 a

moment	before	kissing	 her.	Scarlet	sank	against	him.	 It	 was	as	tender	a	kiss	 as

any	half-man,	half-wolf	 mutant	had	ever	given.

     When	 he	pulled	 away,	 though,	he	 was	frowning.	  “Do	 you	 really	 think	 the

neighbor	kids	will	 be	afraid	of	me?”

     “Definitely,”	   she	said.	“But	I	have	a	feeling	you’ll	 win	 them	over	in	the	end.”

     His	 eyes	crinkled.	“I’ll	  do	my	 best.”	Then	his	smile	 turned	wicked.	 His	hand

gathered	the	material	at	the	small	 of	Scarlet’s	 back	and	he	fell	 back	on	the	bed,

pulling	her	down	 beside	him.

783
     “Scarlet!	 Scar—oh.”

     They	 both	froze.	 Groaning,	 Scarlet	pushed	herself	 up	onto	 her	elbows.	 Iko

was	half	  inside	 her	 suite,	 gripping	  the	door	  handle.	Her	  android	 body	 was

covered	in	bandages,	which	were	purely	 aesthetic,	but	there	weren’t	 a	whole	lot

of	android	supply	shops	on	Luna	and	she’d	told	Scarlet	she	was	sick	of	everyone

staring	at	her.

     “Sorry!	 I	 should	have	knocked.	But	 you	weren’t	 answering	your	 comms	and

—”	Iko	 beamed,	with	more	happiness	than	a	person	who	ran	on	wires	and	power

cells	should	have	possessed.	“Cinder’s	awake!”

784
	




                                             Ninety-Two







     DIAGNOSTICS	CHECK	COMPLETE.	ALL	SYSTEMS	STABILIZED.	REBOOTING	IN

     3	…	2	…	 1	…


     Cinder’s	 eyes	sprang	open,	met	with	a	white	 ceiling	 and	blinding	 lights.	She

jerked	upward	and	hissed	at	the	shock	of	pain	in	her	chest.

     The	woman	who	 had	been	hunkered	over	Cinder’s	hand	cried	out	and	fell	off

her	rolling	 stool,	landing	 hard	on	the	ground.	Metal	 fuse	pullers	clattered	beside

her.

     Kai	 jumped	up	from	 a	chair	in	the	room’s	corner	and	rushed	to	Cinder’s	 side,

pushing	his	messy	hair	out	of	his	eyes.	“It’s	 all	right,”	 he	said,	supporting	Cinder

as	she	pressed	both	hands	against	her	chest.	She	could	feel	a	lump	of	bandaging

there,	on	top	of	the	ache.

     She	pried	 her	 startled	attention	 off	 the	 woman—a	 stranger—and	turned	 to

Kai.

     Blinked.	 Noticed	first	 how	handsome	he	looked,	and	second	how	exhausted.

     A	 spurt	of	data	began	to	scroll	against	her	vision	in	sterile	green	text.


     EMPEROR	KAITO	OF	THE	EASTERN	COMMONWEALTH

           ID	#0082719057

785
            BORN	7	APR	108	T.E.

            FF	107,448	MEDIA	HITS,	REVERSE	CHRON

            POSTED	13	NOV	 T.E.:	  IN	A	STATEMENT	RELEASED	THIS	MORNING,

      EMPEROR	KAITO	INFORMED	THE	PRESS	THAT	HE	HAS	DELAYED	HIS	RETURN

      TO	EARTH	FOR	AN	INDETERMINATE	AMOUNT	OF	TIME,	STATING	THAT	HIS

      PRESENCE	IS	NECESSARY	AT	THIS	TIME	TO	OVERSEE	THE	RECONSTRUCTION

      OF	THE	LUNAR	CAPITAL—


      Cinder	  squeezed	 her	 eyes	 shut	  and	 willed	   the	 text	 to	  descend	 out	  of	 her

vision.	 She	waited	 for	 her	 heart	rate	 to	calm	 before	 opening	 her	eyes	again.

      Her	lap	 was	 draped	with	  a	white	 linen	  blanket	 so	thin	 she	 could	 see	a	groove

in	 the	fabric	  where	 the	 flesh	 of	 her	 left	  thigh	 met	 the	 top	 of	 her	 prosthetic	  leg.

Her	left	 hand	 was	splayed	 out,	 palm	 up,	on	 top	of	 the	blanket.	  The	palm	 chamber

was	open,	revealing	  a	multitude	  of	 disconnected	 wires	 inside.

      “What	 are	you	 doing	 to	 my	 hand?”	 she	croaked.

      The	woman	  climbed	  to	 her	feet	 and	 straightened	 her	 white	  lab	coat.	 “Fixing

it.”

      “Here,	 drink	  this.”	 Kai	 held	 out	 a	glass	of	 water.	 Cinder	 stared	at	 it	for	 longer

than	she	 should	 have,	 her	 brain	  working	  through	  mud,	 before	  she	took	  it	 from

him.	 “This	  is	 Dr.	 Nandez,”	  Kai	 said,	 watching	  her	 drink.	  “She’s	  one	of	 Earth’s

best	cybernetic	  surgeons.	I	 had	her	 flown	  up	yesterday	 to	 …	 to	look	  at	you.”	 His

lips	 tightened,	  as	if	 he	wasn’t	  sure	 if	 he’d	 overstepped	  some	 boundary	 between

them.

      Handing	 the	 glass	back	 to	Kai,	  Cinder	 studied	 the	doctor,	  who	 stood	with	  her

arms	 crossed,	 tapping	 the	 fuse	 pullers	  against	 her	 forearm.	  Cinder	  reached	 for

the	back	of	 her	 head,	where	 her	panel	 was	shut	 tight.

786
     “I’m	 not	dead?”

     “You	almost	were,”	said	Kai.	“The	 knife	penetrated	one	of	your	prosthetic

heart	chambers,	which	drove	your	body	into	survival	mode.	That	chamber	shut

down	while	the	rest	of	your	heart	was	able	to	keep	functioning	…	more	or	less.”

Kai	glanced	at	the	doctor.	“Did	I	get	that	right?”

     “Close	enough,”	said	Dr.	Nandez	with	a	weak	smile.

     Cinder’s	heart	throbbed	with	every	breath.	“My	retina	display	is	functioning

again.”

     The	doctor	nodded.	“You	were	in	need	of	a	new	processing	unit—the	one

you	were	installed	with	wasn’t	designed	for	full	 underwater	submersion.	You

were	lucky	it	went	into	preservation	mode,	otherwise	you	wouldn’t	have	had	any

function	over	your	hand	or	leg	either.”

     “I	 didn’t,	for	a	while.”	 Cinder	tried	to	move	her	cybernetic	fingers,	but	they

sat	unmoving	on	the	bedspread.	“I’m	sorry	I	scared	you.”

     “Your	reaction	was	warranted.”	Dr.	Nandez	gestured	at	Cinder’s	hand.	“May

I?”

     An	 awkwardness	started	to	creep	up	Cinder’s	spine—her	palm	open	and

vulnerable,	right	in	front	of	Kai.

     But	then	she	felt	silly	and	vain,	so	she	nodded.

     Dr.	Nandez	wheeled	herself	back	to	Cinder’s	side	and	set	a	portscreen	on	the

bed.	A	 holograph	flickered	in	 the	air	above	the	 screen—an	exact	replica	of

Cinder’s	hand	and	internal	wiring.	The	doctor	adjusted	the	image	and	bent	over

Cinder’s	hand	again.

     “You	should	lie	back	down,”	Kai	said.	“You	were	stabbed,	you	know.”

     “I	 remember.”	Grimacing,	she	pressed	her	hand	harder	against	her	wound.

787
The	pressure	eased	some	of	the	throbbing.

     “Forty-two	  stitches,	and	something	 tells	me	you	 may	have	just	 pulled	 some

of	them	out.	Here,	lie	down.”

     She	allowed	 Kai	 to	guide	 her	back	onto	 the	pillows.	 She	sank	into	 the	soft,

crisp	bedding	 with	  a	sigh,	 though	 the	doctor’s	  surgical	 light	 was	 once	again

blinding	her	and	Kai	 had	taken	on	a	supernatural	glow.

     “Levana’s	 dead?”	she	murmured.

     “Levana’s	 dead.”

     With	 that	confirmation,	  and	the	stark	memory	 of	a	gunshot	and	a	splatter	 of

blood	burned	into	her	mind,	she	opened	her	brain	to	all	the	other	questions.	They

tumbled	like	 a	waterfall	 into	her	thoughts.	 Cress,	Thorne,	Scarlet,	Wolf,	 Winter,

Jacin,	Iko—

     “Everyone’s	 alive,”	  Kai	 said	as	if	 her	 thoughts	were	 written	 in	 plain	green

text	on	her	irises.	“But	 Cress	is	…	her	vitals	 are	stable,	and	they’re	hopeful	for	 a

recovery,	 but	 she	 hasn’t	  come	 out	 of	  suspension	 yet.	 Scarlet	 had	 a	  mild

concussion,	but	  she’s	 all	 right.	  Thorne	  lost	 two	  fingers,	 but	 he’s	  a	 prime

candidate	for	prostheses	if	he	 wants	them.	Wolf	 is	 …	well,	 they	 can’t	undo	 the

bioengineering	without	  risking	 serious	damage,	but	 he’s	alive	 and	 seems,	you

know,	like	 Wolf.	  Jacin	suffered	some	injuries,	 but	nothing	 life	 threatening,	and

Princess	Winter…”	 His	gaze	dropped.

     Cinder	 felt	 a	jolt	 in	 her	wrist,	 and	 her	thumb	 twitched	 uncontrollably	 for	 a

moment	before	there	was	another	zing	and	it	stopped.

     “She’s	  been	  inconsolable	 since	  the	  revolt.	  They’ve	  had	  to	  keep	 her

restrained.	And	a	lot	 of	 people	died,	on	both	 sides,	but	…	 it	worked.	 The	outer

sectors	responded	in	 droves,	far	 too	 many	 for	 the	 thaumaturges	to	 control	 at

788
once.	People	 were	still	  coming	 in	 from	  the	outer	 sectors	for	  hours	after	 the

fighting	 was	over.”

     Another	 zap	of	 electricity,	 then	the	snap	of	 a	metal	latch.	 “Give	 that	 a	try,”

said	Dr.	Nandez,	turning	off	 the	holograph.

     Cinder	 lifted	 her	 hand.	It	  had	been	polished	 to	 a	sparkling	 finish	  and	she

could	see	echoes	of	her	dark	hair	 in	the	surface.	She	curled	her	 fingers	one	at	a

time,	then	rolled	 her	wrist	 back	 and	forth.	 Spreading	her	fingers,	she	tested	the

functionality	 of	 the	tools	 inside	 them—all	 except	the	gun,	 which	 she	hoped	to

never	fire	again.

     Resealing	her	fingertips,	she	peered	at	the	doctor.	“Thank	you.”

     “My	  pleasure,”	said	Dr.	Nandez,	standing.	“I’ll	  be	back	to	 check	on	you	in	 a

few	hours.”

     As	 soon	as	she	left,	 Cinder	felt	 the	 air	change.	A	 sudden	tension,	a	sudden

stillness.

     She	licked	her	parched	lips.	“Are	 you	the	king	of	 Luna	now?”

     Kai	 looked	 surprised	 at	the	 question.	 “No.	 As	 Levana	 was	never	 the	true

queen,	she	didn’t	have	the	 legal	power	to	 appoint	anyone	as	king	 consort.	I	 am

technically	a	widower,	 but	I	think	 I	can	get	that	little	mishap	annulled.”

     “‘Little	  mishap’?”	  For	something	she	had	risked	 her	life	 to	prevent	multiple

times,	Cinder	wasn’t	sure	she	could	consider	Kai’s	marriage	a	“little	 mishap.”

     “A	 temporary	 mistake,”	 he	said,	shoving	 away	the	surgeon’s	light	 so	 it	was

no	longer	blinding	 Cinder.	“With	  all	 that	was	going	on,	we	never	 even	had	time

to	consummate.”

     Cinder	coughed.	“Unnecessary	information.”

     “Really?	 You	weren’t	 curious?”

789
     “I’d	 been	trying	 not	to	think	about	it.”

     “Well—think	  no	more.	I’m	 still	 thanking	all	 the	stars,	one	by	one.”

     Cinder	would	 have	laughed,	except	it	hurt	too	much.

     Pacing	around	the	bed,	Kai	claimed	the	doctor’s	stool.	 The	wheels	clacked	on

the	floor	 as	he	pulled	himself	 so	close	his	 knees	pressed	against	the	bed	frame.

“What	else	do	you	need	to	know	before	I	let	 you	get	some	rest?”

     She	ran	her	 tongue	against	the	 roof	 of	her	 mouth,	wishing	 she	would	  have

drank	more	water.	“Am	 I	…	do	they	think	 I’m…?”

     “The	 queen?”

     She	nodded.

     “Yes,	 Cinder.	 You’re	 the	 queen	of	Luna.”	  The	words	 were	unrelenting.	 So

unapologetic.	 “They	 ran	 your	 DNA	  while	 you	 were	 unconscious	 and	you’re

definitely	 Selene.	According	  to	 Lunar	 law,	 that	means	you	 were	 the	 princess

regent	until	 your	 thirteenth	 birthday,	 at	 which	 time	 you	 became	the	queen	 of

Luna.	Levana	was	 the	impostor.	 They’re	 calling	 you	 ‘the	lost	 queen.’	 They’ve

been	celebrating	your	 return	 since	the	night	 of	 the	battle.	 Of	 course,	they	will

want	to	have	a	ceremony	eventually—more	for	tradition	 than	anything	else.”

     Cinder	 bit	 her	 lip,	 thinking	  of	 the	years	she’d	 spent	under	 Adri’s	  care.	A

mechanic,	a	servant,	a	piece	 of	property.	 All	  that	time	 she’d	been	royalty,	 and

she	had	no	idea.

     “Even	 the	thaumaturges,	the	 ones	who	are	still	 alive,	 say	their	 loyalty	 is	 to

the	Lunar	throne	and	whoever	sits	on	it.	At	 least,	that’s	what	they’re	 saying	now.

We’ll	 see	how	they	feel	 once	things	start	to	change	around	here.”	Kai	 scratched

behind	his	ear.	 “The	 army	is	 being	problematic.	 We’re	 recalling	 all	 those	who

were	sent	to	Earth,	but	some	of	the	soldiers	are	…	well,	not	 convinced	the	war	is

790
over.	Some	have	gone	rogue	on	Earth	and	the	Earthen	militaries	  are	doing	their

best	to	track	them	down,	but	we’re	hoping	to—”

     She	reached	for	his	hands,	silencing	him.

     She	was	still	working	 through	the	fact	that	she	was	the	queen.

     She	was	the	queen	of	Luna.

     She	reminded	herself	that	this	 was	what	she	wanted.	This	responsibility,	 this

duty,	this	right	 was	what	she’d	 been	fighting	for	 all	along.	 The	chance	to	rid	the

world	of	 Levana	and	change	the	country	she’d	been	born	to.	To	change	it	for	the

better.

     Kai’s	 fingers	covered	hers.	Only	 then	did	she	realize	she’d	grabbed	him	with

her	cyborg	hand.

     “I’m	  sorry,”	  said	Kai.	 “You	  don’t	 need	to	 worry	 about	 all	 that	right	 now.

Torin	and	I	 are	taking	care	of	everything.	Making	 sure	the	injured	 are	taken	care

of,	getting	the	city	 cleaned	up	…	oh,	and	the	antidote.	We’re	 preparing	some	big

shipments	for	 Earth,	 and	the	 technicians	have	 been	working	 to	 produce	more

batches.	We’ve	  already	  sent	 more	 than	  a	 thousand	 doses	 home	 with	  the

diplomats	and	they	 say	we’ll	 have	triple	 that	amount	 ready	to	go	 out	tomorrow

evening,	although…”	 He	hesitated,	a	shadow	crossing	his	face.	 “The	antidote	 is

produced	using	 shell	  blood,	 and	 there’s	 a	 whole	 complicated	 mess	 of	 laws

surrounding	 the	shells,	 and	 the	antidote,	 and	 I	 didn’t	 feel	 comfortable	  doing

anything	without	 you.	That’s	 something	we’re	 going	to	 have	to	deal	with,	 when

you’re	ready.”	 He	trailed	off,	 though	Cinder	could	see	the	struggle	warring	in	 his

eyes.	The	relief	of	 having	the	antidote	 at	his	disposal,	coupled	 with	the	 horrible

things	Levana	had	been	doing	to	obtain	it.

     She	tried	 to	 smile,	but	 she	knew	 how	 drained	she	must	 look.	 “Thank	 you,

791
Kai.”

     He	 shifted	 his	 head,	chunks	of	 hair	 falling	  across	his	 brow.	 “I’m	  sorry.	 I

should	let	you	sleep.	It’s	just	 …	it’s	 really	good	to	see	you	awake.	To	talk	 to	you

about	all	this.”

     “How	 long	was	I	 out?”

     “Almost	 three	days.”

     She	turned	her	eyes	toward	the	ceiling.	“Three	days.	What	a	luxury.”

     “A	 much	 deserved	one.”	Kai	 lifted	 her	hand	and	pressed	his	lips	against	her

knuckles.	“Take	your	time	 recovering.	The	hard	part	is	over.”

     “Is	 it?”

     He	hesitated.	“Well.	 The	dangerous	part	is	over.”

     “Can	you	 do	something	for	me?”

     Kai	  frowned,	 like	  he	didn’t	  want	 to	  encourage	any	 crazy	 ideas,	but	  the

moment	was	brief.	“Anything.”

     “Have	 all	the	Earthen	leaders	gone	back	to	Earth?”

     “No.	  We	were	 able	 to	sneak	 all	 the	Earthens	out	 of	 Artemisia	  during	 the

fighting,	 once	we	 got	 the	ports	 open,	but	 most	 of	 them	came	back	 after	 they

learned	you	succeeded.	I	think	they’re	all	waiting	 to	meet	you.”

     “Can	 you	 call	  a	meeting?	 You,	 me,	 the	 Earthen	leaders	 …	 and	 …	 does

Luna	…	do	I	have	a	cabinet,	or	a	prime	minister	or	anything?”

     His	 lip	  twitched	  like	 he	 wanted	 to	 tease	her,	 but	 he	 withheld	  the	 urge.

“Normally	   the	 head	 thaumaturge	  would	  act	 as	  second	 in	  command,	 but

Thaumaturge	Aimery	  is	 dead.	 Your	 court	 is	 in	  sad	disarray	 right	  now,	 I’m

afraid.”

     “Well,	  whoever	you	think	 should	 be	invited	 then,	to	an	official	  meeting.	An

792
important	one.”

     “Cinder…”

     “And	 my	stepmother.	Is	she	still	here?”

     He	 frowned.	 “Actually,	  yes.	She	 and	her	daughter	 have	been	given	 a	spot

aboard	one	of	our	representatives’	ships,	but	it	won’t	be	leaving	until	 tomorrow.”

     “Bring	 her	too.	And	 maybe	that	doctor	that	was	just	here.”

     “Cinder,	 you	need	to	rest.”

     “I’m	  fine.	I	 have	to	do	 this—as	soon	as	possible,	before	anyone	else	tries	to

kill	 me.”

     He	grinned,	but	it	 was	a	tender	look.	“You	 have	to	do	what,	exactly?”

     “Sign	 the	Treaty	 of	 Bremen.”	 Saying	the	 words	brought	 a	real	smile	 to	her

lips.	“I	 want	to	make	our	alliance	official.”

793
	




                                          Ninety-Three







Jacin	slumped	in	the	visitor	chair,	watching	 the	doctor	check	Winter’s	 vitals	with

no	small	amount	of	 envy.	He	wished	 he	was	the	one	to	administer	 to	her	needs,

to	know	 from	 a	readout	of	life	 statistics	 how	she	was	faring	 and	what	 he	could

do	to	make	her	 better.	Instead	he	had	to	 sit	there	and	pretend	 to	be	patient	and

wait	 for	 the	doctor	 to	 inform	 him,	 once	 again,	there	was	 nothing	 to	 be	done.

They	just	had	to	wait	and	see	if	she	would	recover.

     Recover.

     Jacin	hated	the	 word.	Every	 time	 it	 was	said	he	could	 hear	Winter’s	  voice,

haunted	and	afraid.	I	 do	 not	know	that	 even	a	sane	person	 could	recover	 from

this.	So	how	can	I?

     “Her	  heartbeat	 is	  still	  accelerated,”	  said	 the	 doctor,	  putting	  away	  his

portscreen,	“but	 at	 least	 she’s	sleeping.	 We’ll	  check	 on	 her	 again	when	 she

wakes	up.”

     Jacin	 nodded,	holding	 back	 any	 of	 the	multiple	  retorts	 he	had.	When	 she

wakes	up	kicking	 and	screaming.	When	 she	wakes	up	crying.	 When	she	wakes

up	howling	 again	like	 a	sad,	lonely	 wolf.	  When	she	wakes	up	 and	nothing	 has

changed.

794
     “I	don’t	 get	it,”	Jacin	grumbled,	letting	his	gaze	rest	on	Winter’s	forehead—

at	least	she	was	calm	in	her	sleep.	“It	should	have	made	her	better,	using	her	gift.

Not	worse.	She	shouldn’t	be	like	this,	after	so	many	years	of	fighting	it.”

     “All	 those	years	are	precisely	what	caused	it.”	The	doctor	sighed,	and	he	too

looked	wistfully	down	on	 the	princess.	Too	wistfully.	Jacin	bristled.	“It	might

help	to	think	of	the	brain	and	our	gift	like	a	muscle.	If	you	don’t	use	that	muscle

for	many	years,	and	then	one	day	you	decide	to	push	it	 to	its	 full	 potential,

you’re	more	likely	to	strain	it	than	strengthen	it.	She	did	too	much,	too	quickly,

and	it	…	damaged	her	mind,	quite	extensively.”

     I	am	destroyed,	she’d	said.	Not	damaged.	Destroyed.

     And	that	was	before	Aimery	had	even	shown	up.

     As	soon	as	the	doctor	left,	Jacin	scooted	his	chair	closer	to	Winter’s	bed.	He

checked	the	padded	restraints	on	her	limbs—they	were	secure,	but	not	too	tight.

She	had	often	woken	up	with	violent	thrashing	and	clawing,	and	one	medical

assistant	had	nearly	lost	an	eye	before	they	decided	it	was	best	to	secure	her.

Jacin	hated	watching	them	do	it,	but	even	he	agreed	it	was	for	the	best.	She	had

become	a	danger	to	others	and	to	herself.	Her	teeth	had	even	left	an	impressive

gash	on	his	own	shoulder,	yet	he	still	couldn’t	fathom	that	it	was	Winter	lashing

out.	Sweet,	gentle	Winter.

     Broken,	destroyed	Winter.

     Jacin	let	his	fingers	lie	on	her	wrists	longer	than	was	necessary,	but	there	was

no	one	to	chastise	him	now,	other	than	himself.

     The	rash	from	the	disease	grew	fainter	every	day.	He	doubted	it	would	leave

many	scars,	and	what	it	did	leave	would	be	largely	unnoticeable	on	her	dark

skin.	Not	like	the	scars	on	her	cheek	that	had	paled	over	time.

795
     He	both	hated	and	admired	those	scars.	On	one	hand,	they	reminded	him	of	a

time	she’d	been	suffering.	Of	a	time	when	he	hadn’t	been	able	to	protect	her.

     On	 the	other	hand,	 they	also	reminded	 him	 of	 her	bravery	and	 the	courage

that	so	few	 people	saw	 in	 her.	In	 her	subtly	 defiant	 way,	 she	had	dared	to	 go

against	Levana’s	 wishes	and	the	 expectations	of	 their	 society	 time	 and	again.

She	had	been	forced	to	choose	her	battles,	but	choose	them	she	had,	and	both	her

losses	and	her	victories	had	cost	her	so	much.

     The	doctors	were	at	a	loss	for	what	 to	do	with	 her.	They	had	little	 experience

with	Lunar	 sickness.	Few	people	chose	to	let	their	sanity	deteriorate	like	she	had,

and	they	could	only	guess	what	the	long-term	effects	might	be.

     And	 all	because	she	refused	to	be	like	Levana	and	Aimery	 and	all	the	rest	of

the	Lunars	 who	 abused	and	manipulated	 and	 used	others	 to	fulfill	   their	 own

selfish	desires.

     Even	 in	 her	 last	 desperate	act,	when	 she	 had	used	 Scarlet’s	 hand	to	 kill

Aimery,	Jacin	knew	she	had	done	it	to	save	him,	not	herself.	Never	herself.

     Just	like	he	would	 do	anything	to	save	her.

     He	 dragged	a	 hand	down	 his	 face,	overcome	 with	 exhaustion.	 He’d	 spent

every	night	 since	the	 fight	 at	her	side	 and	was	surviving	  on	little	  nourishment

and	even	less	sleep.

     His	 parents,	 he	had	 been	shocked	 to	 learn,	 were	 not	 dead.	He	 had	 been

certain	that	his	defying	 Levana’s	order	 and	helping	Winter	 escape	would	end	in

their	 public	 executions,	like	  Levana	had	 threatened,	but	 a	 twist	 of	 irony	 had

spared	their	lives.	His	 father	 had	been	transferred	to	a	lumber	 sector	years	ago.

When	Cinder’s	call	 for	revolution	 broadcast,	the	civilians	 rioted,	imprisoning	 all

of	their	 guards	 and	the	 guards’	 families.	 By	 the	time	 Levana’s	 order	 to	 have

796
them	killed	 had	come	through,	Jacin’s	parents	were	no	longer	under	her	domain.

The	lumber	 sector,	 it	 turned	 out,	 was	 the	same	 one	where	 Winter	  had	been

poisoned.

     He	hadn’t	 seen	them	yet,	as	all	guards	were	waiting	to	be	granted	trials	under

the	new	regime.	Most	would	be	offered	 a	chance	to	swear	fealty	to	Queen	Selene

and	join	the	new	 royal	guard	she	was	building.	 He	knew	 his	father,	a	good	 man

who	had	long	suffered	under	Levana’s	thumb,	would	 be	happy	at	the	change.

     Jacin	 himself	 was	 nervous	to	 be	 reunited	 with	 his	 family.	  After	 years	 of

pushing	everyone	he	loved	 away,	it	 was	difficult	  to	 imagine	a	 life	 in	which	 he

was	free	to	 care	for	 people	 without	 fear	 of	 them	becoming	 pawns	to	 be	 used

against	him.

     He	knew	 they	would	 love	 to	see	Winter	again	too,	 who	had	been	like	 a	part

of	their	family	 growing	 up.	But	 …	not	like	 this.	Seeing	her	like	 this	would	break

their	hearts.

     Seeing	her	like	this	…

     Winter	 whimpered,	a	pathetic	sound	like	that	of	a	dying	 animal.	Jacin	jumped

to	his	feet	and	settled	a	hand	on	her	shoulder	in	what	he	hoped	was	a	comforting

gesture.	She	whipped	 her	 head	back	 and	forth	  a	few	 times,	 her	 eyes	jerking

beneath	her	closed	 lids,	 but	she	 didn’t	 wake	 up.	 When	she	 had	settled	 down

again,	Jacin	breathed	a	heavy	sigh.

     He	wanted	her	to	be	better.	He	wanted	this	to	be	over.	He	wanted	her	to	open

her	eyes	and	 not	 thrash	or	 bite	 or	 howl.	 He	 wanted	her	 to	 look	 at	 him	 with

recognition	and	 happiness	and	that	hint	 of	mischief	 that	 had	captured	his	heart

long	before	she’d	been	the	most	beautiful	girl	on	Luna.

     He	pulled	 a	coiled	spring	of	 hair	away	from	 her	lips,	brushing	 it	back	off	 her

797
face.

     “I	  love	 you,	 Princess,”	 he	whispered,	 hovering	 over	 her	 for	 a	 long	 time,

tracing	the	planes	of	her	face	and	the	curve	of	her	lips	and	remembering	how	she

had	kissed	him	in	the	menagerie.	She’d	told	 him	then	that	she	loved	him,	 and	he

hadn’t	been	brave	enough	to	say	it	back.

     But	now	 …

     He	placed	one	hand	on	the	other	side	of	her	body,	 leaning	into	it	 for	balance.

His	heart	was	racing,	and	he	felt	like	an	idiot.	 If	anyone	saw	him,	they’d	 think	 he

was	one	of	Winter’s	creepy	admirers.

     It	 would	 change	nothing—every	bit	 of	 logic	told	 him	 so.	A	stupid,	 idealistic

kiss	could	not	put	her	mind	back	together.

     But	he	had	nothing	to	lose.

     Winter	 went	on	sleeping,	her	chest	rising.	Falling.

     Rising	and	falling	 and	rising.

     Jacin	 realized	he	 was	stalling.	  Building	  up	hope,	 but	 also	erecting	 a	wall

around	himself	for	when	nothing	 happened.	Because	nothing	would	happen.

     He	leaned	over	her,	leaving	a	hint	of	 space	between	them,	and	dug	his	fingers

into	the	thin	hospital	blankets.	“I	 love	you,	 Winter.	I	 always	have.”

     He	kissed	her.	One-sided	as	it	was,	it	 had	little	 of	the	passion	there’d	been	in

the	menagerie,	but	so	much	more	hope.	And	a	whole	lot	of	foolishness.

     Pulling	 away,	he	swallowed	hard	and	dared	to	open	his	eyes.

     Winter	 was	staring	at	him.

     Jacin	snapped	backward.	“Dammit,	 Winter.	 You	 …	how	 long…”	 He	 rubbed

the	back	of	his	neck.	“Were	you	just	pretending	 to	be	asleep?”

     Winter	 stared	up	at	him,	a	dreamy	half	smile	on	her	lips.

798
     Jacin’s	pulse	skittered	at	that	look,	 his	attention	dipping	 back	to	her	lips.	Was

it	possible—?

     “Win—Princess?”

     “Hello,”	  she	said,	her	voice	 parched,	but	no	 less	sweet	than	usual.	“Do	 you

see	the	snow?”

     His	brow	 twitched.	“Snow?”

     Winter	 peered	 up	at	 the	ceiling.	  Though	 her	wrists	 were	 bound	 tight,	 she

opened	up	a	palm,	like	 trying	 to	catch	something.	 “It	 is	more	 beautiful	than	 I’d

ever	imagined,”	 she	whispered.	“I	 am	the	 girl	 of	ice	 and	snow,	and	I	 think	 I’m

very	glad	to	meet	you.”

     Disappointment	 tried	to	 burrow	into	 Jacin’s	chest,	but	the	walls	 he’d	 thrown

up	did	their	job,	and	it	 was	repelled	as	quickly	as	it	came.

     At	 least	she	wasn’t	trying	to	bite	him.

     “Hello,	   snow	 girl,”	   he	  said,	 folding	   her	 fingers	  around	 an	  imaginary

snowflake.	“I’m	 glad	to	 meet	you	too.”

799
	




                                         Ninety-Four







Still	 weak-legged,	Cinder	held	 on	to	 Kai’s	 arm	 as	he	 guided	her	 through

Artemisia	Palace	for	 the	 first	 time	 since	the	 insurrection.	All	  around	her,

enormous	windows	and	tiled	walls	glittered	in	the	sunlight.	It	was	so	beautiful.

She	was	having	trouble	believing	it	was	hers.

     Her	palace,	her	kingdom,	her	home.

     She	wondered	how	long	it	would	take	before	it	felt	real.

     Iko	had	chosen	her	dress,	a	simple	gown	taken	from	Winter’s	wardrobe,	and

done	her	hair	in	some	fancy	updo.	Cinder	was	afraid	to	move	her	head	for	fear	it

would	all	come	tumbling	down.	She	knew	she	was	supposed	to	feel	regal	and

powerful,	but	instead	she	felt	like	a	feeble	girl	playing	dress-up.

     She	drew	strength	from	Kai’s	presence	on	one	side	and	Iko	on	the	other,	even

though	Iko	wouldn’t	stop	reaching	up	and	mucking	with	her	hair.	Cinder	batted

her	away	again.

     At	least	Iko’s	 arm	was	working	again.	Dr.	Nandez	had	managed	to	return

most	of	 her	body’s	functionality,	 but	 there	was	still	 a	lot	 of	 damage	to	be

repaired.

     As	they	turned	a	corner,	she	spotted	her	new	personal	guard,	Liam	Kinney,

800
along	with	Kai’s	 adviser,	Konn	Torin.	 Beside	them	were	Adri	 and	Pearl.

     Cinder	hesitated,	her	pulse	speeding	up.

     “Cinder.”

     She	met	 Kai’s	 gaze,	his	encouraging	 smile,	 and	felt	 her	heart	 tumbling	 for

another	reason	entirely.

     “I	  know	 this	is	 weird,”	 he	 said,	“but	 I’m	  here	if	 you	 need	me.	You	 won’t

need	me,	though.	You’re	going	to	be	great.”

     “Thanks,”	 she	murmured,	fighting	 the	urge	to	 embrace	him,	to	crawl	 into	his

arms	and	hide	from	the	rest	of	the	galaxy.	Maybe	forever.

     “Also”—his	  voice	lowered—“you	  look	beautiful.”

     It	 was	Iko	who	responded,	“Thank	you	for	 noticing.”

     Kai	 laughed,	while	 Cinder,	her	 thoughts	fluttering	 in	 all	different	 directions,

ducked	her	head.

     Cinder	limped	 along,	making	 a	point	not	to	look	 at	her	stepfamily.	 When	she

was	 close	 enough,	 Konn	  Torin	  bowed	 to	  her.	 Diplomatic	   respect,	Cinder

thought,	remembering	 all	 the	many	 glares	she’d	 received	from	 this	 man	since

she’d	first	 seen	him	  at	the	 annual	ball.	 But	 when	 he	raised	 his	head,	 he	was

smiling.	In	 fact,	he	seemed	downright	friendly.

     “Your	   Majesty,”	   he	  said.	 “On	   behalf	  of	  the	  people	  of	  the	 Eastern

Commonwealth,	I	want	to	 thank	you	for	all	 you’ve	done,	and	all	you	will	 do.”

     “Oh,	 um.	 Yeah.	 Anytime.”	  With	 a	 difficult	  swallow,	  she	dared	to	 look	 at

Adri.

     Her	stepmother’s	face	had	a	gauntness	about	it.	Her	number	of	gray	hairs	had

tripled	these	past	weeks.

     There	was	a	moment	in	which	 Cinder	thought	 of	a	thousand	things	she	could

801
say	to	this	woman,	but	none	of	them	seemed	important	anymore.

     Adri’s	   gaze	 dropped	  to	  the	  floor.	  She	 and	  Pearl	  both	 lowered	  into

uncomfortable	curtsies.

     “Your	 Majesty,”	 said	Adri,	 sounding	like	 she	was	chewing	on	a	bitter	lemon.

Beside	her,	Pearl	also	mumbled,	almost	unintelligibly,	 “Your	 Majesty.”

     Iko	 snorted—a	derisive	 sound	that	Cinder	 hadn’t	even	 thought	escorts	were

capable	of	making.

     Staring	 at	the	 tops	of	 Pearl’s	 and	Adri’s	  heads,	she	attempted	to	 come	up

with	a	gracious	response—something	Kai	would	 have	said.	Things	a	good	queen

would	have	done	to	ease	the	tension.	To	offer	forgiveness.

     Instead,	she	turned	away.

     Kinney	 fisted	 a	hand	against	his	chest	and	Cinder	gave	him	 what	she	hoped

was	a	regal	 nod,	 before	Kai	 led	 her	 through	a	 pair	 of	 double	doors.	 She	had

asked	him	to	find	 a	neutral	place	to	host	this	 meeting—not	the	throne	 room	that

had	seen	so	much	blood,	or	 the	queen’s	solar,	or	 wherever	Levana	 would	 have

conducted	such	a	thing.	 She	entered	into	a	 conference	room	with	 an	 enormous

marble	table	and	two	holograph	nodes,	turned	off.

     The	room	 was	already	full.	  She	gulped,	the	uncanny	 silence	nearly	pushing

her	back	into	 the	hallway.	 She	recognized	most	of	them,	 but	her	brain	interface

wasted	no	time	in	pulling	 up	their	profiles	from	 the	net	database	anyway.

     President	Vargas	of	the	American	Republic.

     Prime	Minister	 Kamin	 of	the	African	 Union.

     Queen	Camilla	of	 the	United	Kingdom.

     Governor-General	Williams	 of	 Australia.

     Prime	Minister	 Bromstad	of	 the	European	Federation.

802
     Dr.	 Nandez—the	acclaimed	cybernetic	 surgeon,	and	Nainsi,	the	android	 that

Cinder	had	 fixed	 for	 Kai	  a	long	 time	 ago.	 She	had	been	 brought	to	 Luna	 to

record	this	occasion	for	Earth’s	official	 records.

     Adri	 and	Pearl	were	escorted	around	the	table.

     Which	 left	 only	  Iko,	 Kai,	 Konn	 Torin,	 and	 Cinder	 herself—or,	 Her	 Royal

Majesty,	Queen	Selene	Channary	Jannali	Blackburn	of	 Luna.	She	wondered	if	it

was	all	right	for	 her	to	ask	that	everyone	just	call	her	Cinder.

     Before	 she	could	speak,	the	world’s	  leaders	rose	to	their	 feet	and	started	to

applaud.	Cinder	recoiled.

     One	by	one,	they	went	around	the	room,	bowing	 and	curtsying	in	turn.

     Suddenly	 panicked,	 Cinder	 looked	 at	 Kai.	 He	 gave	 her	a	 one-shouldered

shrug,	suggesting	that,	yeah,	it’s	weird,	but	you	get	used	to	it.

     When	the	circle	 came	around	to	him,	he	too	pressed	one	hand	to	his	chest	and

inclined	his	head,	the	best	bow	he	could	 give	while	 still	 supporting	her	with	 one

arm.

     “Th-thank	  you,”	  she	stammered,	wondering	 if	  she	should	 curtsy,	 but	 she

couldn’t	perform	 a	graceful	curtsy	on	her	best	of	days,	and	it	would	be	disastrous

with	all	 her	injuries.	 Instead	she	held	her	cyborg	hand	out	to	them.	“Um,	 please,

be	seated?”

     The	clapping	had	faded,	but	no	one	sat.

     Kai	 led	Cinder	 to	the	 head	of	the	table	 and	eased	her	into	a	seat.	Only	 then

did	the	others	follow,	  Kai	taking	 the	seat	to	Cinder’s	 right.	 Adri	 and	Pearl	were

sandwiched	between	Konn	Torin	 and	President	Vargas.	They	 looked	supremely

uncomfortable.

     “Um.	  Thank	you	 all	 for	 coming	 on	 such	short	 notice,”	 Cinder	 began.	She

803
tried	folding	  her	hands	on	top	 of	the	 table,	but	 that	felt	 strange,	so	she	instead

curled	them	in	her	lap.	“I’m	 sure	you’re	 all	eager	to	return	home.”

     “I’m	  so	sorry	to	interrupt,”	 said	Queen	Camilla,	 not	looking	 at	all	sorry,	 “but

might	 I	 take	 this	moment	 to	 say	 congratulations	 on	 the	 reclamation	 of	 your

throne.”

     Another	 fit	  of	 clapping	 started	 at	the	 queen’s	words,	 and	 Cinder	 had	 the

impression	they	 weren’t	 so	 much	congratulating	 her	 on	 becoming	a	 queen	as

they	were	congratulating	themselves	on	no	longer	having	to	deal	with	Levana.

     “Thanks.	 Thank	you.	I	 hope	you’ll	 understand	that	I	 …	um.	 I	hope	you’ll	 be

patient	with	me.	This	is	all	 new	for	me	and	I’m	 not…”

     I’m	 not	really	 a	queen.

     She	glanced	around	 the	table,	at	the	 eager,	hopeful	faces	staring	 at	her	like

she	was	some	sort	of	hero.	Like	 she	had	done	something	great.	Her	 gaze	swept

around	the	 table,	feeling	 more	 nervous	and	 inadequate	with	 every	 person	she

crossed—older,	wiser,	experienced—until	Kai.

     As	soon	as	he	had	her	attention,	he	winked.

     Her	stomach	flipped.

     She	turned	away	and	squared	her	shoulders.

     “I	 asked	you	here	today	because	the	relationship	between	Earth	and	Luna	has

been	strained	for	a	long	time,	and	my	first	act	as…”	 She	hesitated	and	moved	her

hands	to	 the	top	 of	 the	 table	again,	 lacing	 her	fingers	 together.	 A	 few	 gazes

dropped	to	her	cyborg	prosthetic,	but	all	tried	 to	pretend	they	hadn’t	noticed.	“As

my	 first	 act	 as	queen	 of	 Luna,	 I	 want	 to	 forge	 a	 peaceful	alliance	 with	  the

Earthen	Union.	Even	if	 it’s	 only	 symbolic	 at	first,	 I	hope	it	 will	 be	the	start	of	 a

fruitful	 and	mutually	beneficial	 …	political	 …	 um…”	 She	glanced	at	Kai.

804
     “Relationship?”	 he	suggested.

     “Relationship.”	  She	straightened	her	spine,	hoping	she	didn’t	sound	as	stupid

as	she	felt.	 Around	  her,	though,	 the	 diplomats	 were	nodding,	 all	 respect	 and

agreement.	“I’m	 aware	that	a	peaceful	alliance	will	 begin	with	 all	Lunar	 military

units	being	removed	from	Earthen	soil,	 and	I	will	 try	 to	ensure	that	the	transition

is	completed	as	quickly	as	possible.”

     A	 breath	of	relief	washed	over	those	gathered.

     “In	 fact,”	 Cinder	 continued,	“my	 understanding	is	that,	under	Kai—Emperor

Kai—Kaito?”	  She	raised	her	eyebrows	 at	him,	 realizing	 this	was	 the	first	 time

she’d	ever	been	expected	to	be	formal	in	his	presence.

     In	response,	Kai	looked	like	 he	wanted	to	laugh.	She	glared	at	him.

     “Under	 Emperor	Kaito’s	 instruction,”	  she	continued,	“some	of	those	military

units	are	already	en	route	back	to	Luna.”

     A	 round	of	nods.	They	had	heard	this	already.

     She	swallowed,	hard.	Her	wounds	were	starting	to	itch	 on	top	of	the	constant,

drug-dulled	 aching.	She	hoped	 that	her	 first	 act	as	queen	wouldn’t	  be	passing

out.

     “Luna	 will	  also	continue	to	 produce	and	distribute	 the	letumosis	antidote	 as

it’s	 necessary	and	our	 resources	allow.	 As	 you	 know,	 the	antidote	 was	 being

obtained	from	ungifted	 Lunars	who	 had	been	forced	into	 a	permanent	comatose

state	in	order	to	 have	their	 blood	extracted,	which	 is	 a	violation	 of	 their	 rights.

I’m	 told	it	 might	 be	possible	to	manufacture	lab-grown	 blood	platelets	to	mimic

those	of	the	shell—um,	 ungifted	 Lunars,	and	I	 hope	to	redirect	 Luna’s	 research

efforts	 in	 that	direction,	  and	find	 a	 solution	 that	 will	 be	 fair	 to	 everyone.	Of

course,	all	  samples	 of	 the	 antidote	  that	 we	 already	 have	 in	  stock	 will	  be

805
dispersed	to	Earth	immediately.”

     Nodding.	 Smiles.	Relief	and	gratitude.

     Cinder	 braced	herself.	 “That	 said,	I	 do	 have	a	few	 …	 requests	to	make	 of

you.”

     As	 the	air	 of	 victory	 around	the	 table	gave	way	 to	 masked	patience,	and	a

hint	of	tension,	Cinder	tucked	a	strand	of	fallen	 hair	behind	her	ear.

     “I	 want	to	make	clear	that	these	requests	are	just	that—requests.	Your	answer

won’t	 change	 my	 mind	  about	 any	 of	 the	 promises	 I’ve	  made.	This	  isn’t	 a

negotiation.”	She	pulled	herself	closer	to	the	table.

     “First.”	  She	 tried	 to	hold	 eye	 contact	with	  those	around	 her,	but	 found	 it

impossible,	her	 gaze	sinking	 down	 to	 her	hands	 while	 she	spoke.	“For	  years,

cyborgs	 have	been	 treated	 as	secondary	 citizens…”	  She	 cleared	 her	 throat,

feeling	Kai’s	 presence,	burning,	 beside	her.	“I	 experienced	it	 firsthand	growing

up	in	 the	 Commonwealth.	 Underage	 cyborgs	are	 seen	more	as	 property	 than

people,	 with	  hardly	   any	 more	  rights	  than	  androids.	 There’s	  a	  prejudice

surrounding	us,	 that	because	we’ve	 been	given	 unnatural	abilities—man-made

abilities—we’re	 a	danger	to	 society.	But	 it	 isn’t	 true.	We	 just	want	 acceptance,

like	 anybody	 else.	And	 so,	 my	 request	is	 that	 all	 laws	 regarding	 cyborgs	be

reexamined,	and	we	 be	given	 the	same	equality	 and	basic	rights	 as	everybody

else.”

     Daring	 to	look	 up,	she	saw	more	than	one	flushed	face,	and	no	one	daring	to

make	eye	contact	with	her.	The	new	cyborg	queen	of	Luna.

     Except	Kai,	 who	 looked	ashamed	to	be	included	with	 the	others.	But	despite

his	decision	 to	stop	 the	cyborg	 draft	 for	 letumosis	testing,	 the	Commonwealth

continued	to	have	many	of	the	same	injustices	as	the	rest	of	the	planet.

806
     Kai	 was	the	first	 to	nod.	“The	 Commonwealth	 agrees	to	your	request.	These

laws	are	unfair	and	antiquated.”

     After	  another	 long	 silence,	 Queen	 Camilla	 cleared	 her	 throat.	 “The	  UK

agrees	as	well.	We	will	 begin	 the	reexamination	of	 the	laws	in	earnest	upon	my

return.”

     Prime	 Minister	 Bromstad	bashfully	 admitted	 that	he	would	 need	to	set	up	 a

parliamentary	vote	before	 any	changes	could	be	made	into	law,	 as	did	the	other

republics,	but	there	was	general	agreement	around	the	table.	It	was	by	no	means

a	hearty	agreement,	Cinder	 could	tell,	 and	she	tried	 to	disguise	 how	much	 this

irked	 her.	She	knew	 that	 just	because	one	cyborg	 had	 saved	the	world	  didn’t

mean	they	were	ready	to	give	 up	generations	of	 prejudices,	but	Cinder	 hoped	it

was	a	start.

     “Second.	 I	ask	that	 all	restrictions	 on	Lunar	 emigration	 be	removed.	Lunars

should	be	free	to	come	 and	go	between	Luna	and	Earth	 as	they	please—I	don’t

want	Luna	 to	 feel	like	  a	prison	 to	its	 citizens	 anymore.	Likewise,	  once	we’re

prepared	for	it,	I	 will	 open	Luna’s	ports	to	 Earthen	travel	and	emigration.	Like	 it

used	to	  be,	when	  Luna	 first	  became	 a	 country	 and	 trade	 and	 travel	 were

encouraged.	I	feel	 like	  it’s	 the	only	  way	our	 two	 societies	 will	  begin	to	 start

trusting	each	other.”

     As	 she	 spoke,	she	noticed	 many	 glances	 being	 passed	between	the	 other

leaders.

     It	  was	 the	  Australian	  governor-general	 who	  dared	 to	  speak.	 “While	  I

understand	your	motives,	 how	can	we	 trust	that	 the	Lunars	who	 come	into	 our

countries	won’t…”	 He	hesitated.

     “Manipulate	    you?”	   said	  Cinder.	   “Brainwash	   your	   people?	  Commit

807
unspeakable	crimes	against	humanity,	knowing	 how	 easy	it	 will	 be	for	 them	to

get	away	with	it?”

     He	flashed	a	wry	smile.	 “Exactly.”

     “I	  believe	 that	 Earthens	and	Lunars	 can	 coexist	 peacefully,”	  said	Cinder.

“We’ve	 seen	it	in	 Farafrah	and	other	north	 African	 towns	 over	the	past	decade,

where	close	to	fifteen	percent	of	the	population	 is	made	up	of	Lunar	immigrants.

They	work	together.	They	trust	each	other.”

     “Fifteen	  percent?”	said	 Africa’s	  Prime	 Minister	 Kamin.	  “I’ve	  never	heard

this	statistic.”

     “They	 don’t	 publicize	it,	 but	it	didn’t	 seem	to	be	a	secret,	even	to	the	Earthen

locals.	They	had	formed	a	mutually	beneficial	 relationship.”

     “As	 lovely	  as	that	 thought	is,”	  said	Kamin,	 “with	  all	 due	respect,	 you	are

very	young,	 Your	 Majesty.	 You	may	 not	be	 aware	that	there	was	 a	time	when

travel	was	encouraged	between	Earth	and	Luna,	and	in	that	time,	we	experienced

episodes	of	mass	brainwashing	 put	upon	 our	 people,	forced	 suicides,	rapes	…

Not	only	 is	 it	difficult	  to	 prove	when	 a	Lunar	 has	manipulated	an	Earthen,	but

half	the	time,	we	 can’t	even	tell	 a	crime	was	committed.”	 She	stopped	herself	as

her	voice	started	to	rise.	“I	of	course	mean	no	disrespect	to	you,	Your	Majesty.”

     “No	  disrespect	taken,”	 said	Cinder.	 “I	  am,	in	 fact,	 quite	 familiar	  with	 the

Massacre	at	New	 Haven,	 41	T.E.,	the	Mindless	 Marches	of	 18	 T.E.,	the	highly

publicized	case	of	Roget	v.	 Caprice	in	the	second	era,	and,	oh,	about	a	thousand

other	notable	examples	of	Lunars	exerting	their	gift	 on	the	people	of	Earth.”

     Kamin	 looked	taken	aback.	In	fact,	 the	whole	table	seemed	more	than	a	little

surprised.

     Leaning	 forward,	  Cinder	 spoke	 very	 clearly.	  “I	  have	 a	computer	  in	 my

808
brain,”	 she	said.	“So	while	I’m	 not	going	 to	tell	you	 that	I	am	the	smartest	or,	by

any	means,	the	most	experienced	person	 in	this	 room,	I	 would	 suggest	that	no

one	use	my	youth	to	believe	that	I	am	also	ignorant.”

     “Of	 course,”	said	Kamin,	 newly	tense.	“Forgive	 me.	I	meant	no	offense.”

     “Your	 concerns	are	legitimate,”	  said	Cinder.	“If	  I	could	 offer	 you	a	solution

—a	promise	that	no	Earthen	would	 ever	be	manipulated	again,	or	 would	at	least

be	given	an	opportunity	 to	protect	themselves	against	that	manipulation—would

you	agree	to	my	request?”

     “It	 would	 be	worth	 considering,”	 said	President	Vargas.	“And	 I,	 for	one,	am

dying	to	know	 what	this	solution	might	 be.”

     “Right.”	  Cinder	flicked	 her	 hand	toward	her	stepmother.	“This	 is	 Linh	 Adri,

a	citizen	of	the	Eastern	Commonwealth.”

     Adri	 started,	whipping	her	gaze	around	the	table	of	very	important	 people.

     “Adri’s	  husband,	a	man	named	Linh	Garan,	was	an	inventor	who	 specialized

in	android	systems	and	cybernetics.	He’s	 deceased	now,	but	when	he	was	alive,

he	invented	a	…	device.	It	attaches	to	a	person’s	nervous	system	and	can	protect

them	from	 being	manipulated	 by	 the	Lunar	 gift.	 Levana	learned	of	 this	 device

recently	and	did	her	best	to	have	all	patents	and	blueprints	concerning	the	device

destroyed,	 even	 going	 so	  far	 as	 to	  have	 Adri,	  the	 rightful	   owner	 of	  the

technology,	imprisoned	here	on	Luna.”

     Adri	  had	gone	 pale.	“I’m	  sorry,	 but	 I	 don’t	 know	 anything	  about	it.	 This

device,	if	it	 ever	existed,	is	long	gone—”

     “Well,	  it’s	 sort	of	 long	 gone,”	 interrupted	 Cinder.	“As	 far	 as	I	 know,	 there

were	 only	 two	  working	  prototypes.	 One	 was	 in	 an	 Earthen	 woman	 named

Michelle	 Benoit,	who	 was	killed	 during	 the	attacks	in	 Paris.	The	other	is	 inside

809
me.”	She	turned	to	 Dr.	Nandez,	whose	interest	 seemed	piqued	for	the	first	 time

since	the	meeting	had	started.

     Leaning	 forward,	 the	 doctor	 cupped	her	 chin	 in	 one	 hand.	“On	 your	 axis

vertebra?”	she	said.	“I	saw	it	on	your	holograph,	 but	I	didn’t	 know	what	it	 was.”

     Cinder	 nodded.	“I	hope	you’ll	  tell	 me	the	device	can	be	safely	removed,	and

the	hardware	 reproduced.	If	  we	 can	 copy	 it,	 there	could	  come	a	 time	 when

everyone	who	wants	 to	avoid	 bioelectrical	 manipulation	 would	 have	the	power

to	do	so.”

     A	 rustle	of	disbelief.

     “Is	 that	possible?”	said	President	Vargas.

     “Absolutely,”	   said	Cinder.	  “It	 worked	 on	 me,	 and	it	  worked	 on	Michelle

Benoit.”

     “I	  hate	 to	 be	 pessimistic,”	  said	 Dr.	  Nandez,	 “but	 your	  installed	 device

appeared	to	have	severe	damage.	Though	it’s	possible	we	could	use	it	to	create	a

blueprint	 for	 the	hardware,	 I	 have	to	 assume	that	any	 programming	 has	been

damaged	beyond	repair.	If	 Queen	Levana	 really	 did	have	 the	data	destroyed,	I

don’t	know	 how	easily	it	can	be	reproduced.”

     “You’re	  right.	  Mine	 was	 destroyed.”	 Cinder	 risked	 a	 glance	 at	Adri	  and

Pearl,	who	 were	 frowning	 as	 they	tried	 to	 follow	  the	 conversation.	“Luckily,

Linh	 Garan	created	a	backup	for	 the	 device’s	internal	 software.	 He	was	clever

enough	to	hide	it	in	an	obscure	place	where	no	one	would	think	to	 look	for	 it.	Do

you	know,	Linh-jiĕ?”

     Startled	at	the	formal	greeting,	Adri	 shook	her	head.

     “He	 hid	it	inside	 the	personality	chip	of	a	lowly	 Serv9.2.”

     Iko	 squeaked.

810
     Redness	crept	into	Adri’s	  cheeks.	Dawning	comprehension,	and	horror.	 “Oh

—but	I	…	 but	the	android	…	I	 didn’t	know	 she	was—”

     “Valuable?”	  Cinder	smiled	wryly.	  “I	 know.	Adri	 had	the	android	 in	question

dismantled	and	sold	off	as	spare	parts.”

     There	was	more	than	 one	gasp	around	the	table,	and	a	lot	of	 furious	 glances

passed	toward	Adri	and	Pearl.

     “Everything,”	  Cinder	 added,	“except	 the	faulty	 personality	 chip	that	 no	one

else	wanted.	No	 one	except	Linh	 Garan	…	 and	me.”	 She	nodded	 at	Iko.	 “The

chip	is	inside	 my	escort-droid	 friend	 here,	and	I	have	no	 doubt	we’ll	  be	able	to

extract	the	information	stored	there.”

     “Huh,”	  said	Iko,	 pressing	her	 finger	into	 her	 temple.	“I	 remember	 when	he

uploaded	those	files.	I	thought	they	were	for	malware	protection.”

     “Of	  course,”	 said	 Cinder,	 “Linh	  Adri	  is	the	 owner	 of	 the	 patent	 and	the

technology,	so	it’s	fair	 she	be	compensated.	I	expect	you	can	work	out	some	sort

of	royalty	from	 the	manufacturing	of	 the	device.”

     A	 round	 of	agreement	rumbled	 through	the	 table—all	 but	Adri.	  “Royalty?”

Her	gaze	darted	to	Pearl,	then	back	to	Cinder.	“How	…	how	 much	of	a	royalty?”

     Iko	 lowered	her	hand,	grumbling,	“Too	 much.”

     Cinder	 bit	 back	a	 smile.	 “That’s	 between	you	 and	 the	government	 entities

you’re	  selling	 it	  to.”	  Leaning	  across	 the	 table,	 she	 fixed	  a	  glare	 on	 her

stepmother.	“I	suggest	you	don’t	get	greedy.”

     Scolded,	Adri	 sank	back	 in	her	chair.	 But	there	 was	a	brightness	in	her	 eye,

as	someone	across	the	table	mentioned	the	 potential	 market	for	 such	a	device.

Millions,	 possibly	billions	 could	be	reproduced	over	the	next	decade	…

     Adri	 reached	for	 her	daughter’s	hand.	 Pearl	glanced	at	her	mother,	 and	she,

811
too,	seemed	to	finally	understand.

     Linh	 Garan’s	device	had	the	potential	to	make	them	very,	very	wealthy.

     Cinder	 realized,	with	 some	surprise,	that	she	didn’t	  feel	as	bitter	 about	it	 as

she’d	thought	 she	would.	 Let	 Adri	 have	her	 riches	and	royalties,	 her	 daughter

and	her	life.	  After	 this	 day,	 Cinder	 intended	never	 to	think	  of	 either	of	 them

again.

     Her	 only	regret	 was	that	Peony	wasn’t	 here	to	 see	it.	She	would	 never	play

dress-up	with	Iko	 in	 the	royal	 closets.	Her	eyes	wouldn’t	  sparkle	as	Cinder	put

on	her	 crown	 for	 the	first	  time.	She	 had	never	 met	Kai,	 who	 had	 become	so

much	more	to	Cinder	than	her	prince	or	her	emperor	or	an	impossible	dream.

     “That	 brings	me	to	my	 final	 request,”	Cinder	said,	determined	to	 get	through

this	meeting	 before	 any	 emotions,	good	 or	 bad,	overwhelmed	 her.	 “This	 one

relates	to	only	 two	 of	you.	 President	Vargas	and	 Governor-General	Williams.”

Cinder	adjusted	herself	in	her	chair.	“It	 involves	a	man	named	Carswell	Thorne.”

812
	




                                             Ninety-Five







The	nurse	 kept	apologizing	  as	she	escorted	Cress	 from	 the	med-clinic	  to	 the

palace.	Far	from	 being	 fully	  healed,	Cress	had	to	 be	transported	 on	a	maglev

chair,	which	 was	 the	oddest	 floating	 contraption	 she’d	 ever	seen.	Not	 quite	 a

gurney,	but	 not	 a	 wheelchair,	 either.	For	 the	 moment	 in	 which	 Cress	let	 her

imagination	carry	 her	away,	she’d	been	an	exotic	first-era	 princess	being	carried

around	on	a	lavish	throne	on	the	shoulders	of	very	strong	men.

     Then	 the	  nurse	 had	 launched	 into	  her	 apologies	  again,	 destroying	  the

daydream.	The	clinic	 was	so	overcrowded,	she	explained,	the	 doctors	spread	so

thin,	and	now	that	Cress	was	out	of	critical	status	…

     Cress	didn’t	mind	 the	change.	She	was	glad	to	be	out	of	the	sterile	clinic.

     Though	 Cress	had	only	been	brought	out	of	 suspended	animation	four	hours

ago,	she’d	already	seen	Iko,	Scarlet,	Wolf,	 and	even	a	weary	Jacin,	who	told	her

of	their	 victory	 and	how	 Cinder	 had	signed	the	Treaty	 of	Bremen	 and	how	 the

shells	had	been	awakened	and	how	researchers	were	figuring	out	the	best	way	to

get	them	adjusted	to	 life	 on	Luna	 while	 also	meeting	Earth’s	 antidote	needs.	It

left	Cress’s	head	spinning.

     At	 the	top	of	her	thoughts,	however—always,	always—was	 Thorne.

813
     He	hadn’t	been	there.

     No	 one	had	even	mentioned	his	 name,	and	Cress	had	felt	like	 they	 were	all

holding	their	breath.	Wanting	 to	say	something,	but	waiting,	uncertain.

     She’d	shot	off	 two	 of	his	fingers.	 It	 may	have	been	a	minor	injury	 compared

with	 what	she	and	Cinder	 had	suffered,	 but	still—she	 had	done	it.	 Of	 her	own

will	 and	volition.

     The	nurse	guided	her	into	 a	familiar	 guest	wing.	This	 was	where	she	had	run

into	Kai.

     “Here	 we	are,”	 said	the	 nurse,	opening	a	door.	 “If	 you	 need	anything	 at	all

—”

     “I’m	  fine.”	  Cress	used	the	controls	 on	 the	chair’s	 arm	 to	 guide	it	 into	 the

room.	 A	 canopied	 bed	 was	 covered	 in	 shining	  silks,	 the	 stone	 floors	 were

polished	to	 a	 glossy	finish.	  The	window	  looked	 out	 on	some	 of	 the	palace’s

flowering	 gardens,	full	of	gazebos	and	statues.	“Thank	you.”

     “We’ve	  taken	 care	 to	 make	 sure	you’re	  close	 to	 your	 friends,”	  said	 the

woman.	 “Mr.	  Kesley	 and	Miss	  Benoit	 are	 two	 doors	 down	 on	 the	left,	  and

Emperor	Kaito	is	around	the	corner.	Mr.	 Thorne	is	staying	across	the	hall.”

     Cress	spun	 her	 chair	 around.	 Her	 door	 was	still	  open	and	 she	could	  see

Thorne’s	closed	door	from	where	she	sat.	“He	is?”

     “Would	 you	like	 me	to	see	if	he’s	in?”

     Cress	flushed.	“Oh.	No,	 that’s	all	right.	 Thank	you.”

     “Then	 I	should	be	getting	back	to	the	clinic.	 Would	 you	like	to	 be	helped	into

bed	before	I	go?”

     “No,	 I	think	 I’m	 going	to	sit	and	enjoy	the	view	 for	a	while.	 Thank	you.”

     The	nurse	left,	shutting	the	door	behind	her.

814
     Cress	took	in	a	deep	breath.	The	fine	guest	quarters	smelled	of	lemon	cleaner

and	a	bouquet	 of	 white	 lilacs	 that	 sat	on	 a	 desk.	They	 were	 already	wilting,

though,	and	Cress	wondered	how	long	they’d	 been	there.	Perhaps	this	room	had

been	set	up	for	 someone	else,	 perhaps	one	of	 the	Earthen	 diplomats	who	 had

already	gone	home.

     Mr.	 Thorne	is	staying	across	the	hall.

     She	stared	at	the	door,	willing	him	 to	appear.

     Her	 stomach	was	throbbing	 where	Thorne	had	stabbed	her,	when	 he’d	been

under	Levana’s	 control.	 She	pressed	her	fingers	against	 the	bandages	over	her

stitches,	trying	 to	 ease	the	 ache.	She	wondered	 if	 she	should	 have	 asked	the

nurse	to	leave	her	some	pain	medicine.

     She	took	 in	a	 deep	breath,	feeling	the	 sting	in	 her	ribs	 as	her	lungs	pressed

against	them.	She	would	 be	 brave.	She	would	 be	heroic.	 She	would	 make	her

own	destiny.

     She	urged	her	floating	chair	to	the	door	and	yanked	it	open.

     Thorne	stood	in	the	hallway.

     He	 jumped,	clasping	his	 hands	behind	his	 back,	a	rigidly	  formal	 stance.	He

was	clean-shaven	with	 his	hair	 neatly	combed,	 and	he	was	wearing	 brand-new

clothes:	a	blue	 collared	 shirt	 rolled	 to	the	 elbows	and	 khaki	 pants	tucked	into

brown	boots.

     Cress	squeezed	herself	 against	 the	 back	 of	 the	 chair,	 feeling	 inadequate.

Though	she’d	 showered	 away	 the	suspension	tank’s	 goop,	 she	still	  wore	 the

paper-thin	gown	from	the	clinic	 and	hadn’t	even	had	a	chance	to	comb	her	hair.

     “Captain,”	 she	breathed.

     “Sorry,”	 he	said,	clicking	 his	heels.	“Were	you	leaving?”

815
     “No.	I	…	I	thought	I’d	come	see	you.”

     Thorne	looked	caught	off	guard,	but	then	an	edge	of	relief	turned	up	one	side

of	his	mouth.	He	leaned	down	and	placed	his	hands	on	her	armrests.	His	right

hand	was	cocooned	in	a	cast.	“You’re	supposed	to	be	resting,”	he	said,	pushing

her	backward	and	shutting	the	door	with	 his	 foot.	 He	took	 her	back	to	 the

window,	then	glanced	around.	“What	can	I	get	you?	A	portscreen?	A	masseuse?

Whiskey	on	the	rocks?”

     She	couldn’t	take	her	eyes	off	him.	Even	knowing	he	was	alive,	she	hadn’t

completely	believed	it	until	then.	“You	 look…”	 She	couldn’t	finish.	Her	eyes

started	to	water.

     A	grin	 in	 expectation	of	a	compliment	quickly	turned	to	panic.	“Oh,	 hey,

what	are	you	doing	that	for?”	He	crouched	in	front	of	her.	“I	don’t	think	crying

will	feel	very	good	in	your	condition.”

     She	bit	 her	lip,	 hard.	 He	was	right.	 Already	 her	warbling	 breaths	were

making	her	abdomen	throb.	She	forced	the	tears	to	subside.

     Thorne	took	her	hands,	snaking	his	cast	beneath	her	fingers.	His	skin	looked

tan	and	rugged	against	hers.

     “I’m	 sorry,”	he	said.	“I	wanted	to	be	there	when	they	brought	you	out	of	the

tank,	but	I	was	in	 a	meeting	when	Scarlet	commed	to	tell	me,	and	I	couldn’t

leave,	and	I	thought	…	 I	didn’t	 know…”	 He	 exhaled,	a	frustrated	set	to	his

mouth.

     “A	 meeting?”	Cress	said,	not	sure	if	this	explanation	made	her	feel	better	or

worse.

     His	 expression	brightened.	“You’ll	 never	 believe	this.	 President	Vargas

himself	wanted	to	meet	me.	The	actual	president	of	 the	American	Republic.

816
Guess	what	he	said.”

     She	considered.	“He’s	giving	 you	a	medal	of	honor	for	 your	bravery?”

     “Close	  enough.”	   Thorne’s	  blue	  eyes	  gleamed.	 “He’s	   giving	   me	  the

Rampion.”

     Her	eyes	widened.

     Launching	 to	his	feet,	Thorne	started	to	pace.	“Well,	 I	 mean,	he’s	leasing	me

the	Rampion,	but	 I	can	start	 making	payments	to	 purchase	it	from	 the	military.

Cinder	asked	him	to	pardon	me	if	 I	promised	not	to	 steal	anymore,	yadda	yadda,

and	she	recommended	me	 and	my	 crew	to	 head	the	efforts	 of	 distributing	  the

letumosis	antidote.	 But	 I	need	 a	ship	to	 do	 it,	 which	 is	why	 President	 Vargas

made	the	deal.	You	 should	have	seen	how	 unhappy	he	looked	 about	it.	 I	don’t

think	he’s	my	biggest	fan,	but—he	 still	did	 it.”

     Cress	clapped.	“I’m	 so	happy	for	you.”

     “Can	you	 imagine,	me,	in	a	legitimate	job?”

     “And	  a	 job	 that’s	 helping	  people.”	 She	 beamed.	“I	  can	 imagine	 it	  very

easily.”

     “I’m	  sure	you’re	the	only	one.”	He	 stopped	pacing	long	enough	to	grin	at	her.

     Warmth	 flooded	 her	face,	and	she	looked	 down,	noticing	 his	cast	again.	 He

would	have	to	retrain	himself	 how	to	fly	 with	 his	injuries.	“I’m—I’m	   sorry	about

your	hand,”	she	stammered.

     “Don’t,”	  he	said	quickly,	 as	if	he’d	 been	expecting	this	apology.	“Scarlet	and

I	are	going	 to	start	a	missing-fingers	 club.	 We	might	 let	 Cinder	be	an	honorary

member.”	Sinking	 onto	 the	edge	of	 the	bed,	he	stared	at	his	 cast,	twisting	 it	 in

the	light.	 “Plus,	 I’m	 thinking	  of	getting	 some	cyborg	 replacements.	You	 know

how	Cinder’s	 hand	does	all	sorts	of	 tricks?	I	 thought	it	 might	 be	nice	to	always

817
have	a	 toothpick	 handy.	 Or	 maybe	a	 comb.”	 He	 sounded	distracted,	 like	 his

words	and	thoughts	weren’t	lining	 up	with	 each	other.	When	he	dared	to	look	up

again,	there	was	 anxiety	 behind	his	 eyes.	“I’m	  sorry	 too,	Cress.	I	 …	 I	 nearly

killed	you	 and—”

     “Levana	 almost	killed	me.”

     His	 jaw	flexed.	 “I	 was	the	one	holding	 the	knife.	 I	felt	 it.	I	 felt	 it	happening,

and	there	was	nothing	I	could	do…”

     “There	 was	nothing	you	could	do,”	 she	agreed.

     Settling	 his	elbows	 on	his	knees,	he	leaned	over,	 his	head	hanging	 between

his	shoulders.	 “No.	 I	 know.”	  He	 dragged	his	 good	 hand	through	 his	 hair.	 “I

know,	logically,	  that	it	 was	her,	not	me.	But	 …	 Cress.”	He	sighed.	“I	 will	  have

nightmares	about	that	moment	for	the	rest	of	my	life.”

     “It	 wasn’t	 your	fault.”

     “Cress,	that’s	not…”	 Massaging	the	back	of	his	neck,	he	peered	up	at	her,	but

the	look	was	so	intense	she	had	trouble	holding	it.	Her	blush	deepened.	“I…”	 He

planted	his	hands	on	his	knees,	bracing	himself.	“Will	 you	stay	on	my	crew?”

     Her	thoughts	scattered.	“Your	 …	crew?”

     “I	  know.”	  He	cleared	 his	 throat.	 “You’ve	  spent	your	 entire	 life	  in	 space,

removed	from	 civilization.	  I	understand	if	 you	say	 no.	If	 you	want	 to	stay	here

on	Luna,	 or	even	 …	 even	if	 you	 want	me	 to	take	 you	 to	Earth.	 I’m	 sure	you

could	stay	 with	 Kai	 for	 a	while,	  who,	you	 know,	 lives	 in	 a	palace.”	 Thorne’s

expression	darkened.	“Which	   is	probably	  really	 tempting	 compared	 with	 the

cargo	ship	I’m	offering.”

     He	 started	 to	  pace	 again.	 “But	  Wolf	   and	 Scarlet	 are	 staying	  on—just

temporarily,	  until	  the	 disease	 is	 under	  control.	  And	  I	  had	 an	 idea.	 This

818
assignment	will	  take	us	 all	 over	the	 Republic.	 Not	 that	 we’ll	  be	doing	 much

sightseeing,	but	 there’ll	  be	…	 um.	 Forests.	 And	 mountains.	 And	 all	 sorts	 of

things.	And	 when	we’re	 done,	if	 there’s	 anywhere	you	 want	to	 go	back	to,	 we

could	do	that.	And	stay	for	 a	while.	Or	 I	could	take	you	 …	anywhere.	Anywhere

you	want	to	see.”

     His	pacing	was	making	 her	dizzy.	“You’re	 offering	 me	a	…	job.”

     “Ye—no.”	  He	hesitated.	“I	mean,	sort	of.	You	 know,	this	went	a	lot	 smoother

when	I	practiced	last	night.”

     She	shut	one	 eye,	squinting.	 “Captain,	 I’m	 still	 on	 a	lot	 of	medication,	 and

I’m	not	 sure	I’m	following	  you.”

     He	 took	in	 the	hospital	 gown	 and	hovering	 chair	as	if	 he’d	 forgotten	 about

them.	“Spades,	I	am	bad	at	this,	aren’t	 I?	Do	you	 want	to	lie	 down?	You	 should

lie	down.”

     Without	 waiting	 for	a	response,	he	swept	an	arm	beneath	her	knees	and	lifted

her	out	of	the	 chair,	gentle,	as	if	 he	were	picking	 up	a	priceless	dream	doll.	 She

buried	a	hiss	of	pain	in	her	throat	as	he	carried	her	to	the	bed.

     “Better?”	 he	said,	easing	her	on	top	of	the	covers.

     “Better,”	 she	admitted.

     But	he	didn’t	 let	go,	and	he	was	awfully	 close	when	she	met	his	eyes.	“Cress,

look.	I’m	 obviously	 no	good	at	this.	At	 least	not	when	it’s	 …	when	it’s	 you.”	 He

seemed	frustrated.	His	 fingers	 curled,	 gathering	 up	the	 flimsy	 material	 of	 the

hospital	gown.	“But	 I	am	good	at	this.”

     He	 leaned	closer	and	his	lips	 found	 hers,	pressing	her	into	 the	soft	 pillows.

She	gasped	and	dug	her	fingers	into	 his	shirt,	afraid	 he	would	 pull	 away	before

she	could	memorize	this	 moment.	But	 he	didn’t	 pull	 away,	and	Cress	gradually

819
dared	to	kiss	him	back.	The	mattress	shifted—Thorne	bringing	 a	knee	up	to	keep

from	crushing	 her.	His	cast	brushed	her	hip,	clumsy	 at	first,	 but	less	so	when	he

raised	it	to	the	 side	of	her	face	to	 trace	his	bare	thumb	against	her	jaw.	 And	 his

lips	followed.	 To	her	chin.	Her	neck.	The	dip	 of	her	clavicle.

     Her	body	 became	liquid,	and	she	thought,	if	 they	could	 bottle	him,	 he	would

make	the	best	pain	medication.

     Thorne	 stopped	kissing	  her,	but	 she	could	  still	 feel	 the	 brush	of	  his	hair

against	her	jaw,	the	warmth	of	his	breath	on	her	shoulder.

     “Twenty-three,”	  he	said.

     “Mm?”	  She	opened	her	dazed	eyes.	Thorne	pulled	 back,	looking	 guilty	 and

worried,	which	 made	some	of	her	euphoria	fade	away.

     “You	  once	asked	me	how	many	 times	I’d	  told	a	 girl	 I	 loved	her.	I’ve	  been

trying	to	remember	them	all,	and	I’m	 pretty	sure	the	answer	is	twenty-three.”

     She	blinked,	a	slow,	 fluttering	 stare.	Her	lips	pursed	in	 a	question	that	took	a

while	to	form.	 “Including	 the	Lunar	girl	 who	kissed	you?”

     His	brow	 furrowed.	“Are	 we	counting	 her?”

     “You	 said	it,	didn’t	 you?”

     His	gaze	darted	to	the	side.	“Twenty-four.”

     Cress	gaped.	Twenty-four	girls.	She	didn’t	 even	know	twenty-four	 people.

     “Why	 are	you	telling	 me	this?”

     “Because	I	 need	you	 to	 know	 I	 never	meant	it.	 I	 said	it	 because	I	 thought

that’s	 what	 you’re	  supposed	to	  say,	 but	 it	 didn’t	  mean	 anything.	  And	 it’s

different	 with	you.	 This	 is	the	first	 time	 I’ve	 been	scared.	Scared	you’ll	 change

your	mind.	Scared	I’ll	 screw	it	up.	Aces,	Cress,	I’m	 terrified	 of	you.”

     Her	stomach	fluttered.	He	didn’t	 look	 terrified.

820
     “Here’s	 the	 thing.”	 Thorne	 crawled	over	 her	legs	and	 lay	down	 beside	her,

boots	and	all.	“You	 deserve	better	than	some	thief	who’s	 going	 to	end	up	in	 jail

again.	Everyone	knows	 it.	Even	 I	know	 it.	 But	you	 seem	determined	to	believe

I’m	 actually	 a	 decent	guy	 who’s	 halfway	 worthy	 of	 you.	 So,	 what	scares	me

most”—he	twisted	 a	lock	of	her	hair	between	his	fingers—“is	  that	someday	even

you	will	 realize	that	you	can	do	better.”

     “Thorne…”

     “Not	 to	worry.”	  He	kissed	the	lock	of	 hair.	“I	 am	a	criminal	 mastermind,	and

I	have	a	plan.”	Clearing	his	throat,	 he	started	to	check	things	off	in	the	air.	“First,

get	a	legitimate	 job—check.	Legally	  buy	my	 ship—in	 progress.	Prove	that	 I’m

hero	material	by	helping	Cinder	save	the	world—oh,	 wait,	I	 did	that	already.”	He

winked.	“Oh,	 and	I	have	to	stop	stealing	things,	but	 that’s	probably	a	given.	 So	I

figure,	by	the	time	 you	realize	how	 much	I	don’t	 deserve	you	…	I	 might	kind	 of

deserve	you.”	His	 grin	turned	smug.	“And	  that’s	how	 that	speech	was	supposed

to	go.”

     “That	 was	a	good	speech,”	she	said.

     “I	  know.”	  Scooting	 closer,	he	 kissed	 her	shoulder.	 Goose	bumps	 erupted

down	her	arm.

     “Captain?”

     “Cress.”

     She	couldn’t	  not	 say	it,	 although	 she	realized	he	 was	right.	 It	 was	 sort	 of

scary.	Much	 scarier	 than	it	 had	been	 the	first	 time	 she’d	 told	 him,	 out	 in	 the

desert.	It	was	different	now.	It	 was	real.	“I’m	 in	love	with	 you.”

     He	 chuckled.	 “I	  should	 hope	 so,	 after	 all	  that.”	 He	 leaned	 forward	 and

pressed	a	kiss	against	her	temple.	“And	I	love	you	too.”

821
	




                                               Ninety-Six







Winter	 picked	 up	a	 stick	from	  the	ground	 and	tossed	it	 toward	 the	 protective

fence	around	the	enclosure,	but	the	ghost	Ryu	just	tilted	his	head	to	one	side.

     Sighing,	she	dropped	her	hands	into	her	lap.

     Her	 fits	 still	 came	and	 went,	but	 she’d	been	deemed	lucid	 enough	 that	the

doctors	allowed	her	 to	make	the	decision:	 Would	she	rather	remain	 in	the	med-

clinic,	 where	 she	could	 be	restrained	 when	her	 outbursts	came,	 or	would	  she

rather	be	outfitted	with	 shock	bracelets	that	could	incapacitate	her	when	needed?

She	had	chosen	this	imaginary	freedom,	thinking	 of	Ryu	and	how	his	 own	collar

would	never	let	him	 leave	the	enclosure	that	must	have	seemed	very	escapable	at

first.

     Jacin	hated	the	idea.	He	had	argued	that	her	mind	was	fragile	enough	without

fearing	random	shocks.	But	 Winter	 had	needed	to	get	out	of	 the	clinic.	 She	had

needed	to	get	away	from	the	nightmares	that	haunted	her.

     She	came	to	the	menagerie	often	 since	her	release,	finding	 it	one	of	 the	few

serene	places	in	a	city	that	was	fluttering	with	 talk	of	 reconstruction	and	political

change.	This	 was	 all	 very	 important,	 of	  course.	She	had	 always	 wanted	 her

country	to	 be	a	 place	where	the	 people	could	 speak	their	 mind	 and	be	treated

822
fairly,	 where	people	were	given	choices	over	the	life	they	wanted	to	 live.	But	 the

talk	of	 it	made	her	head	hurt.	 When	the	world	 started	to	 spin	out	of	 control	 she

found	it	 best	to	 remove	herself	 to	somewhere	peaceful	and	 solitary,	 where	she

couldn’t	hurt	 anyone	but	herself.

     The	 delusions	 were	 no	  longer	 constant	 like	  they	 had	 been	in	  the	 days

following	   the	 battle,	  although	 her	  mind	  still	  tricked	  her	  into	  seeing	 her

stepmother’s	shadow	in	 the	palace,	waiting	 with	 a	 sharpened	knife	and	cruelly

kind	words.	Or	the	flash	of	 Aimery’s	 eyes	following	 her	down	the	corridors.	 Too

often	she	smelled	the	blood	dripping	down	the	walls.

     The	first	 time	she’d	come	to	the	menagerie,	Ryu’s	ghost	had	been	waiting	for

her.

     In	 the	uncertainty	of	 the	revolution,	 the	gamekeepers	had	run	away,	and	had

yet	to	be	found.	The	animals	had	been	hungry	and	restless,	and	Winter	had	spent

the	 whole	 day	 hunting	  down	 the	 storage	 rooms	 where	 the	 food	 was	 kept,

cleaning	out	the	cages,	and	turning	 the	menagerie	back	into	the	sanctuary	she’d

always	known	 it	 to	 be.	When	 Jacin	had	 come	looking	 for	 her,	 he	conscripted

servants	to	help	too.

     Staying	busy	helped.	It	 was	not	a	cure,	but	it	 helped.	As	far	 as	anyone	cared,

she	was	 the	gamekeeper	now,	 though	 everyone	 still	  called	 her	Princess	 and

pretended	she	didn’t	smell	like	manure.

     Ryu	 laid	his	head	in	 Winter’s	 lap	and	she	stroked	him	between	the	ears,	this

sad	ghost	who	wouldn’t	play	 fetch	anymore.

     “Princess.”

     Ryu	 evaporated.	Jacin	was	leaning	 against	the	enclosure	wall,	  not	far	 from

where	he’d	faked	her	murder.	Where	she’d	kissed	him	and	he’d	kissed	her	back.

823
     With	 that	memory,	Winter	 was	submerged.	In	water	and	ice,	in	 hot	and	cold.

She	shivered.

     Jacin’s	brow	 twitched	with	 concern,	but	she	stuffed	the	memory	down.	 Not	a

hallucination.	Just	a	normal	 fantasy,	like	a	normal	 girl	 might	have	when	she	had

a	normal	crush	on	her	best	friend.

     “You	 don’t	 have	to	call	me	that,	 you	know,”	 she	said,	brushing	her	hair	back

from	her	shoulders.	“There	was	a	time	when	you	called	me	Winter.”

     He	leaned	his	 elbows	on	the	 enclosure	wall.	 “There	was	 also	a	time	when	 I

could	come	visit	you	 without	feeling	 like	 I	was	supposed	to	toss	bread	crumbs	to

earn	your	favor.”

     “Bread	 crumbs?	Do	I	look	like	 a	goose?”

     He	tilted	 his	head	to	the	side.	“You	 don’t	 look	 like	 an	arctic	wolf,	 either,	but

that’s	what	the	plaque	tells	me	I’m	 looking	at.”

     Winter	 leaned	 back	on	 her	hands.	“I	  will	  not	play	 fetch,”	  she	said,	“but	  I

might	howl	 if	you	ask	nicely.”

     He	grinned.	“I’ve	  heard	your	howl.	It’s	 not	very	wolf-like,	  either.”

     “I’ve	 been	practicing.”

     “You	 won’t	 bite	me	if	 I	come	in	there,	will	 you?”

     “I	 make	no	guarantees.”

     Jacin	hopped	over	the	rail	 and	came	to	sit	beside	her.	She	raised	an	eyebrow.

“You	 don’t	look	 like	an	arctic	wolf,	 either.”

     “I	 also	 don’t	 howl.”	 He	considered.	 “Though	 I	might	 play	 fetch,	depending

on	the	prize.”

     “The	 prize	is	another	game	of	fetch.”

     “You	 drive	a	hard	bargain.”

824
     Her	lips	 curled	upward,	but	when	it	 seemed	like	Jacin	was	going	to	return	the

smile,	he	looked	 away.	“You	 and	I	 have	had	a	request	from	 Cin—Selene.	Now

that	the	treaty’s	 signed,	she	wants	to	start	 discussing	trade	agreements	between

Luna	 and	Earth.	 Along	  with	  open	communication,	  travel,	 access	to	 Earthen

media,	stuff	like	that.”

     Ryu	 bumped	his	 head	between	Winter’s	  shoulder	 blades.	Pulling	 back	 her

arm,	she	tried	to	scratch	under	his	ear,	but	as	soon	as	she	touched	him,	he	faded

away.

     Jacin	was	watching	her.	“The	wolf	 again?”

     “Don’t	  worry.	He’s	 forgiven	you.”

     He	frowned.

     “What	 can	we	do	to	help	Selene	with	her	politics?”

     “Well,	  given	 that	you’re	 so	regrettably	 charming,	 and	you	 did	such	a	 great

job	getting	the	wolf	 soldiers	to	join	us,	and	everyone	likes	you	so	much…”

     “So	many	 compliments	in	a	row?	I	feel	 like	I	must	be	walking	 into	a	trap.”

     “Exactly.	  Cinder	  thinks	  you	 might	  make	 a	 good	 ambassador.	Her	  first

ambassador.”

     She	cocked	her	head	to	the	side.	“What	would	I	have	to	do?”

     “I’m	  not	 sure.	Go	to	 Earth.	Have	dinner	 with	 fancy	 people.	Show	them	 we

Lunars	aren’t	all	monsters.”

     She	grinned,	feeling	wolfish.

     “I	 told	 her	I	 would	 ask,”	 Jacin	added,	“but	 you’re	 not	obligated	 to	 say	yes.

You	need	to	take	care	of	yourself	first.”

     “Would	 you	be	with	 me?”

     “Of	 course.”	He	crossed	one	ankle	over	the	other.	“But	you	 could	say	no,	and

825
I’ll	 be	with	you	then	too.	I’m	done	serving	everyone	else.”	He	leaned	back	onto

his	elbows.	“Who	knows.	Maybe	someday	I’ll	take	up	studying	to	be	a	doctor

again.	But	until	then,	I’m	your	guard,	to	do	with	as	you	will.”

     “So	it	 will	 be	like	 playing	the	Princess	and	the	Guard,”	she	said—a	game

they’d	played	when	they	were	kids.	She’d	act	out	a	 much	bossier	version	of

herself,	while	Jacin	would	model	himself	after	their	fathers,	all	stoic	and	serious

and	scrambling	to	do	her	bidding.	When	Winter	ran	out	of	commands	to	give

him,	they	would	pretend	there	were	murderers	and	kidnappers	coming	for	the

princess	and	he	would	protect	her	from	them.

     Jacin	grinned.	“Hopefully	with	fewer	kidnappings.”

     She	pressed	her	cheek	against	his	shoulder.	“If	Cinder	wishes	it,	I	would	be

honored	to	charm	the	people	of	Earth.”

     “I	 had	a	feeling	you’d	say	that.”	Lying	all	the	way	back,	he	rubbed	a	hand

over	his	forehead.

     Ryu	howled,	crying	his	soul	up	to	the	menagerie’s	vine-covered	glass	ceiling.

He	was	not	usually	so	restless.	Maybe	it	was	Jacin’s	presence.	Maybe	Ryu	was

trying	to	speak	to	her.

     Maybe	this	was	her	own	insanity,	signifying	nothing.

     Winter	started	to	speak,	but	hesitated.	She	looked	down	at	Jacin,	but	he	had

his	hand	covering	his	eyes.	She	wondered	if	he’d	been	sleeping	much	lately.

     “Dr.	Nandez	says	she	may	have	a	prototype	of	Cinder’s	device	ready	within

the	next	week.”

     Jacin’s	hand	lifted.	“Already?”

     “She	doesn’t	know	yet	if	it	will	work.	She	needs	a	test	subject	first.”

     “Princess—”

826
     “I’ve	 already	volunteered.	You	can	try	to	talk	 me	out	of	 it,	 but	I’m	 fully

prepared	to	ignore	you.”

     Jaw	tensing,	Jacin	sat	up	again.	“The	test	subject?	We	don’t	know	what	the

side	effects	will	be.	We	don’t	know	if	it	will	even	work.	Let	someone	else	try	it

first.”

     “I	want	to	do	it.	I	am	one	of	the	most	severe	cases	of	Lunar	sickness	to	date.”

She	lost	her	fingers	in	the	wolf’s	fur.	“But	it’s	occurred	to	me	that,	if	it	works,	I

won’t	see	Ryu	again.”	She	smiled	sadly.	“And	what	if	…	what	if	people	don’t

like	me	anymore?”

     Jacin	shook	his	head.	“They	don’t	like	you	because	you’re	crazy.	They	like

you	because…”

     She	waited.

     “Because	you	were	good	to	them	when	no	one	else	was.	Because	you	care.

This	device	won’t	change	who	you	are.”

     “You	want	me	to	be	fixed,	don’t	you?”

     Jacin	drew	back,	as	if	she’d	thrown	something	at	him.	“You’re	not	broken.”

     Her	vision	began	to	blur.	“Yes,	Jacin.	I	am.”

     “No,	you’re—”	 He	growled,	a	throaty,	frustrated	sound	that	made	her	feel

giddy.	“Look,	I	would	love	to	not	have	to	worry	about	you	anymore.	That	you’ll

hurt	yourself	or	 that	someone	will	 take	advantage	of	you.	But	you’re	 not—

you’re—”

     “I’m	 delusional,	and	crazy,	and	damaged.	I’ve	known	it	a	long	time,	we	both

have.	Scarlet	tells	me	all	the	time.”

     “You’re	perfect,”	he	said,	finishing	his	thought	as	if	she	hadn’t	interrupted.	“I

don’t	care	if	 you	see	dead	wolves	and	turn	into	 a	living	 ice	 sculpture	when

827
you’re	having	a	bad	day.	I	don’t	care	if	I	have	an	imprint	of	your	teeth	on	my

shoulder.	I	don’t	care	if	you’re	…	fixed.”	He	spat	the	word	like	it	tasted	bad.	“I

want	you	to	be	safe	and	happy.	That’s	all.”

     Winter	fluttered	her	lashes	at	him,	and	he	turned	away.	“Don’t	look	at	me

like	that.”

     “I	 want	to	be	the	test	subject.”	She	reached	for	his	hand.	“I’ll	be	safe	and

happy	when	I’m	no	longer	afraid	of	my	own	mind.”

     Pressing	his	lips	into	a	thin	line,	Jacin	nodded.	Slowly.	“I	just	don’t	like	the

idea	of	you	going	first,”	he	grumbled.

     “Jacin?”

     He	met	her	gaze	again.

     Winter	scooted	closer	and	linked	her	arm	with	his.	“You	think	I’m	perfect?”

     He	didn’t	look	away.	Didn’t	look	bashful	or	even	nervous.	Just	stared	at	her,

like	she’d	asked	him	if	Luna	orbited	the	Earth.

     Then	he	leaned	over	and	brushed	a	kiss	against	her	forehead.	“Just	sort	of,”

he	said.	“You	know.	On	a	good	day.”

828
	




                                       Ninety-Seven







“All	of	them?”

     Cinder	smiled	at	Iko’s	exuberance.	She	had	already	gotten	more	joy	out	of

the	way	Iko	was	beaming	at	the	rows	and	rows	and	rows	of	dresses	than	she	ever

would	have	gotten	from	the	dresses	themselves.

     “Every	last	one,”	said	Cinder.	“I	never	want	to	look	at	them	again.”

     She	had	already	spent	more	time	surrounded	by	Levana	than	she’d	intended.

Her	perfume,	her	gowns,	her	jewelry.	She	had	no	interest	in	her	aunt’s	wardrobe

—but	Iko	did,	so	Iko	could	have	them	all.

     She	had	never	seen	Iko	so	pleased.	Not	even	when	Thorne	had	brought	her

that	escort-droid	body	he’d	found	in	the	desert.	Not	even	when	the	shipment

from	Earth	had	finally	 arrived	with	 the	spare	parts	to	fix	 her	 near-destroyed

body.	Cinder	had	told	her	that	 with	so	much	damage	it	would	 be	more	cost

effective	to	install	her	personality	chip	into	a	brand-new	body.	She	could	have

had	her	pick	of	 any	model	she	wanted.	But	Iko	had	refused.	She	had	grown

attached	to	this	one,	she’d	said,	and	besides—none	of	her	friends’	bodies	were

disposable,	so	why	should	hers	be?

     Cinder	had	no	argument	for	that.

829
     The	 only	  upgrade	Iko	  had	requested	 was	a	 pair	 of	  brand-new	 eyes	that

changed	colors	 based	on	 her	 moods.	 Today	 her	 eyes	were	 sunburst	 yellow.

Happy,	happy,	happy.

     “You	 won’t	 mind	 seeing	them	on	me,	will	  you?”	 asked	Iko,	pulling	 a	slinky

orange	piece	off	its	hanger	and	holding	it	against	her	chest.

     “Not	 if	 they	make	you	that	happy.”

     “Where	 will	 I	wear	them?”	 Before	Cinder	could	answer,	she	waved	her	hand.

“Never	mind.	 Where	wouldn’t	 I	 wear	them?”	 Hanging	the	slinky	 dress	back	up,

Iko	scanned	the	wardrobe	again.	Her	eyes	darkened—more	buttercup	now,	 with

a	tinge	of	lime	around	the	edges.	“I	think	 I	feel	guilty.”

     “Guilty?”

     Huffing,	  Iko	 planted	 her	hands	 on	her	 hips.	 Her	concern	 lasted	for	 a	 few

moments	before	she	beamed	again.	“I	know.	I’ll	 choose	my	ten	favorites	and	sell

the	rest	 on	 escort-droid	 costuming	 feeds.	 We	 can	use	 the	 proceeds	to	 build

schools	in	the	outer	 sectors,	or	something	charitable	like	 that.”	 Fingering	 a	fine

lace	sleeve,	she	glanced	at	Cinder.	“What	do	you	think?”

     If	 Cinder’s	 eyes	 reflected	her	 moods,	they	 would	 have	 been	sapphire-blue

proud.	“I	think	 that’s	a	great	idea.”

     Iko	 beamed	and	started	working	her	way	 through	the	racks	again,	narrowing

down	her	favorites,	 while	 Cinder	turned	 to	face	her	reflection	 in	 the	mirror	 that

had	been	loaned	to	her	from	one	of	the	Earthen	spaceships.	She	was	still	getting

used	to	seeing	herself	looking	so	…	queenly.

     Her	 own	 gown	was	 brand-new.	Although	  she	had	intended	to	 wear	one	 of

Winter’s	dresses	again,	a	few	Artemisian	seamstresses	had	pleaded	to	be	allowed

to	design	her	 coronation	dress,	proclaiming	 what	 an	honor	it	 would	 be.	Cinder

830
hadn’t	even	known	she	had	expectations	until	the	dress	surpassed	them.

     Done	 up	in	 Luna’s	 official	  colors	 of	 white,	 red,	 and	black,	 the	 gown	was

made	of	more	 material	 than	she’d	ever	 seen	in	her	 life.	 The	heavy	 white	 skirt

draped	around	her	like	 a	bell,	 with	 a	massive	train	that	 would	follow	  her	down

the	long,	long	aisle.	 Red	and	black	gems	were	beaded	along	the	skirt’s	 hem	and

woven	 through	 the	 bodice.	 A	  modest	 neckline	 with	  capped	 sleeves	fit	  her

perfectly.

     She	had	expected	the	seamstresses	to	also	make	gloves	to	cover	 her	cyborg

hand,	but	they	didn’t.	 “No	gloves,”	 one	of	the	seamstresses	said	when	she	asked.

“And	 no	veil.”

     A	 knock	drew	her	attention	to	the	door	and	the	guard,	Kinney,	entered.	“Your

Majesty,”	 he	greeted.	His	respectful	expression	turned	sour	as	he	addressed	Iko,

“Madame	Counselor.”

     Iko’s	 eyes	went	coppery	with	 pride	at	her	new	 title,	even	though	 she	met	the

guard	with	a	sour	glare	of	her	own.

     “Yes,	 Kinney?”	 said	Cinder.

     “The	 captain	and	his	crew	are	requesting	an	audience.”

     “Ha!”	  Thorne’s	voice	carried	from	 the	corridor.	“I	 told	 you	I	could	 get	him	to

call	me	the	captain.”

     Cinder	rolled	 her	eyes.	“Let	them	in.”

     They	 poured	in	 before	 Kinney	 could	 admit	 them,	all	 grinning	  and	dressed

formally	 for	the	occasion.	Even	Wolf	 was	wearing	a	suit,	though	Cinder	couldn’t

imagine	it	had	been	easy	to	find	 one	to	fit	 his	altered	body	 on	such	short	notice.

His	  red	  shirt	  matched	 Scarlet’s	  stunning	  red	  dress,	 the	  fabric	   clashing

spectacularly	with	 her	 hair.	 Thorne	was	 in	a	 tuxedo	and	 bow	 tie.	He	 came	in

831
pushing	Cress	 along	 on	 her	floating	  contraption—Cinder	  had	 heard	that	 her

wounds	were	healing	well	 and	she	was	expected	to	be	walking	in	short	bursts	by

the	end	of	 the	 week.	She	was	 wearing	one	 of	 Winter’s	 gauzy	 yellow	 dresses,

hemmed	to	fit	 her.	Jacin	was	in	 his	guard	uniform,	 but	had	replaced	the	 normal

shoulder	armor	 with	  dashing	epaulets,	 making	 him	 almost	 prince-like	  beside

Winter,	who	 was	even	more	breathtaking	than	usual	in	a	white	 gown	that	would

have	looked	plain	 on	anyone	else.	Kai	followed	  the	group	in	 a	black	dress	shirt

with	a	mandarin	collar.

     He	 was	 carrying	 a	 silver	  platter	 topped	 with	 a	 round,	 single-tiered	 cake

covered	in	  swirls	 of	  pale	 yellow	 frosting.	  Cinder	 knew	  immediately	 that	 it

wasn’t	from	 the	royal	pastry	chefs,	whose	creations	were	almost	too	immaculate

to	 touch.	 This	  cake,	 with	  its	  messy	 frosting	 and	  lack	 of	  decoration,	 was

remarkably	unpretentious.

     With	 a	bow,	 the	guard	slipped	 out	the	 door.	Iko	 stuck	her	tongue	 out	at	his

retreating	back.

     “What’s	  going	on?”	 said	 Cinder.	“The	 coronation	 starts	in	 twenty	 minutes.

You	should	all	be	seated	by	now.”

     “It	 was	my	 idea,”	said	Iko,	 bouncing	on	 her	toes.	“I	 knew	you’d	 be	nervous,

so	I	thought	we’d	have	a	celebration	first.”

     “And	 you	made	a	cake?”

     “Scarlet	 did,”	said	Thorne.

     Scarlet	  brushed	 her	  hair	  off	   her	  shoulder.	 “It’s	    a	 lemon	  cake.	  My

grandmother’s	 special	 recipe.	But”—her	   gaze	swooped	 down	 Cinder’s	 dress

—“you	 might	want	 to	wait	until	 after	the	coronation	so	you	 don’t	get	frosting	 all

over	yourself.”

832
     Winter	 snorted	and	grabbed	the	tray	away	from	Kai.	 “Let’s	 not	be	cruel.	One

should	never	save	cake	for	 later	 when	it	 can	be	 eaten	now.”	 She	slid	 the	cake

onto	a	priceless	silk	divan.

     “I’ve	  never	had	cake	before,”	 said	Cress,	drawing	plenty	 of	 surprised	looks.

She	was	holding	 Thorne’s	 hand,	but	 for	 once	she	didn’t	  shrink	 closer	to	 him,

even	being	the	center	of	attention.

     Iko	 crossed	 her	arms.	 “Can	 we	 please	not	 start	 listing	 all	  the	wonderful,

marvelous	food	we’ve	never	had?”

     “That	 settles	it,	then,”	said	Thorne.	“Who	 brought	the	silverware?”

     No	 one	had,	so	Jacin	offered	his	 dagger	instead.	They	took	 turns	cutting	 off

bite-size	chunks	 of	 cake	and	frosting	 and	 eating	it	 with	  their	fingers	 until	  the

cake	resembled	little	more	than	the	crater-pocked	surface	of	the	moon.

     Naturally,	 Cinder	 got	some	on	her	gown—a	 smear	of	yellow	 frosting	 on	the

enormous	skirt.	She	was	mortified	 until	 Iko	adjusted	the	skirt	 so	the	folds	would

hide	it.

     “It	 was	inevitable,”	 Iko	said	with	 a	wink.	“It’s	  part	of	your	charm.”

     Cinder	 started	to	laugh,	 but	was	 startled	into	 silence	by	 a	sudden	hiccup	in

her	chest.

     She	looked	 around,	 at	the	 smiles	and	 the	arms	 draped	over	 shoulders	and

Winter	daintily	  licking	 buttercream	from	 her	fingers.	 At	the	homemade	cake.	A

gathering	of	friends.	 A	celebration,	 for	her.	 They	were	silly	 things	 to	be	floored

by,	but	she	couldn’t	help	it.	 She’d	never	had	these	things	before.

     Gratitude	swelled	 behind	her	sternum,	and	though	she	was	still	nervous—still

terrified—she	realized	that	she	felt	lighter	 than	she	had	in	days.

     “Your	 Majesty?”

833
     She	looked	up.	Kinney	 had	returned.

     “It’s	 time.”

     Cinder	 gulped	  and	 stood,	 her	 heart	thumping.	  The	 festive	  mood	 turned

serious.

     Wolf,	 who	 had	been	holding	 the	knife	 last,	 gobbled	down	 a	few	 extra	bites

before	passing	the	knife	 back	to	 Jacin.	Jacin	took	 one	look	 at	the	frosting-	 and

crumb-covered	blade	and	stuck	it	back	in	the	cake	for	safekeeping.

     “I’m	  ready,”	said	Cinder.	 Breathing	became	difficult	  as	the	dress	constricted

against	her	stomach.	“I	am	ready,	aren’t	I?”

     “Hold	 on.”	 Iko	turned	Cinder	to	 face	her.	“Smile.”

     Cinder	 gave	her	a	nervous	smile,	and	Iko	 nodded	proudly.	 “Nothing	 in	 your

teeth.	I’d	say	you’re	ready.”

     Her	friends	 gathered	around	her,	pulling	her	into	embrace	after	embrace.

     Until	  she	reached	Kai,	 who	wrapped	 his	arms	 around	her	waist	 and	kissed

her.	He	tasted	like	lemon	frosting.

     Thorne	whistled.	 Iko	swooned.	The	kiss	ended	too	quickly.

     “What	 was	that	for?”	Cinder	 whispered	against	him.

     Kai	 scooped	his	 arm	 around	her	 shoulders	and	 led	her	 out	 of	 the	queen’s

chambers.	“I	 was	just	 thinking	 about	the	 good	future,”	 he	 said.	“The	 one	with

you	in	it.”


                                                          *			 *			*

The	official	  coronation	 of	 Queen	 Selene	Channary	 Jannali	Blackburn	  was	in

some	ways	an	intimate	affair,	and	in	others	an	intergalactic	sensation.	Cinder	had

held	a	lottery	 for	 tickets	 so	all	 of	Luna’s	 sectors	would	 be	represented,	and	all

834
the	guests	combined	made	for	a	crowd	a	few	hundred	strong,	which	 barely	filled

up	half	 the	seats	that	 had	been	set	out	 for	 Levana	 and	Kai’s	 ceremony	 a	few

weeks	prior.

     The	footage	 was	broadcast,	not	only	 to	every	 sector	on	Luna	 but	also	to	 all

Earthen	newsfeeds	that	chose	to	run	it.	It	became	the	most	viewed	netfeed	of	the

third	era.

     While	 Cinder	 walked	down	 the	endless	black-carpeted	aisle,	she	tried	not	to

think	of	 all	 the	people	in	 the	universe	who	 were	watching	 her.	She	tried	 not	to

wonder	 whether	 they	  were	 judging	  her	 or	  admiring	  her,	 afraid	 of	  her	 or

impressed	by	her.	She	tried	not	to	guess	how	many	saw	her	as	a	lost	princess	or	a

pathetic	cyborg,	 a	vigilante	 or	 a	criminal,	 a	revolutionary	  or	a	lowly	  mechanic

that	had	gotten	lucky.

     She	tried	 not	 to	 think	 about	 the	smear	of	 yellow	  frosting	 on	 her	priceless

gown.

     Kai	 and	Winter	stood	at	the	altar	encased	in	the	light	of	 glowing	orbs,	Winter

holding	  the	 queen’s	 crown	  and	 Kai	  a	 ceremonial	  scepter.	 Together,	 they

represented	how	both	Earth	and	Luna	would	 accept	her	right	to	rule.	 The	rest	of

her	friends	 were	in	 their	 reserved	seats	in	the	 front	 row.	 Thorne,	on	 the	aisle,

held	out	 his	 hand	 as	Cinder	 passed.	She	snorted	 and	 accepted	the	 high	 five

before	floating	up	the	stairs.

     Winter	 winked	 at	her.	 “Well	 done,	Cinder-friend.	  You	didn’t	  trip.	 The	hard

part	is	over.”

     Kai	 gave	a	smile	meant	for	only	 Cinder,	even	though	the	entire	 universe	was

watching.	“She’s	right,	 that	really	is	the	hard	part.”

     “Thank	 the	stars,”	Cinder	whispered	back.	“Now	 let’s	get	this	over	 with.”

835
     Taking	 in	a	long,	shaky	breath,	she	turned	to	face	her	kingdom.


                                                          *			 *			*

The	blood	had	been	scrubbed	from	the	throne	room	 floor,	but	 the	room	was	still

a	disaster.	Toppled	chairs	and	broken	 rails,	cracked	tiles	 and	wall	 panels	where

bullets	had	hit	them.	Even	the	throne	itself	 had	a	fracture	in	the	stone	from	when

Cinder	had	tried	 to	 shoot	Levana.	It	 smelled	of	 chemicals	and	 bleach	from	 the

cleaning.

     The	horrors	of	 the	rebellion	were	starting	to	fade.	Not,	perhaps,	for	those	who

had	lost	friends	and	family,	 and	Cinder	 knew	there	was	still	 so	much	to	be	done

in	order	for	 Luna	to	 pick	up	the	pieces	of	 Levana’s	rule.	 But	they	were	eager	to

start	picking	up	those	pieces	right	away.

     She’d	  begun	 compiling	  councils	  made	 up	  of	  both	 members	 from	   the

Artemisian	court	and	nominated	citizens	 from	the	outer	sectors	to	begin	bridging

the	gap	between	the	 classes	and	figuring	 out	 how	best	 to	reallocate	 funds	and

labor.	Already	 the	“families”	  and	the	thaumaturges	were	starting	to	fight	 against

her,	but	that	was	all	right.	It	 would	take	time,	but	they	would	 adjust.

     She’d	 been	sitting	 on	 her	throne	 in	 the	silent,	 chemical-filled	  air	 for	 what

could	have	 been	hours,	watching	 the	city	  of	Artemisia	  shimmering	 before	her

and	Earth	turning	above	the	horizon.

     The	doors	opened.	Kai	poked	his	 head	in	and	Cinder	tensed,	feeling	guilty	 to

be	caught	on	the	throne—even	if	it	was	her	throne—all	 alone	in	the	darkness.

     “There	 you	are,”	he	said.

     “Sorry,”	  she	said.	“I’m	 kind	 of	 hiding.	 Would	 you	believe	that	 when	you’re

royalty,	it	 is	really	difficult	  to	find	 a	moment	of	privacy?”

836
     Smirking,	 Kai	 shut	the	door	 behind	him.	 He	kept	a	 hand	behind	his	back	 as

he	came	toward	her.	 “Might	  I	 suggest	getting	yourself	 a	hooded	sweatshirt?	 It

makes	a	surprisingly	adequate	disguise.”	He	 paused	when	he	spotted	Earth	over

the	balcony,	all	beautiful	and	enormous	in	the	dark	sky.	“That’s	 quite	a	view.”

     Cinder	nodded.	“Not	 to	justify	 what	 Levana	did,	but	I	 can	kind	of	understand

why	she	wanted	it	so	much.”

     When	 Kai	 said	nothing,	 she	slid	 her	gaze	back	 to	him	 and	 she	knew	what

he’d	come	there	to	say.	Her	heart	sank.	“You’re	leaving,	 aren’t	you?”

     He	 turned	 away	 from	  the	 view.	  “In	  two	 days.	 Two	  Earthen	 days.”	 He

frowned	apologetically.	 “I’ve	 been	gone	for	too	long	already.”

     She	tried	 to	smother	 the	despair	that	knocked	 into	 her.	Kai	 would	 be	gone.

Thorne,	Cress,	Wolf,	 and	Scarlet	 had	already	left,	 and	Winter	 and	Jacin	would

be	leaving	 on	their	 first	 ambassadorial	trip	 in	 the	next	 few	 days,	and	then	she

would	be	alone.

     Well,	 she	and	Iko	would	be	alone.

     She’d	been	expecting	it.	 She	had	known	he	couldn’t	 stay	forever.	He	had	his

own	country	to	rule.

     “Right,”	  she	said,	 feigning	 confidence.	 “I	 understand.	You’ve	 been	 a	huge

help,	you	and	Konn-dàren.	Is	…	is	he	leaving	too?”

     Kai	 grimaced.	“He	is.	I’m	 sorry.”

     “No.	 You	…	 you	have	to	go	home.	Of	course	you	do.”

     “You	   should	 come	 visit,”	   he	 said,	  speaking	 fast.	 “Soon.	  It	  would	  be

symbolic,	I	 think,	of	 the	new	alliance…”	 He	trailed	 off	 and	scratched	behind	his

neck,	one	hand	still	hidden.	“Or	 I	 could	make	up	a	political	 dilemma	 we	need	to

work	through	if	 that	would	help.”

837
     Cinder	 forced	a	smile.	 “I’d	 like	 to	 come	visit.	 I’m	 …	Iko	 and	I	 are	going	to

miss	you.”

     “I	 think	 you’ll	  find	 that	being	a	 queen	doesn’t	leave	a	whole	 lot	of	 time	 for

being	lonely.”

     “We’ll	  see	about	that.”	 Suddenly,	it	 felt	awkward	 to	be	sitting	 on	her	throne

while	 Kai	 stood	 below	 her.	 She	stood	 and	 crossed	her	 arms	over	 her	 chest,

drifting	 toward	the	balcony	 ledge.	Anxiety	 was	already	growing	 inside	her.	Two

days.	Two	more	days	and	he’ll	be	gone.

     There	was	 so	much	she	wanted	to	 say	to	him,	 and	two	 days	wasn’t	 enough

time	to	 get	it	all	 out—especially	 when	all	 the	words	 remained	locked	up	 in	her

throat.

     “It’s	  strange,”	Kai	 said,	joining	 her	on	the	glass	overhang,	his	 gaze	fixed	on

Earth	again.	“I	 spent	all	that	time	 trying	 to	avoid	a	marriage	 alliance	with	 Luna.

And	now	 that	the	treaty	 is	signed	and	 the	war	is	 over	…	 somehow,	a	marriage

alliance	doesn’t	sound	so	bad.”

     Her	heart	flipped.	 Kai’s	 gaze	danced	back	to	her	and	then	he	was	smiling	in	a

way	that	was	both	bashful	and	confident.	 The	same	smile	he’d	given	her	the	day

they’d	met	in	the	marketplace.	After	 a	long,	awkward	moment,	he	laughed.	“You

really	can’t	 blush,	can	you?”

     A	 mix	 of	 relief	  and	disappointment	 rolled	 through	 her	and	she	 tucked	her

hands	under	her	arms	to	hide	their	shaking.	“That	wasn’t	nice.”

     “Only	 if	 you	think	 I	didn’t	 mean	it.”

     Her	brow	 twitched.

     “Here,	 I	have	something	for	you.”

     “It	 had	better	not	be	an	engagement	ring.”

838
     He	paused,	his	lips	puckering	 as	if	the	thought	hadn’t	 occurred	to	him	and	he

was	regretting	it.

     “Or	 gloves,”	added	Cinder.	“That	 didn’t	 work	out	too	 well	last	time.”

     Grinning,	 Kai	took	 a	step	closer	to	her	and	dropped	to	one	knee.

     Her	eyes	widened.

     “Cinder…”

     Her	heart	thumped.	“Wait.”

     “I’ve	 been	waiting	 a	long	time	to	give	this	 to	you.”

     “Kai—”

     With	 an	expression	as	serious	as	politics,	he	pulled	his	 hand	from	behind	his

back.	In	 it	 was	 cupped	a	small	 metal	 foot,	 frayed	 wires	 sticking	 up	 from	 the

cavity	and	the	joints	packed	with	grease.

     Cinder	released	her	breath,	then	started	to	laugh.	“You—ugh.”

     “Are	  you	  terribly	  disappointed,	 because	I’m	  sure	 Luna	  has	some	 great

jewelry	stores	if	you	 wanted	me	to—”

     “Shut	 up,”	she	said,	taking	 the	foot.	She	turned	it	 over	in	 her	palms,	shaking

her	head.	“I	keep	trying	 to	get	rid	 of	this	thing,	 but	somehow	it	 keeps	finding	its

way	back	to	me.	What	made	you	keep	it?”

     “It	 occurred	to	me	that	if	 I	could	 find	the	cyborg	that	fit	 this	foot,	 it	must	be	a

sign	we	were	meant	to	be	together.”	 He	twisted	 his	lips	 to	one	side.	“But	 then	I

realized	it	would	probably	 fit	 an	eight-year-old.”

     “Eleven,	 actually.”

     “Close	 enough.”	He	 hesitated.	“Honestly,	I	 guess	it	was	the	only	 thing	 I	had

to	connect	me	to	you	when	I	thought	I’d	 never	see	you	again.”

     She	slid	her	gaze	off	the	foot.	“Why	 are	you	still	 kneeling?”

839
     Kai	 reached	for	 her	prosthetic	 hand	and	brushed	his	 lips	 against	her	newly

polished	knuckles.	“You’ll	  have	to	get	used	to	people	kneeling	to	 you.	It	 kind	of

comes	with	the	territory.”

     “I’m	  going	to	make	it	 a	law	that	the	correct	way	 to	address	your	sovereign	is

by	giving	a	high	 five.”

     Kai’s	 smile	brightened.	“That’s	 genius.	Me	too.”

     Cinder	 pulled	 her	hand	away	from	 him	 and	sat	down,	 letting	 her	legs	 hang

over	the	edge.	Her	 thoughts	grew	 serious	again	as	she	stared	at	the	metal	foot.

“Actually,	 there’s	something	I	 wanted	to	get	your	opinion	on.”

     Kai	 settled	beside	her.	His	 expression	turned	curious,	 and	she	looked	away,

bracing	herself.	“I	 think—”	  She	stopped.	Gulped.	Started	again.	“I’ve	decided	to

dissolve	the	Lunar	monarchy.”

     Pressing	her	lips	together,	 she	waited.	The	silence	became	solid	in	 the	space

between	them.	But	Kai	didn’t	 ask	“Why?”	 or	“How?”	  or	“Are	 you	insane?”

     Instead,	he	said,	“When?”

     “I	  don’t	 know.	  When	 things	 have	 calmed	down.	  When	 I	 think	 they	 can

handle	it.”	 She	took	in	a	deep	breath.	“It	 will	 happen	again.	Some	king	or	queen

is	going	to	 brainwash	the	people,	use	their	power	 to	enslave	them	…	 There	has

to	be	some	division	 of	 power,	some	checks	and	 balances	…	so	I’ve	 decided	to

change	Luna	into	 a	republic,	elected	 officials	 and	all.”	 She	bit	 her	lip.	 She	still

felt	 silly	 talking	  politics	 like	 she	 had	a	clue,	 and	 it	 wasn’t	 until	 Kai	  nodded,

thoughtful,	 that	she	realized	 how	 important	 his	approval	 had	been	 to	her.	 She

swallowed	around	the	lump	in	her	throat.	“You	 think	 it’s	 a	good	idea?”

     “I	 think	 it	 will	  be	difficult.	  People	don’t	 like	 change,	and	 even	the	citizens

who	 were	 oppressed	under	 Levana	 immediately	  accepted	you	  as	their	  new

840
queen.	Plus,	they	have	 that	whole	 superstition	 thing	about	 the	royal	 bloodline.

But	…	I	 think	you’re	 right.	I	 think	it’s	 what	Luna	needs.”

     She	felt	as	though	an	entire	moon	had	been	lifted	off	her	shoulders.

     “What	 will	 you	do	then?	After	 you	abdicate?”

     “I	  don’t	  know.	 I	 hear	 Thorne	 is	 looking	  for	 a	 full-time	  mechanic.”	  She

shrugged,	but	Kai	went	on	looking	 pensive.	“What?”

     “I	 think	 you	should	 come	back	to	the	Commonwealth.	 You	could	 stay	in	the

palace,	as	a	Lunar	 ambassador.	It	 would	 be	 a	show	 of	 good	faith.	  Proof	that

Earth	and	Luna	can	work	together,	coincide	together.”

     Cinder	 chewed	 on	 the	 inside	 of	 her	 cheek.	“I	  thought	 the	 people	 of	 the

Commonwealth	 hated	me,”	 she	said.	 “For	 the	 kidnapping.	 And	 all	  that	other

stuff	that	happened.”

     “Please.	You’re	 the	lost	 princess	that	saved	them	from	 the	reign	of	 Empress

Levana.	I	heard	there’s	a	toy	company	 that	wants	to	make	action	figures	 of	you.

And	they	want	to	put	up	a	statue	where	your	booth	used	to	be	at	the	market.”

     She	grimaced.

     Chuckling,	  Kai	  took	 her	 hand.	 “Whenever	 you	 come	 back,	 you	 will	   be

welcomed	 with	  open	  arms.	 And	  after	  everything	  that’s	 happened,	 you’re

probably	going	to	 have	about	two	hundred	thousand	guys	wanting	to	take	you	to

the	Annual	 Peace	Ball	next	 year.	I	 expect	the	offers	 to	start	 rolling	 in	 any	day

now.”

     “I	 highly	 doubt	that.”

     “Just	wait,	 you’ll	 see.”	He	tilted	 his	head,	clumps	of	hair	falling	 into	his	 eyes.

“I	 figured	 it	couldn’t	  hurt	to	 get	my	 name	on	the	list	 before	 anyone	else	steals

you	away.	If	  we	start	now,	 and	plan	 frequent	visits	 between	Earth	and	 Luna,	I

841
might	even	have	time	to	teach	you	to	dance.”

     Cinder	bit	 her	lip	to	disguise	a	budding	smile.

     “Please	say	yes,”	said	Kai.

     Fiddling	 with	 the	dead	wires	of	her	old	 foot,	she	asked,	“Do	I	 have	to	wear	a

dress?”

     “I	 don’t	 care	if	you	wear	military	 boots	and	cargo	pants.”

     “I	 just	might.”

     “Good.”

     “Iko	 would	 kill	  me.”	She	pretended	to	be	considering	 it	as	she	cast	her	gaze

toward	the	sky.	“Can	I	bring	 my	friends?”

     “I	 will	 personally	 extend	invitations	 to	the	entire	Rampion	 crew.	We’ll	 make

a	reunion	out	of	it.”

     “Even	 Iko?”

     “I’ll	  find	 her	a	date.”

     “Because	there’s	a	rule	against	androids	coming	to	the	ball,	you	know.”

     “I	 think	 I	know	someone	who	can	change	that	rule.”

     Grinning,	 she	 scooted	a	bit	 closer.	 The	idea	 of	going	 back	 to	the	 ball	 and

facing	 all	 those	people	who	 had	 stared	at	her	 with	 such	 horror	 and	contempt

filled	  her	  with	  copious	 amounts	  of	 everything	  from	   anxiety	 to	  dread	 to

unspeakable	joy.

     “I	 would	 be	honored,”	she	said.

     His	eyes	warmed.	“And	 those	dance	lessons?”

     “Don’t	  press	your	luck.”

     Kai	 tilted	her	 chin	toward	him	 and	kissed	her.	She	didn’t	know	 what	number

it	was—she’d	finally	  figured	 out	how	to	turn	 off	 her	brain’s	auto-count	 function

842
and	she	didn’t	 care	how	many	times	 he	kissed	her.	She	did	care	that	 every	kiss

no	longer	felt	like	 their	last.

     Except,	 when	  Kai	 pulled	  away,	 a	 hint	  of	 sadness	had	 slipped	  into	 his

expression.	“Cinder,	  I	 believe	 you	 would	  make	 a	great	 ruler.	  I	 believe	 this

decision	is	proof	of	 that.”	He	hesitated.	“But	 I	also	know	 you	never	wanted	to	be

queen.	Not	really.”

     Cinder	had	never	told	 him	that,	 and	she	wondered	if	it	 had	been	obvious	this

whole	time.

     “But	  I	 have	to	 ask	if”—Kai	   hesitated—“if	 you	 think,	 someday,	you	 might

consider	being	an	empress.”

     Cinder	 forced	herself	 to	hold	 his	gaze,	and	to	swallow	 the	 lighthearted	joke

that	rose	to	the	tip	of	 her	tongue.	He	wasn’t	 teasing	her	about	engagement	rings

and	dance	lessons.	This	was	a	real	question,	 from	 a	real	emperor,	who	 had	the

real	future	of	his	country	 to	consider.

     If	 she	wanted	to	be	a	part	of	his	future,	she’d	have	to	be	a	part	of	it	all.

     “I	 would	 consider	it,”	 she	said,	then	took	in	the	first	full	 breath	she’d	taken	in

days.	“Someday.”

     His	grin	 returned,	full	 force	and	full	of	 relief.

     He	put	 an	arm	around	her	and	Cinder	couldn’t	 smother	her	own	smile	 as	she

leaned	against	him,	staring	at	Artemisia	Lake	and	the	white	 city	and	planet	Earth

surrounded	by	stars.	She	spun	the	cumbersome,	hateful	foot	in	 her	fingers.	Ever

since	she	could	remember,	 it	had	 been	a	burden.	A	 constant	reminder	 that	she

was	worthless,	she	was	unimportant,	she	was	nothing	but	a	cyborg.

     She	held	the	foot	over	the	water	and	let	go.

843
	

	



       And	 they	 all	 lived	  happily	  to	 the	end	 of	 their	 days.

844
	




                                Acknowledgments







My	heart	overfloweth	with	gratitude	…

     For	everyone	at	Macmillan	Children’s,	including,	but	 not	limited	 to:	Jean

Feiwel,	Liz	 Szabla,	Jon	Yaged,	Nicole	Banholzer,	Molly	 Brouillette,	 Lauren

Burniac,	Mariel	Dawson,	Lucy	Del	Priore,	Liz	Fithian,	Courtney	Griffin,	Angus

Killick,	 Johanna	Kirby,	Anna	Roberto,	Caitlin	Sweeny,	Mary	Van	Akin,	Allison

Verost,	Ksenia	Winnicki,	and	countless	more	behind-the-scenes	advocates	for

these	books.	You	are	all	so	brilliant	and	creative	and	I’m	so	lucky	to	be	working

with	you.	I	also	want	to	give	special	thanks	to	the	cover	designer,	Rich	Deas,	and

illustrator,	Michael	O,	who	 together	have	created	some	of	the	most	gorgeous

book	covers	an	author	could	hope	for.	 Thanks	also	to	my	 copyeditor,	Anne

Heausler,	for	your	careful	 attention	and	surprisingly	excellent	knowledge	of

moon	geology.

     For	Rebecca	Soler,	the	ridiculously	talented	audiobook	narrator,	along	with

Samantha	Edelson	and	the	whole	crew	at	Macmillan	Audio	for	bringing	these

stories	to	life	in	such	a	lively	and	tangible	way.

     For	my	intrepid	agent	and	her	team:	Jill	Grinberg,	Cheryl	Pientka,	Katelyn

Detweiler,	and	Denise	St.	Pierre.	Thank	you	for	your	constant	faith,	guidance,

845
and	zeal	for	toasting	every	milestone.	(Winter	is	done—cheers!)

     For	my	 beta	readers,	Tamara	Felsinger,	Jennifer	Johnson,	and	Meghan	Stone-

Burgess,	who	have	been	with	me	since	the	start	 of	this	crazy	 journey.	Time	 and

again	you’ve	  forced	 me	to	 dig	 deeper	 and	push	 harder,	and	 your	 invaluable

feedback	has	made	such	a	tremendous	difference	to	 this	series	and	for	 me	as	a

writer.	Plus,	I	just	 really	adore	you	all.

     For	the	 Sailor	Moon	 fandom,	from	 those	who	gave	me	courage	back	when	 I

was	a	fledgling	 fanfiction	  writer,	 to	some	of	 my	dearest	friends	who	 still	 make

me	laugh	with	your	hijinks.	 (There,	I	 put	Jacin	in	a	towel.	Are	you	happy??)

     We	 often	talk	 about	writing	  being	a	solitary	 profession,	 but	it’s	 hard	 to	tell

when	you’re	 surrounded	by	wonderful	 fellow	  writers	 as	I’ve	 been.	I’m	 grateful

for	  my	  local	  partners-in-crime—Gennifer	   Albin	   (we	  miss	  you!),	  Martha

Brockenbrough,	 Corry	 Lee,	Lish	 McBride,	  Ayesha	 Patel,	and	Rori	  Shay—for

keeping	me	inspired	and	focused	during	our	many	writing	 dates	and	retreats.	I’m

so	glad	to	have	met	each	of	 you.	Thanks	also	to	 Mary	 Christine	Weber	 and	Jay

Asher,	who	 joined	me	for	 a	super-fun	 interview	 in	 the	Cress	paperback,	and	to

so	many	 writers	 who	 have	 joked,	 inspired,	 commiserated,	 motivated,	 taught,

toured	with,	 and	encouraged	me	throughout	this	 epic	book-writing	  quest:	Anna

Banks,	Leigh	  Bardugo,	Stephanie	 Bodeen,	Jennifer	 Bosworth,	 Jessica	Brody,

Alexandra	Coutts,	 Jennifer	 Ellision,	 Elizabeth	 Eulberg,	 Elizabeth	 Fama,	Nikki

Kelly,	 Robin	 LaFevers,	Emmy	Laybourne,	 Beth	Revis,	 Leila	 Sales,	and	Jessica

Spotswood,	with	sincere	apologies	to	anyone	I	might	have	missed.

     For	 the	librarians,	teachers,	booksellers,	and	bloggers	who’ve	  rallied	around

this	 series.	 From	 book	 talks	  to	 art	 assignments,	 staff	 picks	  to	 GoodReads

reviews,	 your	  enthusiasm	  has	 introduced	  countless	 readers	 to	  the	  Lunar

846
Chronicles	and	I	am	enormously	grateful	for	 all	you’ve	 done.

     For	 my	  friends	 and	 family,	  who	 plan	 launch	 parties,	 take	 photos,	 make

dinners,	babysit,	 pitch	my	 books	 to	random	 people	at	 the	supermarket,	do	 my

hair,	make	crowns,	share	book	recommendations,	help	me	shop	for	event	outfits,

and	constantly	remind	me	of	the	important	things	in	 life.	Thank	 you;	I	love	you.

     For	Jesse,	who	does	so	much	so	I	can	stay	focused	on	writing	 and	dreaming,

dreaming	and	writing.	I	 love	you	with	 my	whole	 heart.	And	for	Sarah	and	Emily,

whose	smiles	have	made	this	the	brightest	year	of	my	life.

     Lastly,	 I	 have	 infinite	  gratitude	 for	 the	readers	 (yes,	you!).	 Over	 the	 past

years,	you’ve	 made	fanart	and	 written	 letters,	held	 in-depth	discussions	 on	the

merits	of	 various	OTPs,	shared	with	 me	your	struggles	 and	joys,	hosted	read-a-

thons,	donned	 costumes	and	red	 high	 heels,	 driven	 for	 hours	 to	 attend	book

signings,	 dreamed	up	 movie	  fancastings,	 baked	Lunar	  Chronicles	 cupcakes,

started	Tumblrs	 and	compiled	 Pinterest	boards,	and	so	 so	so	much	more.	 This

tale	belongs	to	 you	now,	 as	much	 as	to	me,	 and	I	 couldn’t	 feel	 as	though	I’m

putting	it	in	 better	hands.	If	you	need	me,	I’ll	 be	thanking	all	 the	stars	for	each	of

you,	one	by	one.

847
	




                    Thank	you	for	reading	this	FEIWEL	AND	FRIENDS	book.
                                           The	Friends	who	made
                                                 Winter
                                                  possible	are:

                                                 Jean	 Feiwel
                                                     publisher

                                                  Liz	  Szabla
                                                 editor	in	chief

                                                  Rich	  Deas
                                           senior	creative	director

                                                  Holly	  West
                                                associate	editor

                                                Dave	 Barrett
                                        executive	managing	editor

                                  Nicole	  Liebowitz	   Moulaison
                                        senior	production	manager

                                               Anna	 Roberto
                                                associate	editor

                                         Christine	   Barcellona
                                                associate	editor

                                                 Emily	  Settle
                                          administrative	assistant

848
                                Anna	  Poon
                             editorial	assistant

Follow	us	on	Facebook	or	visit	us	online	at	mackids.com.

           OUR	BOOKS	ARE	FRIENDS	FOR	LIFE

849
	



                               About	         the	    Author






Marissa	Meyer’s	first	book	in	the	Lunar	Chronicles,	Cinder,	debuted	on	the

New	York	Times	bestseller	list.	Marissa	lives	in	Tacoma,	Washington,	with	her

husband	and	their	three	cats.	You	can	sign	up	for	email	updates	here.



                                                     				

850
                                    	


               Thank	 you	for	 buying	 this
              Feiwel	 and	Friends	 ebook.
                                    	
     To	receive	special	offers,	bonus	content,
and	info	on	new	releases	and	other	great	reads,
               sign	up	for	our	 newsletters.
                                    	



                     Or	visit	 us	online	at
        us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup
                                    	
  For	email	 updates	on	the	author,	click	here.

851
	





                                                           Contents








                                                                     Title	Page

                                                                Copyright	Notice

                                                                    Dedication


                                                                     Book	One

                                                                   Chapter	One

                                                                   Chapter	Two

                                                                  Chapter	Three

                                                                   Chapter	Four

                                                                   Chapter	Five

                                                                    Chapter	Six

                                                                  Chapter	Seven

                                                                  Chapter	Eight

                                                                   Chapter	Nine

                                                                   Chapter	Ten

                                                                 Chapter	Eleven

                                                                 Chapter	Twelve

                                                                Chapter	Thirteen

                                                                Chapter	Fourteen

                                                                 Chapter	Fifteen

                                                                 Chapter	Sixteen

                                                               Chapter	Seventeen

                                                                Chapter	Eighteen

852
    Chapter	Nineteen

     Chapter	Twenty


         Book	Two

 Chapter	Twenty-One

 Chapter	Twenty-Two

Chapter	Twenty-Three

 Chapter	Twenty-Four

 Chapter	Twenty-Five

  Chapter	Twenty-Six

Chapter	Twenty-Seven

Chapter	Twenty-Eight

Chapter	Twenty-Nine

      Chapter	Thirty

  Chapter	Thirty-One

  Chapter	Thirty-Two

 Chapter	Thirty-Three

  Chapter	Thirty-Four

  Chapter	Thirty-Five

   Chapter	Thirty-Six

 Chapter	Thirty-Seven

 Chapter	Thirty-Eight


        Book	Three

  Chapter	Thirty-Nine

       Chapter	Forty

   Chapter	Forty-One

  Chapter	Forty-Two

 Chapter	Forty-Three

  Chapter	Forty-Four

   Chapter	Forty-Five

   Chapter	Forty-Six

 Chapter	Forty-Seven

  Chapter	Forty-Eight

  Chapter	Forty-Nine

853
       Chapter	Fifty

   Chapter	Fifty-One

   Chapter	Fifty-Two

  Chapter	Fifty-Three

   Chapter	Fifty-Four

   Chapter	Fifty-Five

    Chapter	Fifty-Six

  Chapter	Fifty-Seven

   Chapter	Fifty-Eight

   Chapter	Fifty-Nine

       Chapter	Sixty


         Book	 Four

   Chapter	Sixty-One

   Chapter	Sixty-Two

  Chapter	Sixty-Three

   Chapter	Sixty-Four

   Chapter	Sixty-Five

    Chapter	Sixty-Six

  Chapter	Sixty-Seven

  Chapter	Sixty-Eight

   Chapter	Sixty-Nine

     Chapter	Seventy

 Chapter	Seventy-One

 Chapter	Seventy-Two

Chapter	Seventy-Three

 Chapter	Seventy-Four

 Chapter	Seventy-Five

  Chapter	Seventy-Six

Chapter	Seventy-Seven


          Book	Five

Chapter	Seventy-Eight

Chapter	Seventy-Nine

      Chapter	Eighty

854
 Chapter	Eighty-One

 Chapter	Eighty-Two

Chapter	Eighty-Three

 Chapter	Eighty-Four

 Chapter	Eighty-Five

  Chapter	Eighty-Six

Chapter	Eighty-Seven

Chapter	Eighty-Eight

 Chapter	Eighty-Nine

     Chapter	Ninety

 Chapter	Ninety-One

 Chapter	Ninety-Two

Chapter	Ninety-Three

 Chapter	Ninety-Four

 Chapter	Ninety-Five

  Chapter	Ninety-Six

Chapter	Ninety-Seven


  Acknowledgments

   About	the	Author

         Copyright

855
	





	






                                                                            A	FEIWEL	AND	FRIENDS	BOOK
                                                                       An	 Imprint	  of	 Macmillan


     WINTER.	Copyright	©	2015	by	Rampion	Books.	  All	 rights	 reserved.	 For	 information,	  address	 Feiwel	 and

                                                Friends,	  175	Fifth	  Avenue,	 New	 York,	  N.Y.	 10010.


    Our	 books	 may	be	 purchased	in	 bulk	 for	 promotional,	  educational,	  or	 business	use.	Please	contact	 your

local	 bookseller	  or	the	Macmillan	   Corporate	 and	 Premium	 Sales	Department	  at	(800)	 221-7945	  ext.	5442	 or

                                            by	e-mail	 at	 MacmillanSpecialMarkets@macmillan.com.


                                       Library	  of	 Congress	 Cataloging-in-Publication	     Data	Available


                                                                                         ISBN

                                                                  978-0-312-64298-3	   (hardcover)

                                                         978-1-250-07421-8	   (international	  edition)

                                                                     978-1-250-06875-0	   (ebook)


                                              Feiwel	 and	 Friends	 logo	 designed	 by	Filomena	  Tuosto


                                                                             First	 Edition:	  2015


                                                                            macteenbooks.com


                                                                        eISBN:	  9781250068750

