2
ALSO BY HANYA YANAGIHARA

   The   People   in   the  Trees

4
   This  book is a work  of fiction.  Names, characters, businesses, organi]ations, places, events, and
incidents either are the product of  the author’s imagination  or are used fictitiously.  Any  resemblance
                    to  actual persons, living  or dead, events, or locales is entirely coincidental.

                                                Copyright  © 2015  by Hanya Yanagihara

All  rights reserved. Published in the United  States by Doubleday, a division  of Random House LLC,
 New York,  and in Canada by Random House of Canada Limited,  Toronto, Penguin Random House
                                                                        companies.

                                                                www.doubleday.com

    DOUBLEDAY and the portrayal of an anchor with a dolphin are registered trademarks of Random
                                                                       House LLC.

                                                        Jacket design by Cardon Webb
 Jacket photograph: Orgasmic Man  by Peter HuMar © 198 The Peter HuMar Archive LLC. Courtesy
                        Pace/MacGill  Gallery,  New York  and Fraenkel Gallery, San Francisco

                                       Library  of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication   Data
                                                                 Yanagihara, Hanya.
                                  A  little  life :  a novel / Hanya Yanagihara. — First  edition.
                                                                         pages; cm
                   ISBN  98-0-385-53925-8 (hardcover)  —ISBN  98-0-385-5392-5 (eBook)
                                        1.  Families—Fiction.  2. Domestic  fiction.  I.  Title.
                                                              PS325.A4L58 2015
                                                         813′.—dc23     20140239

                                                                             v3.1

5
      To Jared Hohlt
in friendship;  with  love

6
                                                                    Contents





Cover
Other Books by This Author
Title Page
Copyright
Dedication

          I     LISPENARD STREET
          Chapter 1
          Chapter 2
          Chapter 3

          II    THE POSTMAN
          Chapter 1
          Chapter 2
          Chapter 3

          III   VANITIES
          Chapter 1
          Chapter 2
          Chapter 3

          IV   THE AXIOM OF E4UALITY
          Chapter 1
          Chapter 2
          Chapter 3

          V    THE HAPPY YEARS
          Chapter 1
          Chapter 2
          Chapter 3

          VI   DEAR COMRADE
          Chapter 1
          Chapter 2
          Chapter 3

          VII  LISPENARD STREET

          Acknowledgments
          About  the Author

7
       [ I ]

Lispenard Street

8
                                                         1

THE ELEVENTH APARTMENT had only one closet, but it did have a sliding glass
door that opened onto  a small  balcony, from  which  he could  see a man
sitting across the way, outdoors in only a T-shirt and shorts even though it
was October, smoking. Willem held  up a hand in greeting to  him, but  the
man didn’t wave back.
   In  the  bedroom, Jude was  accordioning the  closet door,  opening and
shutting it, when Willem came in. “There’s only one closet,” he said.
   “That’s  okay,” Willem said. “I  have nothing to put in it anyway.”
   “Neither  do I.”   They smiled at each other. The agent from the building
wandered in after them. “We’ll take it,” Jude told her.
   But  back  at  the agent’s office,  they  were  told  they couldn’t   rent the
apartment after all. “Why not?” Jude asked her.
   “You  don’t  make enough to cover six months’ rent, and you don’t  have
anything in savings,” said the agent, suddenly terse. She had checked their
credit  and their  bank  accounts and  had at  last  reali]ed  that  there  was
something amiss about two men in  their twenties  who were not  a couple
and yet were trying  to  rent a  one-bedroom apartment on a dull  (but still
expensive) stretch of Twenty-fifth  Street. “Do   you have anyone who  can
sign on as your guarantor? A boss? Parents?”
   “Our  parents are dead,” said Willem, swiftly.
   The agent sighed. “Then I  suggest you lower your expectations. No one
who manages a well-run building  is going to  rent to candidates with your
financial profile.”   And then  she stood, with an air  of  finality,  and looked
pointedly at the door.
   When  they  told  JB  and Malcolm   this, however,  they  made it  into  a
comedy: the apartment floor  became tattooed with  mouse droppings, the
man across the  way  had almost  exposed himself,  the  agent was  upset
because she had been flirting with Willem and he hadn’t reciprocated.
   “Who   wants to  live  on  Twenty-fifth   and Second anyway,”  asked JB.
They were at Pho Viet Huong in Chinatown, where they met twice a month
for  dinner. Pho  Viet  Huong  wasn’t  very  good—the  pho  was curiously
sugary, the lime Muice was soapy, and at least one of them got  sick after

9
every meal—but they  kept coming,  both out  of habit  and necessity. You
could get a bowl of soup or a sandwich at Pho Viet Huong for five  dollars,
or you could get an entrée, which were eight to ten dollars but much larger,
so you could save half of it for  the next day or for  a snack later that night.
Only Malcolm  never ate the whole of his entrée and never saved the other
half either, and when he was finished eating, he put his plate in the center of
the table so Willem and JB—who were always hungry—could eat the rest.
   “Of  course we don’t  want to live  at Twenty-fifth  and Second, JB,” said
Willem,  patiently, “but  we don’t  really have a choice. We don’t  have any
money, remember?”
   “I   don’t understand why you  don’t stay where you  are,” said Malcolm,
who was  now pushing  his mushrooms and tofu—he  always  ordered the
same dish: oyster mushrooms and braised tofu in a treacly brown sauce—
around his plate, as Willem and JB eyed it.
   “Well,  I can’t,”  Willem said. “Remember?” He had to have explained this
to Malcolm  a do]en  times in the  last three months. “Merritt’s  boyfriend’s
moving in, so I have to move out.”
   “But  why do you have to move out?”
   “Because it’s Merritt’s  name on the lease, Malcolm!” said JB.
   “Oh,”   Malcolm said. He  was quiet. He often forgot  what he considered
inconsequential details, but  he also never  seemed to mind  when  people
grew impatient with him for  forgetting. “Right.”  He moved the mushrooms
to the center of the table. “But you, Jude—”
   “I   can’t stay at your  place forever, Malcolm.  Your parents are going to
kill me at some point.”
   “My  parents love you.”
   “That’s  nice of you to say. But they won’t if I don’t move out, and soon.”
   Malcolm  was the only one of the four of them who lived at home, and as
JB liked to  say, if he had Malcolm’s  home, he would  live  at home too. It
wasn’t as if Malcolm’s house was particularly grand—it was, in fact, creaky
and ill-kept, and Willem  had once gotten a splinter  simply by  running his
hand up its banister—but it was large: a real Upper East Side town house.
Malcolm’s sister, Flora, who was three years older than him, had moved out
of the basement apartment recently, and Jude had taken her place as a short-
term solution: Eventually, Malcolm’s parents would want to reclaim the unit
to convert it into offices for  his mother’s literary agency, which meant Jude

10
(who was  finding  the flight   of  stairs that led  down  to it  too  difficult   to
navigate anyway) had to look for his own apartment.
   And   it  was  natural that  he  would  live   with  Willem;   they  had been
roommates throughout college. In  their  first   year, the four  of  them  had
shared a space that consisted of a cinder-blocked common room, where sat
their desks and chairs and a couch that JB’s  aunts had driven up in  a U-
Haul, and a second, far  tinier room,  in  which two  sets of bunk  beds had
been placed. This room had been so narrow that Malcolm and Jude, lying in
the bottom bunks, could reach out  and grab each other’s hands. Malcolm
and JB had shared one of the units; Jude and Willem had shared the other.
   “It’s  blacks versus whites,” JB would say.
   “Jude’s not white,”  Willem would respond.
   “And   I’m   not  black,”   Malcolm  would  add,  more  to  annoy  JB than
because he believed it.
   “Well,”   JB said now, pulling the plate of mushrooms toward him with the
tines of his fork,  “I’d   say you could both  stay with  me, but I  think you’d
fucking  hate it.”  JB  lived  in a  massive, filthy  loft   in Little   Italy,  full  of
strange hallways   that   led  to   unused,  oddly   shaped  cul-de-sacs and
unfinished half  rooms, the Sheetrock abandoned mid-construction, which
belonged to another person they knew from college.  E]ra was an artist,  a
bad one, but he didn’t need to be good because, as JB liked to remind them,
he would never have to work in his entire life. And not only would he never
have to work,  but  his children’s  children’s children  would  never have to
work: They  could make bad, unsalable, worthless art  for generations and
they would  still  be  able to  buy  at whim  the  best oils  they wanted, and
impractically large lofts in  downtown Manhattan that they could trash with
their bad architectural decisions, and when they got sick of the artist’s life—
as JB was convinced E]ra  someday would—all they  would need to  do is
call their trust officers and be awarded an enormous lump sum of cash of an
amount that the four of them (well, maybe not Malcolm) could never dream
of seeing in  their  lifetimes.  In  the meantime, though, E]ra   was a useful
person to know, not only  because he let JB and a few of his other friends
from school  stay in  his  apartment—at any time,  there were four  or  five
people burrowing  in  various corners  of  the loft—but   because he was a
good-natured and basically generous person, and liked to throw excessive
parties in  which  copious  amounts of  food  and drugs  and alcohol  were
available for free.

11
   “Hold  up,”  JB said, putting his chopsticks down. “I Must reali]ed—there’s
someone at the maga]ine renting some place for her aunt. Like, Must on the
verge of Chinatown.”
   “How  much is it?” asked Willem.
   “Probably  nothing—she didn’t  even know  what  to ask for  it.  And  she
wants someone in there that she knows.”
   “Do  you think you could put in a good word?”
   “Better—I’ll   introduce you. Can you come by the office tomorrow?”
   Jude sighed. “I won’t be able to get away.” He looked at Willem.
   “Don’t  worry—I  can. What time?”
   “Lunchtime,  I guess. One?”
   “I’ll   be there.”
   Willem   was still  hungry, but  he let  JB eat the rest  of the  mushrooms.
Then they all waited around for a bit; sometimes Malcolm ordered Mackfruit
ice cream, the one consistently good thing on the menu, ate two bites, and
then stopped, and he and JB would finish the rest. But  this time he didn’t
order the ice cream, and so they asked for the bill so they could study it and
divide it to the dollar.


   The next day, Willem met JB at his office. JB worked as a receptionist at
a small but influential maga]ine based in SoHo that covered the downtown
art scene. This was a strategic Mob for him; his plan, as he’d explained to
Willem one night, was that he’d try to befriend one of the editors there and
then convince him to feature him in the maga]ine. He estimated this taking
about six months, which meant he had three more to go.
   JB  wore a perpetual expression of mild  disbelief  while at  his Mob, both
that he  should  be working   at  all  and  that  no  one had  yet  thought  to
recogni]e his special genius. He was not a good receptionist. Although the
phones rang more or less constantly, he rarely picked them up; when any of
them wanted to get through to him (the cell phone reception in the building
was inconsistent),  they had  to  follow   a  special code  of  ringing  twice,
hanging up, and then ringing again. And even then he sometimes failed to
answer—his hands were busy beneath his desk, combing and plaiting snarls
of hair from a black plastic trash bag he kept at his feet.
   JB  was  going through,  as he  put it,   his hair  phase. Recently he  had
decided to take a break from painting  in favor  of  making sculptures from

12
black hair. Each of  them had  spent an exhausting weekend following  JB
from  barbershop to  beauty shop  in  4ueens,  Brooklyn,  the  Bronx,  and
Manhattan, waiting   outside as  JB  went  in  to  ask  the  owners  for  any
sweepings or cuttings they  might have, and then  lugging an  increasingly
awkward  bag of  hair  down   the street  after  him.  His  early  pieces had
included The Mace, a tennis ball that he had de-fu]]ed,  sliced in  half, and
filled with  sand before coating it in glue and rolling it around and around in
a carpet of  hair so that  the bristles  moved like  seaweed underwater, and
“The Kwotidien,”  in  which he covered various household items—a stapler;
a spatula; a teacup—in pelts of hair. Now he was working on a large-scale
proMect that he refused to  discuss with  them  except in  snatches, but  it
involved the combing out and braiding together of many pieces in order to
make one  apparently endless rope  of  fri]]ing    black  hair. The  previous
Friday he had lured them over with  the promise of  pi]]a  and beer to help
him braid, but after many hours of tedious work, it  became clear that there
was no pi]]a  and beer forthcoming,  and they had left, a little   irritated but
not terribly surprised.
   They  were all bored with  the hair proMect, although Jude—alone among
them—thought  that  the   pieces  were  lovely   and   would   someday be
considered significant.   In   thanks,  JB  had  given   Jude  a  hair-covered
hairbrush, but then had reclaimed the gift when it looked like E]ra’s father’s
friend might be interested in buying it (he didn’t,  but JB never returned the
hairbrush to Jude). The hair proMect had proved difficult in  other ways as
well;  another evening, when the  three of  them had  somehow been once
again conned into going to Little Italy and combing out more hair, Malcolm
had commented that the hair stank. Which it did: not of anything distasteful
but simply the tangy metallic  scent of unwashed scalp. But JB had thrown
one of his mounting tantrums, and had called Malcolm a self-hating Negro
and an Uncle Tom and a traitor to the race, and Malcolm, who very  rarely
angered but who angered over accusations like this, had dumped his wine
into  the nearest bag  of  hair  and gotten  up  and stamped out.  Jude had
hurried, the best he could, after Malcolm, and Willem had stayed to handle
JB. And  although  the two  of  them  reconciled  the next  day, in  the  end
Willem  and Jude felt  (unfairly,   they knew)  slightly  angrier  at Malcolm,
since the next weekend they were back in 4ueens, walking from barbershop
to barbershop, trying to replace the bag of hair that he had ruined.
   “How’s  life  on the black planet?” Willem asked JB now.

13
   “Black,”   said JB, stuffing the plait  he was untangling back into the bag.
“Let’s go; I told  Annika we’d be there at one thirty.” The phone on his desk
began to ring.
   “Don’t  you want to get that?”
   “They’ll   call back.”
   As  they walked downtown,  JB complained. So far, he had concentrated
most of his seductive energies on a senior editor named Dean, whom they
all called DeeAnn. They had been at a party, the three of them, held at one
of the Munior editor’s parents’ apartment in the Dakota, in  which art-hung
room bled  into  art-hung room.  As  JB  talked with   his coworkers  in  the
kitchen, Malcolm  and Willem  had walked through the  apartment together
(Where had Jude been that night? Working, probably), looking at a series of
Edward Burtynskys hanging in the guest bedroom, a suite of water towers
by the Bechers mounted in four  rows of five  over the desk in  the den, an
enormous Gursky floating above the half  bookcases in the library, and, in
the master bedroom, an entire wall of Diane Arbuses, covering the space so
thoroughly that only  a few  centimeters of blank  wall remained at  the top
and bottom. They had been admiring a picture of two sweet-faced girls with
Down  syndrome playing  for   the camera  in  their  too-tight,  too-childish
bathing suits, when Dean had approached them. He was a tall man, but he
had a small,  gophery, pockmarked face  that made him  appear feral  and
untrustworthy.
   They introduced themselves, explained that they were here because they
were JB’s friends. Dean told them that he was one of  the senior editors at
the maga]ine, and that he handled all the arts coverage.
   “Ah,”   Willem said, careful not to look at Malcolm, whom he did not trust
not to  react. JB had told  them that  he had targeted the arts editor  as his
potential mark; this must be him.
   “Have  you  ever seen anything like  this?”  Dean asked them, waving  a
hand at the Arbuses.
   “Never,”  Willem  said. “I love Diane Arbus.”
   Dean stiffened, and his little  features seemed to gather themselves into a
knot in the center of his little face. “It’s DeeAnn.”
   “What?”
   “DeeAnn.  You pronounce her name ‘DeeAnn.’ ”
   They  had  barely been able  to  get out  of  the room  without  laughing.
“DeeAnn!”  JB had said later, when they told him the story. “Christ! What a

14
pretentious little shit.”
   “But  he’s your pretentious little shit,” Jude had said. And ever since, they
had referred to Dean as “DeeAnn.”
   Unfortunately,  however, it appeared that despite JB’s tireless cultivation
of DeeAnn, he was no closer to being included in the maga]ine than he had
been three months ago. JB had even let DeeAnn suck him off in the steam
room at the gym, and still nothing. Every day, JB found a reason to wander
back into the editorial  offices and over to  the bulletin board on  which the
next three months’ story ideas were written on white note cards, and every
day he  looked at  the section  dedicated to  up-and-coming artists for  his
name, and every day  he was disappointed. Instead he saw  the names of
various no-talents and overhypes, people owed favors or people who knew
people to whom favors were owed.
   “If   I ever see E]ra up there, I’m going to kill  myself,”  JB always said, to
which the others said: You won’t,  JB, and Don’t  worry,  JB—you’ll  be up
there someday, and What do you need them for, JB? You’ll find somewhere
else, to which JB would reply, respectively, “Are you sure?,” and “I fucking
doubt it,” and “I’ve   fucking invested this time—three whole months of my
fucking life—I   better be fucking  up there, or this  whole thing  has been a
fucking   waste,  Must like   everything   else,”  everything   else  meaning,
variously, grad school, moving back to New York, the hair series, or life in
general, depending on how nihilistic he felt that day.
   He  was still  complaining  when they  reached Lispenard Street. Willem
was new enough to the city—he had only lived there a year—to have never
heard of the street, which was barely more than an alley,  two blocks long
and one block south of Canal, and yet JB, who had grown up in Brooklyn,
hadn’t heard of it either.
   They  found the building  and punched bu]]er   5C. A  girl  answered, her
voice made scratchy and hollow by the intercom, and rang them in. Inside,
the lobby was narrow and high-ceilinged  and painted a curdled, gleaming
shit-brown, which made them feel like they were at the bottom of a well.
   The  girl was waiting  for  them at the door  of the apartment. “Hey, JB,”
she said, and then looked at Willem and blushed.
   “Annika,  this  is my friend  Willem,”  JB  said. “Willem,  Annika works  in
the art department. She’s cool.”
   Annika  looked down and stuck out her hand in one movement. “It’s nice
to meet  you,”  she said  to  the floor.  JB  kicked  Willem   in  the foot  and

15
grinned at him. Willem ignored him.
   “It’s  nice to meet you, too,” he said.
   “Well,  this is the apartment? It’s my aunt’s? She lived here for fifty years
but she Must moved into a retirement home?” Annika was speaking very fast
and had apparently decided that the best strategy was to treat Willem like an
eclipse and simply not look at him at all.  She was talking faster and faster,
about her aunt, and how  she always said the neighborhood had changed,
and  how  she’d   never  heard  of   Lispenard  Street  until   she’d   moved
downtown, and how she was sorry it hadn’t been painted yet, but her aunt
had Must, literally Must moved out and they’d only had a chance to have it
cleaned the previous weekend. She looked everywhere but at Willem—at
the ceiling (stamped tin),  at the floors  (cracked, but parquet), at the walls
(on which  long-ago-hung picture frames had left  ghostly shadows)—until
finally  Willem  had  to  interrupt, gently,  and ask if   he could  take a  look
through the rest of the apartment.
   “Oh,  be my guest,” said Annika, “I’ll  leave you alone,” although she then
began to follow  them, talking  rapidly to  JB about someone named Jasper
and how  he’d  been using Archer  for  everything,  and didn’t  JB  think  it
looked a little too round and weird for body text? Now  that Willem had his
back turned to her, she stared at him openly, her rambling becoming more
inane the longer she spoke.
   JB  watched Annika watch  Willem.  He had never seen her like  this, so
nervous and girlish (normally she was surly and silent and was actually a bit
feared in the  office for  creating on  the wall  above her desk an  elaborate
sculpture of a heart made entirely of X-ACTO blades), but he had seen lots of
women behave this way around Willem. They  all had. Their friend  Lionel
used to say that Willem must have been a fisherman in a past life, because
he couldn’t  help but attract  pussy. And yet most  of the  time (though  not
always), Willem   seemed unaware of  the  attention.  JB  had once  asked
Malcolm  why  he thought that  was, and Malcolm  said he  thought it  was
because Willem  hadn’t  noticed.  JB  had only  grunted  in  reply,  but  his
thinking was:  Malcolm was  the most obtuse person he knew, and if even
Malcolm had noticed how women reacted around Willem, it was impossible
that Willem  himself  hadn’t.  Later, however, Jude had offered  a different
interpretation: he had suggested that Willem was deliberately not reacting to
all the  women so the other  men around him  wouldn’t  feel threatened by
him.  This  made more sense; Willem   was liked  by  everyone and  never

16
wanted to  make people  feel  intentionally  uncomfortable,  and so  it  was
possible that, subconsciously at least, he was feigning a sort of ignorance.
But still—it  was fascinating to watch, and the three of  them never tired of
it, nor of making fun  of Willem  for it  afterward, though he would normally
Must smile and say nothing.
   “Does  the  elevator  work  well  here?”  Willem  asked  abruptly, turning
around.
   “What?”   Annika replied,  startled. “Yes, it’s  pretty reliable.”  She pulled
her faint lips into  a narrow smile that JB  reali]ed, with  a stomach-twist of
embarrassment for her, was meant to be flirtatious. Oh, Annika, he thought.
“What exactly are you planning on bringing into my aunt’s apartment?”
   “Our   friend,”   he   answered, before  Willem   could.  “He   has  trouble
climbing stairs and needs the elevator to work.”
   “Oh,”   she said,  flushing  again. She was  back to  staring  at the  floor.
“Sorry. Yes, it works.”
   The apartment was not impressive. There was a small foyer, little  larger
than the si]e of  a doormat, from which  pronged the kitchen (a hot, greasy
little cube) to the right and a dining area to the left that would accommodate
perhaps a card table. A half wall separated this space from the living room,
with its four  windows, each striped with bars, looking south onto the litter-
scattered street, and down a short hall to the right was the bathroom with its
milk-glass sconces and worn-enamel tub, and across from it the bedroom,
which had another window  and  was deep but narrow;  here, two wooden
twin-bed frames had been placed parallel to each other, each pressed against
a wall.   One of   the frames  was  already topped  with  a  futon,  a  bulky,
graceless thing, as heavy as a dead horse.
   “The  futon’s never been used,” Annika said. She told a long story about
how  she  was  going  to  move  in,   and  had  even  bought  the  futon  in
preparation, but had never gotten to  use it because she moved in instead
with her friend Clement, who wasn’t her boyfriend, Must her friend, and god,
what a  retard  she was for   saying that.  Anyway,  if   Willem  wanted  the
apartment, she’d throw in the futon for free.
   Willem  thanked her. “What do you think, JB?” he asked.
   What did  he think? He thought it was a shithole. Of course, he too lived
in a shithole, but he was in his shithole by choice, and because it was free,
and the money he would have had to spend on rent he was instead able to
spend on paints, and supplies, and drugs, and the  occasional taxi. But  if

17
E]ra were  to ever decide to start  charging him rent, no  way would  he be
there. His family  may not have E]ra’s  money, or Malcolm’s, but  under no
circumstances would they  allow  him  to  throw  away  money living   in  a
shithole. They would find him something better, or give him a little monthly
gift to  help him along. But Willem  and Jude didn’t have that choice: They
had to pay  their  own way,  and they  had no money,  and thus they  were
condemned to live in a shithole. And  if  they were, then this was probably
the  shithole  to   live   in—it   was   cheap, it   was   downtown,  and  their
prospective landlord already had a crush on fifty percent of them.
   So “I   think  it’s perfect,”  he told  Willem,  who agreed. Annika let  out a
yelp. And a hurried conversation later, it was over: Annika had a tenant, and
Willem and Jude had a place to live—all  before JB had to remind  Willem
that he wouldn’t   mind  Willem  paying  for  a bowl   of  noodles for  lunch,
before he had to get back to the office.


   JB wasn’t  given to introspection, but as he rode the train to his mother’s
house that Sunday, he was  unable to  keep himself  from  experiencing a
vague sort of  self-congratulation,  combined with  something approaching
gratitude, that he had the life and family he did.
   His  father, who had emigrated to New  York from  Haiti,  had died when
JB was three, and although JB always liked to think that he remembered his
face—kind and  gentle, with  a narrow  strip  of  mustache and cheeks that
rounded into plums  when he smiled—he  was never to  know whether  he
only thought he remembered it, having grown  up studying the photograph
of his father that sat on his  mother’s bedside table, or whether he actually
did. Still, that had been his only sadness as a child, and even that was more
of an  obligatory sadness: He was fatherless, and he knew  that fatherless
children  mourned  the absence in   their  lives.  He,  however,  had  never
experienced that yearning himself.  After  his father  had died, his  mother,
who was a second-generation Haitian American, had earned her doctorate
in education, teaching all the while at the public school near their house that
she had deemed JB better  than. By  the time  he was  in  high  school, an
expensive private day school nearly an hour’s commute from their place in
Brooklyn,  which  he attended on scholarship,  she was the principal  of  a
different school, a magnet program in Manhattan, and an adMunct professor
at Brooklyn College. She had been the subMect of an article in The New York

18
Times for her innovative teaching methods, and although he had pretended
otherwise to his friends, he had been proud of her.
   She had always been busy when he was growing up, but he had never felt
neglected, had never felt that his mother loved her students more than she
loved him. At  home, there was his grandmother, who cooked whatever he
wanted, and sang to  him  in  French, and told  him  literally   daily  what a
treasure he was, what a genius, and how he was the man in her life.  And
there were his aunts, his mother’s sister, a detective in Manhattan, and her
girlfriend,  a pharmacist and second-generation American herself (although
she was from Puerto Rico, not Haiti),  who  had no children and so treated
him as their  own. His  mother’s  sister was sporty and taught him  how  to
catch and throw a ball (something that, even then, he had only the slightest
of interest in, but which proved to be a useful social skill  later on), and her
girlfriend was interested in art; one of his earliest memories had been a trip
with  her to  the  Museum of  Modern  Art,   where he clearly  remembered
staring at One: Number 31, 1950,  dumb with  awe, barely listening  to his
aunt as she explained how Pollock had made the painting.
   In  high school, where a bit  of revisionism seemed necessary in order to
distinguish  himself   and,   especially,  make  his   rich   white   classmates
uncomfortable, he blurred  the  truth  of  his  circumstances somewhat: He
became another fatherless black boy, with  a  mother who  had completed
school only after he was born (he neglected to mention that it was graduate
school she had been completing, and so people assumed that he meant high
school), and an  aunt who  walked  the streets (again,  they assumed as a
prostitute, not   reali]ing   he  meant as  a  detective).  His  favorite  family
photograph had been taken by his best friend in high school, a boy named
Daniel, to whom he had revealed the truth Must before he let him in to shoot
their family portrait. Daniel  had been working on a series of, as he called it,
families  “up  from  the  edge,”  and JB  had  had to  hurriedly   correct  the
perception that his aunt was a borderline streetwalker and his mother barely
literate before he allowed his friend inside. Daniel’s mouth had opened and
no sound had emerged, but then JB’s mother had come to the door and told
them both to get in out of the cold, and Daniel had to obey.
   Daniel,   still    stunned,  positioned   them   in   the   living    room:   JB’s
grandmother, Yvette, sat in her favorite high-backed chair, and around her
stood his aunt Christine and her girlfriend,  Silvia, to  one side, and JB and
his mother to the other. But then, Must before Daniel could take the picture,

19
Yvette demanded that JB take her place. “He is the king of the house,” she
told Daniel, as her daughters protested. “Jean-Baptiste! Sit down!” He did.
In the  picture, he is  gripping  both of  the armrests with  his  plump hands
(even then he had been plump), while on either side, women beamed down
at him. He himself is looking  directly at the camera, smiling widely, sitting
in the chair that should have been occupied by his grandmother.
   Their  faith in him,  in his ultimate triumph,  remained unwavering, almost
disconcertingly so. They were convinced—even as his own conviction was
tested so many times that it was becoming difficult to self-generate it—that
he would  someday be an  important artist,  that  his work  would  hang  in
maMor museums, that the people who hadn’t  yet  given him  his  chances
didn’t  properly   appreciate his   gift.   Sometimes he  believed  them  and
allowed himself  to be buoyed by  their confidence. At  other times he was
suspicious—their opinions seemed so the complete opposite of the rest of
the world’s that he wondered whether they might be condescending to him,
or Must cra]y. Or  maybe  they had  bad taste.  How  could  four  women’s
Mudgment differ so profoundly from  everyone else’s? Surely the  odds of
theirs being the correct opinion were not good.
   And  yet  he was relieved  to return every  Sunday on these secret visits
back  home,  where  the  food   was  plentiful    and  free,  and  where  his
grandmother would do  his laundry,  and where every word  he spoke and
every  sketch   he   showed  would    be  savored   and   murmured  about
approvingly. His  mother’s  house was a  familiar  land,  a place  where he
would always be revered, where every custom and tradition felt tailored to
him and his particular needs. At some point in the evening—after dinner but
before dessert, while they all rested in the living room, watching television,
his mother’s cat lying  hotly  in  his lap—he would  look  at his women and
feel something swell within him. He would think  then of Malcolm, with  his
unsparingly intelligent  father  and  affectionate but  absentminded mother,
and then of Willem, with his dead parents (JB had met them only once, over
their freshman year  move-out weekend, and had  been surprised by  how
taciturn, how formal, how un-Willem they had been), and finally, of course,
Jude, with his completely nonexistent parents (a mystery, there—they had
known Jude for almost  a decade now and still  weren’t certain when or  if
there had ever been parents at all, only that the situation was miserable and
not to  be  spoken of),   and feel  a  warm,  watery  rush of  happiness and
thankfulness, as if  an ocean were rising  up in  his chest. I’m   lucky, he’d

20
think, and  then, because he was competitive and kept  track of  where he
stood against his peers in every aspect of life,  I’m  the luckiest one of  all.
But he never thought that he didn’t deserve it, or that he should work harder
to express his appreciation; his family was happy when he was happy, and
so his only obligation  to them was to  be happy, to live  exactly the life  he
wanted, on the terms he wanted.
   “We  don’t get the families we deserve,” Willem had said once when they
had been very stoned. He was, of course, speaking of Jude.
   “I   agree,” JB had replied. And  he did. None  of them—not Willem,  not
Jude, not even Malcolm—had the families  they deserved. But secretly, he
made an exception for himself: He did  have the family  he deserved. They
were wonderful, truly wonderful,  and he knew it. And  what’s more, he did
deserve them.
   “There’s  my  brilliant  boy,”  Yvette would  call out  whenever he walked
into the house.
   It  had never had to  occur to him  that she was anything but  completely
correct.


   The day of the move, the elevator broke.
   “Goddammit,”  Willem  said. “I  asked Annika about this. JB, do you have
her number?”
   But  JB didn’t. “Oh  well,”  said Willem. What good would texting Annika
do, anyway? “I’m sorry, guys,” he said to everyone, “we’re going to have to
take the stairs.”
   No  one seemed to mind. It was a beautiful late-fall day, Must-cold and dry
and blustery, and there were eight of  them to move not  very many boxes
and only a few pieces of furniture—Willem  and JB and Jude and Malcolm
and JB’s friend Richard and Willem’s friend Carolina and two friends of the
four of  theirs in common who  were both named Henry Young, but whom
everyone called Asian Henry  Young and Black  Henry  Young in  order to
distinguish them.
   Malcolm,   who  when  you  least  expected it   would  prove  himself  an
efficient  manager,  made  the  assignments. Jude  would   go  up   to  the
apartment and  direct  traffic   and  the  placement  of  boxes.  In  between
directing traffic,   he would  start  unpacking the  large items  and breaking
down the boxes. Carolina and Black Henry  Young, who were both  strong

21
but short, would carry the boxes of books, since those were of a manageable
si]e. Willem   and JB and  Richard would  carry the  furniture. And  he  and
Asian  Henry  Young  would   take  everything  else.  On  every  trip   back
downstairs, everyone should take down any boxes that Jude had flattened
and stack them on the curb near the trash cans.
   “Do   you  need help?”  Willem   asked Jude quietly  as  everyone began
dividing up for their assignments.
   “No,”   he said, shortly, and Willem watched him make his halting, slow-
stepping way up the stairs, which were very steep and high, until he could
no longer see him.
   It  was an easy move-in, brisk and undramatic, and after they’d all  hung
around for a bit, unpacking books and eating pi]]a,   the others took off,  to
parties and bars, and Willem and Jude were finally left  alone in  their new
apartment. The space was a mess, but the thought of putting things in their
place was simply too  tiring. And  so they lingered,  surprised by how dark
the afternoon had grown so quickly,  and that they  had someplace to live,
someplace in  Manhattan, someplace they  could  afford.  They  had  both
noticed the looks of politely maintained blankness on their friends’ faces as
they saw their apartment for  the first  time (the  room with  its two  narrow
twin beds—“Like  something out of  a Victorian  asylum” was how  Willem
had described it to  Jude—had gotten the most comments), but neither  of
them minded: it was theirs, and they had a two-year lease, and no one could
take it  away from  them.  Here, they  would  even be able  to save a  little
money, and what did they  need more space for, anyway? Of course, they
both craved beauty, but that would have to wait. Or rather, they would have
to wait for it.
   They were talking, but Jude’s eyes were closed, and Willem knew—from
the constant, hummingbird-flutter of his  eyelids and the way his hand was
curled into a fist  so tight that Willem  could see the ocean-green threads of
his veins Mumping under the back of his hand—that he was in pain. He knew
from how rigid  Jude was holding his legs, which were resting atop a box of
books, that the pain  was severe, and knew too that there  was nothing he
could do  for  him. If   he said, “Jude,  let me  get you  some aspirin,”  Jude
would say, “I’m  fine, Willem, I  don’t need anything,” and if he said, “Jude,
why  don’t   you  lie   down,”   Jude would   say, “Willem.    I’m   fine.  Stop
worrying.”  So finally, he did what they had all learned over the years to do
when Jude’s legs were hurting him, which  was to make some excuse, get

22
up, and leave the room, so Jude could lie perfectly still and wait for the pain
to pass without having to  make conversation or expend energy pretending
that everything  was fine  and that  he was  Must tired, or had a cramp,  or
whatever feeble explanation he was able to invent.
   In  the  bedroom, Willem  found  the  garbage bag with  their  sheets and
made up first  his futon  and then Jude’s (which  they had bought for  very
little  from Carolina’s soon-to-be ex-girlfriend  the week before). He  sorted
his clothes into shirts,  pants, and underwear and socks, assigning each its
own cardboard box (newly emptied of books), which he shoved beneath the
bed. He left Jude’s clothes alone, but then moved into the bathroom, which
he cleaned and disinfected before sorting and putting away their toothpaste
and soaps and ra]ors and shampoos. Once or twice he paused in his work to
creep out to the living room, where Jude remained in the same position, his
eyes still closed, his  hand still  balled, his  head turned to the side so that
Willem was unable to see his expression.
   His  feelings  for  Jude were complicated. He  loved him—that  part  was
simple—and feared for him, and sometimes felt as much his older brother
and protector as his friend. He knew that Jude would be and had been fine
without him,  but he sometimes saw things in Jude that disturbed him  and
made him feel  both helpless and, paradoxically, more determined to help
him (although Jude rarely asked for help of any kind). They all loved Jude,
and admired him, but he often felt that Jude had let him see a little more of
him—Must a little—than he had shown the others, and was unsure what he
was supposed to do with that knowledge.
   The pain  in his legs, for  example: as long as they had known him, they
had known he had problems with his legs. It was hard not to know this,  of
course; he had used a cane through college, and when he had been younger
—he was so young when they met him, a full two years younger than they,
that he had  still  been growing—he  had walked  only  with  the aid  of  an
orthopedic crutch, and had worn heavily strapped splint-like  braces on his
legs whose external pins, which  were drilled  into his  bones, impaired his
ability to bend his knees. But he had never complained, not once, although
he had never begrudged anyone else’s complaining, either; their sophomore
year, JB had slipped on some ice and fallen and broken his wrist, and they
all remembered the hubbub that had  followed,  and JB’s theatrical moans
and cries of  misery, and how for  a whole  week after  his cast was set he
refused to leave the university infirmary, and had received so many visitors

23
that the school newspaper had written a story about him. There was another
guy in their dorm, a soccer player who had torn his meniscus and who kept
saying that JB didn’t  know  what pain was, but  Jude had gone to visit  JB
every day, Must as Willem and Malcolm   had, and had given  him  all  the
sympathy he had craved.
   One night  shortly after JB  had deigned to be discharged from the clinic
and had returned to the dorm to enMoy another round of attention, Willem
had woken to find the room empty. This wasn’t  so unusual, really: JB was
at his  boyfriend’s, and  Malcolm,  who  was taking  an astronomy class at
Harvard that semester, was in the lab where he now slept every Tuesday and
Thursday nights.  Willem   himself   was  often  elsewhere, usually   in  his
girlfriend’s  room, but she had the flu  and he had stayed home that night.
But Jude was always there. He had never had a girlfriend  or  a boyfriend,
and he had  always spent  the night  in  their  room,  his  presence beneath
Willem’s bunk as familiar and constant as the sea.
   He  wasn’t  sure what compelled him  to  climb  down  from his  bed and
stand for a minute,  dopily, in  the center of the  quiet room, looking  about
him as if Jude might be hanging from the ceiling like  a spider. But then he
noticed his crutch was gone, and he began to look for him, calling his name
softly in the common room, and then, when he got no answer, leaving their
suite and walking down the hall toward the communal bathroom. After the
dark of  their  room,  the bathroom  was nauseously bright,  its fluorescent
lights emitting their  faint continual si]]le,   and he was so disoriented that it
came as less of a surprise than it should have when he saw, in the last stall,
Jude’s foot sticking out from beneath the door, the tip of his crutch beside it.
   “Jude?” he whispered, knocking on the stall door, and when there was no
answer, “I’m  coming in.”  He pulled  open the door and found Jude on the
floor, one leg tucked up against his chest. He had vomited, and some of it
had pooled on the ground before him,  and some of it  was scabbed on his
lips and  chin,  a stippled  apricot smear. His  eyes were shut  and he was
sweaty, and with one hand he was holding the curved end of his crutch with
an intensity that, as Willem would later come to recogni]e, comes only with
extreme discomfort.
   At  the time, though, he was scared, and confused, and began asking Jude
question after question, none of which he was in any state to answer, and it
wasn’t until  he tried  to hoist  Jude to his  feet that Jude gave a shout and
Willem understood how bad his pain was.

24
   He  somehow managed to half drag, half  carry  Jude to their room,  and
fold him into his bed and inexpertly clean him up. By this time the worst of
the pain seemed to have passed, and when Willem asked him if he should
call a doctor, Jude shook his head.
   “But  Jude,” he said, quietly, “you’re in pain. We have to get you help.”
   “Nothing  will   help,”  he said, and was silent for a few  moments. “I  Must
have to wait.” His voice was whispery and faint, unfamiliar.
   “What  can I do?” Willem asked.
   “Nothing,”   Jude said. They were quiet. “But Willem—will  you stay with
me for a little while?”
   “Of  course,” he said. Beside him, Jude trembled and shook as if chilled,
and Willem took the comforter off his own bed and wrapped it around him.
At one point he reached under the blanket and found Jude’s hand and prised
open his fist so he could hold his  damp, callused palm. It had been a long
time since he  had held another guy’s  hand—not since his  own brother’s
surgery many years ago—and he was surprised by how strong Jude’s grip
was, how muscular his fingers. Jude shuddered and chattered his teeth for
hours, and eventually Willem lay down beside him and fell asleep.
   The  next morning, he woke  in Jude’s bed with his  hand throbbing, and
when he examined the  back of  it  he saw bruised  smudges where Jude’s
fingers had clenched him. He got up, a bit  unsteadily, and walked into the
common  area, where  he  saw  Jude  reading  at  his   desk,  his  features
indistinguishable in the bright late-morning light.
   He looked up when Willem  came in and then stood, and for a while they
merely looked at each other in silence.
   “Willem,  I’m  so sorry,” Jude said at last.
   “Jude,”  he said, “there’s nothing to be sorry for.”  And he meant it; there
wasn’t.
   But  “I’m  sorry, Willem,  I’m so sorry,” Jude repeated, and no matter how
many times Willem tried to reassure him, he wouldn’t be comforted.
   “Just don’t tell  Malcolm and JB, okay?” he asked him.
   “I  won’t,”   he promised. And he never did, although in the end, it  didn’t
make a difference, for  eventually, Malcolm  and JB too  would see him  in
pain, although only a few times in episodes as sustained as the one Willem
witnessed that night.
   He had never discussed it with Jude, but in the years to come, he would
see him in all sorts of pain, big pains and little ones, would see him wince at

25
small hurts and occasionally, when the discomfort was too profound, would
see him vomit,  or  pleat to  the ground,  or simply  blank  out  and become
insensate, the way he was doing in their living room now. But  although he
was a man who  kept  his promises, there was  a part  of him  that  always
wondered why he had never raised the issue with Jude, why he had never
made him discuss what  it  felt  like,  why  he had never dared to  do  what
instinct told him  to do a hundred times: to sit down beside him and rub his
legs, to try  to knead back into  submission those misfiring  nerve endings.
Instead here he was hiding in the bathroom, making busywork for  himself
as, a few yards away, one of his  dearest friends sat alone on a disgusting
sofa, making the slow, sad, lonely Mourney back to consciousness, back to
the land of the living, without anyone at all by his side.
   “You’re  a coward,”  he said to his reflection in  the bathroom mirror. His
face looked back at him, tired with disgust. From the living room, there was
only silence, but Willem  moved  to stand unseen at its border, waiting  for
Jude to return to him.


   “The  place is a shithole,”  JB had told Malcolm,  and although he wasn’t
wrong—the lobby   alone made Malcolm’s   skin  prickle—he  nevertheless
returned home  feeling   melancholy,  and  wondering  yet  again  whether
continuing to live  in his parents’ house was really preferable to living  in a
shithole of his own.
   Logically,  of  course, he should absolutely stay where he was. He made
very little  money, and worked very long hours, and his parents’ house was
large enough so that he could, in theory, never see them if he chose. Aside
from occupying the  entire fourth floor  (which,  to be  honest, wasn’t much
better than  a shithole  itself,  it   was so  messy—his mother  had stopped
sending the housekeeper up to clean after Malcolm had yelled  at her that
Ine] had broken one of his model houses), he had access to the kitchen, and
the washing machine, and the full  spectrum of papers and maga]ines that
his parents subscribed to,  and once a  week he  added his clothes to  the
drooping cloth bag that  his mother dropped off  at the dry cleaners on the
way to her office and Ine] picked up the following day. He was not proud of
this arrangement, of course, nor of the fact that he was twenty-seven and his
mother still  called  him  at  the office  when  she was ordering  the week’s

26
groceries to ask him if he would  eat extra strawberries if she bought them,
or to wonder whether he wanted char or bream for dinner that night.
   Things  would  be easier, however, if  his  parents actually respected the
same divisions of space and time that Malcolm did.  Aside from  expecting
him to  eat breakfast with them in  the morning  and brunch every Sunday,
they also frequently dropped by his floor  for a visit,  preceding their social
calls with a simultaneous knock and doorknob-turn that Malcolm  had told
them time and again defeated the purpose of knocking at all. He knew this
was a terribly bratty and ungrateful thing  to think,  but at times he dreaded
even coming  home for  the  inevitable  small  talk  that he  would  have to
endure before  he  was  allowed  to   scruff  upstairs  like   a  teenager. He
especially dreaded  life  in   the  house without   Jude there;  although  the
basement apartment had been more private than his floor, his parents had
also taken to  blithely  dropping  by  when Jude was  in  residence, so that
sometimes when Malcolm went downstairs to see Jude, there would be his
father sitting   in  the  basement apartment  already, lecturing  Jude  about
something dull. His father in  particular liked Jude—he often told Malcolm
that Jude had real intellectual heft and depth, unlike his other friends, who
were essentially flibbertigibbets—and in his absence, it would be Malcolm
whom  his  father  would  regale  with   his  complicated stories  about  the
market, and the shifting global  financial realities, and various other topics
about which Malcolm   didn’t  much care. He in  fact  sometimes suspected
that his father would have preferred Jude for a son: He and Jude had gone to
the same law school. The Mudge for whom Jude had clerked had been his
father’s mentor at his first firm. And Jude was an assistant prosecutor in the
criminal  division of  the  U.S. Attorney’s  Office,  the exact same place his
father had worked at when he was young.
   “Mark   my  words:  that kid   is going  places,”  or  “It’s  so  rare to  meet
someone who’s going  to  be  a truly   self-made star  at the  start of   their
career,” his father would often  announce to Malcolm and his mother after
talking  to  Jude, looking   pleased with  himself,   as if   he  was somehow
responsible for Jude’s genius, and in those moments Malcolm would have
to avoid looking at his mother’s face and the consoling expression he knew
it wore.
   Things  would  also be easier if  Flora were  still  around. When she was
preparing to  leave, Malcolm  had  tried to  suggest that  he should be  her
roommate in her new  two-bedroom apartment on Bethune Street, but she

27
either genuinely didn’t understand his numerous hints or simply chose not
to understand them. Flora had not seemed to mind the excessive amount of
time their  parents demanded from them, which  had  meant that he could
spend more time in his  room working  on his  model houses and less time
downstairs in the  den, fidgeting  through one  of his  father’s  interminable
O]u film   festivals. When he was younger, Malcolm  had been hurt by and
resentful of  his father’s  preference for Flora,  which  was so obvious  that
family friends had commented on it. “Fabulous Flora,” his father called her
(or, at various points of her adolescence, “Feisty Flora,” “Ferocious Flora,”
or “Fierce  Flora,”  though  always with  approval),  and even  today—even
though Flora was practically thirty—he  still  took a special pleasure in her.
“Fabulous said the wittiest thing  today,” he’d say at dinner, as if  Malcolm
and his mother did not themselves talk to Flora on a regular basis, or, after a
brunch downtown near Flora’s apartment, “Why did Fabulous have to move
so far from us?” even though she was only a fifteen-minute car ride  away.
(Malcolm  found this  particularly  galling, as his  father was always telling
him  brocaded stories about how  he had  moved from  the  Grenadines to
4ueens as a child  and how  he had  forever after  felt  like  a man trapped
between two countries, and someday Malcolm too  should go be an expat
somewhere because it would really enrich  him  as a person and give him
some much-needed perspective, etc., etc. And yet if Flora ever dared move
off the island, much less to another country, Malcolm had no doubt that his
father would fall apart.)
   Malcolm  himself had no nickname. Occasionally his father called him by
other famous Malcolms’ last names—“X,”  or “McLaren,”  or  “McDowell,”
or “Muggeridge,”  the last for whom Malcolm  was supposedly named—but
it always  felt  less like  an affectionate gesture and more like  a  rebuke, a
reminder of what Malcolm should be but clearly was not.
   Sometimes—often—it seemed to Malcolm that it was silly for him to still
worry, much less mope, about the fact that his father didn’t seem to like him
very much.  Even  his mother  said  so. “You  know  Daddy  doesn’t  mean
anything by it,” she’d say once in a while, after his father had delivered one
of his soliloquies on Flora’s general superiority, and Malcolm—wanting  to
believe her, though also noting with irritation  that  his mother still  referred
to his father as “Daddy”—would   grunt or mumble something to  show her
that he didn’t care one way or another. And sometimes—again, increasingly
often—he would grow  irritated that he spent so much time thinking  about

28
his parents at  all.  Was  this  normal? Wasn’t  there  something Must a bit
pathetic about it? He was twenty-seven, after all! Was this what  happened
when you  lived  at home? Or  was  it  Must him? Surely this was  the best
possible argument for moving  out:  so he’d  somehow cease to be such a
child. At   night, as beneath him  his parents completed their  routines, the
banging of the old  pipes as they washed their faces and the sudden thunk
into silence as they turned down the living-room   radiators better than any
clock at indicating that it  was eleven, eleven thirty, midnight, he made lists
of what he needed to resolve, and fast, in the following year: his work (at a
standstill), his love life  (nonexistent), his sexuality (unresolved), his future
(uncertain). The four items were always the same, although sometimes their
order of   priority   changed. Also  consistent was  his  ability   to  precisely
diagnose their  status,  coupled  with   his  utter  inability   to  provide   any
solutions.
   The  next morning he’d  wake determined: today he was going  to move
out and tell his parents to leave him  alone. But when he’d get downstairs,
there would be his mother, making him breakfast (his father long gone for
work) and telling him that she was buying the tickets for their annual trip to
St. Barts today, and could he let her know how many days he wanted to Moin
them for? (His  parents still paid for  his vacations. He knew better than to
ever mention this to his friends.)
   “Yes,  Ma,”  he’d say. And  then he’d eat his  breakfast and leave for the
day, stepping out into the world in which no one knew him, and in which he
could be anyone.

29
                                                         2

AT FIVE P.M. every weekday and at eleven a.m. every weekend, JB got on the
subway and headed for his studio in Long Island City. The weekday Mourney
was his favorite: He’d board at Canal and watch the train fill  and empty at
each stop with an ever-shifting mix of different  peoples and ethnicities, the
car’s population reconstituting itself every ten blocks or so into provocative
and improbable  constellations  of  Poles,  Chinese, Koreans,  Senegalese;
Senegalese, Dominicans, Indians, Pakistanis; Pakistanis, Irish, Salvadorans,
Mexicans; Mexicans, Sri Lankans, Nigerians, and Tibetans—the only thing
uniting them being their newness to America and their identical expressions
of exhaustion,  that blend  of  determination and resignation  that only  the
immigrant possesses.
   In  these moments, he was both grateful for his own luck and sentimental
about his city, neither of which he felt very often. He was not someone who
celebrated his hometown as a glorious mosaic, and he made fun of people
who did. But  he admired—how could you  not?—the collective amount of
labor, real labor, that  his trainmates had no doubt  accomplished that day.
And  yet  instead of   feeling  ashamed of  his  relative  indolence,  he was
relieved.
   The only other person he had ever discussed this sensation with, however
elliptically,  was Asian  Henry  Young. They  had been riding  out  to Long
Island City—it   had  been Henry  who’d  found  him   space in  the studio,
actually—when  a   Chinese  man,  slight   and  tendony   and  carrying   a
persimmon-red plastic bag that sagged heavily from  the crook of  the last
Moint of his right index finger, as if he had no strength or will left to carry it
any more declaratively, stepped on and slumped into the seat across from
them, crossing his  legs and folding   his arms around  himself and  falling
asleep at once. Henry, whom he’d known since high  school and was, like
him, a scholarship kid, and was the son of a seamstress in Chinatown, had
looked at JB and mouthed, “There  but for  the grace of  god,” and JB  had
understood exactly the particular mix of guilt and pleasure he felt.
   The other  aspect of those weekday-evening trips he loved was the light
itself, how it  filled  the train like  something living as the cars rattled across

30
the bridge, how  it  washed the  weariness from his  seat-mates’ faces and
revealed them as they were when they first came to the country, when they
were young and America seemed conquerable. He’d watch that kind light
suffuse the car like  syrup, watch it  smudge furrows from  foreheads, slick
gray hairs into  gold,  gentle the aggressive shine from  cheap fabrics into
something lustrous and fine. And then the sun would drift,  the car rattling
uncaringly away  from  it,  and the  world  would  return  to  its normal  sad
shapes and colors, the people to their normal sad state, a shift as cruel and
abrupt as if it had been made by a sorcerer’s wand.
   He  liked  to  pretend  he was  one of   them, but  he  knew  he was  not.
Sometimes there would  be  Haitians  on  the train,  and  he—his  hearing,
suddenly wolflike,  distinguishing from  the murmur around him the slurpy,
singy sound of their  Creole—would find  himself  looking  toward them, to
the two men with  round faces like his  father’s, or to  the two women with
soft snubbed noses like his  mother’s. He always  hoped that he might  be
presented with  a  completely  organic  reason to  speak to  them—maybe
they’d be  arguing about  directions somewhere, and he might  be  able to
insert himself  and provide  the answer—but there  never was. Sometimes
they would let  their eyes scan across the seats, still talking  to each other,
and he would  tense, ready  his face  to smile,  but  they  never seemed to
recogni]e him as one of their own.
   Which  he wasn’t, of course. Even he knew he had more in common with
Asian Henry Young, with  Malcolm,  with  Willem,  or even with  Jude, than
he had with  them. Just look at  him: at  Court Square he disembarked and
walked the three blocks to the former  bottle factory  where he now shared
studio space with three other people. Did real Haitians have studio space?
Would it even occur to real Haitians to leave their large rent-free apartment,
where they could  have theoretically carved out  their own  corner to  paint
and doodle, only  to get on  a subway and travel  half  an hour (think  how
much work could be accomplished in those thirty minutes!) to a sunny dirty
space? No, of course not.  To conceive  of  such a luxury,  you  needed an
American mind.
   The loft,  which  was on the third floor  and accessed by a metal staircase
that made bell-like rings whenever you stepped on it, was white-walled and
white-floored,  though the floors  were  so extravagantly splintered  that in
areas it looked like  a shag rug  had been laid down.  There were tall  old-
fashioned casement windows punctuating every side, and these at least the

31
four of them kept clean—each tenant was assigned one wall as his personal
responsibility—because the light was too good to squander to dirt and was
in fact the whole  point of  the space. There was a bathroom (unspeakable)
and a kitchen (slightly  less horrifying) and, standing in the exact center of
the loft, a large slab of a table made from a piece of inferior marble placed
atop three sawhorses. This was a common area, which anyone could use to
work on a proMect that needed a little extra space, and over the months the
marble had been  streaked lilac  and marigold  and  dropped with  dots  of
precious cadmium red.  Today the table  was covered with  long  strips  of
various-colored hand-dyed  organ]a,  weighted  down  at  either  end with
paperbacks, their tips fluttering  in  the ceiling  fan’s  whisk. A  tented card
stood at its center: DRYING. DO NOT  MOVE.  WILL  CLEAN  UP FIRST
THING TOM’W  P.M. TX  4 PATIENCE, H.Y.
   There were no walls subdividing the space, but it had been split into four
equal sections of five hundred square feet each by electrical tape, the blue
lines demarcating not Must the floor but  also the walls  and ceiling  above
each artist’s   space. Everyone  was  hypervigilant   about  respecting one
another’s territory;   you  pretended  not  to  hear  what  was  going  on  in
someone else’s quarter, even if he was hissing to his girlfriend on his phone
and you could  of  course hear every last word,  and when  you wanted  to
cross into someone’s space, you stood  at the  edge of  the blue  tape and
called his name once, softly, and then only if you saw that he wasn’t deep in
the ]one, before asking permission to come over.
   At  five  thirty, the light  was perfect: buttery and dense and fat somehow,
swelling the room as it had the train into something expansive and hopeful.
He was the only one there. Richard, whose space was next to his, tended bar
at nights and  so spent his time  at the  studio in  the morning,  as did  Ali,
whose area he faced. That left Henry, whose space was diagonal from his
and who usually arrived at seven, after he left his day Mob at the gallery. He
took off  his Macket, which he threw into his corner, uncovered his canvas,
and sat on the stool before it, sighing.
   This  was JB’s fifth  month  in the  studio, and he loved it,  loved it  more
than he thought he would.  He liked  the fact that his  studiomates were all
real, serious artists; he could never have worked in E]ra’s  place, not only
because he believed what his favorite  professor had once told  him—that
you should never paint where you fucked—but  because to work in E]ra’s
was to be constantly surrounded and interrupted by  dilettantes. There, art

32
was something that was  Must an accessory to a lifestyle. You  painted or
sculpted or made crappy installation pieces because it Mustified a wardrobe
of washed-soft T-shirts and dirty Means and a diet of ironic cheap American
beers and ironic expensive hand-rolled American cigarettes. Here, however,
you made art because it was the only  thing you’d  ever been good at,  the
only thing,  really,  you  thought about between shorter  bursts of  thinking
about the things everyone thought about: sex and food and sleep and friends
and money and fame. But somewhere inside you, whether you were making
out with someone in a bar or having  dinner with your  friends, was always
your canvas, its shapes and possibilities floating embryonically behind your
pupils. There was a period—or  at least you hoped there was—with  every
painting or proMect when the life of that painting became more real to you
than your everyday life, when you sat wherever you were and thought only
of returning  to the  studio, when you  were barely conscious that you  had
tapped out a hill  of salt onto the dinner  table and in it  were drawing your
plots and patterns and plans, the white grains moving under your fingertip
like silt.
   He  liked too the specific  and unexpected companionability of the place.
There were times on the weekends when everyone was there at the same
time, and at moments, he would  emerge from the fog of  his painting  and
sense that all of them were breathing in  rhythm, panting almost, from  the
effort of concentrating. He could feel, then, the collective energy they were
expending filling the air like  gas, flammable and sweet, and would wish he
could bottle it so that he might be able to draw from it when he was feeling
uninspired, for the  days in which  he would  sit  in front  of  the canvas for
literally  hours, as though if  he stared long  enough, it might  explode into
something brilliant  and charged. He liked the  ceremony of waiting  at the
edge of the blue tape and clearing his throat in Richard’s direction, and then
crossing over the boundary to look  at his work,  the two  of them standing
before it  in  silence,  needing to  exchange only  the fewest  of  words yet
understanding exactly  what  the other  meant.  You  spent so  much  time
explaining yourself, your  work,  to others—what it  meant, what you  were
trying to  accomplish, why you were trying  to  accomplish it, why  you had
chosen the colors  and subMect matter and materials and application  and
technique that you  had—that  it  was a  relief  to  simply  be  with  another
person to whom you didn’t  have to  explain anything: you  could Must look
and look,  and  when you  asked questions, they  were  usually  blunt  and

33
technical and  literal.  You  could  be  discussing engines, or  plumbing:  a
matter both mechanical and straightforward, for which there were only one
or two possible answers.
   They  all worked  in different  mediums, so there was no competition, no
fear of  one video artist  finding  representation before his studiomate, and
less fear that a curator would come in to look at your work and fall  in love
with   your  neighbor’s   instead. And   yet—and   this  was  important—he
respected everyone else’s  work   as well.   Henry  made  what  he  called
deconstructed sculptures, strange and elaborate ikebana arrangements of
flowers and branches fashioned from various kinds of silk. After he’d finish
a piece,  though,  he’d  remove  its  chicken-wire  buttressing, so  that  the
sculpture fell  to  the ground as  a flat  obMect and appeared as an abstract
puddle  of  colors—only   Henry  knew   what  it   looked  like   as a  three-
dimensional obMect.
   Ali  was a photographer who was working on a series called “The History
of  Asians in  America,”  for  which   he created a photograph  to represent
every decade of Asians in America since 1890. For each image, he made a
different diorama  representing an epochal event  or theme  in  one of  the
three-foot-square pine boxes  that  Richard had  built  for   him,  which  he
populated with little plastic figures he bought at the craft store and painted,
and trees and roads that he  gla]ed  from  potter’s clay,  and backdrops he
rendered with a brush whose bristles were so fine they resembled eyelashes.
He then shot the dioramas and made C-prints. Of the four of them, only Ali
was represented, and he had a show in seven months about which the other
three knew never to ask because any mention of it made him start bleating
with  anxiety. Ali   wasn’t progressing in  historical  order—he had the  two
thousands done (a stretch of  lower  Broadway  thick  with  couples, all  of
whom were white  men and, walking  Must a few steps behind them, Asian
women), and the nineteen-eighties (a tiny Chinese man being beaten by two
tiny white thugs with wrenches, the bottom of the box greased with varnish
to resemble a parking lot’s rain-glossed tarmac), and was currently working
on the  nineteen-forties, for  which  he  was painting  a  cast of  fifty   men,
women, and children  who  were meant to  be prisoners in  the  Tule Lake
internment camp. Ali’s  work  was the most  laborious of  all of  theirs, and
sometimes, when they  were procrastinating  on  their  own  proMects, they
would wander into Ali’s  cube and sit next to him, and Ali, barely lifting  his
head from the magnifying mirror under which he held a three-inch figure on

34
whom he was painting  a herringbone skirt  and saddle shoes, would hand
them  a   snarl  of   steel   wool   that   he  needed  shredded  to  resemble
tumbleweeds, or some fine-gauge wire that he wanted punctuated with little
ties so that it would look barbed.
   But  it  was Richard’s work that JB admired the most. He  was a sculptor
too, but  worked  with  only  ephemeral materials.  He’d  draw  on drafting
paper impossible   shapes, and  then  render  them  in   ice,  in   butter,  in
chocolate, in lard, and  film  them as they vanished. He was  gleeful about
witnessing the disintegration of his works, but JB, watching Must last month
as a massive, eight-foot-tall piece Richard had made—a swooping sail-like
batwing of  fro]en  grape Muice that resembled coagulated blood—dripped
and then crumbled to its demise, had found himself unexpectedly about to
cry, though whether from the  destruction of something so beautiful or  the
mere everyday profundity of its disappearance, he was unable to say. Now
Richard was less interested in substances that melted and more interested in
substances that would attract decimators; he was particularly interested in
moths, which  apparently loved honey. He  had a vision,  he told  JB,  of a
sculpture whose surface so writhed with moths that you couldn’t  even see
the shape of the thing they were devouring. The sills of his  windows were
lined with  Mars of honey, in which  the porous combs floated  like  fetuses
suspended in formaldehyde.
   JB  was the  lone classicist among  them. He  painted. Worse, he was a
figurative painter. When he had been in graduate school, no one really cared
about figurative work:  anything—video  art, performance art, photography
—was more  exciting  than  painting,  and truly  anything  was  better  than
figurative work. “That’s  the way it’s been since the nineteen-fifties,” one of
his professors had sighed when  JB complained  to him.  “You  know  that
slogan for  the  marines? ‘The  few, the  brave …’?   That’s us,  we  lonely
losers.”
   It  was not  as if, over  the years, he hadn’t attempted other things, other
mediums (that  stupid,  fake,  derivative   Meret  Oppenheim  hair  proMect!
Could he have done anything cheaper? He and Malcolm had gotten into a
huge fight, one of their biggest, when Malcolm had called the series “ersat]
Lorna Simpson,” and of course the worst thing was that Malcolm had been
completely right),  but although  he would  never have admitted to  anyone
else that he felt there was something effete, girlish  almost and at any rate
certainly not gangster, about being a figurative painter, he had recently had

35
to accept that it was what he was: he loved paint, and he loved portraiture,
and that was what he was going to do.
   So:  Then what?  He had  known  people—he knew people—who  were,
technically, much better artists  than he was. They  were better draftsmen,
they  had   better  senses of   composition   and  color,   they   were  more
disciplined. But they didn’t have any ideas. An artist, as much as a writer or
composer, needed themes, needed ideas. And for a long time,  he simply
didn’t  have any. He tried  to draw  only  black people, but  a lot  of  people
drew black people, and he didn’t feel he had anything new to add. He drew
hustlers for a while, but that too grew dull. He drew his female relatives, but
found himself  coming  back to  the  black problem.  He began a  series of
scenes from Tintin   books, with  the  characters portrayed realistically,  as
humans, but it soon felt too ironic and hollow, and he stopped. So he la]ed
from canvas to canvas, doing paintings of people on the street, of people on
the subway,  of  scenes from  E]ra’s   many parties  (these were  the  least
successful; everyone at those gatherings were  the sort  who  dressed and
moved as if  they were  constantly being observed, and he ended up  with
pages of studies of posing girls and preening guys, all of their eyes carefully
averted from his ga]e), until one night, he was sitting in Jude and Willem’s
depressing apartment on their depressing sofa, watching the two  of them
assemble dinner, negotiating their way through their miniature kitchen like
a bustling lesbian couple. This had been one of the rare Sunday nights he
wasn’t at his mother’s, because she and his grandmother and aunts were all
on a tacky cruise in the Mediterranean that he had refused to go on. But he
had grown accustomed to seeing people and having dinner—a real dinner—
made for him  on  Sundays, and so had invited  himself  over  to Jude and
Willem’s, both of  whom he knew would  be home because neither of them
had any money to go out.
   He  had his sketch pad with  him,  as he always did,  and when Jude sat
down at the card table to chop onions (they had to do all their prep work on
the table because there was  no counter space in  the  kitchen), he  began
drawing him almost unthinkingly.  From the kitchen came a great banging,
and the smell of smoking olive oil, and when he went in to discover Willem
whacking at a  piece of  butterflied chicken  with  the bottom  of an  omelet
pan, his arm raised over  the meat as if  to  spank it,  his expression oddly
peaceful, he drew him as well.

36
   He wasn’t sure, then, that he was really working toward anything, but the
next weekend, when they all went out to Pho Viet Huong, he brought along
one of Ali’s  old  cameras and shot the three of them eating and then, later,
walking up the street in the snow. They were moving particularly slowly in
deference to Jude, because the sidewalks were slippery. He saw them lined
up in the  camera’s viewfinder: Malcolm,  Jude, and Willem,  Malcolm  and
Willem on  either side of Jude, close enough (he knew, having been in the
position himself) to catch him if he skidded but not so close that Jude would
suspect that  they   were  anticipating   his  fall.   They   had  never  had  a
conversation that they would do this, he reali]ed; they had simply begun it.
   He  took the picture. “What’re  you  doing, JB?”  asked Jude, at the same
time as Malcolm complained, “Cut it out, JB.”
   The party  that night was on Centre Street, in the loft of  an acquaintance
of theirs, a  woman named Mirasol whose twin,  Phaedra, they knew from
college. Once inside, everyone dispersed into their different subgroups, and
JB, after waving at Richard across the room and noting with  irritation  that
Mirasol  had provided  a  whole  tableful  of  food,  meaning that  he’d  Must
wasted fourteen dollars at Pho Viet Huong when he could’ve eaten here for
free, found himself wandering toward where Jude was talking with Phaedra
and some fat dude who might have been Phaedra’s boyfriend and a skinny
bearded guy he  recogni]ed  as a  friend  of  Jude’s from  work.  Jude  was
perched on the back of one of the sofas, Phaedra next to him, and the two of
them were looking  up  at  the fat  and skinny  guys and  all  of  them were
laughing at something: He took the picture.
   Normally  at parties he grabbed or was grabbed by a group of people, and
spent the night as the nuclei for a variety of three- or foursomes, bounding
from  one  to  the  next,  gathering  the  gossip, starting  harmless rumors,
pretending to share confidences, getting others to tell him who  they hated
by divulging  hatreds of his own. But  this night, he traveled the room alert
and purposeful and largely sober, taking pictures of his three friends as they
moved in  their own  patterns, unaware that he was  trailing  them. At  one
point, a couple  of hours  in, he found  them by  the window  with  Must one
another, Jude saying something and the other two leaning in close to hear
him, and then in  the next moment, the three of them leaning back and all
laughing, and  although  for  a  moment he  felt  both  wistful   and slightly
Mealous, he was also triumphant, as he had gotten both shots. Tonight, I am a
camera, he told himself, and tomorrow I will be JB again.

37
   In  a  way, he had  never enMoyed a party more, and no one seemed to
notice his deliberate rovings except for  Richard, who, as the four of  them
were leaving an hour  later to  go uptown  (Malcolm’s  parents were in  the
country, and Malcolm  thought he knew  where his mother  hid her weed),
gave him an unexpectedly sweet old-man clap on the shoulder. “Working on
something?”
   “I  think so.”
   “Good  for you.”
   The next day he sat at his computer looking at the night’s images on the
screen. The camera wasn’t a great one, and it had ha]ed every picture with a
smoky yellow  light, which,  along with  his poor  focusing skills,  had made
everyone warm and rich and slightly  soft-edged, as if  they had been shot
through a tumblerful of whiskey. He stopped at a close-up of Willem’s face,
of him smiling  at someone (a girl, no doubt) off  camera, and at the one of
Jude and Phaedra on the sofa: Jude was wearing a bright navy sweater that
JB could never figure  out belonged to him  or to  Willem,  as both of them
wore it so much, and Phaedra was wearing a wool dress the shade of port,
and she was leaning her head toward his, and the dark of her hair made his
look lighter, and the nubbly  teal of the sofa beneath them made them both
appear shining and Mewel-like, their colors Must-licked and glorious, their
skin delicious. They were colors anyone would want to paint, and so he did,
sketching out the scene first in his book in pencil, and then again on stiffer
board in watercolors, and then finally on canvas in acrylics.
   That had been four months ago, and he now had almost eleven paintings
completed—an astonishing output for him—all of  scenes from his friends’
lives. There was Willem waiting to audition, studying the script a final time,
the sole of  one boot pressed against the sticky red  wall  behind him;  and
Jude at a play, his face half shadowed, at the very second he smiled (getting
that shot had almost gotten JB thrown out of  the theater); Malcolm sitting
stiffly  on a sofa a few feet  away from his father, his  back straight and his
hands clenching his knees, the two of  them watching a  Buñuel film  on  a
television Must out of frame. After some experimentation, he had settled on
canvases the si]e of a standard C-print,  twenty by  twenty-four inches, all
hori]ontally  oriented, and which he imagined might  someday be displayed
in a long snaking single layer, one that would wrap itself around a gallery’s
walls, each image following the next as fluidly  as cells in a film  strip.  The
renderings were realistic, but  photo-realistic; he had never  replaced Ali’s

38
camera with a better one, and he tried to  make each painting capture that
gently fu]]ed  quality the camera gave everything, as if someone had patted
away the top layer of clarity and left  behind something kinder than the eye
alone would see.
   In  his insecure moments, he sometimes worried the proMect was too fey,
too inward—this was where having representation really helped, if only  to
remind you that  someone liked your work,  thought it  important  or at  the
very least beautiful—but he couldn’t  deny the pleasure he got from it,  the
sense of ownership and contentment. At times he missed being part of the
pictures himself;   here was  a  whole  narrative of   his  friends’  lives,  his
absence an enormous missing part, but he also enMoyed the godlike role he
played. He got to see his friends differently,  not as Must appendages to his
life but as distinct characters inhabiting their own stories; he felt sometimes
that he was  seeing them for  the first  time,  even after  so many  years of
knowing them.
   About  a month into the proMect, once he knew that this was what he was
going to concentrate on, he’d of course had to explain to them why he kept
following  them around with  a camera, shooting the mundane moments of
their lives,  and why  it  was  crucial that  they  let him  keep doing  so and
provide him with  as much access as possible. They had been at dinner at a
Vietnamese noodle shop on Orchard Street that they hoped might be a Pho
Viet Huong successor, and after he’d made his speech—uncharacteristically
nervous as he did so—they all found themselves looking toward Jude, who
he’d known in advance would be the problem. The other two would agree,
but that didn’t help him. They all needed to say yes or it wouldn’t work, and
Jude was by far the most self-conscious among them; in college, he turned
his head or blocked his face whenever anyone tried to take his picture, and
whenever he had smiled or laughed, he had reflexively covered his mouth
with his hand, a tic that the rest of them had found upsetting, and which he
had only learned to stop doing in the past few years.
   As he’d  feared, Jude was suspicious. “What would this involve?” he kept
asking, and JB, summoning all his patience, had to reassure him numerous
times that of course his goal wasn’t to humiliate or exploit  him but only  to
chronicle in pictures the drip  of all  of their  lives. The others said nothing,
letting him  do  the work,  and  Jude finally  consented, although he didn’t
sound too happy about it.
   “How  long is this going to go on for?” Jude asked.

39
   “Forever,  I hope.” And  he did. His  one regret was that he hadn’t begun
earlier, back when they were all young.
   On the way out, he walked with  Jude. “Jude,” he said quietly, so that the
others couldn’t hear him. “Anything   that involves you—I’ll   let  you see in
advance. You veto it, and I’ll never show it.”
   Jude looked at him. “Promise?”
   “Swear to god.”
   He  regretted his offer the instant he made it, for  the truth was that Jude
was his favorite of the three of them to paint: He was the most beautiful of
them, with the most interesting face and the most unusual coloring, and he
was the shyest, and so pictures of him always felt more precious than ones
of the others.
   The  following   Sunday  when  he was  back  at  his  mother’s,  he went
through some of his boxes from college that he’d stored in his old bedroom,
looking for  a photograph he knew he had. Finally he found it:  a picture of
Jude from their first year that someone had taken and printed and which had
somehow ended up in his possession. In it, Jude was standing in the living
room of their suite, turned partway to the camera. His left arm was wrapped
around his chest, so you could see the satiny starburst-shaped scar on the
back of his hand, and in  his right  he was unconvincingly holding  an unlit
cigarette. He was wearing a blue-and-white-striped long-sleeved T-shirt that
must not have been his, it was so big (although maybe it really was his; in
those days, all of Jude’s clothes were too big because, as it later emerged,
he intentionally bought them oversi]ed so he could wear them for  the next
few years, as he grew), and his hair, which he wore longish back then so he
could hide behind it,  fi]]led    off at  his Mawline. But the thing that JB  had
always remembered most  about this  photograph was  the expression on
Jude’s face: a wariness that in those days he was never without. He hadn’t
looked at  this  picture in  years,  but doing  so  made him  feel  empty, for
reasons he wasn’t quite able to articulate.
   This  was the painting he was working on now, and for  it he had broken
form and changed to a forty-inch-square canvas. He had experimented for
days to  get right  that  precise shade of  tricky,  serpenty green for  Jude’s
irises, and had redone the colors of his hair again and again before he was
satisfied. It was a great painting, and he knew it, knew it absolutely the way
you sometimes did, and he had no intention of ever showing it to Jude until
it was hanging on a gallery wall  somewhere and Jude would be powerless

40
to  do  anything  about it.   He  knew  Jude would  hate  how  fragile,  how
feminine, how vulnerable, how  young it made him  look, and knew too  he
would find lots of  other imaginary things to hate about it as well, things JB
couldn’t even begin to anticipate because he wasn’t a self-loathing nut Mob
like  Jude. But to  him,  it  expressed everything about what he  hoped this
series would be: it was a love letter, it was a documentation, it was a saga, it
was his. When he worked on this painting, he felt sometimes as if he were
flying, as if the world of galleries and parties and other artists and ambitions
had shrunk to a pinpoint beneath him, something so small he could kick it
away from  himself like  a soccer ball,  watch it  spin off  into  some distant
orbit that had nothing to do with him.
   It  was almost six. The light  would change soon. For now, the space was
still quiet  around him, although distantly, he could hear the train rumbling
by on its  tracks. Before him,  his canvas waited. And so  he picked up his
brush and began.


   There  was poetry  on the  subway. Above  the  rows of  scooped-plastic
seats, filling  the empty display  space between ads for dermatologists and
companies that promised  college degrees by  mail,  were long  laminated
sheets printed with poems: second-rate Stevens and third-rate Roethke and
fourth-rate Lowell, verse meant to agitate no one, anger and beauty reduced
to empty aphorisms.
   Or  so JB  always said. He  was against the  poems. They had appeared
when he was  in  Munior high, and for the  past fifteen  years he had  been
complaining  about them.  “Instead  of  funding   real  art  and  real  artists,
they’re giving money to  a bunch of spinster librarians and cardigan fags to
pick out this  shit,”  he shouted at Willem  over the screech of the F train’s
brakes. “And it’s all  this Edna St. Vincent Millay–type shit. Or  it’s actually
good people they’ve neutered. And they’re all white, have you noticed that?
What the fuck is up with that?”
   The  following  week, Willem  saw a Langston Hughes poster and called
JB to  tell   him.  “Langston  Hughes?!”  JB  groaned. “Let   me  guess—‘A
Dream Deferred,’ right? I knew it!  That shit doesn’t count. And  anyway, if
something really did explode, that shit’d be down in two seconds flat.”
   Opposite   Willem   that   afternoon  is   a   Thom   Gunn   poem:  “Their
relationship consisted / In  discussing if  it  existed.” Underneath, someone

41
has written in black  marker, “Dont worry  man I  cant get no pussy either.”
He closes his eyes.
   It’s  not promising that he’s this tired and it’s only four,  his shift not even
begun. He shouldn’t have gone with JB to Brooklyn the previous night, but
no one else would  go  with  him,  and JB  claimed he owed  him,  because
hadn’t he accompanied Willem to  his friend’s horrible  one-man show Must
last month?
   So he’d gone, of course. “Whose band is this?” he’d asked as they waited
on the platform. Willem’s coat was too thin, and he’d lost one of his gloves,
and as a result  he had begun assuming a heat-conserving posture—arms
wrapped around his chest, hands folded into his armpits, rocking  back on
his heels—whenever he was forced to stand still in the cold.
   “Joseph’s,” said JB.
   “Oh,”   he  said.  He  had  no  idea who   Joseph was. He  admired  JB’s
Felliniesque command of his  vast social circle,  in  which everyone was a
colorfully  costumed extra, and he and Malcolm and Jude were crucial but
still  lowly  accessories to his vision—key  grips  or  second art directors—
whom he regarded as tacitly  responsible for  keeping the entire  endeavor
grinding along.
   “It’s   hard  core,”  said JB  pleasantly, as if   that would  help  him  place
Joseph.
   “What’s  this band called?”
   “Okay, here’s the thing,” JB said, grinning. “It’s called Smegma Cake 2.”
   “What?”  he asked, laughing. “Smegma Cake 2? Why? What happened to
Smegma Cake 1?”
   “It  got a staph infection,” JB shouted over the noise of the train clattering
into  the station.  An  older  woman  standing near  them scowled  in  their
direction.
   Unsurprisingly,  Smegma Cake 2 wasn’t very good.  It wasn’t  even hard
core, really; more ska-like, bouncy and meandering (“Something happened
to their  sound!” JB  yelled into  his ear during  one of  the more prolonged
numbers, “Phantom Snatch 3000.”  “Yeah,”  he  yelled back,  “it   sucks!”).
Midway through the concert (each song seeming to last twenty minutes) he
grew giddy, at both the absurdity of  the band and the crammedness of the
space, and began inexpertly moshing with JB, the two of  them sproinging
off  their neighbors and  bystanders until everyone  was crashing into  one
another, but cheerfully, like a bunch of  tipsy toddlers, JB catching him  by

42
the shoulders and the two of them laughing into each other’s faces. It was in
these moments that he loved JB completely, his ability and willingness to be
wholly silly  and frivolous,  which he could never be with  Malcolm  or Jude
—Malcolm   because he  was,  for   all  his   talk  otherwise,  interested  in
propriety, and Jude because he was serious.
   Of  course, this  morning  he  had suffered. He  woke  in  JB’s corner  of
E]ra’s  loft,  on  JB’s  unmade mattress (nearby, on  the  floor,  JB  himself
snored Muicily into a pile of  peaty-smelling laundry), unsure how, exactly,
they’d gotten back over the bridge. Willem  wasn’t normally  a drinker or a
stoner, but around JB he occasionally found himself behaving otherwise. It
had been a  relief  to return  to  Lispenard Street,  its quiet  and  clean, the
sunlight that baked his side of  the bedroom hot and loafy  between eleven
a.m. and one p.m. already slanting through the window, Jude long gone for
the day. He set his alarm and fell instantly asleep, waking with enough time
only to shower and swallow an aspirin before hurrying to the train.
   The restaurant where he worked had made its reputation on both its food
—which was complicated without  being challenging—and the consistency
and approachability of its staff. At Ortolan they were taught to be warm but
not familiar,  accessible but  not informal.   “It’s  not  Friendly’s,”  his  boss,
Findlay, the restaurant’s general manager, liked to say. “Smile, but don’t tell
people your  name.”  There were  lots of   rules such  as these at  Ortolan:
Women employees could wear their wedding  rings, but  no other Mewelry.
Men shouldn’t wear their hair  longer than the bottom of their earlobes. No
nail polish. No more than two  days’ worth of beard. Mustaches were to be
tolerated on a case-by-case basis, as were tattoos.
   Willem   had  been a  waiter  at  Ortolan  for   almost  two  years. Before
Ortolan, he had worked the weekend brunch and weekday lunch shift at a
loud and popular restaurant in Chelsea called Digits, where the customers
(almost always men, almost always older: forty, at least) would ask him  if
he was on the menu, and then laugh, naughty and pleased with themselves,
as if they were the first people to ever ask him that, instead of the eleventh
or twelfth that shift  alone. Even so, he always smiled and said, “Only as an
appeti]er,” and they’d  retort, “But   I want  an entrée,” and he would  smile
again and they would tip him well at the end.
   It  had been a friend  of  his from  graduate school, another actor named
Roman, who’d recommended him to Findlay after he’d booked a recurring
guest role on a soap opera and had quit. (He was conflicted about accepting

43
the gig, he told Willem,  but what  could he do? It was too much  money to
refuse.) Willem had been glad for the referral, because besides its food and
service, the other thing that Ortolan was known for—albeit  among a much
smaller group of people—was its flexible hours, especially if Findlay  liked
you. Findlay liked  small flat-chested brunette women and all sorts of men
as long   as they  were  tall   and  thin  and,  it   was  rumored,  not  Asian.
Sometimes Willem would  stand on the edge of  the kitchen  and watch as
mismatched pairs  of  tiny   dark-haired waitresses and  long  skinny  men
circled through the main dining room, skating past one another in a weirdly
cast series of minuets.
   Not  everyone who waited at Ortolan was an actor. Or to be more precise,
not everyone at Ortolan was still an actor. There were certain restaurants in
New  York  where one  went from   being an  actor  who  waited tables  to,
somehow, being a waiter who was once an actor. And if the restaurant was
good enough, respected enough, that was not only a  perfectly acceptable
career transition,  it  was  a preferable  one. A   waiter  at  a  well-regarded
restaurant could get  his  friends  a coveted  reservation, could  charm the
kitchen staff into  sending out free dishes to those same friends (though as
Willem learned, charming the kitchen staff was less easy than he’d thought
it would  be). But  what could  an actor who  waited tables get his  friends?
Tickets to yet  another off-off-Broadway  production for  which  you had to
supply your own suit because you were playing a stockbroker who may or
may not be a ]ombie, and yet there was no money for costumes? (He’d had
to do exactly that  last year, and because he didn’t have a suit of his own,
he’d had to  borrow one of  Jude’s. Jude’s legs were about an inch  longer
than his, and so for the duration of  the run he’d had to fold  the pants legs
under and stick them in place with masking tape.)
   It  was easy to tell who at Ortolan was once an actor and was now a career
waiter. The  careerists were older,  for  one, and  precise and fussy  about
enforcing Findlay’s  rules,  and at staff  dinners they  would  ostentatiously
swirl the wine that the sommelier’s assistant poured them to sample and say
things like, “It’s  a little  like  that Linne Calodo Petite Sirah you served last
week, José, isn’t it?”  or “Tastes a little  minerally,  doesn’t it?  This a New
=ealand?” It  was  understood that you  didn’t  ask them  to  come to  your
productions—you only  asked your  fellow  actor-waiters, and if  you  were
asked, it was considered polite to at least try to go—and you certainly didn’t
discuss auditions, or agents, or anything of the sort with them. Acting  was

44
like war, and they were  veterans: they didn’t want to  think about the war,
and they certainly  didn’t  want  to talk  about it  with   naïfs who  were still
eagerly dashing toward the trenches, who were still excited to be in-country.
   Findlay  himself was a former actor, but unlike the other former actors, he
liked to—or  perhaps “liked”  was not the word; perhaps the more accurate
word would  be simply “did”—talk   about his past life,  or at least a certain
version of it. According  to Findlay, he had once almost, almost booked the
second lead in the Public Theater production of A Bright Room Called Day
(later, one of the waitresses had told them that all of the significant roles in
the play were for  women). He  had understudied a part on Broadway (for
what production  was  never made  clear). Findlay  was  a  walking  career
memento mori, a  cautionary tale in  a gray  wool  suit, and the  still-actors
either avoided him, as if his particular curse were something contagious, or
studied him  closely, as if  by  remaining  in  contact with  him,  they  could
inoculate themselves.
   But  at what point had Findlay decided he would give up acting, and how
had it happened? Was it simply age? He was, after all, old: forty-five, fifty,
somewhere around there. How did you know  that it  was time to give  up?
Was it when you were thirty-eight  and still  hadn’t found an agent (as they
suspected had happened to Joel)? Was it when you were forty and still had a
roommate and were making more as a part-time waiter than you had made
the year you decided to be a full-time actor (as they knew had happened to
Kevin)? Was it  when you  got fat, or  bald, or  got bad plastic surgery that
couldn’t disguise the fact  that you were fat  and bald? When did  pursuing
your ambitions  cross the  line  from  brave into  foolhardy?  How  did  you
know when to stop? In earlier, more rigid, less encouraging (and ultimately,
more helpful) decades, things would be much clearer: you would stop when
you turned forty, or when  you got married, or when you  had kids, or after
five years, or ten years, or fifteen.  And  then you would  go get a real Mob,
and acting and your dreams for a career in it would recede into the evening,
a melting into history as quiet as a briquette of ice sliding into a warm bath.
   But  these were days of self-fulfillment, where settling for something that
was not quite your  first choice  of a life  seemed weak-willed and ignoble.
Somewhere, surrendering to what seemed to be your fate had changed from
being dignified  to being a sign  of your  own cowardice. There were times
when  the  pressure to  achieve  happiness felt   almost  oppressive, as  if
happiness were something that everyone should and could attain, and that

45
any sort  of  compromise in  its  pursuit  was somehow  your  fault.  Would
Willem  work  for  year upon year  at Ortolan,  catching the  same trains to
auditions, reading again and again and again, one year maybe caterpillaring
an inch or  two  forward, his  progress so minute that it  hardly  counted as
progress at all? Would he someday have the courage to give up, and would
he be able to recogni]e that moment, or would he wake one day and look in
the mirror and find  himself an old man, still  trying to  call himself an actor
because he was too scared to admit that he might not be, might never be?
   According  to JB, the reason Willem wasn’t yet successful was because of
Willem.  One of  JB’s favorite  lectures to  him  began with  “If   I  had your
looks, Willem,”  and ended with, “And now you’ve  been so fucking spoiled
by things coming to you so easily that you think  everything’s Must going to
happen for you.  And you  know  what, Willem?  You’re good-looking,  but
everyone here is good-looking, and you’re Must going to have to try harder.”
   Even though he thought this was sort of ironic coming from JB (Spoiled?
Look at  JB’s family,  all  of  them clucking  after him,  pushing on  him  his
favorite  foods  and  Must-ironed shirts,  surrounding  him  in   a  cloud  of
compliments and affection; he once overheard JB on the phone telling his
mother he needed her to get him more underwear, and that he’d pick it up
when he went  to  see her for  Sunday dinner,  for  which,  by the  way, he
wanted short ribs),  he  understood what  he meant as  well.  He  knew he
wasn’t la]y, but the truth was that he lacked the sort of ambition that JB and
Jude had, that grim, trudging determination that kept them at the studio or
office longer than anyone else, that gave them that slightly faraway look in
their eyes that always made him think a fraction of them was already living
in some imagined future,  the contours of which  were crystalli]ed   only to
them. JB’s ambition  was fueled  by  a lust  for  that future,  for  his speedy
arrival to  it;  Jude’s, he thought, was motivated  more by  a fear that if   he
didn’t move  forward, he would  somehow slip back to his  past, the life he
had left and about which  he would  tell none of  them. And  it wasn’t  only
Jude and JB who possessed this quality: New York  was populated by the
ambitious. It was often the only thing that everyone here had in common.
   Ambition  and atheism: “Ambition  is my  only religion,”  JB had told  him
late one beery night, and although to Willem  this  line sounded a little  too
practiced, like he was rehearsing it, trying to perfect its careless, throwaway
tone before he someday got to say it for real to an interviewer somewhere,
he also knew  that JB  was sincere. Only  here did  you  feel compelled to

46
somehow Mustify anything short of rabidity for  your  career; only here did
you have to apologi]e for having faith in something other than yourself.
   The  city  often made him feel  he was missing something essential, and
that that ignorance would forever doom him to a life at Ortolan. (He had felt
this in college as well,  where he knew absolutely that he was the dumbest
person in  their  class, admitted  as a  sort  of  unofficial   poor-white-rural-
dweller-oddity  affirmative-action  representative.) The others, he  thought,
sensed this as well, although it seemed to truly bother only JB.
   “I  don’t  know about you sometimes, Willem,”  JB once said to him, in  a
tone that suggested that what he didn’t  know  about Willem  wasn’t good.
This was late  last year, shortly  after Merritt,  Willem’s  former  roommate,
had gotten one of  the two  lead roles in  an off-Broadway  revival  of True
West. The other lead was being played by an actor who had recently starred
in an acclaimed independent film  and was enMoying that brief moment of
possessing both downtown credibility and the promise of more mainstream
success. The director (someone Willem had been longing to work with) had
promised he’d cast an unknown as the second lead. And he had: it was Must
that the unknown was Merritt  and not Willem.  The two  of them had been
the final contenders for the part.
   His  friends had been outraged on his behalf. “But   Merritt  doesn’t even
know how  to act!”  JB had groaned. “He  Must stands onstage and sparkles
and thinks that’s enough!” The three of them had started talking about the
last  thing   they   had   seen  Merritt   in—an    all-male   off-off-Broadway
production of  La Traviata  set in  nineteen-eighties Fire Island (Violetta—
played by Merritt—had been renamed Victor, and he had died of AIDS, not
tuberculosis)—and they all agreed it had been barely watchable.
   “Well,  he does have a good look,” he’d said, in a weak attempt to defend
his absent former roommate.
   “He’s   not  that  good-looking,”  Malcolm   said, with   a vehemence that
surprised all of them.
   “Willem,   it’ll   happen,” Jude consoled him on the way  back home after
dinner. “If  there’s any Mustice in the world, it’ll  happen. That director’s an
imbecile.” But  Jude never blamed Willem  for his  failings; JB  always did.
He wasn’t sure which was less helpful.
   He had been grateful for their anger, naturally, but the truth was, he didn’t
think  Merritt  was  as bad  as they  did.  He was  certainly  no  worse than
Willem himself;  in fact, he was probably better. Later, he’d told this to  JB,

47
who responded with  a  long  silence, stuffed  with  disapproval, before  he
started lecturing Willem. “I  don’t  know about you sometimes, Willem,”  he
began. “Sometimes I  get the sense you  don’t  even really  want to  be an
actor.”
   “That’s  not  true,” he’d  protested. “It’s  Must that I don’t think that every
reMection is meaningless, and I don’t think everyone who gets a Mob over me
does so out of dumb luck.”
   There  had been another silence.  “You’re  too  kind,  Willem,”   JB  said,
darkly. “You’re never going to get anywhere like this.”
   “Thanks,  JB,”  he’d  said.  He was  rarely  offended by  JB’s  opinions—
often, he was right—but at that particular moment, he didn’t much feel like
hearing JB’s  thoughts on  his  shortcomings  and his  gloomy  predictions
about his future unless he completely changed his personality. He’d gotten
off the phone and had lain in bed awake, feeling stuck and sorry for himself.
   Anyway,  changing his personality seemed basically out of the question—
wasn’t it too  late? Before he was a kind man, after all, Willem  had been a
kind boy. Everyone had noticed: his teachers, his classmates, the parents of
his classmates. “Willem is such a compassionate child,” his teachers would
write on  his report cards, report cards his mother  or father would  look  at
once,  briefly   and   wordlessly,  before  adding   them  to   the   stacks  of
newspapers and empty envelopes that they’d take to the recycling  center.
As he grew older, he had begun to reali]e that people were surprised, even
upset, by his parents; a high-school  teacher had once blurted to him  that
given Willem’s temperament, he had thought his parents would be different.
   “Different  how?”  he’d asked.
   “Friendlier,”  his teacher had said.
   He  didn’t  think  of himself  as particularly  generous or unusually good-
spirited. Most things  came easily to him:  sports, school, friends, girls. He
wasn’t nice,  necessarily; he didn’t  seek  to be  everyone’s friend,  and he
couldn’t  tolerate boors,  or  pettiness, or  meanness. He was humble  and
hardworking, diligent,  he knew, rather than  brilliant.  “Know  your  place,”
his father often said to him.
   His  father did.  Willem  remembered once, after a late-spring free]e had
killed off  a number of new lambs in their area, his father being interviewed
by a newspaper reporter who was writing a story about how it had affected
the local farms.

48
   “As   a rancher,” the reporter  began, when Willem’s  father had  stopped
her.
   “Not  a rancher,” he’d said, his accent making these words, as all words,
sound brusquer than they should, “a ranch hand.” He was correct, of course;
a rancher meant something specific—a landowner—and by that definition,
he wasn’t a rancher. But  there were plenty of  other people in  the county
who then  also had  no right   to call  themselves ranchers and  yet did  so
anyway. Willem  had never  heard his father  say that they  shouldn’t—his
father didn’t care what anyone else did or didn’t do—but such inflation was
not for him, or for his wife, Willem’s  mother.
   Perhaps because of this, he felt he always knew  who and what he was,
which is why, as he moved farther and then further away from the ranch and
his childhood, he felt very little  pressure to change or reinvent himself. He
was a guest at his college, a guest in  graduate school, and now he was a
guest in New  York, a guest in  the lives  of  the beautiful and the  rich. He
would never try to pretend he was born to such things, because he knew he
wasn’t; he was a ranch hand’s son from western Wyoming, and his leaving
didn’t mean that everything he had once been was erased, written over by
time and experiences and the proximity to money.
   He  was his parents’ fourth child,  and the only one still  alive. First there
had been a girl, Britte, who  had died of leukemia when she was two, long
before Willem  had been born. This had been in Sweden, when his father,
who was Icelandic, had been working at a fish farm, where he had met his
mother, who was Danish. Then there had been a move to America,  and a
boy, Hemming, who had been born with  cerebral palsy. Three years later,
there had been another boy, Aksel, who had died in his sleep as an infant for
no apparent reason.
   Hemming  was eight when Willem was born. He couldn’t  walk or speak,
but Willem had loved him and had never thought of him as anything but his
older brother. Hemming could smile, however, and as he did, he’d bring his
hand up toward his face, his fingers  shaping themselves into a duck’s bill
claw, his lips  pulling  back from  his a]alea-pink  gums. Willem  learned to
crawl, and then walk and run—Hemming remaining  in his chair year after
year—and when he was old and strong enough, he would push Hemming’s
heavy chair  with   its  fat,  stubborn tires  (this  was  a  chair  meant to  be
sedentary, not to be nosed through grasses or down dirt roads) around the
ranch where they lived with their  parents in a small wooden house. Up the

49
hill  from them was the main house, long and low with  a deep wraparound
porch, and down the  hill  from  them were the stables where their  parents
spent  their   days.  He   had  been   Hemming’s   primary   caretaker,  and
companion, all through high  school; in the mornings, he was the first  one
awake, making   his  parents’  coffee  and  boiling   water  for  Hemming’s
oatmeal, and in the evenings, he waited by the side of the road for the van
that would drop his brother off after  his day at the assisted-living center an
hour’s drive away. Willem always thought they clearly looked like  brothers
—they had their parents’ light, bright hair, and their father’s gray eyes, and
both of  them had a groove, like  an elongated parentheses, bracketing the
left side of their mouths that made them appear easily amused and ready to
smile—but no one else seemed to notice this. They saw only that Hemming
was in a wheelchair, and that his mouth remained open, a damp red ellipse,
and that his eyes, more often than not, drifted skyward, fixed on some cloud
only he could see.
   “What  do you see, Hemming?” he sometimes asked him, when they were
out on their night walks, but of course Hemming never answered him.
   Their  parents were efficient  and competent with Hemming,  but not, he
recogni]ed, particularly affectionate. When Willem  was kept late at school
because of a football game, or a track meet, or when he was needed to work
an extra  shift  at  the  grocery  store, it   was his  mother  who  waited  for
Hemming at the end of the drive, who hefted Hemming into and then out of
his bath, who fed him his dinner of  chicken-and-rice porridge and changed
his diaper before putting him to bed. But  she didn’t read to him, or  talk to
him, or  go on walks  with  him the way  Willem  did.  Watching his parents
around Hemming   bothered him,   in  part   because although  they  never
behaved obMectionably, he could tell that they viewed  Hemming  as their
responsibility but no more. Later he would argue with himself that that was
all that could reasonably be expected of them; anything else would be luck.
But still. He wished they loved Hemming more, Must a little more.
   (Although  maybe love was too much  to ask from his  parents. They had
lost so many children that perhaps they simply either wouldn’t  or couldn’t
surrender themselves wholly to the ones they now had. Eventually, both he
and Hemming would leave them too, by choice or not, and then their losses
would be  complete. But  it  would  be decades before he was able  to  see
things this way.)

50
   His  second year of  college,  Hemming had  had to have  an emergency
appendectomy. “They said they caught it Must in time,” his mother told him
over the phone. Her voice was flat, very matter-of-fact; there was no relief
in it, no anguish, but neither was there any—and he’d had to make himself
consider  this,   even  though   he  hadn’t   wanted  to,   was   scared  to—
disappointment either. Hemming’s caregiver (a local woman, paid to watch
him during the night now that Willem was gone) had noticed him pawing at
his stomach and moaning, and had been able to diagnose the hard truffley
lump  under his  abdomen for  what  it   was. While   Hemming  was being
operated on, the doctors had found a growth, a few centimeters long, on his
large intestine and had biopsied it. X-rays had revealed further growths, and
they were going to excise those as well.
   “I’ll   come home,” he said.
   “No,”   his mother had said. “You can’t do anything here. We’ll tell you if
it’s  anything serious.”  She and his  father  had been more  bemused than
anything when  he  had  been admitted  to  college—neither of   them  had
known he was applying—but now that he was there, they were determined
that he should graduate and forget the ranch as quickly as possible.
   But at night he thought of Hemming, alone in a hospital bed, how he’d be
frightened and  would  cry  and listen  for   the sound  of  his  voice. When
Hemming was twenty-one, he’d had to have a hernia removed, and he had
wept until Willem held his hand. He knew he’d have to go back.
   The   flights  were   expensive, much  more  than   he’d  anticipated.  He
researched bus routes, but it would take three days to get there, three days
to get back, and he had midterm exams he had to take and do well in if he
was to keep his scholarship, and his  Mobs to attend to. Finally, drunk that
Friday night, he confided in Malcolm, who got out his checkbook and wrote
him a check.
   “I  can’t,”  he said, immediately.
   “Why   not?” asked Malcolm.  They  argued back and forth  until  Willem
finally accepted the check.
   “I’ll   pay you back, you know that, right?”
   Malcolm  shrugged. “There’s no way for me to say this without sounding
like a complete asshole,” he said, “but it  doesn’t make a difference to me,
Willem.”
   Still,   it  became important  to  him   to  repay Malcolm   somehow, even
though he knew Malcolm wouldn’t  accept his money. It was Jude who had

51
the idea of putting the money directly  into Malcolm’s  wallet, and so every
two weeks after he’d cashed his check from the restaurant where he worked
on the weekends, he’d stuff two or three twenties into it while Malcolm was
asleep. He never quite knew if   Malcolm  noticed—he spent it so  quickly,
and often on  the three  of them—but  Willem  took  some satisfaction and
pride in doing it.
   In  the  meantime, though, there  was Hemming.  He  was glad  he went
home (his mother had only sighed when he told  her he was coming),  and
glad to see Hemming, although alarmed by how thin he had become, how
he groaned and cried as the nurses prodded the area around his sutures; he’d
had to grab the sides of his chair to keep himself from shouting at them. At
nights, he and his  parents would have silent  meals; he could  almost feel
them pulling away, as if they were unpeeling themselves from their lives as
parents of  two  children and  readying themselves to  drift  toward  a  new
identity elsewhere.
   On  his third night,  he took the keys to the truck to drive  to the hospital.
Back east, it was early spring, but here the dark air  seemed to glitter with
frost, and in the morning the grass was capped with a thin skin of crystals.
   His  father came onto the porch as he was walking down the steps. “He’ll
be asleep,” he said.
   “I  Must thought I’d go,” Willem told him.
   His  father looked  at him.  “Willem,”   he said,  “he won’t  know  whether
you’re there or not.”
   He  felt his  face go hot. “I  know  you don’t  fucking care about him,”  he
snapped at him, “but  I  do.”  It  was the  first  time he’d  ever sworn  at his
father, and he was unable to move for a  moment, fearful and half  excited
that his father might react, that they might have an argument. But his father
Must took a sip from his coffee and then turned and went inside, the screen
door smacking softly shut behind him.
   For the rest of his visit  they were all the same as they always were; they
went in  shifts to  sit with  Hemming,  and when he  wasn’t at  the hospital,
Willem helped his mother with  the ledgers, or his father as he oversaw the
reshodding of  the horses. At  nights  he returned  to the  hospital and  did
schoolwork. He read aloud from The Decameron to Hemming, who stared
at the ceiling  and  blinked, and  struggled through his  calculus, which  he
finally  finished  with   the unhappy  certainty that  he  had gotten  all  of  it
wrong. The three of them had gotten used to Jude doing their calculus for

52
them, working   through the  problems as  quickly  as  if  he  were  running
arpeggios. Their first year, Willem  had genuinely wanted to understand it,
and Jude had sat with him for a string of nights, explaining again and again,
but he had never been able to comprehend it.
   “I’m   Must too stupid to get this,” he’d said after what felt  like  an hours-
long session, at the end of which he had wanted to go outside and run for
miles, he was so prickly with impatience and frustration.
   Jude had looked down. “You’re not stupid,” he said, quietly. “I’m Must not
explaining it well enough.” Jude took seminars in pure math that you had to
be invited to enroll in; the rest of them couldn’t even begin to fathom what,
exactly, he did in it.
   In  retrospect, he was surprised only by his own surprise when his mother
called three months later to tell him that Hemming was on life support. This
was in late May, and he was halfway through his final exams. “Don’t come
back,” she’d told him, commanded him, almost. “Don’t, Willem.”  He spoke
with his  parents in Swedish, and it  wasn’t until  many years later, when a
Swedish director he was working with pointed out how affectless his voice
became when he switched into the language, that he recogni]ed that he had
unconsciously learned to adopt a certain tone when he talked to his parents,
one emotionless and blunt, that was meant to echo their own.
   Over  the  next few  days  he fretted,  did  poorly  in  his  exams: French,
comparative literature,  Jacobean drama,  the  Icelandic  sagas, the  hated
calculus all slurring into one. He picked a fight with his girlfriend,  who was
a senior and graduating. She cried; he felt guilty  but also unable to  repair
the situation.  He thought  of  Wyoming,  of  a machine  coughing life  into
Hemming’s lungs. Shouldn’t he go back? He had to go back. He wouldn’t
be able to stay for long: on June fifteenth, he and Jude were moving into a
sublet off-campus for the summer—they’d both found Mobs in the city, Jude
working   on  weekdays  as  a   classics  professor’s  amanuensis and  on
weekends at the bakery he worked at during the school year, Willem  as a
teacher’s assistant at a program for disabled children—but before then, the
four of them were going  to stay at Malcolm’s parents’ house in Aquinnah,
on Martha’s Vineyard,  after which  Malcolm  and JB  would drive  back to
New York. At  nights, he called Hemming at the hospital, made his parents
or one of the nurses hold the phone up to his ear, and spoke to his brother,
even though he knew he probably couldn’t hear him. But how could he not
have tried?

53
   And  then, one morning  a week later,  his mother called:  Hemming had
died. There was nothing he could say. He couldn’t ask why she hadn’t told
him how  serious the  situation had  been, because some part of  him  had
known she wouldn’t. He couldn’t say he wished he had been there, because
she would have nothing to  say in  response. He couldn’t ask her how  she
felt, because nothing she said would be enough. He wanted to scream at his
parents, to hit  them,  to  elicit  from  them  something—some melting into
grief, some loss of composure, some recognition that something large had
happened, that in  Hemming’s  death  they  had lost  something  vital  and
necessary to their lives. He didn’t care if they really felt that way or not: he
Must needed them to say it, he needed to feel that something lay  beneath
their imperturbable calm, that somewhere within them ran a thin stream of
quick, cool  water, teeming with  delicate  lives, minnows  and grasses and
tiny white  flowers,  all  tender and easily wounded and  so vulnerable you
couldn’t see them without aching for them.
   He didn’t  tell his friends, then, about Hemming. They went to Malcolm’s
house—a beautiful place, the most beautiful  place Willem  had ever seen,
much less stayed in—and late at night, when the others were asleep, each in
his own bed, in his  own room with  his own bathroom (the house was that
big), he crept outside and walked the web of  roads surrounding the house
for hours, the moon so large and bright it seemed made of something liquid
and fro]en. On  those walks, he tried very hard not to  think of  anything in
particular. He concentrated instead on what he saw before him, noticing at
night what had eluded him by  day: how the dirt  was so fine it was almost
sand, and puffed  up  into  little  plumes  as he stepped in  it,  how  skinny
threads of bark-brown snakes whipsawed silently beneath the brush as he
passed. He walked  to the  ocean and above  him  the moon  disappeared,
concealed by tattered rags of clouds, and for a few moments he could only
hear the water, not see it, and the sky was thick and warm with moisture, as
if the very air here were denser, more significant.
   Maybe this  is what it is  to be dead, he thought, and reali]ed it wasn’t so
bad after all, and felt better.
   He expected it would  be awful to  spend his summer around people who
might remind him  of Hemming, but  it was actually pleasant, helpful even.
His  class had  seven students,  all  around  eight  years old,   all  severely
impaired, none very mobile,  and although part  of the  day was ostensibly
devoted to trying  to teach them  colors and shapes, most of the time  was

54
spent playing   with   them:  reading  to  them,  pushing  them  around  the
grounds, tickling   them  with  feathers. During   recess all  the  classrooms
opened their doors to  the school’s central courtyard,  and the space filled
with  children on  such a variety  of wheeled  contraptions and vessels and
vehicles that it  sometimes sounded as if it  was populated by  mechanical
insects, all of  them  squeaking and whirring  and clucking  at once.  There
were children in  wheelchairs, and children on small, scaled-down mopeds
that putted  and  clicked  along  the flagstones  at  a tortoise’s  speed, and
children  strapped prone  atop  smooth  lengths  of  wood  that  resembled
abbreviated surfboards on wheels, and  who pulled  themselves along the
ground with  their elbowed  stumps, and a few children  with  no means of
conveyance at all, who sat in their  minders’ laps, the backs of their  necks
cupped in their  minders’ palms. Those were the  ones who reminded him
most keenly of Hemming.
   Some of  the children on the motorcycles and the wheeled boards could
speak, and he would toss, very gently, large foam balls to them and organi]e
races around the courtyard. He would always begin these races at the head
of   the  pack,   loping   with   an  exaggerated  slowness  (though  not   so
exaggerated that he appeared too broadly comic; he wanted them to think
he was actually trying), but at some point, usually a third of the way around
the square, he would pretend to trip on something and fall, spectacularly, to
the ground, and all the kids would pass him and laugh. “Get up, Willem, get
up!” they’d  cry, and he would, but  by that point  they would have finished
the lap and he would come in last place. He wondered, sometimes, if they
envied him the dexterity of being able to fall  and get up again, and if so, if
he should stop  doing it,  but  when he  asked his supervisor, he  had only
looked at Willem  and said that the kids thought he was funny  and that he
should keep falling. And so every day he fell, and every afternoon, when he
was waiting with  the students for their  parents to come pick them up, the
ones who could speak would ask him if  he was going to fall  the next day.
“No way,”  he’d say, confidently, as they giggled.  “Are  you kidding? How
clumsy do you think I am?”
   It  was, in many ways, a good summer. The apartment was near MIT and
belonged to Jude’s math professor, who was in Leip]ig for the season, and
who was charging them such a negligible rent that  the two of  them found
themselves making small  repairs  to  the place  in  order  to express their
gratitude: Jude  organi]ed  the  books  that  were  stacked into  quavering,

55
precarious skyscrapers on every surface and spackled a section of wall that
had gone  puddingy  with   water  damage;  Willem   tightened doorknobs,
replaced a leaky  washer, changed the  ballcock  in  the toilet.  He  started
hanging out with another of the teacher’s aides, a girl who went to Harvard,
and some nights she would come over to the house and the three of them
would make large pots of spaghetti alle vongole and Jude would tell  them
about his days with  the professor, who had decided to communicate with
Jude in only Latin or ancient Greek, even when his instructions were things
like, “I  need more binder clips,” or “Make sure you get an extra shot of soy
milk  in my  cappuccino tomorrow  morning.”  In  August, their  friends and
acquaintances from college (and from  Harvard,  and MIT,  and Wellesley,
and Tufts) started drifting back to the city, and stayed with them for a night
or two  until they  could move into  their own  apartments and dorm rooms.
One evening toward the end of their stay, they invited fifty people up to the
roof and helped Malcolm make a sort of  clambake on the grill,  blanketing
ears of  corn  and mussels and  clams under  heaps of  dampened banana
leaves; the next morning the four  of them  scooped up the shells from the
floor, enMoying the castanety clatter they made as they were tossed into trash
bags.
   But  it was also that summer that he reali]ed he wouldn’t go home again,
that somehow, without Hemming, there was no point in him and his parents
pretending they needed to stay together. He suspected they felt  the same
way; there was  never any conversation about this,  but he  never felt  any
particular need to see them again, and they never asked him. They spoke
every now and again, and their  conversations were, as always, polite and
factual and dutiful.  He asked them about the ranch, they asked him about
school. His  senior year, he got  a role  in  the school’s  production of  The
Glass Menagerie (he was cast as the gentleman caller, of  course), but he
never mentioned it  to  them, and  when he told  them  that they  shouldn’t
bother to  come east for  graduation,  they didn’t   argue with  him:  it   was
nearing the end of foal season anyway, and he wasn’t sure they would have
been able to come even if he hadn’t excused them. He and Jude had been
adopted by Malcolm’s and  JB’s families  for the weekend, and when they
weren’t around, there were plenty  of  other people to  invite  them to their
celebratory lunches and dinners and outings.
   “But  they’re your parents,” Malcolm  said to him once a year or so. “You
can’t Must stop talking to them.” But  you could, you  did: he  was proof of

56
that. It  was like   any relationship,  he felt—it   took constant pruning,  and
dedication, and vigilance, and if   neither party wanted to  make the effort,
why wouldn’t  it  wither?  The only  thing  he missed—besides Hemming—
was Wyoming itself, its  extravagant flatness, its trees so deeply green they
looked blue, the sugar-and-turd apple-and-peat smell of a horse after it had
been rubbed down for the night.
   When he was in  graduate school, they died, in the same year: his father
of a heart attack in January, his mother of  a stroke the following  October.
Then he had gone home—his parents were older, but he had forgotten how
vivid, how tireless, they had always been, until he saw how diminished they
had become. They had left everything to him, but after he had paid off their
debts—and then he was unsettled anew, for all along he had assumed most
of Hemming’s care and medical treatments had been covered by insurance,
only to learn that four years after his death, they were still writing enormous
checks to the hospital every month—there was very little  left:  some cash,
some bonds; a  heavy-bottomed silver  mug that  had been  his long-dead
paternal grandfather’s; his  father’s bent  wedding ring,  worn  smooth and
shiny and pale; a black-and-white portrait of Hemming and Aksel that he’d
never seen before. He kept these, and a few other things, too. The rancher
who had employed his  parents had long ago died,  but his son,  who now
owned the ranch, had always treated them  well,  and it  had been he who
employed them long after he might reasonably be expected to, and he who
paid for their funerals as well.
   In  their  deaths, Willem  was able to remember that  he had loved  them
after all, and that they had taught him things he treasured knowing, and that
they had never asked from him anything he wasn’t able to do or provide. In
less-charitable moments (moments from  Must a few years prior),  he  had
attributed their  lassitude, their  unchallenging acceptance of  whatever he
might or might not do, to a lack of interest: what parent, Malcolm had asked
him, half  Mealously, half pityingly, says nothing when their only  child  (he
had apologi]ed later) tells them he wants to be an actor? But now, older, he
was able to appreciate that they had  never even suggested he might owe
them a debt—not success, or fealty, or affection, or even loyalty. His father,
he knew, had gotten into some sort of trouble in Stockholm—he was never
to know what—that had in part encouraged his parents’ move to the States.
They would never have demanded he be like them; they hardly  wanted to
be themselves.

57
   And  so he had begun his  adulthood, the last three years spent bobbing
from bank to  bank in a  muck-bottomed pond, the trees above and around
him blotting out the light, making it too dark for him to see whether the lake
he was in opened up into a river or whether it was contained, its own small
universe in  which   he  might  spend years,  decades—his life—searching
bumblingly for a way out that didn’t exist, had never existed.
   If  he had an agent, someone to guide him, she might be able to show him
how to escape, how to find his way downstream. But he didn’t, not yet (he
had to be optimistic enough to think it was still a matter of “yet”), and so he
was left in the company of other seekers, all of them looking for  that same
elusive tributary, through which few left the lake and by which no one ever
wanted to return.
   He  was willing  to  wait. He  had waited. But  recently, he could  feel his
patience sharpening itself into  something  splintery and  ragged, chipping
into dry little bits.
   Still—he  was not an anxious person, he was not inclined toward self-pity.
Indeed, there  were  moments when,  returning  from   Ortolan  or  from  a
rehearsal for a play in which he would be paid almost nothing for a week’s
work, so little  that he wouldn’t have been able to afford the prix fixe at the
restaurant, he would enter the apartment with a feeling of accomplishment.
Only to him and Jude would Lispenard Street be considered an achievement
—for as much work as he had done to it, and as much as Jude had cleaned
it, it was still  sad, somehow, and furtive, as if the place was embarrassed to
call itself  a real apartment—but in those moments he would  at times find
himself thinking, This is  enough. This is more than I hoped. To be in New
York, to be an adult,  to stand on a raised platform of  wood and say other
people’s words!—it was an absurd life, a not-life, a life  his parents and his
brother would never have dreamed for themselves, and yet he got to dream
it for himself every day.
   But  then the feeling would dissipate, and he would be left  alone to scan
the arts section of the paper, and read about other people who were doing
the kinds of things he didn’t even have the expansiveness, the arrogance of
imagination to dream of, and in those hours the world would feel very large,
and the lake very empty, and the night  very black,  and he would wish  he
were back in Wyoming, waiting at the end of the road for Hemming, where
the only path  he had to navigate was the one back  to his  parents’ house,
where the porch light washed the night with honey.

58
   First  there was the life of  the office  you saw: forty  of them in  the main
room, each with  their own  desk, Rausch’s glass-walled room at one end,
closest to Malcolm’s  desk,  Thomasson’s glass-walled room at  the other.
Between them: two walls of  windows, one that looked over  Fifth Avenue,
toward Madison Square Park, the other of which peered over Broadway, at
the glum, gray, gum-stamped sidewalk. That life existed officially from  ten
a.m. until  seven p.m., Monday through Friday.  In this  life,  they did  what
they  were  told:  they   tweaked models,  they   drafted  and  redrew, they
interpreted Rausch’s esoteric scribbles  and Thomasson’s explicit,  block-
printed commands. They did  not  speak. They did  not congregate. When
clients came in to meet with Rausch and Thomasson at the long glass table
that stood in the center of the main room,  they did not look  up. When the
client was famous, as was more and more the case, they bent so low over
their desks and  stayed so quiet  that even Rausch began whispering,  his
voice—for once—accommodating itself to the office’s volume.
   Then there was the second life of the office, its real life. Thomasson was
less and less present anyway, so it was Rausch whose exit they awaited, and
sometimes they had to wait for a long time;  Rausch, for all his partygoing
and press-courting and opining and traveling, was in reality a hard worker,
and although he might go out to an event (an opening, a lecture), he might
also return, and then things would have to  be hastily reassembled, so that
the office he walked back into would resemble the office he had left. It was
better to wait for the nights he would disappear completely, even if it meant
waiting until  nine  or ten o’clock.  They  had cultivated  Rausch’s assistant,
brought  her  coffees   and  croissants,  and  knew  they   could   trust  her
intelligence on Rausch’s arrivals and departures.
   But once Rausch was definitively gone for the day, the office transformed
itself as instantaneously as a pumpkin into a carriage. Music was turned on
(they rotated among the fifteen  of  them who  got to  choose), and takeout
menus materiali]ed,   and   on  everyone’s  computers,  work   for   Ratstar
Architects was sucked back into digital  folders, put  to sleep, unloved and
forgotten, for  the  night.  They  allowed themselves an  hour of   waste, of
impersonating Rausch’s weird Teutonic boom  (some of  them thought  he
was secretly from Paramus and had adopted the name—Joop Rausch, how
could it not be fake?—and the extravagant accent to obscure the fact that he
was boring and from Jersey and his name was probably Jesse Rosenberg),

59
of imitating   Thomasson’s scowl and way  of  marching up  and down  the
length of the office when he wanted to perform for company, barking at no
one in particular  (them, they  supposed), “It’s  ]e  vurk, gentlemen! It’s  ]e
vurk!”   They  made fun   of  the  firm’s   most  senior  principal,  Dominick
Cheung, who was talented but  who was  becoming bitter (it   was clear to
everyone but him that  he would  never be made a partner, no matter how
often Rausch and Thomasson promised him), and even of the proMects they
worked on:  the unreali]ed  neo-Coptic church  wrought from  travertine  in
Cappadocia; the house with no visible  framework in  Karui]awa  that now
wept rust down its  faceless glass surfaces; the museum of food in Seville
that was meant to win  an award but didn’t;  the museum of dolls  in Santa
Catarina that never should’ve won an award but did. They made fun of the
schools they’d   gone  to—MIT,   Yale,  Rhode  Island  School  of  Design,
Columbia, Harvard—and how although they’d  of course been warned that
their lives would  be misery for  years, how they had all of  them, to a one,
assumed they’d be the exception (and now all,  to  a one, secretly thought
they still  would be). They  made fun of  how little  money they  made, how
they were twenty-seven, thirty, thirty-two, and still  lived with  their parents,
a roommate, a girlfriend in banking, a boyfriend in publishing  (a sad thing,
when you had  to sponge off  of  your boyfriend  in  publishing  because he
made more than you). They bragged of what  they would be doing  if  they
hadn’t gone into  this wretched industry: they’d  be a curator  (possibly the
one Mob where you’d make even less than you did now), a sommelier (well,
make that two Mobs), a gallery owner (make it three), a writer (all right, four
—clearly,  none of   them  were  equipped to  make  money,  ever, in  any
imagining).  They  fought about  buildings  they  loved  and buildings  they
hated. They debated a photography show at this gallery, a video art show at
another. They shouted back  and forth   at one  another about critics,  and
restaurants, and philosophies, and materials. They commiserated with one
another about peers who had become successes, and gloated over peers who
had quit the business entirely, who had become llama farmers in Mendo]a,
social workers in Ann Arbor, math teachers in Chengdu.
   During  the day, they  played at being architects. Every  now and then  a
client, his ga]e helicoptering slowly around the room, would stop on one of
them, usually either Margaret or Eduard, who were the best-looking among
them, and Rausch, who was unusually attuned to shifts  in attention  away
from himself, would call  the singled-out over, as if beckoning a child to the

60
adults’ dinner  party. “Ah,   yes, this  is  Margaret,” he’d  say, as the  client
looked at her appraisingly, much as he had minutes before been looking at
Rausch’s blueprints (blueprints  finished in  fact  by  Margaret). “She’ll   be
running me out of town someday soon, I’m sure.” And  then he’d laugh his
sad, contrived, walrus-bark laugh: “Ah! Ha! Ha! Ha!”
   Margaret  would  smile  and  say  hello,  and roll   her  eyes at  them the
moment she turned around. But they knew she was thinking what they were
all  thinking:  Fuck you,  Rausch. And:  When? When  will   I  replace you?
When will it  be my turn?
   In   the meantime,  all  they  had  was play:  after  the  debating  and the
shouting and the eating,  there was silence, and the office  filled   with  the
hollow  tappings of mice  being clicked  and personal work  being dragged
from folders  and opened, and the grainy  sound of pencils  being dragged
across paper. Although they all  worked at the  same time, using the same
company resources, no one ever asked to see anyone else’s work; it was as
if they  had collectively  decided to pretend it didn’t  exist. So you  worked,
drawing dream structures and bending parabolas into dream shapes, until
midnight, and then you left, always with  the same stupid Moke: “See you in
ten hours.” Or  nine, or eight,  if  you were really  lucky, if  you  were really
getting a lot done that night.
   Tonight  was one of the nights Malcolm  left alone, and early. Even if  he
walked out  with  someone else, he was never able to  take the  train with
them; they all  lived downtown  or in  Brooklyn,  and he lived  uptown. The
benefit to walking out alone was that no one would witness him catching a
cab. He wasn’t the only person in the office with rich  parents—Katharine’s
parents were rich  as well,   as, he was  pretty  sure, were  Margaret’s and
Frederick’s—but he lived with his rich parents, and the others didn’t.
   He hailed a taxi.  “Seventy-first and Lex,”  he instructed the driver. When
the driver was black, he always said Lexington. When the driver wasn’t, he
was more honest: “Between Lex and Park, closer to Park.” JB thought this
was ridiculous at best, offensive at  worst. “You  think they’re  gonna think
you’re any more gangster because they think you live at Lex and not Park?”
he’d ask. “Malcolm, you’re a dumbass.”
   This  fight about taxis was one of many he’d  had with JB over the years
about  blackness, and  more   specifically,  his   insufficient   blackness. A
different  fight   about  taxis   had  begun  when  Malcolm   (stupidly;   he’d
recogni]ed his  mistake even as  he heard himself  saying the  words) had

61
observed that he’d never had trouble getting a cab in New York and maybe
people who complained  about it  were exaggerating. This  was his  Munior
year, during his and JB’s first  and last visit to  the weekly Black  Students’
Union meeting. JB’s eyes had practically engorged, so appalled and gleeful
was he, but when it  was another guy, a self-righteous prick  from Atlanta,
who informed Malcolm that he was, number one, barely black, number two,
an oreo, and number three, because of his white mother, unable to wholly
understand the challenges of being truly   black, it  had been JB  who  had
defended him—JB was always harassing him about his relative blackness,
but he didn’t like  it when other people did it,  and he certainly didn’t like  it
when it was done in mixed company, which JB considered everyone except
Jude and Willem, or, more specifically, other black people.
   Back  in  his parents’ house on  Seventy-first Street (closer  to Park), he
endured the nightly parental interrogation, shouted down from  the second
floor (“Malcolm,  is  that you?” “Yes!”  “Did  you eat?” “Yes!”  “Are you  still
hungry?” “No!”),   and trudged upstairs to his lair to  review once again the
central quandaries of his life.
   Although  JB hadn’t been around to overhear that night’s exchange with
the taxicab driver, Malcolm’s guilt and self-hatred over it moved race to the
top of  tonight’s list.  Race had always been a challenge for  Malcolm,  but
their sophomore year, he had hit upon what he considered a brilliant  cop-
out:  he wasn’t   black;  he  was post-black.  (Postmodernism had  entered
Malcolm’s frame  of consciousness much later than everyone else’s, as he
tried to avoid taking  literature classes in a sort of passive rebellion against
his mother.) Unfortunately, no one was convinced by this explanation, least
of all  JB, whom Malcolm  had begun to think of  as not so much black but
pre-black, as if blackness, like nirvana, was an ideali]ed  state that he was
constantly striving to erupt into.
   And  anyway, JB had found yet another way to trump Malcolm, for Must as
Malcolm   was   discovering  postmodern   identity,   JB   was  discovering
performance art   (the  class  he  was  in,   Identity   as  Art:   Performative
Transformations and the Contemporary Body, was favored by a certain kind
of mustachioed lesbian who terrified Malcolm but for  some reason flocked
to JB). So moved was he by the work  of Lee Lo]ano  that for  his midterm
proMect, he decided to perform an homage to her entitled Decide to Boycott
White People (After Lee Lozano), in which  he stopped talking to all  white
people. He semi-apologetically, but mostly  proudly, explained his  plan to

62
them one Saturday—as of  midnight  that night,  he would  stop talking  to
Willem   altogether,  and  would   reduce his   conversational  output  with
Malcolm  by  a  half.  Because Jude’s  race was  undetermined, he  would
continue speaking to him, but would only do so in riddles or  =en koans, in
recognition of the unknowability of his ethnic origins.
   Malcolm  could  see by the  look  that Jude and Willem  exchanged with
each other, brief   and unsmiling  though,  he  observed irritatedly,  full   of
meaning  (he  always   suspected the   two   of   them  of    conducting  an
extracurricular friendship  from  which  he  was excluded),  that they  were
amused by this and were prepared to humor JB. For his part, he supposed
he should be grateful for what might amount to a period of respite from JB,
but he wasn’t grateful and he wasn’t amused: he was annoyed, both by JB’s
easy playfulness with race and by his  using this stupid, gimmicky  proMect
(for  which   he would   probably  get  an  A)   to  make  a  commentary on
Malcolm’s identity, which was really none of JB’s business.
   Living  with  JB under the terms of his proMect (and really, when were they
not negotiating their lives around JB’s whims and whimsies?) was actually
very much like living  with  JB under normal circumstances. Minimi]ing  his
conversations with Malcolm did  not reduce the number of times JB  asked
Malcolm  if  he could pick  up something for  him  at the store, or  refill  his
laundry card  since Malcolm   was going  anyway,  or if   he  could borrow
Malcolm’s copy of  Don Quixote for  Spanish class because he’d left his in
the basement men’s room in the library. His not speaking to Willem didn’t
also mean that there wasn’t plenty of nonverbal communication, including
lots of  texts and notes that he’d scribble  down (“Scrning  of  Godfather at
Rex’s—coming?”)  and hand him,  which  Malcolm   was positive  was not
what Lo]ano had intended. And his poor-man’s Ionesconian exchanges with
Jude suddenly dissolved when he needed Jude to do his calculus homework,
at which point Ionesco abruptly transformed into Mussolini, especially after
Ionesco reali]ed that there was a whole  other problem set he hadn’t  even
begun because he had been busy in the men’s room in the library, and class
began in  forty-three   minutes (“But   that’s  enough  time  for   you,  right,
Judy?”).
   Naturally,  JB being JB  and their peers easy prey for  anything that was
glib and glittery,  JB’s little  experiment was written up in the school paper,
and then in a new black literary maga]ine, There Is Contrition, and became,
for a short tedious period, the talk of the campus. The attention had revived

63
JB’s already flagging enthusiasm for  the proMect—he was only eight days
into it, and Malcolm  could see him at times almost wanting to explode into
talk with Willem—and  he was able to last another two days before grandly
concluding the experiment a success and announcing that his point had been
made.
   “What   point?”  Malcolm  had asked. “That  you  can be  as annoying to
white people without talking to them as when you are talking to them?”
   “Oh,  fuck  you, Mal,”  said JB, but la]ily,   too triumphant to even engage
with him.  “You  wouldn’t  understand.” And  then he headed off to  see his
boyfriend, a white guy with  a face like a praying mantis’s who was always
regarding JB with a fervent and worshipful  expression that made Malcolm
feel slightly sick.
   At  the time, Malcolm  had been convinced that this racial discomfort  he
felt was a temporary thing, a purely contextual sensation that was awakened
in everyone in college but then evaporated the further from  it you  moved.
He had never felt any particular agita about or pride in being black, except
in the most remote ways: he knew he was supposed to have certain feelings
about certain things  in  life  (taxicab  drivers, for  one),  but somehow that
knowledge was only theoretical, not anything he had experienced himself.
And yet blackness was an essential part of his family’s narrative, which had
been told and retold until  it was worn  to a shine: how his  father had been
the third  black managing director  at his  investment firm,  the  third  black
trustee at  the  very  white   boys’  preparatory  school  that  Malcolm   had
attended, the second black CFO of a maMor commercial bank. (Malcolm’s
father had been  born too  late to  be  the first  black  anything,  but  in  the
corridor  in  which  he moved—south of  Ninety-sixth   Street and north  of
Fifty-seventh; east of Fifth  and west of Lexington—he  was still  as rare as
the red-tailed hawk that sometimes nested in the crenellations of one of the
buildings opposite  theirs on  Park  Avenue.) Growing  up,  the fact  of  his
father’s blackness (and, he supposed, his own), had been trumped by other,
more significant matters, factors that counted for more in their slice of New
York City  than his  father’s race: his  wife’s  prominence in the Manhattan
literary scene, for example, and, most important, his wealth. The New York
that Malcolm  and his  family  occupied  was one divided  not  along racial
lines but  rather tax brackets, and Malcolm  had  grown up  insulated from
everything that money could protect him from, including  bigotry itself—or
so it in retrospect seemed. In fact, it wasn’t until  college that he was made

64
to  truly    confront  the   different   ways   in   which   blackness had   been
experienced by other people, and, perhaps more stunningly, how apart his
family’s  money had  set him  from  the rest  of the  country  (although this
assumed you could consider his classmates representative of the rest of the
country, which you of  course couldn’t). Even today, almost a decade after
meeting him, he  still  had trouble comprehending the sort  of poverty  that
Jude had been raised in—his  disbelief  when he  finally  reali]ed  that  the
backpack  Jude  had  arrived  to   college   with   had  contained,  literally,
everything on earth in his  possession had been so intense that it had been
almost physical, so profound that he had mentioned it to his father, and he
was not in the habit  of revealing to  his father evidence of  his naïveté, for
fear of provoking a lecture about his naïveté. But even his father, who had
grown up poor in  4ueens—albeit with  two working  parents and a new set
of clothes every year—had been shocked, Malcolm sensed, although he had
endeavored to  conceal  it   by   sharing  a  story   of   his  own   childhood
deprivation (something about a Christmas tree that had to be bought the day
after Christmas), as if lack of privilege were a competition that he was still
determined to  win,  even  in  the  face of   another’s clear  and inarguable
triumph.
   However,  race seemed less and less a defining characteristic when one
was six years out of college, and those people who still nursed it as the core
of their identity came across as somehow childish and faintly pathetic, as if
clinging to a youthful fascination with Amnesty International or the tuba: an
outdated and embarrassing preoccupation with something that reached its
potent  apotheosis in   college  applications.  At   his  age,  the  only   truly
important  aspects of  one’s  identity   were  sexual  prowess; professional
accomplishments; and money. And in all  three of  these aspects, Malcolm
was also failing.
   Money  he set aside. He would someday inherit a huge amount. He didn’t
know how huge, and he had never felt the need to ask, and no one had ever
felt the  need to tell  him, which  is how  he knew  it was huge indeed. Not
E]ra  huge,  of  course, but—well,   maybe it   was  E]ra  huge.  Malcolm’s
parents lived much more modestly than they might, thanks to his mother’s
aversions to garish  displays  of  wealth, so  he  never knew  if  they  lived
between Lexington and Park because they couldn’t afford to live  between
Madison and  Fifth,  or  whether they  lived  between  Lexington  and Park
because his mother would find it too ostentatious to live between Madison

65
and Fifth. He would like  to make his own money, he would. But he wasn’t
one of those rich kids who  tortured himself about it.  He would try  to earn
his way, but it wasn’t wholly up to him.
   Sex, and sexual fulfillment,  however, was something he did have to take
responsibility for. He  couldn’t blame his lack  of a sex life  on the fact  that
he’d  chosen  a  low-paying   field,   or  on   his  parents  for  not   properly
motivating him.  (Or could he? As a child,  Malcolm  had had to endure his
parents’ long groping sessions—often conducted in front of him  and Flora
—and he now  wondered whether their show-offy  competence had dulled
some competitive spirit  within   him.)  His  last real  relationship  had been
more than three years ago, with a woman named Imogene who dumped him
to become a  lesbian. It  was  unclear to  him,  even now, whether  he had
actually been physically attracted to Imogene or had simply been relieved to
have someone else make  decisions that  he  had  been happy  to  follow.
Recently, he had  seen Imogene (also  an architect,  although at  a public
interest group that built experimental low-income housing—exactly the sort
of Mob Malcolm felt he should want to have, even if he secretly didn’t) and
had teasingly told her—he had been Moking!—that he couldn’t help but feel
that he had driven her to lesbianism. But Imogene had bristled and told him
that she had always been a lesbian and had stayed with him because he had
seemed so sexually confused that she thought she might  be able to  help
educate him.
   But  since Imogene, there had  been no one. Oh, what  was wrong  with
him? Sex; sexuality:  these too were  things he should  have sorted out  in
college, the  last place  where such  insecurity  was not  Must tolerated but
encouraged. In his early twenties,  he had tried falling   in and  out of  love
with  various people—friends of  Flora’s,  classmates, one of his  mother’s
clients, a debut novelist who had written a literary roman à clef about being
a sexually confused firefighter—and yet still didn’t know to whom he might
be attracted. He often thought that being gay (as much as he also couldn’t
stand the thought  of  it;  somehow  it,  like  race, seemed the  province of
college, an identity to inhabit  for a period  before maturing to more proper
and  practical   realms)   was   attractive   mostly   for    its   accompanying
accessories, its collection of political  opinions and causes and its embrace
of aesthetics. He was  missing, it  seemed, the sense of victimi]ation   and
woundedness and perpetual anger it took to be black, but he was certain he
possessed the interests that would be required if he were gay.

66
   He  fancied  himself  already half  in  love  with  Willem,   and at  various
points in love with  Jude too, and at work he would sometimes find himself
staring at  Eduard.  Sometimes he  noticed  Dominick   Cheung staring  at
Eduard as well, and then he would stop himself, because the last person he
wanted to be was sad, forty-five-year-old Dominick, leering at an associate
in a firm  that he would never inherit. A  few weekends ago, he had been at
Willem  and Jude’s,  ostensibly to  take  some measurements so he could
design them a bookcase, and Willem had leaned in front of him to grab the
measuring tape from  the  sofa, and  the  very  nearness of him  had  been
suddenly unbearable, and he had made an excuse about needing to get into
the office and had abruptly left, Willem calling after him.
   He  had in fact  gone to the office,  ignoring  Willem’s  texts, and had sat
there at  his  computer,  staring  without  seeing  the file   before  him  and
wondering yet again why  he had Moined Ratstar. The worst thing was that
the answer was so obvious that he didn’t even need to ask it: he had Moined
Ratstar to impress his parents. His last year of architecture school, Malcolm
had had a  choice—he could  have chosen to  work  with  two  classmates,
Jason Kim and Sonal Mars, who were starting their own  firm  with money
from Sonal’s grandparents, or he could have Moined Ratstar.
   “You’ve  got  to be kidding  me,” Jason had said when Malcolm had told
him of  his decision. “You  reali]e  what your  life  is going  to be like  as an
associate at a place like that, don’t you?”
   “It’s   a great firm,”   he’d said,  staunchly, sounding like his  mother, and
Jason had rolled his eyes. “I mean, it’s a great name to have on my résumé.”
But even as he said it,  he knew  (and, worse, feared Jason knew as well)
what he really meant: it was a great name for his parents to say at cocktail
parties. And, indeed, his parents liked to say it.  “Two kids,”  Malcolm  had
overheard his father say to  someone at a dinner party  celebrating one of
Malcolm’s mother’s clients. “My   daughter’s an editor at FSG, and my son
works for  Ratstar Architects.” The woman had made an approving sound,
and Malcolm, who had actually been trying  to find  a way to tell  his father
he wanted to quit, had felt something in him wilt.  At such times, he envied
his friends for the exact things he had once pitied them for: the fact that no
one had any expectations for  them, the ordinariness of  their  families  (or
their very  lack of  them), the way  they navigated their lives  by  only their
own ambitions.

67
   And  now?  Now Jason and Sonal had had  two proMects appear in New
York and one in The New York Times, while he was still  doing the sort  of
work he had done in his  first year of  architecture school, working for  two
pretentious men at a firm they had pretentiously named after a pretentious
Anne Sexton poem, and getting paid almost nothing to do it.
   He had gone to architecture school for the worst reason of all, it seemed:
because he loved buildings. It had been a respectable passion, and when he
was a  child,   his  parents  had  indulged  him   with  tours  of   houses, of
monuments wherever they had traveled. Even as a very young boy, he had
always drawn imaginary buildings, built  imaginary  structures: they were a
comfort and they were a repository—everything he was unable to articulate,
everything he  was unable  to  decide, he  could,  it  seemed, resolve in  a
building.
   And  in an essential way, this was what he was most ashamed of: not his
poor understanding of   sex, not  his  traitorous  racial  tendencies, not his
inability  to separate himself from  his parents or  make his own  money or
behave like an autonomous creature. It was that, when he and his colleagues
sat there  at  night,   the  group  of  them  burrowed  deep  into  their   own
ambitious  dream-structures, all   of   them   drawing   and  planning   their
improbable buildings,  he  was doing  nothing.  He had  lost  the ability   to
imagine anything.  And   so every  evening,  while  the  others created, he
copied: he drew buildings he had seen on his travels, buildings other people
had dreamed and constructed, buildings he had lived in or passed through.
Again and again, he made what had already been made, not even bothering
to  improve   them,   Must mimicking   them.   He   was   twenty-eight;   his
imagination had deserted him; he was a copyist.
   It  frightened him. JB  had his series. Jude had his work, Willem had his.
But what if Malcolm  never again created anything? He longed for the years
when it was enough to simply be in his room with  his hand moving over a
piece of graph paper, before the years of decisions and identities, when his
parents made his choices for him, and the only thing he had to concentrate
on was the clean blade stroke of a line, the ruler’s perfect knife edge.

68
                                                         3

IT WAS JB who decided that Willem and Jude should host a New Year’s Eve
party at their apartment. This was resolved at Christmas, which was a three-
part affair: Christmas Eve was held at JB’s mother’s place in Fort  Greene,
and Christmas dinner itself (a formal,  organi]ed  event, at which suits and
ties were required) was at Malcolm’s house, and succeeded a casual lunch
at JB’s aunts’ house. They had always followed this ritual—four years ago,
they had added Thanksgiving at Jude’s friends Harold and Julia’s house in
Cambridge to the lineup—but  New  Year’s Eve had  never been assigned.
The previous year, the first  post-school-life  New Year’s that  they had all
been in the same city at the same time, they had all ended up separate and
miserable—JB lodged at some lame party at E]ra’s,  Malcolm  stuck at his
parents’ friends’ dinner uptown, Willem  trapped by Findlay  into a holiday
shift at Ortolan, Jude mired in bed with the flu at Lispenard Street—and had
resolved to actually  make  plans for  the next  year. But  they  hadn’t, and
hadn’t, and then it was December and they still hadn’t done anything.
   So they didn’t  mind JB deciding for  them, not in this case. They figured
they   could   accommodate  twenty-five    people  comfortably,    or   forty
uncomfortably. “So make it  forty,”  said JB, promptly, as they’d  known he
would, but later, back at their apartment, they wrote up a list of Must twenty,
and only their and Malcolm’s  friends, knowing  that JB would  invite  more
people than were allotted him, extending invitations  to friends and friends
of friends  and  not-even friends and  colleagues and bartenders and shop
clerks, until the place grew so dense with bodies that they could open all the
windows to the night air and still  not dispel the fog of heat and smoke that
would inevitably accumulate.
   “Don’t   make this  complicated,”  was the  other thing  JB  had said,  but
Willem and Malcolm  knew that  was a caution meant solely for Jude, who
had a tendency to make things more elaborate than was necessary, to spend
nights making batches of gougères when everyone would have been content
with pi]]a,   to actually clean the place beforehand, as if anyone would care
if the floors  were crunchy with  grit  and the sink was scummed with dried
soap stains and flecks of previous days’ breakfasts.

69
   The  night before the  party was unseasonably warm, warm enough that
Willem walked the two  miles from Ortolan to  the apartment, which was so
thick with its rich  butter scents of cheese and dough and fennel that it made
him feel he had never left work  at all. He stood in  the kitchen for a while,
pinching the little  tumoric  blobs of  pastry off  their  cooling racks to  keep
them from  sticking,  looking  at  the stack of  plastic  containers with  their
herbed shortbreads and cornmeal gingersnaps and feeling slightly sad—the
same sadness he felt when he  noticed that  Jude had cleaned after  all—
because he knew they  would  be devoured mindlessly, swallowed  whole
with beer, and that they would begin the New Year finding crumbs of those
beautiful cookies everywhere, trampled and stamped into  the tiles. In  the
bedroom, Jude was already asleep, and the window was cracked open, and
the heavy air made Willem  dream of  spring, and trees afu]]   with  yellow
flowers, and  a flock  of  blackbirds,  their  wings  lacquered as if  with  oil,
gliding soundlessly across a sea-colored sky.
   When he woke, though, the weather had turned again, and it took him a
moment to reali]e  that he  had been shivering, and that the  sounds in his
dream had been of wind, and that he was being shaken awake, and that his
name was being repeated, not by  birds but  by  a human voice:  “Willem,
Willem.”
   He  turned over and propped himself up  on his elbows, but  was able to
register Jude only in segments: his face first, and then the fact that he was
holding  his  left  arm  before  him  with  his  right   hand, and  that  he had
cocooned it with something—his towel, he reali]ed—which was so white in
the gloom  that  it   seemed a source of   light  itself,  and  he  stared at  it,
transfixed.
   “Willem,   I’m  sorry,” said Jude, and his voice was so calm that for a few
seconds, he thought it was a dream, and stopped listening, and Jude had to
repeat himself. “There’s been an accident, Willem; I’m sorry. I need you to
take me to Andy’s.”
   Finally  he woke. “What kind of accident?”
   “I  cut myself. It was an accident.” He paused. “Will you take me?”
   “Yeah,  of course,” he said, but he was still  confused, still  asleep, and it
was without understanding that he fumblingly  dressed, and Moined Jude in
the hallway, where he was waiting, and then walked with him up to Canal,
where he turned for the subway before Jude pulled him back:  “I  think we
need a cab.”

70
   In  the  taxi—Jude giving   the driver  the address in  that same crushed,
muted voice—he at last gave in  to consciousness, and saw that Jude was
still holding the towel. “Why  did you bring your towel?” he asked.
   “I  told you—I  cut myself.”
   “But—is  it  bad?”
   Jude shrugged, and Willem  noticed  for  the first  time  that his  lips  had
gone a strange color, a not-color, although maybe that was the streetlights,
which slapped and slid across his face, bruising it yellow  and ocher and a
sickly larval white as the cab pushed north. Jude leaned his head against the
window and closed his eyes, and it was then that Willem felt the beginnings
of nausea, of fear, although he was unable to articulate  why, only  that he
was in a cab heading uptown and something had happened, and he didn’t
know what  but that it  was something bad, that  he wasn’t comprehending
something important and vital,  and that the damp warmth  of a  few hours
ago had vanished and the world had reverted to its  icy  harshness, its raw
end-of-year cruelty.
   Andy’s  office  was on Seventy-eighth and Park, near Malcolm’s parents’
house, and it was only once they were inside, in the true light, that Willem
saw that the dark pattern on Jude’s shirt was blood, and that the towel had
become sticky with   it,  almost varnished, its  tiny  loops of  cotton  matted
down like wet fur. “I’m  sorry,” Jude said to Andy, who had opened the door
to let them in,  and when Andy  unwrapped the towel, all  Willem  saw was
what looked like  a choking of  blood, as if Jude’s arm had grown a mouth
and was vomiting blood from  it, and with  such avidity that it  was forming
little frothy bubbles that popped and spat as if in excitement.
   “Jesus fucking  Christ,  Jude,”  said Andy,  and steered him  back to  the
examining room, and Willem sat down to wait. Oh god, he thought, oh god.
But it  was  as if  his  mind  was a bit  of  machinery  caught uselessly in  a
groove, and he couldn’t think beyond those two words. It was too bright in
the waiting  room,  and he  tried  to  relax, but  he couldn’t   for  the phrase
beating its rhythm like a heartbeat, thudding through his body like a second
pulse: Oh god. Oh god. Oh god.
   He  waited a  long hour  before Andy  called  his name. Andy  was eight
years older than he, and they had known him  since their sophomore year,
when Jude had had  an episode so  sustained that the three  of  them had
finally  decided to take  him to  the hospital connected with  the university,
where Andy had been the resident on call. He had been the only doctor Jude

71
agreed to  see again,  and  now,  even  though Andy   was  an  orthopedic
surgeon, he still treated Jude for anything that went wrong, from his back to
his legs to flu and colds. They all liked Andy, and trusted him, too.
   “You  can take  him home,”  Andy  said. He was angry. With  a  snap, he
peeled off his gloves, which  were crusty with  blood, and pushed back his
stool. On  the  floor  was  a long,  messy  paint-swipe streak  of  red, as  if
someone had tried  to clean  up something  sloshed and had  given up  in
exasperation. The walls had red on them as well, and Andy’s sweater was
stiff  with  it.  Jude sat  on the  table,  looking  slumped and miserable  and
holding  a glass  bottle  of  orange Muice. His hair  was  glued together  in
clumps, and his shirt appeared hard and shellacked, as if it  was made not
from cloth but from metal. “Jude, go to the waiting room,” Andy instructed,
and Jude did, meekly.
   Once he was gone, Andy  shut the door and looked  at Willem.  “Has he
seemed suicidal to you?”
   “What?  No.” He  felt himself grow  very still.  “Is that what he was trying
to do?”
   Andy  sighed. “He says he wasn’t. But—I don’t know. No. I don’t know; I
can’t tell.”   He went  over to  the sink and  began to scrub violently  at  his
hands. “On the  other hand, if   he had gone  to the  ER—which  you guys
really  should’ve  fucking   done, you   know—they  most  likely   would’ve
hospitali]ed him. Which  is why he probably didn’t.”  Now  he was speaking
aloud to  himself.  He  pumped a small  lake  of  soap onto  his hands  and
washed them again. “You know he cuts himself, don’t you?”
   For a while, he couldn’t answer. “No,” he said.
   Andy  turned back around and stared at Willem,  wiping  each finger dry
slowly. “He  hasn’t seemed depressed?” he asked. “Is he eating regularly,
sleeping? Does he seem listless, out of sorts?”
   “He’s  seemed fine,”  Willem  said, although the truth  was that he didn’t
know. Had  Jude  been eating? Had  he  been sleeping?  Should he  have
noticed? Should he have been paying more attention? “I mean, he’s seemed
the same as he always is.”
   “Well,”  said Andy. He looked deflated for a moment, and the two of them
stood quietly, facing but  not looking  at each other. “I’m  going to  take his
word for  it  this time,”  he said.  “I  Must saw him a week ago, and I agree,
nothing seemed unusual. But if he starts behaving strangely at all—I mean
it, Willem—you  call me right away.”

72
   “I  promise,”  he said. He had seen Andy a few times over the years, and
had always  sensed his frustration,  which  often  seemed directed toward
many people at once: at himself, at Jude, and especially at Jude’s friends,
none of whom,  Andy  always managed to suggest (without ever saying it
aloud), were doing  a good enough Mob taking care of him.  He  liked  this
about Andy,   his  sense of   outrage  over  Jude,  even  as  he  feared his
disapproval and also thought it somewhat unfair.
   And  then, as it  often  did once he  had finished rebuking  them, Andy’s
voice changed and became almost tender. “I know you will,”  he said. “It’s
late. Go home. Make sure you give  him something to  eat when he wakes
up. Happy New Year.”


   They  rode home in silence. The driver  had taken a single, long  look at
Jude and said, “I need an extra twenty dollars on the fare.”
   “Fine,”  Willem  had said.
   The sky  was almost light, but  he knew he wouldn’t  be able to sleep. In
the taxi, Jude had turned away from Willem and looked out of the window,
and back at the apartment, he stumbled at the doorway and walked slowly
toward the bathroom, where Willem knew he would start trying to clean up.
   “Don’t,”   he told him. “Go  to bed,” and Jude, obedient for once, changed
direction  and  shuffled  into  the  bedroom,  where  he  fell  asleep  almost
immediately.
   Willem  sat on his own bed and watched him. He was aware, suddenly, of
his every Moint and muscle and bone, and this made him feel very, very old,
and for several minutes he simply sat staring.
   “Jude,”  he called, and then again more insistently, and when Jude didn’t
answer, he went over to his bed and nudged him onto his back and, after a
moment’s hesitation, pushed up  the  right  sleeve of  his  shirt.  Under his
hands, the fabric  didn’t   so  much yield  as  it  did  bend  and crease, like
cardboard, and although he was only able to fold it  to the inside of  Jude’s
elbow, it  was enough to see the three  columns of  neat white scars, each
about an inch wide and slightly raised, laddering up his arm. He tucked his
finger under the sleeve, and felt the tracks continuing onto  the upper arm,
but stopped when  he reached the bicep, unwilling   to  explore more,  and
withdrew his hand. He wasn’t able to examine the left arm—Andy  had cut
back the  sleeve on  that one,  and Jude’s entire  forearm  and hand  were

73
wrapped with  white  gau]e—but  he knew  he would  find  the  same thing
there.
   He had been lying when he told Andy he hadn’t known Jude cut himself.
Or rather, he hadn’t known for certain, but that was only  a technicality: he
knew, and he had known  for a  long time.  When they  were at Malcolm’s
house the summer after Hemming died, he and Malcolm had gotten drunk
one afternoon, and as they sat and watched JB and Jude, back from their
walk to the dunes, fling sand at each other, Malcolm had asked, “Have you
ever noticed how Jude always wears long sleeves?”
   He’d  grunted  in  response. He had, of  course—it  was difficult   not  to,
especially on hot days—but he had never let himself wonder why. Much of
his friendship with  Jude, it  often seemed, was not letting  himself ask  the
questions he knew he ought to, because he was afraid of the answers.
   There had been a silence then, and the two of them had watched as JB,
drunk himself, fell backward into the sand and Jude limped over and begun
burying him.
   “Flora  had a friend who always wore long sleeves,” Malcolm continued.
“Her name was Maryam. She used to cut herself.”
   He  let the silence pull  between them until he imagined he could hear it
come alive. There had been a girl in their dorm who had cut herself as well.
She had been with them freshman year, but, he reali]ed, he hadn’t seen her
at all this past year.
   “Why?”   he asked Malcolm.  On the  sand, Jude had worked up to  JB’s
waist. JB was singing something meandering and tuneless.
   “I  don’t know,”  Malcolm said. “She had a lot of problems.”
   He  waited,  but  it  seemed Malcolm  had  nothing  more to  say.  “What
happened to her?”
   “I   don’t  know. They lost  touch when  Flora went to  college; she never
spoke about her again.”
   They  were quiet again. Somewhere along the way, he knew, it had been
silently  decided among  the  three  of  them  that  he would   be primarily
responsible for  Jude,  and this,   he recogni]ed,   was Malcolm’s   way  of
presenting him  with  a  difficulty   that  needed a solution,  although what,
exactly, the problem was—or what the answer might be—he wasn’t certain,
and he was willing to bet that Malcolm didn’t know, either.
   For the next few days he avoided Jude, because he knew if he were alone
with him,  he wouldn’t  be able to stop himself from  having a conversation

74
with him,  and he wasn’t sure that he wanted to, or what  that conversation
would be.  It  wasn’t hard  to do:  in  the daytime,  they were together  as a
group, and at night, they were each in their  own rooms. But  one evening,
Malcolm and JB left together to pick up the lobsters, and he and Jude were
left on their own in the kitchen, slicing tomatoes and washing lettuce. It had
been a long, sunny, sleepy day, and Jude was in  one of  his light  moods,
when he was almost carefree, and even as he asked, Willem experienced a
predictive melancholy  at  ruining  such  a perfect  moment, one  in  which
everything—the pink-bled sky above them and the way the knife sliced so
cleanly through  the vegetables beneath them—had conspired to work  so
well, only to have him upset it.
   “Don’t  you want to borrow one of my T-shirts?” he asked Jude.
   He didn’t  answer until he had finished coring the tomato before him, and
then gave Willem a steady, blank ga]e. “No.”
   “Aren’t  you hot?”
   Jude smiled at him, faintly,  warningly. “It’s  going  to be cold any minute
now.” And  it  was true. When  the last daub of  sun vanished, it  would be
chilly, and Willem himself would have to go back to his room for a sweater.
   “But”—and   he heard in advance how absurd he would  sound, how the
confrontation had wriggled  out  of his  control, catlike,  as soon as he had
initiated it—“you’re  going to get lobster all over your sleeves.”
   At  this,  Jude made a noise, a funny  kind of  squawk, too  loud and too
barky to be a real laugh, and turned back to the cutting board. “I think I can
handle it, Willem,”  he said, and although his voice  was mild, Willem  saw
how tightly  he was holding the knife’s handle, almost squee]ing it,  so that
the bunch of his knuckles tinged a suety yellow.
   They  were  lucky  then,  both of   them, that  Malcolm  and  JB  returned
before they had to continue talking, but not before Willem heard Jude begin
to ask  “Why  are—”   And  although he  never finished  his  sentence (and
indeed, didn’t speak to Willem  once throughout dinner, through  which he
kept his sleeves perfectly neat), Willem  knew that his question would  not
have been “Why  are you asking  me this?”  but “Why   are you asking me
this?” because Willem  had always been careful  not to  express too much
interest in  exploring   the  many cupboarded cabinet  in  which   Jude had
secreted himself.
   If  it  had been anyone else, he told himself, he wouldn’t  have hesitated.
He would have demanded answers, he would have called mutual friends, he

75
would have sat him  down  and yelled and  pleaded and threatened until a
confession was extracted. But  this  was part of  the  deal when  you were
friends with Jude: he knew it, Andy knew it, they all knew it. You let things
slide that your  instincts told  you not to,  you scooted around the edges of
your  suspicions. You  understood  that  proof  of   your  friendship  lay  in
keeping your  distance, in  accepting what  was  told  you,  in  turning  and
walking away when the door was shut in your face instead of trying to force
it open again. The  war-room discussions the four  of them  had had about
other people—about Black Henry Young, when they thought the girl he was
dating was cheating on him and were trying to decide how to tell him; about
E]ra, when they knew the girl he was dating was cheating on him and were
trying to  decide how to  tell  him—they would  never have about Jude. He
would consider it a betrayal, and it wouldn’t help, anyway.
   For the rest of the night,  they avoided each other, but on his way to bed,
he found himself standing outside Jude’s room, his hand hovering above the
door, ready to knock,  before he returned to himself:  What would  he say?
What did he want to hear? And so he left,  continued on, and the next day,
when Jude made no mention of the previous evening’s almost-conversation,
he didn’t  either, and soon that day turned to  night, and then  another, and
another, and they moved further and further from his ever trying,  however
ineffectively, to make Jude answer a question he couldn’t bring himself  to
ask.
   But  it  was  always there, that  question, and in  unexpected moments it
would muscle its way  into his  consciousness, positioning itself stubbornly
at the forefront of his mind, as immovable as a troll. Four years ago, he and
JB were sharing an apartment and attending graduate school, and Jude, who
had remained in Boston for law school, had come down to visit them. It had
been night then, too, and there had been a locked bathroom door, and him
banging on   it,  abruptly,  inexplicably   terrified,   and Jude  answering  it,
looking irritated  but also (or was he imagining  this?) strangely guilty,  and
asking him “What, Willem?”  and he once again being unable to answer, but
knowing that  something was amiss. Inside the room  had smelled sharply
tannic, the rusted-metal scent of blood, and he had even picked through the
trash can and found a curl of a bandage wrapper, but was that from dinner,
when JB had cut himself  with a knife  while  trying  to chop a carrot in  his
hand (Willem suspected he exaggerated his incompetency in the kitchen in
order to avoid having to do any prep work), or was it from Jude’s nighttime

76
punishments? But again (again!), he did nothing, and when he passed Jude
(feigning sleep or actually asleep?) on the sofa in the living  room, he said
nothing, and the  next day,  he again said nothing,  and the  days unfurled
before him  as clean  as paper, and  with  each day  he said  nothing,  and
nothing, and nothing.
   And  now  there was this. If  he had done something (what?) three years
ago, eight years ago,  would this  have happened? And what  exactly  was
this?
   But  this time  he would  say something, because this time he had proof.
This time, to let Jude slip away and evade him would mean that he himself
would be culpable if anything happened.
   After  he had resolved this, he felt the fatigue overwhelm him, felt it erase
the worry and anxiety and frustration of the night. It was the last day of the
year, and as he lay down on his bed and closed his eyes, the last thing he
remembered feeling was surprise that he should be falling asleep so fast.


   It  was almost two  in  the afternoon when Willem  finally  woke,  and the
first  thing  he  remembered was  his  resolve  from  earlier  that  morning.
Certainly things  had been realigned to  discourage his sense of initiative:
Jude’s bed was clean. Jude was not in it. The bathroom, when he visited it,
smelled eggily  of bleach. And  at  the card table, there  was Jude himself,
stamping circles into dough with a stoicism that made Willem both annoyed
and relieved. If he was to confront Jude, it seemed, it would be without the
benefit of disarray, of evidence of disaster.
   He slouched into the chair across from him. “What’re you doing?”
   Jude didn’t  look up. “Making   more gougères,” he said, calmly. “One of
the batches I made yesterday isn’t quite right.”
   “No   one’s  going  to  fucking   care, Jude,”  he  said meanly,  and  then,
barreling helplessly forward,  “We could  Must give them cheese sticks and
it’d be the same thing.”
   Jude shrugged, and Willem felt  his annoyance quicken into anger. Here
Jude sat after what was, he could now admit, a terrifying night, acting as if
nothing had happened, even as his bandage-wrapped hand lay uselessly on
the table. He was about to speak when Jude put down the water glass he’d
been using as a pastry cutter and looked at him. “I’m really sorry, Willem,”
he said, so softly  that Willem   almost couldn’t  hear him.  He saw Willem

77
looking at his hand and pulled it into his lap. “I should never—” He paused.
“I’m  sorry. Don’t be mad at me.”
   His anger dissolved. “Jude,” he asked, “what were you doing?”
   “Not  what you think. I promise you, Willem.”
   Years later, Willem would  recount this conversation—its contours, if not
its actual, literal content—for  Malcolm  as proof of his own  incompetence,
his own failure. How might  things have been different if he spoke only one
sentence? And that sentence could have been “Jude, are you trying to kill
yourself?” or “Jude, you need to tell me what’s going on,” or “Jude, why do
you do this to yourself?” Any  of those would have been acceptable; any of
those would   have led  to   a  larger conversation  that  would  have  been
reparative, or at the very least preventative.
   Wouldn’t  it?
   But there, in the moment, he instead only mumbled, “Okay.”
   They sat in silence for what felt  like a long time, listening to the murmur
of  one of  their  neighbors’  televisions,  and it  was  only  much  later that
Willem would  wonder whether Jude had been saddened or relieved that he
had been so readily believed.
   “Are  you mad at me?”
   “No.”   He cleared his throat. And he wasn’t. Or, at least, mad was not the
word he  would  have chosen, but  he couldn’t  then  articulate what  word
would be correct. “But we obviously have to cancel the party.”
   At  this, Jude looked alarmed. “Why?”
   “Why? Are  you kidding me?”
   “Willem,”   Jude said, adopting what  Willem  thought of  as his litigatory
tone, “we can’t cancel. People are going to be showing up in seven hours—
less. And we really have no clue who JB’s  invited. They’re  going to show
up anyway, even if we  let everyone else know. And  besides”—he inhaled
sharply, as if  he’d  had a  lung  infection  and was  trying  to  prove it  had
resolved itself—“I’m  perfectly fine. It’ll   be more difficult  if we cancel than
if we Must go forward.”
   Oh,  how and why did  he always listen to Jude? But he did, once again,
and soon it  was eight,  and the windows  were  once again open, and the
kitchen was once again hot with pastry—as if the previous night had never
happened, as if those hours  had been an illusion—and  Malcolm  and  JB
were arriving. Willem  stood in the door of their bedroom, buttoning up his

78
shirt and listening to Jude tell them that  he had burned his arm baking the
gougères, and that Andy had had to apply a salve.
   “I   told you not  to make those fucking gougères,” he could hear JB say,
happily. He loved Jude’s baking.
   He  was overcome, then, with  a powerful  sensation: he could close the
door, and go  to sleep, and when  he woke,  it  would  be a new  year, and
everything would be wiped fresh, and he wouldn’t  feel that deep, writhing
discomfort  inside  of  him.  The  thought  of  seeing  Malcolm  and  JB,  of
interacting   with    them   and   smiling    and   Moking, seemed   suddenly
excruciating.
   But,  of course, see them he did, and when JB demanded they all go up to
the roof so he could get some fresh air and have a smoke, he let Malcolm
complain uselessly and halfheartedly about how cold it was without Moining
in, before resignedly  following  the three of  them up  the narrow staircase
that led to the tar-papered roof.
   He knew that he was sulking, and he removed himself to the back of the
building,  letting  the  others talk  without   him.  Above  him,  the  sky  was
already completely dark,  midnight  dark.  If  he faced north,  he could  see
directly beneath him the art-supply store where JB had been working part-
time since  quitting  the maga]ine  a  month ago,  and in  the  distance, the
Empire State Building’s gaudy, graceless bulk, its tower aglow with a garish
blue light that made him think of gas stations, and the long drive back to his
parents’ house from Hemming’s hospital bed so many years ago.
   “Guys,”  he called  over to the others, “it’s  cold.”  He wasn’t  wearing his
coat; none of  them were. “Let’s  go.”  But  when he went  to the  door that
opened into the building’s  stairwell,  the handle wouldn’t  turn. He  tried it
again—it  wouldn’t  budge.  They  were  locked  out. “Fuck!”    he shouted.
“Fuck, fuck, fuck!”
   “Jesus,  Willem,”   said  Malcolm,   startled, because Willem   rarely  got
angry. “Jude? Do you have the key?”
   But  Jude didn’t.  “Fuck!”   He  couldn’t  help himself.  Everything  felt  so
wrong. He  couldn’t  look at  Jude. He blamed him,  which  was unfair.  He
blamed himself,  which  was more  fair  but  which  made him  feel  worse.
“Who’s got  their phone?” But idiotically,  no one had his phone: they were
down in  the apartment, where they themselves should have been, were it
not for   fucking  JB,  and for   fucking  Malcolm,  who  so  unquestioningly
followed everything JB said, every stupid, half-formed idea, and for fucking

79
Jude as well, for last night, for  the past nine years, for hurting himself, for
not letting himself be helped, for frightening and unnerving him, for making
him feel so useless: for everything.
   For  a while they screamed; they pounded their feet on the rooftop in the
hopes that someone beneath them,  one  of  their  three neighbors  whom
they’d  still   never met,  might   hear them.  Malcolm   suggested throwing
something at the windows of one of the neighboring buildings, but they had
nothing to  throw  (even their wallets  were downstairs, tucked  co]ily   into
their coat pockets), and all the windows were dark besides.
   “Listen,”   Jude said at last, even though the last thing Willem  wanted to
do was listen to Jude, “I  have an idea. Lower  me down to the fire  escape
and I’ll break in through the bedroom window.”
   The idea was so stupid that he initially  couldn’t  respond: it sounded like
something that JB would  imagine, not Jude. “No,”  he said, flatly.  “That’s
cra]y.”
   “Why?”   asked JB. “I   think  it’s  a great plan.”  The  fire  escape was an
unreliable, ill-conceived, and mostly useless obMect, a rusted metal skeleton
affixed to the front  of the building  between the fifth and third  floors like  a
particularly ugly  bit  of decoration—from  the roof,  it was a  drop of  about
nine feet to the landing, which ran half the width of their living  room; even
if  they  could  safely get  Jude down  to  it  without   triggering  one of  his
episodes or having him break his leg,  he’d have to crane over its  edge in
order to reach the bedroom window.
   “Absolutely  not,”  he told  JB, and the two of  them argued for a bit until
Willem  reali]ed,  with   a growing  sense of  dismay, that  it  was  the only
possible solution. “But not Jude,” he said. “I will.”
   “You  can’t.”
   “Why?  We won’t need to break in through the bedroom, anyway; I’ll Must
go in through one of the living-room  windows.”  The living-room  windows
were barred, but one of them was missing, and Willem thought he might be
able to squee]e between the remaining two bars, Must. Anyway, he’d have
to.
   “I  closed the windows before we came up here,” Jude admitted in a small
voice, and  Willem  knew  that meant  he’d also  locked  them, because he
locked anything that could be: doors, windows, closets. It was reflexive for
him.  The  bedroom window’s   lock  was  broken,  however,  so Jude  had

80
fashioned a mechanism—a complex,  blocky  thing  made from  bolts  and
wire—that he claimed secured it completely.
   He   had  always   been  mystified   by   Jude’s  hyper-preparedness, his
dedication to finding disaster everywhere—he had long ago noticed Jude’s
habit of,  upon entering any new room  or space, searching for the nearest
exit and then standing close to it, which had initially   been funny and then,
somehow, became less  so—and  his  equal  dedication  to  implementing
preventative measures whenever he could. One night, the two of them had
been awake late in their bedroom, talking, and Jude had told him (quietly,
as if  he was confessing something precious) that  the bedroom window’s
mechanism could in fact be  opened from the outside, but that he was  the
only one who knew how to unMam it.
   “Why  are you telling me this?” he’d asked.
   “Because,” Jude had said, “I think we should get it fixed, properly.”
   “But   if  you’re  the only  one  who knows  how  to  open it,  why  does it
matter?” They didn’t  have extra money for a locksmith,  not to come fix  a
problem that wasn’t a problem. They couldn’t ask the superintendent: After
they  had moved  in,   Annika  had  admitted  that  she  technically  wasn’t
allowed  to  sublet the  apartment, but  as long  as  they  didn’t  cause any
problems, she thought the landlord wouldn’t bother them. And so they tried
not to cause problems: they made their own repairs, they patched their own
walls, they fixed the plumbing themselves.
   “Just in case,” Jude had said. “I Must want to know we’re safe.”
   “Jude,”  he’d said. “We’re  going  to be safe. Nothing’s  going to happen.
No one’s going  to break in.”  And  then, when Jude was silent, he sighed,
gave up. “I’ll call  the locksmith tomorrow,” he’d said.
   “Thank  you, Willem,”  Jude had said.
   But in  the end, he’d never called.
   That had been two months ago, and now they were standing in the cold
on their  roof,   and that  window  was  their  only  hope.  “Fuck,  fuck,”   he
groaned. His head hurt. “Just tell me how to do it, and I’ll open it.”
   “It’s  too difficult,”   Jude said. By now they had forgotten Malcolm and JB
were standing there, watching them, JB quiet for once. “I won’t  be able to
explain it.”
   “Yeah, I  know  you think I’m  a  fucking moron, but  I can figure it  out if
you only use small words,” he snapped.

81
   “Willem,”   said Jude, surprised, and there was a silence. “That’s not what
I meant.”
   “I  know,”  he said. “Sorry. I  know.”  He took a deep breath. “Even if  we
were to do this, though—and I don’t think we should—how would we even
lower you down?”
   Jude walked to the edge of the roof, which was bordered on each side by
a flat-topped shin-high wall, and peered over it. “I’ll  sit on the wall looking
out, directly above the fire escape,” he said. “Then you and JB should both
sit by it. Each of you hold one of my hands with both of your own, and then
you’ll  lower me down. Once you can’t reach anymore, you’ll let go and I’ll
drop the rest of the way.”
   He  laughed, it was so risky and dumb. “And  if  we  did this, how  would
you reach the bedroom window?”
   Jude looked at him. “You’re going to have to trust I can do it.”
   “This  is stupid.”
   JB stopped him. “This  is the only plan, Willem.  It’s fucking  free]ing  out
here.”
   And  it was; only his rage was keeping him warm. “Have you not noticed
his whole fucking arm is completely bandaged up, JB?”
   “But  I’m  fine, Willem,”  said Jude, before JB could respond.
   It  was ten more minutes of the  two of  them bickering until  Jude finally
marched back over to the edge. “If  you won’t  help  me, Willem,  Malcolm
will,”  he said, although Malcolm looked terrified as well.
   “No,”   he said, “I  will.”  And  so he and JB knelt and pressed themselves
against the wall, each holding one of Jude’s hands with both of their  own.
By now  it  was so cold that  he could barely  feel his  fingers close around
Jude’s palm. He had Jude’s left hand, and all he could sense anyway was its
cushion of gau]e. As he squee]ed it, an image of Andy’s face floated before
him, and he was sick with guilt.
   Jude pushed off  the side of  the ledge, and Malcolm  gave a little  moan
that ended in a squeak. Willem and JB leaned over as far as they could, until
they were in  danger of tipping  over the  edge themselves, and when Jude
called to them to let go, they did,  and watched him land in a clatter on the
slat-floored fire escape beneath them.
   JB cheered, and Willem wanted to smack him. “I’m   fine!”  Jude shouted
up to  them, and waved  his bandaged hand in  the air  like  a flag,  before
moving over to the edge of the fire escape, where he pulled himself up onto

82
its railing   so he  could start  untangling  the implement.  He  had his  legs
twined  around one  of  the  railing’s  iron   spindles, but  his  position  was
precarious, and Willem   watched  him  sway  a  little,  trying   to  keep  his
balance, his fingers moving slowly from numbness and cold.
   “Get  me down  there,” he said to  Malcolm  and JB, ignoring  Malcolm’s
fluttery protests, and then he went over the  edge himself, calling down  to
Jude before he did so his arrival wouldn’t upset his equilibrium.
   The  drop  was scarier, and the  landing  harder, than he had  thought it
would be,  but he made himself  recover quickly   and went over  to where
Jude was and wrapped his arms around his waist, tucking his leg around a
spindle to brace himself. “I’ve  got you,”  he said, and Jude leaned out over
the edge of the railing,  farther  than he could  have done on his own,  and
Willem held  on to him so tightly  that he could  feel the knuckles of Jude’s
spine through  his  sweater, could  feel  his  stomach sink  and  rise as  he
breathed, could feel the echo of his fingers’ movements through his muscles
as he  twisted  and unkinked  the  twigs  of  wire   that  were fastening  the
window  into  its stile.  And  when  it  was done, Willem   climbed  onto the
railing and into the bedroom first, and then reached out again to pull Jude in
by his arms, careful to avoid his bandages.
   They  stood back on  the inside,  panting from  the effort,  and looked  at
each other. It was so deliciously warm inside this room, even with the cold
air gusting in,  that he at last let  himself  feel weak with  relief.  They were
safe, they had been spared. Jude grinned at him then, and he grinned back—
if it  had been JB before him, he would’ve  hugged him out of  sheer stupid
giddiness, but Jude wasn’t a hugger and so he didn’t. But then Jude raised
his hand to brush some of the rust flakes  out of his  hair, and Willem  saw
that on the inside of his wrist his bandage was stained with a deep-burgundy
splotch, and recogni]ed, belatedly, that the rapidity of Jude’s breathing was
not Must from exertion but from pain. He watched as Jude sat heavily on his
bed, his white-wrapped hand reaching behind him to  make sure he would
land on something solid.
   Willem    crouched  beside  him.   His  elation   was  gone,  replaced  by
something else. He felt himself weirdly close to tears, although he couldn’t
have said why.
   “Jude,”  he began, but he didn’t know how to continue.
   “You’d  better get them,” Jude said, and although each word came out as a
gasp, he smiled at Willem again.

83
   “Fuck  ’em,”  he said, “I’ll   stay here with you,” and Jude laughed a little,
although he winced  as he did  so, and carefully  tipped himself  backward
until he was lying  on his side, and Willem  helped lift  his legs up onto the
bed. His sweater was freckled with more flecks of rust, and Willem picked
some of them off  of him.  He sat on the bed next to  him, unsure where to
begin. “Jude,” he tried again.
   “Go,”   Jude said, and closed his eyes, although he was still smiling, and
Willem reluctantly stood, shutting the window and turning off  the bedroom
light as he  left, closing  the door behind him,  heading for  the stairwell  to
save Malcolm  and JB,  while  far beneath him,  he could  hear the  bu]]er
reverberating through the staircase, announcing the arrival of the evening’s
first guests.

84
     [ II ]

The Postman

85
                                                         1

SATURDAYS WERE FOR work, but Sundays were for walking. The walks had
begun out of necessity five years ago, when he had moved to the city and
knew little  about it: each week, he would choose a different neighborhood
and walk  from  Lispenard  Street to  it,   and then  around it,  covering  its
perimeter precisely, and  then home  again. He  never skipped  a  Sunday,
unless the weather made it near impossible, and even now, even though he
had walked every neighborhood in Manhattan, and many in Brooklyn  and
4ueens as well, he still left every Sunday morning at ten, and returned only
when his route was complete. The walks had long ceased to be something
he enMoyed, although he didn’t   not  enMoy them, either—it  was  simply
something he did.  For  a period,  he had  also hopefully  considered them
something more  than  exercise,  something  perhaps restorative,  like  an
amateur physical therapy session, despite the fact that Andy  didn’t  agree
with him, and indeed disapproved of his walks. “I’m fine with your wanting
to exercise your legs,”  he’d  said. “But  in  that case, you should really  be
swimming, not  dragging yourself  up  and down pavement.”  He wouldn’t
have minded swimming, actually, but there was nowhere private enough for
him to swim, and so he didn’t.
   Willem  had occasionally Moined him on these walks, and now, if his route
took him past the theater, he would time it  so they could meet at the Muice
stand down the block after the matinee performance. They would have their
drinks, and Willem would tell him  how the show had gone and would buy a
salad to eat before the evening performance, and he would continue south,
toward home.
   They  still  lived  at Lispenard Street, although  both of  them could  have
moved into  their  own  apartments: he,  certainly;  Willem,   probably. But
neither of them had ever mentioned leaving to the other, and so neither of
them had. They had, however, annexed the left half of  the living  room  to
make a second bedroom, the group of them building a lumpy Sheetrocked
wall one weekend, so now  when you  walked in,  there was only the  gray
light from  two windows,  not four, to greet you. Willem  had taken the new
bedroom, and he had stayed in their old one.

86
   Aside  from their stage-door visits, it felt  like he never saw Willem  these
days, and for all  Willem  talked about how la]y  he was, it  seemed he was
constantly at work, or trying  to work:  three years ago, on his twenty-ninth
birthday, he had sworn that he was going to quit  Ortolan before he turned
thirty, and two weeks before his thirtieth birthday, the two of them had been
in the apartment, squashed into their newly partitioned living room, Willem
worrying about whether he could actually afford  to leave his Mob, when he
got a call,  the call  he had  been waiting for  for  years. The  play that  had
resulted from that call had been enough of a success, and had gotten Willem
enough attention, to allow  him  to  quit  Ortolan for  good  thirteen months
later: Must one year past his  self-imposed deadline. He  had gone  to see
Willem’s  play—a  family  drama  called The  Malamud  Theorem, about a
literature professor in the early throes of dementia, and his estranged son, a
physicist—five  times, twice with  Malcolm  and JB,  and once with Harold
and Julia, who were in town for the weekend, and each time he managed to
forget that it was his old friend,  his roommate, onstage, and at curtain call,
he  had felt   both  proud   and  wistful,   as if   the  stage’s  very  elevation
announced Willem’s ascendancy to some other realm of life, one not easily
accessible to him.
   His  own  approach to thirty  had triggered no latent  panic, no fluster  of
activity,  no  need to  rearrange the  outlines  of  his  life   to  more  closely
resemble what a thirty-year-old’s life ought to be. The same was not true for
his friends, however, and he had spent the last three years of his twenties
listening to their  eulogies for  the decade, and their detailing of  what they
had  and  hadn’t  done,  and  the  cataloging   of  their   self-loathings  and
promises. Things had changed, then. The  second bedroom, for  example,
was erected partly  out  of  Willem’s  fear  of  being  twenty-eight  and still
sharing a room with his college roommate, and that same anxiety—the fear
that, fairy-tale-like, the turn  into their fourth  decade would transform them
into something else, something out of their control, unless they preempted it
with their  own radical  announcements—inspired Malcolm’s hasty coming
out to his parents, only to see him retreat back in the following  year when
he started dating a woman.
   But  despite his friends’ anxieties, he knew he would love being thirty, for
the very  reason that they  hated it:  because it was  an age of  undeniable
adulthood. (He looked forward to being thirty-five,  when he would be able
to say he had been an adult for more than twice  as long as he had been a

87
child.) When  he was growing  up, thirty  had been a far-off,  unimaginable
age. He clearly remembered being a very  young  boy—this was when  he
lived in the monastery—and asking Brother Michael, who liked  to tell him
of the travels he had taken in his  other life,  when he too might be able to
travel.
   “When  you’re older,” Brother Michael had said.
   “When?”  he’d  asked. “Next year?”  Then, even a month had seemed as
long as forever.
   “Many   years,” Brother  Michael  had  said. “When  you’re  older.  When
you’re thirty.” And  now, in Must a few weeks, he would be.
   On those Sundays, when he was readying to leave for his walk, he would
sometimes stand, barefoot, in the kitchen, everything quiet around him, and
the small, ugly apartment would feel like  a sort of  marvel. Here, time was
his, and space was his, and every door could be shut, every window locked.
He would  stand  before the  tiny  hallway  closet—an alcove,  really,  over
which they had strung a length of burlap—and admire the stores within  it.
At Lispenard  Street, there were no late-night scrambles to the  bodega on
West Broadway for a roll  of toilet  paper, no squinching your nose above a
container of long-spoiled milk  found in the back corner of the refrigerator:
here, there was always extra. Here, everything was replaced when it needed
to be. He made sure of it. In their first year at Lispenard Street he had been
self-conscious about his habits, which he knew belonged to someone much
older and probably  female, and had  hidden his  supplies of  paper towels
under his bed, had stuffed the fliers for  coupons into his briefcase to look
through later, when  Willem  wasn’t  home, as  if  they were  a particularly
exotic form of  pornography. But one day, Willem had discovered his stash
while looking for a stray sock he’d kicked under the bed.
   He  had been embarrassed. “Why?” Willem had asked him. “I   think it’s
great. Thank god you’re looking  out for this  kind of  stuff.”  But it  had still
made him  feel  vulnerable,  yet  another piece of   evidence added to  the
overstuffed file  testifying  to  his  pinched prissiness, his fundamental and
irreparable inability to be the sort of person he tried to make people believe
he was.
   And  yet—as  with  so much  else—he couldn’t  help himself.  To  whom
could he explain that he found as much contentment and safety in unloved
Lispenard Street, in his bomb-shelter stockpilings, as he did in the facts of
his degrees and his Mob? Or that those moments alone in the kitchen were

88
something akin   to  meditative,  the  only   times  he  found  himself   truly
relaxing, his  mind  ceasing to scrabble forward,  planning  in  advance the
thousands of   little   deflections  and  smudgings  of   truth,   of  fact,   that
necessitated his every interaction with the world and its inhabitants? To no
one, he knew, not even to Willem. But he’d had years to learn how to keep
his thoughts  to himself;  unlike  his  friends,  he had  learned not  to share
evidence of  his  oddities  as  a  way  to  distinguish  himself  from   others,
although he was happy and proud that they shared theirs with him.
   Today  he would  walk  to  the Upper  East Side:  up West  Broadway to
Washington Square Park, to University and through Union Square, and up
Broadway to Fifth,  which  he’d stay on until  Eighty-sixth  Street, and then
back down  Madison  to  Twenty-fourth  Street,  where he’d  cross east  to
Lexington before continuing south and east once more to Irving, where he’d
meet Willem outside the theater. It had been months, almost a year, since he
had done this circuit, both because it was very far  and because he already
spent every Saturday on the Upper East Side, in a town house not far from
Malcolm’s parents’, where he tutored  a twelve-year-old boy named Felix.
But it   was mid-March,  spring  break, and Felix  and  his family   were on
vacation in Utah, which meant he ran no risk of seeing them.
   Felix’s  father was  a friend  of friends  of Malcolm’s   parents, and it had
been Malcolm’s  father who  had gotten  him  the Mob. “They’re really  not
paying you enough at the U.S. Attorney’s Office, are they?” Mr. Irvine  had
asked him. “I   don’t  know  why  you  won’t  Must let me introduce  you  to
Gavin.”  Gavin  was  one  of  Mr.  Irvine’s   law  school  friends,  who  now
presided over one of the city’s more powerful firms.
   “Dad,  he doesn’t want to  work  for some corporate firm,”  Malcolm  had
begun, but his father continued talking as if  Malcolm  hadn’t even spoken,
and Malcolm had hunched back into his chair. He had felt bad for Malcolm
then, but  also  annoyed, as  he  had  told  Malcolm   to  discreetly  inquire
whether his  parents knew  anyone  who  might  have  a  kid  who  needed
tutoring, not to actually ask them.
   “Really,  though,” Malcolm’s  father had said to  him, “I  think  it’s  terrific
that  you’re  interested  in  making   your  way  on  your   own.”   (Malcolm
slouched even lower in his  seat.) “But do you  really need the money that
badly? I  didn’t  think the  federal government paid that  miserably, but it’s
been a long time since I was in public service.” He grinned.

89
   He  smiled back. “No,”   he said, “the salary’s fine.”  (It  was. It  wouldn’t
have been to Mr. Irvine, of course, nor to Malcolm, but it was more money
than he had ever dreamed he would have, and every two weeks it arrived, a
relentless accumulation  of  numbers.)  “I’m   Must saving up  for  a  down
payment.” He  saw Malcolm’s  face swivel  toward  him,  and he reminded
himself to tell Willem  the particular lie he had told Malcolm’s father before
Malcolm told Willem  himself.
   “Oh,   well,  good for  you,”  said  Mr.  Irvine.  This  was a  goal he  could
understand. “And as it happens, I know Must the person.”
   That  person was Howard Baker, who  had hired  him after  interviewing
him for  fifteen distracted minutes to tutor his  son in Latin,  math, German,
and piano. (He  wondered why Mr.  Baker  wasn’t hiring  professionals for
each subMect—he could have afforded it—but didn’t ask.) He felt sorry for
Felix, who  was small and unappealing, and who had a habit of scratching
the inside of one narrow nostril, his index finger  tunneling upward until he
remembered himself and quickly retracted it, rubbing  it  on the side of his
Means. Eight months later, it was still unclear to him Must how capable Felix
was. He wasn’t  stupid,  but he suffered  from  a lack  of  passion, as if,  at
twelve, he had  already become resigned to the  fact that  life  would  be a
disappointment, and he a disappointment to the people in it. He was always
waiting, on time and with his assignments completed, every Saturday at one
p.m., and  he  obediently  answered every  question—his answers always
ending in  an anxious, querying  upper register, as if  every  one, even the
simplest (“Salve,  Felix,  quid  agis?”  “Um  …   bene?”), were  a desperate
guess—but he never had any questions of his own, and when he asked Felix
if  there was any subMect in particular he might  want to  try  discussing in
either language, Felix would shrug and mumble, his finger drifting  toward
his nose. He always had the impression, when waving goodbye to Felix at
the end  of  the  afternoon—Felix  listlessly  raising  his  own  hand  before
slouching back into  the recesses of the  entryway—that he never  left  the
house, never went out, never had friends over. Poor Felix:  his  very name
was a taunt.
   The  previous month,  Mr.  Baker had asked to  speak to him  after  their
lessons were over, and he had said goodbye to Felix and followed the maid
into the study. His limp had been very pronounced that day, and he had been
self-conscious, feeling—as he often did—as if he were playing  the role of
an impoverished governess in a Dickensian drama.

90
   He had expected impatience from Mr. Baker, perhaps anger, even though
Felix was doing quantifiably  better in  school, and he was ready to defend
himself if he needed—Mr. Baker paid far more than he had anticipated, and
he had plans  for  the  money he  was earning there—but  he  was instead
nodded toward the chair in front of the desk.
   “What  do you think’s wrong with Felix?”  Mr. Baker had demanded.
   He  hadn’t  been expecting the  question, so he  had to  think  before he
answered. “I   don’t  think   anything’s  wrong  with   him,   sir,”  he’d   said,
carefully. “I   Must think he’s not—” Happy,  he nearly said.  But what  was
happiness but an  extravagance, an  impossible state  to  maintain,  partly
because it was so difficult to articulate? He couldn’t remember being a child
and being able to define happiness: there was only misery, or fear, and the
absence of misery or  fear, and the  latter state was  all he  had needed or
wanted. “I think he’s shy,” he finished.
   Mr.  Baker  grunted (this was  obviously not  the answer he was looking
for).  “But   you  like   him,   right?”  he’d   asked him,   with  such  an  odd,
vulnerable desperation that he experienced a sudden deep sadness, both for
Felix and for  Mr. Baker. Was this what  being a parent was like? Was this
what being  a  child  with   a parent  was  like?  Such unhappinesses, such
disappointments, such expectations that would go unexpressed and unmet!
   “Of   course,” he had said, and Mr. Baker  had sighed and given him his
check, which the maid usually handed to him on his way out.
   The next week, Felix hadn’t wanted to play his assignment. He was more
listless than usual. “Shall we  play something else?” he’d asked. Felix had
shrugged. He thought. “Do you want me to play something for you?” Felix
had shrugged again. But he did anyway, because it was a beautiful  piano
and sometimes, as  he watched  Felix  inch  his  fingers  across its  lovely
smooth keys, he longed to be alone with  the instrument and let his  hands
move over its surface as fast as he could.
   He  played Haydn, Sonata No. 50 in D MaMor, one of his favorite pieces
and so bright and likable that he thought it  might cheer them both up. But
when he was finished, and there was only the quiet boy sitting next to him,
he was ashamed, both of the braggy, emphatic optimism of the Haydn and
of his own burst of self-indulgence.
   “Felix,”   he’d begun, and then stopped. Beside him, Felix waited. “What’s
wrong?”

91
   And  then, to his astonishment, Felix had begun to cry, and he had tried to
comfort him. “Felix,”  he’d said, awkwardly putting  his arm around him. He
pretended he was Willem, who would have known exactly  what to do and
what to  say without  even thinking  about it.  “It’s   going to  be all  right.  I
promise you, it will be.” But Felix  had only cried harder.
   “I  don’t have any friends,” Felix had sobbed.
   “Oh,  Felix,”  he’d  said, and his sympathy, which until  then had been of
the remote, obMective kind, clarified itself. “I’m sorry.” He felt then, keenly,
the loneliness of  Felix’s  life,  of  a Saturday spent sitting  with  a  crippled
nearly thirty-year-old lawyer  who was there only  to earn money, and who
would go  out that night  with  people he loved and who,  even, loved him,
while   Felix   remained  alone,  his   mother—Mr.   Baker’s   third   wife—
perpetually elsewhere, his  father convinced  there was  something wrong
with  him, something that  needed fixing.  Later, on his  walk  home (if  the
weather was  nice, he  refused  Mr.  Baker’s  car  and walked),  he  would
wonder at the unlikely unfairness of it all: Felix, who  was by any definition
a better kid than he had been, and who yet had no friends, and he, who was
a nothing, who did.
   “Felix,   it’ll   happen eventually,” he’d  said, and Felix  had  wailed, “But
when?” with such yearning that he had winced.
   “Soon, soon,”  he had told him, petting his skinny back, “I  promise,” and
Felix had nodded, although later, walking him to the door, his little geckoey
face made even more reptilian from  tears, he’d had the distinct  sensation
that Felix had known  he was lying.  Who could  know if  Felix  would ever
have friends? Friendship, companionship: it so often defied logic, so often
eluded the deserving, so often settled itself on the odd, the bad, the peculiar,
the damaged. He waved goodbye at Felix’s small  back, retreating already
into  the house, and although  he would  never  have said  so to  Felix,  he
somehow fancied that this was why Felix  was so wan all  the time: it  was
because Felix had already figured  this  out, long  ago;  it  was because he
already knew.


   He knew  French and German. He knew the periodic table. He knew—as
much as he didn’t care to—large parts of the Bible almost by  memory. He
knew how to help birth a calf and rewire a lamp and unclog a drain and the
most efficient  way  to harvest a  walnut tree  and which  mushrooms were

92
poisonous and which  were not  and how  to  bale hay  and how  to  test a
watermelon, an apple, a squash, a muskmelon for freshness by thunking it
in the right  spot. (And then he knew things he wished he didn’t,  things he
hoped never to have to use again, things that, when he thought of them or
dreamed of them  at  night, made  him  curl  into  himself  with  hatred and
shame.)
   And  yet it  often seemed he knew nothing of  any real value  or use, not
really. The languages and the math, fine. But daily he was reminded of how
much he didn’t  know. He had never heard of  the sitcoms whose episodes
were constantly referenced. He had never been to a movie. He had never
gone on vacation. He had never been to summer camp. He had never had
pi]]a  or popsicles or macaroni and cheese (and he had certainly never had
—as both Malcolm  and  JB had—foie  gras or  sushi or marrow).  He  had
never owned a  computer or  a phone, he  had rarely  been allowed  to go
online. He had never owned anything, he reali]ed, not really: the books he
had that he was so proud of, the shirts that he repaired again and again, they
were nothing, they were trash, the pride he took in them was more shameful
than not owning anything at all. The classroom was the safest place, and the
only  place  he  felt  fully   confident:  everywhere  else  was an  unceasing
avalanche of  marvels,  each more  baffling   than the  next,  each another
reminder of  his bottomless ignorance.  He found  himself  keeping mental
lists of new  things he had heard and encountered. But he could never ask
anyone for  the  answers. To  do  so would   be an  admission  of  extreme
otherness, which  would  invite   further  questions  and would   leave  him
exposed, and which would  inevitably  lead  to conversations he definitely
was not prepared to have. He felt, often, not so much foreign—for even the
foreign students (even Odval, from a village outside Ulaanbaatar) seemed to
understand  these  references—as  from   another   time   altogether:   his
childhood might  well  have been spent in  the nineteenth century, not  the
twenty-first,  for  all  he had apparently  missed, and for  how  obscure and
merely  decorative what  he  did  know  seemed to  be.  How   was it   that
apparently all  of   his  peers, whether  they  were  born  in  Lagos  or  Los
Angeles, had had more or less the same experience, with the same cultural
landmarks? Surely there was someone who knew as little as he did? And if
not, how was he ever to catch up?
   In  the evenings, when a group of them lay splayed in someone’s room (a
candle burning, a Moint burning as well), the conversation often turned to his

93
classmates’ childhoods, which they  had barely left  but  about which  they
were curiously   nostalgic  and certainly   obsessed. They recounted  what
seemed like every detail of them, though he was never sure if the goal was
to  compare  with   one  another  their   similarities   or  to   boast  of   their
differences, because they seemed to take equal pleasure in both. They spoke
of curfews, and rebellions, and punishments (a few people’s parents had hit
them, and they related these stories with something close to pride, which he
also found curious) and pets and siblings, and what they had worn that had
driven their parents cra]y, and what groups they had hung out with in high
school and to whom they had lost their virginity,  and where, and how, and
cars they had  crashed and bones they  had broken,  and sports they  had
played  and bands  they  had  started.  They  spoke  of  disastrous  family
vacations and strange, colorful relatives and odd next-door  neighbors and
teachers, both beloved and  loathed. He  enMoyed these divulgences more
than he expected—these were real teenagers who’d had the sorts of real,
plain lives he had always  wondered about—and he found it both relaxing
and educational to sit there late at night and listen to them. His silence was
both a necessity and a protection, and had the added benefit of making him
appear more mysterious and more interesting than he knew he was. “What
about you, Jude?” a few  people had asked him, early in  the term, and he
knew enough by then—he was a fast learner—to simply shrug and say, with
a smile, “It’s too boring to get into.” He was astonished but relieved by how
easily they accepted that, and grateful too for their self-absorption. None of
them really  wanted to  listen  to someone else’s story  anyway; they  only
wanted to tell their own.
   And  yet  his silence did  not  go unnoticed by  everyone, and it  was his
silence that   had  inspired  his  nickname.  This   was  the  year  Malcolm
discovered postmodernism, and JB had made such a fuss about how  late
Malcolm  was to  that particular  ideology  that he hadn’t  admitted that  he
hadn’t heard of it either.
   “You  can’t Must decide you’re post-black, Malcolm,” JB  had said. “And
also: you have to have actually been black to begin with  in order to  move
beyond blackness.”
   “You’re  such a dick, JB,” Malcolm had said.
   “Or,”   JB had continued, “you  have to  be so genuinely  uncategori]able
that the normal terms of  identity don’t  even apply to you.”  JB had turned
toward him, then, and he had felt  himself free]e  with a momentary terror.

94
“Like  Judy here: we never see him with anyone, we don’t know what race
he is, we  don’t  know  anything about him.  Post-sexual, post-racial, post-
identity, post-past.” He smiled at him,  presumably to show he was at least
partly Moking. “The post-man. Jude the Postman.”
   “The  Postman,” Malcolm had repeated: he was never above grabbing on
to someone else’s discomfort as a way of deflecting attention from his own.
And  although the  name didn’t  stick—when  Willem   had returned to  the
room and heard it, he had only rolled his eyes in response, which seemed to
remove some of its thrill  for JB—he was reminded that as much as he had
convinced himself he was fitting  in,  as much as he worked to conceal the
spiky odd  parts of  himself,  he  was fooling  no  one. They  knew  he was
strange, and now his foolishness extended to his having convinced himself
that he had convinced them that he wasn’t. Still, he kept attending the late-
night groups, kept Moining his classmates in their rooms: he was pulled to
them, even though he  now knew  he was putting  himself  in  Meopardy by
attending them.
   Sometimes during these sessions (he had begun to think of them this way,
as intensive tutorials in which  he could correct his own  cultural paucities)
he would catch Willem watching him with  an indecipherable expression on
his face, and would wonder how  much Willem  might  have guessed about
him. Sometimes he  had to  stop himself  from  saying  something to  him.
Maybe he was wrong,  he sometimes thought. Maybe it  would  be nice to
confess to someone that most of the time he could barely relate to what was
being discussed, that  he  couldn’t  participate  in   everyone else’s shared
language of childhood  pratfalls and  frustrations. But  then he would  stop
himself, for  admitting  ignorance of  that language would  mean having to
explain the one he did speak.
   Although  if   he were to  tell  anyone, he knew  it  would be  Willem.  He
admired all three of his roommates, but Willem was the one he trusted. At
the home, he had quickly learned there were three types of boys: The first
type might cause the fight (this was JB). The second type wouldn’t Moin in,
but wouldn’t run  to get help, either (this was Malcolm). And  the third type
would actually  try to  help you  out (this was the  rarest type, and this was
obviously Willem).  Maybe it was the same with girls as well, but he hadn’t
spent enough time around girls to know this for sure.
   And  increasingly he was certain Willem knew something. (Knows what?
he’d argue with himself, in saner moments. You’re Must looking for a reason

95
to tell him, and then what will he think of you? Be smart. Say nothing. Have
some self-control.) But this was of course illogical. He knew even before he
got to college that his childhood had been atypical—you had only to read a
few books to come to that  conclusion—but it wasn’t  until recently  that he
had reali]ed how  atypical it  truly  was. Its very  strangeness both insulated
and isolated him: it was near inconceivable that anyone would guess at its
shape and specificities, which meant that if they did, it was because he had
dropped clues like cow turds, great ugly unmissable pleas for attention.
   Still.  The suspicion persisted, sometimes with an uncomfortable intensity,
as if  it  was inevitable  that he should  say something and was being  sent
messages that took more energy to ignore than they would have to obey.
   One night it  was Must the four of them. This was early in their third year,
and was unusual enough for them all  to feel co]y   and a little  sentimental
about the clique they had made. And they were a clique, and to his surprise,
he was part of it: the building they lived  in was called Hood Hall, and they
were known around campus as the Boys in the Hood. All of them had other
friends (JB  and  Willem   had the  most),  but  it  was  known  (or  at  least
assumed, which was Must as good) that  their first   loyalties  were to  one
another. None of them had ever discussed this explicitly, but they all knew
they liked this  assumption, that they liked this code of  friendship that had
been imposed upon them.
   The  food  that  night  had been pi]]a,    ordered by  JB  and paid  for  by
Malcolm. There had been weed, procured by JB, and outside there had been
rain and then hail, the sound of  it cracking  against the glass and the wind
rattling  the   windows  in   their   splintered  wooden  casements the  final
elements in their happiness. The Moint went round and round, and although
he didn’t  take a  puff—he  never did;  he was too  worried  about what  he
might do or  say if  he lost control  over himself—he  could feel  the smoke
filling  his eyes, pressing upon his eyelids like a shaggy warm beast. He had
been careful, as he always was when one of the others paid for food, to eat
as little as possible, and although he was still hungry (there were two slices
left over, and he stared at them, fixedly, before catching himself and turning
away resolutely), he was also deeply content. I could fall asleep, he thought,
and stretched out on the couch, pulling Malcolm’s  blanket over him  as he
did. He was pleasantly exhausted, but then he was always exhausted those
days: it was as if the daily effort it took to appear normal was so great that it
left energy for  little  else. (He was aware, sometimes, of seeming wooden,

96
icy,  of  being  boring,  which  he  recogni]ed  that  here  might  have  been
considered the greater misfortune than being whatever it was he was.) In the
background, as if far away, he could  hear Malcolm and JB  having a fight
about evil.
   “I’m   Must saying, we wouldn’t  be  having this  argument if  you’d   read
Plato.”
   “Yeah, but what Plato?”
   “Have  you read Plato?”
   “I  don’t see—”
   “Have  you?”
   “No,  but—”
   “See!  See, see?!” That would  be Malcolm,  Mumping up and down and
pointing at JB, while Willem  laughed. On weed, Malcolm grew both sillier
and more  pedantic, and  the  three of   them liked   getting  into  silly   and
pedantic philosophical arguments with him, the contents of which Malcolm
could never recall in the morning.
   Then there was an interlude of Willem and JB talking about something—
he was too sleepy to  really listen,  Must awake enough to distinguish their
voices—and then JB’s voice, ringing through his fug: “Jude!”
   “What?”  he answered, his eyes still closed.
   “I  want to ask you a question.”
   He could  instantly feel something inside him come alert. When high, JB
had the uncanny ability  to  ask questions or  make observations that both
devastated and discomfited. He didn’t think there was any malice behind it,
but it  made you wonder what went on  in JB’s subconscious. Was this the
real JB, the one who had asked their hallmate, Tricia Park, what it was like
growing up as the ugly twin  (poor Tricia  had gotten up and run out of  the
room), or was it  the one who, after JB had witnessed him in  the grip of  a
terrible episode, one in  which he could  feel himself  falling  in  and out of
consciousness, the sensation as sickening as tumbling off a roller coaster in
mid-incline, had snuck out that night with his stoner boyfriend and returned
Must before daybreak with a bundle of bud-furred magnolia branches, sawn
off illegally  from the quadrangle’s trees?
   “What?”  he asked again, warily.
   “Well,”   said JB, pausing and taking another inhalation, “we’ve all known
each other a while now—”
   “We have?” Willem  asked in fake surprise.

97
   “Shut  up,  Willem,”   JB continued.  “And  all  of  us  want to  know  why
you’ve never told us what happened to your legs.”
   “Oh,  JB, we do not—” Willem  began, but Malcolm, who had the habit of
vociferously taking JB’s side when stoned, interrupted him: “It  really hurts
our feelings, Jude. Do you not trust us?”
   “Jesus,  Malcolm,”   Willem   said, and  then,  mimicking   Malcolm  in   a
shrieky falsetto, “  ‘It  really  hurts our feelings.’  You sound like  a girl.  It’s
Jude’s business.”
   And  this was worse, somehow, having to have Willem,  always Willem,
defend him.  Against Malcolm   and JB!  At  that  moment, he hated all  of
them, but  of course he  was in  no  position to  hate them. They  were his
friends, his first  friends, and he understood that friendship was a series of
exchanges: of   affections,   of   time,  sometimes  of   money,   always  of
information. And  he had no money. He had nothing  to give them, he had
nothing to offer. He couldn’t loan Willem a sweater, the way Willem let him
borrow his, or  repay Malcolm  the hundred dollars he’d pressed upon him
once, or even help JB on move-out day, as JB helped him.
   “Well,”   he began, and was  aware of all  of  their  perked silences, even
Willem’s. “It’s  not very  interesting.” He kept his eyes closed, both because
it made it easier to tell  the story when he didn’t  have to look at them, and
also because he simply didn’t think he could stand it at the moment. “It was
a car inMury. I was fifteen. It was the year before I came here.”
   “Oh,”   said JB. There was a pause; he could feel something in the room
deflate, could feel how his revelation had shifted the others back into a sort
of somber sobriety. “I’m sorry, bro. That sucks.”
   “You  could walk  before?” asked Malcolm, as if  he could not walk  now.
And this made him sad and embarrassed: what he considered walking, they
apparently did not.
   “Yes,”  he said, and then, because it was true, even if not the way they’d
interpret it, he added, “I used to run cross-country.”
   “Oh,  wow,” said Malcolm. JB made a sympathetic grunting noise.
   Only  Willem,  he noticed, said nothing. But he didn’t  dare open his eyes
to look at his expression.
   Eventually  the word got out, as he knew it would. (Perhaps people really
did wonder about his legs. Tricia  Park later came up to  him and told  him
she’d always assumed he had cerebral palsy. What was he supposed to say

98
to that?) Somehow, though, over the tellings and retellings, the explanation
was changed to a car accident, and then to a drunken driving accident.
   “The  easiest explanations are often the right ones,”  his math professor,
Dr. Li,  always said, and maybe the same principle applied here. Except he
knew it didn’t. Math was one thing. Nothing else was that reductive.
   But  the odd thing  was this: by  his story morphing  into one about a car
accident, he was being given an opportunity for  reinvention; all  he had to
do was claim  it.  But he  never could. He  could never call  it  an accident,
because it wasn’t. And so was it  pride or  stupidity  to not take the  escape
route he’d been offered? He didn’t know.
   And  then he  noticed something else. He was  in the  middle of  another
episode—a highly humiliating one, it had taken place Must as he was coming
off of his shift at the library, and Willem had Must happened to be there a few
minutes early, about to start his own shift—when  he heard the librarian, a
kind, well-read  woman whom  he liked,  ask why he  had these. They had
moved him, Mrs. Eakeley and Willem,  to the break room in  the back, and
he could smell  the  burned-sugar tang of old  coffee,  a scent he despised
anyway, so sharp and assaultive that he almost vomited.
   “A  car inMury,” he heard Willem’s reply, as from across a great black lake.
   But  it wasn’t until that night that he registered what Willem had said, and
the word he had used: inMury, not accident. Was it deliberate, he wondered?
What did  Willem  know?  He  was so addled that  he might  have actually
asked him,   had  Willem   been around,  but  he   wasn’t—he  was  at  his
girlfriend’s.
   No  one was there, he reali]ed.  The room  was his. He  felt  the creature
inside him—which he pictured as slight and raggedy and lemurlike, quick-
reflexed  and  ready to   sprint,  its  dark   wet  eyes forever   scanning the
landscape for future dangers—relax and sag to the ground. It was at these
moments that he found college most enMoyable: he was in a warm room, and
the next day he would have three meals and eat as much as he wanted, and
in between he would  go to  classes, and no one would try  to  hurt him  or
make him do anything  he didn’t  want to do.  Somewhere nearby were his
roommates—his  friends—and  he   had   survived  another   day  without
divulging any of  his secrets, and placed another day between the person he
once  was   and   the   person   he   was   now.   It   seemed,  always,   an
accomplishment worthy  of   sleep, and so  he  did,  closing  his  eyes and
readying himself for another day in the world.

99
   It  had been Ana, his first and only social worker, and the first person who
had never betrayed him, who had talked to  him seriously about college—
the college he ended up attending—and who was convinced that he would
get in. She hadn’t been the first person to suggest this, but she had been the
most insistent.
   “I  don’t  see why not,” she said. It was a favorite phrase of hers. The two
of them  were sitting  on  Ana’s  porch, in  Ana’s  backyard, eating  banana
bread that Ana’s girlfriend had made. Ana didn’t care for nature (too buggy,
too squirmy, she always said), but when he made the suggestion that they
go outdoors—tentatively, because at the time he was still unsure where the
boundaries of her tolerance for  him  lay—she’d  slapped the edges of her
armchair and heaved herself up. “I  don’t see why not.  Leslie!”  she called
into the  kitchen, where  Leslie was  making lemonade. “You  can  bring it
outside!”
   Hers was the first face he saw when he had at last opened his eyes in the
hospital. For a long moment, he couldn’t remember where he was, or who
he was, or what had happened, and then, suddenly, her face was above his,
looking at him. “Well, well,”  she said. “He awakes.”
   She  was  always  there,  it   seemed, no   matter  what  time   he  woke.
Sometimes it was day, and he heard the sounds of the hospital—the mouse
squeak of the nurses’ shoes, and the clatter of a cart, and the drone of the
intercom announcements—in the ha]y, half-formed moments he had before
shifting   into  full    consciousness. But   sometimes it    was  night,   when
everything was  silent around  him,  and it  took  him  longer  to figure  out
where he was, and  why  he was there, although  it  came back to  him,  it
always did,  and unlike  some reali]ations, it  never  grew easier or  fu]]ier
with each remembrance. And sometimes it was  neither day nor night  but
somewhere in between, and there would  be something strange and dusty
about the light that made him imagine for  a moment that there might after
all be such a thing as heaven, and that he might after all have made it there.
And then  he would  hear Ana’s  voice, and  remember again why  he was
there, and want to close his eyes all over again.
   They  talked of nothing in  those moments. She would ask him if he was
hungry, and no matter his answer, she would have a sandwich for  him  to
eat. She would ask him if he was in pain, and if he was, how intense it was.
It was in  her presence that he’d had the first of his  episodes, and the pain

100
had been so awful—unbearable, almost, as if someone had reached in and
grabbed his spine like a snake and was trying to loose it from its bundles of
nerves by shaking it—that later, when the surgeon told  him that an inMury
like his was an “insult”  to the body, and one the body would never recover
from completely, he had understood what the word meant and reali]ed how
correct and well-chosen it was.
   “You  mean he’s going to have these all his life?” Ana had asked, and he
had been grateful for her outrage, especially because he was too tired and
frightened to summon forth any of his own.
   “I   wish I  could say no,”  said the surgeon. And then, to  him, “But  they
may not  be this  severe in the  future.  You’re young  now. The  spine has
wonderful reparative qualities.”
   “Jude,”  she’d said  to him  when the next  one came, two days after  the
first. He could hear her voice, but  as if from  far away, and then, suddenly,
awfully close, filling  his mind like explosions. “Hold  on to my hand,” she’d
said, and again, her voice swelled and receded, but she sei]ed his hand and
he held it so tightly he could feel her index finger  slide oddly over her ring
finger,  could   almost  feel   every   small  bone   in   her  palm   reposition
themselves in  his  grip,  which  had  the effect  of  making  her  seem like
something delicate and intricate, although there was nothing delicate about
her in either appearance or manner. “Count,” she commanded him the third
time it  happened, and he did, counting up  to a  hundred again and again,
parsing the pain into negotiable increments. In those days, before he learned
it was better to be still, he would flop  on his bed like a fish on a boat deck,
his free hand scrabbling for a halyard line to cling to for safety, the hospital
mattress unyielding and  uncaring, searching for  a  position in  which  the
discomfort might  lessen. He tried  to be  quiet, but  he could hear himself
making strange animal noises, so that at times a forest appeared beneath his
eyelids, populated with  screech owls  and deer and  bears, and he would
imagine he was  one of  them, and  that the  sounds he was making  were
normal, part of the woods’ unceasing soundtrack.
   When it  had ended, she would give him some water, a straw in the glass
so he wouldn’t  have to  raise his  head. Beneath him, the  floor  tilted  and
bucked, and he was often  sick.  He had never  been in the  ocean, but he
imagined this  was what it  might  feel  like,  imagined the  swells of  water
forcing the linoleum floor into quavering hillocks. “Good  boy,” she’d say as
he drank. “Have a little more.”

101
   “It’ll    get better,” she’d say, and he’d nod, because he couldn’t begin to
imagine his  life  if  it   didn’t  get better. His  days now  were  hours: hours
without pain and hours with  it, and the unpredictability  of this  schedule—
and his body, although it was his in name only, for he could control nothing
of it—exhausted him, and he slept and slept, the days slipping away  from
him uninhabited.
   Later, it would  be easier to simply tell people that it was his legs that hurt
him, but that wasn’t really true: it was his back. Sometimes he could predict
what would  trigger  the spasming, that  pain that  would  extend down  his
spine into one leg or  the other, like  a wooden stake set aflame and thrust
into him:   a certain movement,  lifting  something  too heavy  or  too high,
simple tiredness.  But  sometimes he  couldn’t.  And  sometimes  the pain
would be  preceded by an interlude  of numbness, or a  twinging  that was
almost pleasurable, it was so  light  and ]ingy,  Must a sensation of electric
prickles moving up and down his spine, and he would know to lie down and
wait for it  to finish its cycle, a penance he could never escape or avoid. But
sometimes it barged in, and those were the  worst: he grew  fearful that  it
would  arrive  at  some  terribly   inopportune  time,  and  before  each big
meeting, each big interview, each court appearance, he would beg his own
back to still itself, to carry him through the next few hours without incident.
But all of  this was in the future, and each lesson he learned he did so over
hours and hours of these episodes, stretched out over days and months and
years.
   As the weeks passed, she brought him books, and told him to write down
titles he was interested in and she would go to the library and get them—but
he was too shy to do so. He knew she was his social worker, and that she
had been assigned to him, but it wasn’t until more than a month had passed,
and the doctors had begun to talk about his casts being removed in a matter
of weeks, that she first asked him about what had happened.
   “I   don’t  remember,” he said.  It  was his default  answer for  everything
back then. It  was a lie  as well;  in  uninvited moments, he’d  see the car’s
headlights, twinned glares of  white,  rushing toward  him,  and recall how
he’d shut his  eyes and Merked his head to the side, as if that  might have
prevented the inevitable.
   She  waited.  “It’s   okay,  Jude,”  she  said.  “We  basically   know  what
happened. But I need you to tell me at some point, so we can talk about it.”
She had interviewed him  earlier, did he remember? There had apparently

102
been a moment soon after he’d  come out of  the first  surgery that he had
woken, lucid,  and  answered all her  questions, not  only  about what  had
happened that night but  in  the  years before it  as well—but   he honestly
didn’t remember this at all, and he fretted about what, exactly, he had said,
and what Ana’s expression had been when he’d told her.
   How  much had he told her? he asked at one point.
   “Enough,”  she said, “to  convince  me that there’s a hell  and those men
need to be in it.” She didn’t sound angry, but her words were, and he closed
his eyes, impressed and a little scared that the things that had happened to
him—to him!—could  inspire such passion, such vitriol.
   She  oversaw  his  transfer  into   his  new   home, his   final   home:  the
Douglasses’. They had two other fosters, both girls, both young—Rosie was
eight and had Down syndrome, Agnes was nine and had spina bifida. The
house was a ma]e of  ramps, unlovely  but sturdy and smooth, and  unlike
Agnes, he could wheel himself around without asking for assistance.
   The  Douglasses were evangelical Lutherans, but they didn’t  make him
attend church with  them. “They’re  good people,”  Ana said.  “They  won’t
bother you, and you’ll be safe here. You think you can manage grace at the
table for a little  privacy  and guaranteed security?” She looked at him and
smiled. He nodded. “Besides,” she continued, “you  can always call  me if
you want to talk sin.”
   And  indeed, he was in Ana’s care more than in the Douglasses’. He slept
in their house, and ate there, and when he was first learning how to move on
his crutches, it was Mr. Douglass who sat on a chair outside the bathroom,
ready to enter if he slipped and fell getting into or out of the bathtub (he still
wasn’t able to balance well enough to take a shower, even with a walker).
But it was Ana who took him to most of his doctor’s appointments, and Ana
who waited at one end of her backyard, a cigarette in her mouth, as he took
his first slow steps toward her, and Ana who finally  got him to write  down
what had happened with Dr. Traylor, and kept him from having to testify in
court. He had said he could do it, but she had told him he wasn’t ready yet,
and that they had plenty of evidence to put Dr. Traylor away for years even
without his testimony, and hearing that, he was able to admit his own relief:
relief at  not having  to  say aloud words  he didn’t  know  how to  say, and
mostly, relief  that he wouldn’t  have to see Dr. Traylor  again. When he at
last gave her the statement—which he’d written as plainly as possible, and
had imagined while  writing  it  that he was in  fact  writing  about someone

103
else, someone he had known once but had never had to talk to again—she
read it through once, impassive, before nodding at  him. “Good,”  she said
briskly, and refolded it and placed it back in  its envelope. “Good Mob,” she
added, and then, suddenly, she began to cry, almost ferociously, unable to
stop herself. She was saying something to him, but she was weeping so hard
he couldn’t understand her, and she had finally left, though she had called
him later that night to apologi]e.
   “I’m   sorry, Jude,” she said. “That was really unprofessional of me. I Must
read what you wrote and I Must—” She was silent for a period, and then took
a breath. “It won’t happen again.”
   It  was also Ana who, after the doctors determined he wouldn’t be strong
enough to go to school, found him  a tutor  so he could finish  high school,
and it was she who made him discuss college. “You’re really smart, did you
know that?”  she asked him. “You  could  go  anywhere, really. I  talked to
some of your  teachers in Montana, and they  think  so as well.  Have you
thought about it? You have? Where would you want to go?” And  when he
told her, preparing  himself for  her  to laugh,  she instead only nodded: “I
don’t see why not.”
   “But,”  he began, “do you think they’d take someone like me?”
   Once  again, she didn’t   laugh. “It’s   true, you  haven’t  had the  most—
traditional—of educations”—she smiled at him—“but your tests are terrific,
and although you probably don’t  think so, I  promise you know  more than
most, if not  all, kids  your age.” She sighed. “You  may have something to
thank Brother Luke for after all.”  She studied his face. “So I don’t see why
not.”
   She helped him with  everything: she wrote one of his recommendations,
she let him use her computer to type up his essay (he didn’t write about the
past year; he wrote about Montana, and how he’d learned there to forage for
mustard shoots and mushrooms), she even paid for his application fee.
   When he was accepted—with a full  scholarship, as Ana had predicted—
he told her it was all because of her.
   “Bullshit,”   she said. She was so sick  by  that point that  she could only
whisper it. “You did  it yourself.”  Later he would scan through the previous
months and see, as  if  spotlit,  the  signs of  her  illness,  and how,  in  his
stupidity and self-absorption, he had missed one after the next: her weight
loss, her yellowing  eyes, her fatigue, all  of  which  he had attributed to—
what? “You  shouldn’t  smoke,” he’d  said to  her  Must two months earlier,

104
confident enough around her now to start issuing orders; the first adult he’d
done so to. “You’re  right,”  she’d said, and squinted her eyes at him while
inhaling deeply, grinning at him when he sighed at her.
   Even then, she didn’t give  up. “Jude, we should talk about it,”  she’d say
every few days, and when he shook his head, she’d be silent. “Tomorrow,
then,” she’d say. “Do you promise me? Tomorrow we’ll talk about it.”
   “I  don’t  see why I have to talk  about it at all,”  he muttered at her once.
He knew she had read his records from Montana; he knew she knew what
he was.
   She was quiet. “One thing I’ve learned,” she said, “you have to talk about
these things while they’re fresh. Or you’ll never talk about them. I’m going
to teach you how to  talk about them, because it’s going to  get harder and
harder the longer you wait, and it’s  going to  fester inside you, and you’re
always going  to think  you’re  to  blame. You’ll   be wrong,  of  course, but
you’ll  always think it.”  He didn’t know how to  respond to that, but the next
day, when she brought it up again, he shook his head and turned away from
her, even though she called after him. “Jude,” she said, once, “I’ve let you
go on for too long without addressing this. This is my fault.”
   “Do   it  for  me,  Jude,” she said  at  another point.  But  he couldn’t;   he
couldn’t  find  the language to  talk  about it,  not even  to her. Besides, he
didn’t want to relive those years. He wanted to forget them, to pretend they
belonged to someone else.
   By  June she was so weak she couldn’t sit. Fourteen months after they’d
met, she was the one in bed, and he was the one next to her. Leslie worked
the day shift at the hospital, and so often, it was Must the two of them in the
house. “Listen,” she said. Her throat was dry from one of  her medications,
and she winced  as she spoke. He reached for  the  Mug of water, but she
waved her hand, impatiently. “Leslie’s  going to  take you shopping before
you leave; I made a list for her of things you’ll  need.” He started to protest,
but she stopped him. “Don’t argue, Jude. I don’t have the energy.”
   She swallowed.  He waited.  “You’re  going  to be great  at college,”  she
said. She shut her eyes. “The other kids are going to ask you about how you
grew up, have you thought about that?”
   “Sort  of,” he said. It was all he thought about.
   “Mmph,”    she grunted. She  didn’t  believe  him  either. “What   are you
going to tell them?” And then she opened her eyes and looked at him.
   “I  don’t know,”  he admitted.

105
   “Ah,   yes,”  she  said. They   were quiet.  “Jude,”   she began, and  then
stopped. “You’ll   find  your  own  way  to  discuss what  happened to you.
You’ll  have to, if  you ever want  to be close to anyone. But your  life—no
matter what you think, you  have nothing to be ashamed of, and none of it
has been your fault. Will you remember that?”
   It  was the closest they had ever gotten to discussing not only the previous
year but the years that preceded it, too. “Yes,” he told her.
   She glared at him. “Promise me.”
   “I  promise.”
   But even then, he couldn’t believe her.
   She sighed. “I  should’ve made you talk  more,” she said. It  was the last
thing she ever said to him. Two weeks later—July third—she was dead. Her
service was the week after that. By this point he had a summer Mob at a local
bakery, where he sat in the back room spackling cakes with fondant, and in
the  days following    the  funeral  he  sat  until   night  at  his   workstation,
plastering cake after cake with carnation-pink icing,  trying  not to think  of
her.
   At  the  end of  July, the Douglasses moved: Mr.  Douglass had gotten a
new Mob in San Jose, and they were taking Agnes with  them;  Rosie was
being reassigned to a different  family.  He  had liked  the Douglasses, but
when they  told him  to  stay  in touch,  he knew  he wouldn’t—he   was so
desperate to move away  from  the life   he was  in,  the life   he’d had;  he
wanted to be someone whom no one knew and who knew no one.
   He  was put  into  emergency shelter. That was what the  state called it:
emergency shelter. He’d argued that he was old  enough to be left  on his
own (he imagined, also illogically, that he would sleep in the back room of
the bakery), and that in less than two months he’d be gone anyway, out of
the system  entirely,  but  no   one agreed  with   him.  The  shelter  was  a
dormitory,  a  sagging gray  honeycomb  populated by  other  kids  who—
because of what they had done or what had been done to them or  simply
how old they were—the state couldn’t easily place.
   When  it was time  for him  to leave, they  gave him some money to buy
supplies for school. They  were, he recogni]ed,  vaguely proud of  him;  he
might not have been in the system for long, but he was going to college, and
to a superior college at that—he would  forever after be claimed as one of
their successes. Leslie drove him to the Army Navy Store. He wondered, as
he chose things he thought he might need—two sweaters, three long-sleeve

106
shirts, pants, a gray blanket that resembled the clotty stuffing that vomited
forth from  the  sofa in  the shelter’s  lobby—if  he  was getting the  correct
things, the  things that  might  have been on  Ana’s  list.  He couldn’t   stop
himself from thinking  that there was something else on that list, something
essential that Ana thought he needed that he would  now  never know. At
nights, he craved that list,  sometimes more than he  craved her; he could
picture it  in his  mind, the funny  up-and-down capitali]ations  she inserted
into a single word, the mechanical pencil she always used, the yellow legal
pads, left over from  her years as a lawyer, on which  she made her notes.
Sometimes the letters solidified into words, and in the dream life he’d  feel
triumphant; ah,  he’d think,  of  course!  Of  course that’s what  I  need! Of
course Ana would know!  But  in  the mornings, he could  never remember
what those things were. In  those moments he wished, perversely, that he
had never met her, that it was surely worse to  have had her for so brief  a
period than to never have had her at all.
   They  gave him a bus ticket north;  Leslie came to the station to see him
off. He  had packed his things in a double-layered black  garbage bag, and
then inside the backpack he’d bought at the Army  Navy Store: everything
he owned in one neat package. On the bus he stared out the window  and
thought of nothing. He hoped his back wouldn’t betray him on the ride, and
it didn’t.
   He  had been the first to arrive  in their  room, and when the second boy
came in—it had been Malcolm—with  his  parents and suitcases and books
and speakers and television and phones and computers and refrigerator and
flotillas of  digital gadgetry, he had felt the first sensations of sickening fear,
and then anger, directed irrationally at Ana: How could she let him believe
he might be equipped to do this? Who could he say he was? Why had she
never told  him  exactly  how  poor, how  ugly,  what  a scrap of  bloodied,
muddied cloth, his life  really  was? Why had she let him believe  he might
belong here?
   As  the months passed, this feeling dampened, but it never disappeared; it
lived on him like  a thin scum of mold. But as that knowledge became more
acceptable, another piece became less so: he began to reali]e that she was
the first and last person to whom he would never have to explain anything.
She knew that he wore his life on his skin, that his biography was written in
his flesh and on his bones. She would never ask him why he wouldn’t wear
short sleeves, even in the steamiest of weather, or why he didn’t like to be

107
touched, or, most important,  what had happened to his legs  or back:  she
knew already. Around  her he  had felt  none of  the  constant anxiety, nor
watchfulness, that he seemed condemned to feel around everyone else; the
vigilance was exhausting, but it eventually  became simply a part of life,  a
habit like  good posture. Once, she had reached out to  (he later  reali]ed)
embrace him, but he had reflexively brought his hands up over his head to
protect himself, and  although he had been embarrassed, she hadn’t made
him feel silly  or overreactive. “I’m  an idiot, Jude,” she’d said instead. “I’m
sorry. No more sudden movements, I promise.”
   But  now she was gone, and no one knew him. His  records were sealed.
His first  Christmas, Leslie had sent him a  card, addressed to him through
the student affairs office, and he had kept it  for days, his last link  to  Ana,
before finally  throwing it  away. He never wrote back, and he never heard
from Leslie  again. It was a new life.  He was determined not to  ruin it  for
himself.
   Still,  sometimes, he thought back to their  final conversations, mouthing
them  aloud.   This   was   at   night,   when   his   roommates—in  various
configurations, depending on who was in the room at the time—slept above
and next to him. “Don’t  let this silence become a habit,” she’d warned him
shortly before she died. And: “It’s all right to be angry, Jude; you don’t have
to hide it.”  She had been wrong about him,  he always thought; he wasn’t
what she thought he was. “You’re  destined for greatness, kid,” she’d  said
once, and he wanted to believe her, even though he couldn’t. But she was
right about one thing:  it did  get harder and harder. He did blame himself.
And although he tried every day to remember the promise he’d made to her,
every day it became more and more remote, until it was Must a memory, and
so was she, a beloved character from a book he’d read long ago.


   “The  world has two kinds of people,” Judge Sullivan used to say. “Those
who are inclined  to  believe, and those who aren’t.  In  my courtroom,  we
value belief. Belief in all things.”
   He  made this  proclamation often,  and after doing  so, he would  groan
himself to his feet—he was very fat—and toddle out of the room. This was
usually at the  end of  the day—Sullivan’s  day, at least—when he  left his
chambers and came over to speak to his law clerks, sitting on the edge of
one  of   their   desks  and  delivering   often   opaque  lectures  that  were

108
interspersed with frequent  pauses, as if  his clerks  were not  lawyers  but
scriveners, and should be writing down his words. But no one did, not even
Kerrigan, who was a true believer and the most conservative of the three of
them.
   After   the Mudge left, he would  grin  across the room  at  Thomas, who
would  raise his  eyes upward  in  a gesture of   helplessness and apology.
Thomas was a conservative, too, but “a thinking conservative,” he’d remind
him, “and  the  fact  that I  even  have to  make that  distinction  is  fucking
depressing.”
   He  and Thomas had started clerking  for  the Mudge the same year, and
when he had been approached by the Mudge’s informal search committee—
really, his Business Associations professor, with whom  the Mudge was old
friends—the spring of  his second year of  law  school, it  had been Harold
who had encouraged him to apply. Sullivan  was known among his fellow
circuit  court  Mudges for always hiring   one  clerk  whose political   views
diverged from  his own,  the more  wildly,  the better. (His  last  liberal  law
clerk had gone  on to  work  for a  Hawaiian rights  sovereignty group  that
advocated for the islands’ secession from the United States, a career move
that had sent the Mudge into a fit of apoplectic self-satisfaction.)
   “Sullivan  hates me,” Harold had told him  then, sounding pleased. “He’ll
hire you Must to spite me.” He smiled, savoring the thought. “And because
you’re the most brilliant student I’ve ever had,” he added.
   The compliment  made him look at the ground: Harold’s praise tended to
be conveyed to him by others, and was rarely handed to him directly. “I’m
not sure I’m   liberal  enough for  him,”   he’d  replied. Certainly  he  wasn’t
liberal enough for Harold;  it was one of the things—his  opinions; the way
he read the law; how he applied it to life—that they argued about.
   Harold snorted. “Trust me,” he said. “You are.”
   But  when he went  to Washington for  his  interview the  following  year,
Sullivan had talked  about the law—and  political  philosophy—with  much
less vigor and specificity  than he  had anticipated. “I  hear that you  sing,”
Sullivan  said instead  after an  hour  of  conversation about  what  he had
studied (the Mudge had attended the same law school), and his position as
the articles editor on the  law review  (the same position the Mudge himself
had held), and his thoughts on recent cases.
   “I   do,”  he replied, wondering  how the Mudge had learned that. Singing
was his comfort, but he rarely did it in front  of others. Had he been singing

109
in Harold’s  office  and been overheard? Or sometimes he sang in the law
library, when he was re-shelving books late at night  and the space was as
quiet and still as a church—had someone overheard him there?
   “Sing  me something,” said the Mudge.
   “What  would  you like  to hear, sir?” he asked. Normally, he would have
been much more nervous, but he had heard that the Mudge would make him
do a performance of  some sort (legend had it  that he’d  made a previous
applicant Muggle), and Sullivan was a known opera lover.
   The Mudge put his fat fingers to his fat lips and thought. “Hmm,” he said.
“Sing me something that tells me something about you.”
   He  thought, and then sang. He was  surprised to hear what he  chose—
Mahler’s “Ich  bin der Welt abhanden gekommen”—both because he didn’t
even really like Mahler that much and because the lied was a difficult one to
perform, slow and mournful and subtle and not meant for a tenor. And yet
he liked the poem itself, which his voice teacher in college had dismissed as
“second-rate romanticism,”   but  which  he  had  always  thought  suffered
unfairly from  a poor translation. The standard interpretation of the first line
was “I  am lost to the world,”   but he read it as “I  have become lost to the
world,”  which,  he believed, was less self-pitying,  less melodramatic, and
more resigned, more confused. I have become lost to the world  In which I
otherwise wasted so much time. The  lied  was about the life  of  an artist,
which  he  was definitely   not.  But   he understood,  primally  almost,  the
concept of losing, of loosing oneself from the world, of  disappearing into a
different place, one of retreat and safety, of the twinned yearnings of escape
and discovery. It means nothing to me  Whether the world believes me dead
 I can hardly say anything to refute it  For truly, I am no longer a part of
the world.
   When he finished, he opened his eyes to the Mudge clapping and laughing.
“Bravo,”  he said. “Bravo! But I think  you might be in the wrong profession
altogether, you know.” He laughed again. “Where’d  you learn to sing  like
that?”
   “The  brothers, sir,” he’d replied.
   “Ah,   a Catholic boy?”  asked the Mudge, sitting up fatly in his chair and
looking ready to be pleased.
   “I  was raised Catholic,” he began.
   “But  you’re not now?” the Mudge asked, frowning.

110
   “No,”   he said. He had worked for  years to keep the apology out  of his
voice when he said this.
   Sullivan  made a noncommittal grunting noise. “Well, whatever they gave
you should have offered at least some sort of  protection against whatever
Harold Stein’s been filling  your head with for  the past few years,” he said.
He looked at his résumé. “You’re his research assistant?”
   “Yes,”  he said. “For more than two years.”
   “A   good mind,  wasted,” Sullivan  declared (it  was  unclear whether he
meant his or Harold’s). “Thanks  for coming down,  we’ll  be in touch. And
thanks for the lied; you have one of the most beautiful tenors I’ve heard in a
long time. Are  you sure you’re  in the right  field?”  At  this, he smiled,  the
last time he would ever see Sullivan smile with such pleasure and sincerity.
   Back  in  Cambridge,  he  told  Harold  about his  meeting  (“You  sing?”
Harold asked him, as if he’d Must told him he flew), but that he was certain
he wouldn’t get the clerkship. A week later, Sullivan called: the Mob was his.
He was surprised, but Harold wasn’t. “I told you so,” he said.
   The next day, he went to Harold’s office as usual, but Harold had his coat
on. “Normal  work is  suspended today,” he announced. “I need you to run
some errands with me.” This was unusual, but Harold was unusual. At the
curb, he held out the keys: “Do you want to drive?”
   “Sure,”   he said, and  went to  the driver’s  side.  This was  the car  he’d
learned to drive in, Must a year ago, while Harold sat next to him, far more
patient outside the classroom than he was in it. “Good,” he’d said. “Let  go
of the clutch a little more–good. Good, Jude, good.”
   Harold  had to pick up some shirts he’d had altered, and they drove to the
small, expensive men’s store on the edge of the square where Willem had
worked his senior year. “Come  in  with  me,” Harold  instructed him,  “I’m
going to need some help carrying these out.”
   “My   god, Harold, how many shirts did  you buy?”  he asked. Harold had
an unvarying wardrobe of  blue  shirts, white  shirts, brown corduroys  (for
winter), linen pants (for spring and summer), and sweaters in various shades
of greens and blues.
   “4uiet,   you,” said Harold.
   Inside, Harold  went off to find  a salesperson, and he waited, running his
fingers over  the ties  in  their display  cases, rolled and  shiny as  pastries.
Malcolm had given him two of  his old cotton suits, which he’d had tailored
and had worn throughout both of  his summer internships, but he’d had to

111
borrow his roommate’s suit for  the Sullivan  interview, and he had tried to
move carefully in it the entire time it was his, aware of its largeness and the
fineness of its wool.
   Then “That’s him,”  he heard Harold say, and when he turned, Harold was
standing with  a small man  who had a  measuring tape draped around his
neck like a snake. “He’ll need two suits—a dark gray and a navy—and let’s
get him a do]en shirts, a few  sweaters, some ties, socks, shoes: he doesn’t
have anything.” To him he nodded and said, “This is Marco. I’ll  be back in
a couple of hours or so.”
   “Wait,”  he said. “Harold. What are you doing?”
   “Jude,”  said Harold, “you  need something to wear. I’m hardly an expert
on this front,  but you can’t  show up to Sullivan’s  chambers wearing what
you’re wearing.”
   He  was  embarrassed: by his  clothes, by  his  inadequacy, by Harold’s
generosity. “I know,” he said. “But I can’t accept this, Harold.”
   He would’ve  continued, but Harold stepped between him and Marco and
turned him away. “Jude,”  he said,  “accept this. You’ve  earned it.  What’s
more, you need it.  I’m  not going  to have you  humiliating  me in  front  of
Sullivan. Besides, I’ve  already paid for  it, and I’m   not getting my  money
back. Right, Marco?” he called behind him.
   “Right,”  said Marco, immediately.
   “Oh,  leave it, Jude,” Harold said, when he saw him about to speak. “I’ve
got to go.” And he marched out without looking back.
   And   so  he  found   himself  standing  before   the  triple-leafed  mirror,
watching the reflection of Marco busying about his ankles, but when Marco
reached up his leg to measure the inseam, he flinched, reflexively.  “Easy,
easy,” Marco said, as if he were a nervous horse, and patted his thigh, also
as if he were a  horse, and when he gave another involuntary half  kick as
Marco did the other leg, “Hey! I have pins in my mouth, you know.”
   “I’m   sorry,” he said, and held himself still.
   When Marco was finished, he looked at himself in his new suit: here was
such anonymity, such  protection. Even  if  someone were  to accidentally
gra]e his back, he was wearing enough layers so that they’d never be able
to feel the ridges of scars beneath. Everything was covered, everything was
hidden. If  he was standing still,  he could  be anyone, someone blank and
invisible.

112
   “I  think  maybe half an inch more,” Marco said, pinching the back of the
Macket in around the waist. He swatted some threads off his sleeve. “Now all
you need’s a good haircut.”
   He  found  Harold waiting  for  him  in  the tie  area, reading a maga]ine.
“Are you done?” he asked, as if the entire trip had been his idea and Harold
had been the one indulging his whimsy.
   Over their  early dinner, he tried to thank Harold again, but every time he
tried, Harold  stopped him  with  increasing impatience. “Has  anyone ever
told you  that sometimes you Must need to accept things, Jude?” he finally
asked.
   “You  said to never Must accept anything,” he reminded Harold.
   “That’s  in the classroom and in the courtroom,” Harold said. “Not in life.
You see, Jude, in life, sometimes nice things happen to good people. You
don’t need to worry—they don’t  happen as often as they should. But when
they do, it’s up to the good people to Must say ‘thank you,’ and move on, and
maybe consider that the person who’s doing the nice thing gets a bang out
of it  as well,  and really isn’t  in  the mood to  hear all the  reasons that the
person for whom he’s  done the nice thing doesn’t  think he deserves it or
isn’t worthy of it.”
   He  shut up then,  and after dinner  he let Harold  drive  him  back to his
apartment on Hereford Street. “Besides,” Harold said as he was getting out
of the car, “you looked really, really nice. You’re a great-looking kid; I hope
someone’s told  you   that  before.”  And   then,  before  he  could  protest,
“Acceptance, Jude.”
   So  he swallowed what  he was going  to  say. “Thank you,  Harold.  For
everything.”
   “You’re  very welcome, Jude,” said Harold. “I’ll  see you Monday.”
   He stood on the sidewalk and watched Harold’s car drive away, and then
went up to his apartment, which  was on the second floor of  a brownstone
adMacent to an MIT fraternity  house. The  brownstone’s owner, a  retired
sociology professor, lived on the ground floor and leased out the remaining
three floors   to  graduate students:  on  the  top  floor   were Santosh  and
Federico, who were getting their doctorates in electrical engineering at MIT,
and on  the  third  floor  were  Janus]  and Isidore,  who  were  both  Ph.D.
candidates at Harvard—Janus] in biochemistry and Isidore in Near Eastern
religions—and directly below them were he and his roommate, Charlie Ma,
whose real name was Chien-Ming Ma and whom everyone called CM. CM

113
was an  intern  at  Tufts  Medical   Center, and  they  kept  almost entirely
opposite schedules: he would wake and CM’s door would be closed and he
would  hear his  wet, snuffly   snores, and when he  returned home  in  the
evenings at eight, after working with Harold,  CM would  be gone. What he
saw of CM he liked—he was from  Taipei and had gone to boarding school
in Connecticut and had a sleepy, roguish grin that made you want to smile
back at him—and he was a friend  of  Andy’s friend,  which  was how they
had met. Despite his perpetual air of stoned languor, CM was tidy as well,
and liked  to cook:  he’d come  home sometimes and find  a plate of  fried
dumplings in the center of the table, with a note beneath that read EAT ME,
or, occasionally, receive a text instructing  him to  rotate the chicken in  its
marinade before he  went to  bed,  or asking  him  to  pick  up a  bunch of
cilantro on his way  home. He always would, and would  return to find  the
chicken simmered into a stew, or the cilantro minced and folded into scallop
pancakes. Every few months or so, when their schedules intersected, all six
of them would  meet in Santosh and Federico’s apartment—theirs was the
largest—and eat and play poker. Janus] and Isidore would worry aloud that
girls thought  they were  gay because they were always hanging  out with
each other (CM cut his eyes toward him; he had bet him twenty dollars that
they were sleeping together but were trying to pretend they were straight—
at any rate, an impossible thing to prove), and Santosh and Federico would
complain about how stupid their students were, and about how the quality
of MIT  undergraduates had really gone downhill since their time there five
years ago.
   His  and CM’s  was the smallest of the apartments, because the landlord
had annexed half of the floor to make a storage room. CM paid significantly
more of the rent, so he had the bedroom. He occupied a corner of the living
room, the part with the bay window. His bed was a floppy foam egg-carton
pallet, and his  books were  lined up  under the  windowsill,  and he  had a
lamp, and a folding paper screen to give him some privacy. He and CM had
bought a large wooden table, which they placed in the dining-room alcove,
and which had  two metal  folding  chairs, one discarded from  Janus], the
other from Federico. One half of the table was his, the other half CM’s, and
both halves were  stacked with  books and papers and their  laptops, both
emitting their chirps and burbles throughout the day and night.
   People were  always stunned by the  apartment’s bleakness, but he had
mostly ceased to notice it—although not entirely. Now, for example, he sat

114
on the floor before the three cardboard boxes in which he stored his clothes,
and lifted  his  new  sweaters and shirts  and socks  and shoes from  their
envelopes of white tissue paper, placing them in his lap one at a time. They
were the nicest things he had ever owned, and it seemed somehow shameful
to  put  them  in  boxes  meant  to  hold  file   folders.  And   so  finally,   he
rewrapped them and returned them carefully to their shopping bags.
   The generosity of Harold’s  gift unsettled him. First, there was the matter
of the gift  itself:  he had never, never received anything so grand. Second,
there was the impossibility   of  ever adequately repaying him.  And  third,
there was the meaning behind the gesture: he had known for some time that
Harold respected him, and even enMoyed his company. But was it possible
that he was someone important to Harold, that Harold liked him more than
as Must a student, but as a real, actual friend? And if that was the case, why
should it make him so self-conscious?
   It  had taken him many months to  feel truly  comfortable around Harold:
not in the classroom or in his office, but outside of the classroom, outside of
the office. In life,  as Harold would say. He would return home after dinner
at Harold’s house and feel a flush of relief.  He knew why, too, as much as
he didn’t want to admit  it to himself:  traditionally, men—adult men, which
he didn’t yet consider himself  among—had been interested in him for one
reason, and so he had learned to be frightened of them. But Harold didn’t
seem to be one of those men. (Although Brother Luke hadn’t seemed to be
one of those men  either.) He was  frightened of  everything, it  sometimes
seemed, and he hated that about himself. Fear and hatred, fear and hatred:
often, it seemed that those were the only two qualities he possessed. Fear of
everyone else; hatred of himself.
   He had known  of Harold before he met him,  for Harold was known.  He
was a relentless questioner: every remark you made in his class would be
sei]ed upon and pecked at in an unending volley of Whys. He was trim and
tall, and had a  way of  pacing in  a tight  circle, his  torso pitched forward,
when he was engaged or excited.
   To  his  disappointment, there was much  he simply  couldn’t  remember
from that first-year contracts class with Harold. He couldn’t  remember, for
example, the specifics  of  the paper he  wrote that  interested Harold  and
which led to conversations with him outside the classroom and, eventually,
to an offer to become one of his research assistants. He couldn’t remember
anything particularly  interesting he said in  class. But  he could remember

115
Harold on that first  day of  the semester, pacing and pacing, and lecturing
them in his low, quick voice.
   “You’re  One Ls,”  Harold had said. “And  congratulations, all of  you. As
One Ls,  you’ll   be  taking  a  pretty  typical  course load:  contracts; torts;
property; civil  procedure; and, next  year, constitutional and criminal  law.
But you know all this.
   “What  you  may not know  is that  this course load reflects—beautifully,
simply—the very  structure of  our  society, the very  mechanics of what  a
society, our particular society, needs to make it work. To have a society, you
first need an institutional  framework: that’s constitutional law.  You need a
system of punishment: that’s criminal.  You need to know  that you have a
system in  place  that  will   make those  other  systems work:  that’s  civil
procedure. You need a way to  govern matters of  domain and ownership:
that’s  property.  You  need  to  know   that  someone  will   be  financially
accountable for inMuries caused you by others: that’s torts. And finally, you
need to know that people will  keep their  agreements, that they will honor
their promises: and that is contracts.”
   He paused. “Now, I don’t want to be reductive, but I’ll  bet half of you are
here so you  can  someday wheedle money  out  of  people—torts people,
there’s nothing  to  be ashamed of!—and  the other  half  of  you  are here
because you think you’re going to  change the world. You’re here because
you dream of arguing before the Supreme Court, because you think the real
challenge of  the  law  lies in   the blank  spaces between the lines  of  the
Constitution. But  I’m   here to  tell  you—it   doesn’t. The  truest, the  most
intellectually engaging, the richest  field  of the law  is contracts. Contracts
are not  Must sheets of  paper promising  you   a Mob, or  a  house, or  an
inheritance: in  its  purest, truest,  broadest sense, contracts govern every
realm of law. When we choose to live in a society, we choose to live under a
contract, and to  abide  by  the  rules that  a contract  dictates for   us—the
Constitution itself is a contract, albeit a malleable contract, and the question
of Must how malleable it is, exactly, is where law intersects with politics—
and it  is  under the  rules, explicit  or  otherwise, of  this  contract  that we
promise not to kill,  and to pay our taxes, and not to steal. But in this  case,
we are both the creators of and bound by  this contract: as citi]ens  of this
country, we have assumed, from birth, an obligation to  respect and follow
its terms, and we do so daily.

116
   “In  this  class, you will of  course learn the mechanics of contracts—how
one is created, how one is broken, how binding one is  and how to unbind
yourself from  one—but you will   also be asked to consider law itself  as a
series of contracts. Some are more fair—and this one time, I’ll allow you to
say such a thing—than others. But fairness is not the only, or even the most
important, consideration in law: the law is not always fair. Contracts are not
fair,  not  always. But  sometimes they  are  necessary, these unfairnesses,
because they are necessary for the proper functioning   of society.  In this
class you will learn the difference between what is fair and what is Must, and,
as important, between what is  fair  and what is  necessary. You will  learn
about the obligations we have to  one another as members of society, and
how far society should go in enforcing  those obligations. You will  learn to
see your life—all of  our lives—as a series of agreements, and it will make
you rethink not only the law but this country itself, and your place in it.”
   He  had been thrilled by  Harold’s speech, and in the  coming weeks, by
how differently  Harold thought, by how  he would stand at the front of  the
room like a conductor, stretching out a student’s argument into strange and
unimaginable formations. Once, a fairly benign discussion about the right to
privacy—both the most cherished and the foggiest of constitutional rights,
according  to    Harold,   whose   definition   of    contracts   often   ignored
conventional boundaries and bounded happily into other fields of law—had
led to an argument between the two of them about abortion, which  he felt
was indefensible on moral  grounds but necessary on social ones. “Aha!”
Harold had said; he was one of the few professors who would entertain not
Must legal arguments but moral ones. “And, Mr. St. Francis, what happens
when we forsake morals in law for social governance? What is the point at
which a country, and its people, should start valuing social control over its
sense of morality? Is there such a point? I’m not convinced there is.” But he
had hung in,  and the class had stilled  around them, watching  the two  of
them debate back and forth.
   Harold  was the author of three books, but it  was his last, The American
Handshake: The Promises and Failures of the Declaration of Independence,
that had made him famous. The book,  which he  had read even before he
met Harold, was a legal interpretation of the Declaration of  Independence:
Which of its promises had been kept and which had not, and were it written
today, would it be able to withstand trends in contemporary Murisprudence?
(“Short answer: No,”  read the Times review.) Now he was researching his

117
fourth  book,  a sequel  of  sorts to  The  American  Handshake, about the
Constitution, from a similar perspective.
   “But   only the  Bill  of  Rights, and the sexier amendments,” Harold  told
him when he was interviewing him for the research assistant position.
   “I  didn’t  know some were sexier than others,” he said.
   “Of  course some are sexier than others,” said Harold. “Only the eleventh,
twelfth, fourteenth, and sixteenth are sexy. The rest are basically the dross
of politics past.”
   “The  thirteenth is garbage?” he asked, enMoying himself.
   “I  didn’t  say it was garbage,” Harold said, “Must not sexy.”
   “But  I think  that’s what dross means.”
   Harold sighed dramatically, grabbed the dictionary off his desk, flipped it
open, and studied it  for a  moment. “Okay, fine,”   he said, tossing it  back
onto a heap of papers, which slid toward the edge of the surface. “The third
definition. But  I  meant the first  definition:  the leftovers, the detritus—the
remains of politics past. Happy?”
   “Yes,”  he said, trying not to smile.
   He   began working   for  Harold   on  Monday,  Wednesday, and Friday
afternoons and evenings, when his course load was lightest—on Tuedays
and Thursdays he had afternoon seminars at MIT, where he was getting his
master’s, and worked  in  the  law  library  at  night,  and  on Saturdays he
worked in the library in the morning and in the afternoons at a bakery called
Batter, which was near the medical college, where he had worked since he
was an undergraduate and where he fulfilled  specialty  orders: decorating
cookies and making hundreds of  sugar-paste flower petals for  cakes and
experimenting with  different  recipes, one  of  which,  a ten-nut  cake, had
become the bakery’s best seller. He worked at Batter on Sundays as well,
and one day Allison, the bakery’s owner, who entrusted him with  many of
the more complicated proMects, handed him an order form for three do]en
sugar cookies decorated to look like  various kinds of  bacteria. “I  thought
you  of  all   people  might  be  able  to  figure   this  out,”   she  said. “The
customer’s wife’s  a microbiologist  and he  wants to  surprise her and her
lab.”
   “I’ll   do some research,” he said, taking the page from her, and noting the
customer’s name: Harold Stein. So he had, asking CM and Janus] for their
advice, and had made cookies shaped like  paisleys, like mace balls,  like
cucumbers, using different-colored frosting  to  draw their  cytoplasms and

118
plasma membranes and ribosomes and fashioning flagella from strands of
licorice. He typed up a list identifying each and folded it into the box before
closing it and tying it with twine;  he didn’t know Harold very well  then, but
he liked the idea of making something for  him, of  impressing him, even if
anonymously. And  he liked  wondering  what the  cookies were  meant to
celebrate: A publication? An  anniversary? Or was it simple uxoriousness?
Was Harold Stein the sort of person who showed up at his wife’s  lab with
cookies for no reason? He suspected he perhaps was.
   The  following  week,  Harold told  him  about the ama]ing  cookies he’d
gotten at Batter. His enthusiasm, which Must a few hours ago in class had
been directed at the Uniform Commercial Code, had found a new subMect in
the cookies. He sat, biting  the  inside of  his cheek so  he wouldn’t  smile,
listening to Harold  talk about how genius they’d  been and how Julia’s lab
had been struck speechless by their detail and verisimilitude,  and how he
had been, briefly, the hero of the lab:  “Not  an easy thing to be with  those
people, by the way, who secretly think everyone involved in the humanities
is something of a moron.”
   “Sounds like  those cookies were made by a real obsessive,” he said. He
hadn’t told Harold he worked at Batter, and didn’t plan on doing so, either.
   “Then  that’s  an obsessive I’d  like  to  meet,”  said Harold.  “They  were
delicious, too.”
   “Mmm,”   he said, and thought of a question to ask Harold so he wouldn’t
keep talking about the cookies.
   Harold  had other research assistants, of course—two second-years and a
third-year he knew only  by sight—but their  schedules were such that they
never overlapped. Sometimes  they  communicated with   one another  by
notes or e-mail, explaining where they’d left off in their research so the next
person could pick it up and carry it forward. But  by the second semester of
his first  year, Harold  had assigned him  to work   exclusively on  the fifth
amendment. “That’s  a  good one,”  he  said.  “Incredibly  sexy.”  The  two
second-year assistants were assigned the ninth amendment, and the third-
year, the tenth, and as much as he knew it was ridiculous, he couldn’t help
but feel triumphant,  as if  he had been favored with  something the others
hadn’t.
   The first  invitation  to dinner at Harold’s house had been spontaneous, at
the end of one cold and dark March  afternoon. “Are you  sure?” he asked,
tentative.

119
   Harold  had  looked  at him,  curiously.  “Of   course,” he  said. “It’s   Must
dinner. You have to eat, right?”
   Harold  lived  in  a  three-story house in  Cambridge, at  the edge of  the
undergraduate campus. “I didn’t know you  lived here,”  he said, as Harold
pulled into the driveway. “This  is one of my favorite streets. I used to walk
down it every day as a shortcut to the other side of campus.”
   “You  and everybody else,” Harold replied. “When I  bought it Must before
I got  divorced,  all  these houses were occupied by grad  students; all the
shutters were falling off. The smell of pot was so thick you could get stoned
Must driving by.”
   It  was snowing, Must lightly, but he was grateful that there were only two
steps leading up to  the door,  and that  he wouldn’t  have to  worry  about
slipping or needing Harold’s  help. Inside, the house smelled of butter and
pepper and starch: pasta, he thought. Harold dropped his briefcase on the
floor and gave him  a vague tour—“Living   room; study  behind it; kitchen
and dining room to your left”—and  he met Julia, who was tall like  Harold,
with short brown hair, and whom he liked instantly.
   “Jude!”  she said. “Finally!  I’ve  heard so much about you; I’m  so happy
to be meeting you at last.” It sounded, he thought, like she really was.
   Over dinner, they talked. Julia was from an academic family from Oxford
and had lived in America since graduate school at Stanford; she and Harold
had met five years ago through a friend.  Her lab  studied a new virus that
appeared to be a variant of H5N1 and they were trying  to map its  genetic
code.
   “Isn’t  one of the concerns in microbiology the potential weaponi]ation of
these genomes?” he asked, and felt, rather than saw, Harold  turn  toward
him.
   “Yes,   that’s  right,”    Julia   said,  and  as  she  explained   to  him   the
controversies surrounding her and her colleagues’ work, he glanced over at
Harold, who  was watching him,  and who  raised an eyebrow at  him in  a
gesture that he couldn’t interpret.
   But  then  the conversation  shifted, and  he could  almost  watch as  the
discussion moved steadily  away from  Julia’s  lab  and inexorably  toward
him, could see how good a litigator Harold would be if he wanted to, could
see his skill in redirecting and repositioning, almost as if their conversation
were something liquid,  and he was guiding  it through  a series of troughs

120
and chutes, eliminating   any  options for   its  escape, until  it  reached its
inevitable end.
   “So, Jude,” Julia asked, “where did you grow up?”
   “South  Dakota  and Montana,  mostly,”  he said, and  he could  feel  the
creature inside of him sit up, aware of danger but unable to escape it.
   “So  are your parents ranchers?” asked Harold.
   He had learned over the years to anticipate this sequence of questioning,
and how to  deflect  it  as well.  “No,”  he  said, “but  a lot  of  people were,
obviously. It’s beautiful  countryside out there; have you spent any time in
the West?”
   Usually, this was enough, but it wasn’t for Harold. “Ha!”  he said. “That’s
the silkiest pivot I’ve  heard in a long  time.” Harold  looked at him, closely
enough so that he eventually  looked down  at his plate.  “I  suppose that’s
your way of saying you’re not going to tell us what they do?”
   “Oh,   Harold,  leave him  alone,”  said  Julia,  but  he could  feel  Harold
staring at him, and was relieved when dinner ended.
   After  that  first night  at Harold’s,  their relationship became both deeper
and more difficult.  He  felt he had  awakened Harold’s curiosity, which  he
imagined as a perked, bright-eyed dog—a terrier, something relentless and
keen—and wasn’t sure that  was such a good  thing. He  wanted to  know
Harold better, but  over dinner  he had been reminded that  that process—
getting to know someone—was always so much more challenging than he
remembered. He always  forgot;  he was  always  made to  remember. He
wished,  as  he  often  did,   that  the  entire   sequence—the divulging   of
intimacies, the exploring  of pasts—could be sped past, and that he  could
simply  be   teleported  to  the   next  stage,  where  the   relationship  was
something soft and pliable and comfortable, where both parties’ limits were
understood and respected.
   Other people might  have made a few more attempts at questioning him
and then left him  alone—other people had left  him alone: his  friends, his
classmates, his other professors—but Harold was not as easily dissuaded.
Even his  usual strategies—among them, telling  his  interlocutors  that he
wanted to hear about their  lives,  not talk  about his:  a tactic that  had the
benefit of  being true  as well  as effective—didn’t   work  with  Harold.  He
never knew when Harold would pounce next, but whenever he did, he was
unprepared, and he felt himself becoming more self-conscious, not less, the
more time they spent with each other.

121
   They   would   be   in   Harold’s   office,   talking   about  something—the
University  of  Virginia  affirmative  action  case going before the  Supreme
Court,  say—and Harold   would  ask,  “What’s   your  ethnic  background,
Jude?”
   “A   lot  of things,”  he would  answer, and then would  try  to change the
subMect, even if it meant dropping a stack of books to cause a distraction.
   But  sometimes the  questions were contextless and random,  and these
were impossible to anticipate, as they came without preamble. One night he
and Harold  were  in  his  office,  working  late,  and Harold   ordered them
dinner. For dessert, he’d gotten cookies and brownies, and he pushed the
paper bags toward him.
   “No,  thanks,” he said.
   “Really?”   Harold  asked, raising  his eyebrows.  “My  son  used to  love
these. We tried to bake them for him at home, but we never got the recipe
quite right.”  He broke a brownie in half.  “Did  your parents bake for you a
lot when you were a kid?”  He would  ask these questions with a deliberate
casualness that he found almost unbearable.
   “No,”  he said, pretending to review the notes he’d been taking.
   He  listened to  Harold  chewing  and, he  knew, considering whether  to
retreat or to continue his line of questioning.
   “Do   you  see your  parents often?”  Harold  asked him,   abruptly, on  a
different night.
   “They’re  dead,” he said, keeping his eyes on the page.
   “I’m   sorry,  Jude,” Harold  said after a  silence, and the sincerity  in  his
voice made him look up. “Mine are, too. Relatively recently. Of course, I’m
much older than you.”
   “I’m   sorry,  Harold,”  he said. And  then,  guessing, “You were  close to
them.”
   “I  was,” said Harold. “Very. Were you close to yours?”
   He shook his head. “No, not really.”
   Harold was quiet. “But I’ll   bet they were proud of you,” he said, finally.
   Whenever  Harold  asked him  questions about  himself,  he always  felt
something cold move across him, as if he were being iced from the inside,
his organs and nerves being protected by a sheath of frost. In that moment,
though, he thought he might break, that if  he said anything  the ice would
shatter and he would  splinter and  crack. So he  waited until  he knew  he
would sound normal before he asked Harold if  he needed him to  find the

122
rest of the articles now or if  he should do it in the morning. He didn’t  look
at Harold, though, and spoke only to his notebook.
   Harold  took a long time  to reply. “Tomorrow,”  Harold said, quietly,  and
he nodded, and gathered his  things to  go  home for  the  night, aware  of
Harold’s eyes following his lurching progress to the door.
   Harold  wanted  to  know  how  he had been  raised, and if   he had  any
siblings, and who  his  friends were,  and what  he did  with  them: he  was
greedy for information. At  least he could answer the last questions, and he
told him  about his friends,  and how they  had met, and where they were:
Malcolm in  graduate school at Columbia, JB and Willem at Yale. He liked
answering Harold’s questions about them, liked  talking about them,  liked
hearing Harold laugh  when he told  him  stories about them. He  told  him
about CM, and how Santosh and Federico were in some sort of fight  with
the engineering undergrads who lived in the frat house next door, and how
he had awoken one morning  to a fleet  of  motori]ed  dirigibles  handmade
from condoms floating  noisily  up  past his window,  up toward  the fourth
floor, each dangling signs that read SANTOSH JAIN AND FEDERICO DE
LUCA HAVE  MICRO-PENISES.
   But  when Harold  was asking the other questions, he felt  smothered by
their weight and frequency and inevitability. And sometimes the air grew so
hot with the questions Harold wasn’t asking him that it was as oppressive as
if he actually  had. People wanted to know so much, they wanted so many
answers. And he understood it,  he  did—he wanted answers, too;  he too
wanted to know everything. He was grateful,  then, for his friends, and for
how relatively  little  they  had mined from  him,  how they  had left  him to
himself, a blank,  faceless prairie under whose yellow  surface earthworms
and beetles wriggled through  the black  soil,  and chips of  bone calcified
slowly into stone.
   “You’re  really  interested in this,” he snapped at Harold once, frustrated,
when Harold  had  asked him  whether he  was  dating anyone,  and then,
hearing his tone, stopped and apologi]ed. They had known each other for
almost a year by then.
   “This?”  said Harold, ignoring the apology. “I’m  interested in you. I don’t
see what’s strange about that. This is  the kind  of stuff  friends  talk about
with each other.”
   And  yet  despite his  discomfort, he  kept coming  back to  Harold,  kept
accepting his  dinner  invitations,   even  though  at  some  point  in  every

123
encounter there would be a moment in which he wished he could disappear,
or in which he worried he might have disappointed.
   One night  he went to dinner at Harold’s and was introduced to Harold’s
best friend, Laurence, whom he had met in law school and who was now an
appellate court Mudge in Boston, and his wife, Gillian, who taught English at
Simmons.  “Jude,”  said  Laurence,  whose  voice  was  even  lower   than
Harold’s, “Harold  tells me you’re also getting  your master’s at MIT. What
in?”
   “Pure math,” he replied.
   “How   is  that  different  from”—she   laughed—“regular  math?”  Gillian
asked.
   “Well,  regular  math, or applied math,  is what I  suppose you could call
practical math,” he said. “It’s  used to solve problems, to provide solutions,
whether it’s in  the realm  of economics, or  engineering, or accounting, or
what have  you.  But  pure  math doesn’t  exist  to  provide  immediate,  or
necessarily obvious, practical  applications.  It’s  purely   an expression of
form, if you will—the  only  thing it proves is the almost infinite elasticity of
mathematics itself, within   the accepted set of  assumptions by which  we
define it, of course.”
   “Do  you mean imaginary geometries, stuff like that?” Laurence asked.
   “It  can be, sure. But it’s not Must that. Often, it’s merely proof of—of the
impossible yet consistent internal logic of  math itself. There’s all  kinds of
specialties within pure math: geometric pure math, like  you  said, but also
algebraic math, algorithmic   math, cryptography, information   theory, and
pure logic, which is what I study.”
   “Which  is what?” Laurence asked.
   He   thought.   “Mathematical   logic,   or   pure  logic,   is   essentially   a
conversation between truths and falsehoods. So for example, I might say to
you ‘All   positive numbers are real.  Two is  a positive number. Therefore,
two must  be real.’  But  this isn’t  actually  true,  right? It’s  a  derivation, a
supposition of truth. I haven’t actually proven that two is a real number, but
it must logically  be true. So you’d  write  a proof to, in  essence, prove that
the logic of  those two statements is in fact real, and infinitely  applicable.”
He stopped. “Does that make sense?”
   “Video, ergo est,” said Laurence, suddenly. I see it, therefore it is.
   He  smiled. “And  that’s exactly  what applied math is.  But pure  math is
more”—he thought again—“Imaginor, ergo est.”

124
   Laurence smiled back at him and nodded. “Very good,” he said.
   “Well,   I have  a question,”  said Harold, who’d   been quiet, listening  to
them. “How and why on earth did you end up in law school?”
   Everyone laughed, and he did, too. He had been asked that question often
(by Dr. Li,  despairingly; by his master’s adviser, Dr. Kashen, perplexedly),
and he always changed the answer to suit the audience, for the real answer
—that he wanted to have the means to protect himself;  that he wanted to
make sure no  one could  ever reach him  again—seemed too selfish  and
shallow  and tiny   a  reason to  say  aloud  (and  would  invite   a  slew  of
subsequent questions anyway). Besides, he knew enough now to know that
the law was a flimsy  form of  protection: if  he really wanted to be safe, he
should have  become a  marksman squinting  through  an  eyepiece, or  a
chemist in a lab with his pipettes and poisons.
   That night, though, he said, “But law  isn’t so unlike pure math, really—I
mean, it too in theory can offer an answer to every question, can’t it? Laws
of anything are meant to be pressed against, and stretched, and if they can’t
provide solutions to every matter they claim to cover, then they aren’t really
laws at  all,  are  they?”  He  stopped to  consider what  he’d  Must said. “I
suppose the difference is that in law, there are many paths to many answers,
and in math, there are many paths to a single answer. And also, I guess, that
law isn’t  actually about the truth:  it’s about governance. But math doesn’t
have to be convenient, or practical, or managerial—it only has to be true.
   “But    I   suppose the  other   way  in   which   they’re   alike   is  that   in
mathematics, as well as in  law, what  matters more—or, more accurately,
what’s more memorable—is not that the  case, or proof, is won  or solved,
but the beauty, the economy, with which it’s done.”
   “What  do you mean?” asked Harold.
   “Well,”   he  said,  “in  law,  we  talk  about a  beautiful  summation, or  a
beautiful Mudgment: and what we mean by that, of course, is the loveliness
of not only its logic but its expression. And similarly, in math, when we talk
about a beautiful  proof,  what  we’re  recogni]ing  is  the simplicity   of  the
proof, its … elementalness, I suppose: its inevitability.”
   “What  about something like Fermat’s last theorem?” asked Julia.
   “That’s  a perfect example of a non-beautiful proof. Because while it was
important that it was solved, it was, for a lot of people—like my adviser—a
disappointment. The proof went on for  hundreds of pages, and drew from
so many disparate fields of mathematics, and was so—tortured, Migsawed,

125
really, in  its execution, that  there are still  many people at work  trying  to
prove it  in  more elegant terms, even though it’s  already  been proven. A
beautiful proof is succinct, like a beautiful ruling. It combines Must a handful
of different concepts, albeit from across the mathematical universe, and in a
relatively brief series of steps, leads to a grand and new generali]ed truth in
mathematics:  that  is,   a   wholly   provable,   unshakable  absolute  in   a
constructed world with very few unshakable absolutes.” He stopped to take
a breath, aware, suddenly, that he had been talking and talking, and that the
others were silent, watching him. He could feel himself flushing, could feel
the old   hatred fill    him  like  dirtied   water  once more.  “I’m    sorry,”  he
apologi]ed. “I’m  sorry. I didn’t mean to ramble on.”
   “Are  you  Moking?” said Laurence. “Jude, I think that was the first  truly
revelatory conversation I’ve   had in  Harold’s  house in  probably  the  last
decade or more: thank you.”
   Everyone  laughed again, and Harold  leaned back in his  chair, looking
pleased. “See?” he caught Harold mouthing across the table to  Laurence,
and Laurence nodding, and he understood that this was meant about him,
and was flattered despite himself, and shy as well. Had Harold talked about
him to his  friend? Had this been a test for him,  a test he hadn’t known he
was to   take? He   was  relieved  he  had  passed it,  and  that  he  hadn’t
embarrassed Harold,   and  relieved   too   that,  as   uncomfortable  as  it
sometimes made him, he  might  have fully   earned his place in  Harold’s
house, and might be invited back again.
   With  each day he trusted Harold a little more, and at times he wondered
if he was making the same mistake again. Was it better to trust or better to
be wary? Could you have a real friendship if some part of you was always
expecting betrayal? He felt  sometimes as if   he was taking  advantage of
Harold’s  generosity,  his  Molly faith   in  him,   and  sometimes  as if   his
circumspection was the wise choice after all, for if it should end badly, he’d
have only himself to blame. But it  was difficult  to not trust Harold: Harold
made it  difficult,   and, Must as important, he  was making  it  difficult   for
himself—he wanted to trust  Harold, he  wanted to give  in, he  wanted the
creature inside him to  tuck itself  into  a sleep from  which  it would  never
wake.
   Late one night  in his second year of law school he was at Harold’s, and
when they opened the door, the steps, the street, the trees were hushed with

126
snow, and the flakes cycloned toward the door, so fast that they both took a
step backward.
   “I’ll   call a cab,” he said, so Harold wouldn’t have to drive him.
   “No,  you won’t,”  Harold said. “You’ll  stay here.”
   And  so  he stayed in  Harold and  Julia’s spare bedroom on  the second
floor, separated from their room by a large windowed space they used as a
library,  and  a  brief  hallway.   “Here’s  a  T-shirt,”   Harold  said,  lobbing
something gray and soft at him, “and here’s a toothbrush.” He placed it on
the bookcase. “There’s extra towels in the bathroom. Do you want anything
else? Water?”
   “No,”  he said. “Harold, thank you.”
   “Of  course, Jude. Good night.”
   “Good  night.”
   He stayed awake for a while,  the feather comforter wadded around him,
the mattress plush  beneath him,  watching  the  window  turn  white,   and
listening to  water glugging  from the  faucets, and Harold and Julia’s  low,
indistinguishable murmurs  at each  other, and one  or  the other  of  them
padding from  one  place to  another, and then,  finally,  nothing.  In  those
minutes, he pretended that they were his parents, and he was home for the
weekend from law school to visit them, and this was his room, and the next
day he would get up and do whatever it  was that grown children  did with
their parents.
   The summer after that second year, Harold invited him  to their house in
Truro, on Cape Cod. “You’ll  love it,”  he said. “Invite  your friends. They’ll
love it,  too.”   And  so on  the Thursday  before Labor  Day,  once his  and
Malcolm’s internships had ended, they all drove up to the house from New
York,  and for  that  long  weekend, Harold’s  attention  shifted  to  JB  and
Malcolm  and Willem.   He  watched them  too, admiring  how  they  could
answer every one of Harold’s  parries, how generous they were with  their
own lives, how they could tell stories about themselves that they laughed at
and that made Harold and Julia laugh as well, how comfortable they  were
around  Harold   and  how   comfortable  Harold   was   around  them.  He
experienced the singular pleasure of watching people he loved fall in love
with other people he loved. The house had a private walk down to a private
spit of beach, and in the mornings  the four of  them would troop  downhill
and swim—even he did, in his pants and undershirt and an old oxford shirt,
which no one bothered him about—and then lie on the sand baking, the wet

127
clothes ungluing themselves from his body as they dried. Sometimes Harold
would come and watch them, or swim as well. In  the afternoons, Malcolm
and JB would pedal off through the dunes on bicycles, and he and Willem
would follow  on foot, picking up bits of shaley shells and the sad carapaces
of long-nibbled-away hermit crabs as they went, Willem slowing his pace to
match his own.  In the  evenings, when the air  was soft, JB  and Malcolm
sketched and he and Willem read. He felt doped, on sun and food and salt
and contentment, and at night he fell  asleep quickly and early, and in  the
mornings he woke before the others so he could  stand on the back porch
alone looking over the sea.
   What is  going to happen to me? he asked the sea. What is happening to
me?
   The  holiday ended and the  fall  semester began, and it didn’t  take him
long to  reali]e  that over that weekend, one of  his friends  must have said
something to Harold, although  he was certain it  wasn’t Willem,  who  was
the only  one to whom  he’d finally   told something of  his  past—and even
then, not very much at all:  three facts, each more slender than the last, all
meaningless, all of  which  combined to  make not  even a beginning  of  a
story. Even the first sentences of a fairy tale had more detail than what he
had told Willem: Once upon a time, a boy and a girl lived with  their father,
a woodcutter, and their stepmother, deep in a cold forest. The woodcutter
loved his children, but  he was very poor, and so one day …  So whatever
Harold had learned had been speculation, buttressed by their observations
of him, their  theories and guesses and fictions. But whatever it was, it had
been enough to make Harold’s questions to him—about who he had been
and where he had come from—stop.
   As  the months and then the years passed, they developed a friendship in
which the first fifteen  years of his life remained unsaid and unspoken, as if
they had  never  happened at all,   as if   he had  been removed  from  the
manufacturer’s box when he reached college, and a switch at the base of his
neck had been flipped, and he had shuddered to life.  He knew  that those
blank years were filled  in  by Harold’s  own imaginings,  and that some of
those imaginings were worse than what had actually  happened, and some
were better. But Harold never told  him what he supposed for him,  and he
didn’t really want to know.
   He had never considered their friendship contextual, but he was prepared
for the  likelihood  that  Harold and  Julia did.  And  so when  he moved to

128
Washington for his clerkship, he assumed that they would forget him,  and
he tried to prepare himself for the loss. But that didn’t happen. Instead, they
sent e-mails, and called, and when one or the other was in town, they would
have dinner. In  the summers, he and  his friends  visited  Truro, and over
Thanksgiving, they went to Cambridge. And when he moved to New York
two years later to  begin his Mob at the U.S. Attorney’s Office, Harold  had
been almost alarmingly excited for  him. They had even offered to  let him
live in  their apartment on the  Upper West Side, but he knew they  used it
often, and he wasn’t sure how real their offer was, and so he declined.
   Every Saturday, Harold would call and ask him about work, and he’d tell
him  about his  boss,  Marshall,  the  deputy U.S.  Attorney,  who  had  the
unnerving ability  to  recite entire Supreme Court decisions from  memory,
closing his  eyes to summon a  vision  of  the page in  his mind,  his  voice
becoming robotic and dull  as he chanted, but never dropping or  adding a
word.  He  had always  thought  he  had a  good  memory, but  Marshall’s
ama]ed him.
   In  some ways, the U.S. Attorney’s Office  reminded him of  the home: it
was largely  male,  and  the place  fi]]ed    with  a  particular  and  constant
hostility,  the kind   of  hissing acrimony  that  naturally  arises whenever a
group of highly competitive  people who are all evenly matched are housed
in the  same small space with  the understanding that only  some of  them
would have the opportunity to  distinguish themselves. (Here, though, they
were matched in  accomplishments; at  the  home, they  were matched  in
hunger, in want.) All   two hundred of  the assistant prosecutors, it seemed,
had attended one of five or  six law  schools, and virtually  all of  them had
been on the law review and moot court at their respective schools. He was
part of a four-person team that worked mostly on securities fraud cases, and
he and his teammates each had something—a credential, an idiosyncrasy—
that they hoped lifted them above the others: he had his master’s from MIT
(which no one cared about but was at least an oddity) and his circuit court
clerkship with   Sullivan,  with  whom  Marshall  was  friendly.  Citi]en,   his
closest friend  at the  office,  had a  law  degree from  Cambridge and had
practiced as a barrister  in London  for  two  years before moving  to  New
York. And  Rhodes, the third in their  trio,  had been a Fulbright Scholar in
Argentina after college.  (The fourth  on their  team was a profoundly  la]y
guy named Scott who, it was rumored, had only gotten the Mob because his
father played tennis with the president.)

129
   He  was usually at the  office, and sometimes, when he and Citi]en   and
Rhodes were there late, eating takeout, he was reminded of being with his
roommates in their suite at Hood.  And although  he enMoyed Citi]en’s and
Rhodes’s company, and the specificity and depth of  their  intelligence, he
was in those moments nostalgic for his friends, who thought so differently
than he did and who made him  think differently  as well.  In the middle  of
one  conversation  with   Citi]en   and  Rhodes  about  logic,   he  recalled,
suddenly, a question Dr. Li had asked him his freshman year, when he was
auditioning to  be accepted into his pure math  seminar: Why are manhole
covers round? It was an easy question, and easy to answer, but when he’d
returned to Hood and had repeated Dr. Li’s question to his roommates, they
were silent.  And  then  finally  JB  had  begun, in  the  dreamy tones  of  a
wandering storyteller, “Once, very long  ago, mammoths roamed the earth,
and their footprints left permanent circular indentations in the ground,” and
they had all laughed. He smiled, remembering it; he sometimes wished he
had a mind like JB’s, one that could create stories that would delight others,
instead of  the  mind  he  did  have,  which  was  always searching  for  an
explanation, an  explanation  that,  while  perhaps correct,  was  empty  of
romance, of fancy, of wit.
   “Time  to whip  out the credentials,” Citi]en  would whisper to him on  the
occasions that the U.S. Attorney himself would  emerge onto the floor and
all  the  assistant  prosecutors would   bu]]   toward   him,  mothlike,   as  a
multitude of gray suits. They and Rhodes would Moin the hover, but even in
those gatherings he never mentioned the one credential he knew could have
made not only Marshall but the U.S. Attorney as well stop and look at him
more closely. After he’d  gotten the Mob, Harold had asked him if he could
mention him   to  Adam,  the  U.S.  Attorney,  with   whom  Harold  was,  it
happened, longtime acquaintances. But he’d told Harold he wanted to know
he could make it on his own. This was true, but the greater reason was that
he was tentative about naming Harold as one of his assets, because he didn’t
want Harold to regret his association with him. And so he’d said nothing.
   Often, however, it felt  as if Harold was there anyway. Reminiscing about
law    school    (and    its    attendant    activity,    bragging    about    one’s
accomplishments in law school) was  a favorite pastime in  the office,  and
because so many of his colleagues had gone to his school, quite a few  of
them knew Harold (and the others knew of him), and he’d sometimes listen
to them talk  about classes they’d taken with him,  or how prepared they’d

130
had to be for them, and would feel proud of Harold, and—though he knew
it  was  silly—proud   of  himself  for   knowing  him.   The  following   year,
Harold’s book about the Constitution would be published, and everyone in
the office  would   read the  acknowledgments and see his  name  and his
affiliation  with  Harold  would  be  revealed, and many of  them  would  be
suspicious, and he’d see worry in their faces as they tried to remember what
they might have said about Harold in his presence. By that time, however,
he would feel he had established himself in the office on his own, had found
his own place alongside Citi]en and Rhodes, had made his own relationship
with Marshall.
   But  as much as he would have liked to, as much as he craved it, he was
still  cautious about claiming  Harold  as his friend:  sometimes he worried
that he was  only  imagining  their  closeness, inflating  it  hopefully  in  his
mind,  and then  (to  his  embarrassment) he would  have  to  retrieve The
Beautiful Promise from his shelf and turn to the acknowledgments, reading
Harold’s words again, as if it were itself  a contract, a declaration that what
he felt for Harold was at least in some degree reciprocated. And yet he was
always prepared: It will end this month, he would tell himself. And  then, at
the end of the month: Next month. He won’t want to talk to me next month.
He tried to keep himself in a constant state of readiness; he tried to prepare
himself for disappointment, even as he yearned to be proven wrong.
   And  still,  the friendship spooled on and on,  a long, swift  river  that had
caught him  in   its  slipstream and  was  carrying  him  along,  taking  him
somewhere he couldn’t see. At  every point  when he thought  that he had
reached the limits of what their relationship would be, Harold or Julia flung
open the doors to another room and invited him in. He met Julia’s father, a
retired pulmonologist,  and  brother,  an art  history  professor,  when they
visited from England one Thanksgiving, and when Harold and Julia came to
New York, they took him and Willem out to dinner, to places they had heard
about but couldn’t afford  to visit  on their own.  They saw the apartment at
Lispenard Street—Julia polite,   Harold  horrified—and  the week  that  the
radiators mysteriously stopped working, they left him a set of keys to their
apartment uptown, which was so warm that for  the first  hour after he and
Willem arrived, they simply sat on the sofa like mannequins, too stunned by
the sudden reintroduction of heat into their lives to move. And after Harold
witnessed him in the middle of an episode—this was the Thanksgiving after
he moved to New  York,  and in his  desperation (he knew he wouldn’t  be

131
able to make it  upstairs), he had turned off  the stove, where he had been
sauteeing some spinach, and pulled himself into the pantry, where he had
shut the door and laid down on the floor  to wait—they  had rearranged the
house, so that the next  time he visited,  he found  the spare bedroom had
been moved  to  the   ground-floor  suite  behind  the  living   room   where
Harold’s study had been, and Harold’s desk and chair and books moved to
the second floor.
   But  even after all  of this, a part  of him  was always waiting for  the day
he’d come to a door and try the knob and it wouldn’t move. He didn’t mind
that, necessarily; there was  something scary and  anxiety-inducing  about
being in  a  space where nothing  seemed to be  forbidden to  him,  where
everything was offered to him and nothing was asked in return. He tried to
give them what  he could;  he was aware it  wasn’t  much. And  the things
Harold gave him so easily—answers, affection—he couldn’t reciprocate.
   One  day after he’d  known them  for almost  seven years, he was at the
house in springtime. It was Julia’s birthday; she was turning fifty-one,  and
because she had been at a conference in Oslo for her fiftieth birthday, she’d
decided that this would be her big celebration. He and Harold were cleaning
the living   room—or  rather, he  was  cleaning, and  Harold  was plucking
books at random from the shelves and telling  him stories about how  he’d
gotten each one, or flipping back the covers so he could see other people’s
names written inside, including  a  copy of  The Leopard on  whose flyleaf
was scrawled: “Property of Laurence V. Raleigh. Do not take. Harold Stein,
this means you!!”
   He had threatened to tell Laurence, and Harold had threatened him back.
“You’d better not, Jude, if you know what’s good for you.”
   “Or  what?” he’d asked, teasing him.
   “Or—this!”   Harold had said, and had leaped at him, and before he could
recogni]e that Harold  was Must being playful, he had recoiled so violently,
torquing his body to  avoid contact, that he had bumped into the bookcase
and had knocked against a lumpy  ceramic mug that  Harold’s son, Jacob,
had made, which fell to the ground and broke into three neat pieces. Harold
had stepped back from him then, and there was a sudden, horrible silence,
into which he had nearly wept.
   “Harold,”   he said, crouching to the ground, picking  up the pieces, “I’m
so sorry,  I’m  so  sorry. Please forgive  me.”  He  wanted  to  beat himself

132
against the floor; he knew  this was the last  thing Jacob had made Harold
before he got sick. Above him, he could hear only Harold’s breathing.
   “Harold,   please forgive  me,”   he repeated, cupping  the  pieces in  his
palms. “I  think  I can fix  this,  though—I  can make it better.”  He couldn’t
look up from the mug, its shiny buttered gla]e.
   He  felt Harold  crouch beside him. “Jude,” Harold  said, “it’s  all right.  It
was an accident.” His voice was very quiet. “Give  me the pieces,” he said,
but he was gentle, and he didn’t sound angry.
   He did. “I  can leave,” he offered.
   “Of  course you’re not going to leave,” Harold said. “It’s okay, Jude.”
   “But  it was Jacob’s,” he heard himself say.
   “Yes,”  said Harold.  “And  it  still  is.”  He stood. “Look  at  me, Jude,” he
said, and he finally did. “It’s okay. Come on,” and Harold held out his hand,
and he took it, and let Harold pull him to his feet. He wanted to howl, then,
that after everything Harold had given him, he had repaid him by destroying
something precious created by someone who had been most precious.
   Harold  went  upstairs to  his study  with  the mug  in  his  hands, and he
finished his cleaning in  silence, the lovely day graying around him.  When
Julia came home, he waited for Harold  to tell  her how stupid  and clumsy
he’d been, but he didn’t.  That night at  dinner, Harold was the same as he
always was, but when he returned to Lispenard Street, he wrote  Harold a
real, proper letter, apologi]ing properly, and sent it to him.
   And  a few  days later,  he got a  reply, also in  the form  of  a real letter,
which he would keep for the rest of his life.
   “Dear    Jude,”   Harold   wrote,   “thank    you   for    your   beautiful    (if
unnecessary) note. I  appreciate everything in  it.  You’re  right;   that mug
means a lot to me. But you mean more. So please stop torturing yourself.
   “If   I were a different kind of  person, I might say that this whole incident
is a metaphor for life in general: things get broken, and sometimes they get
repaired, and in most cases, you reali]e that no matter what gets damaged,
life rearranges itself to compensate for your loss, sometimes wonderfully.
   “Actually—maybe  I am that kind of person after all.
   “Love,  Harold.”


   It  was not so many years ago—despite the fact that he knew otherwise,
despite what Andy had been telling  him  since he was seventeen—that he

133
was still maintaining  a sort of small,  steady hope that he might get better.
On especially bad days, he would repeat the Philadelphia surgeon’s words
to himself—“the  spine has wonderful  reparative qualities”—almost like  a
chant. A few years after meeting Andy, when he was in law school, he had
finally  summoned the courage to suggest this to  him, had said  aloud the
prediction he had treasured and clung to, hoping that Andy might nod and
say, “That’s exactly right. It’ll Must take time.”
   But  Andy  had snorted. “He told you  that?” he asked. “It’s  not going  to
get better, Jude; as you get older, it’ll  get worse.” Andy  had been looking
down at his ankle  as he spoke, using twee]ers to pick  out shreds of dead
flesh from  a  wound he’d  developed, when he  suddenly fro]e,  and  even
without  seeing Andy’s  face, he could  tell  he was  chagrined. “I’m   sorry,
Jude,” he said, looking up, still  cupping  his foot in  his hand. “I’m   sorry I
can’t tell you differently.”  And when he couldn’t answer, he sighed. “You’re
upset.”
   He was, of  course. “I’m  fine,”  he managed to say, but he couldn’t bring
himself to look at Andy.
   “I’m   sorry, Jude,” Andy repeated, quietly. He had two settings, even then:
brusque and gentle, and he had experienced both of them often, sometimes
in a single appointment.
   “But  one thing I promise,” he said, returning to the ankle, “I’ll  always be
here to take care of you.”
   And  he had. Of all the people in his life, it  was in some ways Andy who
knew the most about him:  Andy  was the only  person he’d been naked in
front of  as an adult, the only person who was familiar with  every physical
dimension of his body. Andy had been a resident when they met, and he had
stayed in Boston for  his  fellowship,  and his postfellowship,  and then the
two of them had moved to New York  within months of each other. He was
an orthopedic surgeon, but he treated him for everything, from chest colds
to his back and leg problems.
   “Wow,”   Andy  said  dryly,  as  he sat  in  his  examining  room  one day
hacking up phlegm (this had been the previous spring, shortly before he had
turned twenty-nine, when  a bout  of bronchitis  had been snaking its  way
through the office), “I’m   so glad I  speciali]ed in orthopedics. This is  such
good practice  for  me.  This  is  exactly  what  I  thought  I’d   do with   my
training.”

134
   He had started to laugh, but then his coughing had begun again and Andy
had thumped him  on the back.  “Maybe  if  someone recommended a real
internist to me, I  wouldn’t  have to keep going to a chiropractor for  all my
medical needs,” he said.
   “Mmm,”    Andy  said.  “You  know,  maybe  you  should start  seeing an
internist. God knows it’d save me a lot of time, and a shitload of headaches
as well.” But he would  never go to see anyone but Andy, and he thought—
although they had  never discussed it—that Andy   wouldn’t  want him  to,
either.
   For  all Andy  knew about him,  he knew relatively  little  about Andy. He
knew that he and Andy had gone to the same college, and that Andy was a
decade older than he, and that Andy’s father was GuMarati and his mother
was Welsh, and that he had grown up in Ohio. Three years ago, Andy had
gotten married, and he  had been surprised to be invited  to  the wedding,
which was small and held at Andy’s in-laws’ house on the Upper West Side.
He had made Willem come with  him,  and was even more surprised when
Andy’s new wife,  Jane, had thrown her arms around him when they  were
introduced and said, “The  famous  Jude St. Francis!  I’ve  heard so much
about you!”
   “Oh,  really,” he’d said, his mind filling   with fear, like a flock  of flapping
bats.
   “Nothing  like  that,”  Jane had said, smiling (she was a doctor as well: a
gynecologist). “But  he adores you, Jude; I’m  so glad you  came.” He had
met Andy’s parents as well, and at the end of the evening, Andy had slung
an arm around his neck and given him a hard, awkward kiss on the cheek,
which he  now did  every time  they  saw each other. Andy  always looked
uncomfortable doing it, but also seemed compelled to keep doing it, which
he found both funny and touching.
   He   appreciated Andy   in  many   ways,  but  he  appreciated most   his
unflappability. After  they had met, after Andy  had made it difficult   not to
continue seeing him by showing up at Hood, banging on their door after he
had missed two follow-up  appointments (he hadn’t  forgotten; he had Must
decided not to go) and ignored three phone calls and four e-mails,  he had
resigned himself to the  fact that it  might  not be bad to  have a doctor—it
seemed, after all, inevitable—and that  Andy  might be  someone he could
trust. The third  time  they met,  Andy  took his  history, or  what he  would

135
provide of it, and wrote down the facts he would tell him without  comment
or reaction.
   And  indeed, it  was only years later—a little  less than four  years ago—
that Andy had directly  mentioned his childhood. This  had been during his
and  Andy’s   first   big   fight.   They’d   had   skirmishes,  of   course,  and
disagreements, and once or twice a year Andy would deliver a long lecture
to him (he saw Andy every six  weeks—though more frequently these days
—and could  always anticipate which  appointment  would be  the Lecture
Appointment  by  the  terseness with  which  Andy  would   greet him   and
conduct his examination) that covered what Andy considered his perplexing
and infuriating unwillingness to take proper care of himself, his maddening
refusal to see a therapist, and his bi]arre reluctance to take pain medication
that would probably improve his quality of life.
   The fight  had concerned what Andy had retroactively come to consider a
botched suicide attempt. This had been right before New Year’s, and he had
been cutting himself, and he had cut too close to a vein, and it had resulted
in a great, sloppy, bloody  mess into which he  had been forced to involve
Willem.  In the examining  room that  night, Andy  had refused to speak to
him, he was so angry, and had actually muttered to himself as he made his
stitches, each as neat and tiny as if he were embroidering them.
   Even before Andy had opened his mouth at his next appointment, he had
known that he was furious.  He had actually considered not coming  in for
his checkup at all,  except he knew if  he didn’t,  Andy  would simply  keep
calling  him—or  worse,  calling  Willem,   or  worse yet,  Harold—until   he
showed up.
   “I  should fucking have had you hospitali]ed,” were Andy’s  first words to
him, followed by, “I’m  such a fucking idiot.”
   “I  think you’re  overreacting,” he’d begun, but Andy ignored him.
   “I  happen to believe you weren’t trying to kill  yourself, or I’d’ve  had you
committed so fast your  head would’ve  spun,” he said.  “It’s  only  because
statistically, anyone who  cuts themselves as much as you do,  and for  as
many years  as you  have,  is  in  less  immediate danger  of  suicide  than
someone who’s   less  consistently  self-inMurious.” (Andy   was   fond  of
statistics. He sometimes suspected he made them up.) “But   Jude, this is
cra]y,  and  that  was  way  too   close. Either   you  start  seeing  a  shrink
immediately or I’m going to commit you.”

136
   “You  can’t  do that,”  he’d said,  furious himself  now, although he knew
Andy could: he had looked up the laws of involuntary commitment in New
York State, and they were not in his favor.
   “You  know I  can,” Andy had said. He was almost shouting at this point.
Their appointments were always after office hours, because they sometimes
chatted afterward if Andy had time and was in a good mood.
   “I’ll   sue you,” he’d said, absurdly, and Andy had yelled back at him, “Go
right ahead! Do you  know how fucked  up this is, Jude? Do you  have any
idea what kind of position you’re putting me in?”
   “Don’t   worry,”   he’d  said, sarcastically, “I   don’t  have any  family.  No
one’s going to sue you for wrongful death.”
   Andy  had stepped back, then, as if  he had tried to  hit him.  “How  dare
you,” he’d said, slowly. “You know that’s not what I mean.”
   And  of  course he did. But  “Whatever,” he said. “I’m   leaving.”  And  he
slid off  the table (fortunately, he  hadn’t changed out of his  clothes; Andy
had started lecturing him before he’d  had a chance) and tried to leave the
room, although leaving the room at his pace was hardly dramatic, and Andy
scooted over to stand in the doorway.
   “Jude,”  he said, in one of  his sudden mood changes, “I know you don’t
want to go.  But this  is getting  scary.” He  took a breath. “Have  you  ever
even talked to anyone about what happened when you were a kid?”
   “That  doesn’t have anything to do with anything,” he’d said, feeling cold.
Andy had never alluded to what he’d told him, and he found himself feeling
betrayed that he should do so now.
   “Like  hell  it doesn’t,” Andy  had said, and the self-conscious theatricality
of the  phrase—did anyone really say  that outside of  the movies?—made
him  smile despite himself,  and  Andy,  mistaking  his smile  for  mockery,
changed directions again.  “There’s  something incredibly   arrogant about
your stubbornness, Jude,” he  continued. “Your   utter refusal  to  listen  to
anyone about anything that concerns your health or well-being  is either  a
pathological case of self-destructiveness or it’s a huge fuck-you to the rest
of us.”
   He  was hurt  by  this.  “And  there’s  something incredibly  manipulative
about you threatening to  commit  me whenever I  disagree with  you, and
especially in  this case, when I’ve  told  you  it  was a stupid  accident,” he
hurled back at  Andy. “Andy,  I  appreciate you,  I really  do.  I  don’t know

137
what I’d do without you. But I’m  an adult and you can’t dictate what I do or
don’t do.”
   “You  know  what, Jude?” Andy  had asked (now  he was yelling  again).
“You’re  right.  I  can’t  dictate your  decisions. But  I  don’t  have to accept
them, either. Go find some other asshole to be your doctor. I’m not going to
do it any longer.”
   “Fine,”  he’d snapped, and left.
   He couldn’t  remember when he had been angrier on his own behalf. Lots
of things made him angry—general inMustice, incompetence, directors who
didn’t give  Willem a part he wanted—but he rarely got angry about things
that happened or had happened to him: his  pains, past and present, were
things he tried not to brood about, were not questions to which he spent his
days searching for meaning. He already knew why they had happened: they
had happened because he had deserved them.
   But  he  knew  too that  his  anger was unMustified. And as much  as he
resented his dependence upon Andy, he was grateful for him as well, and he
knew Andy   found  his behavior  illogical.   But  Andy’s  Mob was to make
people better:  Andy  saw  him  the  way  he  saw a  mangled  tax  law,  as
something to be untangled and repaired—whether he thought he could be
repaired was almost incidental. The thing  he was trying  to fix—the   scars
that raised his back into an awful, unnatural topography, the skin stretched
as glossy and taut as a  roasted duck’s: the reason he was trying  to  save
money—was not,  he knew,  something Andy  would  approve of.  “Jude,”
Andy would say if  he ever heard what he was planning, “I promise you it’s
not going to work,  and you’re going  to have wasted all that money. Don’t
do it.”
   “But  they’re hideous,” he would mumble.
   “They’re  not, Jude,” Andy would say. “I swear to god they’re not.”
   (But  he wasn’t  going to  tell  Andy anyway, so  he would never have to
have that particular conversation.)
   The days passed and he didn’t call Andy and Andy didn’t call him.  As if
in punishment, his wrist throbbed at night when he was trying to sleep, and
at work he forgot and banged it rhythmically against the side of his desk as
he read, a longtime  bad tic  he’d not  managed to erase. The stitches had
seeped blood then, and he’d had to clean them, clumsily, in  the bathroom
sink.
   “What’s  wrong?” Willem  asked him one night.

138
   “Nothing,”   he said. He  could tell  Willem,  of  course, who would  listen
and say “Hmm”  in his  Willem-ish  way, but he knew he would  agree with
Andy.
   A  week  after their  fight,  he came home to  Lispenard Street—it was  a
Sunday, and he had been walking through  west Chelsea—and Andy was
waiting on the steps before their front door.
   He was surprised to see him. “Hi,” he said.
   “Hi,”   Andy had replied. They stood there. “I wasn’t sure if you’d take my
call.”
   “Of  course I would’ve.”
   “Listen,”  Andy  said. “I’m sorry.”
   “Me  too. I’m  sorry, Andy.”
   “But  I really do think you should see someone.”
   “I  know you do.”
   And  somehow they managed to leave it  at that:  a fragile  and mutually
unsatisfying cease-fire, with   the question  of  the  therapist the  vast gray
demilitari]ed  ]one  between them. The compromise (though how  this had
been agreed upon as such was unclear to him now) was that at the end of
every visit, he had to show Andy his arms, and Andy would examine them
for new cuts. Whenever he found one, he would log it in his chart. He was
never sure what  might  provoke another outburst  from  Andy:  sometimes
there were many new cuts, and Andy would  merely groan and write them
down, and sometimes there were only a few new cuts and Andy would get
agitated anyway. “You’ve fucking ruined your arms, you know that, right?”
he would ask him. But  he would say nothing, and let Andy’s  lecture wash
over him.  Part of  him  understood that by  not letting  Andy  do his  Mob—
which was, after all,  to heal him—he  was being disrespectful, and was to
some degree making Andy into a Moke in his own office.  Andy’s tallies—
sometimes he wanted to ask Andy if he would get a pri]e once he reached a
certain number, but he knew it would make him angry—were a way for him
to at least pretend he could manage the situation, even if he couldn’t: it was
the accrual of data as a small compensation for actual treatment.
   And  then,  two years later,  another wound had  opened on his left  leg,
which had always been the more troublesome one, and his cuttings were set
aside for the more urgent matter of his  leg. He had first  developed one of
these wounds less than a year after the inMury, and it had healed quickly.
“But  it  won’t  be  the last,”  the  Philadelphia surgeon had said.  “With  an

139
inMury like yours, everything—the vascular system, the dermal system—has
been so compromised that you should expect you might get these now and
again.”
   This  was the  eleventh he’d  had, so although  he was prepared for  the
sensation of it,  he was never to know  its  cause (An insect bite? A  brush
against the edge of  a  metal filing   cabinet? It  was always  something so
gallingly small, but still capable of tearing his skin as easily as if it had been
made of  paper), and  he was  never to  cease being  disgusted by  it:  the
suppuration, the sick, fishy scent, the little  gash, like a fetus’s mouth, that
would appear, burbling viscous, unidentifiable fluids.  It was unnatural, the
stuff of  monster movies  and myths,  to walk  about with   an opening that
wouldn’t, couldn’t  be closed. He began seeing Andy every Friday night so
he could debride the wound, cleaning it and removing  the dead tissue and
examining the area around it, looking for  new skin  growth, as he held his
breath and gripped the side of the table and tried not to scream.
   “You   have to  tell  me when  it’s  painful,  Jude,” Andy  had  said, as he
breathed and sweated and counted in his head. “It’s a good thing if you can
feel this, not a bad thing. It  means the nerves are still alive and still doing
what they’re supposed to.”
   “It’s  painful,”  he managed to choke out.
   “Scale of one to ten?”
   “Seven. Eight.”
   “I’m    sorry,”  Andy  replied.  “I’m    almost done,  I  promise.  Five  more
minutes.”
   He  shut  his  eyes and  counted to  three  hundred, making  himself  go
slowly.
   When it  was over, he would  sit, and Andy would  sit with  him  and give
him something to drink:  a soda, something sugary, and he’d feel the room
begin to clarify  itself around him, bit  by blurry  bit. “Slowly,”   Andy  would
say, “or you’ll  be sick.”  He would  watch as Andy dressed the wound—he
was always at his calmest when he was stitching or sewing or wrapping—
and in those moments, he would feel so vulnerable and weak that he would
have agreed to anything Andy might have suggested.
   “You’re  not going to cut yourself on your legs,”  Andy would say, more a
statement than a question.
   “No,  I won’t.”
   “Because that would be too insane, even for you.”

140
   “I  know.”
   “Your  anatomy is so degraded that it’d get really infected.”
   “Andy.  I know.”
   He had, at various points, suspected that Andy was talking to his friends
behind his  back, and  there were times  when they  would  use Andy-like
language and turns of phrase, and even four years after “The Incident,” as
Andy had begun calling it, he suspected that Willem was going through the
bathroom trash  in   the  morning,  and  he’d  had  to   take  extra  cautions
disposing of his ra]ors, bundling them in tissue and duct tape and throwing
them into  garbage cans on the  way to  work.  “Your  crew,”  Andy  called
them: “What’ve  you and your crew been up to these days?” (when he was
in a good mood)  and “I’m  going  to tell  your fucking  crew they’ve  got to
keep their eyes on you” (when he wasn’t).
   “Don’t    you   dare,  Andy,”    he’d   say.  “And   anyway,   it’s   not   their
responsibility.”
   “Of  course it is,”  Andy  would retort. As with  other issues, they couldn’t
agree on this one.
   But  now it  was twenty  months after the appearance of this most recent
wound and it  still  hadn’t healed. Or rather, it  had healed and then broken
again and then healed again, and then  he had woken  on Friday  and felt
something damp and gummy on  his leg—the  lower calf,  right  above the
ankle—and had known it had split.  He hadn’t called Andy  yet—he would
do so on  Monday—but  it  had been important  to  him  to take  this walk,
which he feared would be his last for some time, maybe months.
   He was on Madison and Seventy-fifth now, very near Andy’s office,  and
his leg was hurting him so much that he crossed to Fifth and sat on one of
the benches near the wall  that bordered the  park. As  soon as he sat, he
experienced that familiar di]]iness, that stomach-lifting nausea, and he bent
over and waited until  the  cement became cement again and he would be
able to stand. He felt in  those minutes his body’s treason, how sometimes
the central, tedious struggle in his life was his unwillingness to  accept that
he would be betrayed by it  again and again, that he could  expect nothing
from it  and yet had to keep maintaining it. So much time,  his and Andy’s,
was spent trying to repair something unfixable, something that should have
wound up in charred bits on a slag heap years ago. And for what? His mind,
he  supposed. But   there  was—as  Andy   might   have  said—something

141
incredibly arrogant about that, as if he was saving a Malopy because he had a
sentimental attachment to its sound system.
   If  I walk  Must a few more blocks, I can be at his office, he thought, but he
never would have. It was Sunday. Andy deserved some sort of respite from
him, and besides, what he was feeling now was not something he hadn’t felt
before.
   He waited a few more minutes and then heaved himself to his feet, where
he stood for half  a minute before dropping  to the bench again. Finally  he
was able to  stand for  good. He  wasn’t  ready yet,  but he  could imagine
himself walking  to the curb, raising his arm  to hail a cab, resting his head
against the back of its black  vinyl  banquette. He would count the steps to
get there, Must as he would count the steps it would take him to get from the
cab and to his building,  from  the elevator to  the apartment, and from the
front door to his  room. When he had learned to walk the third time—after
his braces had come off—it  had been Andy  who  had helped instruct  the
physical therapist (she had not been pleased, but had taken his suggestions),
and Andy who had, as Ana had Must four years before, watched him make
his way  unaccompanied across a space of ten feet, and then twenty, and
then fifty,  and then  a hundred. His  very  gait—the left  leg  coming up  to
make a near-ninety-degree angle with the ground, forming  a  rectangle of
negative space, the right listing behind—was engineered by Andy, who had
made him work at it for hours until he could do it himself. It was Andy who
told him he thought he was capable of walking without a cane, and when he
finally did it,  he’d had Andy to thank.
   Monday  was not very many hours away, he told himself as he struggled
to stay standing, and Andy would see him as he always did, no matter how
busy he was. “When did you notice  the break?” Andy would  say, nudging
gently at it with a bit of  gau]e. “Friday,”  he’d say. “Why didn’t  you call me
then, Jude?” Andy would say, irritated. “At   any rate, I hope you didn’t  go
on your  stupid fucking   walk.”  “No,  of  course not,”  he’d  say, but  Andy
wouldn’t  believe him.  He sometimes wondered whether Andy thought  of
him as only a collection of viruses and malfunctions: If you removed them,
who was he? If  Andy  didn’t  have to  take care of  him, would  he still   be
interested in him? If he appeared one day magically whole, with a stride as
easy as Willem’s and JB’s complete lack of self-consciousness, the way he
could lean  back in  his  chair  and let  his  shirt  hoist  itself  from  his  hips
without any fear, or with  Malcolm’s long  arms, the skin on their insides as

142
smooth as frosting, what would he be to Andy? What would he be to any of
them? Would they like him less? More? Or would he discover—as he often
feared—that what he understood as friendship was really motivated by their
pity of him?  How much of who  he was was inextricable from what he was
unable to do? Who  would  he have been, who  would  he be, without   the
scars, the cuts, the hurts, the sores, the fractures, the infections, the splints,
and the discharges?
   But  of course he would never know. Six months ago, they had managed
to get the wound under control,  and Andy  had examined it, checking and
rechecking, before issuing a fleet of warnings about what he should do if it
reopened.
   He  had been only half listening. He  was feeling light  that day for  some
reason, but Andy was querulous, and along with a lecture about his leg, he
had also endured another about his cutting (too much, Andy thought), and
his general appearance (too thin, Andy thought).
   He  had admired his leg, pivoting  it  and examining the place where the
wound  had at  last  closed  over, as  Andy  talked  and  talked.  “Are   you
listening to me, Jude?” he had finally demanded.
   “It   looks  good,”   he told  Andy,   not  answering him,  but  wanting  his
reassurance. “Doesn’t it?”
   Andy  sighed. “It  looks—”  And  then he stopped, and was quiet, and he
had looked up, had watched Andy shut his  eyes, as if refocusing himself,
and then open them  again. “It   looks good,  Jude,” he’d  said, quietly.  “It
does.”
   He had felt, then, a great surge of gratitude, because he knew Andy didn’t
think it  looked good, would never think it  looked good. To Andy, his body
was an onslaught of terrors, one against which the two  of them had to  be
constantly attentive.  He knew  Andy  thought  he was  self-destructive, or
delusional, or in denial.
   But  what Andy never understood about him was this: he was an optimist.
Every month, every week, he chose to open his eyes, to live another day in
the world. He did it  when he was feeling so awful that sometimes the pain
seemed to transport him to another state, one in which everything, even the
past that he worked so hard to forget, seemed to fade into a gray watercolor
wash. He did it when his memories crowded out all other thoughts, when it
took real effort,  real concentration, to tether himself  to his current  life,  to
keep himself from raging with despair and shame. He did it when he was so

143
exhausted of trying,  when being awake and alive  demanded such energy
that he had to lie in bed thinking of reasons to get up and try again, when it
would be much easier to go to the bathroom and untape the plastic ]ipped
bag containing  his cotton  pads and loose  ra]ors  and alcohol  wipes  and
bandages from its  hiding  place  beneath the  sink  and simply  surrender.
Those were the very bad days.
   It  really had been a mistake, that night before New Year’s Eve when he
sat in  the bathroom drawing  the ra]or   across his arm: he  had been half
asleep still; he was normally never so careless. But when he reali]ed what
he had done, there had been a minute, two minutes—he had counted—when
he genuinely hadn’t known what to  do, when sitting there, and letting  this
accident become  its  own   conclusion,  seemed easier than  making   the
decision himself, a decision that would ripple  past him to include  Willem,
and Andy, and days and months of consequences.
   He hadn’t known, finally,  what had compelled him to grab his towel from
its bar and wrap  it  around his arm, and  then pull  himself to  his feet  and
wake Willem up.  But with  each minute that passed, he moved further and
further from the other option, the events unfolding themselves with a speed
he couldn’t control, and he longed for that year right after the inMury, before
he met Andy, when it seemed that everything might be improved upon, and
that his future self might  be something bright and clean, when he knew so
little but had such hope, and faith that his hope might one day be rewarded.


   Before New York there had been law school, and before that, college, and
before that, there was Philadelphia, and the long, slow trip across country,
and before  that,  there was  Montana,  and  the boys’   home, and  before
Montana was the Southwest, and the motel rooms, and the lonely stretches
of road and the hours spent in the car. And  before that was South Dakota
and the monastery. And before that? A father and a mother, presumably. Or,
more realistically, simply  a man and a woman. And  then, probably, Must a
woman. And then him.
   It  was Brother  Peter, who taught him math, and was always  reminding
him of  his good fortune, who  told him  he’d been found in  a garbage can.
“Inside  a trash  bag, stuffed  with   eggshells and old  lettuce  and spoiled
spaghetti—and you,” Brother Peter said. “In the alley behind the drugstore,
you know the one,” even though he didn’t, as he rarely left the monastery.

144
   Later, Brother Michael claimed this wasn’t even true. “You weren’t in the
trash bin,” he told him. “You  were next to the trash bin.” Yes, he conceded,
there had been a trash bag, but he had been atop it, not in it, and at any rate,
who knew what was in  the trash bag itself, and who cared? More likely  it
was things  thrown away  from  the  pharmacy: cardboard and tissues and
twist ties and packing chips. “You mustn’t believe everything Brother Peter
says,” he reminded him, as he often did, along with: “You  mustn’t indulge
this tendency to self-mythologi]e,” as he said whenever he asked for details
of how  he’d come  to live  at the  monastery. “You came, and you’re  here
now, and you should concentrate on your future, and not on the past.”
   They  had created the past for  him.  He was found  naked, said Brother
Peter (or in  Must a diaper, said Brother  Michael),  but either  way, it  was
assumed he’d been left to, as they said, let nature have its way  with  him,
because it was mid-April  and still  free]ing,  and a  newborn couldn’t  have
survived for long  in that weather. He must have been there for only a few
minutes, however, because he was still almost warm when they found him,
and the  snow  hadn’t  yet  filled  the  car’s  tire  tracks,  nor  the footprints
(sneakers, probably a woman’s si]e eight) that led to the trash bin and then
away from it. He was lucky they had found him (it  was fate they had found
him). Everything  he had—his  name, his birthday  (itself  an estimate), his
shelter, his very  life—was  because of them. He should  be grateful  (they
didn’t expect him to be grateful to them; they expected him to be grateful to
God).
   He  never knew  what  they might  answer and  what they  might  not. A
simple question (Had he been crying when they found him? Had there been
a note? Had they looked for whoever had left him?) would be dismissed or
unknown or unexplained, but there were declarative answers for the more
complicated ones.
   “The   state couldn’t  find  anyone to  take  you.”  (Brother  Peter, again.)
“And  so we  said we’d  keep you here  as a temporary measure, and then
months turned into  years  and here you  are. The  end. Now  finish   these
equations; you’re taking all day.”
   But  why couldn’t the state find anyone? Theory one (beloved of Brother
Peter):  There   were  simply    too  many   unknowns—his   ethnicity,   his
parentage, possible congenital health problems, and on and on. Where had
he come from? Nobody knew. None  of the local  hospitals had recorded a
recent live birth  that matched his description. And  that was worrisome  to

145
potential guardians. Theory two (Brother Michael’s): This was a poor town
in a poor region in a poor state. No matter the public sympathy—and there
had been sympathy, he wasn’t to forget that—it was quite another thing to
add an extra child to one’s household, especially when one’s household was
already so stretched. Theory three (Father Gabriel’s): He was meant to stay
here. It had been God’s will. This was his home. And now he needed to stop
asking questions.
   Then there was a fourth  theory, invoked by almost all  of them when  he
misbehaved: He was bad, and had been bad from the beginning. “You must
have done something very bad to  be left  behind like  that,” Brother  Peter
used to tell him  after he hit him  with  the board, rebuking him as he stood
there, sobbing his apologies. “Maybe you cried so much they Must couldn’t
stand it any longer.”  And  he’d cry  harder, fearing that Brother  Peter was
correct.
   For  all their  interest in history,  they were collectively  irritated  when he
took interest in  his own, as if  he was persisting in  a particularly  tiresome
hobby that he wasn’t outgrowing at a fast enough rate. Soon he learned not
to ask, or at least not to ask directly, although he was always alert to stray
pieces of  information   that  he  might  learn  in   unlikely  moments,  from
unlikely  sources. With Brother  Michael, he read Great  Expectations, and
managed to misdirect the brother into a long  segue about what life for  an
orphan would be like  in  nineteenth-century London, a place as foreign to
him  as Pierre,  Must a hundred-some miles away. The  lesson  eventually
became a lecture, as he knew it would, but from it he did learn that he, like
Pip, would have been given to a relative if there were any to be identified or
had. So there were none, clearly. He was alone.
   His  possessiveness was also a bad habit that needed to be corrected. He
couldn’t remember when he first  began coveting something that he could
own, something that would  be his and no one else’s. “Nobody  here owns
anything,” they  told him,  but  was that really  true? He knew  that Brother
Peter had a tortoiseshell comb, for example, the color of freshly tapped tree
sap and Must as light-filled, of which he was very proud and with which he
brushed his mustache every morning. One day the comb disappeared, and
Brother Peter had interrupted his  history lesson with  Brother Matthew  to
grab him by  the shoulders and shake him,  yelling  that he had  stolen the
comb and had better return it  if  he knew what was good for  him.  (Father
Gabriel later found the comb, which had slipped into the shallow wedge of

146
space between the brother’s desk and the radiator.) And Brother Matthew
had an original  clothbound edition  of  The Bostonians, which  had a soft-
rubbed green spine and which he once held before him so he could look at
its  cover (“Don’t   touch!  I   said don’t  touch!”).   Even Brother  Luke,  his
favorite of the brothers, who rarely spoke and never scolded him, had a bird
that all the others considered his. Technically, said Brother David, the bird
was no one’s, but it had been Brother Luke who had found it and nursed it
and fed it and to whom it flew, and so if Luke wanted it, Luke could have it.
   Brother    Luke   was   responsible   for   the   monastery’s   garden  and
greenhouse, and in the warm months, he would help him with small tasks.
He knew from  eavesdropping on the other brothers that Brother Luke had
been a rich  man  before he came  to the  monastery. But  then something
happened, or he had done something (it  was  never clear which),  and he
either lost most of his money or gave it away, and now he was here, and Must
as poor as the others, although it was Brother Luke’s money that had paid
for  the  greenhouse, and which  helped defray  some of   the monastery’s
operating expenses. Something about the way  the other  brothers mostly
avoided Luke made him think he might be bad, although Brother Luke was
never bad, not to him.
   It  was shortly after Brother  Peter accused him of stealing his comb that
he actually stole his first item:  a package of crackers from the kitchen. He
was passing by one morning on the way to the room they had set aside for
his schooling, and no one was there, and the package was on the countertop,
Must within his reach, and he had, on impulse, grabbed it and run, stuffing it
under the scratchy wool tunic he wore, a miniature version of the brothers’
own. He had detoured so he could hide it under his pillow, which had made
him late for  class with Brother Matthew, who  had hit him with  a forsythia
switch  as punishment,  but  the  secret  of  its  existence  filled   him  with
something warm and Moyous. That night, alone in bed,  he ate one of  the
crackers (which he didn’t even really  like)  carefully, breaking it  into eight
sections with  his  teeth and letting   each piece sit  on  his tongue  until  it
became soft and gluey and he could swallow it whole.
   After  that, he stole more and more. There was nothing in the monastery
he really wanted, nothing  that was really worth  having, and so he simply
took what he came across, with no real plan or craving: food when he could
find it;  a clacky  black button  he found on  the floor  of  Brother Michael’s
room in  one of his  post-breakfast prowlings; a pen from  Father Gabriel’s

147
desk, snatched when, mid-lecture, the father had turned from him to find a
book; Brother Peter’s comb (this  last was the only  one he planned, but it
gave him no greater thrill than the others). He stole matches and pencils and
pieces of  paper—useless Munk, but someone else’s Munk—shoving them
down his underwear and running back to his  bedroom to hide them under
his mattress, which was so thin that he could feel its  every spring beneath
his back at night.
   “Stop  that  running around or  I’ll   have to beat you!”   Brother Matthew
would yell at him as he hurried to his room.
   “Yes, Brother,” he would reply, and make himself slow to a walk.
   It   was the  day he  took  his  biggest pri]e   that he  was caught:  Father
Gabriel’s  silver  lighter,  stolen  directly  off   his  desk when  he’d  had  to
interrupt his  lecturing of  him  to answer a phone call.  Father Gabriel had
bent over his  keyboard, and he had reached out and  grabbed the lighter,
palming its cool  heavy weight in  his hand until  he was finally   dismissed.
Once outside  the  father’s  office,   he  had  hurriedly  pushed  it  into   his
underwear and was walking as quickly as he could back to his room when
he turned the corner without  looking  and ran directly  into  Brother Pavel.
Before the brother could shout at him,  he had fallen  back, and the lighter
had fallen out, bouncing against the flagstones.
   He  had been beaten, of course, and shouted at, and in what he thought
was a final punishment, Father Gabriel had called  him into  his office  and
told him  that  he would  teach him  a lesson about stealing other  people’s
things.  He  had  watched,  uncomprehending but   so  frightened  that  he
couldn’t even cry, as Father Gabriel folded his handkerchief to the mouth of
a bottle of olive  oil, and then rubbed the oil  into the back of  his left hand.
And then he had taken his lighter—the same one he had stolen—and held
his hand under the  flame until  the  greased spot had caught fire,  and his
whole hand was swallowed by a white, ghostly glow. Then he had screamed
and screamed, and the father had hit him in the face for  screaming. “Stop
that shouting,” he’d shouted. “This is what you get. You’ll  never forget not
to steal again.”
   When  he regained consciousness, he was back in his bed, and his hand
was bandaged. All of his things were gone: the stolen things, of course, but
the things he had found on  his own  as well—the stones and feathers and
arrowheads, and the fossil that  Brother Luke  had given  him for  his  fifth
birthday, the first gift he had ever received.

148
   After  that,  after he was caught, he was made to go  to Father Gabriel’s
office every  night and take off  his clothes, and the  father would  examine
inside him for any contraband. And later, when things got worse, he would
think back to that package of crackers: if only he hadn’t stolen them. If only
he hadn’t made things so bad for himself.
   His  rages  began after  his evening  examinations with   Father Gabriel,
which soon expanded to include midday ones with Brother Peter. He would
have tantrums, throwing himself  against the stone walls of  the monastery
and screaming as loudly as he  could, knocking  the back of  his  damaged
ugly hand (which,  six months later, still  hurt  sometimes, a deep, insistent
pulsing)  against the  hard,  mean  corners of  the  wooden  dinner  tables,
banging the back of his neck, his elbows, his cheeks—all the most painful,
tender parts—against the side of his desk. He had them in  the day and at
night, he couldn’t  control them, he would feel  them move over him like  a
fog and let himself relax into them, his body and voice moving in ways that
excited and repelled  him, for  as  much as he  hurt afterward,  he knew  it
scared the brothers, that they feared his anger and noise and power. They hit
him with  whatever they could find, they started keeping a belt looped on a
nail on the schoolroom wall, they took off their sandals and beat him for so
long that the next day he couldn’t even sit, they called him a monster, they
wished for his death, they told him they should have left him on the garbage
bag. And  he  was  grateful  for  this,  too,  for  their  help  exhausting him,
because he couldn’t lasso the beast himself and he needed their assistance to
make it retreat, to make it walk  backward into the cage until it  freed itself
again.
   He started wetting his bed and was made to go visit the father more often,
for more examinations, and the more examinations the father gave him, the
more he wet the bed. The father began visiting him in his room at night, and
so did  Brother Peter, and later,  Brother Matthew,  and he  got worse  and
worse: they made him sleep in  his wet  nightshirt, they  made him wear it
during the day. He knew how badly he stank, like  urine and blood, and he
would scream and rage and howl, interrupting  lessons, pushing books off
tables so that the brothers would have to  start hitting  him right  away, the
lesson abandoned. Sometimes he  was hit   hard enough  so that  he  lost
consciousness, which is what he began to crave: that blackness, where time
passed and he wasn’t in it,  where things were  done to him  but he didn’t
know it.

149
   Sometimes  there were  reasons behind his  rages, although  they  were
reasons known only  to him.  He  felt  so ceaselessly dirty, so soiled,  as if
inside he was a  rotten building,  like  the condemned church he had been
taken to  see in  one of   his rare  trips  outside the  monastery: the  beams
speckled with mold, the rafters splintered and holey with nests of termites,
the triangles of white sky showing immodestly  through the ruined rooftop.
He had learned in a history lesson about leeches, and how many years ago
they had  been thought  to  siphon the  unhealthy blood  out  of  a  person,
sucking the disease foolishly and greedily into their fat wormy  bodies, and
he had spent his free hour—after classes but before chores—wading in the
stream on the edge of the monastery’s property, searching for leeches of his
own. And when he couldn’t find any, when he was told there weren’t any in
that creek, he screamed and screamed until his voice deserted him, and even
then he couldn’t stop, even when his throat felt like it was filling itself  with
hot blood.
   Once he was in his room, and both Father Gabriel and Brother Peter were
there, and he  was trying  not  to  shout, because he had  learned that  the
quieter he was, the sooner it  would  end, and he thought he  saw, passing
outside the   doorframe  quick  as  a  moth,  Brother   Luke,  and  had  felt
humiliated, although he didn’t know the word  for humiliation  then. And so
the next day he had gone in his free time to Brother Luke’s garden and had
snapped off every one of  the daffodils’  heads, piling  them at the door  of
Luke’s gardener’s shed, their  fluted crowns  pointing  toward the  sky like
open beaks.
   Later, alone again and moving through his chores, he had been regretful,
and sorrow had made his arms heavy, and he  had dropped the bucket of
water he was lugging from  one end of the room to  the other, which made
him toss himself to the ground and scream with frustration and remorse.
   At  dinner, he  was unable to eat. He looked  for Luke,  wondering when
and how he would be punished, and when he would have to apologi]e to the
brother. But he wasn’t there. In his anxiety, he dropped the metal pitcher of
milk, the  cold white liquid  splattering across the floor,  and Brother Pavel,
who was next to him, yanked him from the bench and pushed him onto the
ground. “Clean it  up,” Brother  Pavel barked at him, throwing  a dishrag at
him. “But that’ll  be all you’ll  eat until Friday.”  It was Wednesday. “Now go
to your room.” He ran, before the brother changed his mind.

150
   The door to  his room—a converted closet, windowless and wide enough
for only  a cot, at one end of  the second story above the dining hall—was
always left open, unless one of the brothers or the father were with him, in
which case it was usually closed. But even as he rounded the corner from
the staircase, he could see the door was shut, and for a while he lingered in
the quiet, empty hallway, unsure what might be waiting for him: one of the
brothers, probably. Or  a monster, perhaps. After  the  stream incident,  he
occasionally daydreamed that  the shadows  thickening  the corners  were
giant  leeches, swaying upright,   their  glossy  segmented skins dark  and
greasy, waiting to smother him with their wet, soundless weight. Finally he
was brave enough and ran straight at the door, opening it with a slam, only
to find  his bed, with  its mud-brown  wool blanket,  and the box of  tissues,
and his schoolbooks on their shelf. And  then he saw it in  the corner, near
the head of  the bed: a glass Mar with a bouquet of  daffodils,  their  bright
funnels frilled at their tops.
   He  sat on the floor   near the Mar and rubbed one of the flowers’  velvet
heads between his fingers, and in that moment his sadness was so great, so
overpowering, that he wanted to  tear at himself,  to  rip  the scar from  the
back of  his  hand, to  shred himself  into  bits  as  he had  done to  Luke’s
flowers.
   But  why had he done such a thing to Brother Luke? It wasn’t as if  Luke
was the only  one who was  kind to  him—when  he wasn’t being  made to
punish him, Brother David  always praised him and told him how  quick he
was, and even Brother Peter regularly brought him books from the library in
town  to  read and  discussed them  with  him  afterward,  listening  to  his
opinions as if he were a real person—but not only  had Luke never beaten
him, he had  made efforts to  reassure him, to express his allegiance with
him. The previous Sunday, he was to recite aloud the pre-supper prayer, and
as he stood at the foot of Father Gabriel’s table, he was suddenly sei]ed by
an impulse to misbehave, to grab a handful of the cubed potatoes from the
dish before him and fling them around the room. He could already feel the
scrape in his throat from the screaming he would do, the singe of the belt as
it slapped across his back, the darkness he would sink into, the giddy bright
of day  he would  wake  to. He  watched his  arm lift   itself  from  his  side,
watched his fingers open, petal-like,  and float  toward the bowl.  And  Must
then he had raised his head and had seen Brother Luke, who  gave him a
wink, so solemn and brief, like a camera’s shutter-click, that he was at first

151
unaware he had seen anything at all. And then Luke winked at him  again,
and for some reason this calmed him, and he came back to himself, and said
his lines and sat down, and dinner passed without incident.
   And  now there were these flowers. But before he could think about what
they might  mean, the door  opened, and there was Brother  Peter, and he
stood, waiting in  that terrible  moment that he could  never prepare for, in
which anything might happen, and anything might come.
   The  next day, he had left  directly  after  his classes for the  greenhouse,
determined that he should say something to Luke. But as he drew closer, his
resolve deserted him, and he dawdled, kicking at small stones and kneeling
to pick  up  and then discard twigs,  throwing  them toward  the forest  that
bordered the property. What, really, did he mean to say? He was about to
turn back,  to  retreat toward  a  particular  tree on  the  north  edge of  the
grounds in  whose  cleft  of  roots  he had  dug  a  hole and  begun a  new
collection  of   things—though  these  things   were  only   obMects he had
discovered in the woods  and were safely nobody’s:  little  rocks; a branch
that was shaped a bit like a lean dog in mid-leap—and where he spent most
of his free time, unearthing his possessions and holding them in his hands,
when he heard someone say his name and  turned and saw it  was  Luke,
holding his hand up in greeting and walking toward him.
   “I    thought   it   was   you,”   Brother   Luke    said  as   he  neared   him
(disingenuously, it would  occur to  him much later,  for who  else would  it
have been? He was the only child at the monastery), and although he tried,
he was unable to find the words to apologi]e to Luke, unable in truth to find
the words for anything, and instead he found himself crying. He was never
embarrassed when he cried, but in this moment he was, and he turned away
from Brother  Luke and held the back of  his scarred hand before his eyes.
He was  suddenly aware  of  how  hungry  he was,  and how  it   was only
Thursday afternoon, and he wouldn’t  have anything  to  eat until  the next
day.
   “Well,”   said Luke, and he could feel the brother  kneeling, very close to
him. “Don’t   cry;  don’t  cry.”   But  his voice  was so  gentle, and  he cried
harder.
   Then Brother Luke  stood, and when he spoke next, his voice was Mollier.
“Jude, listen,” he said. “I have something to show you. Come with me,” and
he started walking toward the greenhouse, turning around to make sure he
was following.  “Jude,”  he called again, “come  with  me,” and he, curious

152
despite himself, began to  follow  him,  walking  toward the  greenhouse he
knew so well with  the beginnings of  an unfamiliar eagerness, as if he had
never seen it before.
   As  an adult,  he became obsessed in spells with  trying   to identify   the
exact moment in which  things had started going so wrong, as if  he could
free]e it,  preserve it in agar, hold it  up and teach it before a class: This is
when it happened. This is where it started. He’d think: Was it when I  stole
the crackers? Was it when I ruined Luke’s daffodils? Was it when I had my
first tantrum? And, more impossibly, was it  when I did whatever I  did that
made her leave me behind that drugstore? And what had that been?
   But  really, he would  know: it  was when he walked into  the greenhouse
that afternoon. It was when he allowed himself  to be escorted in, when he
gave up everything  to follow   Brother Luke.  That  had been the moment.
And after that, it had never been right again.


   There  are five  more steps and then he is at  their front  door,  where he
can’t fit the key into  the lock because his hands are shaking, and he curses,
nearly dropping  it.  And  then he is  in  the  apartment, and there are only
fifteen steps from the front door to his bed, but he still  has to stop halfway
and bring himself down slowly to the ground, and pull himself the final feet
to his  room on his  elbows. For  a while  he lies  there, everything shifting
around him, until he is strong enough to pull the blanket down over him. He
will  lie there until the sun leaves the sky and the apartment grows dark, and
then, finally, he will  hoist himself onto his bed with his arms, where he will
fall  asleep  without  eating  or  washing  his  face  or  changing,  his  teeth
clacking  against themselves from   the pain.  He  will   be  alone,  because
Willem  will  go out  with  his girlfriend  after the  show, and by the time  he
gets home, it will be very late.
   When  he wakes, it  will   be very  early, and he  will  feel  better, but  his
wound will  have wept during the night,  and pus will  have soaked through
the gau]e he had applied on Sunday morning before he left for his walk, his
disastrous walk, and his pants will be stuck to his skin with its oo]e. He will
send a message to Andy, and then leave another with his exchange, and then
he will shower, carefully removing  the bandage, which will bring scraps of
rotten flesh and clots of blackened mucus-thick blood with it.  He will  pant
and gasp to keep from shouting. He will remember the conversation he had

153
with  Andy  the last  time  this  happened, when Andy  suggested he get a
wheelchair to keep on reserve, and although he hates the thought of using a
wheelchair again, he will wish  he had one now. He will think  that Andy is
right, that his walks are a sign of his inexcusable hubris, that his pretending
that everything  is fine,  that he  is not  in  fact  disabled, is selfish,  for  the
consequences it means for other people, people who have been inexplicably,
unreasonably generous and good to him for years, for almost decades now.
   He  will  turn off  the shower and lower himself  into the tub  and lean his
cheek against the tile and wait to  feel better. He will  be reminded of  how
trapped he is, trapped in a body he hates, with a past he hates, and how he
will never be able to change either. He will want to cry, from frustration and
hatred and pain, but he hasn’t cried since what happened with Brother Luke,
after which he told himself he would  never cry again. He will  be reminded
that he is a nothing,  a scooped-out husk in which the  fruit  has long since
mummified and shrunk, and now rattles uselessly. He will  experience that
prickle, that shiver of  disgust that afflicts him  in both  his happiest and his
most wretched moments, the  one that  asks him  who  he thinks  he is  to
inconvenience so many people, to think he has the right to keep going when
even his own body tells him he should stop.
   He will  sit  and wait and breathe and he will be grateful that it is so early,
that there is no chance of Willem discovering  him and having to save him
once again. He  will   (though  he won’t  be  able  to remember how  later)
somehow work himself into a standing position, get himself out of  the tub,
take some aspirin, go to work. At  work,  the words will  blur  and dance on
the page, and by the time Andy calls, it will only be seven a.m., and he will
tell Marshall he’s sick, refuse Marshall’s offer of  a car, but let him—this is
how bad he feels—help him into a cab. He will  make the ride uptown that
he had stupidly walked  Must the previous day. And when Andy opens the
door, he will try to remain composed.
   “Judy,”  Andy will  say, and he will be in his gentle mode, there will be no
lectures from him today, and he will allow Andy to lead him past his empty
waiting room,  his office  not yet  open for  the day, and help him  onto the
table where he has spent hours, days of hours, will let  Andy help  undress
him even, as he closes his eyes and waits for the small bright hurt of Andy
easing the tape off his leg, and pulling away from  the raw skin the sodden
gau]e beneath.

154
   My  life,  he will think,  my life. But  he won’t be able to think beyond this,
and he will keep repeating the words to himself—part chant, part curse, part
reassurance—as he slips into that other world that he visits when  he is in
such pain, that world he  knows is never far  from his  own but that he can
never remember after: My life.

155
                                                         2

YOU ASKED ME once when I knew that he was for me, and I told you that I had
always known. But that wasn’t true, and I knew it even as I said it—I said it
because it sounded pretty, like something someone might say in a book or a
movie, and because we were both feeling  so wretched, and helpless, and
because I thought if I said it,  we both might  feel better about the situation
before us, the situation that we perhaps had been capable of preventing—
perhaps not—but at any rate hadn’t. This was in the hospital: the first time,
I should say. I know  you remember: you had flown  in from  Colombo that
morning, hopscotching across cities and countries and hours, so  that you
landed a full day before you left.
   But  I want to be accurate now. I want to be accurate both because there is
no reason not to be, and because I should be—I have always tried to be, I
always try to be.
   I’m  not sure where to begin.
   Maybe with  some nice words, although they are also true words: I liked
you right  away. You  were twenty-four  when we  met, which  would  have
made me forty-seven. (Jesus.) I thought you were unusual: later, he’d speak
of your  goodness, but he never needed to explain it  to  me, for  I  already
knew you were. It  was the first  summer the group of  you came up to the
house, and it was such a strange weekend for me, and for him as well—for
me because in you four I saw who and what Jacob might have been, and for
him because he had only known  me as his teacher, and he was suddenly
seeing me in my shorts and wearing my  apron as I scooped clams off the
grill,  and arguing with  you three about everything. Once I  stopped seeing
Jacob’s face in all  of yours,  though, I  was able to enMoy the weekend, in
large part because you three seemed to enMoy it so much. You saw nothing
strange in the situation: you were boys who assumed that people would like
you, not from  arrogance but because people always had, and you had no
reason to think that, if you were polite and friendly, then that politeness and
friendliness might not be reciprocated.
   He,  of  course, had every reason to not think  that,  although I  wouldn’t
discover that until  later. Then, I watched him  at mealtimes, noticing  how,

156
during particularly  raucous debates, he would  sit  back in  his  seat, as if
physically leaning out of  the ring,  and observe all of you,  how easily you
challenged me  without   fear  of  provoking   me,  how  thoughtlessly  you
reached across the table to serve yourselves more potatoes, more ]ucchini,
more steak, how you asked for what you wanted and received it.
   The thing  I  remember most vividly  from that weekend is a small  thing.
We were walking,  you and he and Julia and I,  down  that little  path lined
with birches that led to the lookout. (Back then it was a narrow throughway,
do you remember that? It was only later that it became dense with trees.) I
was with him,  and you and Julia were behind us. You were talking  about,
oh, I don’t know—insects? Wildflowers? You two  always found something
to discuss, you both loved being outdoors, both loved animals: I loved this
about both of  you,  even though  I  couldn’t  understand it.  And  then you
touched his shoulder and moved in front of him and knelt and retied one of
his shoelaces that had come undone, and then fell back in step with Julia. It
was so fluid,  a little   gesture: a step forward, a  fold  onto bended knee, a
retreat back toward her side. It was nothing  to you, you  didn’t  even think
about it;  you never  even paused in your  conversation. You were  always
watching him  (but you  all  were), you took  care of  him in  a do]en  small
ways, I   saw all   of  this  over  those few  days—but  I  doubt  you  would
remember this particular incident.
   But  while you were doing it, he looked at me, and the look on his face—I
still cannot describe it, other than in that moment, I felt something crumble
inside me, like a tower  of damp sand built too high:  for him,  and for you,
and for me as well. And in his face, I knew my  own would be echoed. The
impossibility of  finding  someone to do such a thing for another person, so
unthinkingly,  so gracefully!  When I  looked  at him,  I  understood, for the
first time since Jacob died, what people meant when they said someone was
heartbreaking, that something could break your heart. I had always thought
it mawkish, but in that moment I reali]ed  that it might  have been mawkish,
but it was also true.
   And  that, I suppose, was when I knew.


   I  had never thought I  would  become a parent, and not because I’d had
bad parents myself.  Actually,  I  had wonderful  parents: my  mother  died
when I was very young, of breast cancer, and for the next five years it was

157
Must me and my father. He was a doctor, a general practitioner who liked to
hope he might grow old with his patients.
   We lived  on West End, at Eighty-second Street, and his practice was in
our building,  on  the  ground floor,  and  I  used to come  by  to visit   after
school. All his patients knew me, and I was proud to be the doctor’s son, to
say hello to everyone, to watch the babies he had delivered grow into kids
who looked up to me because their parents told them I was Dr. Stein’s son,
that I went to a good high school, one of the best in the city, and that if they
studied hard enough, they might be  able to as well.  “Darling,”   my father
called me, and when he saw me after school on those visits, he would place
his palm on the back of my neck, even when I grew taller than he, and kiss
me on the side of my head. “My darling,” he’d say, “how was school?”
   When I was eight, he married his office manager, Adele. There was never
a moment in my childhood in which I was not aware of Adele’s presence: it
was she who took me shopping for  new clothes when I  needed them, she
who Moined us for Thanksgiving, she who wrapped my birthday presents. It
was not so much that Adele was a mother to me; it’s  that to me, a mother
was Adele.
   She was older, older than my father, and one of those women whom men
like and feel  comfortable around but  never think of  marrying,  which is  a
kind way of saying she wasn’t pretty. But who needs prettiness in a mother?
I asked her once if she wanted children of her own, and she said I was her
child, and she couldn’t imagine having a better one, and it says everything
you need to know about my father and Adele and how I felt about them and
how they treated me that I never even questioned that claim of hers until I
was in my thirties and my then-wife  and I were fighting  about whether we
should have another child, a child to replace Jacob.
   She was an only child, as I was an only child, and my father was an only
child, too: a family  of onlys. But  Adele’s parents were living—my  father’s
were not—and we used to  travel out to  Brooklyn,  to what  has now been
swallowed by  Park Slope,  to see them  on weekends. They had  lived  in
America for  almost  five  decades and still  spoke very  little   English: the
father, timidly,  the mother, expressively. They were blocky,  like  she was,
and kind, like  she was—Adele  would speak to  them in  Russian, and her
father, whom I  called Grandpa by  default, would  unclench one of his  fat
fists and show me what was secreted within: a wooden birdcall, or a wodge
of bright-pink  gum.  Even when I  was an  adult, in  law  school, he would

158
always give me something, although he no longer had his store then, which
meant he  must  have  bought  them   somewhere. But   where? I   always
imagined there might be a secret shop full of toys that went out of  fashion
generations ago, and yet was patroni]ed, faithfully, by  old immigrant  men
and women, who kept  them in  business by buying their  stocks of whorl-
painted wooden tops and little metal soldiers and sets of Macks, their rubber
balls sticky with grime even before their plastic wrap had been torn.
   I  had always had a theory—born of nothing—that men who had been old
enough to witness their father’s second marriage (and, therefore, old enough
to make a Mudgment) married their stepmother, not their mother. But I didn’t
marry someone like  Adele.  My  wife,   my first   wife,  was cool  and self-
contained. Unlike  the  other girls  I   knew, who  were  always minimi]ing
themselves—their intelligence, of course, but also  their desires and anger
and fears and composure—Liesl  never did.  On  our  third  date, we  were
walking out  of  a café on MacDougal  Street, and a man stumbled from  a
shadowed doorway and vomited on her. Her  sweater was chunky with  it,
that pumpkin-bright splatter, and I  remember in particular the way  a large
globule clung to the little diamond ring she wore on her right hand, as if the
stone itself had grown a tumor. The people around us gasped, or shrieked,
but Liesl  only closed her eyes. Another woman would  have screeched, or
squealed (I would  have screeched or squealed), but I remember she only
gave a great shudder, as if her body  were acknowledging the  disgust but
also removing  itself  from   it,  and  when she  opened her  eyes, she was
recovered. She peeled off her cardigan, chucked it into the nearest garbage
can. “Let’s  go,”  she told  me. I  had  been mute, shocked, throughout the
entire episode, but in that moment, I wanted her, and I followed her where
she led me, which  turned out to be  her apartment, a hellhole on Sullivan
Street. The entire time, she kept her right hand slightly aloft from her body,
the blob of vomit still clinging  to her ring.
   Neither  my father nor  Adele particularly  liked  her, although they never
told me so; they  were polite, and respectful of  my wishes. In  exchange, I
never asked them, never made them lie. I  don’t  think  it was  because she
wasn’t Jewish—neither of my parents were religious—but, I think, because
they thought I  was too  much in  awe of  her. Or  maybe this  is what  I’ve
decided, late in life. Maybe it  was because what I admired as competence,
they saw as frigidity, or coldness. Goodness knows they wouldn’t have been
the first to think that. They were always polite to her, and she reasonably so

159
to them, but I  think they would  have preferred a potential daughter-in-law
who would  flirt  with  them a  little,  to whom  they could  tell embarrassing
stories about my childhood,  who  would have lunch  with  Adele  and play
chess with my father. Someone like you, in fact. But  that wasn’t Liesl  and
wouldn’t ever be, and once they reali]ed that, they too remained a bit aloof,
not to express their displeasure but as a sort of self-discipline, a reminder to
themselves that there were limits, her limits, that they should try to respect.
When I was with  her, I felt  oddly relaxed, as if, in  the face of such sturdy
competence, even misfortune wouldn’t dare try to challenge us.
   We  had met in  New York,  where I  was in  law  school and she was in
medical school, and after graduating, I got  a clerkship in  Boston, and she
(one year older  than I)  started her internship.  She was training  to be  an
oncologist. I  had  been admiring  of  that,  of  course, because of  what  it
suggested: there is nothing more soothing than a woman who wants to heal,
whom you  imagine bent maternally  over a patient,  her lab coat  white as
clouds. But Liesl didn’t want to be admired: she was interested in oncology
because it was one of the harder disciplines, because it was thought to be
more cerebral. She and her  fellow  oncological  interns had scorn  for  the
radiologists (too mercenary), the cardiologists  (too puffed-up and pleased
with  themselves), the pediatricians  (too  sentimental), and especially  the
surgeons (unspeakably arrogant) and the dermatologists (beneath comment,
although they  of  course worked  with   them frequently).  They  liked   the
anesthesiologists (weird and geeky and fastidious, and prone to addiction),
the pathologists (even more cerebral than they), and—well, that was about
it. Sometimes a group of them would  come over to our  house, and would
linger  after  dinner  discussing cases and studies, while   their  partners—
lawyers and historians and writers and lesser scientists—were ignored until
we slunk off to the living room to discuss the various trivial, less-interesting
things with which we occupied our days.
   We  were two  adults,  and it  was  a happy  enough life.   There was no
whining that we didn’t spend enough time with each other, from me or from
her. We remained in Boston for her residency, and then she moved back to
New York to  do her fellowship.  I stayed. By that  time I  was working at a
firm  and was  an adMunct at the law  school. We  saw each other  on  the
weekends, one in Boston, one in New  York. And  then she completed her
program and returned to Boston; we  married; we  bought a house, a little
one, not the one I have now, Must at the edge of Cambridge.

160
   My  father and Adele  (and Liesl’s parents, for  that matter; mysteriously,
they were considerably more emotive than she was, and on our infrequent
trips to Santa Barbara, while her father made Mokes and her mother placed
before me  plates of  sliced  cucumbers and peppered tomatoes from  her
garden, she would watch with a closed-off expression, as if embarrassed, or
at least perplexed by,  their relative  expansiveness) never asked us if  we
were going to have children; I think they thought that as long as they didn’t
ask, there was a chance we might. The truth was that I didn’t really feel the
need for it; I  had never envisioned having a child, I didn’t  feel about them
one way or another. And that seemed enough of a reason not to: having a
child, I  thought, was something you  should actively want,  crave, even. It
was not a venture for the ambivalent or passionless. Liesl felt the same way,
or so we thought.
   But  then, one evening—I  was thirty-one, she was thirty-two:   young—I
came home and she was already in the kitchen, waiting  for me. This  was
unusual; she worked longer hours than I  did, and I  usually didn’t  see her
until eight or nine at night.
   “I   need to talk to  you,”  she said, solemnly, and I was suddenly scared.
She saw that and  smiled—she wasn’t  a cruel  person, Liesl,  and I  don’t
mean to  give   the  impression  that  she was  without   kindness,  without
gentleness, because she had both in her, was capable of both. “It’s nothing
bad, Harold.” Then she laughed a little. “I don’t think.”
   I   sat. She inhaled.  “I’m   pregnant.  I  don’t  know  how  it   happened. I
must’ve skipped a pill or two and forgotten. It’s almost eight weeks. I had it
confirmed at  Sally’s  today.”  (Sally  was  her roommate  from  their  med-
school days, her best friend, and her gynecologist.)  She said all this  very
quickly, in staccato, digestible sentences. Then she was silent. “I’m on a pill
where I don’t get my periods, you know, so I didn’t know.” And then, when
I said nothing, “Say something.”
   I  couldn’t, at first. “How  do you feel?” I asked.
   She shrugged. “I feel fine.”
   “Good,”  I said, stupidly.
   “Harold,”  she said, and sat across from me, “what do you want to do?”
   “What  do you want to do?”
   She shrugged again. “I know what I want to do. I want to know what you
want to do.”
   “You  don’t want to keep it.”

161
   She didn’t disagree. “I want to hear what you want.”
   “What  if I  say I want to keep it?”
   She was ready. “Then I’d seriously consider it.”
   I  hadn’t been expecting this, either. “Lee],”   I said, “we  should do what
you want  to  do.”  This  wasn’t  completely  magnanimous; it  was  mostly
cowardly. In   this case, as  with  many  things,  I  was  happy to  cede the
decision to her.
   She sighed. “We don’t have to decide tonight. We have some time.” Four
weeks, she didn’t need to say.
   In  bed, I thought. I thought those thoughts all men think when a woman
tells them she’s pregnant: What would the baby look like? Would I  like it?
Would  I  love  it?  And   then,  more crushingly:   fatherhood. With   all  its
responsibilities and fulfillments and tedium and possibilities for failure.
   The next morning, we didn’t  speak of it, and the day after that, we didn’t
speak of it  again. On Friday, as we were going  to bed, she said, sleepily,
“Tomorrow  we’ve got  to  discuss this,” and  I  said, “Absolutely.”  But  we
didn’t, and we  didn’t, and then the ninth  week passed, and then the tenth,
and then the  eleventh and twelfth,  and  then it  was too  late to  easily  or
ethically do anything, and I think  we were both relieved. The decision had
been made for us—or rather, our indecisiveness had made the decision for
us—and we were going to have a child. It was the first time in our marriage
that we’d been so mutually indecisive.
   We  had imagined that  it  would be  a girl,  and if  it  was,  we’d  name it
Adele, for  my  mother, and Sarah, for Sally.  But it  wasn’t  a girl,  and we
instead let Adele (who was so happy she started crying, one of the very few
times I’d  seen her  cry) pick  the  first  name and Sally  the  second: Jacob
More. (Why More, we asked Sally, who said it was for Thomas More.)
   I  have never been one of those people—I know you aren’t, either—who
feels that the love one has for a child is somehow a superior love, one more
meaningful, more significant, and grander than any other. I didn’t feel  that
before Jacob, and I didn’t feel that after. But it is a singular love, because it
is  a  love  whose foundation   is  not  physical  attraction,  or  pleasure, or
intellect, but fear. You  have never known fear until  you have a child,  and
maybe that  is what  tricks  us  into  thinking  that  it  is  more  magnificent,
because the fear itself is more magnificent. Every day, your first thought is
not “I  love him”  but  “How  is he?” The world,  overnight, rearranges itself
into an obstacle course of terrors. I would hold him in my arms and wait to

162
cross the street and would think how absurd it was that my child,  that any
child,  could expect  to survive  this  life.  It  seemed as improbable  as the
survival of one of those late-spring butterflies—you know, those little white
ones—I sometimes saw wobbling through the air,  always Must millimeters
away from smacking itself against a windshield.
   And  let me tell you two  other things I learned. The first is that it doesn’t
matter how old that child  is, or  when or how  he became yours. Once you
decide  to  think   of   someone as  your   child,   something  changes, and
everything you have previously  enMoyed about them, everything you have
previously felt for them, is preceded first by that fear. It’s not biological; it’s
something extra-biological, less a determination  to ensure the survival  of
one’s genetic code, and more a  desire to  prove oneself inviolable  to  the
universe’s feints and challenges, to  triumph  over the things  that want  to
destroy what’s yours.
   The second thing is this: when your child dies, you feel everything you’d
expect to feel, feelings so well-documented by so many others that I won’t
even bother to list  them here, except to say that  everything that’s written
about mourning is all the same, and it’s all the same for a reason—because
there is no real deviation  from  the text. Sometimes you feel  more of  one
thing and less of  another, and sometimes you feel them out of  order, and
sometimes you feel  them  for  a  longer  time  or  a shorter  time.  But  the
sensations are always the same.
   But  here’s what no one says—when it’s your child, a part of you, a very
tiny  but  nonetheless unignorable part of  you,  also  feels relief.  Because
finally,   the  moment   you  have  been  expecting,   been  dreading,  been
preparing yourself for since the day you became a parent, has come.
   Ah, you tell yourself, it’s arrived.  Here it is.
   And  after that, you have nothing to fear again.


   Years ago, after the publication of my third book, a Mournalist once asked
me if you could tell right away whether a student had a mind for law or not,
and the answer is: Sometimes. But often, you’re  wrong—the student who
seemed so bright in the first half of the semester becomes steadily less so as
the year goes on, and the student about whom you never thought one thing
or another is the one who emerges as a da]]ler, someone you love hearing
think.

163
   It’s   often  the  most naturally  intelligent   students who  have  the most
difficult  time  in their  first  year—law school,  particularly  the first  year of
law school,  is  really  not a  place where  creativity,  abstract thought, and
imagination are rewarded. In this way, I often think—based upon what I’ve
heard, not what I know firsthand—that it’s a bit like art school.
   Julia   had  a  friend,   a  man  named  Dennys,  who  was   as a   boy  a
tremendously gifted artist. They had been friends since they were small, and
she once showed me some of the drawings he made when he was  ten or
twelve: little sketches of birds pecking at the ground, of his face, round and
blank, of his father, the local  veterinarian, his hand smoothing the fur of a
grimacing terrier. Dennys’s father didn’t  see the point of  drawing lessons,
however, and so he was never formally schooled. But when they were older,
and Julia went  to university,  Dennys went  to art  school to  learn how  to
draw. For the first week, he said, they were allowed to draw whatever they
wanted, and it was always Dennys’s sketches that the professor selected to
pin up on the wall for praise and critique.
   But  then they were made to  learn how to draw:  to re-draw, in  essence.
Week two,  they  only   drew  ellipses. Wide  ellipses,  fat  ellipses,  skinny
ellipses. Week  three, they  drew  circles:  three-dimensional circles,  two-
dimensional circles. Then it was a flower. Then a vase. Then a hand. Then a
head. Then a body. And  with  each week  of proper  training,  Dennys got
worse and worse. By the time the term had ended, his pictures were never
displayed on the wall. He had grown  too self-conscious to draw. When he
saw a dog now, its long  fur whisking  the ground beneath it, he saw not  a
dog but a circle  on a box, and when he tried  to draw it,  he worried about
proportion, not about recording its doggy-ness.
   He  decided to speak to his professor. We are meant to break you down,
Dennys, his professor said. Only  the  truly  talented will  be  able to come
back from it.
   “I   guess I  wasn’t  one  of  the  truly  talented,”  Dennys would  say.  He
became a barrister instead, lived in London with his partner.
   “Poor  Dennys,” Julia would say.
   “Oh,  it’s all right,”  Dennys would sigh, but none of us were convinced.
   And  in that same way, law school breaks a mind down. Novelists, poets,
and artists don’t often do well in law  school (unless they are bad novelists,
poets, and artists), but  neither, necessarily, do mathematicians, logicians,

164
and scientists. The first  group  fails  because their logic  is their  own;  the
second fails because logic is all they own.
   He, however, was a good student—a great student—from the beginning,
but this greatness was often camouflaged in an aggressive nongreatness. I
knew, from  listening  to  his answers in  class, that  he had  everything he
needed to be a superb lawyer: it’s not accidental that law is called a trade,
and like all trades, what it demands most is a capacious memory, which he
had. What it demands next—again, like many trades—is the ability  to see
the problem before you  … and then, Must as immediately, the rat’s tail of
problems that might follow. Much  the way that, for a contractor, a house is
not Must a structure—it’s a snarl of pipes engorging with ice in the winter, of
shingles swelling with humidity  in the summer, of rain gutters belching up
fountains of water in the spring, of cement splitting in the first autumn cold
—so too is a house something else for a lawyer. A  house is a locked safe
full  of   contracts, of  liens,  of  future  lawsuits,  of  possible  violations:  it
represents potential attacks  on  your  property, on  your   goods, on  your
person, on your privacy.
   Of  course, you can’t literally  think  like  this all  the time, or  you’d drive
yourself cra]y.  And so for  most lawyers, a  house is, finally,  Must a house,
something to fill   and fix   and repaint and empty.  But there’s  a period in
which every law  student—every good law student—finds that their  vision
shifts, somehow, and reali]es that the law is inescapable, that no interaction,
no aspect of daily life, escapes its long, graspy fingers. A street becomes a
shocking  disaster, a  riot   of  violations   and  potential  civil   lawsuits.  A
marriage looks like a divorce. The world becomes temporarily unbearable.
   He could do this. He could  take a case and see its end; it is very difficult
to do, because you have to be able to hold in your head all the possibilities,
all the probable consequences, and then choose which ones to worry over
and which to ignore. But  what he also did—what he couldn’t  stop himself
from doing—was wonder as well about the moral implications  of the case.
And that is not  helpful in  law school. There were colleagues of mine who
wouldn’t let  their students even say the words “right” and “wrong.”  “Right
has nothing to do with it,” one of my professors used to bellow at us. “What
is the law? What does the law say?” (Law professors enMoy being theatrical;
all of  us  do.) Another,  whenever the words  were mentioned,  would  say
nothing, but walk over to the offender and hand him a little slip  of paper, a

165
stack of which  he kept  in  his Macket’s inside pocket, that read: Drayman
241. Drayman 241 was the philosophy department’s office.
   Here, for example, is a hypothetical: A football  team is going to an away
game when one of their vans breaks down. So they ask the mother of one of
the players if they can borrow her van to transport them. Sure, she says, but
I’m not going to drive. And so she asks the assistant coach to drive the team
for her. But then, as they’re driving along, something horrible happens: the
van skids off the road and flips over; everyone inside dies.
   There is no  criminal case here. The road was slippery, the driver wasn’t
intoxicated. It   was  an accident.  But  then  the parents  of  the  team, the
mothers and fathers of the dead players, sue the owner of the van. It was her
van, they argue, but more important, it was she who appointed the driver of
her van.  He was  only  her agent, and  therefore, it  is  she who  bears the
responsibility. So: What happens? Should the plaintiffs win their suit?
   Students don’t  like  this  case. I don’t  teach it  that often—its  extremity
makes it more flashy than it is instructive, I  believe—but whenever I did, I
would always hear a voice in the auditorium say, “But it’s not fair!”  And as
annoying as that word is—fair—it   is  important that students never forget
the concept. “Fair” is never an answer, I would tell them. But it is always a
consideration.
   He never mentioned whether something was fair, however. Fairness itself
seemed to hold little interest for him, which  I found fascinating, as people,
especially young people, are  very interested in  what’s  fair. Fairness is  a
concept  taught   to   nice   children:   it   is   the   governing   principle   of
kindergartens and summer camps and playgrounds and soccer fields. Jacob,
back when he was able to go to school and learn things and think and speak,
knew what fairness was and that it was important, something to be valued.
Fairness is for happy people, for  people who  have been lucky enough to
have lived a life defined more by certainties than by ambiguities.
   Right  and wrong,  however, are for—well,  not unhappy people, maybe,
but scarred people; scared people.
   Or am I Must thinking this now?
   “So  were the plaintiffs   successful?” I asked. That year, his first  year, I
had in fact taught that case.
   “Yes,”  he said,  and he explained why:  he knew instinctively   why they
would have been. And then, right on cue, I heard the tiny “But it’s not fair!”
from the back of the room, and before I could begin my  first lecture of the

166
season—“fair”  is never  an answer, etc.,  etc.—he said,  quietly, “But   it’s
right.”
   I  was never  able to ask him  what  he meant by  that. Class ended, and
everyone got up at once and almost ran for the door, as if the room was on
fire. I  remember telling myself  to ask him  about it in  the next class, later
that week, but I forgot. And then I forgot again, and again. Over the years, I
would remember this conversation every now  and again, and each time I
would think: I must ask him what he meant by that. But then I never would.
I don’t know why.
   And  so this became his pattern: he knew the law. He had a feeling for it.
But then,  Must when I wanted him to  stop talking,  he would  introduce  a
moral argument, he would  mention  ethics. Please, I  would  think,  please
don’t  do this.  The  law  is  simple.  It  allows  for  less nuance than  you’d
imagine. Ethics and morals do, in reality, have a place in law—although not
in Murisprudence. It is morals that help us make the laws, but morals do not
help us apply them.
   I  was worried he’d  make it harder for  himself, that he’d  complicate the
real gift  he  had with—as  much as  I  hate to  have to  say this  about my
profession—thinking. Stop! I  wanted to tell  him. But  I never did,  because
eventually, I reali]ed I enMoyed hearing him think.
   In  the end, of course, I needn’t have worried; he learned how to control
it, he learned to  stop mentioning right  and wrong.  And  as we know, this
tendency of his didn’t  stop  him from  becoming a great lawyer.  But later,
often, I was sad for him, and for me. I wished I had urged him to leave law
school, I wished I had told him to go to the equivalent of Drayman 241. The
skills I  gave him were  not skills  he needed after all. I  wish I  had nudged
him in  a direction  where his  mind  could have been as supple as it  was,
where he wouldn’t have had to harness himself to a dull way of thinking.  I
felt I had taken someone who once knew how to draw a dog and turned him
into someone who instead knew only how to draw shapes.
   I   am guilty   of  many  things  when  it  comes to  him.   But  sometimes,
illogically,  I  feel  guiltiest  for  this. I  opened the  van door, I  invited  him
inside.  And  while   I   didn’t   drive   off   the  road,  I   instead  drove  him
somewhere bleak and  cold  and  colorless, and  left  him   standing there,
where, back  where I  had  collected him,  the  landscape shimmered with
color, the sky fi]]ed  with fireworks, and he stood openmouthed in wonder.

167
                                                         3

THREE WEEKS BEFORE he left for Thanksgiving in Boston, a package—a large,
flat, unwieldy  wooden crate  with  his name and address written on  every
side in black marker—arrived for  him at work,  where it sat by his desk all
day until he was able to open it late that night.
   From  the  return  address, he knew  what  it  was, but  he  still  felt  that
reflexive curiosity  one  does when unwrapping anything,  even something
unwanted. Inside the box were  layers of brown  paper, and then layers of
bubble wrap, and then, wrapped in sheets of white paper, the painting itself.
   He  turned  it   over. “To   Jude with   love  and  apologies, JB,”   JB  had
scribbled  on  the  canvas,  directly   above  his  signature:  “Jean-Baptiste
Marion.” There was an envelope from JB’s gallery taped to the back of the
frame, inside of which was a letter certifying the painting’s authenticity and
date, addressed to him and signed by the gallery’s registrar.
   He called  Willem, who  he knew would have already left the theater and
was probably on his way home. “Guess what I got today?”
   There  was only  the slightest of  pauses before Willem  answered. “The
painting.”
   “Right,”  he said, and sighed. “So I suppose you’re behind this?”
   Willem  coughed. “I  Must told him he didn’t  have a choice in the matter
any longer—not  if  he  wanted you  to talk  to  him  again at  some point.”
Willem paused, and he could hear the wind whooshing past him. “Do  you
need help getting it home?”
   “Thanks,”  he said. “But I’m Must going to leave it here for now and pick it
up later.”  He re-clad the  painting in  its  layers and replaced it  in its  box,
which he shoved beneath his console. Before he shut off his computer, he
began a note to JB, but  then stopped, and deleted what he’d written,  and
instead left for the night.
   He was both surprised and not that JB had sent him the painting after all
(and not at all surprised to learn that it had been Willem who had convinced
him to do so). Eighteen months ago, Must as Willem was beginning his first
performances in The Malamud Theorem, JB had been offered representation
by a gallery on the Lower  East Side, and the previous spring, he’d had his

168
first  solo show, “The  Boys,”   a series of  twenty-four  paintings based on
photographs he’d taken of the three of them. As he’d  promised years ago,
JB had let him see the pictures of him that he wanted to paint, and although
he had approved many of them (reluctantly: he had felt queasy even as he
did so, but he knew how important the series was to JB), JB had ultimately
been less interested in the ones he’d approved than in the ones he wouldn’t,
a few of which—including  an image in which he was curled into himself in
bed, his  eyes  open but  scarily   unseeing, his  left   hand stretched open
unnaturally wide, like a ghoul’s claw—he alarmingly had no memory of JB
even taking. That had been the first fight: JB wheedling, then sulking, then
threatening, then shouting, and then, when  he couldn’t  change his mind,
trying to convince Willem to advocate for him.
   “You  reali]e I  don’t actually owe you anything,” JB had told him once he
reali]ed his negotiations with Willem  weren’t progressing. “I  mean, I don’t
technically have to ask your permission here. I could technically Must paint
whatever the fuck I want. This is a courtesy I’m extending you, you know.”
   He could’ve  swamped JB with arguments, but he was too angry to do so.
“You promised me, JB,” he said. “That  should be enough.” He could have
added, “And you owe me as my friend,” but he had a few years ago come to
reali]e  that   JB’s  definition   of   friendship  and   its  responsibilities  was
different than his  own,  and there was no arguing  with  him about  it:  you
either accepted it or you didn’t,  and he had decided to accept it,  although
recently, the work it took to accept JB and his limitations had begun to feel
more enraging and wearisome and arduous than seemed necessary.
   In  the end, JB had had to admit defeat, although in the months before his
show opened, he had made occasional allusions to what he called his “lost
paintings,” great works he could’ve made had he, Jude, been less rigid, less
timid, less self-conscious, and (this was his favorite of JB’s arguments) less
of  a  philistine.   Later,  though,  he  would  be  embarrassed by  his   own
gullibility,  by how he had trusted that his wishes would be respected.
   The  opening  had been on  a  Thursday in  late  April   shortly  after  his
thirtieth  birthday, a night  so unseasonably cold that the  plane trees’ first
leaves had fro]en and cracked, and rounding the corner onto Norfolk Street,
he had stopped to admire the scene the gallery made, a bright golden box of
light  and shimmered warmth  against the  chilled  flat  black  of  the night.
Inside, he immediately  encountered Black  Henry Young  and a friend  of
theirs from  law  school, and  then so many  other people  he knew—from

169
college, and their various parties at  Lispenard Street, and JB’s aunts, and
Malcolm’s parents, and long-ago friends of JB’s that he hadn’t seen in years
—that it  had taken some time before he could push through the  crowd to
look at the paintings themselves.
   He  had always known that JB was talented. They all did,  everyone did:
no matter  how  ungenerously you  might   occasionally think   of  JB  as a
person, there was something about his work that could  convince you that
you were wrong, that whatever deficiencies of character you had ascribed to
him  were in  reality  evidence of  your  own  pettiness and ill-temper,  that
hidden  within   JB  was   someone of   huge  sympathies  and  depth  and
understanding. And that  night,  he had  no trouble  at  all  recogni]ing  the
paintings’ intensity and beauty, and had felt only an uncomplicated pride in
and gratitude for  JB: for  the accomplishment of  the work,  of course, but
also for his ability  to produce colors and images that made all other colors
and images seem wan and flaccid in comparison, for his ability to make you
see the world anew. The paintings had been arranged in a single row that
unspooled across the walls like  a  stave, and the tones JB  had created—
dense bruised blues and bourbonish yellows—were so distinctly their own,
it was as if JB had invented a different language of color altogether.
   He  stopped to admire Willem  and the Girl,   one of  the pictures he had
already seen and  had indeed  already bought,  in  which  JB  had painted
Willem  turned away from  the  camera but for  his eyes, which  seemed to
look directly back at the viewer, but were actually looking at, presumably, a
girl  who  had  been standing  in  Willem’s   exact sightline.  He  loved  the
expression on Willem’s face, which  was one he knew very well,  when he
was Must about to  smile  and  his  mouth  was  still   soft  and  undecided,
somehow, but the muscles around his eyes were already pulling themselves
upward. The paintings weren’t  arranged chronologically, and so after this
was one of himself from Must a few months ago (he hurried past the ones of
himself), and following  that an image of Malcolm and his sister, in what he
recogni]ed from  the furniture was Flora’s long-departed first  West Village
apartment (Malcolm and Flora, Bethune Street).
   He looked around for JB and saw him talking to  the gallery director, and
at that moment, JB straightened his neck and caught his eye, and gave him a
wave. “Genius,” he mouthed to JB over  people’s heads, and JB grinned at
him and mouthed back, “Thank you.”

170
   But  then he had moved to the third and final wall and had seen them: two
paintings, both of him, neither of which JB had ever shown him. In the first,
he was very young  and holding  a cigarette, and in  the second, which  he
thought was from  around two years ago, he  was sitting bent  over on the
edge of his bed,  leaning his forehead against the wall,  his legs  and arms
crossed and his eyes closed—it was the position he always assumed when
he was coming out of an episode and was gathering his physical resources
before attempting to stand up again. He hadn’t remembered JB taking this
picture, and indeed, given its perspective—the camera peeking around the
edge of  the  doorframe—he  knew  that  he  wasn’t  meant  to  remember,
because he wasn’t meant to be aware of the picture’s existence at all. For a
moment, the noise of the space blotted out around him, and he could only
look and look at the paintings: even in  his distress, he had the presence of
mind to understand that he was responding less to the images themselves
than to the memories and sensations they provoked, and that his sense of
violation that  other people should be seeing these documentations of two
miserable moments of  his life   was a  personal reaction, specific  only  to
himself.  To   anyone  else,  they   would   be  two   contextless  paintings,
meaningless unless he chose to announce their meaning. But oh, they were
difficult  for  him to  see, and he wished, suddenly and sharply, that he was
alone.
   He  made it through  the post-opening dinner, which was endless and at
which he missed Willem intensely—but Willem  had a show that night and
hadn’t been able to come. At least he hadn’t had to speak to JB at all, who
was busy holding court, and to the people who approached him—including
JB’s gallerist—to tell him  that the final two pictures, the ones of him, were
the best in the show (as if  he were somehow responsible for this), he was
able to smile and agree with them that JB was an extraordinary talent.
   But  later, at home, after regaining control of himself,  he was at last free
to articulate to Willem his sense of betrayal. And Willem had taken his side
so unhesitatingly,  had  been so  angry  on  his  behalf,  that he  had  been
momentarily soothed—and had reali]ed that JB’s duplicity  had come as a
surprise to Willem as well.
   This  had begun the second fight, which had started with a confrontation
with  JB  at  a  café  near JB’s   apartment, during  which   JB  had proven
maddeningly incapable of apologi]ing: instead, he talked and talked, about
how wonderful  the pictures were, and  how someday, once he had gotten

171
over whatever issues he had with himself,  he’d  come to appreciate them,
and how it wasn’t even that big a deal, and how he really needed to confront
his insecurities,  which  were groundless anyway,  and maybe  this  would
prove helpful  in  that  process, and how everyone except  him  knew how
incredibly great-looking  he was, and so shouldn’t that tell  him something,
that maybe—no, definitely—he was the one who was wrong about himself,
and finally,  how the  pictures were already done, they  were finished,  and
what did  he  expect should  happen? Would he  be  happier if   they were
destroyed? Should he rip them off the wall and set them on fire? They had
been seen and couldn’t be un-seen, so why couldn’t he Must accept it and get
over it?
   “I’m   not  asking  you  to destroy  them, JB,”  he’d  said,  so furious  and
di]]ied   by  JB’s bi]arre   logic  and almost  offensive  intractability  that  he
wanted to scream. “I’m asking you to apologi]e.”
   But  JB couldn’t,  or wouldn’t,  and finally  he had gotten up and left, and
JB hadn’t tried to stop him.
   After  that, he simply stopped speaking to JB. Willem  had made his own
approach, and the two of  them  (as Willem  told  him)  had actually begun
shouting at  each other in  the  street, and then  Willem,  too,  had stopped
speaking to JB, and so from then on, they had to rely primarily on Malcolm
for news of JB. Malcolm, typically noncommittal, had admitted to them that
he thought JB was totally in  the wrong, while at  the same time suggesting
that  they  were  both  being  unrealistic:   “You  know  he’s  not   going  to
apologi]e, Judy,” he said. “This  is JB  we’re talking  about. You’re wasting
your time.”
   “Am  I being unreasonable?” he asked Willem after this conversation.
   “No,”  Willem  said, immediately. “It’s fucked up, Jude. He fucked up, and
he needs to apologi]e.”
   The show sold out. Willem and the Girl  was delivered to him at work, as
was Willem and Jude, Lispenard Street, II, which Willem had bought. Jude,
After Sickness (the title, when he learned it, had made him so newly angry
and humiliated that  for a  moment he experienced what the saying “blind
with rage” meant) was sold to a collector whose purchases were considered
benedictions and predictive of future success: he only bought from artists’
debut shows, and almost every artist whose work he had bought had gone
on to have a maMor career. Only the show’s centerpiece, Jude with Cigarette,
remained unplaced, and this was due to a shockingly  amateurish error, in

172
which the director of the gallery had sold it to an important British collector
and the owner of the gallery had sold it to the Museum of Modern Art.
   “So,  perfect,”  Willem  said to  Malcolm,  knowing Malcolm  would  ferry
his words  back to  JB.  “JB  should tell  the  gallery  that he’s  keeping the
painting, and he should Must give it to Jude.”
   “He  can’t do that,” Malcolm  said, as appalled as if Willem had suggested
simply tossing the canvas into a trash can. “It’s MoMA.”
   “Who   cares?”  Willem  asked. “If    he’s that  fucking   good, he’ll   have
another shot at MoMA. But I’m telling  you, Malcolm, this is really  the only
solution he has left if he wants to keep Jude as a friend.” He paused. “And
me, too.”
   So Malcolm conveyed that message, and the prospect of losing Willem as
a friend had been enough to make JB call Willem and demand a meeting, at
which  JB had  cried  and accused Willem  of  betraying  him,  and always
taking Jude’s side, and obviously not giving  a shit  about his, JB’s, career,
when he, JB, had always supported Willem’s.
   All   of this  had taken place over months, as spring turned into  summer,
and he and Willem  had gone to Truro  without JB  (and without  Malcolm,
who told them he was afraid of leaving JB on his own), and JB had gone to
the Irvines’  in Aquinnah  over Memorial  Day and they  had gone over the
Fourth of   July, and  he and  Willem  had  taken the  long-planned  trip  to
Croatia and Turkey by themselves.
   And  then it  was fall,  and by  the time Willem   and JB had their  second
meeting, Willem had suddenly and unexpectedly booked his first film role,
playing the king in an adaptation of The Girl with the Silver Hands and was
leaving to shoot in Sofia in January, and he had gotten a promotion at work
and had been approached by a partner at Cromwell Thurman Grayson and
Ross, one of the best corporate firms in the city, and was having to use the
wheelchair Andy had gotten him that May more often than not, and Willem
had broken  up with   his girlfriend   of  a  year and  was dating  a costume
designer named Philippa, and his former  fellow  law  clerk,  Kerrigan, had
written a  mass e-mail to everyone he had  ever worked with  in  which  he
simultaneously came out  and  denounced conservatism, and Harold  had
been asking him who was coming over for Thanksgiving this year, and if he
could stay a night after  whoever he invited  had left, because he and Julia
needed to talk  about  something with   him,  and he  had seen plays  with
Malcolm and gallery shows with Willem  and had read novels that he would

173
have argued about with JB, as the two of them were the novel-readers of the
group: a whole list of things the four of  them would have once picked over
together that they now instead discussed in twos or threes. At  first, it  had
been disorienting, after so many years of operating as a foursome, but  he
had  gotten  used  to  it,   and  although   he  missed  JB—his   witty   self-
involvement, the way he could see everything the world had to offer only as
it  might  affect  him—he  also found  himself  unable to  forgive  him  and,
simultaneously, able to see his life without him.
   And  now, he  supposed, their fight was  over, and the painting  was his.
Willem came down with  him to the office  that Saturday and he unwrapped
it and leaned it against the wall and the two of them regarded it in  silence,
as if it were a rare and inert ]oo animal. This was the painting that had been
reproduced in the Times review and, later, the Artforum story, but it wasn’t
until now, in the safety of his office, that he was able to truly appreciate it—
if he could  forget it  was him, he could almost see how lovely  an image it
was, and why JB would have been attracted to it: for the strange person in it
who looked so frightened and watchful, who was discernibly neither female
nor male, whose clothes looked borrowed, who was mimicking the gestures
and postures of adulthood while clearly understanding nothing of them. He
no longer felt  anything  for  that person, but  not feeling  anything for  that
person had been a conscious act of will, like turning away from someone in
the street  even  though  you  saw  them  constantly,  and pretending  you
couldn’t see them day after day until one day, you actually couldn’t—or so
you could make yourself believe.
   “I   don’t  know what  I’m  going  to  do with  it,”   he admitted to  Willem,
regretfully, because he didn’t   want the  painting,  and yet  felt  guilty  that
Willem had axed JB out of his life on his behalf, and for something he knew
he would never look at again.
   “Well,”   said Willem, and there was a silence. “You could always give  it
to Harold;  I’m   sure he’d  love  it.”   And  he  knew then  that  Willem  had
perhaps always known that he didn’t  want the painting, and that  it hadn’t
mattered to him,  that he  hadn’t regretted choosing  him over  JB, that  he
didn’t blame him for having to make that decision.
   “I  could,”  he said slowly,  although he knew he wouldn’t:  Harold would
indeed love  it  (he had when  he had  seen the show)  and would  hang it
somewhere prominent, and whenever he went to visit him, he would  have

174
to look  at it.  “I’m   sorry, Willem,”  he said at  last, “I’m   sorry to  drag you
down here. I think I’ll  leave it here until I figure out what to do.”
   “It’s   okay,” Willem  said, and the two  of  them wrapped it up  again and
replaced it under his desk.
   After  Willem  left, he turned on his phone and this time, he did write JB a
message. “JB,” he began, “Thanks very much for the painting, and for your
apology, both of which mean a lot.” He paused, thinking about what to say
next. “I’ve missed you, and want to hear what’s been going on in your life,”
he continued. “Call me when you  have some time to hang out.” It  was all
true.
   And  suddenly, he knew what he should do with the painting. He  looked
up the address for  JB’s registrar  and wrote  her a note,  thanking her  for
sending him Jude with Cigarette and telling her that he wanted to donate it
to MoMA,  and could she help facilitate the transaction?
   Later, he would look  back on this episode as a sort of fulcrum, the hinge
between a relationship that was one thing and then became something else:
his friendship with JB, of course, but also his friendship with Willem. There
had been periods in his twenties when he would look at his friends and feel
such a pure, deep contentment that he would wish the world  around them
would  simply  cease, that none of  them  would  have to  move  from  that
moment, when everything  was in  equilibrium  and his  affection for  them
was perfect.  But,   of  course,  that  was  never  to  be:  a  beat  later,  and
everything shifted, and the moment quietly vanished.
   It  would have been too melodramatic, too final,  to say that after this JB
was forever diminished for  him. But  it  was true that for  the first  time, he
was able  to  comprehend that  the people  he  had grown  to  trust  might
someday betray him anyway, and that as disappointing as it might be, it was
inevitable as well, and that life would keep propelling him steadily forward,
because for everyone who might fail  him in  some way, there was at least
one person who never would.


   It  was his opinion (shared by Julia) that Harold  had a tendency to make
Thanksgiving more complicated than it needed to be. Every year since he’d
first been invited to Harold and Julia’s for the holiday, Harold promised him
—usually in  early November, when he was still  full  of enthusiasm for the
proMect—that this year he was going to  blow  his  mind  by upending  the

175
lamest of  American  culinary   traditions.  Harold  always  began with  big
ambitions: their first Thanksgiving together, nine years ago, when he was in
his second year of law school, Harold had announced he was going to make
duck à l’orange, with kumquats standing in for the oranges.
   But  when he arrived at Harold’s house with the walnut  cake he’d baked
the night  before, Julia  was standing alone in  the  doorway to  greet him.
“Don’t  mention the  duck,” she whispered as she kissed him  hello. In  the
kitchen, a  harassed-looking Harold was lifting   a  large turkey  out of  the
oven.
   “Don’t  say a word,” Harold warned him.
   “What  would I say?” he asked.
   This year, Harold asked how he felt about trout. “Trout stuffed with other
stuff,” he added.
   “I   like   trout,”  he’d  answered, cautiously.  “But   you  know,  Harold,  I
actually like turkey.”  They had a variation on this conversation every year,
with Harold proposing various animals and proteins—steamed black-footed
Chinese chicken,   filet   mignon,  tofu   with   wood   ear  fungus,  smoked
whitefish salad on homemade rye—as turkey improvements.
   “No   one likes  turkey,  Jude,”  Harold  said, impatiently.  “I   know  what
you’re doing. Don’t insult me by pretending you do because you don’t think
I’m actually capable of making anything else. We’re having trout, and that’s
it. Also,  can you make that cake you  made last year? I think  it’d  go well
with this wine I got. Just send me a list of what you need me to get.”
   The  perplexing  thing, he  always thought,  was that  in  general, Harold
wasn’t that interested in food  (or wine).  In  fact, he had terrible  taste, and
was often  taking  him  to  restaurants that were overpriced  yet  mediocre,
where Harold  would  happily  devour  dull  plates of  blackened meat  and
unimaginative sides of   gloppy  pasta. He and  Julia  (who  also had  little
interest in food) discussed Harold’s strange fixation every year: Harold had
numerous obsessions, some of  them  inexplicable,  but  this  one seemed
particularly so, and more so for its endurance.
   Willem   thought that  Harold’s Thanksgiving  quest had begun partly  as
shtick, but over the years, it had morphed into something more serious, and
now he  was truly   unable to  stop himself,  even  as he knew  he’d  never
succeed.
   “But  you know,” Willem  said, “it’s really all  about you.”
   “What  do you mean?” he’d asked.

176
   “It’s  a performance for you,” Willem had said. “It’s his way of telling  you
he cares about you enough to try to impress you, without actually saying he
cares about you.”
   He’d   dismissed  this   right  away:   “I   don’t   think   so,  Willem.”    But
sometimes, he pretended to himself that Willem might be right, feeling silly
and a little pathetic because of how happy the thought made him.
   Willem  was the only one coming to  Thanksgiving this year: by the time
he and JB had reconciled, JB had already made plans to  go to his  aunts’
with Malcolm;  when he’d tried to cancel, they had apparently been so irked
that he’d decided not to antagoni]e them further.
   “What’s  it  going to  be this year?” asked Willem.  They were taking  the
train up  on  Wednesday, the night  before Thanksgiving.  “Elk?   Venison?
Turtle?”
   “Trout,”  he said.
   “Trout!”   Willem   replied. “Well,   trout’s easy. We may  actually  end up
with trout this year.”
   “He  said he was going to stuff it with something, though.”
   “Oh.  I take it back.”
   There  were eight  of  them  at dinner:  Harold  and  Julia, Laurence  and
Gillian, Julia’s friend James and his boyfriend Carey, and he and Willem.
   “This   is dynamite  trout, Harold,”  Willem   said, cutting  into his  second
piece of turkey, and everyone laughed.
   What  was the point,  he wondered, at which  he had stopped feeling  so
nervous and out of  place  at Harold’s  dinners? Certainly, his  friends  had
helped. Harold liked  sparring with  them, liked  trying  to  provoke JB  into
making outrageous and borderline racist statements, liked teasing Willem
about when  he was going  to  settle  down, liked   debating structural and
aesthetic trends with  Malcolm.  He  knew  Harold enMoyed engaging with
them, and that they enMoyed it too, and it gave him  the chance to simply
listen to them being who they were without  feeling the need to participate;
they were  a fleet  of  parrots shaking their  bright-colored  feathers at one
another, presenting themselves to their peers without fear or guile.
   The dinner was dominated by talk of  James’s daughter, who was getting
married in the summer. “I’m an old man,” James moaned, and Laurence and
Gillian,  whose daughters were still in college  and spending the holiday at
their friend’s house in Carmel, made sympathetic noises.

177
   “This  reminds me,”  said Harold, looking  at him and Willem,  “when are
you two ever going to settle down?”
   “I  think he means you,” he smiled at Willem.
   “Harold,  I’m  thirty-two!”   Willem  protested, and everyone laughed again
as Harold spluttered: “What is that, Willem? Is that an explanation? Is that a
defense? It’s not like you’re sixteen!”
   But  as much  as he enMoyed the evening, a part of  his mind  remained
abu]]   and anxious,  worrying   about  the conversation  Harold  and  Julia
wanted to  have with  him   the next  day. He  had finally   mentioned it   to
Willem  on  the  ride  up, and  in  moments, when  the  two  of  them  were
working  together (stuffing  the turkey,  blanching the potatoes, setting the
table), they would try  to figure out what  Harold might have to say to him.
After dinner,  they put on  their coats and sat in the  back garden, pu]]ling
over it again.
   At  least  he knew  that nothing  was wrong  with  them—it  was the first
thing he had asked, and Harold had assured him that he and Julia were both
fine. But what, then, could it be?
   “Maybe  he thinks I’m  hanging around them too much,”  he suggested to
Willem. Maybe Harold was, simply, sick of him.
   “Not   possible,” Willem   said, so quickly  and  declaratively that  he was
relieved. They were quiet. “Maybe one of  them got a Mob offer somewhere
and they’re moving?”
   “I  thought of that, too. But I don’t  think Harold would ever leave Boston.
Julia, either.”
   There weren’t, in the end, many options, at least many that would make a
conversation with  him  necessary: maybe they were selling  the  house in
Truro (but why  would  they need to talk to  him about that, as much as he
loved the  house). Maybe  Harold  and  Julia  were  splitting  up  (but  they
seemed the same as they always did around each other). Maybe they were
selling the New York apartment and wanted to know if he wanted to buy it
from them (unlikely:  he was certain they  would never sell the apartment).
Maybe they were renovating the apartment and needed him to oversee the
renovation.
   And  then their speculations grew more specific  and improbable: maybe
Julia was coming out (maybe Harold was). Maybe Harold  was being born
again (maybe Julia was). Maybe they were quitting their Mobs, moving to an
ashram in upstate New  York.  Maybe  they  were becoming ascetics who

178
would live  in a remote Kashmiri  valley. Maybe they were having his-and-
hers plastic surgery. Maybe  Harold  was becoming a  Republican. Maybe
Julia had found God. Maybe Harold had been nominated to be the attorney
general. Maybe Julia had been identified by the Tibetan government in exile
as the  next   reincarnation  of  the  Panchen  Lama  and  was  moving  to
Dharamsala. Maybe  Harold   was  running  for   president  as  a  Socialist
candidate. Maybe they were opening a restaurant on the square that served
only turkey  stuffed with other  kinds of meat. By  this time  they were both
laughing so hard, as much from the nervous, self-soothing helplessness of
not knowing as from the absurdity of their guesses, that they were bent over
in their  chairs,  pressing their  coat collars  to their  mouths  to muffle   the
noise, their tears free]ing pinchingly on their cheeks.
   In  bed, though,  he returned to  the thought  that had crept,  tendril-like,
from  some dark  space  of  his  mind  and  had  insinuated itself   into  his
consciousness like a thin green vine:  maybe one of  them had discovered
something about the person he once was. Maybe  he would  be presented
with evidence—a doctor’s report, a  photograph, a (this was the nightmare
scenario) film   still.   He  had  already  decided  he  wouldn’t   deny  it,  he
wouldn’t   argue  against   it,   he  wouldn’t    defend   himself.   He  would
acknowledge its veracity,  he would  apologi]e,  he would  explain  that  he
never meant to deceive them, he would offer not to contact them again, and
then he would leave. He would ask them only to keep his secret, to not tell
anyone else. He practiced saying the words: I’m  so sorry, Harold.  I’m  so
sorry, Julia. I  never meant to embarrass you. But  of course it was such a
useless apology. He  might  not  have meant to,  but  it  wouldn’t   make  a
difference: he would have; he had.
   Willem  left the next morning; he had a show that night. “Call me as soon
as you know, okay?” he asked, and he nodded. “It’s going to be fine, Jude,”
he promised. “Whatever it is, we’ll figure it out. Don’t  worry, all right?”
   “You  know I will  anyway,” he said, and tried to smile back at Willem.
   “Yeah, I know,”  said Willem. “But try. And  call me.”
   The  rest of  the day  he kept  himself busy  cleaning—there was always
plenty to clean at the house, as both Harold and Julia were unenthusiastic
tidiers—and by  the time  they sat down  to an  early dinner  he’d made of
turkey stew  and a beet salad, he  felt  almost aloft  from  nervousness and
could only pretend to eat, moving the food around his plate like a compass
point, hoping Harold and Julia wouldn’t notice. After, he began stacking the

179
plates to take them to the  kitchen, but Harold  stopped him. “Leave  them,
Jude,” he said. “Maybe we should have our talk now?”
   He felt  himself go fluttery  with  panic. “I  should really rinse them off, or
everything’s going to congeal,” he protested, lamely, hearing how stupid he
sounded.
   “Fuck   the  plates,”  said  Harold,  and  although  he  knew  that  Harold
genuinely didn’t care what did or didn’t congeal on his plates, for a moment
he wondered if his casualness was too casual, a simulacrum of ease rather
than the real thing. But finally, he could do nothing but put the dishes down
and trudge  after Harold  into  the  living   room,  where Julia  was pouring
coffee for herself and Harold, and had poured tea for him.
   He  lowered himself to  the sofa, and Harold to  the chair to his  left, and
Julia to the  squashed su]ani-covered ottoman facing him: the places they
always sat, the low table between them, and he wished the moment would
hold itself, for what if this was the last one he would have here, the last time
he would sit in this warm dark room, with its  books and tart, sweet scent of
cloudy apple Muice and the navy-and-scarlet Turkish carpet that had buckled
itself into  pleats under the coffee table, and the patch on the sofa cushion
where the fabric  had worn  thin  and he  could see the  white  muslin skin
beneath—all the things that he’d allowed to  grow so dear to him,  because
they were Harold and Julia’s, and because he had allowed himself to think
of their house as his.
   For a while they all  sipped at their drinks, and none of them looked at the
other, and he tried to pretend that this was Must a normal evening, although if
it had been a normal evening, none of them would be so silent.
   “Well,”   Harold  began at  last,  and he  set his  cup down  on  the table,
readying himself.   Whatever he  says,  he reminded  himself,   don’t  start
making excuses for yourself. Whatever he says, accept it, and thank him for
everything.
   There was another long silence. “This is hard to say,” Harold  continued,
and shifted his mug in his hand, and he made himself wait through Harold’s
next pause. “I really  did have a script  prepared, didn’t I?”  he asked Julia,
and she nodded. “But I’m more nervous than I thought I would be.”
   “I  know,” she said. “But you’re doing great.”
   “Ha!”   Harold replied. “It’s sweet of you to lie to me, though,” and smiled
at her, and he had the sense that it was only the two of  them in the room,

180
and that for  a moment,  they had forgotten  he was there  at all.  But  then
Harold was quiet again, trying to say what he’d say next.
   “Jude, I’ve—we’ve—known   you for  almost a decade now,” Harold said
at last, and he  watched as Harold’s eyes moved  to him  and then moved
away, to somewhere above Julia’s  head. “And   over those years, you’ve
grown very dear to us; both of us. You’re our friend, of course, but we think
of you as more than a friend to us; as someone more special than that.” He
looked at Julia, and she nodded at him  once more. “So I  hope you won’t
think this is  too—presumptuous, I suppose—but we’ve been wondering if
you might  consider letting  us,  well,  adopt you.”  Now  he  turned to  him
again, and smiled. “You’d be our legal son, and our legal heir, and someday
all  this”—he  tossed  his  free arm  into   the  air  in  a  parodic  gesture of
expansiveness—“will be yours, if you want it.”
   He was silent. He couldn’t speak, he couldn’t react; he couldn’t even feel
his face, couldn’t sense what his expression might be, and Julia hurried in.
“Jude,” she said, “if you don’t  want to, for whatever reason, we understand
completely. It’s a  lot to  ask. If  you  say no, it  won’t  change how we  feel
about you, right, Harold? You’ll   always, always be welcome here, and we
hope you’ll always be part of our lives. Honestly, Jude—we won’t be angry,
and you shouldn’t feel bad.” She looked at him. “Do you want some time to
think about it?”
   And   then  he  could  feel   the  numbness receding,  although  as  if  in
compensation, his hands began shaking, and he grabbed one of the throw
pillows and wrapped his arms around it to hide them. It took him a few tries
before he was able to speak, but when he did, he couldn’t look at either of
them. “I   don’t  need to  think  about it,”   he  said, and  his voice  sounded
strange and thin to him. “Harold,  Julia—are you kidding?  There’s nothing
—nothing—I’ve  ever wanted more. My whole life.  I Must never thought—”
He stopped; he was speaking in fragments. For a minute they were all quiet,
and he was finally able to look at both of  them. “I  thought you were going
to tell me you didn’t want to be friends anymore.”
   “Oh,  Jude,” said Julia,  and Harold looked  perplexed. “Why  would  you
ever think that?” he asked.
   But he shook his head, unable to explain it to them.
   They  were  silent  again, and then  all  of  them  were smiling—Julia   at
Harold, Harold at him, he into the pillow—unsure  how to end the moment,

181
unsure where to  go  next. Finally,  Julia  clapped her  hands together and
stood. “Champagne!” she said, and left the room.
   He  and Harold stood as well and looked at each other. “Are  you sure?”
Harold asked him, quietly.
   “I’m   as  sure as you  are,” he  answered, Must as quietly. There was an
uncreative and obvious Moke to be made, about how much like a marriage
proposal the event seemed, but he didn’t have the heart to make it.
   “You  reali]e you’re  going to be bound to us for life,”  Harold smiled, and
put his hand on his shoulder, and he nodded. He hoped Harold wouldn’t say
one more word, because if he did, he would  cry, or vomit,  or pass out, or
scream, or  combust. He  was  aware, suddenly, of   how  exhausted, how
utterly depleted he was, as much by the past few weeks of anxiety as well
as the past thirty years of craving, of wanting, of wishing so intensely even
as he told  himself  he didn’t  care, that by  the  time they  had toasted one
another and first Julia and then Harold  had hugged him—the sensation of
being  held  by  Harold   so  unfamiliar  and  intimate   that  he  had  nearly
squirmed—he was relieved when Harold told him to leave the damn dishes
and go to bed.
   When  he reached his room,  he had to  lie on  the bed for  half  an hour
before he could even think  of retrieving  his phone. He needed to feel the
solidity  of the bed beneath him,  the silk  of the cotton  blanket against his
cheek, the familiar yield of  the mattress as he moved against it. He needed
to assure himself that this was his world, and he was still in it, and that what
had happened had really happened. He thought, suddenly, of a conversation
he’d once had with  Brother  Peter, in which  he’d  asked the brother if  he
thought he’d ever be adopted, and the brother had laughed. “No,” he’d said,
so decisively that  he had never asked again. And although  he must have
been very young, he remembered, very clearly, that the brother’s dismissal
had only hardened his resolve, although of course it wasn’t an outcome that
was his to control in the slightest.
   He  was  so  discombobulated that  he forgot  that  Willem   was already
onstage when he called, but when Willem called him back at intermission,
he was still in the same place on the bed, in the same comma-like shape, the
phone still cupped beneath his palm.
   “Jude,”  Willem breathed when he told him, and he could hear how purely
happy Willem  was for him.  Only  Willem—and Andy,  and to some extent
Harold—knew the  outlines of  how  he had grown  up: the  monastery, the

182
home, his time  with  the  Douglasses. With everyone else, he  tried  to be
evasive for as long as he could, until finally   he would say that his parents
had died when he was little, and that he had grown up in foster care, which
usually stopped their questions. But Willem knew more of the truth, and he
knew Willem   knew that  this  was his  most impossible,  his most  fervent
desire. “Jude, that’s ama]ing. How do you feel?”
   He tried to laugh. “Like  I’m  going to mess it up.”
   “You  won’t.”  They were both quiet. “I didn’t  even know you could adopt
someone who’s a legal adult.”
   “I  mean, it’s  not common, but you can. As long as both parties consent.
It’s mostly done for purposes of inheritance.” He made another attempt at a
laugh. (Stop trying to laugh, he scolded himself.) “I  don’t  remember much
from when I studied this in family  law, but I do know  that I get a new birth
certificate with their names on it.”
   “Wow,”  said Willem.
   “I  know,” he said.
   He   heard  someone  calling   Willem’s   name,  commandingly,  in   the
background. “You have to go,” he told Willem.
   “Shit,”   said  Willem.  “But   Jude? Congratulations. No  one  deserves it
more.” He called back at whoever was yelling for him. “I’ve   got to go,” he
said. “Do you mind if I write  Harold and Julia?”
   “Sure,”  he said. “But Willem, don’t tell  the others, okay? I Must want to sit
with it for a while.”
   “I  won’t  say a word. I’ll   see you tomorrow. And Jude—” But  he didn’t,
or couldn’t, say anything else.
   “I  know,” he said. “I know, Willem.  I feel the same way.”
   “I   love  you,”   said Willem,   and then  he was  gone before  he  had to
respond. He never knew what to say when Willem said that to him, and yet
he always longed for him to say it. It  was a night of impossible things, and
he fought to stay awake, to be conscious and alert for as long as possible, to
enMoy and repeat to  himself   everything  that  had  happened to  him,   a
lifetime’s worth of wishes coming true in a few brief hours.
   Back in  the apartment the next day, there was a note from Willem telling
him to wait up, and when Willem came home, he had ice cream and a carrot
cake, which the two  of them ate even though neither of  them particularly
liked  sweets, and champagne, which they  drank even  though he had  to
wake up early the following  morning. The next few  weeks slid by: Harold

183
was handling  the  paperwork,  and  sent him  forms   to sign—the   petition  for
adoption,   an   affidavit     to   change   his   birth    certificate,    a  request   for
information   about his potential   criminal  record—which   he took  to  the bank
at lunch  to have  notari]ed;  he  didn’t  want  anyone at  work  to know   beyond
the few  people he  told:  Marshall,  and Citi]en,    and Rhodes. He  told  JB and
Malcolm,   who  on  the  one  hand  reacted  exactly   as he’d   anticipated—JB
making  a  lot  of  unfunny   Mokes at an almost  tic-like   pace,  as if   he might
eventually  land  on one  that worked;  Malcolm   asking  increasingly   granular
questions about  various  hypotheticals  that  he couldn’t   answer—and  on  the
other had been genuinely  thrilled  for  him.  He told  Black  Henry  Young,  who
had taken  two   classes with   Harold   when  he  was  in  law  school  and  had
admired him,  and JB’s  friend  Richard,  to  whom  he’d grown  close  after one
particularly   long  and  tedious  party  at  E]ra’s   a year  ago when   the two   of
them had  had a conversation   that had  begun with   the French  welfare  state
and then  had  moved  on  to  various  other  topics,  the  only   two  semi-sober
people  in  the   room.  He   told   Phaedra,  who  had  started   screaming,  and
another old college  friend,  EliMah, who had screamed as well.
    And,  of course, he told  Andy,  who  at first  had Must stared at him and then
nodded, as if  he had asked if  Andy  had an extra  bandage he could  give him
before he  left  for  the  night.  But  then  he began  making  a  series of  bi]arre
seal-like  sounds,  half   bark,  half   snee]e,  and  he  reali]ed   that  Andy   was
crying.   The  sight  of   it  made  him   both  horrified    and  slightly   hysterical,
unsure of  what  to  do.  “Get  out  of  here,”   Andy  commanded  him   between
sounds. “I  mean  it, Jude,  get the fuck   out,”  and so  he did.  The next  day  at
work,  he received an arrangement  of  roses the si]e  of a gardenia  bush, with
a note in Andy’s  angry  blocky  handwriting   that read:

        JUDE—I’M SO FUCKING EMBARRASSED I CAN BARELY WRITE THIS NOTE.
        PLEASE FORGIVE ME FOR YESTERDAY. I COULDN’T BE HAPPIER FOR YOU
        AND THE ONLY 4UESTION IS WHAT TOOK HAROLD SO FUCKING LONG. I
        HOPE YOU’LL TAKE THIS AS A SIGN THAT YOU NEED TO TAKE BETTER
        CARE OF YOURSELF SO SOMEDAY YOU’LL HAVE THE STRENGTH TO
        CHANGE HAROLD’S ADULT DIAPERS WHEN HE’S A THOUSAND YEARS OLD
        AND INCONTINENT, BECAUSE YOU KNOW HE’S NOT GOING TO MAKE IT
        EASY FOR YOU BY DYING AT A RESPECTABLE AGE LIKE A NORMAL
        PERSON. BELIEVE ME, PARENTS ARE PAINS IN THE ASS LIKE THAT. (BUT
        GREAT TOO, OF COURSE.) LOVE, ANDY

It was, he and Willem   agreed, one of the best letters  they’d  ever read.
    But  then the  ecstatic month  passed, and  it  was January, and  Willem   left
for  Bulgaria  to  film,   and the old  fears  returned,  accompanied  now  by new

184
fears. They had a court  date for February fifteenth,  Harold  told him,  and
with a little  rescheduling, Laurence would be presiding. Now that the date
was so close, he was sharply, inescapably aware that he might ruin  it  for
himself, and he began, at first unconsciously and then assiduously, avoiding
Harold  and Julia,  convinced that  if  they  were  reminded too  much,  too
actively of  what  they  were in  fact  getting that  they  would  change their
minds. And  so when they came into  town for  a play  the second week in
January, he pretended he was  in  Washington on  business, and on  their
weekly phone calls, he tried to say very little, and to keep the conversations
brief. Every  day the improbability  of  the situation  seemed to grow larger
and more vivid  in  his mind;  every time he  glimpsed the reflection  of his
ugly ]ombie’s   hobble in  the side  of a  building,  he would  feel  sickened:
Who, really, would ever want this? The idea that he could become someone
else’s seemed increasingly ludicrous, and if Harold saw him Must once more,
how could he too not  come to the same conclusion? He knew it shouldn’t
matter so much to him—he  was, after all, an adult;  he knew the adoption
was more ceremonial than truly sociologically significant—but he wanted it
with a steady fervor  that defied logic,  and he couldn’t  bear it being taken
away from him  now, not when everyone he cared about was so happy for
him, not when he was so close.
   He had been close before. The year after he arrived in Montana, when he
was thirteen, the home had participated in a tristate adoption fair. November
was National Adoption Month, and one cold morning, they had been told to
dress neatly and had been hurried onto two  school buses and driven two
hours to  Missoula,  where they  were  herded off  the  buses and into  the
conference room of a hotel. Theirs had been the last buses to arrive, and the
room was already filled with  children, boys on one side, girls on the other.
In the center of the room was a long stripe of tables, and as he walked over
to his  side,  he saw  that they  were  stacked with  labeled binders:  Boys,
Babies; Boys, Toddlers; Boys, 4–; Boys, –9; Boys, 10–12; Boys, 13–15;
Boys, 15+.  Inside,  they had  been told,  were pieces of   paper with  their
pictures, and names, and information about  themselves: where they were
from, what ethnicity  they were, information  about how they  did in  school
and what sports they liked to play and what talents and interests they had.
What, he wondered, did  his  sheet of paper say about him?  What  talents
might have been invented for him, what race, what origins?

185
   The older boys, the ones whose names and faces were in the 15+ binder,
knew they would never be adopted, and when the counselors turned away,
they snuck out through the back exit to, they all knew, get high. The babies
and toddlers had only to be babies and toddlers; they would be the first to
be chosen, and they didn’t even know it. But as he watched from the corner
he had drifted toward, he saw that some of the boys—the ones old enough
to have experienced one of the fairs  before, but still  young  enough to be
hopeful—had strategies. He watched as the sullen became smiling, as the
rough and bullying   became Mocular and playful, as boys who  hated one
another in  the context  of  the  home played  and bantered in  a  way  that
appeared convincingly friendly.  He  saw the  boys who  were  rude to  the
counselors, who cursed at one another in the hallways, smile and chat with
the adults,  the prospective  parents, who  were filing   into  the  room.  He
watched as the  toughest,  the meanest of  the  boys,  a  fourteen-year-old
named Shawn who had once held  him  down in  the bathroom,  his knees
digging into  his shoulder blades, pointed at his  name tag as the man and
woman he had been talking with walked  toward the binders. “Shawn!”  he
called after them, “Shawn Grady!” and something about his hoarse hopeful
voice, in which he could hear the effort,  the strain, to not sound hopeful at
all, made him feel sorry for  Shawn for the first time,  and then angry at the
man and woman,  who,  he could  tell,  were  actually  paging through  the
“Boys, –9” binder. But those feelings passed quickly, because he tried not
to feel anything those days: not hunger, not pain, not anger, not sadness.
   He  had no  tricks,  he had  no skills,  he  couldn’t  charm. When  he had
arrived at the home, he had been so fro]en that they had left him behind the
previous November, and a year later, he wasn’t sure that he was any better.
He thought less and less frequently  of  Brother Luke,  it  was true, but his
days outside the classroom smeared into one; most of the time  he felt  he
was floating, trying  to pretend that he didn’t  occupy his own life,  wishing
he was invisible,  wanting only  to  go unnoticed. Things  happened to him
and he didn’t fight  back the way he once would have; sometimes when he
was being hurt, the part of him that was still  conscious wondered what the
brothers would think  of  him  now: gone were  his rages, his tantrums, his
struggling. Now he was the boy they had always wished him to be. Now he
hoped to be someone adrift, a presence so thin and light and insubstantial
that he seemed to displace no air at all.

186
   So he  was surprised—as surprised as the counselors—when he learned
that night that he was one of  the children chosen by a couple: the Learys.
Had he noticed a woman and man looking  at him, maybe even smiling  at
him? Maybe. But the afternoon had passed, as most did, in a ha]e, and even
on the bus ride home, he had begun the work of forgetting it.
   He    would   spend   a   probationary   weekend—the   weekend  before
Thanksgiving—with  the  Learys, so they  could  see how  they liked  each
other. That Thursday he was driven  to their  house by a counselor named
Boyd, who taught shop and plumbing and whom he didn’t know very well.
He knew Boyd  knew  what some of the  other counselors did to  him, and
although he never stopped them, he never participated, either.
   But  as he was getting out of the car in the Learys’ driveway—a one-story
brick house, surrounded on all sides by fallow, dark fields—Boyd snatched
his forearm and pulled him close, startling him into alertness.
   “Don’t   fuck this  up, St. Francis,” he said. “This  is your  chance, do you
hear me?”
   “Yes, sir,”  he’d said.
   “Go  on, then,” said Boyd, and released him, and he walked toward Mrs.
Leary, who was standing in the doorway.
   Mrs.  Leary was fat, but her husband was simply big, with large red hands
that looked like  weaponry. They had two daughters, both in their twenties
and both married, and they thought it  might  be nice to  have a boy in  the
house, someone who could help Mr. Leary—who repaired large-scale farm
machinery and also farmed himself—with the field  work. They chose him,
they said,  because he  seemed quiet,  and polite,   and they  didn’t   want
someone rowdy; they wanted someone hardworking, someone who would
appreciate what having a home and a house meant. They had read in  the
binder that he knew how to work, and how to clean, and that he did well on
the home’s farm.
   “Now,  your name, that’s an unusual name,” Mrs. Leary said.
   He had never thought it unusual, but “Yes, ma’am,” he said.
   “What   would  you  think  of  maybe going  by  a  different  name?” Mrs.
Leary asked. “Like, Cody, maybe? I’ve always liked  the name Cody. It’s a
little less—well, it’s a little  more us, really.”
   “I  like  Cody,” he said, although he didn’t really have an opinion about it:
Jude, Cody, it didn’t matter to him what he was called.
   “Well,  good,” said Mrs. Leary.

187
   That night,  alone, he said the name aloud to himself: Cody Leary. Cody
Leary. Could it  be possible that he was entering this house as one person
and then, as if the place were enchanted, transformed into another? Was it
that simple,  that  fast? Gone would   be Jude St.  Francis, and  with  him,
Brother Luke, and Brother Peter, and Father Gabriel, and the monastery and
the counselors at the home and his  shame and fears and filth,  and in his
place would be Cody  Leary, who  would have parents, and a room  of his
own, and would be able to make himself into whomever he chose.
   The  rest of the weekend passed uneventfully, so uneventfully  that with
each day, with each hour, he could feel pieces of himself awaken, could feel
the clouds that he gathered around himself separate and vanish, could feel
himself seeing into the future, and imagining the place in it he might have.
He tried his hardest to be polite, and hardworking, and it wasn’t difficult: he
got up early in the morning and made breakfast for the Learys (Mrs. Leary
praising him so loudly  and extravagantly that he had smiled, embarrassed,
at the floor),  and cleaned dishes, and helped Mr. Leary degrease his tools
and rewire a lamp, and although there were events he didn’t care for—the
boring church service they attended on Sunday; the prayers they supervised
before he was allowed to go to bed—they were hardly worse than the things
he didn’t  like   about the  home, they  were  things he  knew  he could  do
without  appearing resentful  or  ungrateful.  The Learys,  he  could  sense,
would not be the sort of people who would  behave the way that parents in
books would, the way the parents he yearned for might, but he knew how to
be industrious, he knew how to keep them satisfied. He was still frightened
of Mr. Leary’s large red hands, and when he was left alone with him in the
barn, he was shivery and watchful, but at least there was only Mr. Leary to
fear, not a whole  group of Mr.  Learys, as there had been before, or there
were at the home.
   When  Boyd picked  him up  Sunday evening, he was pleased with how
he’d done, confident, even. “How’d   it  go?” Boyd  asked him, and he was
able to answer, honestly, “Good.”
   He  was certain, from Mrs. Leary’s  last words to him—“I  have a feeling
we’ll  be seeing much more of you very soon, Cody”—that they would call
on Monday, and that soon, maybe even by Friday, he would be Cody Leary,
and the home would  be  one more  place he’d  put behind  him. But  then
Monday passed, and then Tuesday, and Wednesday, and then it  was the
following  week, and he  wasn’t called to  the headmaster’s office, and his

188
letter to the Learys had gone unanswered, and every day the driveway to the
dormitory remained a long, blank stretch, and no one came to get him.
   Finally,  two weeks after the visit,  he went to see Boyd at his workshop,
where he knew he stayed late on Thursday nights. He waited through dinner
out in the cold, the snow crunching under his feet, until he finally saw Boyd
walking out the door.
   “Christ,”   Boyd  said when  he saw  him,  nearly stepping on  him  as he
turned. “Shouldn’t you be back in the dorms, St. Francis?”
   “Please,” he begged. “Please tell me—are the Learys coming to get me?”
But he knew what the answer was even before he saw Boyd’s face.
   “They  changed their minds,” said Boyd, and although he wasn’t known,
by the counselors or the boys, for his gentleness, he was almost gentle then.
“It’s  over, St.  Francis. It’s  not going  to happen.”  He reached out a hand
toward him, but  he ducked, and Boyd shook his  head and began walking
off.
   “Wait,”   he called,  recovering himself  and running as well  as he  could
through the snow after Boyd. “Let  me try again,”  he said. “Tell me what I
did wrong,  and I’ll   try again.”  He could  feel the  old hysteria descending
upon him, could feel  inside him the vestiges of the  boy who would  throw
fits and shout, who could still a room with his screams.
   But  Boyd shook his head again. “It  doesn’t work  like that, St. Francis,”
he said, and then he stopped and looked directly at him.  “Look,”   he said,
“in a few  years you’ll be out of  here. I know it  seems like a long time, but
it’s not. And  then you’ll  be an adult and you’ll be able to do whatever you
want. You Must have to get through these years.” And then he turned again,
definitively, and stalked away from him.
   “How?”   he yelled after  Boyd. “Boyd,  tell  me how!  How, Boyd,  how?”
forgetting that he was to call him “sir,” and not “Boyd.”
   That night  he had his first tantrum in years, and although the punishment
here was the same, more or less, as it had been at the monastery, the release,
the sense of flight  it  had once given him,  was not: now  he was someone
who  knew  better,  whose  screams would  change  nothing,  and  all   his
shouting did was bring him back to himself, so that everything, every hurt,
every insult, felt  sharper and brighter and stickier and more resonant than
ever before.
   He  would never, never know  what he had done wrong that weekend at
the Learys’.  He  would  never  know  if  it   had been something  he could

189
control, or something he couldn’t. And of all the things from the monastery,
from  the  home,  that  he  worked  to  scrub  over,  he  worked  hardest at
forgetting that weekend, at forgetting the special shame of allowing himself
to believe that he might be someone he knew he wasn’t.
   But  now, of course, with the court date six weeks, five weeks, four weeks
away, he thought of it constantly. With Willem gone, and no one to monitor
his hours and activities, he stayed up until the sun began lightening the sky,
cleaning, scrubbing with  a  toothbrush the space beneath the refrigerator,
bleaching each  skinny  grout-canal  between the  bathtub  wall   tiles.  He
cleaned so he wouldn’t cut himself, because he was cutting himself so much
that even he knew how cra]y,  how destructive he was being; even he was
scared of himself,  as much by  what  he was doing  as by  his inability   to
control it. He  had begun a new method of balancing the edge of the blade
on his skin and then pressing down, as deep as he could, so that when he
withdrew the ra]or—stuck like an ax head into a tree stump—there was half
a second in which he could pull apart the two sides of flesh and see only a
clean white  gouge, like  a  side of  fatted  bacon, before  the blood  began
rushing in to pool within  the cut. He felt  di]]y,   as if his body was pumped
with helium; food tasted like rot to him, and he stopped eating unless he had
to. He stayed at the  office until  the  night shift  of  cleaners began moving
through the hallways, noisy  as mice, and then stayed awake at  home; he
woke with his heart thudding so fast that he had to gulp air to calm himself.
It was only work, and Willem’s calls, that forced him into normalcy, or he’d
have never left  the  house, would  have cut  himself  until  he  could  have
loosed whole pyramids of flesh from  his arms and flushed them down the
drain. He had a vision in which he carved away at himself—first arms, then
legs, then chest and neck and face—until he was only bones, a skeleton who
moved and sighed and  breathed and tottered through  life  on  its porous,
brittle stalks.
   He was back to seeing Andy every six  weeks, and had delayed his most
recent visit twice, because he dreaded what Andy might say. But finally, a
little less than four weeks before the court date, he went uptown and sat in
one of the examining  rooms until  Andy  peered in to  say he was running
late.
   “Take your time,”  he said.
   Andy  studied him, squinting a bit. “I won’t  be long,” he said, finally, and
then was gone.

190
   A   few  minutes later,  his nurse  Callie  came in.  “Hi,   Jude,” she  said.
“Doctor wants me to get your weight; do you mind stepping on the scale?”
   He didn’t  want to, but he knew it wasn’t Callie’s fault or decision, and so
he dragged himself off the table, and onto the scale, and didn’t look at the
number as Callie wrote it down  in his chart, and thanked him, and left the
room.
   “So,”  Andy  said after he’d come in, studying his chart. “What should we
talk about first, your extreme weight loss or your excessive cutting?”
   He didn’t  know what to say to that. “Why  do you think I’ve  been cutting
myself excessively?”
   “I  can always tell,” Andy  said. “You get sort of—sort of bluish under the
eyes. You’re probably not even conscious of it.  And  you’re  wearing your
sweater over the gown. Whenever it’s bad, you do that.”
   “Oh,”  he said. He hadn’t been aware.
   They were quiet, and Andy  pulled his stool close to the table and asked,
“When’s the date?”
   “February fifteenth.”
   “Ah,”   said Andy. “Soon.”
   “Yes.”
   “What’re  you worried about?”
   “I’m    worried—”   he began,  and then  stopped, and  tried  again.  “I’m
worried that if  Harold finds  out what I really  am, he won’t  want to—”  He
stopped. “And I don’t  know which is worse: him  finding out before, which
means this definitely won’t  happen, or him finding  out after, and reali]ing
I’ve deceived him.”  He sighed; he hadn’t  been able to articulate this until
now, but having done so, he knew that this was his fear.
   “Jude,”  Andy said, carefully, “what do you think  is so bad about yourself
that he wouldn’t want to adopt you?”
   “Andy,”  he pled, “don’t  make me say it.”
   “But  I honestly don’t know!”
   “The  things  I’ve  done,”  he said, “the  diseases I have from  them.”  He
stumbled on, hating himself. “It’s disgusting; I’m disgusting.”
   “Jude,”  Andy   began, and as he spoke,  he paused between every few
words, and he could feel Andy picking his way across a mine-pocked lawn,
so deliberately and slowly  was he going. “You  were a kid,  a baby. Those
things were done to you. You have nothing, nothing to blame yourself for,
not ever, not in any universe.”

191
   Andy  looked at him. “And even if  you hadn’t been a kid, even if you had
Must been some horny guy who wanted to fuck everything in sight and had
ended up with a bunch of STDs, it still wouldn’t be anything to be ashamed
of.” He sighed. “Can you try to believe me?”
   He shook his head. “I don’t know.”
   “I   know,”  Andy  said. They  were quiet.  “I  wish  you’d  see a therapist,
Jude,” he added, and his voice was sad. He couldn’t  respond, and after a
few minutes, Andy  stood up. “Well,”  he  said, sounding determined, “let’s
see them,” and he took off his sweater and held out his arms.
   He  could  tell   by  Andy’s  expression  that  it  was  worse than  he  had
anticipated, and  when  he  looked  down   and tried   to  view   himself  as
something unfamiliar, he could see in flashes what Andy  did:  the gobs of
bandages applied at intervals to the  fresh cuts, the half-healed cuts, with
their fragile   stitchings of  still-forming   scar  tissue, the one  infected cut,
which had developed a chunky cap of dried pus.
   “So,”  Andy  said after a long silence, after he’d almost finished his right
arm, cleaning  out the  infected cut  and  painting antibiotic   cream on  the
others, “what about your extreme weight loss?”
   “I  don’t think  it’s extreme.”
   “Jude,”  said Andy, “twelve  pounds in  not quite eight weeks is extreme,
and you didn’t exactly have twelve pounds to spare to begin with.”
   “I’m   Must not hungry,” he said, finally.
   Andy  didn’t  say anything else until  he finished both his  arms, and then
sighed and sat down again and started scribbling on his pad. “I want you to
eat three full meals a day, Jude,” he said, “plus one of the things on this list.
Every day. That’s in addition to standard meals, do you understand me? Or
I’m going to call your crew and make them sit with you every mealtime and
watch you eat, and you don’t want that, believe me.” He ripped the page off
the pad and handed it to him. “And  then I want  you back here next week.
No excuses.”
   He   looked  at  the  list—PEANUT   BUTTER   SANDWICH.    CHEESE
SANDWICH.   AVOCADO  SANDWICH.   3  EGGS  (WITH   YOLKS!!!!).
BANANA  SMOOTHIE—and  tucked it into his pants pocket.
   “And   the other thing I  want  you to do  is this,”  said Andy.  “When  you
wake up in the middle of  the night and want to cut yourself, I  want you to
call me instead. I don’t care what time it is, you call me, okay?” He nodded.
“I mean it, Jude.”

192
   “I’m   sorry, Andy,” he said.
   “I   know you  are,” said Andy.  “But  you don’t  need to be sorry—not  to
me, anyway.”
   “To  Harold,” he said.
   “No,”  Andy  corrected. “Not to Harold, either. Just to yourself.”
   He  went home  and ate away at  a banana until  it  turned to  dirt  in  his
mouth and then changed and continued washing the living-room windows,
which he had begun the night before. He rubbed at them, inching the sofa
closer so he could stand atop one of its  arms, ignoring the  twinges in his
back as he climbed up and down, lugging the bucket of dirtied  gray water
slowly to  the tub. After  he’d finished the living   room and Willem’s  room,
he was in  so much pain  that he had to  crawl  to the  bathroom, and after
cutting himself, he rested, holding his arm above his head and wrapping the
mat  about him.   When  his  phone  rang, he  sat  up,  disoriented,  before
groaningly moving to  his bedroom—where the clock read three a.m.—and
listening to a very cranky (but alert) Andy.
   “I  called too late,” Andy  guessed. He didn’t say anything. “Listen, Jude,”
Andy continued,  “you  don’t stop  this and I  really  am going  to have you
committed. And I’ll  call Harold and tell him  why. You can count on it.” He
paused. “And besides which,” he added, “aren’t you tired, Jude? You don’t
have to do this to yourself, you know. You don’t need to.”
   He didn’t  know  what it was—maybe it  was Must the calmness of Andy’s
voice, the steadiness with which he made his promise that made him reali]e
that he was serious this time in  a way he hadn’t been before; or maybe it
was Must the reali]ation that yes, he was tired, so tired that he was willing,
finally, to accept someone else’s orders—but over the next week, he did as
he was told. He ate his meals, even as the food transformed itself by some
strange alchemy to mud, to offal: he made himself chew and swallow, chew
and swallow. They  weren’t big  meals, but they  were meals. Andy  called
every night   at  midnight,  and  Willem  called  every  morning   at six   (he
couldn’t bring himself to ask, and Willem never volunteered, whether Andy
had contacted him).  The  hours in  between were  the most  difficult,   and
although he couldn’t cease cutting himself entirely, he did limit it: two cuts,
and he stopped. In  the  absence of cutting,  he felt  himself  being  tugged
toward earlier punishments—before he had been taught to cut himself, there
was a period in  which he would  toss himself against the wall  outside the
motel room he shared with Brother Luke  again and again until he sagged,

193
exhausted, to the ground, and his left side was permanently stained blue and
purple and brown with bruises. He didn’t  do that now, but he remembered
the sensation, the satisfying slam of  his body  against the wall,  the awful
pleasure of hurling himself against something so immovable.
   On  Friday he  saw Andy, who  wasn’t approving  (he hadn’t  gained any
weight), but also didn’t lecture him  (nor had he lost any), and the next day
he flew  to Boston. He  didn’t  tell anyone he was going,  not even Harold.
Julia, he knew, was at  a conference in Costa Rica;  but Harold,  he knew,
would be home.
   Julia had given him a set of keys six years ago, when he was arriving for
Thanksgiving  at  a time   when both  she  and  Harold  happened to  have
department meetings, so he let himself into the house and poured a glass of
water, looking out at the back garden as he drank. It was Must before noon,
and Harold would still  be at his tennis game, so he went to the living room
to wait  for  him. But  he fell  asleep, and when he woke,  it  was to Harold
shaking his shoulder and urgently repeating his name.
   “Harold,”  he said, sitting up, “I’m  sorry, I’m sorry; I should’ve called.”
   “Jesus,”  Harold said, panting;  he smelled cold and sharp. “Are  you  all
right, Jude? What’s wrong?”
   “Nothing,   nothing,”  he said, hearing  before he said it   how absurd his
explanation was, “I Must thought I’d stop by.”
   “Well,”   said Harold, momentarily silent. “It’s good to see you.” He sat in
his chair and looked  at him.  “You’ve  been something of a  stranger these
past few weeks.”
   “I  know,” he said. “I’m  sorry.”
   Harold shrugged. “No apologies necessary. I’m Must glad you’re okay.”
   “Yes,”  he said. “I’m okay.”
   Harold tilted  his head. “You don’t look too good.”
   He  smiled. “I’ve  had the flu.”  He ga]ed  up at the ceiling, as if  his lines
might be written there. “The forsythia’s falling down, you know.”
   “I  know. It’s been a windy winter.”
   “I’ll   help you stake it, if you want.”
   Harold looked at him for  a long moment then, his mouth slightly moving,
as if  he was both trying  and not  trying  to speak. Finally  he said,  “Yeah.
Let’s go do that.”
   Outside  it   was  abruptly,  insultingly   cold,  and  both   of  them  began
sniffling. He  positioned the stake and Harold hammered it into the ground,

194
although the earth was fro]en and chipped up into pottery-like shards as he
did. After   they’d  gotten it   deep enough, Harold  handed him  lengths of
twine, and he tied the center stalks of the bush to the stake, snugly enough
so they’d be secure, but not so snug that they’d be constricted. He worked
slowly, making sure the knots were tight, snapping off a few  branches that
were too bent to recover.
   “Harold,”  he said, when he was halfway down the bush, “I wanted to talk
to you about something, but—I don’t know where to begin.” Stupid, he told
himself. This is such a stupid idea. You were so stupid to think any of  this
could ever happen. He opened his mouth to continue and then shut it, and
then opened it again: he was a fish, dumbly blowing bubbles, and he wished
he had never come, had never begun speaking.
   “Jude,”  said  Harold, “tell   me. Whatever  it  is.”  He  stopped. “Are  you
having second thoughts?”
   “No,”  he said. “No, nothing like that.”  They were silent. “Are you?”
   “No,  of course not.”
   He   finished   the  last  tie   and  brought   himself  to   his  feet,   Harold
deliberately not helping  him. “I  don’t  want  to tell  you this,”  he said, and
looked down  at  the forsythia,  its  bare  twiggy  ugliness.  “But  I  have  to
because—because I don’t want to  be deceitful  with  you.  But  Harold—I
think you think I’m  one kind of person, and I’m not.”
   Harold was quiet. “What kind of  person do I think you are?”
   “A  good person,” he said. “Someone decent.”
   “Well,”  said Harold, “you’re  right. I do.”
   “But—I’m    not,” he  said, and could feel  his eyes grow hot,  despite the
cold. “I’ve   done things  that—that good  people don’t  do,”  he  continued,
lamely. “And  I Must think you should know that about me. That  I’ve  done
terrible things, things I’m  ashamed of, and if you knew, you’d be ashamed
to know me, much less be related to me.”
   “Jude,”  Harold  said at  last. “I  can’t  imagine anything  you might  have
done that would change the way I feel about you. I don’t care what you did
before. Or rather—I do care; I would love to hear about your life before we
met. But I’ve always had the feeling, the very strong feeling, that you never
wanted to discuss it.”  He stopped and waited. “Do  you want to  discuss it
now? Do you want to tell me?”
   He  shook his head. He wanted to and didn’t want to, both. “I  can’t,”  he
said.  Beneath the   small  of   his  back,  he  felt   the  first   unfurlings   of

195
discomfort, a blackened seed spreading its thorned branches. Not now, he
begged himself, not now, a plea as impossible as the plea he really meant:
Not now, not ever.
   “Well,”   Harold  sighed, “in  the absence of specifics, I  won’t  be able to
reassure you specifically,  so I’m   Must going to  give you  a  blanket,  all-
encompassing reassurance, which I hope you’ll believe. Jude: whatever it
is, whatever you did, I  promise you, whether you someday tell me or  not,
that it will  never make me regret wanting or having you as a member of my
family.”  He took  a deep breath, held his right  hand before him. “Jude St.
Francis, as your future parent, I hereby absolve you of—of  everything for
which you seek absolution.”
   And  was this what he in fact wanted? Absolution? He looked at Harold’s
face, so familiar  he could remember its  every furrow  when he closed his
eyes, and which, despite the flourishes and formality of his declaration, was
serious and unsmiling. Could he believe Harold?  The hardest thing is not
finding the knowledge, Brother Luke once said to him after he’d confessed
he was having difficulty believing  in God. The hardest thing is believing it.
He felt   he had  failed  once  again: failed   to  confess properly,  failed  to
determine in advance what he wanted to hear in response. Wouldn’t it have
been easier in a way  if  Harold  had told him  that  he was right,  that they
should perhaps rethink the adoption? He  would have been devastated, of
course, but it would have been an old sensation, something he understood.
In Harold’s  refusal to let  him go  lay a future  he couldn’t  imagine, one in
which someone might really want him for  good, and that was a reality that
he had  never experienced before, for   which  he had  no  preparation, no
signposts. Harold would lead and he would follow, until  one day he would
wake and Harold  would  be  gone, and  he would  be  left  vulnerable and
stranded in a foreign land, with no one there to guide him home.
   Harold  was waiting for his reply, but  the pain was now unignorable, and
he knew he had to rest. “Harold,” he said. “I’m   sorry. But I think—I   think
I’d better go lie down for a while.”
   “Go,”  said Harold, unoffended, “go.”
   In  his  room, he lies  down atop  the comforter  and closes his eyes, but
even after the episode ends, he’s exhausted, and tells himself he’ll nap for
Must a few minutes and then get up again and see what Harold has in the
house: if he has brown sugar, he’ll  bake something—there was a bowl of
persimmons in the kitchen, and maybe he’ll make a persimmon cake.

196
   But  he doesn’t wake up. Not when Harold comes to check on him in the
next hour and places the back of his hand against his cheek and then drapes
a blanket over  him;  not when  Harold checks on  him  again, right  before
dinner. He sleeps through his phone ringing  at midnight  and again at  six
a.m., and through the house phone ringing at twelve thirty  and then at six
thirty,  and Harold’s  conversations with  first  Andy  and then  Willem.  He
sleeps into the morning, and through lunch, and only wakes when he feels
Harold’s hand on  his shoulder and hears Harold  saying his name, telling
him his flight’s leaving in a few hours.
   Before he wakes, he dreams of a man standing in a field. He can’t see the
man’s features, but he is tall and thin, and he’s helping another, older man
hitch the hulk of a tractor carapace to the back of a truck. He knows he’s in
Montana from the whitened, curved-bowl vastness of the sky, and from the
particular kind  of  cold  there, which  is  completely  without  moisture and
which feels somehow purer than cold he’s felt anywhere else.
   He  still can’t  see the man’s features, but he thinks he knows who he is,
recogni]es his long strides and his way of crossing his arms in front of him
as he listens to the other man. “Cody,”  he calls  out in  his dream, and the
man turns, but he’s too far away, and so he can’t quite tell if, under the brim
of the man’s baseball cap, they share the same face.


   The fifteenth  is a Friday, which he takes off  from work.  There had been
some talk of a dinner party on Thursday night, but in the end, they settle on
an early  lunch  the  day  of   the ceremony  (as  JB  calls  it).  Their   court
appointment is at ten, and after  it’s over, everyone will   come back to the
house to eat.
   Harold  had wanted to  call a  caterer, but he insisted he’d  cook, and he
spends the remains of Thursday evening in the kitchen. He does the baking
that night—the  chocolate-walnut  cake Harold  likes;  the  tarte tatin  Julia
likes; the sourdough bread they both like—and picks through ten pounds of
crab and mixes the meat with egg and onion and parsley and bread crumbs
and forms them into patties. He cleans the potatoes and gives the carrots a
quick scrub, and chops the ends off the brussels sprouts, so that the next day
all he’ll  have to  do is toss them in  oil  and shove them into  the oven. He
shakes the cartons of figs into a bowl, which he’ll  roast and serve over ice
cream topped with honey and balsamic vinaigrette. They are all of  Harold

197
and Julia’s  favorite  dishes, and he  is  glad to  make  them, glad  to  have
something to give  them, however small.  Throughout the evening, Harold
and Julia wander in and out, and although he tells them not  to, they wash
dishes and pans as he dirties them, pour him glasses of water and wine, and
ask if  they  can help  him,  even though he  tells  them they  should relax.
Finally they  leave for bed, and although he promises them that he will  as
well, he instead stays up, the kitchen bright and silent around him, singing
quietly, his hands moving to keep the mania at bay.
   The past few days have been very difficult, some of the most difficult  he
can remember, so difficult  that one night  he even called Andy  after their
midnight check-in,  and when Andy offered  to meet him  at a diner at  two
a.m., he accepted the offer and went,  desperate to get himself out  of  the
apartment, which suddenly seemed full of irresistible temptations: ra]ors, of
course, but also knives and scissors and matches, and staircases to throw
himself down. He knows that if  he goes to his room now, he won’t be able
to stop himself from  heading directly  to the bathroom, where he has long
kept a bag, its contents identical to the one at Lispenard Street, taped to the
sink’s undercarriage: his arms ache with yearning, and he is determined not
to give in. He has both dough and batter left over, and decides he’ll make a
tart with pine nuts and cranberries, and maybe a round flat cake gla]ed with
slices of oranges and honey: by the time both are done baking, it will almost
be daylight  and he  will  be  past danger and will   have sucessfully saved
himself.
   Malcolm   and JB will   both  be at  the courthouse the next  day; they’re
taking the  morning  flight.   But  Willem,  who  was supposed to  be there,
won’t; he called the week before to say filming had been delayed, and he’ll
now be  coming  home on  the  eighteenth, not the  fourteenth. He  knows
there’s nothing to be done about this, but still, he mourns Willem’s absence
almost fiercely: a day like  this without Willem  won’t  be a day at all. “Call
me the second it’s over,” Willem had said. “It’s killing me I can’t be there.”
   He  did,  however, invite  Andy  in  one of  their  midnight  conversations,
which he  grew to  enMoy: in those talks, they  discussed everyday things,
calming things, normal  things—the new  Supreme Court Mustice nominee;
the  most  recent health-care  bill   (he  approved  of   it;  Andy   didn’t);   a
biography of Rosalind Franklin they’d  both read (he liked it; Andy  didn’t);
the apartment that Andy and Jane were renovating. He liked the novelty of
hearing Andy   say, with  real  outrage,  “Jude, you’ve   got  to  be  fucking

198
kidding me!,”  which he was used to hearing when being confronted about
his  cutting,  or  his  amateurish bandaging  skills,  instead  applied  to  his
opinions about movies, and the mayor, and books, and even paint  colors.
Once he  learned that  Andy  wouldn’t   use their  talks  as an  occasion to
reprimand him, or lecture him, he relaxed into them, and even managed to
learn some more  things  about Andy   himself:  Andy  spoke  of  his  twin,
Beckett, also a  doctor, a heart surgeon, who  lived  in  San Francisco and
whose boyfriend Andy hated and was scheming to get Beckett to dump; and
how Jane’s parents were giving them their house on Shelter Island; and how
Andy had been on the football team in high school, the very Americanness
of which had made his parents uneasy; and how he had spent his Munior year
abroad in  Siena, where  he dated a  girl  from   Lucca and  gained twenty
pounds. It wasn’t that he and Andy  never spoke of Andy’s personal life—
they did  to  some extent  after every  appointment—but on  the  phone he
talked more, and he was able to pretend that Andy was only his friend and
not his doctor, despite the fact that this illusion was belied by the call’s very
premise.
   “Obviously,   you shouldn’t  feel  obligated  to come,”  he  added, hastily,
after inviting Andy to the court date.
   “I’d   love to come,” Andy said. “I was wondering when I’d be invited.”
   Then he felt  bad. “I  Must didn’t want you to feel you  had to spend even
more  time  with   your  weird   patient  who  already  makes  your  life   so
difficult,”  he said.
   “You’re   not Must my weird patient, Jude,” Andy  said. “You’re  also  my
weird friend.” He paused. “Or at least, I hope you are.”
   He smiled into  the phone. “Of course I am,” he said. “I’m  honored to be
your weird friend.”
   And  so  Andy  was coming  as well:   he’d  fly  back  that afternoon,  but
Malcolm  and JB would  spend the night, and they’d  all  leave together on
Saturday.
   Upon  arriving,   he had  been surprised,  and then  moved, to  see  how
thoroughly Harold  and Julia had  cleaned the house, and how proud  they
were of  the  work  they’d   done. “Look!”    one or  the  other  kept  saying,
triumphantly pointing at a surface—a table, a chair, a corner of floor—that
would normally  have  been obscured by stacks of  books or  Mournals, but
which was now clear of all clutter. There were flowers everywhere—winter
flowers:  bunches  of   decorative  cabbages and  white-budded  dogwood

199
branches and paperwhite bulbs, with their sweet, faintly  fecal fragrance—
and the books in their cases had been straightened and even the nap on the
sofa had been repaired.
   “And  look  at this, Jude,” Julia had said, linking her arm through his, and
showing him the celadon-gla]ed dish on the hallway table, which had been
broken for as long as he’d known them, the shards that had snapped off its
side permanently nested in the bowl and furred with  dust. But  now it  had
been fixed, and washed and polished.
   “Wow,”  he said when presented with each new thing, grinning idiotically,
happy because they were so happy. He didn’t care, he never had, whether
their place  was clean  or  not—they  could’ve  lived  surrounded by  Ionic
columns of old  New York Times, with colonies of  rats squeaking plumply
underfoot for all  he cared—but he knew they thought he minded, and had
mistaken his incessant, tedious cleaning of everything as a rebuke, as much
as he’d tried, and tried,  to assure them it wasn’t.  He cleaned now to  stop
himself, to  distract himself, from  doing  other things, but  when he was in
college, he  had cleaned  for  the  others to  express his  gratitude:  it  was
something he could do and had always done, and they gave him so much
and he gave them so little. JB, who enMoyed living in squalor, never noticed.
Malcolm,  who  had  grown  up  with  a  housekeeper, always noticed  and
always thanked him. Only Willem hadn’t liked  it. “Stop it,  Jude,” he’d said
one day, grabbing  his wrist  as he  picked JB’s  dirty  shirts  off  the  floor,
“you’re  not our maid.”  But  he hadn’t been able to stop, not then, and not
now.
   By  the time  he wipes off  the  countertops a final  time, it’s  almost four
thirty, and he staggers to his room, texts Willem  not to  call him,  and falls
into a brief,  brutal sleep. When he wakes, he makes the bed and showers
and dresses and returns to  the kitchen,  where Harold  is  standing at  the
counter, reading the paper and drinking coffee.
   “Well,”  Harold  says, looking up at him. “Don’t you look handsome.”
   He  shakes his head, reflexively, but the truth is  that he’d bought a  new
tie, and had his hair cut the day before, and he feels, if not handsome, then
at least neat and presentable, which he always tries to  be. He rarely  sees
Harold in  a suit,  but he’s  wearing one as well,  and the  solemnity of  the
occasion makes him suddenly shy.
   Harold smiles at him. “You were busy last night, clearly. Did you sleep at
all?”

200
   He smiles back. “Enough.”
   “Julia’s  getting ready,” says Harold, “but I have something for you.”
   “For  me?”
   “Yes,”  says Harold, and picks up a small leather box, about the si]e of a
baseball, from beside his coffee mug and holds it  out to him.  He opens it
and inside is Harold’s watch, with its round white face and sober, forthright
numbers. The band has been replaced with a new black crocodile one.
   “My   father gave this to me when I  turned thirty,”  says Harold, when he
doesn’t say anything.  “It  was  his. And  you  are  still  thirty,  so I  at  least
haven’t messed up the symmetry of this.”  He takes the box from him  and
removes the watch and reverses it so he can see the initials engraved on the
back of  the  face: SS/HS/JSF. “Saul Stein,”   says Harold. “That   was my
father. And then HS for me, and JSF for you.” He returns the watch to him.
   He  runs  his  thumbtip   lightly   over  the  initials.  “I   can’t   accept this,
Harold,” he says, finally.
   “Sure  you can,”  Harold says. “It’s  yours, Jude. I  already bought a new
one; you can’t give it back.”
   He can feel Harold looking  at him. “Thank you,”  he says, at last. “Thank
you.” He can’t seem to say anything else.
   “It’s  my  pleasure,” says Harold, and neither of them says anything for a
few seconds, until he comes to himself and unclasps his watch and fastens
Harold’s—his, now—around his wrist, holding  his arm up for Harold,  who
nods. “Nice,” he says. “It looks good on you.”
   He’s  about to  reply  with  something (what?), when  he hears, and then
sees, JB and Malcolm, both in suits as well.
   “The  door was unlocked,” JB says, as Malcolm sighs. “Harold!” he hugs
him, “Congratulations! It’s a boy!”
   “I’m   sure Harold’s never heard that one before,” says Malcolm, waving
hello at Julia, who’s entering the kitchen.
   Andy   arrives  next,  and  then  Gillian;   they’ll    meet  Laurence at  the
courthouse.
   The  doorbell  rings again.  “Are  we  expecting someone else?” he asks
Harold, who shrugs: “Can you get it, Jude?”
   So  he opens the door, and there  is Willem.  He  stares at Willem  for  a
second, and then, before he can tell himself to be calm, Willem  springs at
him like a civet cat and hugs him so hard that for a moment he fears he will
tip over. “Are you surprised?” Willem says into his ear, and he can tell from

201
his voice that he’s smiling. It’s the second time that morning he’s unable to
speak.
   The court will  be the third time. They take two cars, and in his (driven by
Harold, with Malcolm  in the front  seat), Willem explains that his departure
date actually had been changed; but when it  was changed back again, he
didn’t tell  him, only  the others, so that his appearance would be a surprise.
“Yeah, thanks for that, Willem,”   says Malcolm, “I  had to  monitor JB  like
the CIA to make sure he didn’t say anything.”
   They  go not to the family  courts but  to the appeals court on Pemberton
Square. Inside Laurence’s courtroom—Laurence unfamiliar in his robes: it
is a  day  of  everyone in  costume—he and Harold  and  Julia  make their
promises to each other, Laurence smiling the entire time, and then there is a
flurry  of  picture-taking, with  everyone taking  photos of  everyone else in
various arrangements and configurations. He is the only  one who doesn’t
take any at all, as he’s in every one.
   He’s  standing with Harold  and Julia, waiting  for Malcolm  to  figure out
his enormous, complicated camera, when JB calls his name, and all three of
them look over, and JB takes the shot. “Got it,” says JB. “Thanks.”
   “JB,  this’d  better not be for—”  he begins, but then Malcolm  announces
he’s ready, and the three of them swivel obediently toward him.
   They’re  back  at the  house by  noon, and soon  people start arriving—
Gillian  and  Laurence and James and  Carey, and Julia’s  colleagues and
Harold’s, some of whom he hasn’t seen since he had classes with them in
law school. His old voice teacher comes, as does Dr. Li, his math professor,
and Dr. Kashen, his master’s adviser, and Allison, his former boss at Batter,
and a friend of all of theirs from Hood Hall,  Lionel, who  teaches physics at
Wellesley. People come and go all  afternoon, going  to and from  classes,
meetings, trials. He had initially   been reluctant to  have such a gathering,
with  so many  people—wouldn’t   his acquisition  of  Harold  and  Julia  as
parents provoke, even encourage, questions about why he was parentless at
all?—but as the hours pass, and no one asks any questions, no one demands
to know  why he  needs a new set anyway, he finds himself  forgetting his
fears. He knows his  telling  other people about the  adoption is a  form of
bragging, and that bragging has its own consequences, but he cannot help
himself. Just this once, he implores whoever in the world is responsible for
punishing him  for  his bad behavior. Let  me celebrate this  thing that  has
happened to me Must this once.

202
   There is  no etiquette for such a party, and so their guests have invented
their own: Malcolm’s parents have sent a magnum of champagne and a case
of super Tuscan from  a vineyard they  partly  own outside of  Montalcino.
JB’s mother sent him  with  a burlap sack of  heirloom  narcissus bulbs for
Harold and Julia,  and a card for  him; his  aunts have sent an orchid. The
U.S. Attorney  sends an  enormous crate of  fruit,   with  a card  signed by
Marshall and Citi]en  and Rhodes as well. People bring wine  and flowers.
Allison,  who had years ago revealed him  to  Harold as the creator of  the
bacteria cookies, brings  four  do]en  decorated with  his  original  designs,
which makes him blush and Julia shout with delight. The rest of the day is a
binging  on  all   things  sweet:  everything  he  does  that  day  is  perfect,
everything he says comes out right.  People reach for him  and he doesn’t
move or shy away from  them; they  touch him and he lets  them. His face
hurts from  smiling.  Decades of approbation, of  affection are stuffed  into
this one afternoon, and he gorges on it, reeling from the strangeness of it all.
He overhears Andy arguing with Dr. Kashen about a massive new proposed
landfill  proMect in Gurgaon, watches Willem listen patiently to his old torts
professor, eavesdrops on JB explaining to  Dr. Li   why  the New  York art
scene is irretrievably fucked, spies Malcolm and Carey trying to extract the
largest of the crab cakes without toppling the rest of the stack.
   By  the  early evening, everyone has left,  and it  is  Must the six of them
sprawled out in the living room:  he and Harold and Julia and Malcolm and
JB and Willem. The house is once again messy. Julia mentions dinner, but
everyone—even he—has eaten too much, and no one, not even JB, wants to
think about  it.  JB has given  Harold and  Julia a painting  of  him,  saying,
before he hands  it  over to  them,  “It’s  not  based on  a photo,  Must from
sketches.” The painting, which  JB  has done in watercolors  and ink  on a
sheet of stiff paper, is of his face and neck, and is in a different style than he
associates with JB’s work:  sparer and more gestural, in a somber, grayed
palette. In it, his right hand is hovering over the base of his throat, as if he’s
about to grab it and throttle himself, and his mouth is slightly open, and his
pupils are very large, like  a cat’s in  gloom. It’s  undeniably him—he  even
recogni]es the  gesture as  his  own,  although  he  can’t,  in  the  moment,
remember what it’s meant to signal, or  what emotion it  accompanies. The
face is slightly larger than life-si]e, and all of them stare at it in silence.
   “It’s   a really  good piece,”  JB  says at last, sounding  pleased. “Let  me
know if you ever want to sell it, Harold,” and finally, everyone laughs.

203
   “JB,  it’s  so, so beautiful—thank  you so  much,” says Julia,  and Harold
echoes her. He is finding  it  difficult,  as he always  does when confronted
with JB’s  pictures of him,  to separate the beauty of the art itself  from the
distaste he feels for his own image, but he doesn’t want  to be ungracious,
and so he repeats their praise.
   “Wait,  I  have something, too,”  Willem  says, heading for  the bedroom,
and returning  with   a  wooden statue, about  eighteen inches  high,  of  a
bearded man in hydrangea-blue robes, a curl of flames, like a cobra’s hood,
surrounding his reddish hair, his right arm held diagonally against his chest,
his left by his side.
   “Fuck’s  that dude?” asks JB.
   “This   dude,”   Willem   replies,  “is  Saint   Jude, also  known   as Judas
Thaddeus.” He puts him  on  the coffee table,  turns him  toward Julia  and
Harold. “I  got  him  at a little   antiques store in Bucharest,” he  tells them.
“They  said  it’s  late  nineteenth-century, but I   don’t  know—I  think   he’s
probably Must a village  carving.  Still,   I  liked  him.  He’s  handsome and
stately, Must like our Jude.”
   “I  agree,” says Harold, picking up the statue and holding it in  his hands.
He strokes the figure’s pleated robe, his wreath of fire. “Why’s his head on
fire?”
   “It’s  to  symboli]e that he was at Pentecost and received the holy spirit,”
he hears himself  saying, the  old  knowledge never  far, cluttering  up  his
mind’s cellar. “He was one of the apostles.”
   “How’d   you know  that?” Malcolm  asks, and Willem, who’s sitting  next
to him,  touches his arm. “Of  course you  know,”  Willem  says, quietly. “I
always forget,”   and  he  feels  a  rush  of  gratitude  for   Willem,  not   for
remembering, but for forgetting.
   “The   patron saint  of  lost  causes,” adds Julia,  taking  the statue  from
Harold, and the words come to him at once: Pray for us, Saint Jude, helper
and keeper of the hopeless, pray for us—when he was a  child, it  was his
final prayer of  the night, and it wasn’t until  he was older that he would  be
ashamed of his name, of how it seemed to announce him to the world, and
would wonder if the brothers had intended it as he was certain others saw it:
as a mockery; as a diagnosis; as a prediction. And yet it also felt, at times,
like it  was all that was truly  his, and although there had been moments he
could have, even  should have changed it,  he  never did.  “Willem,   thank
you,” Julia says. “I love him.”

204
   “Me  too,” says Harold. “Guys, this is all really sweet of you.”
   He,  too, has brought a present for Harold  and Julia, but as the day  has
passed, it’s come to seem ever-smaller and more foolish. Years ago, Harold
had mentioned that he and Julia had heard a series of Schubert’s early lieder
performed in  Vienna  when they  were  on their  honeymoon.  But  Harold
couldn’t remember which ones they had loved, and so he had made up his
own list,  and augmented it with  a few  other songs he liked, mostly  Bach
and Mo]art,  and then rented a small  sound booth and recorded a disc  of
himself singing them: every few months or so, Harold asks him to sing for
them, but  he’s  always  too  shy  to  do  so.  Now,  though,  the  gift   feels
misguided and tinny, as well as shamefully boastful, and he is embarrassed
by his own presumption. Yet he can’t bring  himself to throw  it  away. And
so, when everyone is standing and stretching and saying their good nights,
he slips away and wedges the disc, and the letters he’s written each of them,
between two books—a battered copy of Common Sense and a frayed edition
of White  Noise—on a low  shelf,  where they might  sit,  undiscovered, for
decades.
   Normally,  Willem stays with JB in the upstairs study, as he’s the only one
who can tolerate JB’s snoring, and Malcolm stays with him downstairs. But
that evening, as everyone heads off for bed, Malcolm volunteers that he’ll
share with JB, so that he and Willem can catch up with each other.
   “  ’Night,  lovers,” JB calls down the staircase at them.
   As  they get ready for  bed, Willem  tells  him more  stories from the set:
about the lead actress, who perspired so much that her entire face had to be
dusted with powder every two  takes; about the lead actor, who played the
devil, and who was constantly trying to curry favor with the grips by buying
them beers and asking them who wanted to play football, but who then had
a tantrum when  he couldn’t  remember his  lines; about  the nine-year-old
British actor playing  the actress’s son, who had approached Willem at the
craft services table to  tell him  that he really  shouldn’t  be eating crackers
because they were empty  calories, and  wasn’t  he afraid  of  getting  fat?
Willem talks and talks, and he laughs as he brushes his teeth and washes his
face.
   But  when the lights are turned off and they are both lying in the dark, he
in the bed, Willem  on the sofa (after an argument in which  he tried to get
Willem  to  take the  bed himself),  Willem  says, gently,  “The  apartment’s
really fucking clean.”

205
   “I  know,” he winces. “I’m  sorry.”
   “Don’t  be,” Willem  says. “But Jude—was it really awful?”
   He understands then that Andy did tell Willem at least some of what had
happened, and so he  decides to  answer honestly.  “It   wasn’t  great,”  he
allows, and then,  because he doesn’t want Willem  to  feel  guilty,  “but  it
wasn’t horrible.”
   They are both quiet. “I wish I could’ve  been there,” Willem says.
   “You  were,” he assures him. “But Willem—I missed you.”
   Very quietly, Willem  says, “I missed you, too.”
   “Thank  you for coming,” he says.
   “Of   course I  was going  to come, Judy,”  Willem  says from  across the
room. “I would’ve  no matter what.”
   He  is silent,  savoring this promise and committing  it  to memory  so he
can think about it in moments when he needs it most. “Do you think it went
all right?” he asks.
   “Are  you  serious?” Willem  says, and he can hear him sit up. “Did   you
see Harold’s face?  He looked  like  the  Green Party  Must elected its first
president and the Second Amendment was eliminated and the Red Sox were
canoni]ed, all in the same day.”
   He laughs. “You really think so?”
   “I  know so. He was really, really happy, Jude. He loves you.”
   He  smiles into the dark.  He wants to hear Willem  say such things over
and over, an  endless loop of  promises and avowals,  but he  knows such
wishes are self-indulgent, and so he changes the subMect, and they talk of
little things, nothings, until first Willem,  and then he, fall asleep.
   A   week  later,   his  giddiness  has  mellowed  into   something  else:  a
contentment, a stillness. For the past week, his nights have been unbroken
stretches of sleep in which he dreams not of the past but of the present: silly
dreams about work, sunnily absurd dreams about his friends. It is the first
complete week  in  the now  almost  two  decades since he  began cutting
himself that he hasn’t woken in  the middle of  the night, since he’s felt  no
need for the ra]or. Maybe he is cured, he dares to think. Maybe this is what
he needed all  along, and  now  that it’s  happened, he is  better. He  feels
wonderful,  like  a  different  person: whole  and  healthy and  calm.  He is
someone’s son, and at times the knowledge of that is so overwhelming that
he imagines it  is  manifesting  itself  physically,  as if  it’s  been written  in
something shining and gold across his chest.

206
   He is  back in their apartment. Willem  is with  him. He has brought back
with him a second statue of Saint Jude, which they keep in the kitchen, but
this Saint Jude is bigger and hollow and ceramic, with  a slot chiseled into
the back of his head, and they feed their change through it at the end of the
day; when it’s full,  they decide, they’ll  go buy a really good bottle of wine
and drink it, and then they’ll begin again.
   He  doesn’t know this  now, but in  the years to come he will,   again and
again, test  Harold’s  claims  of  devotion,  will   throw  himself  against his
promises to see how steadfast they are. He won’t  even be conscious that
he’s doing this. But  he will   do it  anyway, because part of him will   never
believe Harold and Julia; as much as he wants to, as much as he thinks he
does, he won’t, and he will  always be convinced that they will   eventually
tire of him, that they will one day regret their involvement with him. And so
he will challenge them, because when their relationship inevitably ends, he
will  be able to  look back and know  for  certain that he caused it, and not
only that, but the specific incident that caused it, and he will  never have to
wonder, or worry,  about what he did  wrong, or  what he could  have done
better. But that is in the future. For now, his happiness is flawless.
   That  first  Saturday after he returns from  Boston, he goes up to  Felix’s
house as usual, where Mr.  Baker  has requested he come a few  minutes
early. They talk, briefly,  and then he goes downstairs to find Felix, who  is
waiting for him in the music room, plinking at the piano keys.
   “So,  Felix,”   he says, in  the break they  take after  piano and Latin  but
before German and math, “your father tells me you’re going away to school
next year.”
   “Yeah,”  says Felix, looking  down  at his feet. “In  September. Dad went
there, too.”
   “I  heard,” he says. “How do you feel about it?”
   Felix  shrugs. “I don’t  know,” he says, at last. “Dad says you’re going to
catch me up this spring and summer.”
   “I   will,”  he promises. “You’re  going to  be so ready for that school that
they won’t know  what hit  them.” Felix’s  head is still bent, but  he sees the
tops of his cheeks fatten a little and knows he’s smiling, Must a bit.
   He doesn’t know  what makes him say what he does next: Is it empathy,
as he hopes, or  is  it  a  boast, an  alluding  aloud to  the  improbable  and
wondrous turns his life has taken over the past month? “You know, Felix,”
he begins, “I never had friends, either, not for a very  long time, not until  I

207
was much older  than you.”  He  can sense, rather than see, Felix become
alert, can feel  him  listening.  “I   wanted them,  too,”  he continues, going
slowly now, because he wants to make sure his words come out right. “And
I always wondered if I would ever find  any, and how, and when.” He traces
his index  finger  across the dark walnut  tabletop, up  the spine of  Felix’s
math textbook, down his cold glass of water. “And  then I  went to college,
and I met people who, for  whatever reason, decided to be my friends, and
they taught  me—everything, really.  They  made me, and  make me,  into
someone better than I really am.
   “You  won’t understand what I mean now, but someday you will: the only
trick of  friendship, I think,  is to find  people who are better than you are—
not smarter, not cooler, but kinder, and more generous, and more forgiving
—and then to appreciate them for  what they can teach you, and to  try  to
listen to them when they tell you something about yourself, no matter how
bad—or good—it might be, and to trust them, which is the hardest thing of
all. But the best, as well.”
   They’re   both  quiet   for   a  long  time,   listening  to   the  click   of   the
metronome, which  is faulty   and sometimes starts ticking  spontaneously,
even after he’s stopped it. “You’re  going to make friends, Felix,”  he says,
finally. “You  will.  You won’t  have to work  as hard at finding them as you
will  at keeping them,  but I  promise, it’ll   be work  worth doing.  Far more
worth doing than, say, Latin.”  And now  Felix looks  up at him and smiles,
and he smiles back. “Okay?” he asks him.
   “Okay,”  Felix says, still smiling.
   “What  do you want to do next, German or math?”
   “Math,”  says Felix.
   “Good  choice,” he says, and pulls Felix’s math book over to him. “Let’s
pick up where we left  off  last time.” And  Felix  turns to the page and they
begin.

208
 [ III ]

Vanities

209
                                                         1

THEIR NEXT-DOOR SUITEMATES their second year in Hood had been a trio of
lesbians, all seniors, who had  been in a band called  Backfat and had for
some reason taken a liking to JB (and, eventually, Jude, and then Willem,
and finally, reluctantly, Malcolm).  Now, fifteen years after the four of them
had graduated, two  of  the  lesbians had coupled  up  and were  living   in
Brooklyn. Of the four of  them, only JB talked to them regularly: Marta was
a nonprofit labor lawyer, and Francesca was a set designer.
   “Exciting   news!” JB told  them one Friday in October over  dinner. “The
Bitches of  Bushwick called—Edie  is in  town!”  Edie  was the third  in  the
lesbians’ trio, a beefy, emotional Korean American who  shuttled back and
forth  between San Francisco and  New  York,  and seemed always to  be
preparing for one improbable Mob or another: the last time they had seen her,
she was about to leave for Grasse to begin training to become a professional
nose, and Must eight months before that, she had finished a cooking course in
Afghani cuisine.
   “And  why  is this  exciting news?” asked Malcolm,  who had never quite
forgiven the three of them for their inexplicable dislike of him.
   “Well,”  said JB, and paused, grinning. “She’s transitioning!”
   “To   a  man?”  asked  Malcolm.  “Give   me  a  break,  JB.  She’s  never
exhibited any gender dysphoric ideations for as long as we’ve known her!”
A  former  coworker  of  Malcolm’s  had  transitioned  the year  before and
Malcolm had become a self-anointed expert on the subMect, lecturing them
about their intolerance and ignorance until  JB had finally  shouted at him,
“Jesus, Malcolm, I’m far more trans than Dominic’ll ever be!”
   “Well,  anyway, she is,” JB continued, “and the Bitches are throwing her a
party at their house, and we’re all invited.”
   They  groaned. “JB, I  only  have five  weeks before I  leave for London,
and I have so much shit  to get done,”  Willem  protested. “I  can’t spend a
night listening to Edie Kim complaining out in Bushwick.”
   “You   can’t  not  go!”   shrieked JB.  “They   specifically  asked for   you!
Francesca’s inviting some girl who knows you from something or other and
wants to see you again. If you don’t go, they’re all going to think you think

210
you’re too good for them now. And there’s going to be a ton of other people
we haven’t seen in forever—”
   “Yeah, and maybe there’s a reason we haven’t seen them,” Jude said.
   “—and  besides, Willem, the pussy will  be waiting  for  you whether you
spend an hour in Brooklyn or not. And it’s not like it’s the end of the world.
It’s Bushwick. Judy’ll drive  us.” Jude had bought a car the year before, and
although it wasn’t particularly fancy, JB loved to ride around in it.
   “What? I’m  not going,”  Jude said.
   “Why  not?”
   “I’m    in   a  wheelchair,  JB,  remember? And   as  I  recall,   Marta  and
Francesca’s place doesn’t have an elevator.”
   “Wrong  place,” JB  replied triumphantly. “See how long  it’s been? They
moved. Their new place definitely has one. A freight elevator, actually.” He
leaned back, drumming his  fist  on the  table as the rest of  them  sat in  a
resigned silence. “And off we go!”
   So the following  Saturday they met at Jude’s loft on Greene Street and he
drove them to  Bushwick,  where he circled  Marta and Francesca’s block,
looking for a parking space.
   “There was a spot right back there,” JB said after ten minutes.
   “It  was a loading ]one,” Jude told him.
   “If   you  Must put that handicapped sign up,  we can  park wherever we
want,” JB said.
   “I  don’t like  using it—you know that.”
   “If  you’re  not going to use it, then what’s the point of having a car?”
   “Jude, I think  that’s a space,” said Willem, ignoring JB.
   “Seven blocks from the apartment,” muttered JB.
   “Shut up, JB,”  said Malcolm.
   Once inside the party, they  were each tugged by a different person to a
separate corner of the room.  Willem  watched as Jude was  pulled firmly
away by Marta: Help me, Jude mouthed to him, and he smiled and gave him
a little wave. Courage, he mouthed back, and Jude rolled his eyes. He knew
how much Jude hadn’t wanted to come, hadn’t wanted to explain again and
again why he was in a wheelchair, and yet Willem had begged him: “Don’t
make me go alone.”
   “You  won’t be alone. You’ll be with JB and Malcolm.”
   “You  know  what I mean. Forty-five  minutes and we’re out  of there. JB
and Malcolm can find  their own  way back to the city  if  they want to  stay

211
longer.”
   “Fifteen  minutes.”
   “Thirty.”
   “Fine.”
   Willem,   meanwhile,  had  been  ensnared by  Edie  Kim,   who   looked
basically the same as she had when they were in college: a little  rounder,
maybe, but that was it. He hugged her. “Edie,” he said, “congratulations.”
   “Thanks, Willem,”   said Edie. She smiled at him. “You look great. Really,
really great.” JB had always had a theory that Edie had a crush on him, but
he’d never believed  it. “I   really  loved The Lacuna  Detectives. You were
really great in it.”
   “Oh,”   he said. “Thanks.”  He had hated The Lacuna Detectives. He had
despised the production of it so much—the story, which was fantastic, had
concerned a pair of metaphysical detectives who entered the unconscious
minds of amnesiacs, but the director had been so tyrannical that Willem’s
costar had quit two weeks into  the shoot and had to be recast, and once a
day, someone had run off the set crying—that he had never actually seen the
film itself.  “So,” he said, trying to redirect the conversation, “when—”
   “Why’s  Jude in a wheelchair?” Edie asked.
   He  sighed. When  Jude had begun using  the wheelchair  regularly two
months ago, the first time he’d had to in four years, since he was thirty-one,
he had prepped  them all  on  how  to  respond to  this  question. “It’s   not
permanent,” he said. “He  Must has an infection in his leg  and it  makes it
painful for him to walk long distances.”
   “God,  poor guy,”  said Edie. “Marta says he left the U.S. Attorney’s  and
has a huge Mob at some corporate firm.” JB had also always suspected Edie
had a crush on Jude, which Willem thought was fairly plausible.
   “Yeah,  for  a few years now,”  he said, eager to move  the subMect away
from Jude, for whom he never liked to answer; he would have loved to talk
about Jude, and he knew what he could and couldn’t say about him, or on
his behalf,  but  he didn’t   like  the sly,  confiding  tone  people took  when
asking about him, as if  he might be caMoled or tricked into revealing what
Jude himself wouldn’t. (As if  he ever would.) “Anyway,  Edie, this is really
exciting for you.”  He stopped. “I’m  sorry—I should’ve asked—do you still
want to be called Edie?”
   Edie frowned. “Why  wouldn’t  I?”

212
   “Well—”   He paused. “I didn’t  know  how far into  the process you were,
and—”
   “What  process?”
   “Um,  the transition process?” He should’ve stopped when he saw Edie’s
befuddlement, but he didn’t. “JB said you were transitioning?”
   “Yeah,  to  Hong Kong,”   said Edie,  still  frowning.  “I’m   going  to  be a
freelance vegan consultant for medium-si]e  hospitality businesses. Wait a
minute—you thought I was transitioning genders?”
   “Oh  god,” he said, and two thoughts, separate but equally resonant, filled
his mind: I  am going  to kill   JB. And:  I  can’t wait  to tell  Jude about this
conversation. “Edie, I’m so, so sorry.”
   He remembered from college that Edie was tricky: little,  little-kid   things
upset her (he once saw her sobbing because the top scoop of her ice cream
cone had tumbled onto  her new  shoes), but big  things (the  death of her
sister; her screaming, snowball-throwing breakup with her girlfriend, which
had taken place in the 4uad, and which everyone at Hood had leaned out of
their windows to witness) seemed to leave her unfa]ed. He wasn’t sure into
which category his gaffe fell,  and Edie herself appeared equally uncertain,
her small mouth convoluting itself into shapes in confusion. Finally, though,
she started laughing, and called  across the room  at someone—“Hannah!
Hannah! Come here! You’ve got to hear this!”—and he exhaled, apologi]ed
to and congratulated her again, and made his escape.
   He started across the room toward Jude. After years—decades, almost—
of these parties, the two of them had worked out their own sign language, a
pantomime whose every gesture meant the same thing—save me—albeit
with  varying levels  of  intensity. Usually,  they were able  to simply  catch
each other’s eye across the room  and telegraph their  desperation, but at
parties like  this,  where the  loft  was  lit  only  by  candles and  the guests
seemed to have multiplied themselves in the space of his short conversation
with Edie,  more expressive body language was often necessary. Grabbing
the back of one’s neck meant the other person should call him on his phone
right away;  fiddling  with  one’s  watch-band meant “Come  over here and
replace me in this conversation, or at least Moin in”; and yanking down on
the left earlobe meant “Get me out of this right now.” He had seen, from the
edge of his eye, that Jude had been pulling steadily on his  earlobe for the
past ten minutes, and he could now  see that Marta had  been Moined by a
grim-looking  woman he vaguely remembered meeting (and disliking) at a

213
previous party. The two of them were looming interrogatively  over Jude in
a way that made them appear proprietary and, in the candlelight, fierce, as if
Jude were a  child  who  had  Must been caught breaking a licorice-edged
corner off their gingerbread house, and they were deciding whether to broil
him with prunes or bake him with turnips.
   He tried,  he’d later tell  Jude, he really did; but he was at one end of the
room and Jude was at the other, and he kept getting stopped and tangled in
conversations with people he hadn’t  seen in years and, more annoyingly,
people he had seen Must a few weeks ago. As he pressed forward, he waved
at Malcolm   and  pointed in   Jude’s direction,  but  Malcolm   gave him   a
helpless shrug and mouthed “What?”   and he made a  dismissive gesture
back: Never mind.
   I’ve  got to  get out of here, he thought, as he pushed through the crowd,
but the truth was that he usually didn’t mind these parties, not really; a large
part of  him even enMoyed them. He suspected the same might be true of
Jude as well, though perhaps to a lesser extent—certainly he  did fine  for
himself at parties, and people always wanted to talk  to him,  and although
the two of them always complained to each other about JB and how he kept
dragging them to these things and how tedious they were, they both knew
they could simply refuse if they really wanted to, and they both rarely did—
after all, where else would they get to  use their semaphores, that language
that had only two speakers in the whole world?
   In  recent years, as his life had moved further from college and the person
he had been, he sometimes found it relaxing to see people from there. He
teased JB about how  he  had never really  graduated from  Hood,  but  in
reality, he  admired  how  JB had  maintained so  many  of  his,  and their,
relationships  from    then,   and   how   he   had   somehow  managed   to
contextuali]e so many of them. Despite his collection  of friends from  long
ago,  there  was  an   insistent  present  tenseness to  how   JB   saw  and
experienced life, and around him, even the most dedicated nostalgists found
themselves less inclined to pick over the chaff  and glitter of  the past, and
instead made themselves contend with whoever the person standing before
them had become. He also appreciated how the people JB had chosen to
remain friendly  with were, largely,  unimpressed with who he had become
(as much as  he could  be said  to  have become anyone). Some  of  them
behaved differently around him now—especially in the last year or so—but
most of them were dedicated to lives and interests and pursuits that were so

214
specific  and,  at  times,  marginal,  that  Willem’s   accomplishments were
treated as neither more nor less important than their own. JB’s friends were
poets and  performance artists  and academics and  modern  dancers and
philosophers—he had, Malcolm   once observed,  befriended everyone  at
their college who  was least  likely  to  make money—and their lives  were
grants and residencies and fellowships and awards. Success, among JB’s
Hood Hall  assortment, wasn’t defined  by your  box-office  numbers (as it
was for his agent and manager) or your costars or your reviews (as it was by
his grad-school classmates): it was defined simply and only  by how  good
your work was, and whether you were proud of it. (People had actually said
that to him at these parties: “Oh, I didn’t see Black Mercury 3081. But were
you proud  of your  work  in  it?”  No,  he hadn’t  been proud of  it.  He had
played a brooding intergalactic scientist who was also a MuMitsu warrior and
who successfully and single-handedly defeated a gargantuan space monster.
But he had been satisfied with  it:  he had worked  hard and had taken his
performance seriously, and that was all he ever hoped to do.) Sometimes he
wondered whether he was being fooled, if  this entire circle  of  JB’s was a
performance art piece in itself, one in which the competitions and concerns
and ambitions of the real world—the world  that sputtered along on money
and greed and envy—were  overlooked  in  favor  of  the pure  pleasure of
doing work. Sometimes this felt astringent to him,  in the best way: he saw
these parties,  his  time  with   the  Hoodies, as  something  cleansing and
restorative, something that returned him to who he once was, thrilled to get
a part in the college  production of Noises Off,  making his roommates run
lines with him every evening.
   “A  career mikva,” said Jude, smiling, when he told him this.
   “A  free-market douche,” he countered.
   “An  ambition enema.”
   “Ooh,  that’s good!”
   But   sometimes the   parties—like  tonight’s—had  the  opposite  effect.
Sometimes he found himself  resenting the  others’ definition   of him,  the
reductiveness and immovability of it: he was, and forever would be, Willem
Ragnarsson of Hood Hall, Suite Eight, someone bad at math and good with
girls, an identity both simple and understandable, his persona drawn in two
quick brushstrokes. They weren’t wrong, necessarily—there was something
depressing about being  in  an  industry  in  which  he  was  considered an
intellectual simply  because he didn’t read certain maga]ines and websites

215
and because he had gone to the college he had—but it made his life, which
he knew was small anyway, feel smaller still.
   And  sometimes he sensed in his former  peers’ ignorance of  his career
something stubborn and willful   and begrudging; last  year, when his  first
truly big studio film  had been released, he had been at a party in Red Hook
and had  been talking   to  a  Hood  hanger-on who  was  always  at  these
gatherings, a man named Arthur who’d lived in the loser house, Dillingham
Hall, and who now published an obscure but respected Mournal about digital
cartography.
   “So,  Willem, what’ve you  been doing lately?” Arthur asked, finally, after
talking for ten minutes about the most recent issue of The Histories, which
had featured a three-dimensional rendering of the Indochinese opium route
from eighteen thirty-nine through eighteen forty-two.
   He experienced, then, that moment of disorientation he occasionally had
at these gatherings. Sometimes that very  question was asked in  a Mokey,
ironic way, as a congratulations, and he would smile and play along—“Oh,
not much, still waiting at Ortolan. We’re doing a great sablefish with tobiko
these days”—but sometimes, people genuinely didn’t  know. The  genuine
not-knowing happened less and less frequently these days, and when it did,
it was usually from someone who lived so far off the cultural grid that even
the reading of The New York Times was treated as a seditious act or, more
often, someone who was trying to communicate their disapproval—no, their
dismissal—of  him   and  his  life   and  work   by  remaining  determinedly
ignorant of it.
   He didn’t  know  Arthur well  enough to know into which  category he fell
(although he knew him well enough to not like  him, the way he pressed so
close into his space that he had literally backed into a wall), so he answered
simply. “I’m  acting.”
   “Really,”  said Arthur, blandly. “Anything  I’d’ve  heard of?”
   This  question—not the question itself, but Arthur’s tone, its carelessness
and derision—irritated  him  anew, but he didn’t   show it.  “Well,”   he said
slowly,  “they’re   mostly   indies.  I   did  something  last  year  called  The
Kingdom  of  Frankincense, and  I’m   leaving  next   month  to  shoot  The
Unvanquished, based on the novel?” Arthur looked blank.  Willem  sighed;
he had won an award for The Kingdom of Frankincense. “And something I
shot a couple  of  years ago’s Must been released: this thing  called Black
Mercury 3081.”

216
   “Sounds  interesting,”  said  Arthur,  looking  bored.  “I   don’t  think  I’ve
heard of  it,  though.  Huh.  I’ll   have  to  look  it  up.  Well,  good  for  you,
Willem.”
   He  hated the way certain people said “good for  you, Willem,”   as if  his
Mob were some sort of  spun-sugar fantasy, a fiction  he  fed  himself and
others, and not something that actually existed. He especially hated it that
night, when not fifty  yards away, framed clearly in the window Must behind
Arthur’s head, happened to be a spotlit billboard  mounted atop a building
with his face on it—his scowling face, admittedly: he was, after all, fighting
off  an enormous mauve computer-generated alien—and BLACK MERCURY 3081:

COMING SOON in two-foot-high letters. In those moments, he  would   be
disappointed in the Hoodies. They’re no better than anyone else after all, he
would reali]e.  In the end, they’re  Mealous and trying to make me feel bad.
And I’m  stupid, because I  do feel bad.  Later, he would  be  irritated with
himself: This is what you wanted, he would remind himself. So why do you
care what  other people think?  But  acting  was caring  what other  people
thought (sometimes it felt like that was all it  was), and as much as he liked
to think himself immune to other people’s opinions—as if he was somehow
above worrying about them—he clearly wasn’t.
   “I  know  it sounds so fucking petty,” he told Jude after that party. He was
embarrassed by how annoyed he  was—he wouldn’t  have  admitted it  to
anyone else.
   “It  doesn’t sound petty at all,”  Jude had said. They were driving back to
the city from Red Hook. “But  Arthur’s a Merk, Willem. He always has been.
And years of studying Herodotus hasn’t made him any less of one.”
   He smiled, reluctantly. “I  don’t know,”  he said. “Sometimes I feel there’s
something so … so pointless about what I do.”
   “How  can you say that, Willem? You’re an ama]ing actor; you really are.
And you—”
   “Don’t  say I bring Moy to so many people.”
   “Actually,  I  wasn’t going to say that. Your films aren’t really  the sorts of
things that bring Moy to anyone.” (Willem had come to speciali]e in playing
dark and  complicated characters—often quietly  violent,   usually  morally
compromised—that inspired different  degrees of  sympathy. “Ragnarsson
the Terrible,” Harold called him.)
   “Except  aliens, of course.”

217
   “Right,  except aliens. Although not  even them—you kill  them all in  the
end, don’t you? But Willem, I love watching them, and so do so many other
people. That’s got to count for  something, right? How many people get to
say that, that they can actually remove someone from his daily life?”  And
when he didn’t answer: “You  know, maybe we should stop going to  these
parties; they’re   becoming  unhealthy exercises  in  masochism  and self-
loathing for  us both.” Jude turned to him  and grinned. “At  least you’re in
the arts. I might  as well be working  for  an arms dealer. Dorothy Wharton
asked me  tonight   how  it   felt  waking   up  each  morning  knowing   I’d
sacrificed yet another piece of my soul the day before.”
   Finally,  he laughed. “No, she didn’t.”
   “Yes, she did. It was like having a conversation with Harold.”
   “Yeah, if  Harold was a white woman with dreadlocks.”
   Jude smiled. “As I said, like having a conversation with Harold.”
   But  really,  both of  them  knew  why  they kept  attending these parties:
because they had become one of the few opportunities the four of them had
to be together, and at  times they  seemed to be their  only opportunity  to
create memories the four of them could share, keeping their friendship alive
by dropping bundles of kindling  onto a barely smoldering black smudge of
fire. It was their way of pretending everything was the same.
   It  also provided them an excuse to pretend that everything was fine with
JB, when they all three knew that something wasn’t. Willem couldn’t  quite
identify  what was  wrong with   him—JB  could be, in  his  way, almost  as
evasive as Jude when it came to certain conversations—but he knew that JB
was lonely, and unhappy, and uncertain, and that none of those sensations
were familiar ones to him. He sensed that JB—who had so loved college, its
structures and hierarchies and microsocieties that  he had known  how  to
navigate so  well—was   trying   with  every   party  to  re-create  the  easy,
thoughtless companionship they  had  once had,  when their  professional
identities were still foggy to  them and they were united by their aspirations
instead of divided by their daily realities. So he organi]ed these outings, and
they all obediently followed  as they had always done, giving him the small
kindness of letting him be the leader, the one who decided for them, always.
   He  would have liked to  have seen JB one-on-one, Must the two of them,
but these days, when  he wasn’t  with  his  college friends,  JB ran  with  a
different crowd, one consisting mostly of art world hangers-on, who seemed
to be only interested in doing lots of drugs and then having dirty sex, and it

218
simply wasn’t appealing to him. He was in New York  less and less often—
Must eight months in the past three years—and when he was home, there
were the twin  and contradictory pressures to spend meaningful time with
his friends and to do absolutely nothing at all.
   Now,   though, he  kept  moving  toward   Jude, who  had  at  least been
released by Marta and her grouchy  friend and was talking  to  their friend
Carolina (seeing this, he felt guilty anew, as he hadn’t talked to Carolina in
months and he knew she was angry with him), when Francesca blocked his
path to  reintroduce him  to  a woman  named Rachel with   whom  he had
worked four years ago on a production of Cloud 9, for which  she had been
the assistant dramaturg. He was happy enough to  see her again—he had
liked her all those years ago; he had always thought she was pretty—but he
knew, even as he was  talking  to her, that  it  would  go no  further than  a
conversation. After all,  he hadn’t been exaggerating: he started filming  in
five weeks. Now  was not the time  to get ensnared in something new and
complicated, and he didn’t  really have the energy for  a one-night hookup
which, he knew, had a funny way of becoming as exhausting as something
longer-term.
   Ten minutes or so into  his conversation with  Rachel, his phone bu]]ed,
and he apologi]ed  and  checked the message from  Jude: Leaving. Don’t
want to interrupt  your  conversation with the future  Mrs. Ragnarsson. See
you at home.
   “Shit,”   he said, and then to  Rachel, “Sorry.”  Suddenly, the spell of  the
party ended, and he  was desperate to leave. Their  participation  in  these
parties were a  kind  of theater that  the four  of  them  agreed to stage for
themselves, but once one of  the actors left  the stage, there seemed little
point in continuing. He said goodbye to Rachel, whose expression changed
from perplexed to  hostile once she reali]ed  he was truly  leaving  and she
wasn’t being invited to leave with him,  and then to a group of other people
—Marta, Francesca, JB, Malcolm,  Edie, Carolina—at least half  of  whom
seemed deeply annoyed with him.  It  took  him  another thirty  minutes to
extricate himself from the apartment, and on his way downstairs, he texted
Jude back, hopefully, You still here? Leaving now, and then, when he didn’t
get a reply, Taking train. Picking something up at the apt—see you soon.
   He took the L  to Eighth Avenue and then walked the few blocks south to
his apartment. Late October was his favorite  time in  the city,  and he was
always sad to miss it. He lived on the corner of Perry and West Fourth, in a

219
third-floor  unit whose windows were Must level with the tops of the gingko
trees; before he’d moved in, he’d had a vision that he would lie in bed late
on the weekends and watch  the tornado the  yellow  leaves made as they
were shaken loose from their branches by the wind. But he never had.
   He had no special feelings for the apartment, other than it was his and he
had bought it, the first and biggest thing he had ever bought after paying off
the last of his student loans. When he had begun looking, a year and a half
ago, he had  known  only  that he  wanted to  live  downtown  and  that he
needed a building with an elevator, so that Jude would be able to visit him.
   “Isn’t   that a little codependent?” his girlfriend  at the time, Philippa, had
asked him, teasing but also not teasing.
   “Is  it?”  he had asked, understanding what she meant but pretending not
to.
   “Willem,”   Philippa had said, laughing to conceal her irritation. “It is.”
   He  had shrugged, unoffended. “I  can’t  live  somewhere he can’t  come
visit,” he said.
   She sighed. “I know.”
   He knew that Philippa  had nothing against Jude; she liked him, and Jude
liked her as well, and had even one day gently told Willem that he thought
he should spend more time with Philippa  when he was in town.  When he
and Philippa had  begun dating—she was a costume designer, mostly for
theater—she had been amused, charmed even, by his friendships. She had
seen them,  he  knew,  as  proof  of   his  loyalty,   and dependability,  and
consistency. But as they  continued dating,  as they  got  older, something
changed, and the  amount of  time  he  spent with  JB  and  Malcolm  and,
especially, Jude became evidence instead of his fundamental immaturity, his
unwillingness to leave behind the comfort of one life—the life with them—
for the uncertainties of another, with her. She never asked him to abandon
them completely—indeed, one of  the things  he had loved  about her was
how close she was to her own group  of friends,  and that the two of  them
could spend a night with their own people, in their own restaurants, having
their own  conversations, and then meet at  its end,  two distinct  evenings
ending as a single shared one—but she wanted, finally, a kind of surrender
from  him, a  dedication to  her and  their  relationship that  superseded the
others.
   Which  he couldn’t bring  himself to do. But he felt  he had given more to
her than she recogni]ed. In their last two years together, he hadn’t gone to

220
Harold and Julia’s for Thanksgiving nor to  the Irvines’ at Christmas, so he
could instead go  to  her parents’ in  Vermont;  he had forgone  his annual
vacation with  Jude; he  had accompanied her to  her friends’  parties  and
weddings and dinners and shows, and had stayed with her when he was in
town, watching as she sketched designs for a production  of The Tempest,
sharpening her expensive colored pencils while she slept and he, his mind
still stuck in a different time ]one, wandered through the apartment, starting
and stopping books, opening and closing maga]ines, idly straightening the
containers of pasta and cereal in the pantry. He had done all of this happily
and without  resentment. But  it   still  hadn’t  been  enough, and they  had
broken up, quietly and, he thought, well, the previous year, after almost four
years together.
   Mr.  Irvine,  hearing that  they had  broken up, shook  his head (this  had
been at Flora’s baby shower). “You boys are really turning into a bunch of
Peter Pans,” he  said. “Willem,   what  are  you? Thirty-six?   I’m  not  sure
what’s going  on  with  you  lot.  You’re  making  money.  You’ve  achieved
something. Don’t you  think you  guys should stop clinging  to one another
and get serious about adulthood?”
   But   how  was  one  to  be  an  adult?  Was couplehood  truly   the  only
appropriate option?   (But  then,   a  sole  option  was   no  option   at  all.)
“Thousands of years of evolutionary and social development and this is our
only  choice?” he’d  asked Harold  when they  were up  in  Truro  this  past
summer, and Harold had laughed. “Look, Willem,” he said, “I  think you’re
doing Must fine. I know I  give you a hard  time about settling down,  and I
agree with Malcolm’s dad that couplehood is wonderful,  but all you  really
have to do is Must be a good person, which you already are, and enMoy your
life. You’re young. You have years and years to figure out what you want to
do and how you want to live.”
   “And  what if this is how I  want to live?”
   “Well,  then, that’s fine,” said Harold. He smiled at Willem. “You boys are
living every man’s dream, you know. Probably even John Irvine’s.”
   Lately, he had been wondering if codependence was such a bad thing. He
took pleasure in his friendships, and it didn’t hurt anyone, so who cared if it
was codependent or not? And   anyway, how  was a friendship  any  more
codependent than a relationship? Why  was it  admirable  when you  were
twenty-seven  but  creepy   when  you   were  thirty-seven?   Why   wasn’t
friendship as good as a relationship? Why wasn’t it even better? It was two

221
people who remained together, day after day, bound not by sex or physical
attraction  or  money  or   children  or  property,  but   only  by   the  shared
agreement to keep going, the mutual dedication to a union that could never
be codified. Friendship was witnessing another’s slow drip of miseries, and
long bouts of boredom, and occasional triumphs. It was feeling honored by
the privilege  of  getting  to  be  present for  another person’s most  dismal
moments, and knowing that you could be dismal around him in return.
   More  troubling  to  him  than his  possible immaturity,  though, were  his
capabilities as a friend. He had always taken pride in the fact that he was a
good friend;  friendship  had always  been important  to  him.  But  was he
actually any good at it? There was the unresolved JB problem, for example;
a good friend would have figured something out. And a good friend would
certainly have figured out a better way to deal with  Jude, instead of telling
himself, chantlike, that there simply  was no better way  to deal with  Jude,
and if there was, if  someone (Andy? Harold? Anyone?) could figure out a
plan, then he’d be happy to follow  it.  But even as he told  himself this, he
knew that he was Must making excuses for himself.
   Andy  knew  it,  too. Five  years ago, Andy  had called him  in  Sofia and
yelled at him. It was his first  shoot; it had been very late at night, and from
the moment he answered the phone and heard Andy say, “For someone who
claims to be such a great friend,  you sure as fuck haven’t been around to
prove it,” he had been defensive, because he knew Andy was right.
   “Wait  a minute,” he said, sitting upright, fury  and fear clearing away any
residual sleepiness.
   “He’s  sitting  at home fucking  cutting himself  to shreds, he’s essentially
all scar tissue now, he  looks like  a fucking  skeleton, and where are you,
Willem?”  asked Andy. “And  don’t  say ‘I’m   on a shoot.’  Why  aren’t you
checking in on him?”
   “I  call him every single day,” he began, yelling himself.
   “You  knew this was going to be hard for  him,”  Andy  continued, talking
over him.  “You   knew the  adoption  was going  to  make  him  feel  more
vulnerable. So why didn’t  you put  any safeguards in place, Willem? Why
aren’t your other so-called friends doing anything?”
   “Because he doesn’t want them to know that he cuts himself, that’s why!
And I didn’t know  it was going to be this hard for him, Andy,” he said. “He
never tells me anything! How was I supposed to know?”
   “Because! You’re supposed to! Fucking use your brain, Willem!”

222
   “Don’t   you fucking  shout at me,”  he shouted. “You’re  Must mad, Andy,
because he’s your patient and you can’t fucking figure  out a way to  make
him better and so you’re blaming me.”
   He  regretted it the moment he said it, and in that instant they were both
silent, panting into their phones. “Andy,” he began.
   “Nope,”  said Andy. “You’re right, Willem.  I’m  sorry. I’m sorry.”
   “No,”   he said, “I’m  sorry.” He  was abruptly miserable, thinking of  Jude
in the ugly  Lispenard Street bathroom. Before he had left,  he had looked
everywhere for Jude’s ra]ors—beneath the toilet tank lid; in the back of the
medicine cabinet; even under the drawers in the cupboard, taking each out
and examining them  from all  angles—but couldn’t  find   them. But  Andy
was right—it was his responsibility. He should have done a better Mob. And
he hadn’t, so really, he had failed.
   “No,”   said Andy. “I’m  really sorry, Willem;  it’s  totally inexcusable. And
you’re right—I   don’t know  what to  do.”  He sounded tired. “It’s   Must that
he’s had—he’s had such a shitty life, Willem. And he trusts you.”
   “I  know,” he mumbled. “I  know he does.”
   So  they’d   worked  out  a   plan,  and  when  he  got  back  home,  he’d
monitored Jude more closely than he had before, a process that had proved
singularly unrevealing. Indeed, in the month or so after the adoption, Jude
was different than he’d  seen him before. He couldn’t  exactly define how:
except on rare occasions, he wasn’t ever able to determine the days Jude
was unhappy and the days he wasn’t.  It  wasn’t as if  he normally  moped
around and was unemotive  and then, suddenly, wasn’t—his  fundamental
behavior and rhythms and gestures were the same as before. But something
had changed, and for a brief  period, he had the strange sensation that the
Jude he knew had been replaced by another Jude, and that this other Jude,
this changeling, was someone of whom he could ask anything, who might
have funny stories about pets and friends and scrapes from childhood, who
wore long sleeves only because he was cold and not because he was trying
to hide something. He was determined to take Jude at his word as often and
as much as he could: after all, he wasn’t his doctor. He was his friend. His
Mob was to treat him as he wanted to be treated, not as a subMect to be spied
on.
   And  so, after  a certain point,  his vigilance  diminished,  and eventually,
that other Jude departed, back to the land of fairies and enchantments, and
the Jude he knew reclaimed his space. But then, every once in a while, there

223
would be  troubling reminders that  what he knew  of  Jude was only  what
Jude allowed  him  to   know:  he  called  Jude daily   when  he was  away
shooting, usually at a prearranged time, and one day last year he had called
and they’d had a normal conversation, Jude sounding no different than he
always did, and the two of them laughing at one of Willem’s  stories, when
he  heard   in   the   background  the   clear   and  unmistakable   intercom
announcement of the sort one only hears at hospitals: “Paging Dr. Nesarian,
Dr. Nesarian to OR Three.”
   “Jude?” he’d asked.
   “Don’t  worry, Willem,”   he’d said. “I’m fine.  I Must have a slight infection;
I think Andy’s gone a little cra]y.”
   “What  kind of infection? Jesus, Jude!”
   “A  blood infection,  but it’s nothing. Honestly, Willem, if  it was serious, I
would’ve told you.”
   “No,  you fucking wouldn’t  have, Jude. A blood infection is serious.”
   He was silent. “I would’ve,  Willem.”
   “Does Harold know?”
   “No,”  he said, sharply. “And you’re not to tell him.”
   Exchanges like this left  him stunned and bothered, and he spent the rest
of  the  evening trying   to  remember the  previous  week’s  conversations,
picking through them for  clues that something might have been amiss and
he might have simply, stupidly overlooked it. In more generous, wondering
moments,  he  imagined   Jude  as   a  magician   whose  sole   trick   was
concealment, but every year, he got better and better at it, so that now  he
had only to bring one wing  of the silken cape he wore before his eyes and
he would become instantly invisible, even to those who knew him best. But
at other times, he bitterly resented this trick, the year-after-year exhaustion
of keeping Jude’s secrets and yet never being given anything in return but
the meanest smidges of information, of not being allowed the opportunity to
even try to help him, to publicly  worry about him. This  isn’t fair, he would
think in  those moments. This isn’t  friendship.  It’s  something, but it’s  not
friendship. He felt  he had been hustled into a game of  complicity, one he
never intended to play. Everything  Jude communicated to them indicated
that he  didn’t  want  to be  helped. And  yet  he couldn’t  accept that.  The
question was how you ignored someone’s request to be left alone—even if
it meant Meopardi]ing the friendship. It was a wretched little koan: How can
you help someone who won’t be helped while reali]ing that if you don’t try

224
to help, then  you’re  not being a  friend  at all?  Talk to  me, he sometimes
wanted to shout at Jude. Tell me things. Tell me what I need to do to make
you talk to me.
   Once, at  a party, he had overheard Jude tell someone that he told him,
Willem, everything, and he had been both flattered and perplexed, because
really: he knew nothing. It  was sometimes incredible to him how much he
cared about someone who refused  to tell  him  any  of  the  things friends
shared with each other—how he had lived before they met, what he feared,
what he craved, who he was attracted to, the mortifications and sadnesses of
daily life.   In the  absence of talking  to Jude himself,  he often  wished he
could talk  to Harold  about Jude, and figure  out how  much he knew, and
whether, if  they—and Andy—braided  together all  their  knowledge,  they
might be able to  find  some sort of solution.  But  this was dreaming: Jude
would never forgive  him,  and instead of the connection he did  have with
him, he would have none at all.
   Back  in his  apartment, he shuffled quickly  through his mail—he  rarely
got anything of  any interest: everything business-related went to his agent
or lawyer; anything  personal went to Jude’s—found the copy of the script
he’d forgotten  there the week  before when he  stopped by the  apartment
after the gym, and left again; he didn’t even take off his coat.
   Since  he’d bought  the apartment a year ago,  he’d spent a  total of  six
weeks there. There was a futon in the bedroom, and the coffee table from
Lispenard Street in the living room, and the scuffed Eames fiberglass chair
that JB had found in the street, and his boxes of books. But that was it. In
theory, Malcolm  was  meant to  be  renovating the  space, converting  the
airless little study near the kitchen into a dining alcove and addressing a list
of other issues as well, but Malcolm, as if sensing Willem’s lack of interest,
had  made the   apartment his   last  priority.   He  complained  about  this
sometimes, but he  knew  it  wasn’t  Malcolm’s  fault:   after all,  he  hadn’t
answered Malcolm’s e-mails about finishes or tiles or the dimensions of the
built-in bookcase or banquette that Malcolm needed him to approve before
he ordered the millwork.   It  was only  recently that he’d  had his  lawyer’s
office send Malcolm  the final paperwork he needed to begin construction,
and the following  week,  they were finally   going to  sit down  and he was
going to make some decisions, and when he returned home in mid-January,
the apartment would be, Malcolm promised him, if not totally  transformed,
then at least greatly improved.

225
   In   the meantime,  he  still  more  or  less  lived  with  Jude,  into  whose
apartment on Greene Street he’d moved directly after he and Philippa had
broken up. He used his unfinished apartment, and the promise he’d made to
Andy, as the reasons for his  apparently interminable occupancy of Jude’s
extra bedroom, but the  fact was  that he needed Jude’s company and the
constancy of his presence. When he was away in  England, in  Ireland, in
California, in France, in Tangiers, in Algeria, in India, in the Philippines, in
Canada, he needed to have an image of  what was  waiting  for  him back
home in New York,  and that image never included Perry Street. Home for
him was Greene Street, and when he was far away and lonely, he thought of
Greene Street, and  his  room  there,  and how  on  weekends, after  Jude
finished working,  they would stay up late, talking,  and he would feel time
slow and expand, letting him believe the night might stretch out forever.
   And  now he was finally  going home. He ran down the stairs and out the
front  door and  onto Perry  Street. The  evening had  turned cold,  and he
walked quickly, almost trotting,  enMoying as he always did the pleasure of
walking by himself,  of feeling alone in a city  of so many. It was one of the
things he missed the most. On film sets, you were never alone. An assistant
director walked you to your trailer and back to the set, even if the trailer and
the set were fifty yards away. When he was getting used to sets, he was first
startled, then amused, and then, finally,   annoyed by the  culture of  actor
infantili]ation   that moviemaking seemed to encourage. He sometimes felt
that he had been strapped, upright, to a dolly and was being wheeled from
place to place: he was walked  to the makeup department and then to  the
costume department. Then he  was walked  to  the  set, and  then he  was
walked back  to his  trailer,  and then, an  hour or  two  later, he  would  be
collected from the trailer and escorted to the set once again.
   “Don’t   let  me ever get used to  this,”  he’d  instruct Jude, begging him,
almost. It  was the concluding line  to  all  his stories: about the lunches at
which everyone segregated themselves by rank and caste—actors and the
director at one table, cameramen at another, electricians at a third, the grips
at a fourth,  the costume department at a fifth—and   you made small  talk
about your workouts, and restaurants you wanted to try, and diets you were
on, and trainers, and cigarettes (how  much you  wanted one), and facials
(how much you needed one); about the crew, who both hated the actors and
yet were  embarrassingly susceptible to even  the slightest attention  from
them; about the cattiness of the hair and makeup team, who knew an almost

226
bewildering  amount  of  information   about all   the  actors’  lives,  having
learned to keep perfectly quiet and make themselves perfectly invisible as
they adMusted hairpieces and dabbed on foundation and listened to actresses
screaming at their boyfriends and actors whisperingly arranging late-night
hookups on their phones, all while sitting in their chairs. It was on these sets
that he reali]ed he was more guarded than he’d always  imagined himself,
and also how easy, how tempting, it was to begin to believe that the life of
the set—where everything was fetched for  you,  and where the sun could
literally be made to shine on you—was actual life.
   Once he had been standing on his mark as the cinematographer made a
last adMustment, before coming over and cupping his  head gently—“His
hair!” barked the first assistant director, warningly—and tilting it  an inch to
the left,  and  then to  the right,  and  then to  the  left  again, as if   he was
positioning a vase on a mantel.
   “Don’t   move, Willem,”  he’d cautioned, and he’d promised he wouldn’t,
barely  breathing, but  really   he  had wanted  to  break  into   giggles. He
suddenly thought  of  his  parents—whom, disconcertingly,  he thought  of
more and more as he grew older—and of Hemming, and for half a second,
he saw them standing Must off the set to his left, Must far enough out of range
so he couldn’t  see their faces, whose expressions he wouldn’t  have been
able to imagine anyway.
   He   liked  telling   Jude  all  of   these things,  making   his  days  on  set
something funny and bright. This was not what he thought acting would be,
but what  had  he known   about what  acting  would  be? He  was  always
prepared, he was always on time, he was polite to everyone, he did what the
cinematographer told him  to do  and argued with  the director  only  when
absolutely necessary. But even all these films later—twelve in the past five
years, eight of them in the past two—and through all of their absurdities, he
finds most surreal the minute before the camera begins rolling. He stands at
his first mark; he stands at his second mark; the cameraman announces he’s
ready.
   “Vanities!”   shouts  the  first  assistant director,  and  the  vanities—hair,
makeup, costume—hurry over  to  descend upon him  as if  he  is  carrion,
plucking at his hair and straightening his shirt and tickling  his eyelids with
their soft  brushes. It  takes only  thirty  seconds or so,  but in  those thirty
seconds, his lashes lowered so stray  powder doesn’t  float into  his  eyes,
other people’s hands moving  possessively over his  body  and head as if

227
they’re no longer his own, he has the strange sensation that he is gone, that
he is suspended, and that his very life is an imagining. In those seconds, a
whirl  of  images whips  through his  mind, too  quickly  and  Mumblingly to
effectively identify  each as it occurs to him: there is the scene he’s about to
shoot, of course, and the scene he’d shot earlier, but also all the things that
occupy him, always, the things he sees and hears and remembers before he
falls asleep at night—Hemming and JB and Malcolm and Harold and Julia.
Jude.
   Are you happy? he once asked Jude (they must have been drunk).
   I  don’t think happiness is for me, Jude had said at last, as if Willem  had
been offering him a dish he didn’t want to eat. But it’s for you, Willem.
   As  Vanities tug  and yank at him,  it  occurs to him  that he  should have
asked Jude what he meant by that: why it was for him and not for Jude. But
by  the time   he’s finished  shooting  the  scene, he  won’t  remember  the
question, or the conversation that inspired it.
   “Roll  sound!” yells the first  A.D., and Vanities scatter.
   “Speed,” the sound person answers, which means he’s rolling.
   “Roll   camera,” calls the cameraman, and then there’s the announcement
of the scene, and the clap.
   And  then he opens his eyes.

228
                                                         2

ONE SATURDAY MORNING shortly after he turns thirty-six, he opens his eyes and
experiences that strange, lovely  sensation he sometimes has, the  one in
which he reali]es that his life is  cloudless. He imagines Harold and Julia in
Cambridge, the two  of them  moving do]ily   through  the kitchen, pouring
coffee into their stained and chipped mugs and shaking the dew off of  the
plastic newspaper bags, and, in  the air,  Willem  flying   toward him  from
Cape Town.   He  pictures  Malcolm   pressed against  Sophie  in   bed  in
Brooklyn, and then, because he feels hopeful, JB safe and snoring in his bed
on the Lower  East Side. Here, on  Greene Street, the radiator releases its
sibilant sigh. The sheets smell like soap and sky. Above him is the tubular
steel chandelier Malcolm installed a month ago. Beneath him is a gleaming
black  wood  floor.  The  apartment—still  impossible  in   its  vastness and
possibilities and potential—is silent, and his.
   He  points his  toes toward the bottom  of  the bed and then flexes  them
toward his shins: nothing. He shifts his back against the mattress: nothing.
He draws his knees toward his chest: nothing. Nothing hurts, nothing even
threatens to hurt: his body is his again, something that will perform for him
whatever he can  imagine, without  complaint  or  sabotage. He closes his
eyes, not because he’s tired  but because it  is a  perfect moment, and  he
knows how to enMoy them.
   These moments never last for long—sometimes, all he has to do is sit up,
and he will  be reminded, as if slapped across the face, that his body owns
him, not the other way  around—but in recent years, as things have gotten
worse, he  has worked  very  hard to  give  up  the idea  that  he will   ever
improve, and has instead tried  to  concentrate on and be  grateful for  the
minutes of reprieve,  whenever and wherever his body  chooses to bestow
them. Finally he sits,  slowly, and then stands, Must as slowly. And still, he
feels wonderful. A  good day, he decides, and walks to the bathroom, past
the wheelchair that sulks, a sullen ogre, in a corner of his bedroom.
   He  gets ready and then sits down  with  some papers from the office  to
wait. Generally, he spends most of Saturday at work—that  at least hasn’t
changed from the days he used to take his walks: oh, his walks!  Was that

229
once him, someone who could  trip,  goatlike, to  the Upper East Side and
home again, all eleven miles on his own?—but today he’s meeting Malcolm
and taking him to his suitmaker’s, because Malcolm is going to get married
and needs to buy a suit.
   They’re  not completely certain if  Malcolm is  actually getting married or
not. They think he is. Over the past three years, he and Sophie have broken
up and gotten back together, and broken up, and gotten back together. But
in  the  past  year,  Malcolm   has had  conversations with   Willem   about
weddings, and does Willem think they’re an indulgence or not; and with JB
about Mewelry, and when women say they  don’t  like  diamonds, do  they
really mean it, or are they Must testing the way it sounds; and with him about
prenuptial agreements.
   He had answered Malcolm’s questions as best as he could, and then had
given him the name of a classmate from law school, a matrimonial attorney.
“Oh,”  Malcolm  had said, moving  backward, as if he  had offered him  the
name of a professional assassin. “I’m not sure I need this yet, Jude.”
   “All    right,”  he  said, and  withdrew  the  card, which  Malcolm   seemed
unwilling to even touch. “Well, if  and when you do, Must ask.”
   And  then, a month ago, Malcolm had asked if he could help him pick out
a suit. “I don’t  even really have one, isn’t that nuts?” he asked. “Don’t you
think I  should  have one? Don’t  you think  I  should start looking,  I  don’t
know, more  grown-up  or  something? Don’t  you  think  it’d   be good  for
business?”
   “I  think  you look  great, Mal,”  he said. “And I  don’t think  you need any
help on the business front.  But if  you  want one, sure, I’m  happy  to help
you.”
   “Thanks,”  said  Malcolm.  “I  mean, I  Must think it’s something I  should
have. You know,  Must in case something comes up.” He paused. “I  can’t
believe you have a suitmaker, by the way.”
   He  smiled. “He’s  not my  suitmaker,” he said. “He’s  Must someone who
makes suits, and some of them happen to be mine.”
   “God,”  said Malcolm, “Harold  really created a monster.”
   He laughed, obligingly. But he often feels as if a suit is the only thing that
makes him look normal. For the months he was in a wheelchair, those suits
were  a  way   of   reassuring  his   clients  that   he  was   competent  and,
simultaneously, of reassuring himself that he belonged with the others, that
he could at least dress the way they did. He doesn’t consider himself vain,

230
but rather scrupulous: when he was a child, the boys from the home would
occasionally play baseball games with the boys from the local school, who
would taunt them, pinching their noses as they walked onto the field. “Take
a bath!”  they would  shout. “You  smell!  You smell!”   But they  did bathe:
they had mandatory showers every morning, pumping the greasy pink soap
into their palms and onto washcloths and sloughing off their skin while one
of the  counselors walked back and forth  before the row  of  showerheads,
cracking one  of  the thin  towels  at  the boys  who were  misbehaving, or
shouting at the ones who weren’t  cleaning themselves with enough vigor.
Even now, he  has a horror  of  repulsing, by  being  unkempt, or  dirty,  or
unsightly. “You’ll  always be ugly, but that doesn’t mean you can’t be neat,”
Father Gabriel used to  tell  him, and  although Father Gabriel  was wrong
about many things, he knows he was right about this.
   Malcolm  arrives and hugs him hello and then begins, as he always does,
surveying the space, telescoping his long neck and rotating in a slow circle
around the room, his ga]e like a lighthouse’s beam, making little assessing
noises as he does.
   He answers Malcolm’s question before he can ask it: “Next month, Mal.”
   “You  said that three months ago.”
   “I  know.  But now I  really mean it.  Now I  have the money. Or I will,  at
the end of this month.”
   “But  we discussed this.”
   “I   know. And Malcolm—it’s   so unbelievably generous of you.  But I’m
not going to not pay you.”
   He has lived in  the apartment for more than four years now, and for four
years, he’s been unable to renovate it because he hasn’t had the money, and
he hasn’t had the money because he was paying off the apartment. In the
meantime, Malcolm has drawn up plans, and walled off the bedrooms, and
helped him choose a sofa, which sits, a gray spacecraft, in the center of the
living  room, and fixed some minor problems, including  the floors. “That’s
cra]y,”  he had told Malcolm  at the time.  “You’re  going to have to  redo it
entirely  once the renovation’s  done.”  But  Malcolm  had  said he’d  do  it
anyway; the floor dye was a new product he wanted to try, and until he was
ready to begin work, Greene Street would be his laboratory, where he could
do a little experimentation, if he didn’t  mind (and he didn’t, of course). But
otherwise the apartment is still very  much as it was when he moved  in: a
long rectangle  on the  sixth  floor  of  a  building  in  southern SoHo,  with

231
windows at either end, one set facing west and the other facing east, as well
as the entire southern wall, which  looks over a parking  lot. His  room and
bathroom are at the eastern-facing end, which looks onto the top of a stubby
building on Mercer Street; Willem’s  rooms—or what he continues to think
of as  Willem’s  rooms—are at  the western-facing end,  which  looks over
Greene Street. There is a kitchen in the middle of the apartment, and a third
bathroom. And in between the two  suites of rooms are acres of space, the
black floors shiny as piano keys.
   It  is still  an unfamiliar feeling to have so much space, and a stranger one
to be able to afford it. But you can, he has to remind himself sometimes, Must
as he does when  he stands in  the  grocery store, wondering  whether he
should buy a tub of the black olives he likes, which  are so salty they make
his mouth pucker and his eyes water. When he first moved to the city, they
were an indulgence, and he’d buy them Must once a month, one glistening
spoonful at a time. Every night he’d eat only  one, sucking the meat slowly
off the stone as he sat reading briefs. You can buy them, he tells himself. You
have the money. But he still finds it difficult to remember.
   The  reason behind Greene Street, and the  container of  olives that  are
usually in the refrigerator,  is his Mob at Rosen Pritchard and Klein, one of
the city’s most powerful  and prestigious firms, where he is a litigator  and,
for a little  more than a year now, a partner. Five years ago, he and Citi]en
and Rhodes had been working on  a case concerning securities fraud at a
large commercial bank called  Thackery Smith,  and shortly after  the case
had settled, he had been contacted by a man named Lucien Voigt, whom he
knew was  the chair  of  the litigation   department at Rosen Pritchard  and
Klein, and who had represented Thackery Smith in their negotiations.
   Voigt  asked him to  have a drink.  He had been impressed by his work,
especially in the courtroom, he said. And Thackery Smith had been as well.
He had heard of  him  anyway—he  and Judge Sullivan  had been on  law
review together—and had researched him. Had he ever considered leaving
the U.S. Attorney’s Office and coming to the dark side?
   He  would have been lying  if  he said he hadn’t. All  around him, people
were leaving.  Citi]en,   he knew,  was talking  to  an  international firm   in
Washington, D.C. Rhodes was wondering whether he should go in-house at
a bank. He himself had been approached by two other firms, and had turned
them both down. They  loved the U.S. Attorney’s  Office,  all  of them. But
Citi]en  and  Rhodes were older  than  he was,  and Rhodes and  his  wife

232
wanted to have a baby, and they needed to make money. Money, money: it
was all they spoke of sometimes.
   He, too, thought of money—it was impossible not to. Every time he came
home from   a  party  at  one of   JB’s  or  Malcolm’s   friends’  apartments,
Lispenard Street seemed a little shabbier, a little less tolerable. Every time
the elevator broke and he had to walk up the flights of stairs, and then rest
on the floor in  the hallway, his back against their front door, before he had
the energy to let himself in, he dreamed of living somewhere functional and
reliable.  Every  time  he was  standing  at  the top  of   the subway  stairs,
readying himself  for  the  climb  down,  gripping   the handrail  and  nearly
breathing through his mouth with effort, he would wish he could take a taxi.
And then there were other fears, bigger fears: in his very dark moments, he
imagined himself as an old man, his skin stretched vellum-like over his ribs,
still  in  Lispenard Street, pulling   himself on  his  elbows to  the bathroom
because he was no longer able to walk. In this dream, he was alone—there
was no Willem or  JB or Malcolm  or Andy,  no Harold or Julia.  He was an
old, old  man, and there was no one, and he was the only  one left to  take
care of himself.
   “How  old are you?” asked Voigt.
   “Thirty-one,”   he said.
   “Thirty-one’s   young,” said Voigt,  “but  you won’t  be young forever. Do
you really want to grow old  in the U.S. Attorney’s Office?  You know what
they say  about assistant prosecutors: Men  whose best years  are behind
them.”  He   talked  about  compensation,  about  an  accelerated path   to
partnership. “Just tell me you’ll think about it.”
   “I  will,”   he said.
   And  he  did.  He didn’t   discuss it  with  Citi]en  or  Rhodes—or Harold,
because he knew what he’d say—but  he did discuss it  with  Willem,  and
together they debated the obvious benefits of  the Mob against the obvious
drawbacks: the hours (but he never left work as it was, Willem argued), the
tedium, the high probability he’d be working with  assholes (but Citi]en and
Rhodes aside, he already worked with  assholes, Willem argued). And, of
course, the fact that he would now be defending the people he’d spent the
past six years prosecuting: liars and crooks and thieves, the entitled and the
powerful masquerading as victims. He  wasn’t like  Harold  or Citi]en—he
was practical; he knew that making  a career as a lawyer meant sacrifices,
either of money or of  moralities, but it  still  troubled him, this forsaking  of

233
what he knew  to be Must. And for what? So he  could insure he wouldn’t
become that  old  man,  lonely   and sick?  It   seemed the  worst  kind   of
selfishness, the worst kind of self-indulgence, to disavow what he knew was
right simply  because he was frightened, because he was scared of  being
uncomfortable and miserable.
   Then,  two weeks after his  meeting with  Voigt, he had  come home one
Friday night  very late. He  was exhausted; he’d had to use his wheelchair
that day because the wound on his right leg  hurt so much, and he was so
relieved to get home, back to Lispenard Street, that he had felt himself go
weak—in Must a few minutes, he would  be inside,  and he would  wrap  a
damp washcloth, hot and steamed from the microwave, around his calf and
sit in the warmth.  But when he tried the elevator button,  he heard nothing
but a grinding of gears, the faint winching noise the machine made when it
was broken.
   “No!”   he shouted. “No!”  His voice echoed in the lobby, and he smacked
his palm against the elevator door again and again: “No, no, no!” He picked
up his briefcase and threw it against the ground, and papers spun up from it.
Around him, the building remained silent and unhelpful.
   Finally  he stopped, ashamed and angry, and gathered his papers back into
his bag. He checked his watch: it was eleven. Willem was in a play, Cloud
9, but he knew he’d be off  stage by then. But when he called him, Willem
didn’t pick  up. And  then he began to panic. Malcolm  was on  vacation in
Greece. JB was at an artists’  colony. Andy’s  daughter, Beatrice, had Must
been born the previous  week: he  couldn’t  call  him. There  were only  so
many people he would let help him, whom he felt at least semi-comfortable
clinging to  like  a sloth,  whom he would  allow  to  drag him  up the many
flights.
   But  in  that moment, he was irrationally,  intensely desperate to get into
the apartment. And so he stood, tucking his briefcase under his left arm and
collapsing his wheelchair, which  was too expensive to leave in the  lobby,
with his right. He began to work his way up the stairs, cleaving his left side
to the wall, gripping  the chair by one of  its spokes. He moved slowly—he
had to hop on his left  leg, while  trying to  avoid putting any weight  on his
right,  or  letting  the  wheelchair  bang  against the  wound.  Up  he  went,
pausing to rest every third step. There were a hundred and ten steps from
the lobby to the fifth  floor,  and by the fiftieth,  he was shaking so badly he
had to stop and sit for half an hour. He called and texted Willem again and

234
again. On the fourth call, he left the message he hoped he would never have
to leave: “Willem,   I  really  need help. Please call me.  Please.” He had a
vision of Willem  calling him  right back, telling him he’d  be right there, but
he waited and waited  and Willem  didn’t  call,  and finally   he managed to
stand again.
   Somehow he made it inside.  But he can’t remember anything else from
that night; when he woke the next day, Willem was asleep on the rug next to
his bed, and Andy asleep on the chair they must have dragged into his room
from  the living   room. He  was thick-tongued,  fogged, nauseated, and he
knew that  Andy  must  have given  him  an inMection of pain  medication,
which he hated: he would feel disoriented and constipated for days.
   When  he  woke  again, Willem   was gone,  but  Andy  was awake,  and
staring at him.
   “Jude, you’ve got to get the fuck out of this apartment,” he said, quietly.
   “I  know,” he said.
   “Jude,  what were you  thinking?”  Willem  asked him  later, after he had
returned from the grocery store and Andy had helped him into the bathroom
—he couldn’t  walk:  Andy had  had to carry  him—and then put  him back
into bed, still in  his clothes from the day before, and left. Willem had gone
to a party  after the  show and hadn’t  heard his phone ring;  when he  had
finally   listened to  his   messages, he had rushed  home  and found  him
convulsing on the floor and had called Andy.  “Why  didn’t you  call Andy?
Why  didn’t  you  go  to  a  diner  and wait  for   me? Why  didn’t   you  call
Richard? Why didn’t  you call Philippa and make her find  me? Why didn’t
you call Citi]en, or Rhodes, or Eli, or Phaedra, or the Henry Youngs, or—”
   “I   don’t know,”  he said, miserably.  It was impossible  to explain  to the
healthy the logic of the sick, and he didn’t have the energy to try.
   The following  week, he contacted Lucien Voigt and finali]ed the terms of
the Mob with him. And once he had signed the contract, he called Harold,
who was silent  for  a long  five  seconds before taking  a deep breath and
beginning.
   “I  Must don’t get this, Jude,” he said. “I don’t. You’ve never struck me as a
money-grubber. Are you? I mean, I guess you are. You had—you have—a
great career at the U.S. Attorney’s. You’re  doing work  there that matters.
And you’re  giving it  all  up to defend, who? Criminals. People so entitled,
so certain they  won’t  be caught  that being  caught—that very  concern—
doesn’t even occur  to  them. People who  think  the  laws  are written  for

235
people who make less than nine figures a year. People who think the laws
are applicable only by race, or by tax bracket.”
   He said nothing, Must let Harold become more and more agitated, because
he knew Harold  was right. They  had never explicitly  discussed it, but  he
knew Harold had always assumed that he would make his career in public
service. Over the years, Harold would  talk with  dismay and sorrow about
talented former   students he  admired  who   had  left   Mobs—at the U.S.
Attorney’s, at the Department of Justice, at public defender offices, at legal
aid programs—to go to corporate firms. “A  society cannot run as it should
unless people with excellent legal minds make it  their business to make it
run,” Harold often said, and he had always agreed with him. And he agreed
with him still,  which was why he couldn’t defend himself now.
   “Don’t   you have anything you  want to say for  yourself?”  Harold asked
him, finally.
   “I’m   sorry, Harold,”  he  said. Harold said nothing.  “You’re  so angry  at
me,” he murmured.
   “I’m   not angry, Jude,” Harold said. “I’m disappointed. Do you know how
special you are? Do you  know  what a difference  you could  make if  you
stayed? You could be a  Mudge if you wanted to—you  could  be a Mustice
someday. But you’re not going to be now. Now you’re going  to be another
litigator  in another corporate firm,  and all  the good work  you could have
done you’ll  instead be fighting against. It’s Must such a waste, Jude, such a
waste.”
   He  was  silent again.  He repeated Harold’s  words  to  himself:  Such a
waste, such a waste. Harold  sighed. “So  what  is  this about,  really?”  he
asked. “Is it money? Is this what this is about? Why didn’t you tell  me you
needed money, Jude? I could’ve given you some. Is this all about money?
Tell me what you need, Jude, and I’m happy to help you out.”
   “Harold,”  he began, “that’s so—that’s so kind of you. But—I can’t.”
   “Bullshit,”   said  Harold, “you  won’t.  I’m  offering  you a way  to let  you
keep your Mob, Jude, to not have to take a Mob you’re going to hate, for work
you will  hate—and that’s not a maybe, that’s a fact—with no  expectations
or strings attached. I’m telling  you  that I’m  happy to give  you money for
this.”
   Oh,  Harold,  he  thought.  “Harold,”   he said,  wretchedly,  “the  kind  of
money I need isn’t the kind of money you have. I promise you.”

236
   Harold  was silent, and when he spoke next, his tone was different. “Jude,
are you in any kind of  trouble? You can tell me, you know. Whatever it is,
I’ll  help you.”
   “No,”   he said, but he wanted to cry. “No, Harold, I’m fine.”  He wrapped
his right hand around his bandaged calf, with its steady, constant ache.
   “Well,”   said Harold. “That’s  a relief. But  Jude, what could you possibly
need so much money for, besides an apartment, which Julia and I will help
you buy, do you hear me?”
   He  sometimes found himself both frustrated and fascinated by Harold’s
lack of imagination: in  Harold’s mind, people had parents who were proud
of them, and saved money only for apartments and vacations, and asked for
things when they  wanted them; he seemed to be  curiously unaware of  a
universe in which those things might not be givens, in which  not everyone
shared the same past and future. But this was a highly ungenerous way to
think,  and it  was rare—most of  the  time,  he admired Harold’s  steadfast
optimism,  his   inability   or   unwillingness   to   be  cynical,   to  look   for
unhappiness or misery in  every  situation.  He loved  Harold’s  innocence,
which was made more remarkable considering what he taught and what he
had lost.   And  so  how  could   he  tell  Harold   that  he  had to   consider
wheelchairs, which  needed to  be  replaced every  few  years, and  which
insurance didn’t  wholly  cover?  How  could  he tell  him   that Andy,  who
didn’t take insurance, never charged him, had never charged him, but might
want to someday, and if he did, he certainly wasn’t  not going to pay him?
How could  he tell  him that  this most recent time  his wound had opened,
Andy  had mentioned hospitali]ation  and,  maybe, someday in the  future,
amputation? How could he tell him that if  his leg was amputated, it would
mean a hospital stay, and physical therapy, and prostheses? How could he
tell  him about  the surgery he  wanted on his  back, the  laser burning  his
carapace of scars down to nothing? How could he tell Harold of his deepest
fears: his loneliness, of becoming the old man with  a catheter and a bony,
bare chest? How could he tell Harold  that he dreamed not of marriage, or
children, but that he would someday have enough money to pay someone to
take care of him if  he needed it, someone who would  be kind to him  and
allow  him privacy  and dignity?  And  then,  yes, there were the  things he
wanted: He  wanted to  live   somewhere where the  elevator  worked.  He
wanted to take  cabs when he  wanted to.  He wanted  to find  somewhere

237
private to swim, because the motion stilled his back and because he wasn’t
able to take his walks any longer.
   But  he couldn’t  tell Harold  any of this.  He didn’t  want Harold to  know
Must how flawed he was, what a piece of Munk he’d acquired. And so he said
nothing, and told Harold he had to go, and that he would talk to him later.
   Even  before he  had talked  to  Harold,  he had prepared himself  to  be
resigned to his new Mob, nothing more, but to first his unease, and then his
surprise, and then his delight, and then his slight disgust, he found that he
enMoyed it. He’d had experience with pharmaceutical companies when he
was a  prosecutor, and  so  much  of  his  initial   caseload concerned that
industry:  he worked   with  a  company  that was  opening  an  Asia-based
subsidiary to develop an anticorruption policy,  traveling back and forth  to
Tokyo with the senior partner on the case—this was a small, tidy, solvable
Mob, and therefore unusual. The other cases were more complicated, and
longer, at times infinitely  long:  he mostly worked  on compiling  a defense
for   another   of   the   firm’s    clients,    this   a   massive  pharmaceutical
conglomerate, against a False Claims Act charge. And three years into his
life  at   Rosen Pritchard  and  Klein,   when  the  investment  management
company Rhodes worked  for  was investigated for   securities fraud, they
came to him,  and secured his partnership: he had trial  experience, which
most of  the other associates didn’t, but  he had known  he would  need to
bring in  a client  eventually, and the first  client was always the  hardest to
find.
   He   would  never  have  admitted  it  to   Harold,  but  he  actually  liked
directing  investigations prompted  by  whistle-blowers,  liked  pressing up
against the boundaries of the  Foreign Corrupt  Practices Act,  liked being
able to stretch the law,  like  a strip  of elastic, Must past its natural tension
point, Must to the point where it would snap back at you with a sting. By day
he told  himself  it  was an intellectual  engagement, that his work  was an
expression of  the  plasticity   of  the  law   itself.  But   at  night  he  would
sometimes think of what Harold would say if he was honest with him about
what he was doing, and would hear his words again: Such a waste, such a
waste. What was he doing?, he would think in those moments. Had the Mob
made him venal, or  had he always  been so and had Must fancied himself
otherwise?
   It’s all  within the law, he would argue with the Harold-in-his-head.

238
   Just because you can do it doesn’t mean you should, Harold-in-his-head
would shoot back at him.
   And  indeed, Harold  hadn’t  been completely wrong,  for  he missed the
U.S. Attorney’s Office.  He  missed being righteous and surrounded by the
passionate, the heated, the crusading. He missed Citi]en, who had moved
back to London, and Marshall,  whom he occasionally met for  drinks, and
Rhodes, whom he saw more frequently but who  was perpetually fra]]led,
and gray,  and  whom  he  had  remembered as cheery  and  effervescent,
someone who  would  play  electrotango music  and  squire an  imaginary
woman around the  room  when they  were at  the  office  late and  feeling
punchy, Must to get him and Citi]en  to look  up from  their  computers and
laugh. They were getting older,  all of  them. He liked  Rosen Pritchard, he
liked the people there, but he never sat with them late at night arguing about
cases and talking about books: it wasn’t that sort of  office. The  associates
his age had unhappy girlfriends or boyfriends at home (or were themselves
unhappy girlfriends  or  boyfriends);  the ones older  than  he were getting
married. In the rare moments they weren’t discussing the work before them,
they made small talk  about engagements and pregnancies and real estate.
They didn’t discuss the law, not for fun or from fervor.
   The  firm  encouraged its attorneys to do  pro bono work,  and he began
volunteering with a nonprofit  group that offered free legal advice to artists.
The organi]ation kept what they called “studio  hours” every afternoon and
evening, when artists could drop by  and consult with  a lawyer, and every
Wednesday night he left work early, at seven, and sat in the group’s creaky-
floored  SoHo  offices  on Broome  Street  for  three  hours, helping  small
publishers of   radical  treatises who   wanted  to  establish themselves  as
nonprofit  entities,  and  painters with   intellectual  property  disputes, and
dance groups, photographers, writers, and filmmakers with  contracts that
were either so extralegal (he was presented with one written in pencil on a
paper towel) that they were meaningless or so needlessly complicated that
the artists couldn’t  understand them—he could barely understand them—
and yet had signed them anyway.
   Harold  didn’t  really approve of his  volunteer work, either;  he could tell
he thought it frivolous.  “Are  any of these artists any good?” Harold asked.
“Probably not,”  he said. But it  wasn’t for  him to  Mudge whether the artists
were good or not—other people, plenty of other people, did that already. He
was there only to offer the sort of practical help that so few of them had, as

239
so many of them lived in a world that was deaf to practicalities. He knew it
was romantic, but he admired them: he admired anyone who could live for
year after year on only their fastburning hopes, even as they grew older and
more obscure with every day. And,  Must as romantically, he thought of his
time with  the organi]ation  as his  salute to his friends,  all  of whom  were
living the sorts of lives he marveled at: he considered them such successes,
and he was proud of them. Unlike him, they had had no clear path to follow,
and yet they had plowed stubbornly  ahead. They spent their days making
beautiful things.
   His  friend   Richard was  on  the  board of  the  organi]ation,  and  some
Wednesdays he’d stop by  on his  way  home—he had recently  moved to
SoHo—and sit and talk with him if he was between clients, or Must give him
a wave across the room if  he was occupied. One night after studio hours,
Richard invited him back to his apartment for a drink, and they walked west
on Broome Street, past Centre, and Lafayette, and Crosby, and Broadway,
and Mercer, before  turning  south on  Greene. Richard lived  in  a narrow
building,  its  stone gone the  color  of  soot, with  a  towering  garage door
marking its first  floor  and, to its right,  a metal door with  a face-si]e  glass
window cut  into its  top. There was no lobby, but rather a gray, tiled-floor
hallway lit by a series of three glowing bare bulbs dangling from cords. The
hallway turned right  and led  to  a cell-like  industrial  elevator, the si]e  of
their living room and Willem’s bedroom at Lispenard Street combined, with
a rattling cage door that shuddered shut at the press of a button, but which
glided smoothly  up  through an  exposed cinder-block shaft.  At  the third
floor, it  stopped, and Richard opened the cage and turned his key into the
set of massive, forbidding steel doors before them, which  opened into his
apartment.
   “God,”   he  said, stepping into  the  space, as Richard  flicked  on  some
lights. The  floors  were whitewashed wood,  and the walls  were white  as
well.  High   above  him,  the  ceiling   winked  and  shone with   scores of
chandeliers—old, glass, new, steel—that were strung every three feet or so,
at irregular heights, so that as they walked deeper into the loft, he could feel
glass bugles skimming across the top of  his head, and Richard, who  was
even taller than he was, had to duck so they wouldn’t scrape his forehead.
There were no  dividing  walls,  but  near the  far  end of  the space was  a
shallow, freestanding box of glass as tall and wide as the front doors, and as
he drew closer, he could see that within it was a gigantic honeycomb shaped

240
like  a graceful piece  of  fan coral.  Beyond the  glass box was  a blanket-
covered mattress, and before it was a shaggy white Berber rug, its mirrors
twinkling  in  the  lights,  and a white  woolen  sofa and  television, an  odd
island of  domesticity  in the  midst of  so  much aridity.  It  was the  largest
apartment he had ever been in.
   “It’s   not real,”  said  Richard, watching him  look  at  the honeycomb. “I
made it from wax.”
   “It’s  spectacular,” he said, and Richard nodded his thanks.
   “Come on,”  he said, “I’ll  give you the tour.”
   He  handed him a beer and then unbolted a door next to the refrigerator.
“Emergency stairs,”  he said. “I   love them.  They’re so—descent-into-hell
looking, you know?”
   “They  are,” he agreed, looking into the doorway, where the stairs seemed
to vanish into the gloom.  And then he stepped back, suddenly uneasy and
yet feeling foolish for  being so, and Richard, who hadn’t seemed to notice,
shut the door and bolted it.
   They  went down in  the elevator to  the second floor and into  Richard’s
studio, and Richard  showed him  what he  was working  on.  “I  call  them
misrepresentations,” he said, and let him hold what he had assumed was a
white birch branch but was actually made from fired clay, and then a stone,
round and smooth and  lightweight,  that had been whittled  from  ash and
lathe-turned but that gave the  suggestion of solidity  and  heft, and a  bird
skeleton made of hundreds of small  porcelain pieces. Bisecting the space
lengthwise was a row of  seven glass boxes, smaller than the one upstairs
with  the wax  honeycomb but each still   as large as one of  the  casement
windows, and each containing  a Magged, crumbling mountain of a  sickly
dark yellow substance that appeared to be half rubber, half flesh. “These are
real honeycombs, or they were,” Richard explained. “I let the bees work on
them for a while, and then I released them. Each one is named for how long
they  were occupied,  for   how  long  they  were  actually   a home  and  a
sanctuary.”
   They sat on the rolling  leather desk chairs that Richard worked from and
drank their  beers and talked:  about Richard’s  work,  and  about his  next
show, his  second, that would  open  in  six  months, and  about JB’s  new
paintings.
   “You  haven’t seen them, right?” Richard asked. “I stopped by his studio
two weeks ago, and they’re  really beautiful,  the best he’s ever done.” He

241
smiled at him. “There’re going to be a lot of you, you know.”
   “I  know,”  he said, trying not to grimace. “So, Richard,” he said, changing
the subMect, “how did you find this space? It’s incredible.”
   “It’s  mine.”
   “Really?  You own it? I’m impressed; that’s so adult of you.”
   Richard   laughed. “No,   the   building—it’s   mine.”   He  explained:  his
grandparents had an import business, and when his father and his aunt were
young, they had bought sixteen buildings downtown, all former factories, to
store their  wares: six  in  SoHo, six  in  TriBeCa,  and four  in  Chinatown.
When each of  their four  grandchildren turned  thirty, they  got one  of the
buildings. When they turned thirty-five—as  Richard had the previous year
—they got another. When they turned forty,  they got  a third. They  would
get the last when they turned fifty.
   “Did    you  get  to  choose?”  he asked,  feeling  that  particular   mix  of
giddiness and disbelief he  did whenever he  heard these kinds of  stories:
both that such wealth existed and could be discussed so casually, and that
someone he had known for such a long time was in possession of it. They
were reminders of how naïve and unsophisticated he somehow still was—
he could never imagine such riches, he could never imagine people he knew
had such riches. Even all these years later, even though his years in New
York and, especially, his Mob had taught him differently, he couldn’t help but
imagine the  rich  not  as E]ra  or  Richard  or  Malcolm  but  as they  were
depicted in cartoons, in satires: older men, stamping out of cars with dark-
tinted windows  and fat-fingered  and plush and  shinily  bald, with  skinny
brittle wives and large, polished-floor houses.
   “No,”   Richard grinned, “they  gave us the ones they thought would best
suit our personalities. My grouchy cousin got a building on Franklin  Street
that was used to store vinegar.”
   He laughed. “What was this one used for?”
   “I’ll   show you.”
   And  so  back in  the elevator  they went,  up  to the  fourth  floor,  where
Richard opened the door and turned on the lights, and they were confronted
with pallets  and pallets stacked high, almost to  the ceiling,  with  what he
thought were bricks. “But  not Must bricks,” said Richard, “decorative terra-
cotta bricks, imported from Umbria.” He picked one up from an incomplete
pallet and gave it to him, and he turned the brick, which was gla]ed with  a
thin, bright green finish, in his hand, running his palm over its blisters. “The

242
fifth  and sixth  floors are full   of them, too,”  said Richard,  “they’re  in  the
process of selling them to a wholesaler in Chicago, and then those floors’ll
be clear.” He  smiled. “Now  you  see why I  have such a good elevator in
here.”
   They  returned to Richard’s apartment, back through the hanging garden
of chandeliers, and Richard  gave him  another beer. “Listen,”  he  said, “I
need to talk to you about something important.”
   “Anything,”   he said, placing the bottle on the table and leaning forward.
   “The  tiles  will   probably be  out of  here  by the  end of  the year,”  said
Richard. “The  fifth  and sixth floors  are set up exactly  like  this one—wet
walls in   the same place, three  bathrooms—and the question  is whether
you’d want one of them.”
   “Richard,”  he said, “I’d love to. But how much are you charging?”
   “I’m   not talking about renting it, Jude,” said Richard. “I’m  talking  about
buying  it.”    Richard  had  already   talked  to   his  father,  who   was  his
grandparents’ lawyer: they’d  convert the  building  into a  co-op, and he’d
buy a certain number of shares. The only thing Richard’s family  requested
is that he or his  heirs give them the right  to buy  the apartment back from
him first if  he ever decided to sell it. They would offer him a fair price, and
he would  pay Richard  a monthly  rent  that would  be applied  toward his
purchase. The  Goldfarbs  had  done  this   before—his  grouchy  cousin’s
girlfriend had bought a floor of  the vinegar building a year ago—and it had
worked out fine.  Apparently, they got  some sort of tax break if  they each
converted one of  their  buildings  into   at least  a two-unit   co-op, and  so
Richard’s father was trying to get all of the grandchildren to do so.
   “Why   are  you  doing  this?”  he  asked Richard,  quietly,  once  he had
recovered. “Why me?”
   Richard shrugged. “It  gets lonely here,”  he said. “Not that  I’m  going to
be stopping by all the time. But  it’d  be nice to know there’s another living
being in this  building  sometimes. And you’re the  most responsible of my
friends, not that there’s a  lot of  competition  for the title.  And  I  like  your
company. Also—” He stopped. “Promise you won’t get mad.”
   “Oh  god,” he said. “But I promise.”
   “Willem   told me about what happened, you know, when you were trying
to get  upstairs last  year and the  elevator broke.  It’s  not  anything to  be
embarrassed about, Jude. He’s Must worried about you. I told  him  I  was
going  to  ask you   about this  anyway,  and  he  thought—he thinks—it’s

243
someplace you could live  for  a long  time: forever. And  the elevator  will
never break  here.  And  if   it   does, I’ll    be  right  downstairs.  I  mean—
obviously, you can buy somewhere else, but I hope you’ll consider moving
in here.”
   In  that moment he feels not angry but exposed: not Must to Richard but to
Willem. He  tries to hide  as much as he can from Willem,  not  because he
doesn’t trust him but because he doesn’t want Willem to see him as less of a
person, as someone who  has to  be  looked after  and  helped. He  wants
Willem,  wants them all,  to  think  of  him  as someone reliable and hardy,
someone they can come  to  with  their  problems, instead of  him   always
having to turn  to  them. He is  embarrassed, thinking of the  conversations
that have been had about him—between Willem   and Andy, and between
Willem and Harold (which  he is certain happens more often than he fears),
and now between Willem and Richard—and saddened as well that Willem
is spending so much time worrying about him, that he is having to think of
him the way he would have had to think of Hemming, had Hemming lived:
as someone who needed care, as someone who needed decisions made for
him. He sees the image of himself as an old man again: Is it  possible it is
also Willem’s  vision,  that the  two  of  them share the same fear, that  his
ending seems as inevitable to Willem as it does to himself?
   He  thinks,  then, of  a conversation he  had once had  with  Willem  and
Philippa; Philippa was talking  about how  someday, when she and Willem
were old,  they’d  take over  her parents’  house and orchards in  southern
Vermont. “I can see it now,” she said. “The kids’ll have moved back in with
us, because they won’t be able to make it in the real world, and they’ll have
six kids between them with names like Buster and Carrot and Vixen, who’ll
run around naked and won’t be sent to school, and whom Willem and I will
have to support until the end of time—”
   “What  will  your kids do?” he asked, practical even in play.
   “Oberon   will   make  art  installations   using  only  food   products,  and
Miranda will  play a ]ither  with  yarn for strings,”  said Philippa, and he had
smiled. “They’ll  stay in  grad school forever, and Willem will  have to keep
working until  he’s so broken down that I have to push him onto the set in a
wheelchair”—she stopped, blushing, but carried on after  a hitch—“to  pay
for all  their degrees and experiments. I’ll  have to give up  costume design
and start an organic applesauce company to pay all our debts and maintain
the house, which’ll be this huge, glorious wreck with  termites everywhere,

244
and we’ll  have a huge, scarred wooden table big enough to seat all twelve
of us.”
   “Thirteen,”  said Willem, suddenly.
   “Why  thirteen?”
   “Because—Jude’ll be living  with us, too.”
   “Oh,  will  I?” he asked lightly, but pleased, and relieved, to be included in
Willem’s vision of old age.
   “Of  course. You’ll have the guest cottage, and every morning Buster will
bring you your buckwheat waffles because you’ll be too sick of us to Moin us
at the main table, and then after breakfast I’ll come hang out with you  and
hide  from  Oberon  and  Miranda,   who’re  going   to  want  me  to   make
intelligent and supportive comments about their latest endeavors.” Willem
grinned at  him,  and he  smiled back,  though he  could  see that Philippa
herself wasn’t smiling any longer, but staring at the table. Then she looked
up, and their eyes met for half a second, and she looked away, quickly.
   It  was shortly  after that, he thought, that Philippa’s  attitude toward him
changed. It wasn’t obvious to anyone but him—perhaps not even to her—
but where he used to come into the apartment and see her sketching at the
table and the two of them were able to talk,  companionably, as he drank a
glass of water and looked at her drawings, she would now Must nod at him
and say, “Willem’s at the store,” or “He’s  coming back soon,” even though
he hadn’t  asked (she was always  welcome at  Lispenard Street, whether
Willem was there or  not), and he would  linger a bit  until  it  was clear she
didn’t want to speak, and then retreat to his room to work.
   He  understood  why  Philippa  might   resent him:  Willem   invited   him
everywhere with them, included him in everything, even in their retirement,
even in Philippa’s daydream of their old  age. After that, he was careful to
always decline Willem’s   invitations,  even if  it   was to  things that  didn’t
involve  his and Philippa’s  couplehood—if  they were  going to  a party  at
Malcolm’s  to  which  he  was also  invited,  he’d  leave  separately, and at
Thanksgiving, he made sure to ask Philippa to Boston as well, though she
hadn’t come in the end. He had even tried to talk to Willem  about what he
sensed, to awaken him to what he was certain she was feeling.
   “Do  you not like her?” Willem  had asked him, concerned.
   “You   know  I  like  Philippa,”   he’d replied.  “But   I  think—I   think  you
should Must hang out with her more alone, Willem, with Must the two of you.
It must get annoying for her to always have me around.”

245
   “Did  she say that to you?”
   “No,  Willem,  of course not. I’m  Must guessing. From my vast experience
with women, you know.”
   Later, when Willem  and Philippa broke up, he would  feel as guilty as if
he had  been solely  to  blame.  But  even  before that,  he  had wondered
whether Willem, too,  had come to reali]e  that no serious girlfriend  would
tolerate his   constant presence in   Willem’s   life;  he  wondered  whether
Willem  was trying to  make alternative plans for  him, so he didn’t  end up
living  in a cottage on the property he’d someday have with his wife, so he
wouldn’t  be  Willem’s   sad  bachelor  friend,  a  useless reminder  of   his
forsaken, childish life. I  will  be alone, he decided. He wouldn’t be the one
to ruin  Willem’s   chances for  happiness: he wanted Willem   to have  the
orchard and the termite-nibbled house and the grandchildren and the wife
who was Mealous of his company and attention. He wanted Willem to have
everything he deserved, everything he desired. He wanted every day of his
to be  free  of  worries  and obligations  and  responsibilities—even if  that
worry and obligation and responsibility was him.
   The following  week, Richard’s father—a tall, smiling,  pleasant man he’d
met at Richard’s first show, three years ago—sent him the contract, which
he had a law school classmate, a real estate lawyer, review in tandem with
him, and the building’s engineering report, which he gave to Malcolm. The
price had almost nauseated him, but his classmate said he had to do it: “This
is an unbelievable deal, Jude. You will never, never, never find something
that si]e   in  that  neighborhood  for   this  amount  of  money.”  And   after
reviewing the report, and then the space, Malcolm told him the same thing:
Buy it.
   So he did. And although he and the Goldfarbs had worked out a leisurely
ten-year payment  schedule,  an  interest-free  rent-to-own  plan,   he  was
determined to pay the apartment off as soon as he could. Every two weeks,
he allotted half of  his paycheck to the apartment, and the other half to his
savings and living  expenses. He told  Harold  he had moved  during their
weekly  phone  call  (“Thank   Christ,”   Harold  said:  he  had  never  liked
Lispenard Street), but didn’t   tell him  he  had bought a place, because he
didn’t  want  Harold  to  feel  obligated  to  offer  him  money  for  it.   From
Lispenard Street he brought only his mattress and lamp and the table and a
chair, all of  which he arranged into one corner of  the space. At nights, he
would  sometimes look   up  from  his  work   and think   what  a  ludicrous

246
decision this had been: How could he ever fill so much room? How would
it ever feel  like his? He  was reminded of Boston, of  Hereford Street, and
how there, he had dreamed only of a bedroom, of a door he might someday
close. Even when he was in Washington, clerking for Sullivan, he had slept
in the living  room of a one-bedroom apartment he shared with a legislative
assistant whom he rarely saw—Lispenard Street had been the first time in
his life  that he’d  had a room, a real  room with  a real  window, wholly  to
himself. But  a year after he moved  into Greene Street, Malcolm  installed
the walls, and the place began to feel a little more comfortable, and the year
after that, Willem moved in,  and it felt more comfortable still.  He saw less
of Richard than he thought he might—they  were both traveling frequently
—but on Sunday evenings, he would sometimes go down to his studio and
help him  with  one  of  his proMects, polishing a bunch of  small  branches
smooth with a leaf of sandpaper, or snipping the rachis off the vane from a
fluff  of peacock feathers. Richard’s studio was the sort of  place he would
have loved as a child—everywhere were containers and bowls of marvelous
things: twigs and stones and dried beetles and feathers and tiny, bright-hued
taxidermied birds  and blocks  in  various shapes made of  some soft pale
wood—and at times he wished he could  be allowed to  abandon his work
and simply sit on the floor and play, which he had usually been too busy to
do as a boy.
   By  the  end of  the third  year, he  had paid  for  the apartment, and had
immediately begun saving for the renovation. This took less time than he’d
thought it  would,  in  part  because of something that  had happened with
Andy.  He’d  gone uptown  one  day for   his  appointment, and Andy   had
walked in, looking grim and yet oddly triumphant.
   “What?”   he’d  asked, and Andy   had silently  handed him   a maga]ine
article he’d  sliced out of  a Mournal. He read it: it was an  academic report
about how a recently  developed semi-experimental laser surgery that had
held great promise as a solution  for damageless keloid removal was now
proven to  have adverse medium-term effects:  although the  keloids were
eliminated, patients instead developed raw, burn-like wounds, and the skin
beneath the scars became significantly more  fragile,  more susceptible to
splitting and cracking, which resulted in blisters and infection.
   “This  is what you’re  thinking  of doing, isn’t  it?”  Andy asked him, as he
sat holding the pages in his hand, unable to speak. “I know you, Judy. And I
know you  made an appointment at  that quack Thompson’s office.  Don’t

247
deny it;  they called  for your  chart. I  didn’t  send it.  Please don’t do  this,
Jude. I’m serious. The last thing you need are open wounds on your back as
well as your legs.” And then, when he didn’t say anything, “Talk to me.”
   He shook his head. Andy was right:  he had been saving for this as well.
Like his annual bonuses and most of his savings, all the money he’d made
long ago from tutoring  Felix  had been given over to the apartment, but in
recent months, as it was clear he was closing in on his final  payments, he
had begun saving anew for the surgery. He had it all worked out: he’d have
the surgery and then he’d finish saving for the renovation. He had visions of
it—his   back  made   as  smooth  as   the  floors   themselves,  the  thick,
unbudgeable worm trail   of  scars vapori]ed  in  seconds, and with   it,  all
evidence of his time in the home and in Philadelphia, the documentation of
those years erased from his body. He tried so hard to forget, he tried every
day, but as much as he tried, there it was to remind him, proof that what he
pretended hadn’t happened, actually had.
   “Jude,”  Andy  said, sitting next to  him on  the examining table. “I  know
you’re  disappointed. And  I   promise you  that  when  there’s a  treatment
available that’s both effective and safe, I’ll let  you know. I know  it bothers
you; I’m  always  looking  out for  something for  you.  But right  now  there
isn’t anything, and I  can’t in  good conscience let you do this to yourself.”
He was quiet; they both were. “I suppose I should have asked you this more
frequently,  Jude,  but—do   they   hurt   you?  Do   they   cause  you   any
discomfort? Does the skin feel tight?”
   He  nodded. “Look,   Jude,” Andy  said  after a  pause. “There  are some
creams I  can give  you  that’ll  help  with  that,  but  you’re  going  to  need
someone to help massage them in nightly, or it’s not going to be effective.
Would you let someone do this for you? Willem? Richard?”
   “I  can’t,”  he said, speaking to the maga]ine article in his hands.
   “Well,”   said Andy. “I’ll  write  you a scrip anyway, and I’ll show you how
to do  it—don’t   worry,  I  asked an  actual dermatologist,  this  isn’t  some
method I’ve made up—but I  can’t say how  efficacious it’s going  to be on
your own.” He slid off  the table. “Will you open your gown for me and turn
toward the wall?”
   He did,  and felt Andy’s  hands on his shoulders, and then moving slowly
across his back. He thought Andy might say, as he sometimes did, “It’s not
so bad, Jude,” or “You don’t have anything to be self-conscious about,” but
this time he didn’t,  Must trailed his hands across him, as if his palms were

248
themselves lasers, something that was hovering over him and healing him,
the skin beneath them turning healthy and unmarked. Finally Andy told him
he could cover  himself again,  and he did,  and turned back around. “I’m
really sorry, Jude,” Andy said, and this time, it was Andy who couldn’t look
at him.
   “Do    you  want   to  grab  something  to   eat?”  Andy   asked  after  the
appointment was over, as he was putting his clothes back on, but he shook
his head: “I should go  back to the office.”  Andy  was quiet then, but as he
was leaving, he stopped him. “Jude,” he said, “I really am sorry. I don’t like
being the one who has to destroy your hopes.” He nodded—he knew Andy
didn’t—but  in   that  moment, he  couldn’t  stand  being  around him,   and
wanted only to get away.
   However, he reminds himself—he  is determined to be more realistic, to
stop thinking  he can make himself  better—the fact  that he can’t  get this
surgery means he now has the money for Malcolm to begin the renovation
in earnest. Over the years he has owned the apartment, he has witnessed
Malcolm grow  both bolder  and more imaginative in  his work,  and so the
plans he  drew when  he  first  bought  the place  have been  changed and
revised and  improved   upon  multiple  times:   in  them,  he  can  see  the
development of what even he can recogni]e  as an aesthetic confidence, a
self-assured idiosyncracy.  Shortly  before  he   began working   at  Rosen
Pritchard and Klein, Malcolm  had quit  his Mob at Ratstar, and with two of
his former colleagues and Sophie, an acquaintance of his from architecture
school, had founded a firm called Bellcast; their first commission had been
the renovation of  the  pied-à-terre of  one  of  Malcolm’s  parents’ friends.
Bellcast did mostly  residential work,  but last year they had been awarded
their first   significant  public  commission,  for  a photography  museum in
Doha, and Malcolm—like  Willem,  like himself—was  absent from the city
more and more frequently.
   “Never  underestimate the importance of  having  rich parents, I  guess,”
some asshole at one of JB’s parties had grumbled, sourly, when  he heard
that Bellcast had been the runners-up in a competition to design a memorial
in Los Angeles for  Japanese Americans who had been interned in the war,
and JB had started shouting at him before he and Willem had a chance; the
two of  them  had smiled at  each other over JB’s  head, proud of  him  for
defending Malcolm so vehemently.

249
   And  so he has watched as, with each new revised blueprint  for Greene
Street, hallways have materiali]ed and then vanished, and the kitchen has
grown larger and  then smaller, and bookcases have gone from stretching
along the northern wall, which has no windows, to the southern wall, which
does, and  then   back  again.  One  of   the  renderings  eliminated   walls
altogether—“It’s a loft, Judy, and you should respect its integrity,” Malcolm
had argued with  him,  but  he  had been firm:   he needed a  bedroom; he
needed a door he could close and lock—and in another, Malcolm had tried
to block   up the  southern-facing  windows  entirely,  which  had been  the
reason he had chosen the sixth-floor unit to begin with, and which Malcolm
later admitted had been an idiotic  idea. But  he enMoys watching Malcolm
work, is touched that he has spent so much time—more than he himself has
—thinking  about how he might live.  And now  it is  going to happen. Now
he has enough saved for   Malcolm  to  indulge  even his  most outlandish
design fantasies. Now he has enough for every piece of furniture Malcolm
has ever suggested he might get, for every carpet and vase.
   These days, he argues with Malcolm about his most recent plans. The last
time  they reviewed  the  sketches, three months ago,  he had  noticed  an
element around the toilet in the master bathroom that he couldn’t identify.
“What’s that?” he’d asked Malcolm.
   “Grab  bars,” Malcolm  said, briskly,  as if  by  saying it  quickly  it would
become less significant. “Judy, I know what you’re going to say, but—” But
he was already examining the blueprints more closely, peering at Malcolm’s
tiny notations in  the bathroom, where he’d added steel bars in the shower
and around the bathtub as well, and in the kitchen, where he’d lowered the
height of some of the countertops.
   “But  I’m  not even in a wheelchair,” he’d said, dismayed.
   “But   Jude,”  Malcolm   had begun,  and  then stopped.  He  knew  what
Malcolm wanted to say: But you have been. And you will be again. But he
didn’t. “These are standard ADA guidelines,” he said instead.
   “Mal,”   he’d  said, chagrined by how upset he was. “I  understand. But I
don’t want this to be some cripple’s apartment.”
   “It   won’t be, Jude. It’ll   be yours. But don’t  you think,  maybe, Must as a
precaution—”
   “No,  Malcolm. Get rid of them. I mean it.”
   “But  don’t you think, Must as a matter of practicality—”

250
   “Now  you’re interested in practicalities? The man who wanted me to live
in  a five-thousand-square-foot space with  no  walls?”   He stopped. “I’m
sorry, Mal.”
   “It’s  okay, Jude,” Malcolm said. “I understand. I do.”
   Now,  Malcolm  stands before him, grinning. “I  have something to show
you,” he says, waving the baton of rolled-up paper in his hand.
   “Malcolm,  thank you,” he says. “But should we look at them later?” He’d
had to schedule an appointment with the tailor; he doesn’t want to be late.
   “It’ll   be fast,” Malcolm  says, “and I’ll  leave them with you.” He sits next
to him  and smooths out the sheaf of  pages, giving  him one end to  hold,
explaining things he’s changed and tweaked. “Counters back up to standard
height,” says Malcolm, pointing at the kitchen. “No grab bars in the shower
area, but I gave you  this ledge that  you can use as a seat, Must in case. I
swear it’ll  look nice. I  kept the ones around the toilet—Must think about it,
okay? We’ll install them last, and if you really, really hate them, we’ll leave
them off, but … but I’d  do it, Judy.” He nods, reluctantly. He won’t know it
then, but years later, he will be grateful  that Malcolm has prepared for his
future, even when he hadn’t wanted to: he will notice that in his apartment,
the passages are wider, that the bathroom and kitchen  are oversi]e,  so a
wheelchair can make a full, clean revolution in them, that the doorways are
generous, that wherever possible, the doors slide instead of swing, that there
is no  cabinetry under  the master bathroom  sink,  that the  highest-placed
closet rods lower  with   the touch  of  a pneumatic button,  that  there is  a
benchlike seat in the bathtub, and, finally, that Malcolm won the fight about
the grab bars around the toilet. He’ll  feel  a sort of bitter  wonderment that
yet another person in his life—Andy, Willem, Richard, and now Malcolm—
had foreseen his future, and knew how inevitable it was.
   After  their appointment, where Malcolm is measured for a navy suit and
a dark gray one, and where Franklin, the tailor, greets him and asks why he
hasn’t seen him for two years—“I’m  pretty sure that’s my fault,”  Malcolm
says, smiling—they have lunch. It’s nice taking a Saturday off, he thinks, as
they drink rosewater lemonade and eat ]a’atar-dusted roasted cauliflower at
the crowded Israeli restaurant near Franklin’s shop. Malcolm  is excited to
start work on the  apartment, and he is, too. “This  is such perfect timing,”
Malcolm keeps saying. “I’ll  have the office submit everything to the city on
Monday, and by the time it’s approved, I’ll  be done with Doha and be able
to get started right away, and you can move into Willem’s  while it’s  being

251
done.” Malcolm   has Must finished the final  pieces of  work  on  Willem’s
apartment, which he has supervised more of than Willem has; by the end of
the process, he was making decisions for Willem on paint colors. Malcolm
did a beautiful Mob, he thinks; he won’t mind at all staying there for the next
year.
   It   is  early  when they  finish   lunch,  and they  linger  on  the  sidewalk
outside. For the past week it’s been raining, but today the skies are blue and
he is still feeling strong, and even a little restless, and he asks Malcolm if he
wants to walk for  a bit. He  can see Malcolm hesitate, flicking his  ga]e up
and down his body as if trying to determine how capable he is, but then he
smiles and agrees, and the two of them start heading west, and then north,
toward the Village. They pass the building on Mulberry Street that JB used
to live in before he moved farther east, and they are quiet for a minute, both
of them, he knows, thinking about JB and wondering what he’s doing, and
knowing but also not knowing  why he hasn’t answered their and Willem’s
calls, their  texts,  their  e-mails.  The three  of  them  have had  do]ens  of
conversations with  one another,  with  Richard,  with  Ali   and  the Henry
Youngs about what to do, but with every attempt they have made to find JB,
he has eluded them, or barred their way, or ignored them. “We Must have to
wait until  it  gets worse,” Richard had said at  one point, and he fears that
Richard is correct. It  is, sometimes, as if JB is  no longer theirs at all,  and
they can do nothing but wait for the moment in which  he will  have a crisis
only they  can solve, and they will  be  able to parachute into his  life  once
again.
   “Okay,  Malcolm,   I’ve  got  to  ask you,”  he  says, as they walk  up  the
stretch of  Hudson Street that is  deserted on the weekends, its  sidewalks
treeless and empty of people, “are you getting married to Sophie or not? We
all want to know.”
   “God,  Jude, I Must don’t know,” Malcolm begins, but he sounds relieved,
as if he’s been waiting to be asked the question all along. Maybe he has. He
lists  the  potential  negatives  (marriage  is  so  conventional;  it   feels  so
permanent; he’s not really  interested in  the idea  of  a wedding  but fears
Sophie is; his  parents are going  to try  to  get involved;  something about
spending the rest of his  life  with  another architect depresses him; he and
Sophie are cofounders of the  firm—if   something happens between them,
what will   happen to Bellcast?)  and the  positives, which  also sound like
negatives (if he  doesn’t propose, he thinks Sophie will   leave; his parents

252
have been bothering him about it nonstop and he’d like to shut them up; he
really does love Sophie, and knows he won’t be able to do better than her;
he’s thirty-eight,   and  feels he  has  to  do  something). As   he listens  to
Malcolm,  he tries not  to smile:  he has always liked  this  about Malcolm,
how he can be so decisive on the page and in his designs, and yet in the rest
of his life  so in a dither, and so unself-conscious about sharing it. Malcolm
has never been someone who pretended he was cooler, or more confident,
or silkier  than he actually  is,  and as they grow  older, he appreciates and
admires more and more his sweet guilelessness, his complete trust in  his
friends and their opinions.
   “What  do  you think,  Jude?” Malcolm  asks at last. “I’ve   actually really
wanted to talk to you about this.  Should we sit down somewhere? Do you
have time? I know Willem’s on his way back home.”
   He  could be more like  Malcolm, he thinks;  he could ask his friends for
help, he could be vulnerable around them. He has been before, after all; it
Must hasn’t been by choice. But they have always been kind to  him,  they
have never tried to make him feel self-conscious—shouldn’t that teach him
something? Maybe, for instance, he will  ask Willem  if  he could help  him
with  his back:  if  Willem  is  disgusted by his  appearance, he’ll never say
anything. And  Andy was right—it   is too  difficult  to  apply the creams by
himself, and eventually he stopped, although he didn’t  throw any of  them
away, either.
   He  tries to think how  he might begin the conversation with Willem,  but
he finds   he  can’t  move  beyond  the  first   word—Willem—even  in   his
imaginings. And in that moment, he knows he won’t be able to ask Willem
after all: Not  because I don’t trust you, he says to Willem,  with  whom  he
will  never have this conversation. But because I can’t bear to have you see
me as I really am. Now when he imagines himself as an old man, he is still
alone, but on Greene Street, and in these wanderings, he sees Willem in a
house somewhere green and tree-filled—the Adirondacks, the Berkshires—
and Willem is happy, he is surrounded by people who love him, and maybe
a few times a year he comes into the city to visit him on Greene Street, and
they spend the afternoon  together. In  these dreams, he is  always sitting
down, so he’s uncertain if he can still walk  or not, but  he knows that he is
delighted to see Willem, always, and that at the end of all their meetings, he
is able to tell him not to worry,  that he can take care of himself, giving him

253
that assurance like a benediction, pleased that he has had the strength to not
spoil Willem’s idyll  with his needs, his loneliness, his wants.
   But  that, he reminds himself, is many years in the future. Right now there
is Malcolm, and his hopeful, anxious face, waiting to hear his reply.
   “He’s   not back  until  this  evening,”  he tells  Malcolm.  “We’ve   got all
afternoon, Mal. I’ve got as much time as you need.”

254
                                                         3

THE LAST TIME JB tried—really tried—to stop doing drugs, it was Fourth of
July weekend.  No  one else was  in  the city.  Malcolm   was with   Sophie
visiting  her  parents  in  Hamburg.  Jude  was  with  Harold   and  Julia  in
Copenhagen. Willem    was  shooting   in   Cappadocia.  Richard  was   in
Wyoming, at an artists’ colony. Asian Henry Young was in ReykMavík. Only
he remained, and if he hadn’t been so determined, he wouldn’t have been in
town, either. He’d have been in Beacon, where Richard had a house, or in
4uogue, where E]ra had a house, or in Woodstock, where Ali had a house,
or—well. There weren’t  that many other people who would give him  their
house nowadays, and besides, he wasn’t talking to most of  them because
they were getting on his nerves. But he hated summer in New York. All fat
people hated summer  in  New  York:  everything  was always  sticking  to
everything else, flesh to flesh, flesh to fabric. You never felt truly  dry. And
yet there he was, unlocking the door of his studio  on the third floor  of the
white brick  building  in Kensington, glancing involuntarily   toward the end
of the hall, where Jackson’s studio was, before he let himself in.
   JB was not an addict. Yes, he did drugs. Yes, he did a lot of them. But he
wasn’t an addict. Other people were addicts. Jackson was an addict. So was
=ane, and so was Hera. Massimo and Topher: also  addicts. Sometimes it
felt like he was the only one who hadn’t slipped over the edge.
   And  yet he knew  that a lot  of people thought he had, which  is why  he
was still in  the city when he should be in the country: four  days, no drugs,
only work—and then no one would be able to say anything ever again.
   Today, Friday, was day one. The air-conditioning  unit in  his studio was
broken, so the first thing he did was open all the windows and then, once he
had knocked, lightly, on Jackson’s door to make sure he wasn’t inside, the
door as well. Normally  he never opened the door, both because of Jackson
and because of the noise. His studio was one of fourteen rooms on the third
floor  of a  five-story building.  The  rooms were meant to  be used only as
studio  space, but  he  guessed about  twenty   percent  of  the  building’s
occupants actually lived there illegally. On the rare occasions he had arrived
at his  studio  before ten  in  the morning,  he  would  see people shuffling

255
through the corridors in their boxers, and when he went to the bathroom at
the end of the hall, there’d be someone in there taking a sponge bath in the
sink or  shaving or brushing  his teeth, and he’d  nod at them—“Whassup,
man?”—and they’d nod  back. Sadly, however, the overall  effect was less
collegiate and more institutional. This depressed him. JB could have found
studio space elsewhere, better, more private studio space, but he’d  taken
this one because (he was embarrassed to admit) the building looked like a
dormitory, and he hoped it might feel like college again. But it didn’t.
   The  building   was  also  supposed to  be  a  “low   noise  density”   site,
whatever that meant, but along with the artists, a number of bands—ironic
thrasher bands, ironic folk  bands, ironic  acoustic bands—had also rented
studios there, which meant that the hallway was always Mumbled with noise,
all of  the bands’ instruments melding together to make one long whine of
guitar feedback. The bands weren’t supposed to be there, and once every
few months, when the owner of the building, a Mr.  Chen, stopped by for a
surprise inspection,   he  would   hear  the  shouts  bouncing  through  the
hallways, even through his closed door, each person’s call of alarm echoed
by  the  next,  until  the  warning  had  saturated all   five  floors—“Chen!”
“Chen!”  “Chen!”—so  by the time  Mr. Chen stepped inside the front door,
all was quiet, so unnaturally quiet that he imagined he could hear his next-
door  neighbor  grinding  his  inks   against his   whetstone, and  his  other
neighbor’s spirograph skritching against canvas. And then Mr. Chen would
get into his car  and drive away, and the echoes would reverse themselves
—“Clear!”  “Clear!”  “Clear!”—and  the cacophony would rise up again, like
a flock of screeching cicadas.
   Once  he  was  certain  he  was  alone  on  the  floor   (god,  where  was
everyone? Was he truly the last person left on earth?), he took off his shirt
and then, after a moment, his pants, and began cleaning his studio, which he
hadn’t done in months. Back and forth he walked to the trash cans near the
service elevator, stuffing them full of  old pi]]a   boxes and empty beer cans
and scraps of paper with doodles on them and brushes whose bristles had
gone strawlike because he hadn’t cleaned them and palettes of watercolors
that had turned to clay because he hadn’t kept them moist.
   Cleaning was boring; it was particularly boring while  sober. He reflected,
as he sometimes did, that  none of  the supposedly good things that  were
supposed to happen to you when you were on meth had happened to him.
Other people he knew had grown gaunt, or had nonstop anonymous sex, or

256
had binges in which they cleaned or organi]ed  their apartments or studios
for hours. But he remained fat. His sex drive had vanished. His studio and
apartment remained  disasters. True,  he  was  working   remarkably  long
stretches—twelve, fourteen hours at a time—but he couldn’t  attribute that
to the meth: he had always been a hard worker. When it came to painting or
drawing, he had always had a long attention span.
   After  an hour  or so of  picking  things up, the studio  looked exactly the
same as it had when he began, and he was craving  a cigarette, which he
didn’t  have, or  a  drink,  which  he also  didn’t  have, and  shouldn’t  have
anyway, as it was still only noon. He knew he had a ball of gum in his Means
pocket, which he dug around for and found—it was slightly damp from the
heat—and stuffed into  his  mouth, chewing  it  as he lay  supine, his  eyes
closed, the cement floor  cool beneath his back and thighs,  pretending he
was elsewhere, not in Brooklyn in July in the ninety-degree heat.
   How am I feeling? he asked himself.
   Okay, he answered himself.
   The  shrink he had started seeing had told him to  ask himself that. “It’s
like a soundcheck,” he’d said. “Just a way to  check in with  yourself: How
am I feeling? Do I  want to use? If I do  want to use, why do I want to use?
It’s a way for you to communicate with  yourself, to examine your impulses
instead of simply  giving  in to  them.” What  a moron, JB  had thought. He
still  thought this.  And  yet,  like  many moronic  things, he  was unable to
expunge the question from his memory. Now, at odd, unwelcome moments,
he would find  himself asking himself  how he felt.  Sometimes, the answer
was, “Like I  want to do drugs,” and so he’d do them, if only to illustrate  to
his therapist Must how moronic his method was. See? he’d say to Giles in his
head, Giles who wasn’t even a PhD, Must an MSW. So much for your self-
examination theory. What else, Giles? What’s next?
   Seeing Giles  had not  been JB’s idea. Six  months  ago, in  January, his
mother and aunts had had a mini-intervention with  him, which  had begun
with his mother sharing memories of what a bright  and precocious boy JB
had been, and look at him now, and then his aunt Christine, literally playing
bad cop, yelling at him about how he was wasting all the opportunities that
her sister had provided him and how he had become a huge pain in the ass,
and then his aunt  Silvia,  who had always  been the gentlest of  the three,
reminding him that he was so talented, and that they all wanted him back,
and wouldn’t he consider getting treatment? He had not been in the mood

257
for an intervention,  even one as low-key and co]y  as theirs had been (his
mother had provided  his favorite  cheesecake, which they all  ate as they
discussed his flaws),  because, among other things, he was  still  angry at
them. The month  before, his  grandmother had died, and  his mother had
taken a whole day to call him. She claimed it was because she couldn’t find
him and he wasn’t picking up  his phone, but he knew that the day she had
died he had been sober, and his phone had been on all day, and so he wasn’t
sure why his mother was lying to him.
   “JB,  Grandma would  have been heartbroken if  she knew what  you’ve
become,” his mother said to him.
   “God,  Ma,  Must fuck off,”  he’d  said,  wearily, sick  of  her  wailing  and
quivering, and Christine had popped up and slapped him across the face.
   After   that,  he’d  agreed to  go  see Giles  (some friend  of  a  friend  of
Silvia’s) as a way of apologi]ing  to Christine and, of course, to his mother.
Unfortunately, Giles truly  was an idiot, and during  their sessions (paid for
by his mother: he wasn’t  going to waste his money on  therapy, especially
bad therapy), he would answer Giles’s uninventive questions—Why do you
think you’re so attracted to drugs, JB? What do you feel they give you? Why
do you think your  use of them has accelerated so much over the past few
years? Why do  you  think  you’re  not talking   to Malcolm   and Jude  and
Willem as much?—with answers he knew would excite him. He would slip
in mentions of his dead father, of the great emptiness and sense of loss his
absence had inspired in him, of the shallowness of the art world, of his fears
that  he  would  never  fulfill    his   promise,  and  watch  Giles’s  pen  bob
ecstatically over his pad, and feel both  disdain for stupid  Giles as well as
disgust for his own immaturity. Fucking with one’s therapist—even if one’s
therapist truly deserved to be fucked with—was  the sort  of thing  you did
when you were nineteen, not when you were thirty-nine.
   But  although Giles was an idiot,  JB did  find himself  thinking  about his
questions, because they were questions that he had asked himself as well.
And although  Giles  posed each as a discrete quandary, he knew  that in
reality  each one was  inseparable from  the last,  and that  if  it   had been
grammatically and linguistically  possible to ask all of them together in one
big question, then that would be the truest expression of why he was where
he was.
   First, he’d  say to Giles, he hadn’t set out to like drugs as much as he did.
That sounded like an obvious and even silly thing to say, but the truth was

258
that JB  knew people—mostly  rich,  mostly  white,  mostly boring,  mostly
unloved by their parents—who had in fact started taking drugs because they
thought it might make them more interesting, or more frightening, or  more
commanding of attention, or simply because it made the time go faster. His
friend Jackson, for example, was one of those people. But he was not. Of
course, he had always done drugs—everyone had—but in college, and in
his twenties, he had thought of drugs the way he thought of desserts, which
he also loved: a consumable that had been forbidden to him as a child and
which  was now   freely  available.  Doing  drugs,  like  having  post-dinner
snacks of cereal so  throat-singeingly sweet  that the  leftover milk   in  the
bowl  could  be  slurped  down  like  sugarcane Muice, was a privilege   of
adulthood, one he intended to enMoy.
   4uestions two  and three: When and why had drugs become so important
to him? He  knew the  answers to those as well. When  he was thirty-two,
he’d had his first show. Two things had happened after that show: The first
was that he had become, genuinely, a star. There were articles written about
him  in  the  art press,  and articles  written  about  him  in  maga]ines  and
newspapers read by people who wouldn’t  know  their Sue Williams  from
their Sue Coe. And the second was that his friendship with Jude and Willem
had been ruined.
   Perhaps “ruined” was too strong a word. But it had changed. He had done
something bad—he could admit it—and Willem had taken Jude’s side (and
why should he have been surprised at all that Willem had taken Jude’s side,
because really, when he  reviewed  their  entire friendship,  there was  the
evidence: time after time after  time of  Willem  always taking Jude’s side),
and although they  both said they  forgave him,  something had  shifted in
their relationship. The two of them, Jude and Willem, had become their own
unit, united against everyone, united against him  (why had he  never seen
this before?): We two form a multitude. And yet he had always thought that
he and Willem had been a unit.
   But  all  right,   they weren’t.  So  who  was he  left  with?  Not  Malcolm,
because Malcolm had eventually started dating Sophie, and they made their
own unit. And so who would  be his partner, who would make his unit? No
one, it often seemed. They had abandoned him.
   And  then, with  each year, they abandoned him further.  He had always
known he would be the first  among the four of  them to be a success. This
wasn’t arrogance: he Must knew it. He worked harder than Malcolm, he was

259
more ambitious than Willem.  (He didn’t  count Jude in this race, as Jude’s
profession was one that operated on an entirely different set of metrics, one
that didn’t much matter to him.) He was prepared to be the rich one, or the
famous one, or the respected one, and he knew, even as he was dreaming
about his riches and fame and respect, that he would remain friends with all
of them, that he would never forsake them for anyone else, no matter how
overwhelming the temptation might be. He loved them; they were his.
   But  he hadn’t counted on them abandoning him, on them outgrowing him
through their own  accomplishments. Malcolm had his own business. Jude
was doing  whatever  he did  impressively  enough  so that  when  he was
representing JB in  a silly  argument he’d  had the  previous spring with   a
collector he was trying to sue to reclaim an early painting that the collector
had promised he could buy back and then reneged on, the collector’s lawyer
had raised his eyebrows when JB had told him to contact his lawyer, Jude
St. Francis.  “St.  Francis?” asked the  opposing lawyer.  “How’d   you  get
him?” He  told Black  Henry Young about this,  who wasn’t  surprised. “Oh
yeah,” he said. “Jude’s known  for  being icy,  and vicious. He’ll   get it  for
you, JB,  don’t  worry.”   This had  startled him:  His  Jude? Someone who
literally hadn’t  been able to lift his head and look him in the eye until  their
sophomore year? Vicious? He simply couldn’t  imagine  it.  “I  know,”  said
Black Henry  Young,  when he  expressed his disbelief. “But   he becomes
someone else at work, JB; I saw him in  court once and he was borderline
frightening, Must incredibly relentless. If I hadn’t known him, I’d’ve thought
he was a giant asshole.” But Black Henry Young had turned out to be right
—he got his painting back, and not only that, but he got a letter of apology
from the collector as well.
   And  then, of  course, there was Willem. The  horrible, petty part  of him
had to admit that he had never, ever expected Willem to be as successful as
he was. Not that he hadn’t wanted it for him—he  had Must never thought it
would happen. Willem, with his lack of competitive spirit;  Willem, with  his
deliberateness; Willem, who in college had turned down  a starring role in
Look Back in Anger to go tend to his sick brother. On the one hand, he had
understood it, and on the other hand—his brother hadn’t been fatally ill, not
then; even his own  mother had told  him  not to come—he hadn’t.  Where
once his friends had needed him—for color, for excitement—they no longer
did. He didn’t like to think  of himself as someone who wanted his friends to
be, well, not unsuccessful, but in thrall to him, but maybe he was.

260
   The thing he hadn’t reali]ed  about success was that success made people
boring. Failure  also made people  boring,  but in  a  different  way:  failing
people were  constantly striving   for  one  thing—success. But  successful
people were  also  only   striving   to  maintain  their   success. It  was  the
difference between running and running in place, and although running was
boring no  matter what, at  least the person running  was moving,  through
different scenery and past different  vistas. And  yet here again, it  seemed
that  Jude and   Willem   had  something  he  didn’t,   something  that  was
protecting them from  the suffocating  ennui of  being successful, from the
tedium of waking  up and reali]ing  that you were a success and that every
day you  had  to  keep doing  whatever it   was that  made you  a  success,
because once you  stopped,  you  were  no  longer  a  success, you  were
becoming  a  failure.   He   sometimes  thought  that  the   real  thing   that
distinguished him  and Malcolm  from  Jude  and Willem  was  not race or
wealth, but Jude’s and Willem’s  depthless capacity for wonderment: their
childhoods had been so paltry, so gray, compared to his, that it seemed they
were constantly being da]]led as adults. The June after they graduated, the
Irvines had gotten them all tickets to Paris, where, it emerged, they had an
apartment—“a tiny apartment,” Malcolm had clarified,  defensively—in the
seventh. He had been to Paris with his mother in Munior high, and again with
his class in  high school, and between his  sophomore and Munior years of
college, but it  wasn’t until  he had seen Jude’s and Willem’s faces that he
was able to  most  vividly   reali]e  not  Must the beauty of the  city  but  its
promise of  enchantments. He envied  this in   them, this  ability  they  had
(though he reali]ed that  in Jude’s case at least, it was a reward for a long
and punitive childhood) to still  be awestruck, the faith they maintained that
life, adulthood, would  keep presenting them with astonishing experiences,
that their  marvelous  years were  not  behind  them. He  remembered too
watching them try uni for the first  time, and their reactions—like they were
Helen Keller  and were Must comprehending that that cool splash on their
hands had a name, and that they could know it—made him both impatient
and intensely  envious. What  must  it  feel  like   to  be an  adult  and  still
discovering the world’s pleasures?
   And  that, he sometimes felt, was why he loved being high so much: not
because it offered an escape from everyday life, as so many people thought,
but because it made everyday life seem less everyday. For a brief period—
briefer and briefer with each week—the world was splendid and unknown.

261
   At  other times,  he wondered whether it  was the world  that had lost its
color, or his friends themselves. When had everyone become so alike? Too
often, it  seemed that  the last  time  people were so  interesting had  been
college; grad school. And then they had, slowly but inevitably, become like
everyone else. Take the members of Backfat: in school, they had marched
topless, the three of them fat and luscious and Miggly, all the way down the
Charles to protest cutbacks to Planned Parenthood (no one had been sure
how the toplessness had been relevant, but whatever), and played ama]ing
sets in the Hood  Hall basement, and lit  an effigy  of  an antifeminist  state
senator on fire  in  the 4uad.  But  now Francesca and Marta were  talking
about having babies, and moving from their  Bushwick loft  into  a Boerum
Hill  brownstone, and Edie was actually, actually starting a business for real
this time, and last year, when he’d suggested they stage a Backfat reunion,
they  had  all  laughed,  although  he  hadn’t  been  Moking. His  persistent
nostalgia depressed him, aged him, and yet he couldn’t stop feeling that the
most  glorious   years,  the   years  when   everything   seemed  drawn  in
fluorescents, were gone. Everyone  had been so much  more  entertaining
then. What had happened?
   Age,  he  guessed. And with   it:  Jobs. Money.  Children.  The things  to
forestall death, the things to ensure one’s relevance, the things to comfort
and provide  context  and  content. The  march  forward,  one  dictated by
biology  and  convention, that  not  even  the most  irreverent  mind  could
withstand.
   But  those were his peers. What he really wanted to know was when his
friends had become so  conventional, and  why  he hadn’t  noticed earlier.
Malcolm  had always been conventional, of  course, but  he had expected,
somehow, more from Willem  and Jude. He knew how awful  this sounded
(and so he never said it aloud), but he often thought that he had been cursed
with a happy childhood. What if, instead, something actually interesting had
happened to him? As it was, the only interesting thing that had happened to
him was that he had attended a mostly white prep school, and that wasn’t
even interesting. Thank god he wasn’t a writer, or he’d have had nothing to
write about. And  then there was someone like Jude, who hadn’t grown up
like everyone else, and didn’t look like everyone else, and yet who JB knew
was constantly trying to make himself exactly like everyone else. He would
have taken Willem’s looks, of  course, but he would have killed something
small and adorable to have looked like Jude, to have had a mysterious limp

262
that was really more of  a glide and to have the face and body that he did.
But Jude spent most of his time trying to stand still and look down, as if by
doing so,  no  one would  notice  he  existed. This  had  been sad and  yet
somewhat understandable in college, when Jude had been so childlike and
bony that it made JB’s Moints hurt to look at him, but these days, now that
he’d grown into his looks, JB found it simply  enraging, especially as Jude’s
self-consciousness often interfered with his own plans.
   “Do   you  want  to spend  your  life  Must being completely average and
boring and typical?” he’d once asked Jude (this was during their second big
fight, when he was trying to get Jude to pose nude, an argument he’d known
even before he’d begun it that he had no chance at all of winning).
   “Yes, JB,”  Jude had said, giving him that ga]e he sometimes summoned,
which was intimidating, even slightly  scary, in its flat blankness. “That’s in
fact exactly what I want.”
   Sometimes he suspected that all Jude really wanted to do in life was hang
out in  Cambridge with  Harold  and Julia and play  house with  them. Last
year, for example, JB had been invited on a cruise by one of his collectors, a
hugely wealthy and important patron who had a yacht that plied the Greek
islands and that  was  hung with  modern  masterpieces that any  museum
would have been happy to own—only they were installed  in the bathroom
of a boat.
   Malcolm  had been working  on his  proMect in Doha, or somewhere, but
Willem and Jude had been in town, and he’d called Jude and asked him if
he wanted to go:  The collector  would  pay their  way. He would  send his
plane. It  would  be five   days on a  yacht. He  didn’t   know why  he  even
needed to have a conversation. “Meet me at Teterboro,” he should’ve Must
texted them. “Bring sunscreen.”
   But  no, he had asked, and Jude had thanked him. And then Jude had said,
“But that’s over Thanksgiving.”
   “So?”  he’d asked.
   “JB,  thank you so much for inviting  me,” Jude had said, as he listened in
disbelief. “It sounds incredible. But I have to go to Harold and Julia’s.”
   He  had been gobsmacked by this. Of  course, he too was  very fond  of
Harold and Julia, and like the others, he too could see how good they were
for Jude, and how he’d become slightly less haunted with their  friendship,
but come on! It  was Boston. He could always see them. But Jude said no,
and that was that. (And then, of course, because Jude said no, Willem had

263
said no as well, and in the end, he had ended up with the two of them and
Malcolm in Boston, seething at the scene around the table—parental stand-
ins; friends of the parental stand-ins; lots of mediocre food; liberals having
arguments with one another about Democratic politics that involved a lot of
shouting about issues they all agreed on—that was so clichéd and generic
that he wanted to scream and yet held such bi]arre fascination for Jude and
Willem.)
   So  which had  come first:  becoming close to  Jackson or reali]ing  how
boring his friends were? He had met Jackson after the opening of his second
show, which had come almost five years after his first. The show was called
“Everyone I’ve Ever Known Everyone I’ve  Ever Loved Everyone I’ve Ever
Hated Everyone I’ve  Ever  Fucked” and was  exactly that:  a hundred and
fifty  fifteen-by-twenty-two-inch   paintings on  thin  pieces of  board of  the
faces of everyone he had ever known.  The series had been inspired by a
painting he had done of Jude and given to Harold  and Julia on the day of
Jude’s adoption. (God, he loved that painting. He should have Must kept it.
Or he should  have exchanged it: Harold  and Julia  would’ve  been happy
with a less-superior piece, as long as it was of  Jude. The last time he had
been in Cambridge, he had seriously considered stealing it, slipping it off its
hook in the hallway and stuffing it  into his duffel  bag before he left.) Once
again, “Everyone I’ve Ever Known”  was a success, although it hadn’t been
the series he had wanted to do; the series he had wanted to do was the series
he was working on now.
   Jackson was another of the gallery’s artists, and although JB had known
of him, he had never actually met him before, and was surprised, after being
introduced to him at  the dinner after the opening, how much  he had liked
him, how unexpectedly funny he was, because Jackson was not the type of
person he’d normally gravitate toward. For one thing, he hated, really hated
Jackson’s work: he  made found  sculptures, but of  the  most puerile  and
obvious sort, like a Barbie doll’s  legs glued to the bottom of  a can of tuna
fish. Oh  god, he’d  thought, the first  time  he’d  seen that on the  gallery’s
website. He’s being represented by the same gallery as I am? He didn’t even
consider it art. He  considered it provocation, although only  a high-school
student—no, a Munior-high student—would consider it provocative. Jackson
thought the pieces Kienhol]ian, which offended JB, and he didn’t even like
Kienhol].

264
   For  another, Jackson was rich: so rich that he had never worked a single
day in his life.  So rich that his gallerist  had agreed to represent him (or so
everyone said, and god, he hoped it was true) as a favor to Jackson’s father.
So rich that his shows sold out because, it was rumored, his mother—who
had divorced  Jackson’s father, a manufacturer of  some  sort of  essential
widget of  airplane  machinery, when Jackson was young  and married an
inventor of  some sort  of essential widget  of  heart transplant surgeries—
bought out all his shows and then auctioned the pieces, driving up the prices
and then buying them back, inflating  Jackson’s sales record. Unlike other
rich people he knew—including  Malcolm  and Richard and E]ra—Jackson
only  rarely  pretended not to  be  rich.  JB  had always  found  the  others’
parsimoniousness put-on and irritating,   but  seeing Jackson once  smack
down a hundred-dollar bill  for  two  candy bars when they were both high
and giggly and starving at three in the morning, telling  the cashier to keep
the change, had sobered him.  There was  something obscene about how
careless Jackson was with money, something that reminded JB that as much
as he thought of himself  otherwise, he too  was boring, and conventional,
and his mother’s son.
   For  a  third,  Jackson wasn’t  even good-looking.  He  supposed he was
straight—at any rate, there were always girls  around, girls whom  Jackson
treated disdainfully  and  yet  who  drifted  after  him,  lint-like,   their  faces
smooth and empty—but  he was the  least sexy person JB  had ever met.
Jackson had very pale  hair, almost  white, and  pimple-stippled skin,  and
teeth that were clearly  once expensive-looking but had gone the  color of
dust and whose gaps were grouted with  butter-yellow  tartar, the  sight of
which repulsed JB.
   His  friends hated Jackson, and as it  became clear that Jackson and his
own group  of friends—lonely  rich  girls  like  Hera and sort-of  artists like
Massimo  and alleged  art   writers  like   =ane,  many  of  them  Jackson’s
classmates from the loser day school he’d gone to after failing out of every
other private school in New York, including the one that JB had attended—
were in his life to stay, they all tried to talk to him about Jackson.
   “You’re  always going on about what a phony E]ra  is,” Willem  had said.
“But  how, exactly, is  Jackson any different than E]ra,  other than  being a
total fucking asshole?”
   And  Jackson was an asshole, and around him, JB was an asshole as well.
A few months ago, the fourth or fifth time he’d tried to stop doing drugs, he

265
had called Jude one day. It was five in the afternoon, and he’d Must woken
up, and he felt so awful, so incredibly old and exhausted and Must done—his
skin slimy, his  teeth furry, his eyes dry as wood—that  he had wanted, for
the first time, to  be dead, to simply not have to keep going on and on and
on. Something has  to  change, he told   himself.  I  have to  stop  hanging
around with Jackson. I have to stop. Everything has to stop. He missed his
friends, he missed how innocent and clean they were, he missed being the
most interesting among them, he missed never having to try around them.
   So  he had called  Jude (naturally, Willem  wasn’t  fucking  in  town, and
Malcolm couldn’t  be trusted not to freak out)  and asked him, begged him,
to come over after work. He told him  where, exactly, the rest of the crystal
was (under the loose half-plank of  wood under the right  side of  the bed),
and where his pipe was, and asked him to flush it down the toilet, to get rid
of it all.
   “JB,”   Jude had said. “Listen  to me.  Go to  that café on  Clinton, okay?
Take your sketch pad. Get yourself something to eat. I’m coming down as
soon as I can, as soon as this meeting’s over. And then I’ll  text you  when
I’m done and you can come home, all right?”
   “Okay,”   he’d said. And  he’d  stood up,  and taken a very  long  shower,
hardly scrubbing himself, Must standing under the water, and then had done
exactly what Jude had instructed: He picked up his sketch pad and pencils.
He went to  the café. He ate some of  a chicken  club sandwich and drank
some coffee. And he waited.
   And  while  he was waiting,  he saw, passing the window  like  a bipedal
mongoose, with  his  dirty   hair  and delicate  chin,  Jackson. He  watched
Jackson walk by, his self-satisfied, rich-boy lope, that pleased half smile on
his face that made JB want to  hit him,  as detached as if Jackson was Must
someone ugly he saw on the street, not someone ugly he saw almost every
day. And  then, Must before he passed out  of  sight, Jackson turned,  and
looked in  the  window,  directly  at  him,  and smiled  his  ugly  smile,  and
reversed direction and walked back toward the café and through the door, as
if he had known all  along that JB was there, as if he had materiali]ed only
to remind JB  that JB was his  now, that there would  be no escaping from
him, that JB was there to do what Jackson wanted him to do when Jackson
wanted him to do it, and that his life would never be his own again. For the
first  time,   he  had  been  scared of   Jackson, and  panicked.  What  has
happened? he wondered. He was Jean-Baptiste Marion, he made the plans,

266
people followed  him, not  the other way  around. Jackson would never let
him go, he reali]ed, and he was frightened. He was someone else’s; he was
owned now. How  would  he ever become un-owned? How  could he ever
return to who he was?
   “  ’Sup,”  said Jackson, unsurprised to see him, as unsurprised as if he had
willed JB into being.
   What could he say? “ ’Sup,” he said.
   Then  his phone rang: Jude, telling  him that  all  was safe, and he could
come back. “I’ve   got  to  go,”  he said,  standing, and as he  left,  Jackson
followed him.
   He  watched Jude’s expression change as he saw  Jackson by his  side.
“JB,” he said, calmly, “I’m  glad to see you. Are you ready to go?”
   “Go  where?” he asked, stupidly.
   “Back  to my place,” said Jude. “You said you’d help me reach that box I
can’t get?”
   But  he  was so confused, still   so muddled,  that he hadn’t  understood.
“What box?”
   “The  box on the closet shelf that I  can’t reach,” Jude said, still ignoring
Jackson. “I need your help; it’s  too difficult  for  me to climb  the ladder on
my own.”
   He  should’ve  known,   then; Jude  never made  references to  what  he
couldn’t  do. He  was offering  him  a  way  out, and  he was too  stupid  to
recogni]e it.
   But  Jackson did. “I think your friend wants to get you away from me,” he
told JB, smirking. That was what Jackson always called them, even though
he had met them all before: Your friends. JB’s friends.
   Jude looked  at him.  “You’re   right,”  he  said, still  in  that  calm, steady
voice. “I  do.”  And then, turning  back to him,  “JB—won’t  you  come with
me?”
   Oh,  he wanted to. But  in that  moment, he couldn’t. He  wouldn’t  know
why, not  ever, but  he couldn’t.  He  was powerless, so powerless that he
couldn’t even pretend otherwise. “I can’t,” he whispered to Jude.
   “JB,”   said Jude, and took  his arm and  pulled him  toward the  curb, as
Jackson watched them with his stupid, mocking smile. “Come with me. You
don’t have to stay here. Come with me, JB.”
   He   had  started   crying   then,  not   loudly,   not  steadily,   but   crying
nonetheless. “JB,” Jude said  again, his voice  low.  “Come  with  me. You

267
don’t have to go back there.”
   But  “I  can’t,”  he heard himself saying. “I  can’t. I  want to  go upstairs. I
want to go home.”
   “Then  I’ll  come in with you.”
   “No.  No, Jude. I want to be alone. Thank you. But go home.”
   “JB,”  Jude began, but he turned from him and ran, Mamming the key into
the front door and running up the stairs, knowing Jude wouldn’t be capable
of following   him,  but with  Jackson right  behind him,  laughing his  mean
laugh, while Jude’s calls—“JB! JB!”—trailed  after him, until  he was inside
his apartment (Jude had cleaned while he was here: the sink was empty; the
dishes were stacked in the rack, drying) and couldn’t hear him any longer.
He turned off  his  phone, on which  Jude was calling  him, and muted  the
front-door bu]]er’s  intercom, on which Jude was ringing and ringing him.
   And  then Jackson had cut the lines of coke he had brought and they had
snorted them, and the night had become the same night he’d had hundreds
of times before: the same rhythms, the same despair, the same awful feeling
of suspension.
   “He  is pretty, your  friend,” he heard Jackson say at some point late that
evening. “But too bad about—” And he stood and did an imitation of Jude’s
walk, a lurching  grotesquerie that looked nothing  like  it,  his mouth slack
like a cretin’s, his hands bobbling in front  of him.  He had been too high to
protest, too high  to say  anything at  all, and  so he had only  blinked  and
watched Jackson hobble around the room, trying to speak words in Jude’s
defense, his eyes prickling with tears.
   The  next  day  he  had awoken,  late,  facedown on  the  floor  near  the
kitchen. He stepped around Jackson, who was also asleep on the floor, near
his bookcases, and went into his room, where he saw that Jude had made
his bed as well, and something about that made him want to cry again. He
lifted  the plank under the  right  side of the  bed, cautiously, and stuck his
hand inside the  space: there was nothing  there. And  so he  lay  atop the
comforter, bringing one end of it over himself  completely, covering the top
of his head the way he used to when he was a child.
   As  he tried to sleep, he made himself think of why he had fallen in  with
Jackson. It wasn’t that he didn’t know why;  it  was that he was ashamed to
remember why. He had begun hanging out with  Jackson to prove that  he
wasn’t dependent on his friends, that he wasn’t trapped by his life,  that he
could make and would make his own decisions, even if they were bad ones.

268
By his age, you had met all the friends you would probably ever have. You
had met your  friends’ friends.  Life  got  smaller and smaller. Jackson was
stupid and callow and cruel and not the sort of person he was supposed to
value, who was supposed to be worth his time. He knew this. And that was
why he kept at it: to dismay his friends, to show them that he wasn’t bound
by their  expectations of him.  It  was stupid, stupid,  stupid. It  was hubris.
And he was the only one who was suffering because of it.
   “You  can’t  actually  like  this guy,”  Willem  had said  to him  once. And
although he had known exactly what Willem  meant, he had pretended not
to, Must to be a brat.
   “Why  can’t I,  Willem?”  he’d asked. “He’s fucking hilarious.  He actually
wants to do things. He’s actually around when I need someone. Why can’t
I? Huh?”
   It  was the same with the drugs. Doing drugs wasn’t hard core, it  wasn’t
badass, it didn’t  make him  more  interesting. But  it  wasn’t  what he  was
supposed to do. These days, if you were serious about your art, you didn’t
do drugs. Indulgence, the very idea of  it, had disappeared, was a thing of
the Beats and AbExes and the Ops and the Pops. These days, maybe you’d
smoke some pot. Maybe, every once in a  while, if  you  were feeling  very
ironic, you  might  do a line  of  coke. But  that was it.  This  was an age of
discipline, of  deprivation,  not  inspiration,  and at any  rate inspiration  no
longer meant drugs. No one he knew  and respected—Richard, Ali, Asian
Henry Young—did  them: not  drugs, not sugar, not caffeine,  not salt,  not
meat, not gluten,  not nicotine.  They were  artists-as-ascetics. In his more
defiant moments, he tried  to  pretend to himself  that doing  drugs was so
passé, so tired, that it  had actually become cool  again. But he  knew this
wasn’t true. Just as he knew  it wasn’t  really true  that he enMoyed the sex
parties  that   sometimes  convened  in   Jackson’s  echoey  apartment  in
Williamsburg, where shifting groups of soft skinny people groped blindly at
one another, and where  the  first  time  a boy,  too  reedy and  young and
hairless to really be JB’s  type, told  him he wanted JB  to watch him  suck
away his own blood from a cut he’d  give himself, he had wanted to laugh.
But he hadn’t, and had instead watched as the boy cut himself on his bicep
and then twisted his neck to  lap at the blood, like  a kitten  cleaning itself,
and had felt a crush of sorrow. “Oh JB, I Must want a nice white boy,” his ex
and now-friend  Toby  had once  moaned to  him,  and he  smiled  a little,
remembering it. He did, too.  All  he wanted was a nice white boy, not this

269
sad salamander-like creature, so pale he  was almost  translucent, licking
blood from himself in what had to be the least-erotic gesture in the world.
   But  of all the questions he was able to answer, there was one he was not:
How was he to get out? How was he to stop? Here he was, literally trapped
in  his studio,  literally  peeking  down  the hallway  to  make sure  Jackson
wasn’t  approaching. How  was  he  to  escape Jackson? How  was he  to
recover his life?
   The  night  after he had  made Jude get rid  of  his  stash, he had finally
called him back, and Jude had asked him over, and he had refused, and so
Jude had come to him. He had sat and stared at the wall as Jude made him
dinner, a shrimp  risotto,  handing him  the  plate and then  leaning on  the
counter to watch him eat.
   “Can  I  have more?” he asked when he was done with the first  serving,
and Jude gave it to  him. He  hadn’t reali]ed  how hungry  he was, and his
hand shook as he brought the spoon to his mouth. He thought of  Sunday-
night  dinners   at  his   mother’s,   which   he  hadn’t   gone  to   since  his
grandmother died.
   “Aren’t   you going  to lecture me?” he finally   asked, but Jude shook his
head.
   After  he  ate, he sat on the sofa and watched television  with  the sound
turned off, not really seeing anything but comforted by the flash and blur of
images, and Jude had washed the dishes and then sat on the sofa near him,
working on a brief.
   One of Willem’s  movies was on television—the one in which he played a
con man in  a small Irish  town, whose entire  left cheek was webbed with
scars—and he stopped on  the  channel, not  watching  it,  but  looking  at
Willem’s face, his mouth  moving silently. “I   miss Willem,”  he’d said, and
then reali]ed how  ungrateful he sounded. But Jude had put down  his pen
and looked at the screen. “I  miss him, too,”  he said, and the two  of them
stared at their friend, so far away from them.
   “Don’t  go,”  he’d said to Jude as he was falling asleep. “Don’t leave me.”
   “I  won’t,”  Jude had said, and he knew Jude wouldn’t.
   When he woke  early the next morning, he was still  on the sofa, and the
television was turned off, and he was under his duvet. And there was Jude,
huddled into  the cushions on  the other end  of the  sectional, still  asleep.
Some part of  him  had  always been insulted  by  Jude’s unwillingness  to
divulge anything of  himself  to them, by  his furtiveness and secretiveness,

270
but in  that moment he felt  only  gratitude toward and admiration for  him,
and had sat on the chair next to him, studying his face, which he so loved to
paint, his sweep of complicated-colored hair that he could never see without
remembering how much mixing, the number of shades it took to accurately
represent it.
   I  can do this, he told Jude, silently. I can do this.
   Except he clearly couldn’t. He was in his studio, and it was still only  one
p.m., and he wanted to  smoke so badly, so  badly that  in his  head all  he
could see was the pipe, its glass frosted with leftover white powder, and it
was only day one of his attempt not to do drugs, and already it was making
—he was making—a  mockery  of  him.  Surrounding  him  were  the  only
things he cared about, the paintings in his next series, “Seconds, Minutes,
Hours, Days,”  for   which  he  had followed   Malcolm,  Jude, and  Willem
around for an entire day, photographing everything they did, and then chose
eight to  ten images from  each of  their days to  paint. He  had decided to
document a typical workday for  each of them, all from the same month of
the same year, and had labeled each painting with their name, location, and
time of day he had shot the image.
   Willem’s   series had been the most  far-flung:  he had gone  to London,
where Willem had been on location  filming  something called Latecomers,
and the images he had chosen were a mix of Willem off and on the set. He
had favorites from each person’s take: for Willem,  it was Willem, London,
October 8, 9:08 a.m., an image of him in  the makeup artist’s chair, staring
at his reflection in the mirror, while  the makeup artist held his chin up with
the fingertips of her left hand and brushed powder onto his cheeks with her
right. Willem’s eyes were lowered, but it was still clear that he was looking
at himself, and his  hands were gripping the chair’s  wooden arms as if  he
was on a roller coaster and was afraid he’d fall off if he let go. Before him,
the counter was cluttered with wood-shaving curls from  freshly sharpened
eyebrow pencils that looked like  tatters of lace, and open makeup palettes
whose every hue was a shade of red, all the  reds you could imagine, and
wads of tissue with more red smeared on them like blood. For Malcolm, he
had taken a long shot of him  late at night, sitting  at his kitchen counter at
home, making one of his imaginary buildings  out of squares of rice paper.
He liked  Malcolm, Brooklyn,  October 23, 11:17  p.m. not so much  for its
composition or  color  but  for  more personal reasons: in  college,  he had
always made  fun  of   Malcolm  for   those small   structures he  built  and

271
displayed on his windowsill, but  really he had admired them and had liked
watching  Malcolm   compose  them—his   breaths  slowed,  and  he   was
completely silent,  and his  constant nervousness, which at  times  seemed
almost physical, an appendage like a tail, fell away.
   He worked  on all of  them out of sequence, but he couldn’t quite get the
colors the way  he wanted them for  Jude’s installment, and so he had the
fewest and least of these paintings done. As he’d gone through the photos,
he’d noticed that each of his friends’ days was defined, glossed, by a certain
tonal consistency:  he  had been following    Willem  on  the  days he  was
shooting in what was supposed to be a large Belgravia flat, and the lighting
had been particularly golden, like beeswax. Later, back in the apartment in
Notting Hill   that Willem  was renting, he had taken pictures of him  sitting
and reading, and there, too, the light  had been yellowish, although it  was
less like  syrup and instead crisper,  like  the skin  of  a late-fall  apple. By
contrast,   Malcolm’s    world    was   bluish:    his   sterile,    white-marble-
countertopped office on Twenty-second Street; the house he and Sophie had
bought in   Cobble Hill   after  they  had  gotten  married. And   Jude’s was
grayish, but  a silvery  gray,  a shade particular  to gelatin  prints  that was
proving very difficult  to reproduce with acrylics, although for Jude’s he had
thinned the  colors  considerably, trying   to  capture that  shimmery  light.
Before he began, he had to first find a way to  make gray seem bright, and
clean, and it was frustrating, because all he wanted to do was paint, not fuss
around with colors.
   But  getting frustrated with your  paintings—and it was impossible not to
think  of  your  work   as your  colleague  and co-participant,  as  if  it   was
something that sometimes decided to be agreeable and collaborate with you,
and sometimes decided  to  be truculent  and  unyielding,  like  a  grouchy
toddler—was Must what happened. You had to Must keep doing it, and doing
it, and one day, you’d get it right.
   And   yet  like  his  promise  to  himself—You’re  not  going  to  make  it!
squealed the taunting, dancing imp in his head; You’re not going to make it!
—the paintings were making a mockery of him  as well. For  this series, he
had decided he was going to paint a sequence of one of his days, too, and
yet  for  almost  three  years, he  had  been  unable to   find  a  day  worth
documenting. He had tried—he had taken hundreds of pictures of himself
over the course of  do]ens of  days. But  when he reviewed them,  they all
ended the same way: with him getting high. Or the images would stop in the

272
early evening, and he’d know it was because he had gotten high, too high to
keep taking pictures. And there were other things in those photographs that
he didn’t like, either: he didn’t  want to include Jackson in a documentation
of his life, and yet Jackson was always there. He didn’t like the goofy smile
he saw on his face when he was on drugs, he didn’t like seeing how his face
changed from fat  and hopeful to  fat  and avaricious as the day  sank into
night.  This   wasn’t   the  version  of   himself   he  wanted  to   paint.  But
increasingly, he had  begun to  think  this  was  the version  of  himself  he
should paint:  this  was,  after  all,  his  life.   This  was who   he now  was.
Sometimes he would wake  and it  would  be dark  and he wouldn’t  know
where he was or what time it was or what day it  was. Days: even the very
concept of a  day had become a mockery. He  could no  longer accurately
measure when one began or  ended. Help  me,  he’d  say aloud,  in  those
moments. Help me. But  he didn’t  know  to  whom he  was addressing his
plea, or what he expected to happen.
   And  now he was tired. He had tried. It was one thirty p.m. on Friday, the
Friday of July Fourth weekend. He put on his clothes. He closed his studio’s
windows and  locked  the door  and walked  down  the stairs of   the silent
building. “Chen,”  he said, his voice loud in the stairwell, pretending he was
broadcasting a warning to his fellow artists, that he was communicating to
someone who might  need his help.  “Chen,  Chen, Chen.”  He was  going
home, he was going to smoke.
   He  woke to a  horrible noise, the noise of  machinery, of metal grinding
against metal, and started screaming into his pillow to drown it out until he
reali]ed it  was the bu]]er, and then slowly  brought himself to his feet, and
slouched over to the door. “Jackson?” he asked, holding down the intercom
button, and he heard how frightened he sounded, how tentative.
   There was a pause. “No, it’s us,” said Malcolm. “Let us in.” He did.
   And  then there they all were, Malcolm  and Jude and Willem, as if  they
had come to see him perform a show. “Willem,” he said. “You’re supposed
to be in Cappadocia.”
   “I  Must got back yesterday.”
   “But   you’re  supposed to  be gone  until”—he   knew this—“July   sixth.
That’s when you said you’d be back.”
   “It’s  July seventh,” Willem said, quietly.
   He  started to cry, then,  but he was dehydrated and he didn’t  have any
tears, Must the sounds. July seventh: he had lost so many days. He couldn’t

273
remember anything.
   “JB,”  said Jude, coming close to him, “we’re going to get you out of this.
Come with us. We’re going to get you help.”
   “Okay,”  he said, still  crying. “Okay, okay.”  He kept his blanket wrapped
around him, he was  so cold, but  he allowed Malcolm  to  lead him  to the
sofa, and when  Willem  came over  with  a sweater, he held  his  arms up
obediently, the way he had when he was a child and his mother had dressed
him. “Where’s Jackson?” he asked Willem.
   “Jackson’s  not  going  to  bother you,”   he heard  Jude say, somewhere
above him. “Don’t worry, JB.”
   “Willem,”   he said, “when did you stop being my friend?”
   “I’ve   never stopped being your friend,  JB,”  Willem  said, and sat down
next to him. “You know I love you.”
   He  leaned against the sofa and closed his eyes; he could hear Jude and
Malcolm talking  to each other, quietly, and then Malcolm  walking  toward
the other end of the  apartment, where his bedroom was, and the plank of
wood being lifted  and then dropped back into  place, and the flush  of  the
toilet.
   “We’re  ready,” he heard Jude say, and he stood, and Willem stood with
him, and Malcolm  came over to him  and put his arm across his back and
they shuffled as a group toward the door, where he was gripped by a terror:
if he went outside, he knew he would see Jackson, appearing as suddenly as
he had that day in the café.
   “I  can’t go,” he said, stopping. “I don’t want to go, don’t make me go.”
   “JB,”  Willem  began, and something about Willem’s voice, about his very
presence, made him  in  that  moment irrationally   furious,  and  he shook
Malcolm’s  arm off  of  him  and turned  to face them,  energy flooding  his
body. “You don’t  get a say in  what I do,  Willem,”  he said. “You’re  never
here and you’ve  never supported me and  you never called  me, and you
don’t get to  come in  making fun  of me—poor, stupid,  fucked-up JB, I’m
Willem the Hero, I’m  coming in to save the day—Must because you want to,
okay? So leave me the fuck alone.”
   “JB,  I  know  you’re  upset,” Willem  said,  “but  no one’s making  fun of
you, least of all me,”  but before he’d begun speaking, JB had seen Willem
look over, quickly,  and, it  seemed, conspiratorially, at Jude, and for some
reason this had made him even more livid. What had happened to the days
when they all  understood one another, when he and Willem had gone out

274
every weekend, when they had returned the next day  to share the night’s
stories with Malcolm and Jude, Jude who never went anywhere, who never
shared stories of his own? How had it  happened that he was the one who
was all alone? Why had they left him for Jackson to pick over and destroy?
Why  hadn’t  they fought  harder  for  him?  Why  had he  ruined it   all  for
himself? Why had they  let him? He  wanted to devastate them; he wanted
them to feel as inhuman as he did.
   “And  you,”  he said, turning to Jude. “You like knowing how fucked up I
am? You like  always being the  person who gets to  learn everyone else’s
secrets, without ever telling us a single fucking  thing? What  do you think
this is, Jude? You think you get to be a part of the club and you never have
to say anything, you never have to tell us anything? Well, it doesn’t fucking
work like that, and we’re all fucking sick of you.”
   “That’s  enough, JB,” Willem  said sharply, grabbing his shoulder, but he
was strong  suddenly, and he  wrenched out  of  Willem’s   grasp, his  feet
unexpectedly nimble, dancing toward the bookcase like a boxer. He looked
at Jude, who was standing in silence, his face very still  and his  eyes very
large, almost as if he was waiting for him to continue, waiting for JB to hurt
him further. The first time  he had painted Jude’s eyes, he had gone to a pet
store to take photographs of a rough green snake because the colors were so
similar. But in  that moment they were darker, almost like  a grass snake’s,
and he wished, ridiculously, that he had his paints, because he knew that if
he had them, he’d be able to get the shade exactly right without even having
to try.
   “It   doesn’t work  like  that,” he said to  Jude again. And then,  before he
knew it, he was doing Jackson’s imitation of  Jude, the hideous parody, his
mouth open as Jackson had done it, making an imbecile’s moan, dragging
his right leg behind him as if it  were made of stone. “I’m Jude,” he slurred.
“I’m  Jude St. Francis.”  For a  few seconds, his was the only  voice in  the
room, his movements the only movements, and in those seconds, he wanted
to stop, but he couldn’t stop. And then Willem  had run at him, and the last
thing he had seen was Willem drawing his  fist back, and the last thing  he
had heard was the cracking of bone.
   He  woke  and didn’t   know where  he was.  It  was difficult   to  breathe.
Something was on his nose, he reali]ed. But when he tried to lift his hand to
feel what it  was, he couldn’t. And  then he had looked down and seen that
his wrists were in restraints, and he knew he was in the hospital. He closed

275
his eyes and remembered: Willem had hit him. Then he remembered why,
and he shut his eyes very tightly, howling but not making a noise.
   The moment passed and he opened his eyes again. He turned his head to
the left, where an ugly blue curtain blocked his view of  the door. And then
he turned his  head to the right,  toward  the early-morning  light,  and saw
Jude, asleep in the chair next to his bed. The chair was too small for him to
sleep in,  and he had  folded  himself into  a  terrible-looking  position:  his
knees drawn up to his chest, his cheek resting atop them, his arms wrapped
around his calves.
   You know you  shouldn’t sleep like  that, Jude, he told  him  in  his head.
Your back is going to  hurt when you  wake up. But even if  he could  have
reached his arm over to wake him, he wouldn’t have.
   Oh god, he thought. Oh god. What have I done?
   I’m  sorry,  Jude, he said in  his  head, and this time  he was able to  cry
properly, the tears running into his mouth, the mucus that he was unable to
clean away bubbling over as well.  But  he was silent; he didn’t  make any
noise. I’m  sorry, Jude, I’m  so sorry,  he repeated to himself,  and then he
whispered the words aloud, but quietly, so quietly  that he could hear only
his lips opening and closing, nothing more. Forgive me, Jude. Forgive me.
   Forgive me.
   Forgive me.
   Forgive me.

276
           [ IV ]

The Axiom of Equality

277
                                                         1

THE NIGHT BEFORE he leaves for Boston for their friend Lionel’s wedding, he
gets a message from Dr. Li telling him that Dr.  Kashen has died. “It was a
heart attack; very fast,” Dr. Li writes. The funeral is Friday afternoon.
   The  next  morning  he  drives  directly  to  the  cemetery, and  from  the
cemetery to Dr. Kashen’s house, a two-story wooden structure in  Newton
where the professor used to host  a year-end dinner for  all  of  his current
graduate students. It was understood that you weren’t  to  discuss math at
these parties. “You can talk about anything else,” he’d tell them. “But we’re
not talking about math.” Only at Dr. Kashen’s parties would he be the least
socially inept person in the room (he was also, not coincidentally, the least
brilliant),  and the professor would always make him start the conversation.
“So, Jude,” he’d say. “What are you interested in these days?” At least two
of his fellow   graduate students—both of them PhD candidates—had mild
forms  of  autism,  and he  could  see how   hard they  worked  at  making
conversation, how hard they  worked at  their  table manners, and prior  to
these dinners, he did some research into what  was new in  the worlds  of
online gaming  (which  one  of  them  loved)  and tennis  (which  the  other
loved), so he’d be able to ask them questions they could answer. Dr. Kashen
wanted his  students to  someday  be able  to  find   Mobs, and along with
teaching them math, he also thought it his responsibility to sociali]e  them,
to teach them how to behave among others.
   Sometimes Dr. Kashen’s son, Leo, who was five  or six years older than
he, would be at dinner at well. He too had autism, but unlike Donald’s and
Mikhail’s,  his was instantly noticeable, and severe enough so that although
he’d completed  high school,  he hadn’t  been able to  attend more  than a
semester of college, and had only been able to get a Mob as a programmer
for the phone company, where he sat in a small room day after day fixing
screen after screen of code. He was Dr.  Kashen’s only child,  and he still
lived at home, along with  Dr. Kashen’s sister, who had moved in after his
wife had died, years ago.
   At  the house, he speaks to Leo, who seems gla]ed, and mumbles, looking
away from him as he does, and then to Dr. Kashen’s sister, who was a math

278
professor at Northeastern.
   “Jude,”  she says, “it’s  lovely  to  see you. Thank you  for  coming.”  She
holds his hand. “My brother always talked about you, you know.”
   “He  was a wonderful teacher,” he tells her. “He gave me so much. I’m so
sorry.”
   “Yes,”  she says. “It was very sudden. And poor Leo”—they look at Leo,
who is ga]ing at nothing—“I  don’t know  how he’s going to deal with this.”
She kisses him goodbye. “Thank you again.”
   Outside,  it  is fiercely   cold, and  the windshield  is  sticky  with  ice.  He
drives slowly  to  Harold  and  Julia’s, letting  himself  in  and  calling  their
names.
   “And  here he is!” says Harold, materiali]ing from  the kitchen, wiping his
hands on a dish towel. Harold hugs him, which he had begun doing at some
point,  and as  uncomfortable  as it   makes him,  he  thinks  it’ll   be  more
uncomfortable to try to explain why he’d like  Harold to stop. “I’m  so sorry
about Kashen, Jude. I was shocked to hear it—I ran into him on the courts
about two months back and he looked like he was in great shape.”
   “He  was,”  he says, unwinding his scarf, as Harold takes his coat. “And
not that old, either: seventy-four.”
   “Jesus,”  says Harold, who has Must turned sixty-five. “There’s a cheery
thought. Go put your stuff  in your room  and come into the kitchen. Julia’s
tied up in a meeting but she’ll be home in an hour or so.”
   He drops his bag in the guest room—“Jude’s room,” Harold and Julia call
it; “your  room”—and changes out of his suit and heads toward the kitchen,
where Harold is  peering into a  pot on the  stove, as if  down a well.  “I’m
trying  to   make  a  bolognese,”  he  says,  without   turning  around,  “but
something’s happening; it keeps separating, see?”
   He looks. “How  much olive oil did you use?”
   “A  lot.”
   “What’s  a lot?”
   “A  lot. Too much, obviously.”
   He smiles. “I’ll   fix it.”
   “Thank  god,” says Harold, stepping away from the stove. “I  was hoping
you’d say that.”
   Over  dinner, they  speak of  Julia’s favorite  researcher, who she thinks
might be trying  to Mump to another lab, and of the latest gossip circulating
through the law school, and of the anthology of essays about Brown versus

279
Board of Education that  Harold is  editing, and of  one of Laurence’s twin
daughters, who is  getting married,  and then  Harold says, grinning,  “So,
Jude, the big birthday’s coming up.”
   “Three  months away!” Julia chirps, and he groans. “What are you going
to do?”
   “Probably  nothing,”   he says. He  hasn’t planned anything,  and he  has
forbidden Willem  from planning anything, either. Two years ago, he threw
Willem a big party for his fortieth at Greene Street, and although the four of
them had  always  said they’d   go  somewhere for  each of   their  fortieth
birthdays, it hasn’t worked  out that way. Willem  had been in L.A.  filming
on his actual birthday, but after he had finished, they’d gone to Botswana on
a safari. But it  had been Must the two of them: Malcolm had been working
on a proMect in BeiMing, and JB—well, Willem hadn’t  mentioned inviting
JB, and he hadn’t, either.
   “You  have to do something,”  says Harold. “We could have a dinner for
you here, or in the city.”
   He smiles but shakes his head. “Forty’s forty,” he says. “It’s  Must another
year.” As  a child,  though, he never thought he’d  make it  to  forty:  in the
months after the inMury, he would sometimes have dreams of himself as an
adult, and  although  the  dreams were  very  vague—he was  never quite
certain where he was living or what he was doing, though in  those dreams
he was  usually  walking,  sometimes running—he  was  always young  in
them; his imagination refused to let him advance into middle age.
   To  change the subMect, he tells them about Dr. Kashen’s funeral, where
Dr.  Li   gave  a  eulogy.  “People  who   don’t   love  math  always  accuse
mathematicians of trying to make math complicated,” Dr. Li had said. “But
anyone who does love math knows  it’s really  the opposite: math rewards
simplicity,  and mathematicians value it above all  else. So it’s  no surprise
that Walter’s  favorite  axiom  was  also the  most simple  in  the  realm  of
mathematics: the axiom of the empty set.
   “The  axiom of the empty set is the axiom of ]ero. It states that there must
be a concept of nothingness, that there must be the concept of  ]ero:  ]ero
value, ]ero items. Math  assumes there’s a concept of nothingness, but is it
proven? No. But it must exist.
   “And   if  we are being philosophical—which  we today  are—we can say
that life  itself is the  axiom of  the empty set. It begins in  ]ero and ends in
]ero. We know that both states exist, but we will not be conscious of either

280
experience: they are states that are  necessary parts of life,  even as  they
cannot be experienced as life. We assume the concept of nothingness, but
we cannot prove it. But it must exist. So I prefer to think that Walter has not
died but has instead proven for himself the axiom of the empty set, that he
has proven the concept of ]ero. I know nothing else would have made him
happier. An elegant mind wants elegant endings, and Walter had the most
elegant mind. So I wish him  goodbye; I wish him  the answer to the axiom
he so loved.”
   They  are all  quiet for  a while,  contemplating this.  “Please tell me  that
isn’t your favorite  axiom,”  Harold says suddenly, and he laughs. “No,” he
says. “It’s not.”
   He  sleeps in the next day, and that night he goes to the wedding, where
because both of the grooms lived in Hood, he knows almost everyone. The
non-Hood guests—Lionel’s colleagues from Wellesley, and Sinclair’s from
Harvard, where he teaches European history—stand near one another as if
for protection,  looking  bored and bemused. The wedding is loose-limbed
and slightly chaotic—Lionel starts assigning his guests tasks as soon as they
arrive, which  most  of  them  neglect: he  is supposed to  be making  sure
everyone signs the guest book; Willem  is  supposed to be helping people
find their tables—and people walk around saying how, thanks to Lionel and
Sinclair, thanks to this  wedding, they  won’t  have to go to  their twentieth
reunion this  year. They  are  all  here: Willem   and his  girlfriend,   Robin;
Malcolm and Sophie; and JB and his new boyfriend, whom he hasn’t met,
and he knows, even before checking their place cards, that they will all be
assigned to the same table. “Jude!” people he hasn’t  seen in years say to
him.  “How   are you?  Where’s JB?  I  Must spoke to  Willem!  I   Must saw
Malcolm!”  And then, “Are you four all  still as close as you were?”
   “We all  still talk,”  he says, “and they’re doing great,” which is the answer
he and Willem  had decided they’d  give.  He wonders what  JB is  saying,
whether he is skimming over the truth, as he and Willem are, or whether he
is lying outright, or whether, in a fit of  JBish forthrightness, he is telling the
truth: “No.  We hardly  ever speak anymore. I only  really  talk to  Malcolm
these days.”
   He  hasn’t seen JB in  months and months. He hears of  him, of  course:
through Malcolm,  through Richard,  through Black  Henry  Young. But  he
doesn’t see him  any longer, because even nearly three  years later, he is
unable to forgive  him. He  has tried and tried. He  knows how  intractable,

281
how mean, how uncharitable he is being. But he can’t. When he sees JB, he
sees him doing his imitation  of  him, sees him confirming  in that  moment
everything he has feared and thought he looks like, everything he has feared
and thought other people think  about him.  But  he had never  thought his
friends saw him like that; or at least, he never thought they would tell him.
The accuracy of the imitation tears at him, but the fact that it was JB doing
it  devastates him.  Late   at  night,  when  he  can’t   sleep, the  image  he
sometimes sees is JB dragging himself in a half-moon, his mouth agape and
drooling,  his  hands held  before  him  in  claws:  I’m   Jude. I’m   Jude St.
Francis.
   That night,  after they had taken JB to the hospital and admitted him—JB
had been stuporous and dribbling  when  they  took him  in,  but  then had
recovered and become angry, violent,  screaming wordlessly  at them  all,
thrashing against the orderlies, wresting  his body  out of  their  arms until
they  had sedated him   and  dragged him,   lolling,   down  the  hallway—
Malcolm had left  in  one taxi and he and Willem  had gone home to Perry
Street in another.
   He hadn’t been able to look at Willem in the cab, and without anything to
distract him—no forms to fill  out, no doctors to talk to—he had felt himself
grow cold despite the hot, muggy night, and his hands begin to shake, and
Willem had reached over and taken his right hand and held it in his left for
the rest of the long, silent ride downtown.
   He was there for JB’s recovery. He decided he’d stay until he got better;
he couldn’t abandon JB then, not after all their time  together. The three of
them took  shifts, and after  work  he’d sit  by  JB’s hospital  bed and read.
Sometimes JB was awake, but most of the time he wasn’t. He was detoxing,
but the doctor had also discovered that JB had a kidney infection, and so he
stayed on in the hospital’s main ward, liquids dripping into his arm, his face
slowly  losing  its   bloat.  When  he was  awake,  JB  would  beg  him  for
forgiveness, sometimes dramatically and pleadingly, and sometimes—when
he was more lucid—quietly.  These were the conversations he found most
difficult.
   “Jude, I’m  so sorry,”  he’d say. “I  was so messed up. Please tell me you
forgive me. I was so awful. I  love you, you know  that. I would  never want
to hurt you, never.”
   “I  know you were messed up, JB,” he’d say. “I know.”
   “Then  tell me you forgive me. Please, Jude.”

282
   He’d  be silent. “It’s going to be okay, JB,” he’d say, but he couldn’t make
the words—I forgive you—leave his mouth. At  night,  alone, he would say
them again and again: I forgive you, I  forgive you. It  would  be so simple,
he’d admonish himself. It would make JB feel better. Say it, he’d command
himself as JB looked at him,  the whites of  his eyes smeary and yellowed.
Say it. But he couldn’t. He knew he was making JB feel worse; he knew it
and was still  unable to say it. The  words were stones, held Must under his
tongue. He couldn’t release them, he Must couldn’t.
   Later, when JB called him nightly from  rehab, strident and pedantic, he’d
sat silently through his monologues on what a better person he’d become,
and how he had reali]ed he had no one to depend on but himself, and how
he, Jude, needed to reali]e that there was more in life than Must work, and to
live every  day in  the moment and learn to  love  himself. He  listened and
breathed and said nothing. And  then JB had come  home and had had to
readMust, and none of them heard very much  from  him  at all  for  a  few
months. He had lost the lease on his apartment, and had moved back in with
his mother while he reestablished his life.
   But  then one day he had called. It had been early February, almost seven
months exactly after they had taken him to the hospital,  and JB wanted to
see him and talk. He suggested JB meet him at a café called Clementine that
was near Willem’s   building,  and as  he inched  his  way  past the tightly
spaced tables to a seat against the back wall, he reali]ed why he had chosen
this place: because it  was too  small, and  too cramped, for  JB  to do  his
impression of him, and recogni]ing that, he felt foolish and cowardly.
   He  hadn’t  seen JB in  a  long  time, and  JB leaned over  the table  and
hugged him, lightly, carefully, before sitting down.
   “You  look great,” he said.
   “Thanks,”  said JB. “So do you.”
   For twenty  minutes or so, they discussed JB’s life: he had Moined Crystal
Meth Anonymous. He  was going to  live  with his  mother for  another few
months or so, and then decide what to do next. He was working again, on
the same series he’d been working on before he went away.
   “That’s  great, JB,” he’d said. “I’m proud of you.”
   And  then there was a silence, and they both stared at other people. A few
tables away from  him  was a girl  wearing  a long  gold necklace she kept
winding  and unwinding  around her  fingers.  He watched  her talk  to  her

283
friend, wrapping and unwrapping her necklace, until  she looked up at him
and he looked away.
   “Jude,”  JB began, “I wanted to tell  you—completely sober—that I’m  so
sorry. It was horrible. It was—” He shook his head. “It was so cruel. I can’t
—”  He stopped again, and there was a silence. “I’m  sorry,” he said. “I’m
sorry.”
   “I  know you are, JB,” he said, and he felt a sort of sadness he’d never felt
before. Other people had been cruel to him, had made him feel awful,  but
they hadn’t been people he loved, they hadn’t been people he had always
hoped saw him as someone whole and undamaged. JB had been the first.
   And  yet JB had also been one of the first to be his friend. When he’d had
the episode in college that had made his roommates take him to the hospital
where he had met  Andy,  it  had been JB, Andy  later  told  him, who  had
carried him in,  and JB who  had demanded that he be seen first, who had
made such an upset in the ER that he had been eMected—but not before a
doctor had been summoned.
   He  could see JB’s love for him  in his paintings of  him. He remembered
one summer in  Truro,  watching JB  sketch, and he  had known  from  the
expression on JB’s face, his little smile, and the lingering, delicate way his
large forearm  moved over  the page, that  he was  drawing something  he
treasured, something that was dear to him. “What’re   you drawing?”  he’d
asked, and JB had turned to him, and held up the notepad, and he had seen
it was a picture of him, of his face.
   Oh, JB, he thought. Oh, I will miss you.
   “Can you forgive  me, Jude?” JB asked, and looked at him.
   He  didn’t  have words, he could  only  shake his head. “I  can’t, JB,”  he
said, finally. “I  can’t. I  can’t look  at you without  seeing—” He stopped. “I
can’t,” he repeated. “I’m sorry, JB, I’m so sorry.”
   “Oh,”   said JB,  and he swallowed. They  sat there for  a long  time,  not
saying anything.
   “I’ll   always want wonderful  things for you,”  he said to JB, who nodded,
slowly, not looking at him.
   “Well,”   JB  said, finally,  and stood, and he stood as well,  and held  his
hand out to JB, who  looked at it  as if  it were something alien, something
he’d never seen before, examining it,  squinting  at it.  And then  at last he
took it,  but instead of  shaking it,  he lowered his lips  to  it and  held them

284
there. And then JB returned his hand to him and bumbled, nearly ran, out of
the café, bumping against the little tables—“Sorry, sorry”—as he went.
   He  still  sees JB now and then, mostly at parties, always in  groups, and
the two of  them are polite  and cordial  with each other. They  make small
talk, which is the most painful  thing. JB has never tried to hug or kiss him
again; he comes over to  him  with  his  hand already outstretched, and he
takes it, and they shake. He sent JB flowers—but with only  the briefest of
notes—when “Seconds, Minutes, Hours,  Days”  opened, and although he
skipped the opening, he had gone to the gallery the following Saturday, on
his way up to  work, where he had spent an hour moving slowly  from one
painting to the next. JB had planned on including himself in this series, but
in the end he  hadn’t: there was Must him, and Malcolm, and Willem.  The
paintings were beautiful, and as he looked at each, he thought not so much
of the lives depicted in them, as of the life  who created them—so many of
these paintings were done when JB  was at  his most miserable, his  most
helpless, and yet they were self-assured, and subtle, and to see them was to
imagine the empathy and  tenderness and grace of the person who  made
them.
   Malcolm   has remained friends  with  JB,  although he  felt  the  need to
apologi]e to him  for this fact. “Oh  no, Malcolm,”  he’d said, once Malcolm
had confessed, asking him for his permission. “You should absolutely still
be friends with him.”  He doesn’t want JB to be abandoned by them all; he
doesn’t want  Malcolm   to  feel  he  has to   prove his  loyalty   to  him  by
disavowing JB. He  wants JB to have a friend  who’s  known him  since he
was eighteen, since he was the funniest, brightest person in the school, and
he and everyone else knew it.
   But  Willem has never spoken to JB again. Once JB returned from rehab,
he called JB and said that he couldn’t be friends with  him any longer, and
that JB knew why.  And  that had been the end. He had been surprised by
this, and saddened, because he had always loved watching JB and Willem
laugh together, and spar with each other, and loved  having them tell  him
about their   lives:  they  were  both  so  fearless, so  bold;  they  were  his
emissaries to a less inhibited, more Moyful world. They had always known
how to take pleasure from  everything, and he had always admired that in
them, and had been grateful that they had been willing to share it with him.
   “You  know, Willem,”  he said once, “I hope the reason you’re not talking
to JB isn’t because of what happened with me.”

285
   “Of  course it’s because of what happened with you,” Willem had said.
   “But  that’s not a reason,” he’d said.
   “Of  course it is,” Willem  had said. “There’s no better reason than that.”
   He had never done it before, and so he had no real understanding of how
slow, and sad, and difficult it  was to end a friendship. Richard  knows that
he and JB and Willem  and JB don’t talk  any longer, but  he doesn’t know
why—or at least not from him.  Now, years later, he no longer even blames
JB; he simply cannot forget. He finds that some small but unignorable part
of him is  always wondering if  JB will  do it  again; he finds he is scared of
being left alone with him.
   Two  years ago, the first year JB didn’t  come up to Truro,  Harold asked
him if  anything  was the matter. “You  never talk about him  anymore,” he
said.
   “Well,”   he  began, not knowing  how  to  continue. “We’re  not  really—
we’re not really friends any longer, Harold.”
   “I’m   sorry, Jude,” Harold said after a silence, and he nodded. “Can you
tell me what happened?”
   “No,”   he said, concentrating on snapping the tops off the radishes. “It’s a
long story.”
   “Can it  be repaired, do you think?”
   He shook his head. “I don’t think so.”
   Harold  sighed. “I’m  sorry, Jude,” he repeated. “It must be bad.” He was
quiet.  “I   always  loved  seeing you  four   together, you  know.  You   had
something special.”
   He nodded, again. “I know,” he said. “I agree. I miss him.”
   He misses JB still; he expects he always will. He especially misses JB at
events like this wedding, where the four of them would once have spent the
night  talking   and   laughing   about  everyone  else,  enviable   and  near
obnoxious in their shared pleasure, their pleasure in one another. But now
there are  JB  and Willem,   nodding  at each  other across  the table,  and
Malcolm, talking very  fast to try to obscure any tension, and the other three
people at the table, whom the four of them—he will always think of them as
the four  of  them;  the  four  of  us—start interrogating  with  inappropriate
intensity, laughing  loudly  at their  Mokes, using them as unwitting human
shields. He is  seated next to JB’s  boyfriend—the nice  white  boy he  had
always wanted—who  is  in  his twenties  and has  Must gotten his nursing
degree and is clearly besotted with JB. “What was JB like in college?” asks

286
Oliver, and he says, “Very much the way he is today: funny, and sharp, and
outrageous, and smart. And talented. He was always, always talented.”
   “Hmm,”   says Oliver thoughtfully, looking  over at JB, who is listening to
Sophie with what  seems like exaggerated concentration. “I never think of
JB as funny, really.”  And  then he looks over  at JB as well,  wondering  if
Oliver  has perhaps interpreted JB incorrectly  or whether JB  has, in  fact,
become someone else, someone he now wouldn’t recogni]e as the person
he knew for so many years.
   At  the end of the night, there are kisses and handshakes, and when Oliver
—to whom JB has clearly told nothing—tells him  they should get together,
the three of them, because he’s always wanted to get to know him, one of
JB’s oldest friends, he  smiles and says something vague, and gives JB  a
wave before heading outside, where Willem is waiting for him.
   “How  was it for you?” Willem  asks.
   “Okay,”  he says, smiling back at him.  He thinks these meetings with JB
are even harder for Willem than they are for him. “You?”
   “Okay,”   Willem   says. His  girlfriend   drives  up  to  the curb;  they  are
staying at a hotel. “I’ll call you tomorrow, all right?”
   Back  in  Cambridge, he lets himself  into the  silent house and walks as
softly as he can back to his bathroom, where he prises his bag from beneath
the loose tile near the toilet and cuts himself until he feels absolutely empty,
holding  his  arms  over  the bathtub,  watching  the  porcelain  stain  itself
crimson. As he always does after seeing JB, he wonders if he has made the
right decision. He wonders if all  of them—he, Willem,  JB, Malcolm—will
lie awake that night longer than usual, thinking  of one another’s faces and
of conversations, good and bad, that they have had with one another over
what had been more than twenty years of friendship.
   Oh, he thinks, if I  were a better person. If I were a more generous person.
If I were a less self-involved person. If I were a braver person.
   Then he stands, gripping the towel bar as he does; he has cut himself too
much tonight, and he is faint. He goes over to the full-length  mirror that is
hung on the back of the bedroom’s closet door. In his apartment on Greene
Street, there are no full-length mirrors.  “No  mirrors,”  he told Malcolm.  “I
don’t  like  them.”  But  really, he  doesn’t want  to  be confronted with   his
image; he doesn’t want to see his body, his face staring back at him.
   But  here at Harold and Julia’s, there is a mirror, and he stands in front of
it for  a few  seconds, contemplating himself, before adopting the hunched

287
pose JB had that night. JB was right,  he thinks. He was right.  And that is
why I can’t forgive him.
   Now  he drops his  mouth open. Now  he hops in a little   circle. Now  he
drags his leg behind him. His moans fill the air in the quiet, still house.


   The first  Saturday in May, he and Willem have what they’ve been calling
the Last Supper at a tiny, very expensive sushi restaurant near his office on
Fifty-sixth  Street. The restaurant has only six seats, all at a  wide, velvety
cypress counter, and for the three hours they spend there, they are the only
patrons.
   Although  they both  knew how much  the meal would cost, they’re  both
stunned when they look at the check, and then both start laughing, though
he’s not sure if it’s the absurdity of spending so much on a single dinner, or
the fact that they have, or the fact that they can that is to blame.
   “I’ll    get it,”  Willem  says, but as he’s reaching for his wallet,  the waiter
comes over to  him  with  his credit  card, which  he’d  given  to him  when
Willem was in the bathroom.
   “Goddammit,  Jude,” Willem says, and he grins.
   “It’s  the Last Supper, Willem,” he says. “You can get me a taco when you
come back.”
   “If   I  come back,”  Willem  says. It  has been their  running Moke. “Jude,
thank you. You weren’t supposed to pay for this.”
   It’s  the first warm  night of the year, and he tells Willem  that if  he really
wants to  thank  him  for  dinner,  he’ll   walk  with  him.   “How  far?”   asks
Willem, warily. “We’re  not going to walk all the way down to SoHo, Jude.”
   “Not  far.”
   “It’d   better  not  be,”  Willem  says, “because I’m   really  tired.”  This  is
Willem’s new  strategy, and he is very fond of it:  instead of telling  him  he
can’t do certain things  because it’s not good for  his legs or  back, Willem
instead tries to  make himself  sound incapable in  order  to dissuade him.
These days, Willem is always too tired to walk, or too achey, or too hot, or
too cold. But he knows that these things are untrue. One Saturday afternoon
after they’d gone to some galleries, Willem  had told him he couldn’t  walk
from Chelsea to Greene Street (“I’m too tired”), and so they had taken a cab
instead. But  then  the next  day  at  lunch,  Robin  had said,  “Wasn’t  it  a

288
beautiful day yesterday? After Willem  got  home, we ran for—what,  eight
miles, right, Willem?—all the way up and down the highway.”
   “Oh,  did you?”  he asked her, looking at Willem,  who smiled sheepishly
at him.
   “What  can I say?” he said. “I unexpectedly got a second wind.”
   They start walking south, first veering east from Broadway so they won’t
have to cross through Times Square. Willem’s hair  has been colored dark
for his next role, and he has a beard, so he’s not instantly recogni]able, but
neither of them want to get stuck in a scrum of tourists.
   This  is the last time he will see Willem for  what will  likely  be more than
six months. On Tuesday, he leaves for Cyprus to begin work on  The Iliad
and The Odyssey; he will play Odysseus in both. The two films will be shot
consecutively and released consecutively, but they will have the same cast
and the same director,  too. The  shoot will   take him  all  across southern
Europe and northern Africa before moving to Australia, where some of the
battle scenes are being shot, and because the pace is so  intense and the
distances he has to travel so far, it’s unclear whether he’ll have much time,
if any, to come home on breaks. It is the most elaborate and ambitious shoot
Willem  has  been on,  and  he  is  nervous. “It’s   going  to  be  incredible,
Willem,”  he reassures him.
   “Or  an incredible disaster,” Willem  says. He isn’t glum, he never is, but
he can tell Willem is anxious, and eager to do well, and worried that he will
somehow disappoint. But he is worried  before every film,  and yet—as he
reminds Willem—every one has turned out fine, better than fine. However,
he thinks, this is one of the reasons that Willem will always have work, and
good work:  because he does  take it  seriously,  because he does feel  so
responsible.
   He,  though, is dreading the next six months, especially because Willem
has been so present for the last  year and a half.  First  he was shooting a
small proMect, one based in Brooklyn, that lasted Must a few weeks. And then
he was  in  a play,  a  production called  The Maldivian   Dodo,  about two
brothers, both  ornithologists,   one  of  whom  is   slowly  tipping   into   an
uncategori]able  madness. The  two   of   them  had  a  late  dinner   every
Thursday night for the entire run of the play, which he saw—as he has with
all of Willem’s  plays—multiple  times. On his third  viewing, he spotted JB
with Oliver, Must a few rows ahead of him but on the left side of the theater,
and throughout the  show he  kept glancing  over  at JB  to  see if  he was

289
laughing at or concentrating on the same lines, aware that this was the first
of Willem’s  productions that  the three of  them hadn’t seen together, as a
group, at least once.
   “So,  listen,”  Willem   says as they move  down  Fifth  Avenue, which  is
empty of people, Must bright-lit windows and stray bits of garbage twirling
in the light, soft  bree]e—plastic bags, puffed up with air into Mellyfish, and
twists of newspaper—“I told Robin I’d talk to you about something.”
   He  waits. He has been conscious of not making  the same mistake with
Robin and Willem  that he made with Philippa and Willem—when  Willem
asks him to accompany them anywhere, he makes sure that he’s cleared it
with  Robin first  (finally   Willem  had told  him  to stop asking,  that Robin
knew how much he meant to him and she was fine with it, and if she wasn’t
fine with   it,  she’d have to  get fine  with  it),   and he has tried  to  present
himself to  Robin as someone independent and not likely to  move in with
them when  he’s  old.  (He’s  not  sure exactly  how   to  communicate this
message, however, and so is therefore unsure if he’s been successful or not.)
But he likes Robin—she’s a classics professor at Columbia who was hired
to serve as a consultant on the  films  two years ago, and she has a spiky
sense of humor that reminds him of JB, somehow.
   “Okay,”  says Willem,  and takes a deep breath, and he steadies himself.
Oh no, he thinks. “Do you remember Robin’s friend Clara?”
   “Sure,”  he says. “The one I met at Clementine.”
   “Yes!”  says Willem, triumphantly. “That’s her!”
   “God,  Willem, give me some credit; it was Must last week.”
   “I   know,  I  know.  Well,  anyway, here’s the  thing—she’s interested  in
you.”
   He is perplexed. “What do you mean?”
   “She  asked Robin if  you  were single.”  He pauses. “I  told  her I  didn’t
think you were interested in seeing anyone, but I’d ask. So. I’m asking.”
   The idea is so preposterous that it takes him a while to  understand what
Willem’s saying, and when he does, he stops, and laughs, embarrassed and
disbelieving.  “You’ve    got  to   be  kidding,   Willem,”    he  says.  “That’s
ridiculous.”
   “Why  is it ridiculous?”  asks Willem, suddenly serious. “Jude, why?”
   “Willem,”   he  says, recovering himself. “It’s  very  flattering.  But—”  He
winces and laughs again. “It’s absurd.”

290
   “What  is?”  Willem   says, and he can feel  the conversation turn. “That
someone should be  attracted to  you?  This  isn’t  the  first  time  this  has
happened, you know. You Must can’t see it because you won’t let yourself.”
   He shakes his head. “Let’s talk about something else, Willem.”
   “No,”   says Willem. “You’re  not  getting out of  this one, Jude. Why is it
ridiculous? Why is it absurd?”
   He  is suddenly so uncomfortable that he actually does stop, right on the
corner of Fifth and Forty-fifth,  and starts scanning the avenue for a cab. But
of course, there are no cabs.
   As he considers how to respond, he thinks back to a time a few days after
that night  in JB’s  apartment, when he had asked Willem  if   JB had been
correct, at least in some part: Did Willem resent him? Did he not tell  them
enough?
   Willem  had been silent for such a long time that he knew the answer even
before he heard it.  “Look,  Jude,” Willem   had said, slowly,  “JB was—JB
was out of his mind. I  could never be sick of you.  You don’t owe me your
secrets.” He paused. “But, yes, I do wish you’d share more of yourself with
me. Not so I could have the information but so, maybe, I could be of some
help.” He stopped and looked at him. “That’s all.”
   Since then, he has tried to tell Willem more things. But there are so many
topics that he has never discussed with anyone since Ana, now twenty-five
years ago, that he finds he literally doesn’t have the language to do so. His
past, his fears, what was done to him, what  he has done to himself—they
are subMects that can only be discussed in tongues he doesn’t speak: Farsi,
Urdu, Mandarin,  Portuguese. Once, he tried  to write  some things  down,
thinking that it might  be easier, but it wasn’t—he is unclear how to explain
himself to himself.
   “You’ll    find   your  own  way  to   discuss what  happened to  you,”   he
remembers Ana saying. “You’ll   have to, if   you ever want  to be  close to
anyone.” He wishes, as he often does, that he had let her talk to him, that he
had let her  teach him how  to do  it.  His  silence had begun as something
protective, but   over  the  years it   has transformed  into  something  near
oppressive, something that manages him rather than the other way around.
Now he cannot find a way out of it, even when he wants to. He imagines he
is floating  in  a small  bubble of  water, encased on all sides by walls  and
ceilings and floors of ice, all many feet thick. He knows there is a way out,
but he is  unequipped; he has no  tools to  begin his  work,  and his  hands

291
scrabble uselessly against the ice’s slick. He had thought that by not saying
who he was, he was making himself more palatable, less strange. But now,
what  he doesn’t  say  makes him   stranger, an  obMect of pity  and  even
suspicion.
   “Jude?” Willem  prompts him. “Why is it  absurd?”
   He shakes his head. “It Must is.” He starts walking again.
   For  a block,  they  say nothing. Then  Willem  asks, “Jude, do  you ever
want to be with someone?”
   “I  never thought I would.”
   “But  that’s not what I asked.”
   “I   don’t  know,  Willem,”  he  says, unable to  look  at Willem’s  face.  “I
guess I Must don’t think that sort of thing is for someone like me.”
   “What  does that mean?”
   He  shakes his  head again,  not  saying anything,  but  Willem  persists.
“Because you have some health problems? Is that why?”
   Health  problems, says something  sour and sardonic  inside him.  Now,
that’s a euphemism. But he doesn’t say this out loud. “Willem,”  he pleads.
“I’m  begging you to stop talking  about this. We’ve had such a good night.
It’s our last night, and then I’m not going to see you. Can we please change
the subMect? Please?”
   Willem  doesn’t say anything for another block, and he thinks the moment
has passed, but then Willem says, “You know, when we first started going
out, Robin asked me whether you were gay or straight and I had to tell her I
didn’t know.”  He pauses. “She was shocked. She kept saying, ‘This is your
best friend since you guys were teenagers and you don’t know?’  Philippa
used to ask me about you as well.  And  I’d  tell  her the same thing  I told
Robin: that you’re  a private  person and I’ve  always tried  to respect your
privacy.
   “But  I  guess this is the kind of stuff I  wish you’d  tell me, Jude. Not so I
can do anything with the information,  but Must because it gives me a better
sense of who you are. I  mean, maybe you’re neither. Maybe you’re  both.
Maybe you’re Must not interested. It doesn’t make a difference to me.”
   He doesn’t, he can’t say anything in response, and they walk another two
blocks: Thirty-eighth  Street, Thirty-seventh Street. He is  conscious of his
right foot dragging against the pavement the way it does when he is tired or
dispirited, too tired or dispirited to make a greater effort, and is grateful that
Willem is on his left, and therefore less likely to notice it.

292
   “I  worry  sometimes that you’ve decided to convince yourself that you’re
somehow unattractive or unlovable,  and that  you’ve  decided that certain
experiences are off-limits for you.  But they’re not,  Jude: anyone would be
lucky to be with you,”  says Willem a block later. Enough of this, he thinks;
he can tell by Willem’s tone that he is building up to a longer speech and he
is now actively anxious, his heart beating a funny rhythm.
   “Willem,”   he says, turning to him. “I  think I’d  better take a taxi after all;
I’m getting tired—I’d  better get to bed.”
   “Jude, come on,”  says Willem, with  enough impatience in his voice that
he flinches. “Look,  I’m  sorry. But  really, Jude. You can’t  Must leave when
I’m trying  to talk to you about something important.”
   This  stops him.  “You’re  right,”  he  says. “I’m  sorry. And  I’m   grateful,
Willem, I really am. But this is Must too difficult for me to discuss.”
   “Everything’s  too  difficult    for  you  to  discuss,”  says Willem,  and  he
flinches  again. Willem   sighs.  “I’m   sorry.  I   always  keep thinking   that
someday I’m going to  talk to you,  really talk  to you, and then I  never do,
because I’m afraid you’re going to shut down and then you won’t talk to me
at all.”  They are silent, and he  is chastened, because he knows Willem is
right—that is exactly  what he’d do.  A few  years ago, Willem had tried  to
talk to him  about his cutting. They had been walking  then too, and after a
certain point the conversation had become so intolerable that he had hailed
a cab and  frantically  pulled  himself  in,  leaving  Willem  standing on  the
sidewalk, calling his  name in disbelief; he had cursed himself even as the
car sped south. Willem had been furious; he had apologi]ed; they had made
up. But Willem  has never initiated that conversation again, and neither has
he. “But tell me this, Jude: Are you ever lonely?”
   “No,”   he says, finally. A couple walks by, laughing, and he thinks of the
beginning  of  their  walk,   when  they  too  were  laughing.   How  has  he
managed to ruin this  night, the last  time he will   see Willem  for  months?
“You don’t need to worry about me, Willem. I’ll   always be fine. I’ll  always
be able to take care of myself.”
   And  then Willem  sighs, and sags, and looks so defeated that he feels a
twist of guilt.  But he is also relieved, because he senses that Willem doesn’t
know how to continue the conversation, and he will soon be able to redirect
him, and end the evening pleasantly, and escape. “You always say that.”
   “Because it’s always true.”

293
   There  is a  long, long  silence. They  are standing in  front  of  a Korean
barbeque restaurant, and the air is dense and fragrant with steam and smoke
and roasting meat. “Can I go?” he asks finally, and Willem nods. He goes to
the curb and raises his arm, and a cab glides to his side.
   Willem  opens the door for him and then, as he’s getting in, puts his arms
around him and holds him, and he finally does the same. “I’m going to miss
you,” Willem  says into the back of his neck. “Are you going to take care of
yourself while I’m  gone?”
   “Yes,”   he says. “I   promise.” He  steps back  and looks  at him.  “Until
November, then.”
   Willem  makes a face that’s not quite a smile. “November,” he echoes.
   In  the cab, he finds he really is tired, and he leans his forehead against the
greased window and closes his eyes. By the time he reaches home, he feels
as leaden as a corpse, and in the apartment, he starts taking off his clothes—
shoes, sweater, shirt, undershirt, pants—as soon as he’s locked  the door
behind him, leaving them littering the floor in a trail as he makes his way to
the bathroom. His  hands tremor as he unsticks the bag from  beneath the
sink, and although he hadn’t thought he’d need to cut himself that night—
nothing that  day or  early evening  had indicated he  might—he  is almost
ravenous for it now. He has long ago run out of blank skin on his forearms,
and he now recuts over old cuts, using the edge of the ra]or to saw through
the tough, webby scar tissue: when the new cuts heal, they do so in warty
furrows, and he  is disgusted and dismayed and fascinated all  at once by
how severely he has deformed himself. Lately he has begun using the cream
that Andy gave him for  his back on his arms, and he thinks it  helps, a bit:
the skin feels looser, the scars a little softer and more supple.
   The shower area Malcolm  has created in this bathroom is enormous, so
large he now sits within  it when he’s cutting,  his legs stretched out before
him, and after he’s done, he’s careful to wash away the blood because the
floor  is a great plain  of  marble, and as Malcolm  has told  him  again and
again, once you stain marble, there’s nothing that can be done. And then he
is in bed, light-headed but not quite sleepy, staring at the dark, mercury-like
gleam the chandelier makes in the shadowy room.
   “I’m   lonely,” he says aloud, and the silence of the apartment absorbs the
words like blood soaking into cotton.
   This  loneliness  is a  recent discovery,  and is  different  from  the  other
lonelinesses he has experienced: it is not  the childhood loneliness of  not

294
having parents; or  of  lying  awake  in  a motel  room  with  Brother  Luke,
trying  not to  move, not  to rouse him,  while  the  moon threw  hard white
stripes of light  across the bed; or of the time he ran away from  the home,
the successful time, and spent the  night wedged into  the cleft  of  an oak
tree’s buckling roots that spread open like a pair of legs, making himself as
small as he could. He had thought he was lonely then, but now he reali]es
that what  he  was feeling  was  not  loneliness but  fear. But  now  he  has
nothing to fear. Now he has protected himself: he has this apartment with its
triple-locked doors, and he has money. He has parents, he has friends. He
will   never again  have to  do  anything  he doesn’t  want  to  for  food,  or
transportation, or shelter, or escape.
   He  hadn’t been lying  to Willem:  he is  not meant for a  relationship and
has never thought he was. He has never envied his friends theirs—to do so
would be akin  to a  cat coveting a dog’s  bark: it  is something that  would
never occur to  him  to  envy, because it  is impossible,  something that  is
simply alien to his very species. But recently, people have been behaving as
if it  is something he could  have, or should want to have, and although he
knows they mean it in part as a kindness, it feels like a taunt: they could be
telling him he could be a decathlete and it would be as obtuse and as cruel.
   He  expects it from  Malcolm and Harold;  Malcolm  because he is happy
and  sees  a   single  path—his   path—to   happiness,  and   so  therefore
occasionally asks him if he can set him up with someone, or if he wants to
find someone, and then is bewildered when he declines; Harold because he
knows that  the part of  the  parental role  Harold most  enMoys is inserting
himself into his life  and rooting about in it as best as he can. He has grown
to enMoy this too,  sometimes—he is touched  that someone is  interested
enough in him to order him around, to be disappointed by the decisions he
makes, to  have  expectations for   him,  to   assume the responsibility   of
ownership of him.  Two years ago, he and Harold were at a restaurant and
Harold was giving him  a lecture about how his Mob at Rosen Pritchard had
made him  essentially an accessory to corporate  malfeasance, when they
both reali]ed  that their  waiter  was standing above them, holding  his pad
before him.
   “Pardon me,” said the waiter. “Should I come back?”
   “No,  don’t worry,”  Harold said, picking up his menu. “I’m  Must yelling at
my son,  but I  can do  that  after we  order.” The  waiter  had given  him a
commiserating smile, and he had smiled back, thrilled to have been claimed

295
as another’s in  public,  to  finally  be  a member of  the  tribe  of  sons and
daughters. Later, Harold had resumed his rant, and he had pretended to be
upset, but really, he had been happy the entire night, contentment saturating
his every cell, smiling so much that Harold had finally  asked him if he was
drunk.
   But  now Harold  too has started to ask him questions. “This is  a terrific
place,” he said when he was in  town the previous  month for the  birthday
dinner he’d commanded Willem  not  to throw  for  him  and which Willem
had done anyway. Harold had stopped by the apartment the next day, and as
he always  did,  rambled about  it  admiringly,  saying the  same things  he
always did: “This  is a terrific place”;  “It’s  so clean in here”; “Malcolm  did
such a good Mob”; and, lately, “It’s  massive, though, Jude. Don’t  you get
lonely in here by yourself?”
   “No,  Harold,” he said. “I like  being alone.”
   Harold  had grunted. “Willem seems happy,” he said. “Robin seems like a
nice girl.”
   “She is,”  he said, making Harold a cup of tea. “And I think he is happy.”
   “Jude, don’t you want that for yourself?” Harold asked.
   He sighed. “No, Harold, I’m  fine.”
   “Well,  what  about me and Julia?” asked Harold. “We’d  like  to  see you
with someone.”
   “You  know I  want to make you and Julia happy,” he said, trying to keep
his voice level. “But I’m  afraid I’m  not going to be able to help you on this
front. Here.” He gave Harold his tea.
   Sometimes he wonders whether this very idea of loneliness is something
he would feel at all had he not been awakened to the fact that he should be
feeling lonely, that  there is something strange and unacceptable about the
life he  has. Always, there are people asking him if  he misses what it  had
never occurred to  him  to  want,  never  occurred to  him  he  might  have:
Harold and Malcolm, of course, but also Richard, whose girlfriend, a fellow
artist named India, has all but moved in with  him,  and people he sees less
frequently as well—Citi]en  and EliMah and Phaedra and even Kerrigan, his
old colleague from  Judge Sullivan’s chambers, who had looked him  up a
few months ago when he was in town with his husband. Some of them ask
him with  pity, and some ask him with suspicion: the first group feels sorry
for him  because they assume his singlehood is not his decision but a state
imposed upon him; and the second group feels a kind of hostility  for him,

296
because they think that singlehood is his decision, a defiant violation  of  a
fundamental law of adulthood.
   Either  way, being single at forty  is different  from  being single at thirty,
and with every year it becomes less understandable, less enviable, and more
pathetic, more inappropriate. For the past five years, he has attended every
partners’ dinner alone, and a year ago, when he became an equity partner,
he attended the partners’ annual retreat alone as well. The week before the
retreat, Lucien had come into his office  one Friday night  and sat down to
review the week’s business, as he often did. They talked about the retreat,
which was going to  be in Anguilla,  and which  the two of  them genuinely
dreaded, unlike the other partners, who pretended to dread it  but actually
(he and Lucien agreed) were looking forward to it.
   “Is  Meredith coming?” he asked.
   “She is.”  There was a silence, and he knew what was coming next. “Are
you bringing anyone?”
   “No,”  he said.
   Another  silence, in  which  Lucien  stared at the ceiling.  “You’ve   never
brought anyone to one of these events, have you?” asked Lucien, his voice
carefully casual.
   “No,”   he  said, and then,  when Lucien  didn’t   say anything, “Are   you
trying to tell me something, Lucien?”
   “No,  of course not,” Lucien said, looking back at him. “This isn’t the sort
of firm where we keep track of those kinds of things, Jude, you know that.”
   He  had felt a flush of  anger and embarrassment. “Except it clearly is. If
the management committee is saying something, Lucien, you have to  tell
me.”
   “Jude,”  said  Lucien. “We’re  not.  You  know how  much  everyone here
respects you. I Must think—and this is not the firm talking, Must me—that I’d
like to see you settled down with someone.”
   “Okay,   Lucien,   thanks,”   he’d   said,  wearily.   “I’ll    take   that  under
advisement.”
   But  as self-conscious as he is about appearing normal, he doesn’t want a
relationship for propriety’s  sake: he wants it because he has reali]ed he is
lonely. He is so lonely that he sometimes feels it physically, a sodden clump
of dirty  laundry pressing against his chest. He cannot unlearn the feeling.
People make it  sound so easy, as if  the  decision to  want  it  is the  most
difficult  part of  the process. But  he knows better: being  in a  relationship

297
would mean exposing himself to someone, which he has still never done to
anyone but Andy; it would  mean the confrontation of his own body, which
he has not  seen unclothed in  at least  a decade—even in the  shower he
doesn’t look  at  himself.  And  it  would  mean having  sex with   someone,
which  he  hasn’t  done  since he  was  fifteen,   and which   he  dreads so
completely that  the thought of  it  makes his  stomach fill  with   something
waxy   and  cold.   When   he  first    started  seeing  Andy,   Andy    would
occasionally ask him if  he was sexually active,  until  he finally  told Andy
that he would tell  him when and if  it  ever happened, and until then, Andy
could stop asking him. So Andy never asked again, and he has never had to
volunteer the information.  Not  having  sex: it  was one of  the best things
about being an adult.
   But  as much as he fears sex, he also wants to be touched, he wants to feel
someone else’s hands on him, although the thought of that too terrifies him.
Sometimes he looks at his arms and is filled with a self-hatred so fiery that
he can barely breathe: much of what his body has become has been beyond
his control, but  his arms have been all  his doing,  and he can only blame
himself. When he had begun cutting  himself, he cut  on his legs—Must the
calves—and before he learned to be organi]ed about how he applied them,
he swiped the blade across the skin in hapha]ard strokes, so it looked as if
he had been scratched by a crosshatch of grasses. No one ever noticed—no
one ever looks at a person’s calves. Even Brother Luke hadn’t bothered him
about them. But now, no one could not notice his arms, or his back, or his
legs, which are striped with runnels where damaged tissue and muscle have
been removed, and indentations the si]e of thumbprints, where the braces’
screws had once been drilled through the flesh and into the bone, and satiny
ponds of skin  where he had sustained burns in the  inMury, and the places
where his wounds have closed over, where the flesh  now craters slightly,
the area around them tinged a permanent dull bron]e. When he has clothes
on, he is one person, but without  them, he is revealed as he really  is, the
years of rot manifested on his  skin, his own  flesh advertising his  past, its
depravities and corruptions.
   Once, in Texas, one of his clients had been a man who was grotesque—
so fat that his stomach had dropped into a pendant of flesh between his legs,
and covered everywhere with floes of ec]ema, the skin so dry that when he
moved, small ghostly strips of it floated from his arms and back and into the
air. He had been sickened, seeing the man, and yet they all sickened him,

298
and so in a way, this man was no better or worse than the others. As he had
given the man a blow Mob, the man’s stomach pressing against his neck, the
man had cried, apologi]ing to him: I’m  sorry, I’m sorry,  he said, the tips of
his fingers on the  top of  his head. The man had long  fingernails, each as
thick as bone, and he dragged them over  his scalp, but  gently, as if  they
were tines of a comb. And somehow, it is as if over the years he has become
that man, and he knows that if anyone were to see him, they too would feel
repulsed, nauseated by his deformities. He doesn’t want someone to have to
stand before the toilet retching, as he had done afterward, scooping handfuls
of liquid  soap into his mouth, gagging at the taste, trying  to make himself
clean again.
   So  he will   never have to  do anything  he doesn’t  want to  for  food  or
shelter: he finally   knows that.  But  what is  he willing   to  do to  feel  less
alone? Could he destroy everything he’s built and protected so diligently for
intimacy? How much humiliation  is he ready to endure? He doesn’t know;
he is afraid of discovering the answer.
   But  increasingly,  he is  even more  afraid  that  he will   never have  the
chance to discover it  at all.  What does it  mean to be a human, if  he  can
never have this? And yet, he reminds himself, loneliness is not  hunger, or
deprivation, or illness: it is not fatal. Its eradication is not owed him. He has
a better life than so many people, a better life than he had ever thought he
would have. To wish for  companionship along with everything else he has
seems a kind of greed, a gross entitlement.
   The  weeks pass. Willem’s schedule is  erratic, and he calls  him  at odd
hours: at one in the morning, at three in the afternoon. He sounds tired, but
it isn’t  in Willem’s  nature to complain, and he doesn’t. He tells  him about
the scenery, the archaeological sites they’ve been given permission to shoot
in,  the little   mishaps on  set. When  Willem  is  away,  he is  increasingly
inclined to stay indoors and do nothing, which he knows isn’t  healthy, and
so he has been vigilant about filling his weekends with events, with parties
and dinners. He goes to  museum shows, and to plays  with  Black  Henry
Young and to galleries with  Richard. Felix, whom  he tutored so long ago,
now helms a punk band called the 4uiet Amerikans, and he makes Malcolm
come with  him to  their  show. He tells  Willem  about what  he’s seen and
what he’s read, about conversations with Harold and Julia, about Richard’s
latest proMect and his clients  at  the nonprofit,   about Andy’s   daughter’s

299
birthday party and Phaedra’s new Mob, about people he’s talked to and what
they’ve said.
   “Five   and   a  half  more   months,”  Willem   says  at  the   end  of  one
conversation.
   “Five  and a half more,” he repeats.
   That  Thursday he goes to dinner  at Rhodes’s new apartment, which  is
near Malcolm’s parents’ house, and which Rhodes had told him over drinks
in December is  the source of  all  his nightmares: he wakes at  night with
ledgers scrolling through his mind, the stuff of his life—tuition,  mortgages,
maintenances, taxes—reduced to terrifyingly large figures. “And this is with
my parents’ help,”  he’d  said. “And  Alex  wants to  have another kid.  I’m
forty-five,  Jude, and I’m  already beat; I’m  going to  be working  until  I’m
eighty if we have a third.”
   Tonight, he is  relieved to see, Rhodes seems more relaxed, his neck and
cheeks pink. “Christ,”   Rhodes says, “how do  you stay  so thin  year after
year?” When they had met at the U.S. Attorney’s Office, fifteen  years ago,
Rhodes had still  looked like  a lacrosse player, all  muscle and sinew, but
since Moining the bank, he has thickened, grown abruptly old.
   “I  think the word you’re looking  for is ‘scrawny,’ ” he tells Rhodes.
   Rhodes laughs. “I don’t  think so,”  he says, “but I’d  take scrawny at this
point.”
   There are eleven people at  dinner, and Rhodes has to retrieve his desk
chair  from  his  office,   and  the  bench from   Alex’s  dressing  room.  He
remembers this about Rhodes’s dinners: the food is always perfect, there are
always flowers on the table, and yet something always goes wrong with the
guest list and the seating—Alex invites someone she’s Must met and forgets
to tell  Rhodes, or  Rhodes miscounts, and what  is  intended as a formal,
organi]ed event becomes instead chaotic and casual. “Shit!” Rhodes says,
as he always does, but he’s always the only one who minds.
   Alex  is seated to his left, and he talks to her about her Mob as the public
relations director of a fashion label called Rothko, which  she has Must quit,
to Rhodes’s consternation. “Do you miss it yet?” he asks.
   “Not  yet,”  she says. “I  know Rhodes isn’t  happy about it”—she  smiles
—“but  he’ll  get over it.  I  Must felt I should stay home while  the  kids are
young.”
   He  asks  about  the  country  house the  two  of   them  have bought  in
Connecticut (another source of  Rhodes’s nightmares), and  she tells  him

300
about the renovation, which is grinding into its third summer, and he groans
in  sympathy. “Rhodes  said  you  were looking   somewhere in  Columbia
County,” she says. “Did you end up buying?”
   “Not   yet,”  he says. It  had been a  choice: either  the house, or  he and
Richard were going to  renovate the ground floor, make the  garage usable
and add a gym and a small pool—one with a constant current, so you could
swim in place in it—and in the end, he chose the renovation. Now he swims
every morning in  complete privacy; not even Richard enters the gym area
when he’s in it.
   “We  wanted to wait on the house, actually,” Alex admits. “But really, we
didn’t have a choice—we wanted the kids  to have a yard while  they were
little.”
   He nods; he has heard this story before, from Rhodes. Often, it feels as if
he and Rhodes (and he and almost every one of his contemporaries at the
firm) are living  parallel  versions of adulthood. Their world  is governed by
children, little  despots whose needs—school and camp and activities and
tutors—dictate every decision, and will   for  the next ten, fifteen,  eighteen
years. Having children  has provided  their adulthood  with  an instant  and
nonnegotiable sense of purpose and direction: they decide the length and
location of that year’s vacation; they determine if there will  be any leftover
money, and if so, how it might be spent; they give shape to a day, a week, a
year, a life. Children are a kind of cartography, and all one has to do is obey
the map they present to you on the day they are born.
   But  he and his friends have no children, and in their  absence, the world
sprawls before them, almost stifling in its possibilities. Without them, one’s
status as an adult is never  secure; a childless adult creates adulthood for
himself, and  as exhilarating as  it  often is,  it  is  also a state of  perpetual
insecurity, of  perpetual doubt. Or  it is  to  some people—certainly it  is to
Malcolm, who recently reviewed with  him a list  he’d made in favor of and
against having children with Sophie, much as he had when he was deciding
whether to marry Sophie in the first place, four years ago.
   “I  don’t  know, Mal,”  he said, after listening to Malcolm’s list. “It  sounds
like  the reasons for  having  them are  because you feel  you  should, not
because you really want them.”
   “Of   course I  feel  I  should,”  said Malcolm.  “Don’t   you  ever feel  like
we’re all basically still living  like children, Jude?”

301
   “No,”  he said. And he never had: his life was as far from his childhood as
he could imagine. “That’s your dad talking, Mal. Your life won’t be any less
valid, or any less legitimate, if you don’t have kids.”
   Malcolm   had sighed.  “Maybe,”  he  said. “Maybe   you’re  right.”   He’d
smiled. “I mean, I don’t really want them.”
   He smiled back. “Well,”   he said, “you can always wait. Maybe someday
you can adopt a sad thirty-year-old.”
   “Maybe,”   Malcolm  said again. “After  all,  I hear it  is  a trend in  certain
parts of the country.”
   Now  Alex  excuses herself to help Rhodes in the kitchen, who has been
calling  her name with  mounting  urgency—“Alex.   Alex!  Alex!”—and   he
turns to the person on his right, whom he doesn’t recogni]e from Rhodes’s
other parties, a dark-haired man with a nose that looks like it’s been broken:
it starts heading decisively in one direction before reversing directions, Must
as decisively, right below the bridge.
   “Caleb Porter.”
   “Jude St. Francis.”
   “Let  me guess: Catholic.”
   “Let  me guess: not.”
   Caleb laughs. “You’re right about that.”
   They  talk, and Caleb tells him he’s Must moved to the city from London,
where he’s spent the past decade as the president of a fashion label, to take
over as the new  CEO at  Rothko. “Alex   very  sweetly and spontaneously
invited me  yesterday, and I  thought”—he shrugs—“why  not?  It’s  this, a
good meal with nice people, or sitting in a hotel room looking desultorily at
real estate listings.” From  the kitchen  there is a timpani  clatter of  falling
metal, and Rhodes swearing. Caleb looks at him, his eyebrows raised, and
he smiles. “Don’t worry,” he reassures him. “This always happens.”
   Over  the remainder of  the  meal, Rhodes makes attempts to corral  his
guests into a group conversation, but it doesn’t work—the table is too wide,
and he has unwisely  seated friends near each other—and so he  ends up
talking to Caleb. He is forty-nine, and grew up in Marin County, and hasn’t
lived in  New York since he was in his thirties.  He too went to law  school,
although, he says, he’s never used a day of what he learned at work.
   “Never?”   he asks. He is  always skeptical  when people say that;  he is
skeptical of people who claim law school was a colossal waste, a three-year
mistake. Although he also recogni]es that he is unusually sentimental about

302
law school, which gave him not only  his livelihood  but, in many ways, his
life.
   Caleb thinks. “Well,  maybe not never, but not in the way you’d  expect,”
he finally  says. He has a deep, careful, slow voice,  at once soothing and,
somehow, slightly menacing. “The thing  that actually  has ended up being
useful is,  of  all  things,  civil   procedure. Do  you  know  anyone who’s  a
designer?”
   “No,”  he says. “But I have a lot of friends who’re artists.”
   “Well,  then. You know  how differently  they think—the  better the artist,
the higher the probability  that they’ll  be completely unsuited for  business.
And  they really  are. I’ve   worked at  five  houses in  the past  twenty-odd
years, and what’s fascinating is  witnessing the  patterns of behavior—the
refusal to hew  to  deadlines, the inability  to  stay within  budget,  the near
incompetence when it comes to  managing a staff—that  are so consistent
you  begin  to  wonder  if   lacking  these  qualities  is  something  that’s  a
prerequisite to having the  Mob, or whether the Mob itself encourages these
sorts of  conceptual gaps.  So what  you  have  to  do,  in  my  position,  is
construct a system of governance within the company, and then make sure
it’s enforceable and punishable. I’m  not quite sure how  to explain  it: you
can’t tell  them  that it’s   good business to  do one thing  or  another—that
means nothing to them, or at  least to some of them, as much as they  say
they understand it—you  have to instead present it  as the bylaws of  their
own small universe, and convince them that if they don’t follow these rules,
their universe will  collapse. As long as you can persuade them of this, you
can get them to do what you need. It’s completely maddening.”
   “So  why do you keep working with them?”
   “Because—they do think so differently. It’s fascinating to watch. Some of
them are essentially subliterate: you get notes from them and they can really
barely construct a sentence. But then you watch them sketching, or draping,
or Must putting colors together, and it’s …  I  don’t know.  It’s  wondrous. I
can’t explain it any better than that.”
   “No—I   know exactly what you mean,” he says, thinking of Richard, and
JB, and Malcolm, and Willem. “It’s  as if you’re being allowed entrée into a
way  of  thinking  you  don’t   even have language  to  imagine, much  less
articulate.”
   “That’s  exactly right,” Caleb says, and smiles at him for the first time.

303
   The   dinner  winds  down,  and  as  everyone’s  drinking   coffee,  Caleb
disentangles his legs from under the table. “I’m going to head off,” he says.
“I think  I’m still  on London time. But it was a pleasure meeting you.”
   “You,  too,”  he says. “I  really  enMoyed it. And good luck establishing a
system of civil governance within Rothko.”
   “Thanks,  I’ll   need it,”  says Caleb, and then, as he’s about to stand, he
stops and says, “Would you like to have dinner sometime?”
   For  a  moment, he  is paraly]ed.  But  then  he rebukes himself:  he  has
nothing to  fear. Caleb  has Must moved back to the city—he  knows  how
difficult  it  must be  to find  someone to talk  to, how  difficult   it  is to  find
friends when, in your absence, all your friends have started families and are
strangers to you. It is talking, nothing more. “That’d be great,” he says, and
he and Caleb exchange cards.
   “Don’t   get up,”  Caleb says, as he starts to  rise. “I’ll   be  in touch.”  He
watches as Caleb—who is taller  than he had thought, at least two  inches
taller than he is,  with  a powerful-looking  back—rumbles his goodbyes to
Alex and Rhodes and then leaves without turning around.
   He  gets a message from Caleb the following   day, and they schedule a
dinner for Thursday. Late in the afternoon, he calls Rhodes to thank him for
dinner, and ask him about Caleb.
   “I’m   embarrassed to say I didn’t even speak to him,” Rhodes says. “Alex
invited him  very last  minute. This is  exactly what  I’m  talking  about with
these dinner parties: Why is  she inviting  someone who’s taking over at a
company she’s Must leaving?”
   “So  you don’t know anything about him?”
   “Nothing.  Alex  says he’s well-respected and that Rothko fought hard to
bring him back from  London. But that’s  all I  know. Why?” He  can almost
hear Rhodes smiling. “Don’t tell me you’re expanding your client base from
the glamorous world of securities and pharma?”
   “That’s  exactly what  I’m  doing, Rhodes,” he says. “Thanks again. And
tell Alex thanks as well.”
   Thursday  arrives, and he  meets Caleb at an  i]akaya  in  west Chelsea.
After  they’ve  ordered, Caleb says, “You  know, I  was looking  at  you all
through that dinner and trying  to  remember where I knew  you from,  and
then I  reali]ed—it  was a  painting by  Jean-Baptiste Marion. The  creative
director  at my   last company  owned  it—actually,  he  tried  to  make the
company pay for it,  but that’s a different  story. It’s a really  tight image of

304
your face,  and you’re  standing outside; you  can see a streetlight  behind
you.”
   “Right,”   he says. This has happened to him a few times  before, and he
always finds  it  unsettling. “I   know  exactly the  one you  mean; it’s  from
‘Seconds, Minutes, Hours, Days’—the third series.”
   “That’s   right,”  says Caleb,  and smiles  at him.  “Are   you  and Marion
close?”
   “Not  so much anymore,” he says, and as always, it hurts him to admit it.
“But we were college roommates—I’ve known him for years.”
   “It’s  a great series,” Caleb says, and they talk about JB’s other work, and
Richard, whose work Caleb also knows, and Asian Henry Young; and about
the paucity of  decent Japanese restaurants in London; and about Caleb’s
sister, who lives in Monaco with  her second husband and their huge brood
of children; and about Caleb’s parents, who died, after long illnesses, when
he was in his thirties;  and about the house in Bridgehampton that Caleb’s
law school classmate is letting him use this summer while he’s in L.A. And
then there is enough talk  of  Rosen Pritchard, and the financial  mess that
Rothko has been left in by the departing CEO to convince him that Caleb is
looking not Must for a friend but potentially  for representation as well, and
he starts thinking   about who  at  the firm   should  be responsible for  the
company. He thinks: I should give this to Evelyn,  who is one of the young
partners the firm nearly lost  the previous year to, in fact,  a fashion house,
where she would have been their in-house counsel. Evelyn would be good
for this  account—she is smart and she is interested in the industry, and it
would be a good match.
   He  is thinking   this when  Caleb abruptly asks, “Are   you single?”  And
then, laughing, “Why are you looking at me like that?”
   “Sorry,”  he says, startled, but smiling  back. “I  am, yes. But—I  was Must
having this very conversation with my friend.”
   “And  what did your friend say?”
   “He  said—” he begins, but then stops, embarrassed, and confused by the
sudden shift of topic, of tone. “Nothing,”  he says, and Caleb smiles, almost
as if he has actually recounted the conversation, but doesn’t press him. He
thinks then  how  he will   make this  evening into  a  story  to tell   Willem,
especially this most recent exchange. You win, Willem, he’ll say to him, and
if Willem  tries  to bring up  the subMect again, he decides he’ll let him, and
that this time, he won’t evade his questions.

305
   He  pays and  they  walk  outside, where  it  is  raining,  not  heavily, but
steadily enough so that there are no cabs, and the streets gleam like licorice.
“I have a car waiting,” Caleb says. “Can I drop you somewhere?”
   “You  don’t mind?”
   “Not  at all.”
   The car takes them downtown, and by  the time they’ve  reached Greene
Street it’s pouring, so hard that they can no longer discern shapes through
the window, Must colors, spangles of red and yellow lights, the city reduced
to the honking of horns and the clatter of rain against the roof of the car, so
loud that they can barely hear each other over the din. They stop and he’s
about to get out when Caleb tells him to wait,  he has an umbrella and will
walk him  into the building,  and before he can obMect, Caleb is getting out
and unsnapping an umbrella, and the two of them huddle beneath it and into
the lobby, the door thudding shut behind him, leaving them standing in the
darkened entryway.
   “This  is a hell of a lobby,”  Caleb says, dryly, looking up at the bare bulb.
“Although  it does have a sort of  end-of-empire chic,”  and he laughs, and
Caleb smiles. “Does  Rosen Pritchard know  you’re  living  in  a place  like
this?” he asks, and then, before he can answer, Caleb leans in and kisses
him, very  hard, so that  his back is  pressed against the door, and Caleb’s
arms make a cage around him.
   In   that  moment,  he  goes  blank,   the  world,   his  very   self,  erasing
themselves. It has been a long, long time since anyone has kissed him, and
he remembers the sense of helplessness he felt whenever it happened, and
how Brother Luke used to tell him to  Must open his mouth and relax and do
nothing,  and now—out   of  habit  and  memory,  and the  inability   to  do
anything else—that is what he does, and waits for it to be over, counting the
seconds and trying to breathe through his nose.
   Finally,  Caleb steps back and looks at him,  and after a while,  he looks
back. And then Caleb does it again, this time holding his  face between his
hands, and he has that sensation he always had when he was a child and
was being kissed, that his body was not his own, that every gesture he made
was predetermined, reflex after  reflex  after  reflex, and  that he  could do
nothing but succumb to whatever might happen to him next.
   Caleb  stops a second time  and  steps back again, looking  at  him  and
raising his eyebrows the way he had at Rhodes’s dinner, waiting for him to
say something.

306
   “I  thought you were looking for  legal representation,” he says at last, and
the words are so idiotic that he can feel his face get hot.
   But  Caleb doesn’t laugh. “No,”   he says. There is another long  silence,
and it is  Caleb who speaks next. “Aren’t  you  going to  invite me  up?” he
asks.
   “I   don’t know,”  he says, and he wishes, suddenly, for Willem, although
this is not the sort of problem that Willem  has helped him with before, and
in fact, probably not the sort of problem that Willem would even consider a
problem at all. He knows what  a stolid, careful person he is, and although
that stolidity   and sense of  caution guarantee he will   never be  the most
interesting, or provocative, or glittery person in any gathering, in any room,
they have protected him so far, they have given  him an adulthood free  of
sordidness and filth. But  sometimes he wonders whether he has insulated
himself so much that he has neglected some essential part of being human:
maybe he is ready to be with someone. Maybe enough time has passed so it
will  be different.  Maybe he is  wrong, maybe Willem  is  right:  maybe this
isn’t  an experience that  is  forbidden  to  him  forever.  Maybe  he is  less
disgusting than he thinks.  Maybe he  really is  capable of  this. Maybe  he
won’t be hurt after all. Caleb seems, in that moment, to have been conMured,
dMinn-like, the offspring of his worst fears and greatest hopes, and dropped
into his life as a test: On one side is everything he knows, the patterns of his
existence as regular and banal  as the steady plink   of  a dripping  faucet,
where he is alone but  safe, and shielded from  everything that  could hurt
him.   On  the   other  side   are  waves,  tumult,    rainstorms,  excitement:
everything he  cannot control,  everything  potentially  awful   and ecstatic,
everything he  has lived  his adult  life  trying  to  avoid,  everything  whose
absence bleeds his life of color. Inside him, the creature hesitates, perching
on its hind legs, pawing the air as if feeling for answers.
   Don’t  do  it,  don’t fool  yourself,  no matter  what you  tell  yourself, you
know what you are, says one voice.
   Take a chance, says the other voice. You’re lonely. You have to try. This is
the voice he always ignores.
   This may never happen again, the voice adds, and this stops him.
   It  will   end badly, says the first  voice,  and then both voices  fall  silent,
waiting to see what he will do.
   He doesn’t know  what to do; he doesn’t know what will  happen. He has
to find out. Everything  he has learned tells him to leave; everything he has

307
wished for tells him to stay. Be brave, he tells himself. Be brave for once.
   And  so he looks back at  Caleb. “Let’s go,”  he says, and although he is
already frightened,  he  begins the  long  walk  down  the  narrow  hallway
toward the elevator as if he is not, and along with the scrape of his right foot
against the cement, he hears the tap of Caleb’s footsteps, and the explosions
of rain pinging off the fire escape, and the thrum of his own anxious heart.


   A   year  ago,   he  had  begun  working   on  a  defense  for   a  gigantic
pharmaceutical company called  Malgrave  and  Baskett  whose board  of
directors was being sued by a group of their shareholders for malfeasance,
incompetence, and neglect of their fiduciary duties. “Gee,” Lucien had said,
sarcastically, “I wonder why they’d think that?”
   He  had sighed. “I know,”  he said. Malgrave and Baskett was a disaster,
and everyone knew it. Over the previous few years, before they had come to
Rosen Pritchard, the company had had to contend with two whistle-blower
lawsuits (one alleging that a manufacturing facility was dangerously out of
date, the   other  that   a  different   facility   was  producing   contaminated
products),  had  been  served   with   subpoenas in   connection   with   an
investigation  into  an  elaborate kickback   scheme involving   a  chain  of
nursing homes, and had been alleged to be illegally marketing one of their
bestselling drugs, which was approved only for treatment of schi]ophrenics,
to Al]heimer’s  patients.
   And   so  he  had  spent the  last   eleven months  interviewing   fifty   of
Malgrave  and Baskett’s  current  and  former  directors  and  officers  and
compiling  a report  to  answer the lawsuit’s  claims.  He had  fifteen  other
lawyers on his team; one night he overheard some of them referring to the
company as Malpractice and Bastard.
   “Don’t  you  dare let the client hear you say that,” he scolded them. It was
late, two in the morning; he knew they were tired. If he had been Lucien, he
would  have yelled  at  them,  but  he was  tired  too.  The  previous week,
another of the associates on the case, a young woman, had stood up from
her desk at three a.m., looked around her, and collapsed. He had called an
ambulance and sent everyone home for the night, as long as they returned
by nine a.m.; he had stayed an hour longer and then had gone home himself.
   “You  let them go home and you stayed here?” asked Lucien the next day.
“You’re  getting soft, St.  Francis. Thank god you  don’t act  like  this when

308
you’re at trial  or we’d never get anywhere. If  only opposing counsel knew
what a pushover they were actually dealing with.”
   “So  does this mean the firm  isn’t  going to send poor Emma Gersh any
flowers?”
   “Oh,  we already sent them,” said Lucien, getting up and wandering out of
his office. “ ‘Emma: Get better, get back here soon. Or else. Love from your
family at Rosen Pritchard.’ ”
   He loved  going to trial, he loved arguing and speaking in a courtroom—
you never got to do it enough—but his goal with Malgrave and Baskett was
to get the lawsuit tossed by a Mudge before it entered the grinding, tedious
drone years of investigation and discovery. He wrote the motion to dismiss,
and in early September, the district court Mudge threw out the suit.
   “I’m   proud  of  you,”  Lucien says that  night. “Malpractice   and Bastard
don’t  know  how fucking   lucky  they are;  that  suit was  as solid  as they
come.”
   “Well,  there’s a lot that Malpractice and Bastard don’t seem to know,” he
says.
   “True.  But  I  guess you  can be  complete cretins as long  as you  have
enough sense to hire the right lawyer.” He stands. “Are you going anywhere
this weekend?”
   “No.”
   “Well,  do something relaxing. Go  outside. Have a meal. You don’t look
too good.”
   “Good  night, Lucien!”
   “Okay,  okay.  Good  night.  And  congratulations—really. This  is  a  big
one.”
   He  stays at the office for another two  hours, tidying and sorting papers,
attempting to batten down the constant detritus. He feels no sense of relief,
or victory, after these outcomes: Must a tiredness, but a simple, well-earned
tiredness, as if he has completed a day’s  worth of  physical labor.  Eleven
months:  interviews,  research,  more  interviews,   fact-checking,  writing,
rewriting—and then, in an instant, it  is over, and another case will take its
place.
   Finally  he goes home, where he is suddenly so exhausted that he stops on
the way  to  his  bedroom  to  sit  on  the  sofa,  and wakes  an hour  later,
disoriented and parched. He hasn’t seen or talked to most of his friends in
the past few months—even his conversations with Willem have been briefer

309
than usual. Part of this is  attributable to Malpractice  and Bastard, and the
frantic preparations they had demanded; but the other part is attributable to
his ongoing  confusion over Caleb,  about whom  he has not told  Willem.
This weekend, though, Caleb is  in  Bridgehampton, and he is glad  of  the
time alone.
   He still  doesn’t know how he feels about Caleb, even three months later.
He is not altogether certain that Caleb even likes him. Or rather: he knows
he enMoys talking to him, but there are times when he catches Caleb looking
at  him   with   an   expression  that  borders  on   disgust.  “You’re    really
handsome,” Caleb once said, his voice perplexed, taking his chin between
his fingers  and turning  his  face  toward him.  “But—”    And  although he
didn’t  finish,  he could sense what Caleb wanted to  say: But  something’s
wrong. But you still  repel me. But I don’t  understand why I don’t like you,
not really.
   He knows Caleb hates his walk, for example. A few weeks after they had
started seeing each other, Caleb was sitting on the sofa and he had gone to
get a bottle of wine, and as he was walking back, he noticed Caleb staring at
him so intently  that he had grown nervous. He poured the wine,  and they
drank, and then Caleb said, “You  know, when I  met you, we  were sitting
down, so I didn’t know you had a limp.”
   “That’s  true,” he said, reminding himself that this was not something for
which he had to apologi]e: he hadn’t entrapped Caleb; he hadn’t intended to
deceive him.  He took  a breath  and tried  to  sound light,  mildly  curious.
“Would you not have wanted to go out with me if you’d known?”
   “I   don’t  know,”   Caleb said,  after a  silence. “I   don’t  know.”   He had
wanted to vanish, then, to close his eyes and reel back time, back to before
he had ever met Caleb. He would have turned down Rhodes’s invitation; he
would  have kept  living  his  little   life;  he  would  have never  known  the
difference.
   But  as much as Caleb hates his walk, he loathes his wheelchair. The first
time Caleb  had come over  in  daylight,  he had  given him  a  tour  of  the
apartment. He was proud of the apartment, and every day he was grateful to
be in it, and disbelieving that it was his. Malcolm had kept Willem’s suite—
as they called it—where it had been, but had enlarged it and added an office
at its northern edge, close to the elevator. And then there was the long open
space, with a piano, and a living-room  area facing south, and a table that
Malcolm had designed on the northern side, the side without windows, and

310
behind it,  a bookcase that covered the entire wall  until  the kitchen, hung
with art by  his friends, and friends of friends, and other pieces that he had
bought over the years. The whole eastern end of the apartment was his: you
crossed from the bedroom, on the north side, through the closet and into the
bathroom, which  had windows  that looked  east and south.  Although  he
mostly kept the shades in the apartment lowered, you could open them all at
once and  the space would  feel  like   a rectangle  of  pure  light,  the  veil
between you and the outside world mesmeri]ingly thin. He often feels as if
the apartment is a falsehood: it suggests that the person within it is someone
open, and vital, and generous with his answers, and he of course is not that
person. Lispenard Street, with its half-obscured alcoves and dark warrens
and walls that  had been painted over so  many times that  you could  feel
ridges and blisters where moths and bugs had been entombed in its layers,
was a much more accurate reflection of who he is.
   For  Caleb’s visit,  he  had let  the place shimmer  with  sunlight,  and he
could tell   Caleb was  impressed. They walked  slowly   through it,  Caleb
looking at  the art and asking about different  pieces: where he had gotten
them, who had made them, noting the ones he recogni]ed.
   And  then they came to the bedroom, and he was showing Caleb the piece
at the far end of the room—a painting of Willem in the makeup chair he had
bought  from   “Seconds,  Minutes,   Hours,  Days”—when   Caleb   asked,
“Whose wheelchair is that?”
   He looked where Caleb was looking. “Mine,” he said, after a pause.
   “But  why?” Caleb had asked him, looking confused. “You can walk.”
   He  didn’t  know  what  to  say. “Sometimes I  need it,”   he said,  finally.
“Rarely. I don’t use it that often.”
   “Good,”  said Caleb. “See that you don’t.”
   He  was startled. Was this an expression of concern, or  was it a  threat?
But before  he could  figure  out  what he  should feel,  or  what he  should
answer, Caleb had turned, and was heading into his closet, and he followed
him, continuing his tour.
   A  month after that, he had met Caleb late one night outside his office in
the far western borderland of the Meatpacking  District. Caleb too  worked
long hours; it was early July and Rothko would  present their spring line in
eight weeks. He had driven to work that day, but it was a dry night, and so
he got out of the car and sat in his chair under a streetlamp until Caleb came
down, talking  to  someone else. He  knew  Caleb had  seen him—he  had

311
raised his   hand  in  his   direction  and  Caleb  had  given  him   a  barely
perceptible nod: neither of them were demonstrative people—and watched
Caleb until  he  finished  his  conversation and  the other  man had  begun
walking east.
   “Hi,”   he said, as Caleb came over to him.
   “Why  are you in your wheelchair?” Caleb demanded.
   For a moment, he couldn’t speak, and when he did, he stammered. “I had
to use it today,” he finally said.
   Caleb sighed, and rubbed at his eyes. “I thought you didn’t use it.”
   “I   don’t,”  he said, so ashamed that he could feel himself start to sweat.
“Not really. I only use it when I absolutely have to.”
   Caleb  nodded,  but  continued  pinching   the  bridge  of   his  nose.  He
wouldn’t look at him.  “Look,”  he said at last, “I don’t think we should have
dinner after all. You’re obviously not feeling well,  and I’m tired. I’ve  got to
get some sleep.”
   “Oh,”  he said, dismayed. “That’s all right. I understand.”
   “Okay,  good,” said Caleb. “I’ll   call  you later.” He  watched Caleb move
down the street with his long strides until he disappeared around the corner,
and then had gotten into his car and driven home and cut himself  until he
was bleeding so much that he couldn’t grip the ra]or properly.
   The next  day was Friday, and he didn’t hear from Caleb at all.  Well, he
thought. That’s that. And it was fine:  Caleb didn’t like  the fact that he was
in a wheelchair. Neither did he. He couldn’t resent Caleb for not being able
to accept what he himself couldn’t accept.
   But  then, on Saturday morning, Caleb called Must as he was coming back
upstairs from the  pool. “I’m   sorry  about Thursday night,”  Caleb said.  “I
know it  must seem heartless and bi]arre to  you, this—aversion I  have to
your wheelchair.”
   He  sat  down  in  one of  the  chairs  around the  dining-room  table.  “It
doesn’t seem bi]arre at all,” he said.
   “I  told  you my parents were sick for much of my  adult life,”  Caleb said.
“My  father had multiple sclerosis, and my mother—no one knew what she
had. She got sick when I was in college and never got better. She had face
pains, headaches: she was in a sort of constant low-grade discomfort, and
although I don’t  doubt it  was real, what bothered me so much is  that she
never seemed to want  to try  to  get  better. She Must gave up, as did he.
Everywhere you looked  there was evidence of  their  surrender to illness:

312
first canes, then walkers, then wheelchairs, then scooters, and vials of pills
and tissues and the perpetual scent of pain creams and gels and who knows
what else.”
   He  stopped. “I  want to  keep seeing you,”  he said, at last. “But—but   I
can’t be around these accessories to weakness, to disease. I Must can’t. I hate
it. It  embarrasses me. It makes me feel—not depressed, but furious, like I
need to fight  against it.”  He paused again. “I Must didn’t know that’s who
you were when I met you,”  he said at last. “I thought I could  be okay with
it. But I’m  not sure I can. Can you understand that?”
   He  swallowed;  he wanted  to cry.  But  he could  understand it;  he  felt
exactly as Caleb did. “I can,” he said.
   And  yet improbably, they had continued after all. He  is astonished, still,
by the speed and thoroughness with which Caleb insinuated himself into his
life. It was like something out of a fairy tale: a woman living  on the edge of
a dark forest hears a knock and opens the door of her cottage. And although
it is  Must for a moment, and although she sees no one, in  those seconds,
do]ens of demons and wraiths have slipped past her and into her house, and
she will never be able to rid herself of them, ever. Sometimes this was how
it felt. Was this the way it was for other people? He doesn’t know; he is too
afraid to ask. He  finds himself  replaying old  conversations he has had or
overheard with people talking about their relationships, trying to gauge the
normalcy of   his against  theirs, looking   for  clues  about how  he  should
conduct himself.
   And  then there is the sex, which is worse than he had imagined: he had
forgotten Must how painful it was, how debasing, how repulsive, how much
he disliked it. He hates the postures, the positions it demands, each of them
degrading because they leave him so helpless and weak; he hates the tastes
of it  and the smells of it.  But mostly,  he hates the sounds of it: the meaty
smack of  flesh hitting  flesh,  the wounded-animal moans and  grunts, the
things said to him that were perhaps meant to be arousing but he can only
interpret as diminishing.  Part  of  him,  he reali]es,  had always  thought it
would be  better as an adult,  as if  somehow the  mere fact of  age would
transform the experience into something glorious and enMoyable. In college,
in his twenties, in  his thirties, he would  listen to  people talk about it  with
such pleasure, such delight,  and he  would  think:  That’s what  you’re  so
excited about? Really? That’s  not how  I  remember it  at all.  And  yet  he
cannot be the one who’s correct, and everyone else—millennia of people—

313
wrong. So  clearly  there  is something  he doesn’t  understand about sex.
Clearly he is doing something incorrectly.
   That  first  night they had come upstairs, he had known  what Caleb had
expected. “We have to go slowly,” he told him. “It’s been a long time.”
   Caleb  looked at him  in  the dark;  he hadn’t  turned on the  light.  “How
long?” he asked.
   “Long,”  was all he could say.
   And  for  a while,  Caleb was patient. But  then he wasn’t. There came a
night in which  Caleb tried to remove his clothes, and he had pulled out of
his grasp. “I can’t,” he said. “Caleb—I can’t. I  don’t want you to see what I
look like.”  It had taken everything he had to say this, and he was so scared
he was cold.
   “Why?”  Caleb had asked.
   “I  have scars,” he said. “On my back and legs, and on my arms. They’re
bad; I don’t want you to see them.”
   He hadn’t  known, really, what Caleb would say. Would he say: I’m  sure
they’re not so bad? And then would he have to take his clothes off after all?
Or would  he say: Let’s  see, and then he would  take his  clothes off,  and
Caleb would get up and leave? He saw Caleb hesitate.
   “You  won’t like  them,” he added. “They’re disgusting.”
   And  that had seemed to decide something for Caleb. “Well,” he said, “I
don’t need to see all of your  body, right? Just the relevant parts.” And  for
that night, he had lain there, half dressed and half not, waiting  for it  to be
over and more humiliated than if  Caleb had demanded he take his clothes
off after all.
   But  despite these disappointments, things  have also not  been horrible
with Caleb, either. He likes  Caleb’s slow, thoughtful way  of speaking, the
way he talks  about the designers he’s worked with,  his  understanding of
color and his appreciation of  art. He likes  that he can discuss his work—
about Malpractice and Bastard—and that Caleb will not only understand the
challenges his cases present for him but will find  them interesting as well.
He likes  how closely  Caleb listens  to his  stories, and how  his questions
show how closely he’s been paying attention. He likes how Caleb admires
Willem’s and Richard’s and Malcolm’s  work, and lets him talk  about them
as much as he wants. He likes how, when he is leaving, Caleb will put  his
hands on either side of his face and hold them there for a moment in a sort
of silent blessing. He likes  Caleb’s solidity, his  physical strength: he likes

314
watching him move, likes how, like  Willem, he is so easy in his own body.
He likes  how  Caleb  will  sometimes in  sleep  sling  an arm  possessively
across his chest. He likes  waking with  Caleb  next to  him. He  likes  how
Caleb is  slightly  strange, how  he carries a  faint  threat of  danger:  he is
different from  the people he has sought out his entire adult life, people he
has determined will  never  hurt him,  people defined  by their  kindnesses.
When he is with Caleb, he feels simultaneously more and less human.
   The first  time Caleb hit  him, he was both surprised and not. This was at
the end of July, and he had gone over to Caleb’s at midnight, after leaving
the office. He had used his wheelchair that day—lately, something had been
going wrong with his feet; he didn’t  know what it  was, but he could barely
feel them, and had the dislocating sense that he would topple over if he tried
to walk—but  at Caleb’s,  he had left  the chair in  the car  and had instead
walked very slowly  to the front  door, lifting  each foot unnaturally  high as
he went so he wouldn’t trip.
   He  knew from  the moment  he entered the apartment that he shouldn’t
have come—he could see that Caleb was in a terrible mood and could feel
how the very  air  was hot and  stagnant with his  anger. Caleb had finally
moved into a building in the Flower District,  but he hadn’t unpacked much,
and he was edgy and tense, his teeth squeaking against themselves as he
tightened his Maw. But he had brought food, and he moved his way slowly
over to the counter to set it  down, talking  brightly  to try  to distract Caleb
from his gait, trying, desperately, to make things better.
   “Why  are you walking like that?” Caleb interrupted him.
   He hated admitting to Caleb that something else was wrong with him; he
couldn’t bring  himself  to do it  once again. “Am  I  walking  strangely?” he
asked.
   “Yeah—you look  like Frankenstein’s monster.”
   “I’m   sorry,”  he said.  Leave, said the voice  inside  him. Leave now.  “I
wasn’t aware of it.”
   “Well,  stop it. It looks ridiculous.”
   “All    right,”  he said,  quietly, and  spooned some curry into  a  bowl  for
Caleb. “Here,” he said, but as he was heading toward Caleb, trying to walk
normally, he tripped, his right foot  over his left, and dropped the bowl, the
green curry splattering against the carpet.
   Later,  he will   remember how  Caleb didn’t   say anything,  Must whirled
around and struck him with the back of his hand, and he had fallen back, his

315
head bouncing against the carpeted floor. “Just get out  of here, Jude,” he
heard Caleb say, not even yelling, even before his vision returned. “Get out;
I can’t look  at you right  now.” And  so he had, bringing himself to his  feet
and walking  his ridiculous  monster’s walk  out  of  the apartment, leaving
Caleb to clean up the mess he had made.
   The  next day his face began to turn colors,  the area around his left eye
shading into improbably lovely tones: violets and ambers and bottle greens.
By the  end of the  week, when he went  uptown for  his appointment with
Andy, his cheek was the color of moss, and his eye was swollen nearly shut,
the upper lid a puffed, tender, shiny red.
   “Jesus  Christ,  Jude,” said  Andy,  when  he saw  him.  “What  the  fuck
happened to you?”
   “Wheelchair  tennis,” he said, and even grinned, a grin he had practiced in
the  mirror   the  night  before,  his   cheek  twitching   with  pain.   He  had
researched everything: where the matches were played, and how frequently,
and how many people were in the club. He had made up a story, recited it to
himself and to people at the office  until  it sounded natural, even comic: a
forehand from  the  opposing player,  who  had played  in  college, he  not
turning quickly enough, the thwack the ball had made when it hit his face.
   He  told all  this to Andy  as Andy  listened, shaking his head. “Well,”  he
said. “I’m glad you’re trying  something new. But Christ, Jude. Is this such a
good idea?”
   “You’re   the  one  who’s  always  telling   me to   stay off   my  feet,”   he
reminded Andy.
   “I  know, I  know,” said Andy. “But  you have the pool; isn’t  that enough?
And at any rate, you should’ve come to me after this happened.”
   “It’s  Must a bruise, Andy,” he said.
   “It’s  a pretty fucking bad bruise, Jude. I mean, Jesus.”
   “Well,   anyway,”  he  said, trying   to  sound  unconcerned, even a  little
defiant. “I need to talk to you about my feet.”
   “Tell  me.”
   “It’s   such a strange sensation; they feel like  they’re encased in cement
coffins. I can’t feel where they are in space—I can’t control them. I lift  one
leg up and when I put it  back down, I  can feel in my  calf that I’ve  placed
the foot, but I can’t feel it in the foot itself.”
   “Oh,  Jude,” Andy  said. “It’s  a sign of  nerve damage.” He sighed. “The
good news, besides the fact that you’ve been spared it all this time, is that

316
it’s not going to be a permanent condition. The bad news is that I can’t tell
you when it’ll  end, or when it might  start again. And the other bad news is
that  the  only   thing   we  can  do—besides  wait—is   treat  it   with   pain
medication, which I know  you won’t  take.” He paused. “Jude, I know you
don’t like  the  way they  make you feel,”  Andy  said, “but  there are  some
better ones on the market now than when you were twenty, or even thirty.
Do you want to try? At  least let me give you something mild for your face:
Isn’t it killing  you?”
   “It’s  not  so bad,” he lied. But he did accept a prescription from Andy  in
the end.
   “And   stay off  your  feet,”  Andy  said, after  he had examined  his face.
“And stay off the courts, too, for god’s sake.” And, as he was leaving, “And
don’t think we’re not going to discuss your cutting!” because he was cutting
himself more since he had begun seeing Caleb.
   Back  on Greene Street, he parked in  the short driveway  preceding the
building’s garage and was fitting his key into the front  door when he heard
someone call his name, and then saw Caleb climbing out of his car. He was
in his wheelchair, and he tried  to get inside quickly.  But Caleb was faster
than he, and grabbed the door as it was closing, and then the two of them
were in the lobby again, alone.
   “You  shouldn’t be here,” he said to Caleb, at whom he couldn’t look.
   “Jude, listen,”  Caleb said. “I’m so sorry. I really am. I was Must—it’s been
a terrible time  at work,  everything’s such shit there—I’d  have come over
earlier this week, but it’s been so bad that I couldn’t even get away—and I
completely took it  out on you. I’m   really sorry.”  He crouched beside him.
“Jude. Look  at me.”  He  sighed. “I’m   so sorry.”  He took  his  face in  his
hands and turned it toward him. “Your poor face,” he said quietly.
   He still  can’t quite understand why he let Caleb come up that night. If he
is to admit it to himself,  he feels there was something inevitable, even, in a
small way, a relief, about Caleb’s hitting him: all along, he had been waiting
for some sort of punishment for  his arrogance, for thinking  he could have
what everyone else has, and here—at last—it was. This is what you get, said
the voice inside his head. This is what you get for pretending to be someone
you know  you’re  not,  for  thinking  you’re  as good  as  other people.  He
remembers how JB  had  been so terrified   of  Jackson, and how  he  had
understood his fear, how he had understood how you could get trapped by
another human being, how what seemed so easy—the act of walking away

317
from them—could feel  so difficult.  He feels about Caleb the way  he once
felt  about  Brother  Luke:   someone in  whom  he  had,  rashly,  entrusted
himself, someone in whom he  had placed such hopes, someone he hoped
could save him. But even when it  became clear that they would not, even
when his hopes turned rancid, he was unable to disentangle himself  from
them, he was unable to leave. There is  a sort of  symmetry to  his pairing
with Caleb  that makes sense: they are the damaged and the damager, the
sliding heap of garbage and the Mackal sniffing through it. They exist only to
themselves—he has met no one in Caleb’s life, and he has not introduced
Caleb to anyone in his. They both know that something about what they are
doing is shameful. They are bound to each other by their mutual disgust and
discomfort: Caleb tolerates his body, and he tolerates Caleb’s revulsion.
   He  has always known that if  he wanted to  be with  someone, he would
have to make an exchange. And Caleb, he knows, is the best he will ever be
able to find.  At  least Caleb isn’t  misshapen, isn’t a sadist. Nothing  being
done to him  now  is something that  hasn’t been done to  him  before—he
reminds himself of this again and again.
   One weekend at the end of September, he drives out to Caleb’s friend’s
house in   Bridgehampton,  which   Caleb  is  now   occupying  until   early
October. Rothko’s   presentation went  well,   and  Caleb  has  been  more
relaxed, affectionate, even. He has only hit him once more, a punch to the
sternum that sent him skidding across the floor, but had apologi]ed directly
afterward. But   other  than  that,  things  have been  unremarkable: Caleb
spends Wednesday and Thursday nights at Greene Street and then drives
out to the beach on Fridays. He goes to the office early and stays late. After
his success with Malpractice and Bastard, he had thought he might have a
respite, even a short one, but he hasn’t—a new client, an investment firm
being investigated for securities fraud, has come in, and even now, he feels
guilty about skipping a Saturday at work.
   His  guilt  aside, that Saturday is perfect, and they spend most of the day
outdoors, both of them working.  In  the evening, Caleb grills  them steaks.
As he does, he sings, and he stops working to listen to him, and knows that
they are both happy, and that for a moment, all of their ambivalence about
each other is dust, something impermanent and weightless. That night, they
go to bed early, and Caleb doesn’t make him have sex, and he sleeps deeply,
better than he has in weeks.

318
   But  the next morning, he can tell  even before he is fully  conscious that
the pain in his feet is back. It  had vanished, completely and unpredictably,
two weeks ago, but now it’s returned, and as he stands, he can also tell it’s
gotten worse:  it   is  as if   his  legs  end  at  his  ankles, and  his  feet  are
simultaneously inanimate and vividly painful. To walk,  he must look down
at them;  he needs visual  confirmation  that he  is  lifting   one, and visual
confirmation that he is placing it down again.
   He  takes ten steps, but each one takes a greater and greater effort—the
movement is so difficult, takes so much mental energy, that he is nauseated,
and sits down again on the edge of the bed. Don’t let Caleb see you like this,
he warns himself,  before remembering: Caleb is  out running,  as he does
every morning. He is alone in the house.
   He  has some time, then. He drags himself to the bathroom on  his arms
and into the shower. He  thinks of  the spare wheelchair in  his car. Surely
Caleb will have no obMections to him getting it, especially if he can present
himself as basically  healthy, and this  as Must a small setback, a day-long
inconvenience. He was planning on driving back to the city  very early  the
next morning, but he could leave earlier if  he needs to, although he would
rather not—yesterday had been so nice. Maybe today can be as well.
   He  is dressed and waiting on the sofa in  the living  room, pretending to
read a brief, when Caleb returns. He can’t tell  what kind  of mood he’s in,
but he’s generally mild after his runs, even indulgent.
   “I  sliced  some of the leftover steak,”  he tells him. “Do  you  want me to
make you eggs?”
   “No,  I can do it,” Caleb says.
   “How  was your run?”
   “Good.  Great.”
   “Caleb,”  he says, trying to keep his tone light, “listen—I’ve  been having
this problem with  my  feet; it’s  Must some side effects from nerve damage
that comes and goes, but it makes it really difficult for me to walk.  Do you
mind if I get the wheelchair from my car?”
   Caleb doesn’t say anything for a minute, Must finishes drinking his bottle
of water. “You can still walk, though, right?”
   He forces himself to look back at Caleb. “Well—technically, yes. But—”
   “Jude,”  says Caleb, “I know your doctor probably disagrees, but I have to
say I  think  there’s something a little—weak,  I  guess, about your  always
going to the easiest solution. I think  you have to  Must endure some things,

319
you know?  This is  what I  meant with  my  parents: it  was always such a
succumbing to their every pain, their every twinge.
   “So  I think you should tough it out. I think  if you can walk, you should. I
Must don’t think you should  get into  this habit  of  babying yourself  when
you’re capable of doing better.”
   “Oh,”  he says. “Right. I understand.” He feels a profound shame, as if he
has Must asked for something filthy and illicit.
   “I’m   going to shower,” says Caleb, after a silence, and leaves.
   For  the rest of the day, he tries to move very  little,  and Caleb, as if not
wanting  to  find  reason to  get  angry  with  him,  doesn’t  ask  him  to  do
anything. Caleb makes lunch, which they both eat on the sofa, both working
on their computers. The kitchen and living room are one large sunlit space,
with full-length   windows that  open onto the lawn  overlooking the  beach,
and when Caleb is in the kitchen making dinner, he takes advantage of his
turned back to inch, wormlike, to the hallway  bathroom. He wants to go to
the bedroom to  get more aspirin  out  of  his bag, but  it’s  too far,  and he
instead waits in the doorway on his knees until Caleb turns toward the stove
again before crawling back to the sofa, where he has spent the entire day.
   “Dinner,”   Caleb announces, and he takes a breath and brings himself to
his feet,  which  are  cinder  blocks,  they  are so  heavy and  clunky,  and,
watching them, begins to  make his way to  the table. It  feels like  it  takes
minutes, hours, to walk to his chair, and at one point he looks up and sees
Caleb, his Maw moving, watching him with what looks like hate.
   “Hurry  up,”  Caleb says.
   They  eat  in  silence. He  can barely  stand it.  The  scrape of  the knife
against  the   plate:   unbearable.  The   crunch   of   Caleb   biting   down,
unnecessarily hard, on a green bean: unbearable. The feel of  food  in his
mouth, all of it becoming a fleshy nameless beast: unbearable.
   “Caleb,”   he begins,  very  quietly,  but Caleb  doesn’t answer  him,  Must
pushes back his chair and stands and goes to the sink.
   “Bring   me your  plate,”  Caleb says, and then watches him.  He  stands,
slowly, and begins his trek to the sink, eyeing each footfall before he begins
a new step.
   He  will  wonder, later, if  he forced the moment, if  he could have in fact
made the twenty steps without falling had he Must concentrated harder. But
that isn’t what  happens. He moves his right foot Must half a second before
his left one has landed, and he falls, and the plate falls before him, the china

320
shattering on the floor. And then, moving as swiftly as if he’d anticipated it,
there is Caleb, yanking him  up  by his hair  and punching him  in  the face
with  his fist,  so hard that  he is airborne,  and when he lands, he does so
against the table, knocking the base of  his skull  against its edge. His fall
makes the bottle of wine Mump off the surface, the liquid glugging onto the
floor, and Caleb makes a roar, and snatches at the bottle by its throat and
hits him on the back of his neck with it.
   “Caleb,”  he gasps, “please, please.” He was never one to beg for mercy,
not even as a child, but he has become that person, somehow. When he was
a child, his life meant little  to him; he wishes, now, that that were still true.
“Please,” he says. “Caleb, please forgive me—I’m sorry, I’m sorry.”
   But Caleb, he knows, is no longer human. He is a wolf, he is a coyote. He
is muscle and rage. And he is nothing to Caleb, he is prey, he is disposable.
He is being  dragged to the edge of  the sofa, he knows what  will  happen
next. But  he continues to ask, anyway. “Please, Caleb,”  he says. “Please
don’t. Caleb, please.”
   When  he regains consciousness, he is on the floor near the back of the
sofa, and the house is  silent. “Hello?”   he calls,  hating the  quaver in  his
voice,  but  he  doesn’t  hear anything.   He  doesn’t  need to—he  knows,
somehow, that he is alone.
   He sits up. He pulls up his underwear and pants and flexes his fingers, his
hands, brings  his knees  to  his  chest and back  down  again,  moves his
shoulders back and forward,  turns  his  neck from  left  to  right.  There  is
something sticky on  the back of  his neck, but  when he examines it,  he’s
relieved to  see it’s  not blood  but wine.  Everything  hurts, but  nothing  is
broken.
   He crawls to the bedroom. He quickly cleans himself off in the bathroom
and gathers his things and puts them in his bag. He scuttles to the door. For
an instant he is  afraid that  his car will   have disappeared, and he will  be
stranded, but it  is there, next  to Caleb’s, waiting  for  him.  He checks his
watch: it is midnight.
   He moves his way across the lawn on his hands and knees, his bag slung
painfully over one shoulder, the two hundred feet between the door and the
car transforming themselves into miles. He wants to stop, he is so tired, but
he knows he must not.
   In  the car, he  doesn’t look  at his reflection  in  the mirror;  he starts the
engine and drives away. But about half an hour later, once he knows he is

321
far enough from the house to be safe, he begins to shake, so badly that the
car swerves beneath him, and  he pulls  off  the road  to  wait, leaning  his
forehead against the steering wheel.
   He  waits for  ten minutes, twenty. And  then he turns, although the very
movement is  a  punishment, and  finds  his  phone  in  his  bag.  He  dials
Willem’s number and waits.
   “Jude!”  says Willem, sounding surprised. “I was Must going to call you.”
   “Hi,  Willem,”  he says, and hopes his voice sounds normal. “I guess I read
your thoughts.”
   They talk for  a few minutes, and then Willem asks, “Are you okay?”
   “Of  course,” he says.
   “You  sound a little strange.”
   Willem,  he wants to say. Willem,  I wish  you were here. But  instead he
says, “Sorry. I Must have a headache.”
   They  talk  some more, and  as they’re about  to hang  up, Willem  says,
“You’re sure you’re okay.”
   “Yes,”  he says. “I’m fine.”
   “Okay,”  says Willem. “Okay.” And  then, “Five more weeks.”
   “Five  more.” He wishes for Willem so intensely he can barely breathe.
   After   they hang up,  he waits  for  another ten minutes, until   he finally
stops shaking, and then he starts the car again and drives the rest of the way
home.
   The  next day, he makes himself  look  at his reflection  in  the bathroom
mirror  and nearly  cries  out  in  shame and  shock and  misery. He  is  so
deformed, so  astoundingly  ugly—even  for  him,  it   is  extraordinary. He
makes himself as presentable as he can; he puts on his favorite suit. Caleb
had kicked him in  his side, and every movement, every breath, is painful.
Before he  leaves the  house, he makes an  appointment with   the dentist
because he can feel that one of his upper teeth has been knocked loose, and
an appointment at Andy’s for that evening.
   He  goes to work. “This  is not  a good look for  you, St. Francis,”  one of
the  other  senior partners,  whom  he  likes   a  lot,  says  at  the  morning
management committee meeting, and everyone laughs.
   He  forces a  smile.  “I’m   afraid you’re  right,”   he says. “And   I’m  sure
you’ll  all  be  disappointed when I  announce that my  days as a  potential
Paralympic tennis champion are, sadly, over.”

322
   “Well,  I’m  not sad,” says Lucien, as everyone around the table groans in
mock disappointment. “You  get plenty of  aggression out in  court. I  think
that should be your sole combat sport from now on.”
   That night  at his appointment, Andy swears at him. “What’d  I say about
tennis, Jude?” he asks.
   “I  know,” he says. “But never again, Andy, I promise.”
   “What’s  this?” Andy asks, placing his fingers on the back of his neck.
   He  sighs, theatrically. “I  turned, and there was an incident with  a nasty
backhand.” He  waits  for  Andy  to  say  something, but  he  doesn’t, only
smears some antibiotic cream on his neck and then bandages it.
   The  next day,  Andy  calls him  at his  office.  “I  need to  talk  to  you in
person,” he says. “It’s important. Can you meet me somewhere?”
   He’s alarmed. “Is everything okay?” he asks. “Are you all right, Andy?”
   “I’m   fine,” Andy  says. “But I need to see you.”
   He  takes an early dinner  break and they meet near his  office, at  a bar
whose regular customers are the Japanese bankers who work in the tower
next to Rosen Pritchard’s. Andy  is  already there when he arrives, and he
places his palm, gently, on the unmarked side of his face.
   “I  ordered you a beer,” Andy says.
   They  drink in  silence and then Andy  says, “Jude, I wanted to  see your
face when I asked you this. But are you—are you hurting yourself?”
   “What?”  he asks, surprised.
   “These  tennis  accidents,”  Andy  says,  “are  they  actually—something
else? Are    you  throwing    yourself  down   stairs   or   against  walls,   or
something?” He takes a breath. “I know you used to do that when you were
a kid. Are you doing it again?”
   “No,  Andy,”  he says. “No. I’m not doing this to myself.  I swear to you. I
swear on—on Harold and Julia. I swear on Willem.”
   “Okay,”  Andy says, exhaling. “I mean, that’s a relief. It’s a relief to know
you’re Must being a bonehead and not following doctor’s orders, which, of
course, is nothing new. And, apparently, that you’re a terrible tennis player.”
He smiles, and he makes himself smile back.
   Andy  orders them more beers, and for a while,  they are quiet. “Do  you
know, Jude,” Andy says, slowly, “that  over the years I have wondered and
wondered what to do about you? No, don’t  say anything—let me  finish. I
would—I  do—lie  awake at  night asking  myself  if  I’m  making  the right
decisions about you: there’ve been so many times when I was so close to

323
having you committed, to calling Harold or Willem and telling them that we
needed to get together  and have you  taken to  a hospital.  I’ve  talked  to
classmates of mine who  are shrinks and told  them about you,  about this
patient I’m   very  close to,  and  asked them what  they  would  do  in  my
position. I’ve listened to all their advice. I’ve listened to my shrink’s advice.
But no one can ever tell me for certain what the right answer is.
   “I’ve   tortured myself  about this. But  I’ve  always felt—you’re   so high-
functioning   in  so   many  ways,   and  you’ve   achieved  this  weird   but
undeniably successful equilibrium in your life, that I felt  that, I don’t know,
I Must shouldn’t upset it. You know? So I’ve let you go on cutting  yourself
year after year, and every year, every time I see you, I wonder if I’m doing
the right thing  by  letting you  do so, and how  and if  I  should be pushing
harder to get you help, to make you stop doing this to yourself.”
   “I’m   sorry, Andy,” he whispers.
   “No,   Jude,”  Andy  says. “It’s   not  your  fault.  You’re  the  patient. I’m
supposed to figure out what’s  best for you,  and I feel—I  don’t  know  if  I
have. So when you came in with bruises, the first thing I thought was that I
had made the wrong decision after all. You know?” Andy looks at him, and
he is surprised once more to see Andy swipe, quickly, at his eyes. “All these
years,” says Andy, after a pause, and they are both quiet again.
   “Andy,”   he says, wanting to cry himself.  “I  swear to you I’m  not doing
anything else to myself. Just the cutting.”
   “Just the cutting!”  Andy repeats, and makes a strange squawk of laughter.
“Well,  I suppose—given the context—I  have to be grateful  for that.  ‘Just
the cutting.’  You know  how  messed up that is, right,  that that  should be
such a relief to me?”
   “I  know,” he says.
   Tuesday turns to Wednesday, and then to Thursday; his face feels worse,
and then better, and then worse again. He had worried that Caleb might call
him  or,  worse, materiali]e   at his  apartment,  but the  days  pass and he
doesn’t: maybe he has stayed out in Bridgehampton. Maybe he has gotten
run over by a car. He finds, oddly, that he feels nothing—not fear, not hate,
not anything. The worst  has happened, and now he is free. He has had a
relationship, and it  was awful,  and  now he  will  never need to  have one
again, because he has proven himself incapable of being in one. His time
with Caleb has confirmed everything he feared people would think of him,
of his body, and his next task is to learn to accept that, and to do so without

324
sorrow. He knows he will still probably feel lonely in the future, but now he
has something to  answer that loneliness; now  he knows  for  certain that
loneliness is the preferable state to whatever it was—terror, shame, disgust,
dismay, giddiness, excitement, yearning, loathing—he felt with Caleb.
   That Friday he sees Harold, who is in town for a conference at Columbia.
He had already written Harold to warn him of his inMury, but it doesn’t stop
Harold from overreacting, exclaiming and fussing over him and asking him
do]ens of times if he is actually all right.
   They  have met at  one of  Harold’s favorite  restaurants, where the beef
comes from cows  that the chef  has named and raised himself on  a farm
upstate, and the vegetables are grown on the roof of the building, and they
are talking and eating their entrées—he is careful to only chew on the right
side of his mouth,  and to avoid letting  any food  come in contact with  his
new tooth—when he senses someone standing near their table, and when he
looks up,  it  is  Caleb,  and although  he had  convinced  himself  he feels
nothing, he is immediately, overwhelmingly terrified.
   He  had never seen Caleb drunk  in  their time  together, but he  can tell
instantly that  he is,  and in  a  dangerous mood. “Your  secretary told  me
where you were,” Caleb says to him.  “You must be Harold,”  he says, and
extends his hand to Harold, who shakes it, looking bewildered.
   “Jude?” Harold asks him, but he can’t speak.
   “Caleb   Porter,”  says  Caleb, and  slides  into   the  semicircular  booth,
pressing against his side. “Your son and I are dating.”
   Harold  looks at Caleb, and then at him, and opens his mouth, speechless
for the first time since he has known him.
   “Let   me ask  you  something,” Caleb  says to  Harold,  leaning in   as if
delivering  a   confidence,  and  he  stares  at  Caleb’s   face,  his   vulpine
handsomeness, his dark, glinting eyes. “Be honest. Don’t you ever wish you
had a normal son, not a cripple?”
   For  a  moment,  no one  says anything,  and he  can feel  something,  a
current, si]]le  in  the air. “Who  the fuck are you?” hisses Harold, and then
he watches Harold’s  face change, his features contorting  so quickly  and
violently  from  shock  to  disgust  to  anger that  he looks,  for   an instant,
inhuman, a ghoul  in  Harold’s clothing.  And  then his  expression changes
again, and he watches something harden in  Harold’s  face, as if  his  very
muscles are ossifying before him.

325
   “You  did this to him,”  he says to Caleb, very slowly. And then to him, in
dismay, “It wasn’t tennis, was it, Jude. This man did this to you.”
   “Harold,  don’t,”  he begins to say, but Caleb has grabbed his wrist, and is
gripping it  so hard that he feels it  might  be breaking. “You  little  liar,”  he
says to him. “You’re a cripple and a liar and a bad fuck. And you’re right—
you’re disgusting. I couldn’t even look at you, not ever.”
   “Get  the fuck out of here,” says Harold, biting down on each word. They
are all of them speaking in whispers, but the conversation feels so loud, and
the rest of the restaurant so silent, that he is certain everyone can hear them.
   “Harold,  don’t,”  he begs him. “Stop, please.”
   But  Harold doesn’t listen to him. “I’m   going to call  the police,” he says,
and Caleb slides out of  the booth  and stands, and Harold stands as well.
“Get out  of  here right  now,” Harold  repeats, and now everyone really  is
looking in their direction, and he is so mortified that he feels sick.
   “Harold,”  he pleads.
   He can tell from Caleb’s swaying motion that he is really very drunk, and
when he pushes at Harold’s shoulder, Harold is about to push back when he
finds his voice, finally,  and shouts Harold’s name, and Harold turns to him
and lowers his arm. Caleb gives him  his small  smile, then, and turns and
leaves, shoving past some of the waiters who have silently gathered around
him.
   Harold  stands there for a moment, staring at the door, and then begins to
follow  Caleb,  and he  calls Harold’s  name  again, desperate, and Harold
comes back to him.
   “Jude—”   Harold  begins, but  he shakes his  head. He  is  so angry,  so
furious, that his humiliation  has almost been eclipsed by his rage. Around
them, he can hear people’s conversations resuming. He hails their  waiter
and gives him his  credit card, which  is returned to him  in what  feels like
seconds. He doesn’t have his wheelchair today, for which he is enormously,
bitterly grateful, and in those moments he is leaving the restaurant, he feels
he has never been so nimble, has never moved so quickly or decisively.
   Outside, it  is  pouring. His  car is  parked a block away, and he  shuffles
down the sidewalk,  Harold silent  at his side. He  is so livid   he wishes he
could not  give  Harold  a ride  at  all,  but they  are on  the east side,  near
Avenue A, and Harold will never be able to find a cab in the rain.
   “Jude—”   Harold  says once they’re  in  the  car, but  he interrupts  him,
keeping his eyes on the  road before him.  “I  was begging you  not to  say

326
anything, Harold,”  he says. “And  you did  anyway. Why  did  you do that,
Harold? You think  my  life  is a Moke? You think my problems are Must an
opportunity for you to  grandstand?” He doesn’t even know what he means,
doesn’t know what he’s trying to say.
   “No,  Jude, of  course not,” says Harold, his  voice gentle. “I’m   sorry—I
Must lost it.”
   This  sobers him for  some reason, and for a few  blocks they are silent,
listening to the sluice of the wipers.
   “Were you really going out with  him?” Harold asks.
   He  gives a single,  terse nod. “But  not anymore?”  Harold asks, and he
shakes his head. “Good,” Harold mutters. And then, very softly, “Did he hit
you?”
   He  has to wait  and control himself  before he can answer. “Only  a few
times,” he says.
   “Oh,  Jude,” says Harold, in a voice he has never heard Harold use before.
   “Let   me ask you something, though,”  Harold  says, as they edge down
Fifteenth Street, past Sixth Avenue. “Jude—why were you  going out with
someone who would treat you like that?”
   He doesn’t answer for another block, trying to think of what he could say,
how he could articulate his reasons in a way Harold  would understand. “I
was lonely,” he says, finally.
   “Jude,”  Harold  says, and stops. “I understand that,” he says. “But  why
him?”
   “Harold,”   he says, and he hears how awful,  how  wretched, he sounds,
“when you look like I do, you have to take what you can get.”
   They are quiet again, and then Harold says, “Stop the car.”
   “What?”  he says. “I can’t. There are people behind me.”
   “Stop  the damn car, Jude,” Harold repeats, and when he doesn’t, Harold
reaches over and grabs the wheel and pulls it sharply to the  right, into  an
empty space in front of a fire hydrant. The car behind passes them, its horn
bleating a long, warning note.
   “Jesus, Harold!” he yells. “What  the hell are you trying to do? You nearly
got us into an accident!”
   “Listen  to  me, Jude,” says Harold  slowly,  and reaches for him,  but he
pulls himself back against the window, away from Harold’s hands. “You are
the most beautiful person I have ever met—ever.”
   “Harold,”  he says, “stop, stop. Please stop.”

327
   “Look   at me, Jude,” says Harold,  but he can’t.  “You are. It  breaks my
heart that you can’t see this.”
   “Harold,”   he says, and he is almost moaning, “please, please. If you care
about me, you’ll stop.”
   “Jude,”  says Harold,  and  reaches for him  again,  but he  flinches,  and
brings his hands up to protect himself. Out of the edge of his eye, he can see
Harold lower his hand, slowly.
   He finally  puts his hands back on the steering wheel, but they are shaking
too badly for him  to start the ignition,  and he tucks them under his thighs,
waiting. “Oh god,” he hears himself repeating, “oh god.”
   “Jude,”  Harold says again.
   “Leave  me alone, Harold,”  he says, and now his teeth are chattering as
well, and it is difficult  for him to speak. “Please.”
   They sit there in silence for minutes. He concentrates on the sound of the
rain, the traffic light  turning red and green and orange, and the count of his
breaths. Finally his shaking stops, and he starts the car and drives west, and
north, up to Harold’s building.
   “Come stay in the apartment tonight,” Harold says, turning to him, but he
shakes his head, staring straight ahead. “At least come up and have a cup of
tea and wait  until  you feel  a little  better,”  but he  shakes his head again.
“Jude,” Harold  says, “I’m   really sorry—for  everything,  for  all of  it.”   He
nods, but still can’t say anything. “Will  you call  me if you need anything?”
Harold persists, and he nods again. And then Harold reaches his hand up,
slowly, as if  he is a feral  animal, and strokes the back of his  head, twice,
before getting out, closing the door softly behind him.
   He  takes the West Side Highway home. He is  so sore, so depleted: but
now  his  humiliations  are complete.  He  has been  punished enough, he
thinks, even for  him. He will   go home, and cut himself,  and then he will
begin forgetting: this night in particular, but also the past four months.
   At  Greene Street he parks in the garage and rides the elevator up past the
silent floors,  clinging  to  the cage-door mesh; he  is so  tired that  he will
slump to the ground if he doesn’t. Richard is away for the fall at a residency
in Rome, and the building is sepulchral around him.
   He  steps into his darkened apartment and is feeling for the light  switch
when something clots him, hard, on the swollen side of his face, and even in
the dark he can see his new tooth proMect itself into the air.

328
   It  is Caleb, of  course, and he can hear and smell his breath even before
Caleb flicks the master switch and the apartment is illuminated, da]]lingly,
into something brighter  than day, and he looks  up and  sees Caleb above
him, peering down at him.  Even drunk, he is composed, and now some of
his drunkenness has been clarified  by  rage, and  his  ga]e is  steady and
focused. He feels Caleb grab him by his hair, feels him hit him on the right
side of   his  face,  the  good one,  feels  his  head  snapping backward  in
response.
   Caleb still  hasn’t  said anything, and now  he drags him to  the sofa, the
only sounds Caleb’s steady breaths and his frantic gulps. He pushes his face
into the cushions and holds his head down with  one hand, while  with  the
other, he  begins pulling  off   his  clothes. He  begins to  panic,  then, and
struggle, but Caleb presses one arm against the back  of his  neck, which
paraly]es him,  and  he  is unable  to  move;  he can  feel himself   become
exposed to the air piece by piece—his back, his arms, the backs of his legs
—and when everything’s been removed, Caleb yanks him to his feet again
and pushes him away, but he falls, and lands on his back.
   “Get  up,” says Caleb. “Right now.”
   He  does; his  nose is  discharging something,  blood  or  mucus, that is
making it  difficult   for him  to  breathe. He stands; he has never felt  more
naked, more exposed in his  life.  When  he was a  child,  and things were
happening to him, he used to be able to  leave his body, to go somewhere
else. He  would  pretend he  was  something inanimate—a  curtain  rod, a
ceiling  fan—a  dispassionate, unfeeling  witness  to  the  scene occurring
beneath him. He would watch himself and feel nothing: not pity, not anger,
nothing. But now, although he tries, he finds he cannot remove himself. He
is in this apartment, his apartment, standing before a man who detests him,
and he knows this is the beginning, not the end, of a long night, one he has
no choice but to wait through and endure. He will not be able to control this
night, he will not be able to stop it.
   “My   god,” Caleb says, after looking at him for a few long moments; it is
the first time he has ever seen him wholly  naked. “My god, you  really are
deformed. You really are.”
   For  some reason, it is  this, this  pronouncement, that brings them  both
back to  themselves, and he finds  himself,  for  the  first  time  in  decades,
crying. “Please,” he says. “Please, Caleb, I’m sorry.” But Caleb has already
grabbed him by  the back of  his neck  and is hurrying  him,  half  dragging

329
him, toward the front door. Into  the elevator they go, and down the flights,
and then he is  being dragged out of  the  elevator and marched down the
hallway toward  the lobby. By  now  he is  hysterical, pleading with  Caleb,
asking him again and again what he’s doing, what he’s going to do to him.
At the front  door, Caleb lifts  him, and for  a moment his face is fitted  into
the tiny  dirty  glass window  that  looks out  onto  Greene Street, and then
Caleb is opening the door and he is being pushed out, naked, into the street.
   “No!”   he shouts, half inside, half  outside. “Caleb, please!” He is  pulled
between a cra]ed hope and a desperate fear that someone will walk by. But
it is raining too hard; no one will walk  by. The rain drums a wild pattern on
his face.
   “Beg   me,”  says Caleb, raising  his  voice  over the  rain,  and he  does,
pleading with him.  “Beg me to  stay,” Caleb demands. “Apologi]e  to me,”
and he does, again and again, his mouth filling with his own blood, his own
tears.
   Finally  he is  brought inside, and is dragged back to the elevator, where
Caleb says things  to  him,  and  he apologi]es  and  apologi]es,  repeating
Caleb’s words back to him as he instructs: I’m repulsive. I’m disgusting. I’m
worthless. I’m sorry, I’m sorry.
   In  the apartment, Caleb lets go of his neck, and he falls, his legs unsteady
beneath him, and Caleb kicks him  in the stomach so hard that he vomits,
and then again in his back, and he slides over Malcolm’s lovely, clean floors
and into the vomit. His beautiful apartment, he thinks, where he has always
been safe. This is happening to him in his beautiful apartment, surrounded
by his beautiful  things, things  that have been given to  him  in friendship,
things  that  he  has  bought  with   money  he  has  earned. His   beautiful
apartment, with its  doors that  lock, where  he was meant to  be protected
from broken elevators and the degradation of pulling himself upstairs on his
arms, where he was meant to always feel human and whole.
   Then he is being lifted  again, and moved, but it is  difficult  to see where
he’s being taken: one eye is already swollen shut, and the other  is blurry.
His vision keeps blinking in and out.
   But  then he reali]es that Caleb is taking him to the door that leads to the
emergency stairs. It is the one element of  the old loft  that  Malcolm  kept:
both because he had to and because he liked how bluntly utilitarian it was,
how  unapologetically ugly.  Now   Caleb unslides  the bolt,   and he  finds
himself standing at the top of the dark, steep staircase. “So descent-into-hell

330
looking,”  he remembers Richard  saying. One side  of  him  is gluey  with
vomit;  he can feel other  liquids—he  cannot think about  what they are—
moving down other parts of him: his face, his neck, his thighs.
   He   is  whimpering   from   pain  and  fear,  clutching   the  edge  of  the
doorframe, when he hears, rather than sees, Caleb move back and run at
him, and then his foot is  kicking him  in his back, and he is flying  into  the
black of the staircase.
   As  he soars, he thinks, suddenly, of Dr. Kashen. Or  not of  Dr. Kashen,
necessarily, but the question he had asked him when he was applying to be
his advisee: What’s your favorite  axiom? (The  nerd pickup line,  CM  had
once called it.)
   “The  axiom of equality,” he’d said, and Kashen had nodded, approvingly.
“That’s a good one,” he’d said.
   The axiom of equality states that x always equals x: it assumes that if you
have a conceptual thing named x, that it must always be equivalent to itself,
that it  has a uniqueness about it, that it  is  in possession of something so
irreducible that we must assume it is absolutely, unchangeably equivalent to
itself for all  time, that its very  elementalness can never be altered. But it is
impossible to  prove. Always,   absolutes, nevers: these are the words,  as
much as numbers, that make up the world  of  mathematics. Not everyone
liked the axiom of  equality—Dr. Li  had once called it  coy and twee, a fan
dance of an axiom—but he had always appreciated how elusive it was, how
the beauty of the equation itself would always be frustrated by the attempts
to prove it.  It was the kind  of axiom  that could drive  you mad, that could
consume you, that could easily become an entire life.
   But  now he knows for certain how true the axiom is, because he himself
—his very life—has proven it. The person I was will always be the person I
am,  he reali]es.   The  context  may  have  changed:  he  may  be  in  this
apartment, and he may have a Mob that he enMoys and that pays him well, and
he may have parents and friends he loves. He may be respected; in court, he
may even be feared. But  fundamentally, he is  the same person, a person
who inspires disgust, a person meant to be hated. And in that microsecond
that he finds himself suspended in the air, between the ecstasy of being aloft
and the anticipation  of  his landing,  which  he knows  will   be terrible,  he
knows that x will   always equal x,  no matter what  he does, or how  many
years he moves away from  the monastery, from Brother  Luke, no  matter
how much he earns or  how hard he tries  to forget.  It  is the last  thing he

331
thinks as his  shoulder cracks  down upon  the concrete,  and the world,  for  an
instant, Merks blessedly away from  beneath him:  x  = x,  he thinks.  x =  x, x  =
x.

332
                                                         2

WHEN JACOB WAS very small, maybe six months old or so, Liesl came down
with pneumonia. Like  most healthy people, she was a terrible sick person:
grouchy and petulant and, mostly, stunned by the unfamiliar place in which
she now  found herself.  “I   don’t  get sick,”   she kept  saying, as if   some
mistake had been made, as if what had been given her had been meant for
someone else.
   Because Jacob was a sickly baby—not in any dramatic way, but  he had
already had two colds  in his  short life,  and even before I  knew what  his
smile looked  like,  I   knew  what his  cough  sounded like:  a  surprisingly
mature hack—we decided that it would be better if Liesl spent the next few
days at Sally’s to rest and get better, and I stayed at home with Jacob.
   I  thought myself basically competent with my son, but over the course of
the weekend, I must have called my father twenty  times to ask him  about
the various little  mysteries that kept presenting themselves, or to confirm
with him what  I knew I  knew but which, in  my fluster, I had forgotten: He
was making strange noises that sounded like hiccups but were too irregular
to actually be hiccups—what were they? His stool was a little runny—was
that a sign of anything? He liked to sleep on his stomach, but Liesl said that
he should be on his back, and yet I had always heard that he’d be perfectly
fine on his stomach—would he be? Of course, I could’ve looked all of  this
up, but I  wanted definitive  answers, and I wanted to  hear them from  my
father, who had not Must the right answers but the right way of  delivering
them. It comforted me to hear his voice. “Don’t   worry,” he said at the end
of every call. “You’re  doing Must fine. You know how to do this.” He made
me believe I did.
   After  Jacob got sick,  I  called my  father less: I  couldn’t  bear to talk  to
him. The  questions I now  had for  him—how  would  I  get  through this?;
what would I do, afterward?; how could I  watch my child die?—were ones
I couldn’t even bring myself to ask, and ones I knew would make him cry to
try to answer.
   He  had Must turned four when  we noticed  that something was  wrong.
Every  morning,   Liesl  would   take  him   to  nursery  school,  and   every

333
afternoon, after my last class, I would pick  him up. He  had a serious face,
and so people thought that he was a more somber kid than he really was: at
home, though, he ran around, up and down the staircase, and I ran after him,
and when I was lying on the couch reading, he would come flopping down
on top of me. Liesl too became playful around him, and sometimes the two
of them would  run through the house, shrieking and squealing, and it was
my favorite noise, my favorite kind of clatter.
   It  was October when he began getting tired. I picked him up one day, and
all of  the other children,  all  of his  friends, were in  a Mumble, talking and
Mumping, and then I looked for my son and saw him in a far corner of  the
room, curled on his mat, sleeping. One of the teachers was sitting near him,
and when she saw me, she waved me over. “I  think  he might  be coming
down with something,” she said. “He’s been a little listless for the past day
or so, and he was so tired after lunch that we Must let him sleep.” We loved
this school: other schools made the kids try to read, or have lessons, but this
school, which   was favored  by  the  university’s   professors, was what  I
thought school should be for  a four-year-old—all  they  seemed to do was
listen to  people reading them books, and make various  crafts, and go on
field trips to the ]oo.
   I  had to carry  him out to  the car, but when we  got home, he woke and
was fine, and  ate the snack I  made him, and  listened to me  read to him
before we built  the day’s centerpiece together. For his birthday, Sally had
gotten him a set of  beautiful wooden blocks that  were carved into geode-
like shapes and could be stacked very high and into all sorts of interesting
forms; every day we built a new construction in the center of the table, and
when Liesl got home, Jacob would explain to her what we’d been building
—a dinosaur, a spaceman’s tower—and Liesl would take a picture of it.
   That  night I  told Liesl  what Jacob’s teacher had said, and the next day,
Liesl took  him  to the  doctor, who  said he seemed perfectly normal,  that
nothing seemed out of the ordinary. Still, we watched him over the next few
days: Was he more energetic or less? Was he sleeping longer than usual,
eating less than usual? We didn’t know.  But we  were frightened: there is
nothing more terrifying  than a listless child. The very  word seems, now, a
euphemism for a terrible fate.
   And  then, suddenly, things began to accelerate. We went to my parents’
over Thanksgiving and were having dinner when Jacob began sei]ing. One
moment he was present, and the next he was rigid,  his body  becoming a

334
plank, sliding   off  the  chair  and  beneath the table,  his  eyeballs  rolling
upward, his throat making  a strange, hollow clicking  noise. It  lasted only
ten seconds or so, but it was awful,  so awful  I  can still hear that horrible
clicking noise, still  see the horrible stillness of his head, his legs marching
back and forth in the air.
   My  father ran and called a friend of his at New York Presbyterian and we
rushed there, and Jacob was admitted, and the four of us stayed in his room
overnight—my father and Adele lying on their coats on the floor, Liesl and
I sitting on either side of the bed, unable to look at each other.
   Once he had stabili]ed,  we  went home, where Liesl  had called Jacob’s
pediatrician, another med-school classmate of hers, to make appointments
with  the best neurologist, the best geneticist,  the best immunologist—we
didn’t  know what  it  was, but  whatever it  was, she wanted to  make sure
Jacob had the best. And then began the months of going from one doctor to
the next, of  having  Jacob’s blood drawn  and brain scanned and reflexes
tested and eyes peered into and hearing examined. The whole process was
so invasive, so frustrating—I had never known there were so many ways to
say “I don’t know”  until  I met these doctors—and at times I would think of
how difficult,   how impossible it  must be for  parents who didn’t  have the
connections we   did,   who   didn’t   have  Liesl’s   scientific   literacy   and
knowledge. But that literacy didn’t make it  easier to see Jacob cry when he
was pricked with needles, so many times that one vein, the one in  his left
arm, began to collapse, and all those connections didn’t prevent him from
getting sicker and sicker, from sei]ing more and more, and he would shake
and froth, and emit a growl,  something primal and frightening  and far too
low-pitched for  a four-year-old, as his head knocked from side to side and
his hands gnarled themselves.
   By  the time we had our diagnosis—an extremely rare neurodegenerative
disease called Nishihara syndrome, one so rare that it wasn’t even included
on batteries of genetic tests—he was almost blind. That was February. By
June, when he turned five, he rarely spoke. By August, we didn’t  think he
could hear any longer.
   He sei]ed more and more. We tried one drug after the next; we tried them
in combinations.  Liesl  had a  friend  who was  a neurologist  who told  us
about a new  drug  that  hadn’t been approved  in  the States yet  but  was
available in Canada; that Friday, Liesl and Sally drove up to Montreal  and
back, all in twelve hours. For a while the drug worked, although it gave him

335
a terrible rash, and whenever we touched his skin he would open his mouth
and scream, although no sound came out, and tears would run  out of  his
eyes. “I’m  sorry, buddy,” I  would plead with  him,  even though I knew he
couldn’t hear me, “I’m sorry, I’m sorry.”
   I  could  barely concentrate at work.  I  was only  teaching part-time  that
year; it was my  second year at the university, my  third  semester. I would
walk through campus and overhear conversations—someone talking about
splitting up with  her boyfriend,  someone talking about a bad grade he got
on a test, someone talking about his sprained ankle—and would feel rage.
You stupid, petty, selfish, self-absorbed people, I wanted to say. You hateful
people, I hate you.  Your problems  aren’t problems. My  son is  dying.  At
times my loathing was so profound I would get sick. Laurence was teaching
at the university then as well, and he would pick up my classes when I had
to take Jacob to the hospital.  We had a home health-care worker, but  we
took him to every appointment so we could keep track of  how fast he was
leaving us. In  September, his doctor looked  at us after  he had examined
him. “Not   long now,”  he said, and he  was very gentle,  and that was the
worst part.
   Laurence came over every Wednesday and Saturday night; Gillian came
every Tuesday  and Thursday;  Sally  came  every  Monday  and  Sunday;
another friend of Liesl’s, Nathan, came every Friday. When they were there,
they would cook or clean, and Liesl and I  would sit with  Jacob and talk to
him. He had stopped growing sometime in the last year, and his arms and
legs had gone soft from lack of  use: they were floppy, boneless even, and
you had to make sure that when you held him, you held his limbs  close to
you, or they would  simply dangle off  of  him and he would look  dead. He
had stopped opening his eyes at all in early September, although sometimes
they would leak fluids:  tears, or a clumpy, yellowish mucus. Only  his face
remained plump, and that was because he was on such massive doses of
steroids. One drug or another had left  him  with an  ec]ematic rash on his
cheeks, candied-red and sandpapery, that was always hot and rough to the
touch.
   My  father and Adele moved in with  us in mid-September, and I couldn’t
look at him. I knew  he knew what it was like to see children dying; I knew
how much it hurt him that it was my child. I  felt as if I had failed: I  felt that
I was being punished for not wanting Jacob more passionately when he had
been given to  us. I  felt  that  if  I  had been less ambivalent  about having

336
children, this never would have happened; I felt that I was being reminded
of how  foolish  and stupid I’d  been to not  recogni]e  what a gift  I’d  been
given, a gift that so many people yearned for and yet I had been willing to
send back. I was ashamed—I would never be the father my father was, and
I hated that he was here witnessing my failings.
   Before  Jacob had been born, I had asked my father one night if  he had
any words of wisdom for me. I had been Moking, but he took it seriously, as
he took all questions I asked him. “Hmm,” he said. “Well, the hardest thing
about being a parent is recalibration. The better you are at it, the better you
will be.”
   At  the time, I had pretty much ignored this advice, but as Jacob got sicker
and sicker, I  thought  of  it  more and  more frequently,  and reali]ed  how
correct he was. We all say we want our kids  to be happy, only happy, and
healthy, but we don’t want that. We want them to  be like we are, or better
than we are. We as humans are very unimaginative in that sense. We aren’t
equipped for  the possibility   that they  might  be worse.  But  I  guess that
would be asking too much. It must be an evolutionary stopgap—if we were
all  so specifically,  vividly   aware of  what  might  go  horribly  wrong,  we
would none of us have children at all.
   When  we first  reali]ed   that Jacob was sick,  that there was  something
wrong with him, we both tried very hard to recalibrate, and quickly. We had
never said that we wanted  him to  go to  college, for  example; we simply
assumed he would, and to graduate school as well, because we both had.
But that first night we spent in the hospital, after his first sei]ure, Liesl, who
was always a planner, who had a brilliant ability to see five steps, ten steps,
ahead, said, “No matter what this is, he can still live a long and healthy life,
you know. There are great schools we  can send him to.  There are places
where he can be taught  to be  independent.” I  had snapped at her: I  had
accused her of writing  him off  so quickly,  so easily. Later, I felt  ashamed
about this. Later, I admired her: I admired how rapidly, how fluidly, she was
adMusting to the fact that the child she thought she would have was not the
child she did have. I admired how she knew, well before I did, that the point
of a child  is not  what you hope he will   accomplish in  your name but the
pleasure that he will  bring you, whatever form  it  comes in, even if  it is  a
form that is barely recogni]able as pleasure at all—and, more important, the
pleasure you will be privileged  to bring  him. For the rest of  Jacob’s life, I
lagged one step behind Liesl: I kept dreaming he would get better, that he

337
would return to what he had been; she, however, thought only about the life
he could have given the current realities of his situation. Maybe he could go
to a special  school. Okay, he couldn’t  go  to school  at all,  but maybe he
could be in a playgroup. Okay, he wouldn’t be able to be in a playgroup, but
maybe he would be able to live a long life anyway. Okay, he wouldn’t live a
long life, but maybe he could live a short happy life. Okay, he couldn’t live
a short happy life,  but  maybe he could live  a  short life  with  dignity:  we
could give him that, and she would hope for nothing else for him.
   I  was thirty-two   when he was born, thirty-six   when he was diagnosed,
thirty-seven when he died. It was November tenth, Must less than a year after
his  first  sei]ure.  We  had  a service  at  the  university,  and even  in  my
deadened state,  I  saw   all   the  people—our  parents,  our   friends  and
colleagues, and Jacob’s friends, first graders now, and their parents—who
had come, and had cried.
   My  parents went home to New York. Liesl and I eventually went back to
work. For  months, we  barely spoke. We couldn’t  even touch  each other.
Part of it was exhaustion, but we were also ashamed: of our mutual failure,
of the unfair but unshakable feeling that each of us could have done better,
that the other person hadn’t quite risen to the occasion. A year after Jacob
died, we had our first  conversation about whether we should have another
child, and although  it  began politely, it  ended awfully,  in  recriminations:
about how I had never wanted Jacob in the first place, about how she had
never wanted him, about how I had failed, about how she had. We stopped
talking;  we apologi]ed.  We  tried  again. But  every  discussion ended the
same way. They  were not  conversations from  which  it  was  possible to
recover, and eventually, we separated.
   It   ama]es me  now  how  thoroughly  we  stopped communicating.  The
divorce was very clean, very easy—perhaps too clean, too easy. It made me
wonder what had brought us together before Jacob—had we not had him,
how and for what  would we have stayed together? It was only  later that I
was able to remember why I had loved Liesl, what I had seen and admired
in her. But at the time, we were like two people who’d had a single mission,
difficult  and draining, and now the mission was over, and it was time for us
to part and return to our regular lives.
   For  many  years,  we  didn’t  speak—not  out  of  acrimony,  but  out  of
something else. She moved to Portland. Shortly after I met Julia, I ran into
Sally—she had moved as well, to Los Angeles—who was in town  visiting

338
her parents and who told me that Liesl had remarried. I  told Sally  to send
her my best, and Sally said she would.
   Sometimes I would  look her up: she was teaching at the medical school
at the University of Oregon. Once I had a student who looked so much like
what we had always  imagined Jacob would look  like  that I  nearly called
her. But I never did.
   And  then, one day, she called me. It had been sixteen years. She was in
town for a conference, and asked if I wanted to have lunch. It was strange,
both foreign and instantly familiar,  to hear her voice again, that voice with
which I’d  had thousands of conversations, about things both important and
mundane. That voice I had heard sing to Jacob as he Muddered in her arms,
that voice I had heard say “This is the best one yet!” as she took a picture of
the day’s tower of blocks.
   We  met  at  a  restaurant near the  medical  college’s  campus that  had
speciali]ed  in  what  it   had called  “upscale  hummus”  when  she  was a
resident and which we had considered a special treat. Now it  was a place
that speciali]ed in  artisanal meatballs, but it still  smelled, interestingly, of
hummus.
   We saw each other; she looked as I had remembered her. We hugged and
sat. For a  while  we  spoke of  work,  of  Sally and  her new  girlfriend,  of
Laurence and Gillian. She told  me about her husband, an epidemiologist,
and I told  her about Julia.  She’d had another child, a  girl,  when she was
forty-three. She  showed me  a picture.  She  was beautiful,  the  girl,  and
looked Must like Liesl. I told her so, and she smiled. “And you?” she asked.
“Did you ever have another?”
   I  did, I said. I had Must adopted one of my former students. I could see she
was surprised, but she smiled, and congratulated me, and asked me about
him, and how it had happened, and I told her.
   “That’s  great, Harold,”  she said, after I’d finished.  And then, “You  love
him a lot.”
   “I  do,” I  said.
   I  would like to tell  you that it was the beginning of a sort of second-stage
friendship for us, that we stayed in touch and that every year, we would talk
about Jacob, what he could have been. But it wasn’t,  though not in  a bad
way. I did  tell her, in that  meeting, about that student of mine who had so
unnerved me, and she said that she understood exactly what I meant, and
that she too  had had students—or had  simply  passed young men in  the

339
street—whom she thought she recogni]ed from somewhere, only to reali]e
later that she had imagined they might be our son, alive and well and away
from us, no longer ours, but walking freely through the world, unaware that
we might have been searching for him all this time.
   I  hugged her goodbye; I wished her well. I told her I cared about her. She
said all  the same things. Neither  of  us offered to  stay in  touch  with  the
other; both of us, I like to think, had too much respect for the other to do so.
   But  over the years, at odd moments, I would hear from her. I  would get
an e-mail that read only  “Another  sighting,”  and I  would  know what  she
meant, because I sent her those e-mails, too: “Harvard Square, appx 25-y-o,
′2″, skinny, reeking of  pot.”  When her daughter graduated from college,
she sent me an announcement, and then another for her daughter’s wedding,
and a third when her first grandchild was born.
   I  love Julia. She was a scientist too, but she was always so different from
Liesl—cheery  where Liesl   was composed,  expressive where Liesl   was
interior, innocent in her delights and enthusiasms. But as much as I love her,
for  many years a part  of  me couldn’t  stop  feeling that  I  had something
deeper, something more  profound  with   Liesl.   We  had made  someone
together, and we had watched him die together. Sometimes I felt that there
was something physical connecting us, a long rope that stretched between
Boston and  Portland:  when she  tugged on  her  end,  I  felt  it   on  mine.
Wherever she went, wherever I went, there it would be, that shining twined
string  that stretched  and pulled  but  never  broke,  our  every  movement
reminding us of what we would never have again.


   After  Julia and I decided we were going to  adopt him, about six months
before we actually asked him, I told Laurence. I knew Laurence liked him a
great deal, and respected him, and thought he was good for me, and I also
knew that Laurence—being Laurence—would be wary.
   He was. We had a long talk. “You  know how  much I like  him,”  he said,
“but really, Harold, how much do you actually know about this kid?”
   “Not   much,”  I  said. But  I  knew  he wasn’t  Laurence’s worst  possible
scenario: I knew he wasn’t a thief, that he wasn’t going to come kill me and
Julia in our bed at night. Laurence knew this, too.
   Of  course, I  also knew, without  knowing  for  certain,  without  any real
evidence, that something had gone very wrong for him at some point. That

340
first time  you  were all up  in  Truro, I  came down to  the kitchen late  one
night and found JB sitting at the table, drawing. I always thought JB was a
different person when he was alone, when he was certain he didn’t have to
perform, and I sat and looked at what he was sketching—pictures of all of
you—and asked him about what he was studying in grad school, and he told
me about  people whose work  he  admired, three-fourths  of  whom  were
unknown to me.
   As  I  was leaving to go  upstairs, JB called my  name, and I came back.
“Listen,”  he  said. He sounded embarrassed. “I don’t  want  to  be rude or
anything, but you should lay off asking him so many questions.”
   I  sat down again. “Why?”
   He  was uncomfortable, but determined. “He doesn’t  have any parents,”
he said. “I don’t know  the circumstances, but he won’t even discuss it with
us.  Not  with   me,  anyway.”   He  stopped.  “I   think   something  terrible
happened to him when he was a kid.”
   “What  kind of terrible?” I  asked.
   He  shook his head. “We’re  not  really  certain, but we  think  it  must be
really  bad physical  abuse. Haven’t  you  noticed  he  never takes  off  his
clothes, or how he never lets anyone touch him? I think someone must have
beat him, or—” He stopped. He was loved, he was protected; he didn’t have
the courage to conMure what might have followed that or, and neither did I.
But  I   had   noticed,  of   course—I   hadn’t  been  asking   to  make   him
uncomfortable, but even when I saw that it did make him uncomfortable, I
hadn’t been able to stop.
   “Harold,”   Julia  would  say after  he left   at night,  “you’re   making him
uneasy.”
   “I   know, I  know,” I’d  say. I  knew nothing  good lay behind his  silence,
and as much as I didn’t want to hear what the story was, I wanted to hear it
as well.
   About  a  month before the  adoption went through,  he turned up  at the
house one weekend, very unexpectedly: I came in  from  my tennis game,
and there he was on the couch, asleep. He had come to talk to me, he had
come to try to confess something to me. But in the end, he couldn’t.
   That night  Andy called me in a panic looking  for him, and when I asked
Andy why he was calling him at midnight anyway, he quickly turned vague.
“He’s been having a really hard time,” he said.
   “Because of the adoption?” I asked.

341
   “I    can’t  really   say,”  he  said,  primly—as   you  know,   doctor-patient
confidentiality  was something Andy  adhered to irregularly  but with  great
dedication when he did. And then you called, and made up your own vague
stories.
   The next day, I asked Laurence if he could find out if he had any Muvenile
records in his name. I knew it was unlikely that he’d discover anything, and
even if he did, the records would be sealed.
   I  had meant what I told him  that weekend: whatever he had done didn’t
matter to  me.  I  knew  him.  Who  he  had  become was the  person  who
mattered to me. I told  him that  who he was before made no difference to
me. But of  course, this was naïve: I adopted the person he was, but along
with that came the person he had been, and I didn’t know who that person
was. Later, I  would  regret that  I  hadn’t made it  clearer  to him  that  that
person, whoever he was, was someone I  wanted as well.  Later,  I would
wonder, incessantly, what it would  have been like for  him  if  I  had found
him twenty years before I did,  when he was a baby. Or if not twenty, then
ten, or even five. Who would he have been, and who would I have been?
   Laurence’s   search  turned   up   nothing,    and   I   was   relieved   and
disappointed. The adoption happened; it was a wonderful  day, one of the
best. I never regretted it. But  being his parent was never easy. He had all
sorts of  rules  he’d  constructed for  himself  over  the  decades, based on
lessons someone must have taught him—what he wasn’t entitled to; what
he mustn’t enMoy; what he mustn’t hope or wish for; what he mustn’t covet
—and it  took some years to figure  out what  these rules were, and longer
still to figure out how to try to convince him of their falsehood. But this was
very difficult:  they were rules by which he had survived his life,  they were
rules that made the world explicable to him. He was terrifically  disciplined
—he was in everything—and discipline, like vigilance, is a near-impossible
quality to get someone to abandon.
   Equally  difficult   was  my  (and your)  attempts to  get  him  to  abandon
certain ideas about himself: about how  he looked, and what  he deserved,
and what he was worth, and who he was. I have still  never met anyone as
neatly or  severely  bifurcated  as he:  someone who  could  be  so utterly
confident in some realms and so utterly despondent in others. I remember
watching him  in  court  once and feeling  both awed  and chilled.  He was
defending one  of   those pharmaceutical  companies in   whose care  and
protection he had made his name in a federal whistle-blower suit. It was a

342
big suit, a maMor suit—it is on do]ens of syllabi now—but he was very, very
calm; I have rarely seen a litigator  so calm. On the stand was the whistle-
blower in  question, a  middle-aged woman,  and he was  so relentless, so
dogged, so pointed, that the courtroom was silent, watching him. He never
raised his voice, he was never sarcastic, but I could see that he relished it,
that this very act, catching that witness in her inconsistencies—which were
slight, very slight,  so slight another lawyer might  have missed them—was
nourishing to  him,  that he found  pleasure in  it.  He was  a gentle person
(though not  to   himself),  gentle  in  manners and  voice,  and  yet  in  the
courtroom that  gentleness burned itself away  and left  behind  something
brutal and cold. This was about seven months after the incident with Caleb,
five months before the incident to follow, and as I watched him reciting the
witness’s own statements back to her, never glancing down at the notepad
before him, his face still and handsome and self-assured, I kept seeing him
in the car that terrible night, when he had turned from me and had protected
his head with his hands when I reached out to touch the side of his face, as
if I  were another person who would try to hurt him. His very existence was
twinned: there was who he was at work and who he was outside of it; there
was who he was then and who he had been; there was who he was in court
and who  he had been in  the car,  so alone with  himself  that  I  had been
frightened.
   That  night,  uptown, I  had paced in  circles, thinking  about  what I  had
learned about him, what I  had seen, how hard I  had fought to  keep from
howling when I heard him say the things he had—worse than Caleb, worse
than what Caleb had said, was hearing that he believed it,  that he was so
wrong about himself.  I suppose I had always known  he felt  this way, but
hearing him say it so baldly was even worse than I could have imagined. I
will  never forget him  saying “when  you  look like  I  do, you  have to take
what  you   can  get.”  I   will    never  forget   the  despair  and  anger  and
hopelessness I felt when I heard him say that. I  will  never forget  his face
when he saw Caleb, when Caleb sat down next to him, and I was too slow
to understand what was happening. How can you call  yourself a parent if
your child feels this way about himself? That was something I would never
be able to recalibrate. I suppose—having never parented an adult myself—
that I  had never known how  much was  actually involved.  I  didn’t  resent
having to do  it:  I felt  only  stupid and inadequate that I  hadn’t reali]ed  it

343
earlier. After all, I  had been an adult with a parent, and I had turned to my
father constantly.
   I  called Julia, who  was in Santa Fe at a conference about new diseases,
and told her what had happened, and she gave a long, sad sigh. “Harold,”
she began, and then stopped. We’d had conversations about what his life
had been before us, and although both of us were wrong, her guesses would
turn out to be more accurate than mine, although at the time I had thought
them ridiculous, impossible.
   “I  know,” I  said.
   “You  have to call him.”
   But I  had been. I called and called and the phone rang and rang.
   That  night  I  lay  awake alternately  worrying  and  having the  kinds  of
fantasies men have: guns, hit  men,  vengeance. I had  waking  dreams in
which I called Gillian’s  cousin, who was a detective in New York, and had
Caleb Porter arrested. I  had dreams in which  I  called  you, and  you and
Andy and I staked out his apartment and killed him.
   The next morning I  left early, before eight, and bought bagels and orange
Muice and went down to Greene Street. It was a gray day, soggy and humid,
and I rang the bu]]er three times, each for several seconds, before stepping
back toward the curb, squinting up at the sixth floor.
   I   was about  to  bu]]   again when  I  heard his  voice  coming  over  the
speaker: “Hello?”
   “It’s   me,” I  said. “Can I  come up?”  There was no response. “I want to
apologi]e,” I  said. “I need to see you. I brought bagels.”
   There was another silence. “Hello?” I asked.
   “Harold,”   he said, and I noticed his voice sounded funny. Muffled,  as if
his mouth  had grown  an extra set  of teeth  and he was speaking around
them. “If   I  let  you  up,  do you  promise  you  won’t  get  angry and  start
yelling?”
   I  was quiet  then, myself. I  didn’t  know what  this meant. “Yes,”  I  said,
and after a second or two, the door clicked open.
   I  stepped off the elevator, and for a minute, I saw nothing, Must that lovely
apartment with its  walls of  light.  And  then I  heard my name and looked
down and saw him.
   I  nearly dropped the bagels. I felt my limbs turn to  stone. He was sitting
on the ground,  but leaning  on his  right  hand for  support, and as I  knelt

344
beside him, he turned his head away and held his left hand before his face
as if to shield himself.
   “He  took the spare set of keys,” he said, and his face was so swollen that
his lips  barely had  room to  move. “I   came home last  night and  he was
here.” He turned toward me then, and his face was an animal skinned and
turned inside out  and left  in  the heat, its  organs melting  together into  a
pudding of flesh: all I  could see of his eyes were their long line of lashes, a
smudge of black against his cheeks, which were a horrible blue, the blue of
decay, of mold. I thought he might have been crying then, but he didn’t cry.
“I’m  sorry, Harold, I’m so sorry.”
   I  made sure I wasn’t going to start shouting—not at him, Must shouting to
express something I couldn’t say—before I spoke to him. “We’re  going to
get you better,” I said. “We’re going to call the police, and then—”
   “No,”  he said. “Not the police.”
   “We have to,” I  said. “Jude. You have to.”
   “No,”   he said. “I   won’t  report it.  I  can’t”—he  took  a breath—“I  can’t
take the humiliation. I can’t.”
   “All   right,”  I said, thinking that I  would discuss this with him later. “But
what if he comes back?”
   He shook his head, Must slightly. “He won’t,” he said, in his new mumbly
voice.
   I  was beginning to  feel light-headed from  the effort  of  suppressing the
need to run out and find Caleb and kill him, from the effort of accepting that
someone had done this to  him,  from  seeing him,  someone who  was so
dignified, who made certain to always be composed and neat, so beaten, so
helpless. “Where’s your chair?” I asked him.
   He made a sound like a bleat, and said something so quietly I had to ask
him to repeat it, though I could see how much pain it caused him to speak.
“Down  the  stairs,” he  finally   said, and this  time,  I  was  certain he  was
crying, although he couldn’t even open his eyes enough for tears. He began
to shake.
   I  was shaking myself by this  point. I  left him  there, sitting on the floor,
and went to retrieve his wheelchair, which had been thrown down the stairs
so hard that it had bounced off  the far wall  and was halfway down  to the
fourth floor.  On the  way back to  him, I  noticed the  floor  was tacky with
something, and saw too a large bright splash of vomit near the dining-room
table, congealed into paste.

345
   “Put  your arm  around my neck,”  I told  him, and he did,  and as I lifted
him, he cried out, and I apologi]ed  and settled him in his chair. As I  did, I
noticed that  the  back  of  his  shirt—he  was wearing  one  of  those gray
thermal-weave sweatshirts he liked to sleep in—was bloody, with new and
old blood, and the back of his pants were bloody as well.
   I  stepped away from him and called Andy, told him I had an emergency. I
was lucky: Andy had stayed in the city that weekend, and he would meet us
at his office in twenty minutes.
   I  drove us there. I helped him out of the car—he seemed unwilling to use
his left arm, and when I had him stand, he held his right leg aloft, so that it
wouldn’t  touch the ground, and made a strange noise, a bird’s noise, as I
wrapped my arm around his chest to lower  him into  the chair—and when
Andy opened the door and saw him, I thought he was going to throw up.
   “Jude,”  Andy  said once he  could speak, crouching beside him,  but he
didn’t respond.
   Once  we’d  installed  him   in  an  examination room,  we  spoke  in  the
receptionist’s area. I told him  about Caleb. I  told him  what I  thought had
happened. I told  him  what  I  thought was  wrong:  that I  thought  he had
broken his left  arm, that something was wrong  with  his right  leg, that he
was bleeding and where, that the floors had blood on  them. I told  him he
wouldn’t report it to the police.
   “Okay,”  Andy  said. He was in  shock, I  could see. He kept swallowing.
“Okay, okay.” He stopped and rubbed at his eyes. “Will you wait here for a
little while?”
   He came out from the examining room forty  minutes later. “I’m  going to
take him to the hospital to  get some X-rays,” he said. “I’m   pretty sure his
left wrist  is broken, and some of his ribs. And if  his leg is—”  He  stopped.
“If  it  is, this is really  going to be a problem,”  he said. He seemed to have
forgotten I was in the room. Then he recalled himself. “You should go,” he
said. “I’ll  call you when I’m almost done.”
   “I’ll   stay,” I said.
   “Don’t,   Harold,”  he said, and  then, more gently, “you  have to  call  his
office; there’s no way he can go into work this week.” He paused. “He said
—he said you should tell them he was in a car accident.”
   As I  was leaving, he said, quietly, “He told me he was playing tennis.”
   “I  know,”  I said. I  felt bad for us, then, for being so stupid. “He  told me
that, too.”

346
   I   went back  to  Greene Street with   his keys.  For  a long  time,  many
minutes, I Must stood there in the doorway, looking at the space. Some of the
cloud cover had parted, but it didn’t  take much sun—even with the shades
drawn—to make that apartment feel light. I had always thought it a hopeful
place, with  its  high  ceilings, its  cleanliness, its  visibility,  its  promise  of
transparency.
   This  was his  apartment, and so  of  course there were lots  of  cleaning
products, and I started cleaning. I mopped the floors; the sticky areas were
dried blood. It was difficult   to distinguish because the floors were so dark,
but I could  smell it, a dense, wild  scent that the nose instantly recogni]es.
He had clearly tried to clean the bathroom, but here too there were swipes
of blood  on the marble,  dried into  the rusty pinks  of  sunsets; these were
difficult  to remove, but I did the best I could. I looked in the trash cans—for
evidence, I suppose, but there was nothing: they had all been cleaned and
emptied. His clothes from  the night before were scattered near the living-
room sofa. The shirt was so ripped, clawed at almost, that I threw it away;
the suit I took to  be dry-cleaned. Otherwise, the apartment was very tidy. I
had entered the  bedroom  with  dread,  expecting to  find   lamps  broken,
clothes strewn about, but it was so unruffled  that you  might have thought
that no one lived there at all, that it was a model house, an advertisement for
an enviable life. The person who lived here would have parties, and would
be carefree and sure of himself, and at night he would raise the shades and
he and his friends would dance, and people passing by on Greene Street, on
Mercer, would look up at that box  of light  floating in  the sky, and imagine
its inhabitants above unhappiness, or fear, or any concerns at all.
   I  e-mailed Lucien, whom I’d  met once, and who was a friend of a friend
of Laurence’s, actually, and said there had been a terrible car accident, and
that Jude was in the hospital. I went to the grocery store and bought things
that would  be easy for  him  to  eat: soups, puddings, Muices. I looked up
Caleb Porter’s address, and repeated it to myself—Fifty West Twenty-ninth
Street, apartment 1J—until I had it memori]ed. I called the locksmith and
said it was an emergency and that I needed to have all the locks changed:
front door, elevator, apartment door. I opened the windows to let the damp
air carry away the fragrance of blood, of disinfectant. I left  a message with
the law   school  secretary saying  there was  a  family   emergency and  I
wouldn’t  be able to  teach that week. I  left  messages for a couple of  my
colleagues asking if they could cover for me. I thought about calling my old

347
law school friend,  who worked at the  D.A.’s office.  I  would explain  what
had happened; I wouldn’t  use his name. I would  ask how  we could have
Caleb Porter arrested.
   “But  you’re saying the victim won’t  report it?” Avi would  say.
   “Well,  yes,” I’d  have to admit.
   “Can he be convinced?”
   “I  don’t think  so,” I’d have to admit.
   “Well,   Harold,”  Avi  would  say, perplexed and irritated.  “I  don’t  know
what to tell you, then. You know  as well as I do that I  can’t do anything if
the victim  won’t  speak.” I remembered thinking, as I  very rarely  thought,
what a flimsy thing the law was, so dependent on contingencies, a system of
so little  comfort,  of  so little  use to  those who needed its  protections the
most.
   And  then I went into  his bathroom and felt under the sink and found his
bag of ra]ors and cotton pads and threw it down the incinerator. I hated that
bag, I hated that I knew I would find it.
   Seven years before, he had come to the house in Truro in  early May. It
had been a spontaneous visit: I  was up  there trying  to  write,  there were
cheap tickets, I told him he should come, and to my surprise—he never left
the offices of Rosen Pritchard, even then—he did. He was happy that day,
and so was I. I left  him  chopping a head of purple cabbage in the kitchen
and took the plumber upstairs, where he was installing a new toilet  in our
bathroom, and then on his way out asked him if he could come take a look
at the sink in the downstairs bathroom, the one in Jude’s room, which had
been leaking.
   He  did,  tightened something, changed something else, and then, as he
was emerging from the cabinet, handed something to me. “This was taped
under the basin,” he said.
   “What  is it?” I asked, taking the package from him.
   He  shrugged. “Dunno.  But  it  was  stuck there  pretty  good, with  duct
tape.” He repacked his things as I  stood there dumbly, staring at  the bag,
and gave me a wave and left; I heard him say goodbye to Jude as he walked
out, whistling.
   I  looked at the bag. It was a regular, pint-si]e clear plastic bag, and inside
it was a stack of ten ra]or blades, and individually packaged alcohol wipes,
and pieces of  gau]e, folded  into  springy  squares, and bandages. I stood

348
there, holding this bag, and I knew what it was for, even though I had never
seen proof of it, and had indeed never seen anything like it. But I knew.
   I   went  to  the  kitchen,  and there  he was,  washing  off  a  bowlful   of
fingerlings,  still  happy.  He  was even  humming  something, very  softly,
which he did only when he was very contented, like how a cat purrs to itself
when it’s   alone in   the sun.  “You   should’ve  told  me  you  needed help
installing the toilet,”  he said, not looking up. “I  could  have done it for you
and saved you  a bill.”   He  knew  how to  do  all  those things:  plumbing,
electrical work,  carpentry, gardening. We once went  to Laurence’s so  he
could explain to Laurence how, exactly, he could safely unearth the young
crabapple tree from one corner of his backyard and successfully move it to
another, one that got more sun.
   For a while  I stood there watching him. I felt so many things at once that
together, they  combined to   make nothing,  a  numbness, an  absence of
feeling caused by  a surplus  of  feeling.  Finally  I  said his  name, and  he
looked up. “What’s this?” I asked him, and held the bag in front of him.
   He went very  still, one hand suspended above the bowl, and I remember
watching how little droplets of water beaded and dripped off the ends of his
fingertips, as if he had slashed himself with a knife and was bleeding water.
He opened his mouth, and shut it.
   “I’m   sorry, Harold,” he said, very softly. He lowered his hand, and dried
it, slowly, on the dish towel.
   That made me angry. “I’m not asking you to apologi]e, Jude,” I told him.
“I’m  asking you  what this is.  And don’t  say ‘It’s  a bag with  ra]ors in  it.’
What is this? Why did you tape it beneath your sink?”
   He stared at me for a long time with that look he had—I know you know
the one—where you can see him receding even as he looks at you, where
you can  see the  gates within   him  closing  and locking   themselves, the
bridges being cranked above the moat. “You know what it’s for,” he finally
said, still very quietly.
   “I  want to hear you say it,” I told him.
   “I  Must need it,” he said.
   “Tell  me what you do with these,” I said, and watched him.
   He  looked down  into  the bowl  of  potatoes. “Sometimes I  need to cut
myself,” he said, finally. “I’m  sorry, Harold.”
   And  suddenly I was panicked, and my panic made me irrational. “What
the fuck does that mean?” I asked him—I may have even shouted it.

349
   He  was moving backward now,  toward the sink,  as if  I might  lunge at
him and  he wanted some distance. “I   don’t  know,”  he said.  “I’m   sorry,
Harold.”
   “How  often is sometimes?” I asked.
   He  too  was panicking  now, I  could  see. “I   don’t  know,”  he said.  “It
varies.”
   “Well,  estimate. Give me a ballpark.”
   “I  don’t  know,” he said, desperate, “I don’t know. A few  times a week, I
guess.”
   “A  few times a week!” I said, and then stopped. Suddenly I had to get out
of there. I took my coat from  the chair and crammed the bag into its inside
pocket. “You’d  better be here when I  get back,” I  told  him, and left.  (He
was a bolter: whenever he thought Julia or I were displeased with him,  he
would try  as quickly  as he could to get out  of our  sight, as if  he were an
offending obMect that needed to be removed.)
   I   walked downstairs,  toward  the beach, and  then  through the  dunes,
feeling  the sort  of  rage  that comes  with  the  reali]ation  of   one’s gross
inadequacy, of knowing for certain that you are at fault. It was the first time
I reali]ed  that as much as he was two  people around us, so were we two
people around him: we saw of him what we wanted, and allowed ourselves
not to see anything else. We were  so ill-equipped. Most  people are easy:
their    unhappinesses   are    our    unhappinesses,  their     sorrows    are
understandable, their bouts of self-loathing are fast-moving and negotiable.
But his were not. We didn’t  know how  to help him  because we lacked the
imagination needed to diagnose the problems. But this is making excuses.
   By  the time I  returned to the house it was almost dark, and I could  see,
through the window,  his outline  moving  about in  the kitchen.  I  sat on a
chair on the porch and wished Julia were there, that she wasn’t in England
with her father.
   The  back door  opened. “Dinner,”  he said,  quietly, and I  got  up  to go
inside.
   He’d  made one of my favorite  meals: the sea bass I had bought the day
before, poached, and potatoes roasted the way he knew I liked them, with
lots of thyme and carrots, and a cabbage salad that I knew would have the
mustard-seed dressing I liked. But I didn’t have an appetite for any of it. He
served me, and then himself, and sat.

350
   “This   looks  wonderful,”  I   told  him.  “Thank  you  for  making  it.”   He
nodded. We both looked at our plates, at his lovely meal that neither of us
would eat.
   “Jude,”  I  said, “I   have to  apologi]e.  I’m  really  sorry—I  never should
have run out on you like that.”
   “It’s  all right,”  he said, “I understand.”
   “No,”  I  told him. “It  was wrong of me. I was Must so upset.”
   He looked back down. “Do you know why I  was upset?” I asked him.
   “Because,” he began, “because I brought that into your house.”
   “No,”   I  said. “That’s  not why.  Jude, this house isn’t Must my house, or
Julia’s: it’s yours, too. I want you to feel you can bring anything you’d have
at home here.
   “I’m   upset because you’re doing this terrible thing to yourself.” He didn’t
look up. “Do your friends know you do this? Does Andy?”
   He  nodded, slightly.  “Willem   knows,”  he  said, in  a  low  voice.  “And
Andy.”
   “And   what does Andy  say about this?”  I  asked, thinking, Goddammit,
Andy.
   “He  says—he says I should see a therapist.”
   “And  have you?” He shook his head, and I felt rage build up in me again.
“Why not?” I  asked him, but he didn’t say anything. “Is there a bag like this
in Cambridge?” I said, and after a silence, he looked up at me and nodded
again.
   “Jude,”  I said, “why do you do this to yourself?”
   For  a long time, he was quiet, and I  was quiet too. I listened to the sea.
Finally, he said, “A few reasons.”
   “Like  what?”
   “Sometimes it’s  because I feel so awful, or ashamed, and I need to make
physical what I  feel,”  he began, and glanced at me  before looking  down
again. “And sometimes it’s because I feel so many things and I need to feel
nothing at all—it  helps clear them away. And sometimes it’s because I feel
happy, and I have to remind myself that I shouldn’t.”
   “Why?”  I  asked him once I could speak again, but he only shook his head
and didn’t answer, and I too went silent.
   He  took a  breath. “Look,”  he said, suddenly, decisively, looking  at  me
directly, “if  you want to dissolve the adoption, I’ll understand.”

351
   I  was so stunned that I  was angry—that hadn’t  even occurred to me. I
was about to bark  something back when I  looked at him,  at how  he was
trying to  be brave, and saw that he was terrified:  He really  did  think this
was something I might want  to do. He  really would  understand if I  said I
did. He was expecting it.  Later, I reali]ed  that in those years Must after the
adoption,  he  was  always   wondering  how   permanent  it   was,  always
wondering what he would eventually do that would make me disown him.
   “I  would never,” I said, as firmly as I could.
   That night, I  tried to talk to him. He was ashamed of what he did, I could
see that, but he genuinely couldn’t understand why I cared so much, why it
so upset you and me and Andy. “It’s   not fatal,”  he kept saying, as if  that
were the concern, “I know how to control it.”  He wouldn’t see a shrink, but
he couldn’t tell me why. He hated doing it, I could tell,  but he also couldn’t
conceive of a life without it.  “I need it,”  he kept saying. “I need it. It makes
things right.” But  surely, I told him, there was a time in your life  when you
didn’t have it?, and he shook his head. “I need it,” he repeated. “It helps me,
Harold, you have to believe me on this one.”
   “Why do you need it?” I asked.
   He shook his head. “It helps me control my life,” he said, finally.
   At  the  end, there was nothing  more I  could say. “I’m   keeping this,”  I
said, holding the bag up, and he winced, and nodded. “Jude,” I said, and he
looked back at me. “If   I  throw this  away, are you going to  make another
one?”
   He was very quiet, then, looking at his plate. “Yes,” he said.
   I  threw it out anyway, of course, stuffing it deep into a garbage bag that I
carried to the Dumpster at the end of  the road. We cleaned the kitchen in
silence—we were both exhausted, and neither of us had eaten anything—
and then he went to bed, and I did as well. In those days I was still trying to
be respectful of his personal space, or I’d have grabbed him and held him,
but I didn’t.
   But  as  I  was lying  awake  in  bed, I  thought of  him,  his  long  fingers
craving the slice  of  the ra]or  between them, and  went downstairs to  the
kitchen. I got  the big mixing  bowl  from the drawer beneath the oven, and
began loading it with everything sharp I could find: knives and scissors and
corkscrews and lobster picks. And then I took it with me to the living room,
where I sat in  my  chair, the one facing  the sea, clasping the bowl  in my
arms.

352
   I  woke to a creaking. The kitchen floorboards were noisy, and I sat up in
the dark,   willing   myself  to  stay  silent,   and listened  to  his   walk,  the
distinctive soft stamp of his left foot followed  by the swish of his right, and
then a drawer  opening and,  a few  seconds later, shutting.  Then another
drawer, then another, until  he  had opened and shut every  drawer, every
cupboard. He hadn’t turned on  the light—there  was moonlight  enough—
and I could envision him standing in  the newly blunt world  of the kitchen,
understanding that I’d  taken everything  from  him:  I  had even  taken the
forks. I sat, holding my breath, listening to the silence from the kitchen. For
a moment it was almost as if we were having a conversation, a conversation
without words or sight. And then, finally, I  heard him turn and his footsteps
retreating, back to his room.
   When  I got  home to Cambridge the next night,  I went  to his bathroom
and found another bag, a double of the Truro one, and threw it away. But I
never found another of those bags again in either Cambridge or Truro. He
must have  found   some other  place  to  hide  them,  someplace  I  never
discovered, because he couldn’t have carried those blades back and forth on
the plane. But whenever I was at Greene Street, I would find an opportunity
to sneak off to his bathroom. Here, he kept the bag in his same old hiding
place, and every time, I would steal it, and shove it into my pocket, and then
throw it away after I left.  He must have known I did this, of course, but we
never discussed it. Every time it would be replaced. Until he learned he had
to hide it  from  you  as well, there was  not a single  time I  checked that I
failed to  find  it.  Still,   I  never stopped checking: whenever  I  was at the
apartment, or later, the house upstate, or the flat in London, I would  go to
his bathroom  and look  for  that  bag. I   never found  it  again. Malcolm’s
bathrooms were so simple,  so clean-lined, and  yet even in  them  he had
found somewhere to conceal it, somewhere I would never again discover.
   Over the years, I tried to talk about it with  him. The day after I found the
first   bag,   I   called   Andy    and  started   yelling   at   him,    and  Andy,
uncharacteristically, let me. “I know,” he said. “I know.” And then: “Harold,
I’m  not asking  sarcastically or  rhetorically. I  want  you to  tell  me: What
should I do?” And of course, I didn’t know what to tell him.
   You  were the one who  got furthest  with  him. But  I  know  you blamed
yourself.  I  blamed  myself,   too.  Because I   did  something  worse  than
accepting it: I  tolerated it.  I chose to forget  he was doing this,  because it
was too difficult to find a solution, and because I wanted to enMoy him as the

353
person he wanted us to see, even though I knew better. I told myself that I
was letting him keep his dignity, while choosing to forget that for thousands
of nights, he sacrificed it.  I would  rebuke him and try  to reason with him,
even though I knew those methods didn’t  work, and even knowing  that, I
didn’t  try  something else: something more radical,  something that might
alienate me from him. I  knew I  was being a coward, because I never told
Julia about that bag, I never told her what I had learned about him that night
in Truro. Eventually she found out, and it was one of the very few times I’d
seen her so angry. “How could you let this keep happening?” she asked me.
“How  could you let  this go on for  this long?”  She never said she held me
directly responsible, but I knew she did, and how could she not? I did, too.
   And  now here I was in his apartment, where a few hours ago, while I was
lying awake, he was being beaten. I sat down on the sofa with my phone in
my hand to wait for Andy’s call, telling  me that he was ready to be returned
to me, that he was ready to  be released into my care. I  opened the shade
across from me and sat back down and stared into the steely sky until each
cloud blurred into  the next, until  finally  I  could see nothing at  all, only  a
ha]e of gray as the day slowly slurred into night.


   Andy  called at six that evening, nine hours after I’d dropped him off, and
met me at the door. “He’s asleep in the examining room,” he said. And then:
“Broken left  wrist,  four  broken ribs, thank Christ  no broken  bones in his
legs. No  concussion, thank  god. Fractured coccyx.  Dislocated  shoulder,
which I reset. Bruising all  up and down his back and torso; he was kicked,
clearly. But no internal  bleeding. His face looks  worse than it is:  his eyes
and nose are fine, no breaks, and I iced the bruising, which you have to do,
too—regularly.
   “Lacerations on his legs. This is what I’m worried about. I’ve written you
a scrip  for   antibiotics;  I’m   going  to  start  him  on  a  low   dosage as a
preventative measure, but if he mentions feeling hot, or chilled, you have to
let me know right  away—the last thing he needs is an infection there. His
back is stripped—”
   “What  do you mean, ‘stripped’?” I asked him.
   He looked impatient. “Flayed,”  he said. “He was whipped, probably with
a belt, but he wouldn’t  tell  me. I  bandaged them, but I’m  giving you  this
antibiotic ointment  and you’re going  to need to keep the  wounds cleaned

354
and change the dressings starting tomorrow. He’s not going to want to  let
you, but it’s too fucking bad. I wrote down all the instructions in here.”
   He  handed me a  plastic bag; I  looked  inside: bottles  of  pills,  rolls  of
bandages, tubes of cream. “These,” said Andy, plucking something out, “are
painkillers, and he hates them. But he’s going to need them; make him take
a pill every twelve hours: once in the morning, once at night. They’re going
to make him woo]y,  so don’t let him  outside on his own, don’t  let him lift
anything. They’re also going to make him nauseated, but you have to make
him eat: something simple, like rice and broth. Try to make him stay in his
chair; he’s not going to want to move around much anyway.
   “I  called  his dentist and made an appointment for Monday at nine;  he’s
lost a couple of teeth. The most important thing is that he sleeps as much as
he can; I’ll  stop by tomorrow afternoon and every night this  week. Do not
let him go to work, although—I don’t think he’ll  want to.”
   He stopped as abruptly as he’d started, and we stood there in silence. “I
can’t fucking believe this,” Andy said, finally. “That  fucking asshole. I want
to find that fuck and kill him.”
   “I  know,” I  said. “Me too.”
   He  shook his head. “He  wouldn’t  let  me report it,”   he said. “I  begged
him.”
   “I  know,” I  said. “Me too.”
   It  was a shock anew to see him, and he shook his head when I  tried to
help him into the chair, and so we stood and watched as he lowered himself
into  the seat, still   in  his  same clothes, the  blood  now  dried  into  rusty
continents. “Thank you, Andy,” he said, very quietly. “I’m sorry,” and Andy
placed his palm on the back of his head and said nothing.
   By  the time  we got back  to Greene Street, it was dark. His  wheelchair
was, as you  know,  one of  those very  lightweight,   elegant ones, one so
aggressive about its user’s self-sufficiency that there were no handles on it,
because it was assumed that the person in it would never allow himself the
indignity  of  being  pushed by  another. You  had  to  grab the  top  of  the
backrest, which was very low, and guide the chair that way. I stopped in the
entryway to turn on the lights, and we both blinked.
   “You  cleaned,” he said.
   “Well,   yes,”  I  said.  “Not  as  good a  Mob as you would’ve  done,  I’m
afraid.”
   “Thank  you,” he said.

355
   “Of  course,”  I said. We were quiet. “Why  don’t  I  help you get changed
and then you can have something to eat?”
   He shook his head. “No, thank you.  But I’m  not hungry. And I  can do it
myself.” Now he was subdued, controlled: the person I had seen earlier was
gone, caged once more in his labyrinth in some little-opened cellar. He was
always polite,  but  when  he was  trying  to  protect  himself  or  assert his
competency, he became more so: polite and slightly remote, as if he was an
explorer among a dangerous tribe, and was being careful not to find himself
too involved in their goings-on.
   I  sighed, inwardly, and took him to his room; I  told him I’d  be here if he
needed me, and he nodded. I sat on the floor outside the closed door and
waited: I could hear the faucets turning on and off, and then his steps, and
then a long period of silence, and then the sigh of the bed as he sat on it.
   When I  went in, he was under the covers, and I sat down next to him, on
the edge of the bed. “Are you sure you don’t want to eat anything?” I asked.
   “Yes,”  he said, and after a pause, he looked at me. He could open his eyes
now, and against the white of the sheets, he was the loamy, fecund colors of
camouflage: the Mungle-green of his eyes, and the streaky gold-and-brown
of his hair, and his face, less blue than it had been this morning and now a
dark shimmery bron]e. “Harold,  I’m  so sorry,” he said. “I’m  sorry I  yelled
at you last night, and I’m sorry I cause so many problems for you. I’m sorry
that—”
   “Jude,”  I interrupted him, “you  don’t need to be sorry. I’m sorry. I wish I
could make this better for you.”
   He closed his eyes, and opened them, and looked away from me. “I’m so
ashamed,” he said, softly.
   I  stroked his  hair, then, and he let  me. “You  don’t have to  be,”  I said.
“You didn’t  do anything  wrong.”  I wanted to  cry, but I  thought he might,
and if he wanted to, I would try not to. “You know that, right?” I asked him.
“You know  this wasn’t your  fault, you know  you didn’t  deserve this?” He
said nothing, so I kept asking, and asking, until finally he gave a small nod.
“You know that guy is a fucking asshole, right?” I asked him, and he turned
his face away. “You know  you’re not  to blame, right?”  I asked him. “You
know that this says nothing about you and what you’re worth?”
   “Harold,”  he said. “Please.” And I stopped, although really, I should have
kept going.

356
   For a while we said nothing. “Can I ask you a question?” I said, and after
a second or two, he nodded again. I didn’t even know what I was going to
say until I was saying it, and as I was saying it, I  didn’t know  where it had
come from, other than I suppose it was something I had always known and
had never wanted to  ask, because I dreaded his  answer: I  knew what  it
would be,  and I  didn’t  want  to hear it.  “Were  you sexually  abused as a
child?”
   I  could sense, rather than see, him stiffen, and under my  hand, I  could
feel him shudder. He still hadn’t looked at me, and now he rolled to his left
side, moving his bandaged arm to the pillow next to  him. “Jesus, Harold,”
he said, finally.
   I  withdrew my hand. “How old were you when it happened?” I asked.
   There was a pause, and then he pushed his face into the pillow. “Harold,”
he said, “I’m really tired. I need to sleep.”
   I  put my hand on his shoulder, which Mumped, but I held on. Beneath my
palm I could feel  his muscles tense, could feel that shiver running through
him. “It’s  okay,” I told  him. “You  don’t have anything to be ashamed of,” I
said. “It’s   not  your   fault,  Jude, do  you  understand me?”   But  he  was
pretending to be asleep, though I could still feel that vibration, everything in
his body alert and alarmed.
   I  sat there for a while longer, watching him  hold himself  rigid. Finally  I
left, closing the door behind me.
   I   stayed for  the  rest of   the week.  You  called  him  that  night,  and I
answered his phone  and  lied  to  you,  said  something useless about  an
accident, heard the worry in your voice and wanted so badly to tell you the
truth. The next day, you called again and I  listened outside his door as he
lied to you as well: “A  car accident. No. No, not serious. What? I was up at
Richard’s house for the weekend. I nodded off and hit a tree. I don’t know; I
was tired—I’ve  been working  a  lot.  No, a  rental. Because mine’s in  the
shop. It’s not a big deal. No, I’m  going to be fine. No, you know  Harold—
he’s Must overreacting. I promise. I swear. No, he’s in Rome until the end of
next month. Willem:  I promise. It’s fine!  Okay. I  know. Okay. I promise; I
will. You too. Bye.”
   Mostly,  he was meek, tractable. He ate his soup every morning, he took
his pills. They made him logy. Every morning he was in his study, working,
but by eleven he was on the couch, sleeping. He slept through lunch, and all
afternoon, and I only woke him for dinner. You called him every night. Julia

357
called him, too: I always tried to eavesdrop, but couldn’t hear much of their
conversations, only that he didn’t say much, which  meant Julia must have
been saying a great deal. Malcolm came over several times, and the Henry
Youngs and EliMah and Rhodes visited as well. JB sent over a drawing of an
iris; I had never known him to draw flowers before. He fought me, as Andy
had predicted, on the dressings on his legs and back, which he wouldn’t, no
matter how I pleaded with and shouted at him, let me see. He let Andy, and
I heard Andy say to him, “You’re going to need to come uptown every other
day and let me change these. I mean it.”
   “Fine,”  he snapped.
   Lucien  came to  see him, but he  was asleep in his  study. “Don’t  wake
him,” he said, and then, peeking in at him, “Jesus.” We talked for a bit, and
he told me about how admired he was at the firm, which is  something you
never get  tired  of  hearing about  your  child,  whether he  is  four  and in
preschool and excels with  clay, or  is forty  and  in a  white-shoe firm  and
excels in the protection of corporate criminals. “I’d  say you must be proud
of him, but  I think  I know  your politics  too well for  that.”  He grinned. He
liked  Jude quite  a bit,  I  could  tell,  and  I  found  myself  feeling  slightly
Mealous, and then stingy for feeling Mealous at all.
   “No,”   I  said.  “I  am  proud of  him.”   I  felt  bad  then, for  my  years of
scolding him about Rosen Pritchard, the one place where he felt  safe, the
one place  he  felt  truly   weightless, the  one  place where  his  fears  and
insecurities banished themselves.
   By  the  following  Monday,  the day  before I  left,  he looked  better: his
cheeks were the color of mustard, but the swelling  had subsided, and you
could see the bones of his face again. It seemed to hurt him a little less to
breathe, a little  less to  speak, and his voice  was less breathy, more  like
itself. Andy  had let him  halve his morning pain  dosage, and he was more
alert, though not exactly livelier. We played a game of chess, which he won.
   “I’ll    be back on Thursday evening,”  I told  him  over dinner. I  only had
classes on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays that semester.
   “No,”   he said, “you don’t have to. Thank you, Harold, but really—I’ll  be
fine.”
   “I   already bought  the  ticket,”  I  said.  “And  anyway,  Jude—you don’t
always have to say no, you know. Remember? Acceptance?” He didn’t say
anything else.

358
   So  what else  can I  tell  you? He  went  back to  work  that Wednesday,
despite Andy’s suggestion he stay home through the end of the week. And
despite his threats, Andy came over every night to change his dressings and
inspect his legs.  Julia returned, and every  weekend in  October, she or  I
would go to New York and stay with him at Greene Street. Malcolm stayed
with him during  the week. He didn’t like it,  I could tell,  but we decided we
didn’t care what he liked, not in this matter.
   He  got better. His legs didn’t get infected. Neither  did his back. He was
lucky, Andy  kept saying. He regained the weight he had lost. By  the time
you   came  home,   in   early   November,   he  was   almost   healed.  By
Thanksgiving, which we had that year at the apartment in New York so he
wouldn’t  have to travel,  his cast had  been removed and he was walking
again. I   watched  him  closely   over  dinner,  watched him   talking   with
Laurence and laughing with one of Laurence’s daughters, but couldn’t stop
thinking  of  him  that  night,  his face  when  Caleb grabbed his  wrist,  his
expression of pain and shame and fear. I thought of the day I had learned he
was using a wheelchair at all:  it  was shortly  after I  had found the bag in
Truro and  was in  the  city  for  a  conference, and he  had come  into  the
restaurant in his chair, and I  had been shocked. “Why  did  you never tell
me?” I asked, and he had pretended to be surprised, acted like he thought he
had. “No,”  I said, “you  hadn’t,”  and finally  he had told  me that he hadn’t
wanted me to see him that way, as someone weak and helpless. “I would
never think of you that way,” I’d  told him, and although I didn’t think I  did,
it did change how I thought of him; it  made me remember that what I knew
of him was Must a tiny fraction of who he was.
   It  sometimes seemed as if that week had been a haunting, one that only
Andy and  I had  witnessed. In the months  that followed,  someone would
occasionally Moke about it: his poor driving, his Wimbledon ambitions, and
he would  laugh  back,  make some  self-deprecating comment. He  could
never look at me  in those moments; I  was a reminder of  what had really
happened, a reminder of what he saw as his degradation.
   But  later, I would recogni]e how  that incident had taken something large
from  him,  how  it  had changed him:  into   someone else, or  maybe into
someone he had once been. I would see the months before Caleb as a period
in which  he was healthier than he’d been: he had allowed me to  hug him
when I saw him, and when I touched him—putting an arm around him as I
passed him  in  the  kitchen—he  would  let   me;  his  hand would   go  on

359
chopping the carrots before him  in  the same steady rhythm. It  had taken
twenty  years  for   that  to   happen. But   after  Caleb,   he  regressed. At
Thanksgiving, I had gone toward him  to embrace him, but he had quickly
stepped to the left—Must a bit, Must enough so that my arms closed around
air, and there had been a second in which we  looked at each other, and I
knew that whatever I had been allowed Must a few months ago I would be no
longer: I knew I would have to start all over. I knew that he had decided that
Caleb was right,  that he was disgusting, that  he had, somehow, deserved
what  had happened to   him.  And   that  was the  worst   thing,  the  most
reprehensible thing. He had decided to believe Caleb, to believe him over
us, because Caleb confirmed what he had always thought and always been
taught, and it is always easier to believe what you already think than to try
to change your mind.
   Later,  when things got bad, I  would  wonder what  I could  have said or
done. Sometimes I would think that there was nothing I could have said—
there was something that might have helped, but none of us saying it could
have convinced him.  I still   had those fantasies: the gun, the posse, Fifty
West Twenty-ninth Street, apartment 1J. But this time we wouldn’t shoot.
We would take Caleb Porter by each arm, lead him down to  the car, drive
him to Greene Street, drag him upstairs. We would tell him what to say, and
warn him that we would be Must outside the door, waiting in the elevator, the
pistol cocked  and pointed at  his  back. And  from  behind the  door, we’d
listen to what he said: I didn’t mean any of it. I  was completely wrong. The
things I  did,  but  more than that,  the things  I  said,  they were meant for
someone else. Believe  me,  because you  believed  me  before:  you  are
beautiful and perfect, and  I never meant what I  said. I  was wrong, I  was
mistaken, no one could ever have been more wrong than I was.

360
                                                             3

EVERY AFTERNOON AT four, after the last of his classes and before the first of his
chores, he had  a free period  of  an  hour, but  on Wednesdays,  he was given
two  hours.  Once,  he had  spent  those afternoons  reading   or exploring   the
grounds, but  recently,  ever  since  Brother  Luke   had told  him   he could,  he
had spent them  all at  the greenhouse. If  Luke  was  there, he would  help  the
brother  water  the  plants,   memori]ing    their   names—Miltonia    spectabilis,
Alocasia  amazonica, Asystasia  gangetica—so  he could  repeat them  back to
the brother and be praised. “I   think the  Heliconia  vellerigera’s   grown,”   he’d
say, petting its furred  bracts,  and Brother  Luke would  look  at him  and shake
his head.  “Unbelievable,”    he’d  say.  “My   goodness, what  a  great  memory
you have,”  and he’d smile  to himself,  proud  to have impressed the  brother.
    If  Brother  Luke  wasn’t  there, he instead passed the time  playing  with   his
things. The  brother had shown  him  how if  he moved  aside a stack of  plastic
planters in  the  far  corner of  the  room,  there  was a small  grate,  and  if  you
removed  the grate,  there  was  a small  hole  beneath,  big  enough  to  hold  a
plastic  garbage bag of  his  possessions. So  he had unearthed  his  twigs  and
stones from  under the  tree and  moved his  haul  to the  greenhouse, where  it
was warm   and  humid,   and where   he could   examine  his  obMects without
losing  feeling    in  his   hands.  Over   the  months,   Luke   had  added  to   his
collection:   he gave  him  a wafer  of  sea glass  that the  brother  said  was the
color  of  his eyes,  and a metal  whistle   that had  a round  little   ball  within   it
that Mangled like a bell  when  you  shook it,  and a  small  cloth  doll  of  a man
wearing  a  woolen  burgundy   top  and  a belt  trimmed   with   tiny   turquoise-
colored beads that  the brother  said had  been made by  a NavaMo Indian, and
had been his  when he  was a boy.  Two  months  ago, he had  opened his  bag
and discovered  that  Luke  had  left  him   a candy  cane, and  although  it  had
been February, he had  been thrilled:  he  had always  wanted to  taste a candy
cane, and he  broke it  into  sections,  sucking  each  into  a spear point  before
biting  down on it,  gnashing the  sugar into his  molars.
    The brother  had told  him  that  the next  day he  had to make  sure to  come
right  away, as soon as classes ended, because he had a surprise for  him.  All
day he had been antsy  and distracted,  and although  two  of  the brothers  had

361
hit  him—Michael,   across the face;  Peter, across  the backside—he  had
barely noticed. Only Brother David’s warning, that he would be made to do
extra chores instead of having his free hours if he didn’t start concentrating,
made him focus, and somehow, he finished the day.
   As soon as he was outside, out of view of the monastery building, he ran.
It was spring, and he couldn’t help but feel happy: he loved the cherry trees,
with their  froth of  pink blossoms, and the tulips, their glossed, improbable
colors, and the new grass, soft and tender beneath him. Sometimes, when he
was alone, he would take the NavaMo doll and a twig he had found that was
shaped like a person outside and sit on the grass and play with  them. He
made up voices  for  them  both,  whispering to  himself,  because Brother
Michael had said that boys didn’t  play with  dolls, and that he was getting
too old to play, anyway.
   He  wondered if  Brother Luke  was watching him  run. One  Wednesday,
Brother Luke had said, “I  saw you running  up here today,” and as he was
opening his mouth to  apologi]e,  the brother had continued, “Boy,  what a
great runner you are! You’re so fast!” and he had been literally speechless,
until the brother, laughing, told him he should close his mouth.
   When he stepped inside the greenhouse, there was no one there. “Hello?”
he called out. “Brother Luke?”
   “In   here,”  he  heard, and  he  turned toward  the  little   room  that  was
appended to the greenhouse, the one stocked with the supplies of fertili]er
and bottles of ioni]ed  water and a hanging rack of clippers and shears and
gardening scissors and the floor stacked with bags of mulch. He liked this
room, with  its  woodsy, mossy smell,  and he went  toward it  eagerly and
knocked.
   When he walked  in, he was at first  disoriented. The room was dark and
still,  but for  a small flame  that Brother  Luke was bent over  on the floor.
“Come closer,” said the brother, and he did.
   “Closer,”  the brother said, and laughed. “Jude, it’s okay.”
   So   he  went  closer,  and   the  brother  held   something  up  and  said
“Surprise!”  and he saw it was a muffin,  a muffin  with a lit  wooden match
thrust into its center.
   “What  is it?” he asked.
   “It’s  your  birthday, right?”  asked the brother. “And this is your  birthday
cake. Go on, make a wish; blow out the candle.”
   “It’s  for me?” he asked, as the flame guttered.

362
   “Yes, it’s for  you,” said the brother. “Hurry, make a wish.”
   He had never had a birthday cake before, but he had read about them and
he knew what to  do. He shut his eyes and wished, and then opened them
and blew out the match, and the room went completely dark.
   “Congratulations,”  Luke said, and turned on the light. He handed him the
muffin, and when  he tried to offer  the brother some of it,  Luke  shook his
head: “It’s yours.” He ate the muffin, which had little blueberries and which
he thought was the best thing he had ever tasted, so sweet and cakey, and
the brother watched him and smiled.
   “And  I have something else for you,” said Luke, and reached behind him,
and handed him a package, a large flat box wrapped in newspaper and tied
with  string.   “Go  on,  open  it,”   Luke   said,  and  he did,   removing  the
newspaper carefully  so  it   could  be  reused. The  box  was  plain  faded
cardboard, and when he opened it, he found it contained an assortment of
round pieces of wood. Each piece was notched on both ends, and Brother
Luke showed him  how the  pieces could be slotted within   one another to
build boxes, and then how he could lay twigs across the top to make a sort
of roof.  Many years later, when he was in college, he would  see a box of
these logs in the window of a toy store, and would reali]e  that his gift  had
been missing parts: a red-peaked triangular structure to build a roof, and the
flat green planks that lay across it. But in the moment, it had left him mute
with  Moy, until he had remembered his manners and thanked the brother
again and again.
   “You’re  welcome,” said Luke. “After   all, you don’t  turn eight every day,
do you?”
   “No,”   he admitted, smiling wildly  at the gift,  and for the rest of  his free
period, he had built houses and boxes with the pieces while Brother  Luke
watched him, sometimes reaching over to tuck his hair behind his ears.
   He spent every minute he could with the brother in the greenhouse. With
Luke, he was a different person. To the other brothers, he was a burden, a
collection  of  problems and  deficiencies,  and every  day  brought  a new
detailing of what  was wrong with  him: he was too dreamy, too emotional,
too  energetic, too  fanciful,   too  curious, too   impatient,  too  skinny,  too
playful. He should be more grateful, more graceful, more controlled,  more
respectful, more patient, more dexterous, more disciplined, more reverent.
But to  Brother Luke,  he was smart, he was quick,  he was clever, he was
lively. Brother  Luke never told  him  he asked too many questions, or told

363
him that there were certain things he would  have to wait to know  until  he
grew up. The first  time Brother Luke  tickled him,  he had gasped and then
laughed, uncontrollably, and Brother Luke had laughed with him, the two of
them tussling on  the floor  beneath the orchids. “You  have such a  lovely
laugh,” Brother  Luke said, and “What  a great smile you  have, Jude,” and
“What  a Moyful person you  are,”  until  it  was  as if  the  greenhouse was
someplace bewitched,  somewhere that   transformed  him  into   the  boy
Brother Luke saw, someone funny and bright, someone people wanted to be
around, someone better and different than he actually was.
   When things were bad with the other brothers, he imagined himself in the
greenhouse, playing with his things or talking to Brother Luke, and repeated
back to himself the things Brother Luke said to him. Sometimes things were
so bad he wasn’t able to  go to dinner, but  the next day, he would  always
find something in  his room that Brother  Luke had left  him: a flower,  or a
red leaf, or a particularly bulbous acorn, which he had begun collecting and
storing under the grate.
   The other brothers had noticed he was spending all his time with Brother
Luke  and, he  sensed, disapproved. “Be   careful  around Luke,”   warned
Brother Pavel of all  people, Brother Pavel who hit  him and yelled at  him.
“He’s not  who you  think  he is.”  But he ignored  him. They  were none of
them who they said they were.
   One day he went to the greenhouse late. It had been a very hard week; he
had been beaten very badly; it  hurt him  to walk.  He  had been visited by
both Father Gabriel and Brother Matthew the previous evening, and every
muscle hurt. It  was a Friday;  Brother Michael  had unexpectedly released
him early that day, and he had thought he might go play with his logs. As he
always did after those sessions, he wanted to be alone—he wanted to sit in
that warm space with his toys and pretend he was far away.
   No  one was in  the greenhouse when he arrived, and he lifted the grate
and took out his Indian doll and the box of logs, but even as he was playing
with them, he  found himself crying.  He was trying  to  cry less—it  always
made him feel worse, and the brothers hated it and punished him for it—but
he couldn’t help himself.  He had at least learned to cry silently, and so he
did, although the problem with  crying silently  was that it  hurt, and it took
all  your concentration, and  eventually he  had to  put his  toys  down. He
stayed until the first  bell rang, and then put  his things away and ran back

364
downhill toward the kitchen, where he would peel carrots and potatoes and
chop celery for the night’s meal.
   And  then, for reasons he was never able to determine, not even when he
was an adult, things suddenly became very bad. The beatings got worse, the
sessions got worse, the lectures got  worse. He  wasn’t sure what  he had
done; to himself, he seemed the same as he always had. But it was as if the
brothers’ collective patience with him were reaching some sort of end. Even
Brothers David and Peter, who loaned him  books, as many as he wanted,
seemed less inclined to speak to him. “Go away, Jude,” said Brother David,
when he came to talk to him about a book of Greek myths the brother had
given him. “I don’t  want to look at you now.”
   Increasingly he was becoming convinced that they were going to get rid
of him, and he was terrified,  because the monastery was the only home he
had ever had. How  would  he survive,  what would  he  do, in  the outside
world, which the brothers had told him was full of dangers and temptations?
He could work, he knew that; he knew how to garden, and how to cook, and
how to clean: maybe he could get a Mob doing one of those things. Maybe
someone else might take him in. If that happened, he reassured himself, he
would be better. He wouldn’t  make any of the mistakes he had made with
the brothers.
   “Do  you know  how much it costs to take care of you?” Brother Michael
had asked him  one day. “I   don’t  think  we  ever thought we’d  have  you
around for  this  long.”  He  hadn’t  known  what to  say  to either  of  those
statements, and so  had  sat  staring  dumbly  at   the  desk. “You   should
apologi]e,” Brother Michael told  him.
   “I’m   sorry,” he whispered.
   Now   he was so  tired  that  he didn’t  have  strength even to  go  to  the
greenhouse. Now after his classes he went down to a corner of the cellar,
where Brother Pavel had told him there were rats but Brother Matthew said
there weren’t, and climbed onto one of the wire  storage units where boxes
of oil and pasta and sacks of flour were stored, and rested, waiting until the
bell rang and he had  to go back upstairs. At  dinners, he avoided Brother
Luke, and when the  brother smiled at him,  he turned away. He  knew for
certain now that he wasn’t the boy  Brother Luke thought he was—Moyful?
funny?—and he was ashamed of himself,  of how  he had deceived Luke,
somehow.

365
   He  had been avoiding Luke for a little  more than a week when one day
he went down  to his  hiding place  and saw the brother there, waiting  for
him. He looked for somewhere to hide, but there was nowhere, and instead
he began to cry, turning his face to the wall and apologi]ing as he did.
   “Jude, it’s  all right,”  said Brother Luke,  and stood near him, patting him
on the back. “It’s all right,  it’s all right.”  The brother sat on the cellar steps.
“Come here, come  sit next  to  me,”  he said, but  he shook  his head, too
embarrassed to do so. “Then  at  least sit  down,”  said Luke,  and he  did,
leaning against the wall. Luke  stood, then, and began looking through the
boxes on one of the high shelves, until he retrieved something from one and
held it out to him: a glass bottle of apple Muice.
   “I  can’t,”  he said, instantly. He wasn’t supposed to be in the cellar at all:
he entered it through the small window on the side and then climbed down
the wire  shelves. Brother Pavel was in  charge of  the stores and counted
them every week; if  something was  missing, he’d be  blamed. He always
was.
   “Don’t   worry, Jude,”  said the brother. “I’ll   replace it.  Go on—take  it,”
and finally, after some coaxing, he did. The Muice was sweet as syrup, and
he was torn between sipping it, to  make it last, and gulping it,  in  case the
brother changed his mind and it was taken from him.
   After  he had finished, they sat in silence, and then the brother said, in a
low voice,  “Jude—what they  do to you:  it’s  not right.  They shouldn’t  be
doing that to  you;  they shouldn’t  be hurting  you,”  and he almost started
crying again. “I   would never hurt  you, Jude, you know  that, don’t  you?”
and he was able to look at  Luke, at his  long, kind,  worried face, with  his
short gray beard and his glasses that made his eyes look even larger, and
nod.
   “I  know, Brother Luke,” he said.
   Brother  Luke was quiet  for a long  time before he spoke next. “Do  you
know, Jude, that before I  came here, to the  monastery, I had a son? You
remind me so much of him.  I loved  him so much. But he died,  and then I
came here.”
   He  didn’t   know  what  to  say, but  he didn’t   have to  say  anything,  it
seemed, because Brother Luke kept talking.
   “I   look at you  sometimes, and I think:  you don’t  deserve to have these
things happen to you. You deserve to be with  someone else, someone—”

366
And then Brother Luke  stopped again, because he had begun to cry again.
“Jude,” he said, surprised.
   “Don’t,”    he sobbed,  “please, Brother  Luke—don’t   let  them send me
away; I’ll  be better, I promise, I promise. Don’t let them send me away.”
   “Jude,”  said the brother, and sat down next to him,  pulling him  into his
body. “No one’s sending you away. I promise; no one’s going to  send you
away.” Finally he was able to calm  himself again, and the two of them sat
silent for a long  time. “All  I  meant to say was that you deserve to be with
someone who loves you. Like me. If you were with me, I’d never hurt you.
We’d have such a wonderful time.”
   “What  would we do?” he asked, finally.
   “Well,”   said Luke, slowly,  “we  could go camping.  Have you ever been
camping?”
   He  hadn’t, of  course, and Luke told him  about it:  the tent, the fire,  the
smell and snap of burning  pine, the marshmallows impaled on  sticks, the
owls’ hoots.
   The  next  day he  returned to  the  greenhouse, and over the  following
weeks and months, Luke would tell him about all  the things they might do
together, on their own: they would go to the beach, and to the city, and to a
fair. He would  have pi]]a,   and hamburgers, and corn on the cob, and ice
cream. He would  learn how  to  play baseball, and how  to  fish, and  they
would live in  a little cabin, Must the two of them, like father and son, and all
morning long  they would  read, and  all afternoon  they would  play. They
would  have a  garden where they  would  grow  all   their  vegetables, and
flowers, too, and  yes, maybe they’d have a greenhouse someday as well.
They  would  do  everything  together, go  everywhere  together, and  they
would be like best friends, only better.
   He  was intoxicated by  Luke’s stories, and when  things were awful,  he
thought of them: the garden where they’d grow  pumpkins and squash, the
creek that ran  behind the  house where they’d  catch perch, the  cabin—a
larger version of the ones he built with his logs—where Luke promised him
he would have a  real bed, and where even on the  coldest of nights,  they
would always be warm, and where they could bake muffins every week.
   One afternoon—it  was early January, and so cold that they had to wrap
all  the greenhouse plants in   burlap despite  the heaters—they had  been
working in  silence. He could always tell  when Luke  wanted to talk  about
their house and when he didn’t, and he knew that today was one of his quiet

367
days, when the brother seemed elsewhere. Brother Luke was never unkind
when he was in these moods, only quiet, but the kind  of quiet he knew to
avoid. But he yearned for one of  Luke’s stories; he needed it. It  had been
such an awful day, the kind of  day in which  he had wanted to die, and he
wanted to hear Luke tell him about their cabin, and about all the things they
would do  there when they were  alone. In  their cabin, there would  be no
Brother Matthew or Father Gabriel or Brother Peter. No one would shout at
him or hurt  him. It  would be like  living  all  the time in the greenhouse, an
enchantment without end.
   He was reminding himself not to speak when Brother Luke spoke to him.
“Jude,” he said, “I’m very sad today.”
   “Why,  Brother Luke?”
   “Well,”   said Brother Luke, and paused. “You know how much I care for
you, right? But lately I’ve been feeling that you don’t care for me.”
   This was terrible to hear, and for a moment he couldn’t speak. “That’s not
true!” he told the brother.
   But  Brother Luke shook his head. “I keep talking to you about our house
in the forest,” he said, “but I don’t get the feeling that you really want to go
there. To you, they’re Must stories, like fairy tales.”
   He  shook his  head. “No,  Brother  Luke.  They’re real  to  me, too.”  He
wished he could tell Brother Luke  Must how real they were, Must how much
he needed them, how much they had helped him. Brother Luke looked  so
upset, but finally he was able to convince him that he wanted that life, too,
that he wanted to live with Brother Luke and no one else, that he would do
whatever he needed to in order to have it. And  finally,  finally,  the brother
had smiled, and crouched and hugged him, moving his arms up and down
his back. “Thank you, Jude, thank you,” he said, and he, so happy to have
made Brother Luke so happy, thanked him back.
   And  then Brother  Luke  looked at him,  suddenly serious. He  had been
thinking about it a lot, he said, and he thought it was time for them to build
their cabin; it was time that they go away together. But he, Luke, wouldn’t
do it alone: Was Jude going to come with him? Did he give him  his word?
Did he want to  be with  Brother Luke the way  Brother Luke  wanted to be
with him,  Must the two of them  in their  small and perfect  world? And  of
course he did—of course he did.
   So there was a plan. They would leave in two  months, before Easter; he
would celebrate his ninth birthday in  their cabin. Brother Luke would  take

368
care of everything—all he needed to do was be a good boy, and study hard,
and not  cause any problems. And,  most  important, say  nothing. If   they
found out what they were doing, Brother Luke said, then he would be sent
away, away from the monastery, to make his way on his own, and Brother
Luke wouldn’t be able to help him then. He promised.
   The  next  two  months were  terrible  and wonderful  at  the  same time.
Terrible because they passed so slowly. Wonderful because he had a secret,
one that made his life better, because it meant his life in the monastery had
an end. Every  day he woke  up eager, because it meant he  was one day
closer to being with Brother Luke. Every time one of the brothers was with
him, he would remember that soon he would be far away from them, and it
would be a little  less bad. Every time he was beaten or yelled at, he would
imagine himself in the cabin, and it  would give  him the fortitude—a  word
Brother Luke had taught him—to withstand it.
   He  had begged Brother Luke to let  him help with  the preparations, and
Brother Luke had told him to gather a sample of every flower and leaf from
all the different  kinds  of plants on  the monastery grounds. And so in  the
afternoons he prowled  the  property with   his Bible,  pressing  leaves and
petals between  its  pages.  He  spent  less time   in  the  greenhouse, but
whenever he saw Luke,  the  brother would  give  him  one  of  his somber
winks, and  he would  smile to  himself,  their  secret something warm and
delicious.
   The night finally  arrived, and he was nervous. Brother Matthew was with
him in  the early evening, right  after dinner, but eventually  he left, and he
was alone. And then there was Brother Luke, holding his finger pressed to
his lips, and he nodded. He helped Luke load his books and underwear into
the paper bag he held open, and then they were tiptoeing down the hallway,
and down the stairs, and then through the  darkened building and into  the
night.
   “There’s  Must a short walk to the car,” Luke whispered to him, and then,
when he stopped, “Jude, what’s wrong?”
   “My  bag,” he said, “my bag from the greenhouse.”
   And  then Luke smiled his kind smile, and put his hand on his head. “I put
it in  the car already,” he said, and he smiled back, so grateful to Luke  for
remembering.
   The  air was cold, but  he hardly noticed. On and on  they walked, down
the monastery’s long graveled driveway, and past the wooden gates, and up

369
the hill  that led to  the main road, and then down the main  road itself, the
night  so silent  it   hummed. As  they  walked,  Brother  Luke  pointed  out
different constellations and he named them, he got them all right, and Luke
murmured in  admiration  and  stroked the  back of   his head.  “You’re  so
smart,” he said. “I’m so glad I picked you, Jude.”
   Now  they were on the road, which he had only been on a few times in his
life—to go to the doctor, or to the dentist—although now it was empty, and
little  animals, muskrats and  possums, gamboled before them. Then  they
were at the car, a long maroon station wagon piebald with rust, its backseat
filled with  boxes and black trash bags and some of Luke’s favorite plants—
the Cattleya  schilleriana,  with   its  ugly  speckled petals;  the Hylocereus
undatus, with its  sleepy drooping head of a blossom—in  their dark-green
plastic nests.
   It  was strange to see Brother Luke in a car, stranger than being in the car
itself. But  stranger than that  was the feeling  he had, that everything  had
been worth it, that all his miseries were going to end, that he was going to a
life  that would  be as good as, perhaps better than, anything  he had read
about in books.
   “Are  you ready to go?” Brother Luke whispered to him, and grinned.
   “I   am,”  he whispered  back. And  Brother  Luke  turned the  key  in  the
ignition.


   There were two  ways of  forgetting. For  many years, he had envisioned
(unimaginatively) a  vault, and at the  end of the day, he  would gather the
images and sequences and words that he didn’t want to think about again
and open the heavy steel door only enough to hurry them inside, closing it
quickly and tightly.  But this method wasn’t effective: the memories seeped
out anyway. The important thing, he came to reali]e, was to eliminate them,
not Must to store them.
   So  he had invented some solutions. For small  memories—little slights,
insults—you relived them again and again until they were neutrali]ed, until
they became near meaningless with repetition, or  until  you could  believe
that they were something that had happened to someone else and you had
Must heard about it. For larger memories, you held the scene in your head
like a film   strip, and then you  began to erase it, frame by  frame. Neither
method was easy: you  couldn’t  stop  in  the middle  of  your  erasing and

370
examine what you were looking at, for example; you couldn’t start scrolling
through parts of  it  and hope you wouldn’t   get ensnared in the details  of
what had happened, because you of course would. You had to  work at  it
every night, until it was completely gone.
   Though  they never disappeared completely, of course. But they were at
least more  distant—they  weren’t   things  that  followed  you,   wraithlike,
tugging at  you for  attention,  Mumping in front of  you  when you  ignored
them, demanding so much of your time and effort that it became impossible
to think  of anything else. In  fallow  periods—the moments before you fell
asleep; the minutes before you were landing after an overnight flight, when
you weren’t awake enough to do work and weren’t tired enough to sleep—
they would reassert themselves, and so it was best to imagine, then, a screen
of white, huge and light-lit and still, and hold it in your mind like a shield.
   In   the weeks  following   the beating,  he  worked  on forgetting   Caleb.
Before going  to  bed, he went  to  the door  of  his apartment and, feeling
foolish, tried forcing his old  set of keys into the locks to assure himself that
they didn’t  fit,  that  he really  was once again safe. He set, and  reset, the
alarm system he’d had installed, which was so sensitive that even passing
shadows triggered a flurry of beeps. And then he lay awake, his eyes open
in the dark room, concentrating on forgetting. But it was so difficult—there
were so many memories from those months that stabbed him that he  was
overwhelmed. He heard Caleb’s  voice saying  things to  him,  he saw  the
expression on Caleb’s face as he had stared at his unclothed body, he felt
the horrid blank airlessness of his fall down the staircase, and he crunched
himself into  a knot  and put  his hands over his  ears and closed his eyes.
Finally  he  would  get  up and  go  to  his  office  at  the  other end  of  the
apartment and work. He had a big case coming up, and he was grateful for
it; his days were so occupied that he had little time to think of anything else.
For a while he was hardly going home at all, Must two hours to sleep and an
hour to shower and change, until one evening he’d had an episode at work,
a bad one, the first time he ever had. The night Manitor had found him on the
floor, and had called the building’s security department, who had called the
firm’s  chairman, a man named Peterson Tremain, who had called Lucien,
who was the only  one he had told what  to do in  case something like this
should happen: Lucien had called Andy, and then both he and the chairman
had come into the office  and waited with  him for  Andy  to arrive. He  had
seen them, seen their feet, and even as he had gasped and writhed on the

371
ground, he had tried  to find  the energy to  beg them to leave, to  reassure
them that he was fine, that he Must needed to be left alone. But they hadn’t
left, and Lucien had wiped the vomit from his mouth, tenderly, and then sat
on  the  floor   near  his  head  and held   his  hand  and  he  had  been  so
embarrassed he had almost cried. Later, he had told them again and again
that it was nothing, that this happened all the time, but they had made him
take the rest of the week  off, and the following   Monday, Lucien had told
him that they were making him go home at a reasonable hour: midnight on
the weekdays, nine p.m. on the weekends.
   “Lucien,”  he’d said, frustrated, “this is ridiculous. I’m  not a child.”
   “Believe  me, Jude,” Lucien had said. “I  told the rest of the management
committee I thought  we should ride  you like  you were  an Arabian at the
Preakness, but for some strange reason, they’re worried about your health.
Also, the case. For some reason, they think if  you get sick, we won’t  win
the case.” He  had fought  and fought  with  Lucien,  but  it  hadn’t made a
difference: at midnight, his office  lights abruptly clicked  off, and he had at
last resigned himself to going home when he had been told.
   Since the Caleb incident, he had barely been able to talk to Harold; even
seeing him was a  kind  of torture.  This  made Harold and Julia’s  visits—
which  were  increasingly  frequent—challenging.  He  was  mortified   that
Harold had seen him  like  that: when  he thought of  it,  Harold  seeing his
bloody pants, Harold  asking him  about his childhood  (How  obvious was
he? Could people actually tell by talking to him  what had happened to him
so many years ago? And if so, how could he better conceal it?), he was so
sharply nauseated that he had to stop what he was doing and wait for  the
moment to pass. He could feel  Harold trying  to  treat him the same as he
had, but something  had shifted. No  longer  did  Harold harass him  about
Rosen Pritchard; no longer did he ask him what it was like to abet corporate
malfeasance. And he certainly never mentioned the possibility that he might
settle down with someone. Now his questions were about how he felt: How
was he? How  was  he feeling?  How  were his  legs? Had  he been tiring
himself out?  Had he  been using the chair  a lot?  Did  he need help  with
anything? He always answered the exact same way: fine, fine, fine; no, no,
no.
   And  then there was Andy, who had abruptly reinitiated his nightly phone
calls. Now he called at one a.m. every night, and during their appointments
—which  Andy  had increased to every  other week—he  was un-Andyish,

372
quiet  and polite,  which   made him   anxious. He  examined  his  legs, he
counted his cuts, he asked all the questions he always did, he checked his
reflexes. And every time he got home, when he was emptying his pockets
of  change, he  found  that  Andy  had  slipped in   a card  for  a  doctor,  a
psychologist named Sam Loehmann, and on it had written FIRST VISIT’S
ON ME.  There was always one of these cards, each time with  a different
note: DO IT FOR  ME, JUDE, or  ONE TIME.  THAT’S  IT. They were like
annoying fortune cookies, and he always threw them away. He was touched
by the gesture but  also weary of  it,  of  its pointlessness; it was the  same
feeling he  had whenever he had  to replace the  bag under the  sink after
Harold’s visits.  He’d  go to  the corner of  his  closet where he kept  a box
filled  with  hundreds of alcohol wipes  and bandages, stacks and stacks of
gau]e, and do]ens of  packets of ra]ors,  and make a new bag, and tape it
back in its proper place. People had always decided how his body would be
used, and although he knew that Harold and Andy were trying to help him,
the childish, obdurate part of  him resisted: he would  decide. He had such
little control of his body anyway—how could they begrudge him this?
   He told  himself he was fine, that he had recovered, that he had regained
his equilibrium, but really, he knew something was wrong, that he had been
changed, that he  was slipping.  Willem   was home,  and even though  he
hadn’t been there to  witness what  had happened, even though he  didn’t
know about  Caleb, about  his humiliation—he   had made certain  of  this,
telling Harold  and Julia and Andy  that he’d  never speak to them again if
they said anything to anyone—he was still somehow ashamed to be seen by
him. “Jude, I’m  so sorry,” Willem  had said when he had returned and seen
his cast. “Are you sure you’re okay?” But the cast was nothing, the cast was
the least shameful  part, and  for  a  minute, he  had been  tempted to  tell
Willem  the truth, to  collapse against him the  way he never had and  start
crying,  to confess everything  to  Willem  and  ask him  to  make him  feel
better, to tell  him  that he still  loved  him in  spite of  who  he was. But  he
didn’t,  of  course. He  had already  written  Willem  a  long  e-mail  full   of
elaborate lies  detailing  his  car  accident, and  the  first  night   they were
reunited, they had stayed up so late talking about everything but that e-mail
that Willem  had slept over,  the two of  them falling   asleep on the living-
room sofa.
   But  he  kept his  life  moving  along.  He  got up,  he went  to  work.  He
simultaneously craved  company,  so  he  wouldn’t   think   of  Caleb,  and

373
dreaded it, because Caleb had reminded him how  inhuman he  was, how
deficient, how disgusting, and he was too embarrassed to be around other
people, normal people. He thought of his days the way he thought of taking
steps when he was  experiencing the  pain and  numbness in his  feet:  he
would get through one, and then the next, and then the next, and eventually
things would   get better.  Eventually  he  would  learn  how  to  fold  those
months into his life and accept them and keep going. He always had.
   The court case came, and he won. It was a huge win, Lucien kept telling
him, and he knew it was, but mostly he felt panic: Now what was he going
to do? He had  a new client,  a bank, but  the work  there was of the  long,
tedious, fact-gathering  sort,  not  the kind   of  frantic  work   that  required
twenty-hour days. He would be at  home, by himself, with  nothing but  the
Caleb incident  to  occupy his  mind.  Tremain  congratulated him,  and he
knew he should be happy, but when he asked the chairman for more work,
Tremain had laughed. “No, St. Francis,” he said. “You’re going on vacation.
That’s an order.”
   He didn’t  go on vacation. He promised first Lucien, and then Tremain, he
would, but that he couldn’t  at the moment. But it was as he had feared: he
would be at home, making himself dinner, or at a movie  with Willem,  and
suddenly a scene from his months with Caleb would appear. And then there
would be a scene from the home, and a scene from his years with Brother
Luke, and then a scene from his months with Dr. Traylor, and then a scene
from the  inMury, the headlights’ white glare, his  head Merking to the side.
And  then  his  mind   would  fill    with   images, banshees demanding  his
attention, snatching and tearing  at  him  with  their  long, needley  fingers.
Caleb had unleashed something within him, and he was unable to coax the
beasts back into their dungeon—he was made aware of how much time he
actually spent controlling  his memories, how  much concentration it  took,
how fragile his command over them had been all along.
   “Are  you all  right?”  Willem asked him one night. They  had seen a play,
which he had barely registered, and then had gone out to dinner, where he
had half listened to Willem, hoping he was making the correct responses as
he moved his food around his plate and tried to act normal.
   “Yes,”  he said.
   Things  were getting worse; he knew it  and didn’t know  how to make it
better. It  was eight months  after the  incident, and  every day  he thought
about it more, not less. He felt sometimes as if his months with Caleb were

374
a pack of hyenas, and every day they chased him, and every day he spent all
his energy running  from  them, trying  to  escape being devoured by their
snapping, foaming Maws. All the  things that  had helped in  the past—the
concentrating; the cutting—weren’t helping now. He cut himself  more and
more, but the memories wouldn’t disappear. Every morning he swam, and
every night he swam again, for  miles, until  he had energy enough only to
shower and  climb   into  bed.  As  he  swam,  he  chanted to  himself:   he
conMugated Latin verbs, he  recited  proofs,  he  quoted  back  to  himself
decisions that he  had studied in  law  school.  His  mind was  his, he  told
himself. He would control this; he wouldn’t be controlled.
   “I  have an idea,” Willem said at the end of another meal in which he had
failed to say much of anything. He had responded a second or two too late
to everything Willem had said, and after a while, they were both quiet. “We
should take a vacation together. We should go on that trip to Morocco  we
were supposed to take two years ago. We can do it as soon as I get back.
What do you think,  Jude? It’ll be fall,  then—it’ll   be beautiful.” It  was late
June: nine  months after  the  incident.  Willem  was  leaving  again at  the
beginning of August for a shoot in Sri Lanka; he wouldn’t be back until the
beginning of October.
   As   Willem   spoke,  he  was thinking   of   how  Caleb  had  called  him
deformed, and only Willem’s  silence had reminded him it  was his turn  to
respond. “Sure, Willem,” he said. “That sounds great.”
   The  restaurant was in  the  Flatiron  District,   and after  they paid,  they
walked for a while, neither of them saying anything, when suddenly, he saw
Caleb coming  toward  them,  and in   his  panic, he  grabbed Willem   and
yanked him into  the doorway  of  a building,  startling  them both with  his
strength and swiftness.
   “Jude,”  Willem said, alarmed, “what are you doing?”
   “Don’t   say anything,” he whispered to Willem. “Just stay here and don’t
turn around,” and Willem did, facing the door with him.
   He counted the seconds until he was certain Caleb must have passed, and
then looked cautiously out toward the sidewalk and saw that it hadn’t been
Caleb at all, Must another tall, dark-haired man, but not Caleb, and he had
exhaled, feeling defeated and stupid and relieved  all at  once. He noticed
then that he still had Willem’s shirt bunched in his hand, and he released it.
“Sorry,” he said. “Sorry, Willem.”

375
   “Jude,  what happened?” Willem  asked, trying to  look him  in  the eyes.
“What was that?”
   “Nothing,”   he said. “I Must thought I saw someone I didn’t want to see.”
   “Who?”
   “No   one. This lawyer  on  a case I’m  working  on. He’s  a prick;  I  hate
dealing with him.”
   Willem  looked at him. “No,”  he said, at last. “It wasn’t another lawyer. It
was someone else, someone you’re scared of.” There was a pause. Willem
looked down the street, and then back at him. “You’re frightened,” he said,
his voice wondering. “Who was it, Jude?”
   He shook his head, trying  to think of  a lie he could tell  Willem.  He was
always lying to Willem:  big  lies, small lies. Their entire relationship was a
lie—Willem  thought he was one person, and really, he wasn’t. Only Caleb
knew the truth. Only Caleb knew what he was.
   “I  told you,”  he said, at last. “This other lawyer.”
   “No,  it wasn’t.”
   “Yes, it  was.” Two women walked by them, and as they passed, he heard
one of them whisper excitedly to the other, “That was Willem Ragnarsson!”
He closed his eyes.
   “Listen,”  Willem  said, quietly, “what’s going on with you?”
   “Nothing,”   he said. “I’m tired. I need to go home.”
   “Fine,”  Willem  said. He hailed a cab, and helped him in, and then got in
himself. “Greene and Broome,” he said to the driver.
   In  the cab, his hands began to shake. This had been happening more and
more, and he didn’t know how to stop it. It had started when he was a child,
but it  had happened only in  extreme circumstances—when he was trying
not to cry, or when he was in extraordinary pain but knew that he couldn’t
make a  sound. But  now  it  happened at  strange moments: only   cutting
helped, but sometimes the  shaking was  so severe that he  had difficulty
controlling  the  ra]or.   He  crossed his  arms  against himself  and  hoped
Willem wouldn’t  notice.
   At  the  front  door, he tried  to  get rid  of  Willem,  but  Willem  wouldn’t
leave. “I want to be alone,” he told him.
   “I   understand,” Willem said. “We’ll   be alone together.” They had stood
there, facing  each other, until  he  had finally   turned to  the door,  but he
couldn’t  fit  the key  into  the lock  because he was shaking so badly,  and
Willem took the keys from him and opened the door.

376
   “What  the hell is going on with you?” Willem  asked as soon as they were
in the apartment.
   “Nothing,”   he said, “nothing,”  and now his teeth were chattering, which
was something that had never accompanied the shaking when he was young
but now happened almost every time.
   Willem  stepped close to him,  but he turned  his face away. “Something
happened while I was away,” Willem said, tentatively. “I don’t know what it
is,  but  something  happened. Something’s  wrong.   You’ve  been  acting
strangely ever since I got home from The Odyssey. I don’t know why.” He
stopped, and put his hands on his shoulders. “Tell me, Jude,” he said. “Tell
me what it is. Tell me and we’ll figure out how to make it better.”
   “No,”   he whispered. “I can’t, Willem,  I can’t.”  There was a long silence.
“I want to go to bed,”  he said, and Willem released him, and he went to the
bathroom.
   When  he came out,  Willem  was wearing  one of  his T-shirts, and  was
lofting the duvet from the guest room over the sofa in his bedroom, the sofa
under the painting of Willem in the makeup chair. “What’re you doing?” he
asked.
   “I’m   staying here tonight,” Willem said.
   He  sighed, but Willem  started talking before he could. “You  have three
choices, Jude,” he  said. “One,  I  call  Andy   and tell  him  I  think  there’s
something really going wrong with  you and I  take you up to his office  for
an evaluation. Two, I call Harold, who freaks out and calls Andy. Or three,
you let me stay here and monitor  you because you won’t  talk to  me, you
won’t fucking  tell me anything, and you never seem to understand that you
at least owe your friends  the opportunity to  try  to help you—you  at least
owe me that.” His voice cracked. “So what’s it going to be?”
   Oh  Willem,  he thought. You don’t  know  how badly I  want  to tell  you.
“I’m  sorry, Willem,” he said, instead.
   “Fine,  you’re  sorry,”  said Willem.  “Go  to bed. Do  you still   have extra
toothbrushes in the same place?”
   “Yes,”  he said.
   The next night he came home late from work, and found Willem lying on
the sofa in  his room again, reading. “How   was your day?”  he asked, not
lowering his book.
   “Fine,”  he said. He waited to see if Willem was going to explain himself,
but he didn’t,  and  eventually he went  to  the bathroom. In  the closet, he

377
passed Willem’s duffel  bag, which  was un]ipped  and filled   with  enough
clothes that it was clear he was going to stay for a while.
   He felt  pathetic admitting it to himself, but having Willem there—not Must
in his apartment, but in his room—helped. They didn’t speak much, but his
very presence steadied and refocused him. He  thought less of  Caleb; he
thought less of  everything. It  was  as if  the necessity of  proving  himself
normal to  Willem  really  did  make him  more  normal. Just being  around
someone he knew would never harm him,  not ever, was soothing, and he
was able to quiet his mind, and sleep. As grateful as he was, though, he was
also disgusted at himself, by how dependent he was, how weak. Was there
no end to his needs? How many people had helped him over the years, and
why  had they? Why  had  he let  them? A  better  friend  would  have told
Willem to go home, told him he would be fine on his own. But he didn’t do
this. He let  Willem  spend the few  remaining weeks he had in  New York
sleeping on his sofa like a dog.
   At  least he didn’t  have to  worry about upsetting Robin,  as Willem  and
Robin had broken  up toward  the end of  the Odyssey shoot, when Robin
discovered that  Willem   had  cheated on  her  with   one of   the  costume
assistants. “And I didn’t  even really like  her,” Willem  had told him  in one
of their  phone calls. “I   did it  for  the worst  reason of all—because I  was
bored.”
   He had considered this. “No,”  he said, “the worst reason of all would’ve
been because you were trying  to  be  cruel. Yours  was Must the stupidest
reason of all.”
   There had been a pause, and then Willem had started laughing. “Thanks
for that, Jude,” he said. “Thanks for making me feel both better and worse.”
   Willem  stayed with him  until the very day he had to leave for Colombo.
He was playing  the  eldest son of  a faded Dutch  merchant family  in  Sri
Lanka in  the early nineteen-forties, and had grown  a thick  mustache that
curled up at its tips;  when Willem  hugged him, he felt  it  brushing against
his ear. For a moment,  he wanted to break  down and beg Willem  not  to
leave. Don’t go, he wanted to tell him. Stay here with me. I’m scared to be
alone. He knew that if  he did say this, Willem  would: or he would  at least
try. But  he  would  never say  this.  He knew  it  would  be  impossible for
Willem to  delay the shoot, and he knew that Willem  would feel  guilty  for
his inability  to do so. Instead, he tightened his hold on Willem, which  was
something he rarely did—he rarely showed Willem  any physical  affection

378
—and he could feel  that Willem  was surprised, but then  he increased his
pressure as well, and the two  of  them stood there, wrapped around each
other, for  a long  time.  He  remembered thinking that  he wasn’t  wearing
enough layers to really let Willem hug him  this closely, that Willem  would
be able to feel the scars on his back through his shirt, but in the moment it
was more important to simply  be near him; he had the sense that this was
the last time this would happen, the last time he would see Willem. He had
this fear every  time Willem   went away, but  it was  keener this time,  less
theoretical; it felt more like a real departure.
   After  Willem  left, things were fine for  a few days. But then they got bad
again. The hyenas returned, more numerous and famished than before, more
vigilant in  their hunt. And then everything else returned as well: years and
years and  years  of  memories  he  had  thought  he  had  controlled   and
defanged, all crowding him once again, yelping and leaping before his face,
unignorable in their sounds, indefatigable in their  clamor for his  attention.
He woke gasping for air: he woke  with the names of people he had sworn
he would never think  of  again on his  tongue. He replayed the night  with
Caleb again and again, obsessively, the memory slowing so that the seconds
he was standing naked in the rain on Greene Street stretched into hours, so
that his flight  down the stairs took days, so that Caleb’s raping him  in the
shower, in the elevator, took weeks. He  had visions of  taking an ice pick
and Mamming it through his ear, into his  brain, to  stop the memories. He
dreamed of slamming his head against the wall until it split and cracked and
the gray meat tumbled out  with a  wet, bloody thunk.  He had fantasies of
emptying a container of gasoline over himself and then striking a match, of
his mind being gobbled by  fire. He  bought a set of X-ACTO blades and held
three of them  in his  palm and made a  fist around them  and watched the
blood drip   from  his  hand into   the sink  as  he  screamed into  the quiet
apartment.
   He  asked Lucien for more work  and was given it, but it  wasn’t enough.
He tried to volunteer for more hours at the artists’ nonprofit, but they didn’t
have any additional  shifts  to give  him.  He  tried  to volunteer  at a  place
where Rhodes had once done some pro bono work, an immigrants’ rights
organi]ation,  but  they  said they  were  really  looking  for   Mandarin  and
Arabic speakers at the moment and didn’t  want to waste his time.  He cut
himself more and more; he began cutting  around the scars themselves, so
that he could actually  remove wedges of flesh,  each piece topped with  a

379
silvery sheen of  scar tissue, but  it  didn’t  help, not  enough. At  night,  he
prayed to a god he didn’t believe in, and hadn’t for years: Help me, help me,
help me, he pleaded. He was losing himself; this had to  stop. He couldn’t
keep running forever.
   It  was August; the city  was empty. Malcolm  was in Sweden on holiday
with Sophie;  Richard was in  Capri; Rhodes was in  Maine;  Andy was  on
Shelter Island (“Remember,”  he’d  said before he  left,  as he always said
before a long vacation, “I’m Must two hours away; you need me, and I catch
the next  ferry  back”).  He couldn’t   bear to  be around Harold,  whom  he
couldn’t see without being reminded of his debasement; he called and told
him he had too much work to go to Truro. Instead he spontaneously bought
a ticket  to  Paris and  spent the  long,  lonely  Labor  Day  weekend there,
wandering the streets by himself. He didn’t contact anyone he knew there—
not Citi]en,  who  was working  for  a French bank, or  Isidore, his  upstairs
neighbor from  Hereford Street, who was teaching there, or  Phaedra, who
had taken a Mob as the director of a satellite of a New York gallery—they
wouldn’t have been in the city anyway.
   He  was tired, he was so tired. It was taking  so much energy to hold the
beasts off. He sometimes had an image of himself surrendering to them, and
they would cover him  with their  claws and beaks and talons and peck and
pinch and pluck away at him until he was nothing, and he would let them.
   After  he returned from  Paris, he had a dream in which  he was running
across a cracked reddish plain of earth. Behind him was a dark cloud, and
although he was fast, the  cloud was faster. As  it drew  closer, he heard a
bu]]ing,  and reali]ed it  was a swarm of insects, terrible and oily and noisy,
with pincerlike protuberances Mutting out from beneath their eyes. He knew
that if  he stopped, he would  die, and yet  even in  the dream he knew  he
couldn’t go on for much longer; at some point, he had stopped being able to
run and  had started hobbling  instead, reality  asserting itself  even in  his
dreams. And   then   he  heard  a  voice,   one  unfamiliar   but   calm  and
authoritative, speak to him. Stop, it said. You can end this. You don’t have to
do this. It was such a relief  to hear those words, and he stopped, abruptly,
and faced the cloud, which was seconds, feet away from him, exhausted and
waiting for it to be over.
   He  woke, frightened, because he knew what the words meant, and they
both terrified and comforted  him. Now, as he moved through his  days, he

380
heard that voice in  his head, and he was reminded that he  could, in  fact,
stop. He didn’t, in fact, have to keep going.
   He had considered killing  himself before, of course; when he was in the
home, and in  Philadelphia,  and after  Ana  had died. But  something  had
always stopped him, although now, he couldn’t  remember what that thing
had been. Now as he ran from the hyenas, he argued with himself: Why was
he doing this? He was so tired; he so wanted to stop. Knowing that he didn’t
have to keep going was a solace to him, somehow; it reminded him that he
had options, it reminded him  that even though his  subconscious wouldn’t
obey his conscious, it didn’t mean he wasn’t still in control.
   Almost  as an experiment, he began thinking of  what it would  mean for
him to leave: in January, after his most lucrative year at the firm yet, he had
updated his will,  so that was in  order. He would  need to write  a letter  to
Willem,  a letter to  Harold,  a letter to  Julia; he  would  also want to  write
something to Lucien, to  Richard, to  Malcolm.  To Andy. To  JB, forgiving
him. Then he could go. Every day, he thought about it, and thinking about it
made things easier. Thinking about it gave him fortitude.
   And  then, at  some point, it  was no  longer an experiment. He  couldn’t
remember how he had decided, but after he had, he felt lighter,  freer, less
tormented. The hyenas were still chasing him, but now he could  see, very
far in the distance, a house with an open door, and he knew that once he had
reached that house, he would  be  safe, and everything  that  pursued him
would fall  away. They didn’t like  it, of  course—they could see the door as
well, they knew  he was about to elude them—and every day the hunt got
worse, the  army  of  things  chasing  him  stronger and  louder  and  more
insistent. His brain was vomiting memories, they were flooding everything
else—he thought of people and sensations and incidents he hadn’t thought
of in  years. Tastes appeared on his tongue as if  by  alchemy; he smelled
fragrances he hadn’t smelled in decades. His system was compromised; he
would drown  in his memories; he had to do  something. He had tried—all
his life, he had tried. He  had tried to be someone different, he had tried to
be someone better,  he had  tried  to  make  himself  clean.  But  it  hadn’t
worked. Once he had decided, he was fascinated by his own hopefulness,
by how he could have saved himself years of sorrow by Must ending it—he
could have been his own savior. No law said he had to keep on living;  his
life was still  his own to do  with what he pleased. How had he not reali]ed

381
this in all  these years? The choice now seemed obvious; the only question
was why it had taken him so long.
   He talked  to Harold; he could tell  by the relief  in Harold’s voice that he
must be sounding more normal. He talked to Willem.  “You  sound better,”
Willem said, and he could hear the relief in Willem’s voice as well.
   “I  am,”  he said. He felt a pull of  regret after talking to both of them, but
he was determined. He was  no good  for them,  anyway; he  was only  an
extravagant collection   of  problems,  nothing   more.  Unless he  stopped
himself, he would  consume them with his needs. He would  take and take
and take from them until he had chewed away their every bit of flesh; they
could answer every difficulty he posed to them and he would still find new
ways to destroy them. For  a while,  they would  mourn him,  because they
were good people, the best, and he was sorry for that—but eventually they
would see that their lives were better without him in it. They would see how
much time he had stolen from them; they would understand what a thief he
had been, how he had suckled away all their energy and attention, how he
had exsanguinated them. He hoped they would forgive him; he hoped they
would see that this was  his apology to  them. He was releasing them—he
loved them most of all, and this was what you did for people you loved: you
gave them their freedom.
   The day  came: a Monday at the end of September. The night before he
had reali]ed that it was almost exactly a year after the beating, although he
hadn’t planned it that way. He left work early that evening. He had spent the
weekend organi]ing his  proMects; he had written Lucien a memo detailing
the status of everything he had been working on. At home, he lined up his
letters on  the dining-room  table,  and a  copy of  his  will.   He  had left  a
message with  Richard’s  studio   manager that  the  toilet   in   the  master
bathroom kept running and asked if  Richard could  let in  the plumber the
following  day at nine—both  Richard and Willem  had a set of  keys to his
apartment—because he would be away on business.
   He  took off  his suit Macket and tie and shoes and watch and went to the
bathroom. He sat in the shower area with his sleeves pushed up. He had a
glass of scotch,  which he  sipped at to  steady himself,  and a box  cutter,
which he  knew would  be easier to  hold  than a ra]or.  He  knew what  he
needed to do: three straight  vertical  lines, as deep and long  as he could
make them, following the veins up both arms. And then he would lie down
and wait.

382
   He  waited for a while,  crying a bit,  because he was tired and frightened
and because he was ready to go, he was ready to leave. Finally he rubbed
his eyes and began. He started with  his  left  arm. He  made the first  cut,
which was more painful than he had thought it would be, and he cried out.
Then he made the second. He took another drink of the scotch. The blood
was viscous, more gelatinous than liquid,  and a brilliant,  shimmering oil-
black.  Already   his  pants  were  soaked with   it,   already  his  grip   was
loosening. He made the third.
   When  he was done with both arms, he slumped against the back of the
shower wall.  He wished,  absurdly, for  a pillow.  He  was warm  from  the
scotch, and from his own  blood, which  lapped at him as it  pooled around
his legs—his insides meeting his outsides, the inner bathing the outer. He
closed his eyes. Behind him, the hyenas howled, furious at him. Before him
stood the house with its open door. He wasn’t close yet, but he was closer
than he’d been: close enough to see that inside, there was a bed where he
could rest, where he could lie down and sleep after his long run, where he
would, for the first time in his life, be safe.


   After  they crossed into Nebraska, Brother Luke stopped at the edge of a
wheat field and beckoned him out of the car. It was still dark, but he could
hear the birds stirring, hear them talk back to a sun they couldn’t yet see. He
took the brother’s hand and they skulked from  the car and to a large tree,
where Luke explained that the  other brothers would be looking  for  them,
and they would  have to  change their  appearance. He took off  the  hated
tunic, and put on  the clothes Brother Luke  held out  for him:  a sweatshirt
with a hood and a pair of Means. Before he did, though, he stood still as Luke
cut off his hair with  an electric ra]or. The brothers rarely cut his hair, and it
was long, past his ears, and Brother Luke made sad noises as he removed it.
“Your beautiful hair,”  he said, and carefully wrapped the length of it in  his
tunic and then stuffed it into a garbage bag. “You look like every other boy
now, Jude. But later, when we’re safe, you can grow it back, all right?” and
he nodded, although really, he liked the idea of looking like every other boy.
And then Brother Luke changed clothes himself, and he turned away to give
the brother  privacy. “You   can look,  Jude,”  said Luke,  laughing,  but  he
shook his head. When he turned back, the brother was unrecogni]able, in a
plaid shirt and Means of his own, and he smiled at him before shaving off his

383
beard, the silvery  bristles falling  from  him  like  splinters of  metal. There
were baseball caps for both of them, although the inside of Brother Luke’s
was  fitted   with   a   yellowish   wig,   which   covered  his   balding   head
completely. There were pairs of glasses for both of them as well: his  were
black and  round and  fitted  with  Must glass, not real lenses, but  Brother
Luke’s were square and large and brown and had the same thick lenses as
his real glasses, which he put into  the bag. He could  take them off  when
they were safe, Brother Luke told him.
   They were on their way to Texas, which is where they’d build their cabin.
He had always  imagined Texas as flat  land, Must dust and sky and road,
which Brother Luke  said was mostly true, but there were parts of the state
—like  in east Texas, where he was from—that were  forested with spruce
and cedars.
   It  took them nineteen hours to reach Texas. It would have been less time,
but at one point Brother Luke pulled off the side of the highway and said he
needed to nap for  a while,  and the  two  of them  slept for  several hours.
Brother Luke  had packed them  something to  eat as well—peanut  butter
sandwiches—and in Oklahoma they stopped again in the parking  lot of  a
rest stop to eat them.
   The  Texas of his  mind had, with   Must a few descriptions from Brother
Luke, transformed from  a landscape of tumbleweeds and sod into one of
pines, so tall and fragrant that they  cottoned out all  other sound, all other
life,  so when Brother  Luke  announced that they were  now, officially,   in
Texas, he looked out the window, disappointed.
   “Where are the forests?” he asked.
   Brother Luke laughed. “Patience, Jude.”
   They  would   need to  stay  in  a  motel  for  a  few  days, Brother  Luke
explained, both to make sure the other brothers weren’t following them and
so he could begin scouting for  the perfect  place to build  their cabin.  The
motel was called  The Golden  Hand, and their  room  had two  beds—real
beds—and Brother Luke let him choose which one he wanted. He took the
one near the bathroom, and Brother Luke  took  the one near the window,
with a view of their car. “Why  don’t you take a shower, and I’m going to go
to  the store  and  get us  some  supplies,”  said the  brother,  and he  was
suddenly frightened. “What’s wrong, Jude?”
   “Are  you going to come back?” he asked, hating how scared he sounded.

384
   “Of   course I’ll   come back, Jude,”  said the  brother, hugging him.  “Of
course I will.”
   When he did, he had a loaf of sliced bread, and a Mar of peanut butter, and
a hand of bananas, and a quart of milk,  and a  bag of almonds, and some
onions and peppers and chicken breasts. That evening, Brother Luke set up
the small hibachi he’d brought in the parking lot and they grilled the onions
and peppers and chicken, and Brother Luke gave him a glass of milk.
   Brother  Luke established their routine. They woke  early, before the sun
was  up,  and  Brother   Luke  made  himself   a  pot   of  coffee   with   the
coffeemaker he’d  brought,  and then  they  drove into   town,  to  the high
school’s track, where Luke let him  run around for an hour as he sat in the
bleachers, drinking his coffee and watching him. Then they returned to the
motel room, where the brother gave him lessons. Brother Luke had been a
math professor before he came to the monastery, but he had wanted to work
with children,  and so he had later  taught sixth grade. But  he knew about
other subMects as well: history and  books and music  and languages. He
knew so much more than  the other brothers, and he wondered why Luke
had never taught him when they lived  at the monastery. They ate lunch—
peanut butter sandwiches again—and  then had  more classes until  three
p.m., when he was allowed outside again to run around the parking lot, or to
take a  walk  with   the brother  down  the  highway.  The  motel  faced the
interstate, and   the  whoosh  of   the  passing  cars  provided   a  constant
soundtrack. “It’s like living  by the sea,” Brother Luke always said.
   After  this, Brother Luke made a third pot of  coffee and then drove off to
look for  locations where they’d build  their cabin,  and he stayed behind in
their motel  room.  The brother  always locked  him  into  the room  for  his
safety. “Don’t   open the  door  for  anyone, do  you  hear me?”  asked the
brother. “Not for anyone. I have a key and I’ll let myself in. And don’t open
the curtains; I  don’t  want anyone to  see you’re  in here alone.  There are
dangerous people out there in the world; I  don’t  want you to  get hurt.”  It
was for this  same reason that he wasn’t to  use Brother Luke’s computer,
which he  took with  him  anyway whenever he  left  the room. “You  don’t
know who’s  out there,”  Brother Luke  would say. “I  want  you to  be safe,
Jude. Promise me.” He promised.
   He  would lie  on his bed and read. The television was forbidden to him:
Luke would feel  it when he came back to the room, to see if it  was warm,
and he  didn’t  want  to  displease him,  he didn’t   want to  get  in  trouble.

385
Brother Luke had brought a piano keyboard in his car, and he practiced on
it; the brother was never mean to him, but he did take lessons seriously. As
the sky grew  dark, though, he  would  find  himself sitting  on  the edge of
Brother Luke’s bed, pinching back the curtain and scanning the parking lot
for Brother Luke’s  car; some part of him was always worried  that Brother
Luke wouldn’t  return for  him  after all,  that he was growing  tired of  him,
that he would be left  alone. There was so much he didn’t  know about the
world, and  the world  was a scary place.  He tried  to remind  himself  that
there were things he could do,  that he knew how  to work,  that maybe he
could get a Mob cleaning the motel, but he was always anxious until he saw
the station wagon pulling toward him,  and then he would be relieved, and
would promise himself that he would do better the next day, that he would
never give Brother Luke a reason to not return to him.
   One evening the brother came back to the room looking tired. A few days
ago, he had returned excited: he had found the perfect piece of land, he said.
He described a  clearing surrounded by  cedars and pines, a  little  stream
nearby busy with fish,  the air so cool  and quiet that you could hear every
pinecone as it fell to the soft ground. He had even shown him a picture, all
dark greens and shadows, and had explained where their cabin would go,
and how he could help build it, and where they would make a sleeping loft,
a secret fort, Must for him.
   “What’s  wrong, Brother Luke?”  he asked him, after the brother had been
silent so long that he could no longer stand it.
   “Oh,  Jude,” said the brother, “I’ve failed.”  He told  him how he had tried
and tried to  buy the  land, but he  Must didn’t have the money. “I’m  sorry,
Jude, I’m sorry,” he said, and then, to his ama]ement, the brother began to
cry.
   He  had never before seen an adult cry. “Maybe  you could  teach again,
Brother Luke,”  he said, trying to comfort  him. “I  like  you. If  I were a kid,
I’d like  to be taught by you,” and the brother smiled a bit at him and stroked
his hair and said it didn’t  work  like  that, that he’d have to get licensed by
the state, and it was a long and complicated process.
   He  thought and thought. And  then he remembered: “Brother Luke,”  he
said, “I could help—I could get a Mob. I could help earn money.”
   “No,  Jude,” said the brother. “I can’t let you do that.”
   “But   I want  to,”  he said. He  remembered Brother Michael telling  him
how  much he  cost  for  the  monastery to  maintain,  and  felt  guilty   and

386
frightened, both. Brother Luke had done so much for him, and he had done
nothing in return. He not only wanted to help earn money; he had to.
   At  last he was able to convince the brother, who hugged him. “You really
are one in  a million,   you  know that?”  Luke  asked him.  “You  really  are
special.” And he smiled into the brother’s sweater.
   The  next day they had classes as usual, and then the brother left again,
this time, he said, to find him a good Mob: something he could do that would
help them earn money so they could buy the land and build the cabin. And
this time  Luke  returned  smiling,  excited  even, and seeing  this, he  was
excited as well.
   “Jude,”  said the brother, “I   met someone who wants to give  you some
work; he’s waiting right outside and you can start now.”
   He smiled back at the brother. “What am I going to do?” he asked. At the
monastery, he had been taught to sweep, and dust, and mop. He could wax a
floor so well that even Brother Matthew had been impressed. He knew how
to polish silver, and brass, and wood. He knew how to clean between tiles
and how to scrub a toilet. He knew  how to clean leaves out of gutters and
clean and  reset a  mousetrap. He  knew  how  to  wash windows  and  do
laundry by hand. He knew how to iron, he knew how to sew on buttons, he
knew how to make stitches so even and fine that they looked as if they had
been done by machine.
   He  knew how to  cook. He  could only  make a do]en or  so dishes from
start to   finish,  but  he  knew  how  to   clean and  peel  potatoes, carrots,
rutabaga. He could chop hills of  onions and never cry. He could debone a
fish and knew  how to  pluck and clean a chicken.  He knew how  to make
dough, he knew how to make bread. He knew how to whip egg whites until
they  transformed from   liquid   to  solid  to  something  better  than  solid:
something like air given form.
   And  he  knew  how to  garden. He  knew  which  plants craved sun  and
which  shied from  it.   He  knew  how  to  determine whether  a plant  was
parched or drowning  in  too  much water. He  knew  when a  tree or  bush
needed to be repotted, and when it was hardy enough to be transferred into
the earth. He knew which plants needed to be protected from cold, and how
to protect them.  He knew  how to  make a clipping  and how  to make the
clipping grow. He knew how to mix fertili]er,   how to add eggshells into the
soil for  extra protein, how to  crush an aphid without destroying the leaf it
was perched on. He could do all of these things, although he was hoping he

387
would  get  to  garden, because he wanted  to  work  outside,  and  on  his
morning runs, he could feel that summer was coming, and on their drives to
the track, he had seen fields in bloom with wildflowers, and he wanted to be
among them.
   Brother Luke knelt by  him. “You’re going to do what you did with Father
Gabriel  and a  couple  of   the  brothers,”  he  said, and  then,  slowly,  he
understood what Luke  was saying, and he stepped back toward  the bed,
everything within  him  sei]ing  with  fear. “Jude,  it’s  going to  be different
now,”  Luke said,  before he could  say anything.  “It’ll    be over  so fast, I
promise you. And you’re so good at it. And I’ll   be waiting in the bathroom
to make sure nothing goes wrong, all  right?”  He  stroked his hair. “Come
here,” he  said, and held  him.  “You  are a  wonderful  kid,”  he  said. “It’s
because of you and what you’re doing that we’re going  to have our cabin,
all right?” Brother Luke had talked and talked, and finally, he had nodded.
   The man had come in (many years later, his would be one of the very few
of their faces he would remember, and sometimes, he would see men on the
street and they would look  familiar,  and he would think:  How  do I  know
him? Is he someone I was in court with?  Was he the opposing counsel on
that case last year? And then he would remember: he looks like the first of
them, the first  of the  clients) and Luke  had gone to the bathroom, which
was Must behind his bed, and he and the man had had sex and then the man
had left.
   That night  he was very quiet, and Luke was gentle and tender with him.
He had even  brought him  a  cookie—a gingersnap—and he had tried  to
smile at Luke,  and tried to  eat it, but  he couldn’t, and when  Luke wasn’t
looking, he wrapped it in a piece of paper and threw it away. The next day
he hadn’t wanted to go to the track in the morning, but Luke had said he’d
feel better with some exercise, and so they had gone and he had tried to run,
but it was too painful and he had eventually sat down and waited until Luke
said they could leave.
   Now  their routine was different: they still had classes in the mornings and
afternoons, but now, some evenings, Brother Luke brought back men, his
clients. Sometimes there was Must one; sometimes there were several. The
men brought their own towels and their own sheets, which they fitted over
the bed before they began and unpeeled and took with them when they left.
   He  tried very  hard not  to cry  at night,  but when he  did, Brother  Luke
would come sit  with him  and rub his  back and comfort him.  “How  many

388
more until we can get the cabin?” he asked, but Luke Must shook his head,
sadly. “I won’t  know for  a while,”  he said. “But  you’re doing such a good
Mob, Jude. You’re so good at it. It’s nothing to be ashamed of.” But he knew
there was something shameful about it. No one had ever told him there was,
but he knew anyway. He knew what he was doing was wrong.
   And  then, after a few months—and many motels; they moved every ten
days or so, all around east Texas, and with every move, Luke took him  to
the forest, which really was beautiful, and to the clearing where they’d have
their cabin—things  changed again. He was lying  in  his bed one  night (a
night during a week in which there had been no clients. “A little  vacation,”
Luke had said, smiling. “Everyone needs a break, especially someone who
works as hard as you do”) when Luke asked, “Jude, do you love me?”
   He  hesitated.  Four  months  ago, he  would’ve   said  yes immediately,
proudly and unthinkingly.  But  now—did he love  Brother Luke?  He often
wondered about this. He wanted to. The brother had never hurt him, or hit
him, or  said anything mean to him.  He took  care of him.  He was always
waiting Must behind the wall to make sure nothing bad happened to him. The
week before, a client had tried to make him do something Brother Luke said
he never had to do  if  he didn’t  want  to, and he had  been struggling and
trying to cry out, but there had been a pillow over his face and he knew his
noises were muffled. He  was frantic,  almost sobbing, when suddenly the
pillow  had been lifted from  his face, and the man’s weight from his  body,
and Brother Luke was telling  the man to get out of the room,  in a tone he
had never before  heard from  the  brother but  which  had  frightened and
impressed him.
   And  yet  something else told him  that he  shouldn’t love  Brother Luke,
that the brother had done something to him that was wrong. But he hadn’t.
He had volunteered for  this, after  all;  it  was for  the cabin in  the woods,
where he would have his own sleeping loft, that he was doing this. And so
he told the brother he did.
   He was momentarily happy when he saw the smile on the brother’s face,
as if he had presented him with the cabin itself. “Oh, Jude,” he said, “that is
the greatest gift I could ever get. Do you know how much I love you? I love
you more than I love my own self. I think  of you like  my own son,” and he
had smiled  back, then,  because sometimes, he had privately  thought of
Luke as his father, and he as Luke’s son. “Your  dad said you’re  nine, but
you look older,” one of the clients had said to him, suspiciously, before they

389
had begun, and he had answered what Luke had told him to say—“I’m tall
for  my  age”—both   pleased and oddly   not-pleased that  the  client  had
thought Luke was his father.
   Then  Brother Luke  had explained to  him  that when  two  people loved
each other as much as they did, that they slept in the same bed, and were
naked with each other. He hadn’t known what to say to this, but  before he
could think  of what  it  might be, Brother  Luke was moving  into  bed with
him and taking  off his  clothes and then kissing him.  He had never kissed
before—Brother Luke didn’t  let  the clients do it  with  him—and he didn’t
like it,  didn’t like  the wetness and the force of it. “Relax,”  the brother told
him. “Just relax, Jude,” and he tried to as much as he could.
   The  first  time  the brother had  sex with  him,  he told  him  it  would  be
different than with  the clients. “Because we’re in  love,”  he’d said, and he
had believed him, and when  it  had felt  the same after all—as painful,  as
difficult,   as  uncomfortable,   as  shameful—he  assumed he  was   doing
something wrong, especially because the brother was so happy afterward.
“Wasn’t that nice?” the brother asked him, “didn’t it feel different?,” and he
had agreed, too embarrassed to admit that it had been no different at all, that
it had been Must as awful as it had been with the client the day before.
   Brother Luke  usually didn’t have sex with him if  he’d seen clients earlier
in the  evening, but  they always  slept in  the same bed, and  they always
kissed. Now one bed was used for the clients, and the other was theirs. He
grew to  hate the  taste of  Luke’s  mouth,  its  old-coffee tang,  his  tongue
something slippery and  skinned trying  to  burrow  inside  of him.  Late  at
night, as the brother lay next to  him asleep, pressing him against the wall
with his weight, he would sometimes cry, silently, praying to be taken away,
anywhere, anywhere else.  He  no longer  thought  of  the  cabin:  he  now
dreamed of the monastery, and thought of how stupid he’d been to leave. It
had been better there after all.  When they  were out in  the mornings  and
would pass people, Brother Luke would tell him to lower his  eyes, because
his eyes were distinctive  and if  the brothers were looking  for  them, they
would give  them away. But  sometimes he wanted to raise his  eyes, as if
they could by their very  color and shape telegraph a message across miles
and states to  the brothers:  Here  I  am. Help   me. Please take  me back.
Nothing was his any longer: not his eyes, not his mouth, not even his name,
which Brother Luke  only  called him in  private. Around  everyone else, he

390
was Joey. “And this  is Joey,” Brother  Luke would  say, and he would rise
from the bed and wait, his head bent, as the client inspected him.
   He  cherished his lessons, because they were the one time Brother Luke
didn’t touch him,  and in those hours, the brother was who he remembered,
the person he had trusted and followed. But then the lessons would end for
the day, and every evening would conclude the same as the evening before.
   He  grew more and more silent.  “Where’s my  smiley  boy?” the brother
would ask him, and he would try  to smile back at him.  “It’s  okay to enMoy
it,”  the brother would  say, sometimes, and he would nod, and the brother
would smile  at him and rub  his back. “You  like  it,  don’t you?”  he would
ask, and wink, and he would nod at him,  mutely. “I  can tell,”  Luke would
say, still smiling,  proud of  him. “You  were made for this, Jude.”  Some of
the clients would say that to him  as well—You were born for this—and as
much as he hated it, he also knew that they were right. He was born for this.
He had been born, and left, and found, and used as he had been intended to
be used.
   In  later years, he would try to remember when exactly it was that he must
have reali]ed that the cabin was never going to be built, that the life he had
dreamed of would never be his. When he had begun, he had kept track of
the number of clients he had seen, thinking that when he reached a certain
number—forty?  fifty?—he   would  surely  be  done, he  would   surely  be
allowed to stop. But then the number grew larger and larger, until one day
he had looked at it and reali]ed how large it was and had started crying, so
scared and sick of what he had done that he had stopped counting. So was it
when he reached that number? Or was it when they  left Texas altogether,
Luke  promising  him  that  the  forests  were  better  in  Washington  State
anyway, and they drove west, through New Mexico and Ari]ona,  and then
north, stopping for weeks in  little  towns, staying in  little  motels that were
the twins of that very first motel they had ever stayed in, and that no matter
where they stopped, there were always men, and on the nights there weren’t
men, there was Brother Luke, who seemed to crave him the way he himself
had never craved anything? Was it when he reali]ed that he hated his weeks
off even more than the normal weeks, because the return to his regular life
was so much more terrible than if he had never had a vacation at all? Was it
when he began noticing the inconsistencies in Brother Luke’s stories: how
sometimes it wasn’t his son but a nephew, who hadn’t died but had in fact
moved away, and Brother Luke never saw him again; or how sometimes, he

391
stopped teaching because he had felt the calling to Moin the monastery, and
sometimes it was because he was weary from having to constantly negotiate
with the school’s principal, who clearly didn’t  care for children the way the
brother did; or how in  some stories, he had grown up in east Texas, but in
others, he had spent his childhood in Carmel, or Laramie, or Eugene?
   Or  was it the day that they were passing through Utah to Idaho, on their
way to Washington? They rarely ventured into actual towns—their America
was denuded of trees, of flowers, theirs was Must long stretches of roadway,
the  only   green  thing  Brother   Luke’s   lone  surviving   cattleya,  which
continued to live and leaf, though not bud—but this time they had, because
Brother Luke had a doctor friend in one of the towns, and he wanted him to
be examined because it was clear he had picked up  some sort of  disease
from one of  the clients,  despite the precautions Brother Luke made them
take. He didn’t know the name of the town, but he was startled at the signs
of normalcy, of life around him, and he stared out of his window in silence,
looking at these scenes that he had always imagined but rarely saw: women
standing on the street with strollers, talking and laughing with one another;
a Mogger panting by; families with dogs; a world made of not Must men but
also of children and women. Normally  on these drives he would  close his
eyes—he slept all the time now, waiting for each day to end—but this day,
he felt unusually alert, as if the world was trying to tell him  something, and
all he had to do was listen to its message.
   Brother Luke  was trying to read the map and drive at the same time, and
finally  he pulled over, studying the map and muttering.  Luke had stopped
across the street from  a baseball field,  and he watched  as, if  at once, it
began to fill  with people: women, mostly, and then, running and shouting,
boys. The boys wore uniforms, white with red stripes, but despite that, they
all  looked  different—different  hair,  different  eyes, different   skin.  Some
were skinny, like he was, and some were fat. He  had never seen so many
boys his own age at one time, and he looked and looked at them. And then
he noticed that although they were different,  they were actually the same:
they were all smiling, and laughing, excited to be outside, in the dry, hot air,
the sun bright above them, their mothers unloading cans of soda and bottles
of water and Muice from plastic carrying containers.
   “Aha!  We’re  back on track!”  he heard Luke saying, and heard him fold
up the map. But before he started the engine again, he felt Luke follow his
ga]e, and for a moment the two  of them sat staring at the boys in  silence,

392
until at  last Luke stroked his hair. “I   love you, Jude,” he said, and after  a
moment, he replied as he always did—“I   love you, too,  Brother Luke”—
and they drove away.
   He  was the same as those boys, but he was really not: he was different.
He would never be one of  them. He would  never be someone who would
run across a field while  his mother called after him  to come have a snack
before he played so he wouldn’t get tired. He would never have his bed in
the cabin. He would  never be clean again. The boys were playing  on the
field, and he was driving with Brother Luke to the doctor, the kind of doctor
he knew  from  his  previous  visits  to  other  doctors would   be somehow
wrong, somehow not a good person. He was as far away from them as he
was from the monastery. He was so far gone from himself, from who he had
hoped to be, that it was as if  he was no longer a boy  at all but  something
else entirely. This was his life now, and there was nothing he could do about
it.
   At  the doctor’s office,  Luke  leaned over and held him. “We’re  going to
have fun tonight, Must you and me,” he said, and he nodded, because there
was nothing else he could do. “Let’s go,” said Luke,  releasing him, and he
got out of  the car, and followed  Brother  Luke  across the parking lot  and
toward the brown door that was already opening to let them inside.


   The first  memory: a hospital room. He knew it was a hospital room even
before he opened his eyes because he could smell it, because its quality of
silence—a silence that  wasn’t  really  silent—was  familiar.  Next  to  him:
Willem,  asleep in a chair. Then he had been confused—why was Willem
here? He was supposed to be away, somewhere. He remembered: Sri Lanka.
But he wasn’t. He  was here. How strange, he thought. I wonder why  he’s
here? That was the first memory.
   The second memory: the same hospital room. He turned and saw Andy
sitting on  the side of  his bed, Andy,  unshaven and awful-looking,  giving
him a  strange, unconvincing  smile. He  felt  Andy  squee]e his  hand—he
hadn’t reali]ed he had a hand until he felt Andy squee]e it—and had tried to
squee]e back,  but  couldn’t.  Andy   had  looked  up  at  someone. “Nerve
damage?” he heard Andy ask. “Maybe,” said this other person, the person
he couldn’t  see, “but if   we’re lucky,  it’s  more likely   it’s—”  And  he had
closed his eyes and fallen back asleep. That was the second memory.

393
   The   third  and  fourth   and  fifth   and  sixth   memories  weren’t  really
memories at all: they were people’s faces, their hands, their voices, leaning
into his face, holding his hand, talking to him—they  were Harold and Julia
and Richard and Lucien. Same for the seventh and eighth: Malcolm, JB.
   The ninth  memory was Willem again, sitting  next to him, telling  him he
was so sorry, but he had to leave. Just for a little  while,  and then he’d be
back. He was crying, and he wasn’t sure why, but it didn’t seem so unusual
—they  all   cried,  they  cried  and  apologi]ed   to  him,   which  he  found
perplexing, as none of them had done anything wrong: he knew that much,
at least. He tried to tell  Willem not  to cry, that he was fine, but his tongue
was so thick  in  his mouth, a  great useless slab, and he couldn’t  make it
operate. Willem was already holding one of  his hands, but he didn’t  have
the energy to lift the other so he could put it on Willem’s  arm and reassure
him, and finally he had given up.
   In  the tenth memory, he was still in the hospital, but in a different room,
and he was  still  so tired.  His  arms ached. He  had two  foam  balls,  one
cupped in each palm, and he was supposed to squee]e them for five seconds
and then release them for  five.  Then squee]e them  for  five,  and release
them for  five. He  couldn’t  remember who had told  him this,  or who  had
given him the  balls, but he did  so anyway, although whenever he did, his
arms hurt more, a burning, raw pain, and he couldn’t do more than three or
four repetitions before he was exhausted and had to stop.
   And  then  one night  he  had awoken,  swimming  up through  layers of
dreams he couldn’t remember, and had reali]ed where he was, and why. He
had gone back to sleep then, but the next day he turned his head and saw a
man sitting in a chair next to his bed: he didn’t know who the man was, but
he had seen him  before.  He  would  come and sit  and  stare at him   and
sometimes he would talk to him, but he could never concentrate on what the
man was saying, and would eventually close his eyes.
   “I’m   in a mental institution,” he told the man now, and his voice sounded
wrong to him, reedy and hoarse.
   The man smiled.  “You’re  in the psychiatric wing  of a  hospital, yes,” he
said. “Do you remember me?”
   “No,”  he said, “but I recogni]e you.”
   “I’m   Dr. Solomon. I’m  a psychiatrist  here at the hospital.” There was a
silence. “Do you know why you’re here?”

394
   He  closed his eyes and nodded. “Where’s Willem?” he asked. “Where’s
Harold?”
   “Willem   had to go back to Sri Lanka to finish shooting,” said the doctor.
“He’ll  be back”—he heard the sound of paper flipping—“October ninth. So
in ten days. Harold’s coming at noon; it’s  when he’s been coming, do you
remember?” He shook his head. “Jude,” the doctor said, “can  you tell  me
why you’re here?”
   “Because,” he began, swallowing. “Because of what I did in the shower.”
   There was another silence. “That’s right,”   said the doctor, softly. “Jude,
can you tell  me why—”  But  that was all  he heard, because he had fallen
asleep again.
   The next time  he woke, the man was gone, but Harold was in his place.
“Harold,”  he  said, in  his strange new  voice,  and Harold,  who had  been
sitting with his elbows on his thighs and his face in his hands, looked up as
suddenly as if he’d shouted.
   “Jude,”  he said, and sat next to him on the bed. He took the ball out of his
right hand and replaced it with his own hand.
   He thought that Harold  looked terrible. “I’m  sorry, Harold,”  he said, and
Harold began  to cry.  “Don’t   cry,”  he  told  him,  “please don’t  cry,”  and
Harold got up and went to the bathroom and he could hear him blowing his
nose.
   That  night, once he was alone, he cried as well: not because of what he
had done but because he hadn’t been successful, because he had lived after
all.
   His  mind grew a little clearer with every day. Every day, he was awake a
little longer. Mostly,  he felt nothing. People came to see him and cried and
he looked at them and could register only the strangeness of their faces, the
way everyone looked the same when they cried, their  noses hoggy, rarely
used muscles pulling their  mouths in  unnatural directions,  into unnatural
shapes.
   He  thought of nothing, his  mind was a clean sheet of paper. He learned
little  pieces of  what  had  happened: how Richard’s  studio  manager had
thought the plumber was coming at nine that night, not  nine the following
morning (even in his ha]e, he wondered how anyone could think a plumber
would come at nine in the evening); how Richard had found him and called
an ambulance and had ridden with  him to  the hospital;  how Richard had
called Andy  and Harold  and Willem;  how  Willem  had  flown  back from

395
Colombo to be with him.  He did feel sorry  that it had been Richard who’d
had to discover him—that  was always the part of  the plan that  had made
him uncomfortable, although at the time  he had remembered thinking that
Richard had a high tolerance for blood, having once made sculptures with
it, and so was the least likely among his friends to be traumati]ed—and had
apologi]ed to Richard, who had stroked the back of his hand and told him it
was fine, it was okay.
   Dr.  Solomon came every day and tried to talk to him, but he didn’t have
much to say. Most of the time, people didn’t  talk to him  at all. They  came
and sat and did  work  of  their own,  or spoke to  him  without  seeming to
expect a reply, which he appreciated. Lucien came often, usually with a gift,
once with a  large card that everyone in  the office  had signed—“I’m  sure
this is Must the thing to make you feel better,” he’d said, dryly, “but here it
is, anyway”—and  Malcolm   made him  one of  his  imaginary  houses, its
windows crisp vellum, which he placed on his bedside table. Willem called
him every morning and every night. Harold read The Hobbit to him, which
he had never read, and when Harold couldn’t come, Julia came, and picked
up where Harold had left  off:  those were his favorite  visits. Andy  arrived
every evening, after visiting hours had ended, and had dinner with him; he
was concerned that he wasn’t eating enough, and brought him a serving of
whatever he was having. He brought him a  container of beef barley soup,
but his hands were still too weak to  hold the spoon, and Andy had to feed
him, one slow spoonful after the next.  Once, this would have embarrassed
him, but now he simply didn’t  care: he opened his mouth and accepted the
food, which was flavorless, and chewed and swallowed.
   “I  want to go home,” he told Andy  one evening, as he watched Andy eat
his turkey club sandwich.
   Andy  finished his bite and looked at him. “Oh, do you?”
   “Yes,”   he said. He  couldn’t  think  of  anything  else to  say. “I  want  to
leave.”  He  thought  Andy  would  say  something  sarcastic, but  he  only
nodded, slowly.   “Okay,”   he   said.  “Okay.  I’ll    talk   to   Solomon.”  He
grimaced. “Eat your sandwich.”
   The next day Dr. Solomon said, “I hear you want to go home.”
   “I  feel like I’ve  been here a long time,” he said.
   Dr. Solomon was quiet. “You have been here a little while,” he said. “But
given your history  of self-inMury and the seriousness of your attempt, your
doctor—Andy—and parents thought it was for the best.”

396
   He  thought about this. “So if  my  attempt had been less serious, I could
have gone home earlier?” It seemed too logical to be an effective policy.
   The doctor smiled. “Probably,” he said. “But I’m  not completely opposed
to  letting  you  go  home, Jude,  although  I  think  we  have  to  put  some
protective measures in place.” He stopped. “It  troubles me, however, that
you’ve been so unwilling  to discuss why you made the attempt in the first
place. Dr.   Contractor—I’m   sorry:  Andy—tells   me  that  you’ve  always
resisted therapy, can you tell me why?” He said nothing, and neither did the
doctor. “Your father tells  me that you  were in an abusive relationship last
year, and that it’s had long-term reverberations,” said the doctor, and he felt
himself go cold. But  he willed  himself not to  answer, and closed his eyes,
and finally   he  could  hear Dr.  Solomon  get  up  to  leave. “I’ll    be  back
tomorrow, Jude,” he said as he left.
   Eventually, once it was clear that he wasn’t going to speak to any of them
and that he was  in no  state to hurt  himself  again, they let  him  go, with
stipulations: He  was to  be released into  Julia  and Harold’s  care. It  was
strongly recommended that he remain on a milder course of the drugs that
he’d been given in the hospital. It  was very strongly recommended that he
see a therapist twice a week. He was to see Andy once a week. He was to
take a sabbatical from work, which had already been arranged. He agreed to
everything. He  signed  his  name—the pen  wobbly   in  his  grip—on  the
discharge papers, under Andy’s and Dr. Solomon’s and Harold’s.
   Harold  and Julia took him  to Truro,  where Willem  was already waiting
for him.  Every  night  he slept,  extravagantly, and during  the day he  and
Willem walked slowly  down the hill  to the ocean. It was early October and
too cold to get into the water, but they would sit on the sand and look out at
the hori]on  line, and sometimes Willem would  talk to  him and sometimes
he wouldn’t. He dreamed that the sea had turned into a solid block of ice, its
waves fro]en in mid-crest, and that Willem was at a far shore, beckoning to
him, and he was making his way slowly across its wide expanse to him, his
hands and face numb from the wind.
   They  ate dinner early, because he went to bed so early. The meals were
always something simple, easy to digest, and if there was meat, one of the
three of them would cut it up for him in  advance so he wouldn’t have to try
to wield  a knife. Harold  poured him a glass of milk  every dinner, as if  he
was a child, and he drank it. He  wasn’t allowed to leave the table until  he

397
had eaten at least half of what was on his plate, and he wasn’t  allowed to
serve himself, either. He was too tired to fight this; he did the best he could.
   He was always cold, and sometimes he woke in the middle of the night,
shivering despite the covers heaped on top of him, and he would lie there,
watching  Willem,  who  was  sharing  his  room,  breathing  on the  couch
opposite him, watching clouds drift  across the slice of moon he could  see
between the edge of the window frame and the blind, until  he was able to
sleep again.
   Sometimes he thought about what he had done and felt that same sorrow
he had felt in  the hospital: the sorrow  that he had failed, that  he was still
alive. And  sometimes he thought  about it  and  felt  dread: now everyone
really would treat him differently. Now  he really was a freak, a bigger freak
than he’d been before. Now he would have to begin anew in his attempts to
convince people he was normal.  He thought  of  the office,  the one place
where what he had been hadn’t mattered. But now there would  always be
another, competing story about him. Now he wouldn’t Must be the youngest
equity partner in the firm’s history (as Tremain sometimes introduced him);
now he would  be the partner who had tried to  kill  himself.  They must be
furious with  him, he thought. He thought of  his work there, and wondered
who was handling it.  They  probably didn’t  even need him to  come back.
Who would want to work with him again? Who would trust him again?
   And  it  wasn’t  Must Rosen Pritchard who would see him differently—it
was everyone. All the autonomy he had spent years accumulating, trying to
prove to everyone that he deserved: now it was gone. Now he couldn’t even
cut his own food. The day before, Willem had had to help him tie his shoes.
“It’ll   get better, Judy,” he said to him, “it’ll   get better. The doctor said it’s
Must going to take time.” In the mornings, Harold  or Willem  had to shave
him because his hands were still too unsteady; he looked at his unfamiliar
face in the mirror as they dragged the ra]or down his cheeks and under his
chin. He had taught  himself to  shave in Philadelphia when he was  living
with  the Douglasses, but  Willem  had retaught  him  their freshman  year,
alarmed, he later told  him, by  his tentative, hacking  movements, as if he
was clearing brush with a scythe. “Good at calculus, bad at shaving,” he’d
said then, and had smiled at him so he wouldn’t feel more self-conscious.
   Then he would  tell himself,  You can always try again, and Must thinking
that made him  feel  stronger, although perversely, he  was somehow less
inclined   to  try    again.  He   was  too   exhausted.  Trying   again  meant

398
preparation. It meant finding something sharp, finding some time alone, and
he was never alone. Of course, he knew there were other methods, but he
remained stubbornly  fixated  on the  one he  had chosen, even  though it
hadn’t worked.
   Mostly,  though, he felt nothing. Harold  and Julia and Willem asked him
what  he  wanted  for   breakfast,  but  the  choices  were  impossible  and
overwhelming—pancakes? Waffles? Cereal? Eggs? What  kind  of  eggs?
Soft-boiled? Hard? Scrambled? Sunny-side? Fried? Over easy? Poached?—
and he’d shake his head, and they eventually stopped asking. They stopped
asking his opinion  on anything, which  he found restful.  After  lunch (also
absurdly early),  he napped on  the living-room   sofa in  front  of  the  fire,
falling asleep to the sound of their murmurs, the slosh of water as they did
the dishes. In the afternoons, Harold read to  him;  sometimes Willem and
Julia stayed to listen as well.
   After  ten days or so, he and Willem went home to Greene Street. He had
been dreading his return, but when he went to his bathroom, the marble was
clean and stainless. “Malcolm,”   said Willem,   before he had to  ask. “He
finished last week. It’s all new.” Willem  helped him into bed, and gave him
a manila envelope with his name on it, which  he opened after Willem left.
Inside were the letters he had written everyone, still sealed, and the sealed
copy of his will,  and a note from Richard: “I thought you would want these.
Love, R.” He slid  them back into the envelope, his hands shaking; the next
day he put them in his safe.
   The next morning  he woke very early, creeping past Willem sleeping on
the sofa at the far end of his  bedroom, and walked through the apartment.
Someone had put flowers in every  room, or branches of maple leaves, or
bowls of squashes. The space smelled delicious, like apples and cedar. He
went to his  study, where someone had stacked his mail  on his desk, and
where Malcolm’s  little   paper house sat  atop a  stack of  books.  He  saw
unopened envelopes from JB, from Asian Henry  Young, from India,  from
Ali, and knew they had made drawings for him. He walked past the dining-
room table, letting his fingers  skim along the spines of the books lined  up
on their shelves; he wandered into the kitchen and opened the refrigerator
and saw that it was filled with things he liked. Richard had started working
more with  ceramics,  and at  the center of  the  dining  table  was a  large,
amorphous piece, the gla]e  rough and pleasant under his  palms, painted
with white  threadlike veins.  Next to  it stood his  and Willem’s  Saint Jude

399
statue, which Willem  had taken with him  when he moved to Perry Street,
but which had now found its way back to him.
   The days slipped by and he let them. In the morning he swam, and he and
Willem  ate breakfast. The physical  therapist came and had  him  practice
squee]ing rubber balls, short lengths of rope, toothpicks, pens. Sometimes
he had to pick up multiple obMects with one hand, holding them between his
fingers, which was  difficult.  His  hands shook more than ever, and he felt
sharp prickles vibrating through his fingers, but she told him  not to worry,
that  it    was  his   muscles  repairing   themselves,  his   nerves  resetting
themselves. He had lunch, he napped. While he napped, Richard came to
watch him  and Willem  went out  to run  errands and go downstairs to the
gym and,  he hoped,  do something  interesting and  indulgent  that didn’t
involve him and his problems. People came to see him in the afternoon: all
the same people, and new people, too. They stayed an hour and then Willem
made them leave. Malcolm   came with  JB and  the four  of  them  had an
awkward, polite conversation about things they had done when they were in
college, but he was glad to  see JB, and thought he might  like  to see him
again when he was less cloudy-headed, so he could apologi]e to him  and
tell him  he forgave him. As he was leaving, JB told  him, quietly, “It’ll   get
better, Judy. Trust me, I know,”  and then added, “At  least you didn’t  hurt
anyone in the process,” and he felt guilty,  because he knew he had. Andy
came at the end of the day and examined him; he unwrapped his bandages
and cleaned the  area around his  stitches.  He still   hadn’t  looked  at  his
stitches—he couldn’t bring himself to—and when Andy was cleaning them,
he looked elsewhere or closed his eyes. After Andy left, they ate dinner, and
after dinner, after the boutiques and few remaining galleries had shuttered
for the  night and the  neighborhood was deserted, they walked, making a
neat square around SoHo—east to  Lafayette, north  to  Houston, west  to
Sixth, south  to Grand,  east to Greene—before returning  home. It  was a
short walk, but  it  left  him exhausted, and he once fell  on the way  to the
bedroom, his legs simply  sliding  out from  beneath him. Julia and Harold
took the train  down on  Thursdays and spent all day Friday  and Saturday
with him, and part of Sunday as well.
   Every   morning,  Willem   asked  him,   “Do   you  want   to  talk   to  Dr.
Loehmann today?”  And  every morning  he answered, “Not   yet, Willem.
Soon, I promise.”

400
   By   the end  of  October, he  was feeling  stronger, less shaky.  He was
managing to stay awake for longer stretches at a time. He could lie on his
back and hold a book up without  it  trembling so badly  that he had to roll
over onto his stomach so he could prop it against a pillow. He could butter
his own bread, and he could wear shirts with buttons again because he was
able to slip the button into its hole.
   “What’re   you reading?” he asked Willem  one afternoon, sitting next  to
him on the living-room couch.
   “A  play I’m  thinking of  doing,” Willem  said, putting the pages down.
   He  looked  at  a  point  beyond  Willem’s  head.  “Are  you  going  away
again?” It was monstrously selfish to ask, but he couldn’t stop himself.
   “No,”   said Willem, after a silence. “I thought I’d  stick around New York
for a while, if that’s okay with you.”
   He  smiled  at the  couch’s cushions. “It’s   fine  with  me,”  he  said, and
looked up to see Willem smiling at him.  “It’s  nice to see you smile again,”
was all he said, and went back to reading.
   In  November he reali]ed that he had done nothing to celebrate Willem’s
forty-third   birthday  in   late  August,  and  mentioned  it   to   him.  “Well,
technically, you get a pass, because I wasn’t here,” said Willem. “But sure,
I’ll  let you make it  up to me. Let’s see.” He thought. “Are  you ready to go
out into the world? Do you want to have dinner? An early dinner?”
   “Sure,”  he said, and they went the next week to a little Japanese place in
the East Village that served pressed sushi and where they’d been going for
years. He ordered his own food, although he had been nervous, worried that
he was somehow choosing incorrectly, but Willem was patient and waited
as he deliberated, and when he had decided, he’d nodded at  him. “Good
choice,” he  said. As  they  ate, they  spoke of  their  friends, and  the play
Willem  had decided he was  going to  do, and the  novel he  was reading:
anything but him.
   “I  think  we should go to Morocco,” he said as they walked slowly home,
and Willem looked at him.
   “I’ll   look  into it,”  Willem  said, and took his arm to move him out of  the
path of a bicyclist who was ]ooming down the street.
   “I   want to get you  something for your  birthday,”  he said, a few blocks
later. Really, he wanted to get Willem something to thank him, and to try to
express what he couldn’t  say to  him:  a gift   that would  properly  convey
years of gratitude and love. After  their earlier conversation about the play,

401
he had remembered that Willem had, in fact, committed the previous year to
a proMect that would be shooting in Russia in early January. But when he
mentioned this  to  him,  Willem   had  shrugged. “Oh,  that?”  he’d  asked.
“Didn’t  work  out. It’s  fine.  I didn’t  really  want to  do it  anyway.” He  had
been suspicious, though, and when he had looked online, there were reports
that Willem  had pulled out of  the film  for  personal reasons; another actor
had been cast instead. He had stared at the screen then, the story blurring
before him, but when he had asked Willem about it,  Willem  had shrugged
again. “That’s what  you say when you  reali]e  you and the director  really
aren’t on the same page and no one wants to  lose face,”  he said. But  he
knew that Willem wasn’t telling him the truth.
   “You  don’t need to get me anything,” Willem said, as he knew he would,
and he said (as he always did), “I know I don’t need to, but I want to.” And
then he added, also as he always did, “A better friend would know what to
get you and wouldn’t have to ask for suggestions.”
   “A  better friend would,”  Willem agreed, as he always did, and he smiled,
because it felt like one of their normal conversations.
   More  days passed. Willem moved back into his suite at the other end of
the apartment. Lucien called him a few times to ask him about one thing or
another, apologi]ing as he did, but he was happy to get his calls, and happy
that Lucien now began their conversations by complaining about a client or
a colleague instead of asking how he was. Aside from Tremain and Lucien
and one or two other people, no one at the firm  knew the real reason he’d
been absent: they, like his clients,  had been told he was  recovering from
emergency spinal cord surgery. He knew that when  he returned to Rosen
Pritchard, Lucien would  immediately  restart him on  his normal  caseload;
there would  be no  talk of  giving  him  an  easy transition, no  speculation
about his  ability  to  handle the  stress, and he  was grateful  for  that.  He
stopped taking his drugs, which  he reali]ed were  making him  feel dopey,
and after they had left  his system, he was ama]ed by how  clear he felt—
even his vision  was different, as if  a plate-glass window  had been wiped
clean of  all  grease and smears and he was finally  getting  to  admire the
brilliant green lawn beyond it, the pear trees with their yellow fruit.
   But  he also reali]ed that the drugs had been protecting him, and without
them, the  hyenas returned,  less numerous and  more  sluggish,  but  still
circling  him,  still  following   him, less motivated  in  their  pursuit but  still
there, his unwanted but dogged companions. Other memories came back to

402
him as well, the same old ones, but new ones too, and he was made much
more sharply aware of  how severely he had inconvenienced everyone, of
how much he had asked from people, of how he had taken what he would
never, ever be able to repay. And then there was the voice, which whispered
to him at odd moments, You can try again, you can try again, and he tried
to ignore it,  because at some point—in the same, undefinable way that he
had decided to kill   himself  in  the first  place—he had  decided he would
work on getting better, and he didn’t want to be reminded that he could try
again, that being alive, as ignominious and absurd as it  often was, wasn’t
his only option.
   Thanksgiving  came, which  they  once again had at  Harold  and Julia’s
apartment on West End Avenue, and which was once again a small group:
Laurence and Gillian (their daughters had gone to their husbands’ families’
houses for the  holiday),  him,  Willem,   Richard and  India,  Malcolm  and
Sophie. At  the meal, he could  feel everyone trying  not  to pay  too much
attention to him, and when Willem  mentioned the trip  they were taking to
Morocco in the middle  of December, Harold was so relaxed, so incurious,
that he knew that he must have already thoroughly discussed it with Willem
(and, probably, Andy) in advance, and given his permission.
   “When  do you go  back to Rosen Pritchard?” asked Laurence, as if he’d
been away on holiday.
   “January third,”  he said.
   “So  soon!” said Gillian.
   He smiled  back at her. “Not soon enough,” he said. He meant it; he was
ready to try to be normal again, to make another attempt at being alive.
   He and Willem  left  early, and that evening he cut himself for the second
time since he was released from the  hospital. This  was another thing the
drugs had dampened: his need to cut, to feel  that bright,  startling slap of
pain. The first time he did it, he was shocked by how much it hurt, and had
actually wondered why he had been doing this to himself for so long—what
had he been thinking?  But  then he felt  everything  within  him  slow, felt
himself relax, felt  his  memories dim, and had remembered how it  helped
him, remembered why  he had begun  doing it  at  all.  The scars from  his
attempt were three vertical lines on both arms, from the base of his palm to
Must below the inside of his elbow, and they hadn’t healed well; it looked as
if he had shoved pencils Must beneath the skin. They had a strange, pearly

403
shine, almost as  if  the skin  had  been burned, and now  he  made a fist,
watching them tighten in response.
   That   night  he  woke   screaming,  which  had  been  happening  as  he
readMusted to life, to an existence with dreams; on the drugs, there were no
dreams, not really, or if there were, they were so strange and pointless and
meandering that he soon forgot them. But in this dream he was in one of the
motel rooms, and there was a group of men, and they were grabbing at him,
and he was desperate, trying to fight them. But they kept multiplying,   and
he knew he would lose, he knew he would be destroyed.
   One of the men kept calling his name, and then put his hand on his cheek,
and for some reason that made him more terrified, and he pushed his hand
away, and then the man poured water on him and he woke, gasping, to see
Willem next  to him, his  face pale, holding a glass in his hand. “I’m   sorry,
I’m  sorry,” Willem  said, “I  couldn’t get you  out of it,  Jude, I’m sorry. I’m
going to get you a towel,”  and came back with a towel and the glass filled
with water, but  he was shaking too badly  to hold  it. He  apologi]ed again
and again to Willem, who shook his head and told him not to worry, that it
was all  right, that  it  was Must a dream. Willem got him  a new  shirt, and
turned around as he changed and then took the wet one to the bathroom.
   “Who’s   Brother  Luke?”  asked  Willem,  as  they sat  there together  in
silence and waited for his breathing to return to normal. And then, when he
didn’t answer, “You kept screaming ‘Help me, Brother Luke, help me.’ ” He
was quiet. “Who is he, Jude? Was he someone from the monastery?”
   “I   can’t, Willem,”   he said, and  he yearned for Ana.  Ask me one more
time, Ana, he said to her, and I’ll tell you. Teach me how to do it. This time
I’ll  listen. This time I’ll  talk.
   That weekend they went to Richard’s house upstate and took a long walk
through  the  woods   that  backed  the   property.  Later,  he   successfully
completed the  first  meal he’d  cooked  since he  was released. He  made
Willem’s  favorite,  lamb chops, and  although he’d  needed Willem’s  help
carving the chop itself—he still  wasn’t agile enough to do it  on his own—
he did everything else by himself. That night he woke again, screaming, and
again there was Willem (though without  the glass of water this  time), and
him asking about Brother Luke, and why he kept begging for his help, and
again, he wasn’t able to answer.
   The  next day he was tired,  and his arms ached, and his body ached as
well, and  on their  walk,  he said very  little,  and Willem  didn’t  say much

404
himself. In the afternoon they reviewed their plans for Morocco: they would
begin in  Fe],  and then  drive through  the desert, where they’d  stay  near
Ouar]a]ate, and end in Marrakech. On their way back, they’d stop in  Paris
to visit Citi]en  and a friend of Willem’s for  a few days; they’d be home Must
before the new year.
   As  they were eating dinner, Willem  said, “You know, I  thought of  what
you could give me for my birthday.”
   “Oh?”  he said, relieved to be able to concentrate on something he could
give Willem,  rather than having to ask Willem  for yet more help,  thinking
of all the time he had stolen from him. “Let’s hear it.”
   “Well,”  said Willem,  “it’s kind  of a big thing.”
   “Anything,”   he said. “I mean it,” and Willem gave him a look he couldn’t
quite interpret. “Really,” he assured him. “Anything.”
   Willem  put down his lamb  sandwich and took a breath. “Okay,” he said.
“What I really  want for my birthday is for  you to tell me who Brother Luke
is. And not Must who he is, but what your—your relationship with him was,
and why you think  you keep calling  out his  name at night.” He  looked at
him. “I  want you  to be honest, and thorough, and tell me the whole story.
That’s what I want.”
   There was a long silence. He reali]ed he still had a mouthful of food, and
he somehow swallowed it,  and put down his  sandwich as well,  which he
was still  holding  aloft.  “Willem,”    he said at  last, because he knew  that
Willem  was  serious, and that  he  wouldn’t  be  able to  dissuade him,  to
convince him to wish for something else, “part of me does want to tell you.
But if   I  do—”  He  stopped. “But  if  I  do,  I’m  afraid  you’re  going  to be
disgusted by me. Wait,”  he said, as Willem began to  speak. He looked at
Willem’s face. “I  promise you I will.  I promise you. But—but  you’re going
to have to give me some time.  I’ve never really  discussed it before, and I
need to figure out how to say the words.”
   “Okay,”  Willem  said at last. “Well.”  He paused. “How about if  we work
up to it,  then? I ask you about something easier, and you answer that, and
you’ll  see that it’s not  so bad, talking about it?  And  if it  is,  we’ll  discuss
that, too.”
   He  inhaled;  exhaled. This is  Willem,  he  reminded himself.  He  would
never hurt you, not ever. It’s time. It’s time. “Okay,” he said, finally. “Okay.
Ask me.”

405
   He could  see Willem leaning back in his chair and staring at him, trying
to determine which to choose of the hundreds of questions that one friend
should be able to  ask another and yet he  had never been allowed to  do.
Tears came to his eyes, then, for how lopsided he had let  their friendship
become, and for how  long  Willem  had stayed with  him,  year after year,
even when he had fled from him, even when he had asked him for help with
problems whose origins he wouldn’t  reveal.  In his  new life,  he promised
himself, he  would  be less demanding of  his  friends;  he would  be more
generous. Whatever they wanted, he would give  them. If  Willem  wanted
information, he could have it, and it was up to him to figure out how to give
it to him. He would  be hurt again and again—everyone was—but if he was
going to try,  if  he was going to  be alive, he had to  be tougher, he had to
prepare himself, he had to accept that this  was part of  the bargain of life
itself.
   “Okay,  I’ve   got one,”  Willem  said,  and he sat up  straighter, readying
himself. “How did you get the scar on the back of your hand?”
   He blinked,  surprised. He wasn’t sure what the question was going to be,
but now that  it  had come, he was relieved. He rarely  thought of  the scar
these days, and now he looked  at it,  its  taffeta gleam, and as he  ran his
fingertips  across it,  he thought  of  how  this  scar  led  to  so many  other
problems, and  then  to   Brother  Luke,   and then  to   the  home,  and  to
Philadelphia, to all of it.
   But  what  in  life  wasn’t  connected to  some greater, sadder story? All
Willem was asking for was this one story; he didn’t need to drag everything
else behind it, a huge ugly snarl of difficulties.
   He  thought about how  he could start, and plotted  what he’d  say in his
head before he opened his mouth. Finally, he was ready. “I  was always a
greedy kid,”   he  began, and  across the  table, he  watched  Willem  lean
forward on his elbows, as for  the first  time in  their friendship, he was the
listener, and he was being told a story.


   He was ten, he was eleven. His hair grew long again, longer even than it
had been at the monastery. He grew taller, and Brother Luke took him to a
thrift  store, where you could buy a sack of  clothes and pay by the pound.
“Slow down!”  Brother Luke would Moke with him, pushing down on the top

406
of his  head as if  he were squashing him  back to a  smaller si]e.  “You’re
growing up too fast for me!”
   He  slept all the time  now. In  his lessons, he was awake, but as the day
turned to late afternoon, he would  feel something descend upon him, and
would begin yawning, unable to keep his eyes open. At first  Brother Luke
Moked about this as well—“My  sleepyhead,” he said, “my  dreamer”—but
one night, he sat down with him after the client had left. For months, years,
he had  struggled with   the clients,  more  out  of  reflex  than  because he
thought he was capable of making them stop, but recently, he had begun to
simply lie there, inert, waiting for whatever was going to happen to be over.
“I know  you’re tired,” Brother Luke  had said. “It’s normal; you’re growing.
It’s  tiring  work,  growing.  And  I  know  you  work  hard. But  Jude, when
you’re with your  clients, you have to show a little life; they’re  paying to be
with you, you know—you  have to show them you’re enMoying it.” When he
said nothing, the brother added, “Of  course, I know  it’s not  enMoyable for
you, not the way it is  with Must us, but you have to show a little energy, all
right?”  He leaned  over, tucked his  hair  behind his  ear. “All   right?”   He
nodded.
   It  was also around then that he began throwing himself  into  walls. The
motel they were staying in—this  was in  Washington—had a second floor,
and once he had gone upstairs to refill their bucket of ice. It had been a wet,
slippery  day, and  as he  was walking   back,  he had  tripped  and fallen,
bouncing the entire way downstairs. Brother Luke  had heard the noise his
fall  made and had  run out.  Nothing  had been  broken, but  he had  been
scraped and was bleeding, and Brother Luke had canceled the appointment
he had for that evening. That night, the brother had been careful with him,
and had brought him tea, but he had felt more alive than he had in weeks.
Something about the fall, the freshness of the pain, had been restorative. It
was honest pain, clean pain, a  pain without  shame or filth,   and it  was a
different sensation than he had felt in years. The next week, he went to get
ice again, but this time, on his way back to the room, he stopped in the little
triangle of space beneath the stairwell, and before he was conscious of what
he was doing, he was tossing himself against the brick wall, and as he did
so, he imagined he was knocking out of himself  every piece of dirt,  every
trace of  liquid,  every  memory  of  the  past few  years. He  was resetting
himself;  he was returning  himself  to  something pure;  he was punishing
himself for  what he had done. After that, he felt  better, energi]ed, as if he

407
had run a very  long race and then had vomited,  and he had been able to
return to the room.
   Eventually, however, Brother Luke reali]ed what he was doing, and there
had been another talk. “I understand you get frustrated,” Brother Luke said,
“but Jude, what  you’re doing  isn’t  good for  you. I’m  worried  about you.
And  the clients  don’t  like  seeing you  all  bruised.”  They were  silent. A
month ago, after a very bad night—there had been a group of men, and after
they had left, he had sobbed, wailed, coming as close to a tantrum as he had
in years, while Luke sat next to him and rubbed his sore stomach and held a
pillow over his mouth to  muffle the sound—he had begged Luke to let him
stop. And the brother had cried and said he would, that  there was nothing
more he’d like  than for it  to be Must the two of them, but he had long ago
spent all his  money taking  care of  him.  “I  don’t  regret it  for  an instant,
Jude,” said the brother, “but we don’t have any money now. You’re all I’ve
got. I’m  so sorry. But I’m  really  saving now; eventually, you’ll   be able to
stop, I promise.”
   “When?”  he had sobbed.
   “Soon,”   said  Luke,  “soon.  A  year.  I  promise,”  and  he  had nodded,
although he  had  long   since  learned that  the  brother’s  promises  were
meaningless.
   But  then the brother said that he would teach him a secret, something that
would help him relieve his frustrations, and the next day he had taught him
to cut  himself, and had given  him  a bag already packed with  ra]ors  and
alcohol wipes and cotton and bandages. “You’ll have to experiment to see
what feels best,” the brother had said, and had shown him how to clean and
bandage the cut once he had finished. “So this is yours,” he said, giving him
the bag. “You let me know when you need more supplies, and I’ll get them
for you.”  He had at first  missed the theatrics, the force and weight, of  his
falls and his slams, but he soon grew to appreciate the secrecy, the control
of the cuts. Brother Luke was right: the cutting was better. When he did it, it
was as if he was draining away the poison, the filth, the rage inside him. It
was as if his old dream of leeches had come to life and had the same effect,
the effect he had always hoped it would. He wished he was made of metal,
of plastic: something that could be hosed down and scrubbed clean. He had
a vision of himself being pumped full of water and detergent and bleach and
then blasted dry, everything inside him made hygienic again. Now, after the
final  client  of  the  night  had  left,  he  took  Brother  Luke’s  place in  the

408
bathroom, and until he heard the brother telling him it was time to come to
bed, his body was his to do with what he chose.
   He  was so dependent on Luke: for his food, for his  protection, and now
for his  ra]ors. When he needed to be taken to  the doctor because he was
sick—he got infections from  the clients, no matter how hard Brother Luke
tried, and  sometimes he didn’t  properly  clean his  cuts and they  became
infected as well—Brother  Luke  took him,  and got  him the  antibiotics he
needed. He grew accustomed to Brother Luke’s body, his mouth, his hands:
he didn’t like  them, but he no longer Molted when Luke began to kiss him,
and when the brother put his arms around him, he obediently returned the
embrace. He knew there was no one else who would ever treat him as well
as Luke did: even when he did something wrong, Luke never yelled at him,
and even after all  these years, he had still  never hit  him.  Earlier, he had
thought he might someday have a client who  would be better, who  might
want to  take him  away, but now  he knew  that would  never be the case.
Once, he had started getting undressed before the client was ready, and the
man had slapped his face and  snapped at him. “Jesus,”  he’d said, “slow
down, you little  slut. How  many times have you done this, anyway?” And
as he always did whenever the clients hit  him, Luke  had come out of  the
bathroom to yell  at  the man,  and had made the man  promise to  behave
better if he was going to stay. The clients called him names: he was a slut, a
whore, filthy,  disgusting, a nympho (he had to  look that  one up), a slave,
garbage, trash, dirty, worthless, a nothing. But Luke never said any of those
things to him.  He  was perfect, said Luke,  he was smart, he was  good at
what he did and there was nothing wrong with what he did.
   The brother still  talked of their being together, although now he talked of
a house on the sea, somewhere in central California, and would describe the
stony beaches, the noisy birds,  the  storm-colored water. They  would  be
together, the two of them, like a married couple. No longer were they father
and son; now they  were equals. When he turned sixteen, they  would  get
married. They would go on a honeymoon to France and Germany, where he
could finally   use his languages around real French and Germans, and to
Italy  and Spain, where Brother  Luke  had lived  for  two years: once  as a
student, once the year after he graduated college. They would  buy him  a
piano so he could play and sing. “Other people won’t want you if they knew
how many clients you’d been with,”  the Brother said. “And  they’d be silly
to not want  you. But  I’ll   always want you,  even if  you’ve  been with ten

409
thousand clients.” He would retire when he was sixteen, Brother Luke said,
and he had cried then, quietly, because he had been counting the days until
he was twelve, when Brother Luke had promised he could stop.
   Sometimes Luke apologi]ed  for what he had to do:  when the client was
cruel, when he was in pain, when he bled or  was bruised. And sometimes
Luke acted as if he enMoyed it. “Well, that was a good one,” he’d say, after
one of the men left. “I could tell  you liked that one, am I right? Don’t  deny
it, Jude! I  heard you enMoying yourself. Well, it’s good. It’s good to  enMoy
your work.”
   He turned twelve.  They were now in Oregon, working  their way toward
California,  Luke  said. He  had grown  again;  Brother  Luke  predicted he
would be  six foot  one, six  foot  two  when he stopped—still  shorter than
Brother Luke, but not by much. His voice was changing. He wasn’t a child
anymore, and this  made finding   clients more  difficult.   Now  there were
fewer individual  clients and more  groups. He hated the groups, but Luke
said that was the best he could do. He  looked too old  for  his age: clients
thought he was thirteen or fourteen, and at this age, Luke said, every year
counted.
   It  was fall;  September twentieth. They were in  Montana, because Luke
thought he would  like   to see the  night  sky there,  the stars as bright  as
electrical lights. There was nothing strange about that day. Two days earlier,
he’d had a large group,  and it had  been so awful that Luke  had not  only
canceled his clients for the day  after but had let  him sleep alone for  both
nights, the bed completely his.  That evening, though, life  had returned to
normal. Luke Moined him in bed, and began kissing him. And then, as they
were having sex, there was a banging at their door, so loud and insistent and
sudden that he had almost bitten down on Brother Luke’s tongue. “Police,”
he could hear, “open up. Open up right now.”
   Brother Luke  had clamped his hand over his mouth. “Don’t say a word,”
he hissed.
   “Police,”  shouted the voice again. “Edgar Wilmot, we have a warrant for
your arrest. Open the door right now.”
   He  was confused: Who  was Edgar Wilmot?  Was he  a client? He  was
about to tell Brother Luke that they had made a mistake when he looked up
and saw his face and reali]ed that they were looking for Brother Luke.
   Brother Luke  pulled out of him  and motioned for him to stay in the bed.
“Don’t  move,” he whispered. “I’ll   be right back.” And  then he ran into the

410
bathroom; he could hear the door lock click.
   “No,”   he’d whispered wildly, as Luke left him. “Don’t   leave me, Brother
Luke, don’t leave me alone.” But the brother had left anyway.
   And  then everything seemed to move very slowly and very fast, both  at
the same time. He hadn’t moved, he had been too petrified, but then there
was the splintering  of  wood, and  the room was  filled  with  men  holding
flashlights high by  their heads, so that he couldn’t  see their faces. One of
them came over to him and said something to him—he couldn’t hear for the
noise, for his  panic—and pulled up  his underwear and helped him  to his
feet. “You’re safe now,” someone told him.
   He  heard one of the men swear, and shout from the bathroom, “Get  an
ambulance right now,” and he wrestled free from the man who was holding
him and ducked under another man’s arm and made three fast leaps to the
bathroom, where he had seen Brother Luke with an extension cord around
his neck, hanging from the hook in  the center of the bathroom ceiling, his
mouth open, his eyes shut, his face as gray as his beard. He had screamed,
then, screamed and screamed, and then he was  being dragged from  the
room, screaming Brother Luke’s name again and again.
   He  remembers little  of  what  followed.   He was  questioned again and
again; he was taken to a doctor at a hospital who examined him and asked
him how many times he had been raped, but he hadn’t been able to answer
him: Had he been raped? He had agreed to this, to all of this; it had been his
decision, and he had made it.  “How  many times have you  had sex?” the
doctor asked instead, and he said, “With Brother Luke, or with the others?”
and the doctor had said, “What  others?” And after  he had finished telling
him, the doctor had turned away from him and put his face in his hands and
then looked back at him  and had opened his mouth to say something, but
nothing came out.  And  then he knew  for  certain that  what he  had been
doing was wrong, and he felt  so ashamed, so dirty that  he had wanted to
die.
   They took  him to the home. They brought him his things:  his books, the
NavaMo doll, the stones and twigs and acorns and the Bible with its pressed
flowers he had carried  with  him from  the  monastery, his clothes that the
other boys made fun of. At  the home, they knew what he was, they knew
what he  had done, they  knew  he was ruined  already, and so  he wasn’t
surprised when some of the counselors began doing to him what people had
been doing to him for  years. Somehow, the other boys also knew what he

411
was. They called him  names, the same names the clients had called him;
they left him  alone. When he approached a group of them, they would get
up and run away.
   They  hadn’t brought him  his bag with  ra]ors,  and so he had learned to
improvise: he stole an aluminum can lid from the trash and sterili]ed it over
the gas flame one afternoon when he was on  kitchen duty  and used that,
stuffing it under his mattress. He stole a new lid every week.
   He  thought of  Brother Luke  every day. At  the school, he  skipped four
grades; they allowed him  to  attend classes in math, in  piano, in  English
literature, in  French and German at the  community  college. His  teachers
asked him who had taught him  what he knew, and he said his father had.
“He did a good Mob,” his English teacher told him. “He must have been an
excellent  teacher,” and  he  had  been unable  to   respond, and  she had
eventually moved on to  the next student. At  night, when he was with  the
counselors, he pretended that Brother Luke was standing right behind the
wall, waiting  to spring  out in case things got too awful,  which  meant that
everything that was happening to him  were things Brother Luke  knew he
could bear.
   After  he had come to trust  Ana, he told  her a few things about Brother
Luke. But he was unwilling  to tell  her everything. He told  no one. He had
been a fool to follow Luke, he knew that. Luke had lied to him, he had done
terrible things to him. But he wanted to believe that, through everything, in
spite of everything, Luke really had loved him, that that part had been real:
not a perversion, not  a rationali]ation,  but  real. He didn’t   think he  could
take Ana saying, as she said of the others, “He was a monster, Jude. They
say they love you, but they say that so they can manipulate you, don’t you
see? This is what pedophiles do; this is how they prey on children.” As  an
adult, he was still unable to decide what he thought about Luke. Yes, he was
bad. But was  he worse than the  other brothers? Had he  really made the
wrong decision? Would it  really  have been better if  he had stayed at the
monastery? Would he have been more or less damaged by his time there?
Luke’s legacies were in everything he did, in everything he was: his love of
reading, of music, of  math, of gardening, of languages—those were Luke.
His cutting,  his hatred, his  shame, his fears, his diseases, his inability  to
have a normal sex life, to be a normal person—those were Luke, too. Luke
had taught him how to  find pleasure in life,  and he had removed pleasure
absolutely.

412
   He was careful never to say his name aloud, but sometimes he thought it,
and no matter how old he got, no matter how many years had passed, there
would appear Luke’s face, smiling,  conMured in an instant. He thought of
Luke  when the  two  of  them  were falling   in  love,  when  he was  being
seduced and had been too  much  of  a  child,  too  naïve, too  lonely  and
desperate for affection to know  it.  He was running  to the greenhouse, he
was opening the door, the heat and smell of flowers were surrounding him
like a cape. It was the last time he had been so simply happy, the last time
he had known  such uncomplicated  Moy. “And here’s my  beautiful  boy!”
Luke would cry. “Oh, Jude—I’m so happy to see you.”

413
        [ V ]

The Happy Years

414
                                                         1

THERE HAD BEEN a day, about a month after he turned thirty-eight, when
Willem  reali]ed he  was famous. Initially,  this had fa]ed  him  less than he
would have imagined,  in  part because he had always considered himself
sort of famous—he and JB, that is. He’d  be out downtown with  someone,
Jude or someone else, and somebody would come over to say hello to Jude,
and Jude would introduce him: “Aaron, do you know Willem?”  And Aaron
would say, “Of  course. Willem Ragnarsson. Everyone knows Willem,” but
it wouldn’t  be because of his  work—it  would  be because Aaron’s former
roommate’s sister had dated him at Yale, or he had two  years ago done a
reading for  Aaron’s  friend’s  brother’s  friend  who  was  a playwright,   or
because Aaron, who was an artist, had once been in a group show with JB
and Asian Henry Young, and he’d met Willem at the after-party. New York
City, for  much of his adulthood, had simply  been an extension of college,
where everyone had known  him  and JB, and  the entire infrastructure  of
which sometimes seemed to have been lifted  out of  Boston and  plunked
down within  a few blocks’  radius in lower Manhattan and outer Brooklyn.
The four of them talked to the same—well, if not the same people, the same
types of people at least, that they had in college, and in that realm of artists
and actors and musicians, of course he was known, because he always had
been. It wasn’t such a vast world; everyone knew everyone else.
   Of   the four   of  them,  only  Jude, and  to  some degree Malcolm,   had
experience living in  another world, the real world,  the one populated with
people who did the necessary stuff of life: making  laws, and teaching, and
healing people, and solving problems, and handling money, and selling and
buying things (the bigger surprise, he always thought, was not that he knew
Aaron but that Jude did). Just before he turned thirty-seven, he had taken a
role in a quiet film  titled  The Sycamore Court in which he played a small-
town Southern lawyer who was finally coming out of the closet. He’d taken
the part to  work  with  the actor playing  his  father, who  was someone he
admired and who in the film  was taciturn and casually vituperative, a man
disapproving of his own son and made unkind by his own disappointments.
As part of his research, he had Jude explain to him what, exactly, he did all

415
day, and as he listened,  he found  himself  feeling  slightly  sad that Jude,
whom he considered brilliant, brilliant  in ways he would never understand,
was spending his  life   doing  work  that  sounded so crushingly  dull,  the
intellectual equivalent of housework: cleaning and sorting and washing and
tidying, only  to move on to  the next house and have to begin all over. He
didn’t  say this,  of  course,  and on  one Saturday  he met  Jude at  Rosen
Pritchard and looked through his folders and papers and wandered around
the office as Jude wrote.
   “Well,  what do you think?”  Jude asked, and leaned back in his chair and
grinned at him, and he smiled back and said, “Pretty impressive,” because it
was, in its own way, and Jude had laughed. “I know what you’re  thinking,
Willem,”  he’d  said. “It’s  okay. Harold thinks  it,  too. ‘Such a  waste,’ ” he
said in Harold’s voice. “ ‘Such a waste, Jude.’ ”
   “That’s   not what  I’m  thinking,”   he  protested, although really,  he had
been: Jude was always bemoaning his own  lack of  imagination, his  own
unswervable sense of practicality, but Willem had never seen him that way.
And it did seem a waste: not that he was at a corporate firm but that he was
in law  at all, when  really, he thought, a mind  like Jude’s should be doing
something else. What, he didn’t  know, but it  wasn’t this.  He knew it  was
ridiculous, but he had never truly believed that Jude’s attending law school
would actually  result in  his becoming a  lawyer: he  had always imagined
that at some point he’d  give it  up  and do something else, like  be a math
professor, or a voice teacher, or (although he had recogni]ed the irony, even
then) a psychologist, because he was such a good listener and always so
comforting to his friends. He didn’t know why he clung to this idea of Jude,
even after it was clear that he loved what he did and excelled at it.
   The Sycamore Court had been an unexpected hit and had won Willem the
best reviews he’d ever had, and award nominations, and its release, paired
with a larger, flashier film   that he had shot two years earlier but had been
delayed in  postproduction,  had created a  certain  moment that  even  he
recogni]ed would  transform  his  career. He had  always chosen his  roles
wisely—if  he could be said to have superior talent in  anything, he always
thought it was that: his taste for parts—but until  that year, there had never
been a time in  which  he felt  that he was truly   secure, that he could talk
about films he’d  like to  do when he was in  his fifties  or sixties. Jude had
always told  him  that  he had  an overdeveloped sense of  circumspection
about his career, that he was far  better along than he  thought, but it  had

416
never felt that way; he knew  he was respected by his peers and by critics,
but a  part of  him  always feared that  it  would  end abruptly  and without
warning. He was a practical person in the least practical of careers, and after
every Mob he booked, he would tell his friends he would never book another,
that this was certain to be the last, partly as a way of staving off his fears—
if he acknowledged the possibility, it was less likely to  happen—and partly
to give voice to them, because they were real.
   Only  later, when he and Jude were alone, would he allow himself to truly
worry aloud. “What if I  never work again?” he would ask Jude.
   “That  won’t happen,” Jude would say.
   “But  what if it  does?”
   “Well,”   said Jude, seriously, “in  the  extraordinarily  unlikely  event that
you never act again, then you’ll do something else. And while you figure it
out, you’ll move in with  me.”
   He knew, of course, that he would work again: he had to believe it. Every
actor did. Acting  was a form  of  grifting,  and once you stopped believing
you could, so did everyone else. But he still liked having Jude reassure him;
he liked  knowing he  had somewhere to go Must in case it really did  end.
Once in a while, when he was feeling particularly, uncharacteristically self-
pitying,  he would  think  of  what he would  do  if  it  ended: he thought  he
might work  with disabled children.  He would be good at it,  and he would
enMoy it. He could see himself walking home from an elementary school he
imagined might be on the Lower  East Side, west to SoHo, toward Greene
Street. His apartment would be gone, of course, sold to pay for his master’s
program in education (in  this  dream, all the  millions  he’d earned, all  the
millions  he had  never spent, had somehow vanished),  and he would  be
living in  Jude’s apartment, as if the past two decades had never happened at
all.
   But  after The Sycamore Court, these mopey fantasies had diminished in
frequency, and he spent the  latter half  of  his  thirty-seventh year  feeling
closer to  confidence  than  he  ever had  before.  Something had  shifted;
something had cemented; somewhere his name had been tapped into stone.
He would always have work; he could rest for a bit if he wanted to.
   It  was September, and he was coming back from  a shoot and  about to
embark upon a European publicity tour; he had one day in the city, Must one,
and Jude told him  he’d  take him  anywhere he  wanted. They’d  see each
other, they’d have lunch, and then he’d get back into the car and go straight

417
to the airport for the flight to London. It had been so long since he had been
in New York, and he really wanted to go somewhere cheap and downtown
and homey, like the Vietnamese noodle place they had gone to when they
were in their twenties, but he instead picked a French restaurant known for
its seafood in midtown so Jude wouldn’t have to travel far.
   The  restaurant was filled   with  businessmen, the kinds of  people who
telegraphed their wealth  and  power with   the cut  of  their  suits  and  the
subtlety of their  watches: you had to be wealthy and powerful  yourself in
order to understand what was being communicated. To everyone else, they
were men in  gray  suits, indistinguishable from  one  another. The hostess
brought him to Jude, who was there already, waiting, and when Jude stood,
he reached over and hugged him very close, which he knew Jude didn’t like
but which he had recently decided he would start doing anyway. They stood
there, holding each other, surrounded on  either side by  gray-suited men,
until he released Jude and they sat.
   “Did  I embarrass you enough?” he asked him, and Jude smiled and shook
his head.
   There  were so  many things  to discuss in  so  little  time  that Jude  had
actually written an agenda on the back of a receipt, which he had laughed at
when he  had seen it  but  which  they ended  up following   fairly   closely.
Between Topic Five (Malcolm’s  wedding: What were they going to  say in
their toasts?) and Topic Six (the progression of the Greene Street apartment,
which was being gutted), he had gotten up to go to the bathroom, and as he
walked back to  the table, he had the unsettling feeling  that he was  being
watched. He was of course used to being appraised and inspected, but there
was something different about the quality of this attention, its intensity and
hush, and for the first time in  a long time, he was self-conscious, aware of
the fact that he was wearing Means and not a suit, and that he clearly didn’t
belong. He became aware, in fact, that everyone was wearing a suit, and he
was the only one not.
   “I  think  I’m  wearing the wrong  thing,” he said quietly  to Jude as he sat
back down. “Everyone’s staring.”
   “They’re  not staring at you  because of what you’re wearing,” Jude said.
“They’re staring at you because you’re famous.”
   He shook his head. “To you and literally do]ens of other people, maybe.”
   “No,  Willem,”  Jude had said. “You are.” He smiled at him. “Why do you
think they didn’t  make you wear a Macket? They don’t let Must anyone walt]

418
in here  who’s not  in  corporate mufti.  And  why  do  you think  they  keep
bringing over all these appeti]ers? It’s not because of me, I guarantee you.”
Now he laughed. “Why  did  you choose this place anyway? I thought you
were going to pick somewhere downtown.”
   He  groaned. “I  heard the crudo was  good. And  what do you  mean: Is
there a dress code here?”
   Jude smiled  again and was  about to  answer when one of  the  discreet
gray-suited men came over to them and, vividly   embarrassed, apologi]ed
for  interrupting  them. “I   Must wanted to say that I   loved The  Sycamore
Court,”  he said. “I’m  a big  fan.”  Willem  thanked him, and the man, who
was older, in his fifties, was about to say something else when he saw Jude
and blinked, clearly recogni]ing  him, and stared at him for a bit, obviously
recategori]ing  Jude in  his  head, refiling   what  he  knew  about him.  He
opened his mouth and shut it  and then  apologi]ed  again as he left,  Jude
smiling serenely at him the entire time.
   “Well,  well,”   said Jude, after the man had hurried away. “That  was the
head of the  litigation  department of one  of the  biggest firms  in  the city.
And, apparently, an admirer of yours.” He grinned at Willem. “Now are you
convinced you’re famous?”
   “If   the  benchmark for  fame  is  being recogni]ed  by  twentysomething
female RISD graduates and aging closet cases, then yes,” he said, and the
two  of  them started snickering,  childishly,  until  they  were  both able  to
compose themselves again.
   Jude looked  at him.  “Only   you could  be on  maga]ine covers and  not
think you’re  famous,”  he said, fondly.  But  Willem  wasn’t  anywhere real
when those maga]ine covers came out;  he was on  set. On set,  everyone
acted like they were famous.
   “It’s  different,”  he told  Jude. “I  can’t explain it.”  But  later, in the car to
the airport, he reali]ed what the difference was. Yes, he was used to being
looked at. But he was only really used to being looked at by certain kinds of
people in certain kinds of rooms—people who wanted to sleep with him, or
who wanted  to talk  to  him  because it  might  help their  own  careers, or
people for whom  the simple fact that  he was recogni]able was enough to
trigger  something  hungry  and  frantic  in   them,  to  crave  being  in   his
presence. He wasn’t, however, accustomed to being looked  at by  people
who had other things to do, who had bigger and more important matters to
worry about  than an actor in  New York.  Actors  in New  York:  they were

419
everywhere. The only  time  men with   power ever  looked at  him  was at
premieres, when he was being presented to the studio head and they were
shaking his  hand  and  making  small  talk   even  as he  could  see  them
examining him, calculating how well he’d tested and how much they’d paid
for him and how much the film would have to earn in order for them to look
at him more closely.
   Perversely, though, as this began happening more and more—he would
enter a room, a restaurant, a building, and would feel,  Must for a second, a
slight collective pause—he also began reali]ing that he could turn his own
visibility   on  and  off.   If   he walked   into  a  restaurant expecting  to  be
recogni]ed, he always  was. And  if  he walked  in expecting not  to  be, he
rarely was.  He  was never  able  to determine  what,  exactly, beyond  his
simply willing  it,  made the difference. But it worked; it was why, six  years
after that lunch, he was able to walk through much of SoHo in  plain sight,
more or less, after he moved in with Jude.
   He  had  been at Greene Street since  Jude got  home from  his  suicide
attempt, and as the months passed, he found that he was migrating more and
more of  his  things—first  his clothes,  then his  laptop, then  his boxes of
books and his favorite woolen blanket that he liked  to wrap about himself
and shuffle  around in   as he  made his  morning  coffee: his  life   was so
itinerant that there really wasn’t much else he needed or owned—to his old
bedroom. A  year  later,  he was  living   there still.   He’d  woken  late one
morning and made himself some coffee (he’d had to bring his coffeemaker
as well, because Jude didn’t have one), and had meandered sleepily about
the apartment, noticing as if for the first time that somehow his books were
now  on  Jude’s shelves, and  the pieces  of  art  he’d  brought  over  were
hanging on  Jude’s walls.   When  had this  happened? He  couldn’t  quite
remember, but it felt right; it felt right that he should be back here.
   Even  Mr. Irvine  agreed. Willem  had seen him  at Malcolm’s  house the
previous spring for  Malcolm’s  birthday  and Mr.  Irvine  had  said, “I  hear
you’ve moved back in with Jude,” and he said he had, preparing himself for
a lecture on their eternal adolescence: he was going to be forty-four, after
all; Jude was nearly  forty-two.  But  “You’re  a  good friend,  Willem,”  Mr.
Irvine had said. “I’m  glad you boys are taking care of each other.” He had
been deeply rattled by Jude’s attempt; they all had, of course, but Mr. Irvine
had always liked Jude the best of all of them, and they all knew it.
   “Well,  thanks, Mr. Irvine,” he’d said, surprised. “I’m glad, too.”

420
   In  the first, raw  weeks after Jude had gotten out of the hospital, Willem
used to go into his room at odd hours to give himself confirmation that Jude
was there,  and  alive.  Back  then,  Jude slept  constantly, and  he  would
sometimes sit on the end of  his  bed, staring at him  and feeling  a sort of
horrible  wonder that  he  was still   with  them  at all.  He  would  think:   If
Richard had found  him  Must twenty minutes later, Jude would have been
dead. About a month after Jude had been released, Willem had been at the
drugstore and had seen a box cutter hanging on the rack—such a medieval,
cruel instrument, it seemed—and had almost burst into tears: Andy had told
him that the emergency room surgeon had said Jude’s had been the deepest,
most decisive self-inflicted incisions he had ever seen in his career. He had
always known that  Jude was troubled, but  he was awestruck, almost, by
how little he knew him, by the depths of his determination to harm himself.
   He felt  that he had in some ways learned more about Jude in the past year
than he had  in  the past twenty-six,  and each new  thing  he learned was
awful: Jude’s stories were the  kinds of  stories that he was unequipped to
answer, because so many of them were unanswerable. The story of the scar
on the back of his hand—that had been the one that had begun it—had been
so terrible that Willem  had stayed up that  night, unable to sleep, and had
seriously contemplated calling Harold, Must to be able to have someone else
share the story with him, to be speechless alongside him.
   The  next day he couldn’t  stop himself from  staring at Jude’s hand, and
Jude had  finally   drawn  his   sleeve over  it.   “You’re   making  me  self-
conscious,” he said.
   “I’m   sorry,” he’d said.
   Jude had sighed. “Willem, I’m not going to tell  you these stories if you’re
going to react like this,” he said, finally. “It’s  okay, it really is. It was a long
time ago. I never think  about it.”  He paused. “I don’t  want you  to look at
me differently if I tell  you these things.”
   He’d  taken a  deep breath. “No,”  he said. “You’re   right. You’re  right.”
And so now when he listened to these stories of Jude’s, he was careful not
to say anything, to make small, nonMudgmental noises, as if all his friends
had been whipped with a belt soaked in vinegar until they had passed out or
been made to eat their own vomit off the floor, as if those were normal rites
of childhood. But despite these stories, he still knew nothing: He still didn’t
know who Brother Luke was. He still  didn’t know anything except isolated
stories about the monastery, or the home. He still didn’t know how Jude had

421
made it to  Philadelphia or  what had happened to him  there. And he  still
didn’t know  the story about the inMury. But if Jude was beginning with the
easier stories, he now knew enough to know  that those stories, if he  ever
heard them, would be horrific. He almost didn’t want to know.
   The stories had been part of a compromise when Jude had made it clear
that he wouldn’t  go  to Dr.  Loehmann. Andy  had been stopping by  most
Friday nights, and he came over one evening shortly after Jude had returned
to Rosen Pritchard. As Andy examined Jude in his bedroom, Willem made
everyone drinks, which  they had on  the sofa, the  lights low  and the  sky
outside grainy with snow.
   “Sam Loehmann says you haven’t called him,” Andy said. “Jude—this is
bullshit. You’ve got to call him. This was part of the deal.”
   “Andy,  I’ve  told  you,” Jude said, “I’m  not  going.” Willem  was pleased,
then, to   hear  that  Jude’s stubbornness had  returned,  even  though  he
disagreed with him. Two months ago, when they had been in Morocco, he
had looked up from his  plate at dinner to see Jude staring at the dishes of
me]]e before him, unable to serve himself any of them. “Jude?” he’d asked,
and Jude had looked at him, his face fearful. “I don’t  know how to begin,”
he’d said, quietly, and so Willem had reached over and spooned a little from
each dish onto Jude’s plate, and told him to start with the scoop of stewed
eggplant at the top and eat his way clockwise through the rest of it.
   “You  have to do something,” Andy said. He could tell Andy was trying to
remain calm,  and failing,  and that  too  he found  heartening: a sign  of  a
certain return to normalcy. “Willem thinks  so too, right, Willem? You can’t
Must keep going on like this! You’ve had a maMor trauma in your life! You
have to start discussing things with someone!”
   “Fine,”  said Jude, looking tired. “I’ll  tell Willem.”
   “Willem’s   not a  health-care professional!” said Andy.  “He’s  an actor!”
And  at that,  Jude had  looked at  him  and  the two  of   them had  started
laughing, so hard that  they had  to put  their drinks  down,  and Andy  had
finally stood and said that they were both so immature he didn’t know why
he bothered and  had left,  Jude trying   to  call  after him—“Andy!    We’re
sorry! Don’t  leave!”—but  laughing  too hard to  be intelligible.   It was  the
first time  in months—the first time  since even before the attempt—that he
had heard Jude laugh.
   Later, when  they had recovered, Jude had said, “I thought I  might, you
know, Willem—start telling  you  things sometimes. But do you mind? Is it

422
going to be a burden?”  And he had said of  course it wouldn’t  be, that he
wanted to know. He had always wanted to know, but he didn’t say this; he
knew it would sound like criticism.
   But  as much as he was able to convince himself that Jude had returned to
himself, he was also able to recogni]e that he had been changed. Some of
these changes were, he thought, good ones: the talking, for example. And
some of them were sad ones: although his hands were much stronger, and
although it was less and less frequent, they still shook occasionally, and he
knew Jude was embarrassed by it. And he was more skittish than ever about
being touched, especially, Willem noticed, by  Harold; a month  ago, when
Harold had  visited, Jude had  practically  danced out of  the  way to  keep
Harold from hugging him. He had felt bad for Harold, seeing the expression
on his face, and so had gone over and hugged him himself. “You know he
can’t help  it,”  he told  Harold  quietly, and  Harold had kissed him  on  the
cheek. “You’re a sweet man, Willem,” he’d said.
   Now   it  was  October,  thirteen  months after  the  attempt.  During   the
evening he was at the theater; two months after his run ended in December,
he’d start shooting  his first  proMect since he returned from Sri Lanka,  an
adaptation of Uncle Vanya that he was excited about and was being filmed
in the Hudson Valley: he’d be able to come home every night.
   Not  that the location was a coincidence. “Keep  me in New  York,”  he’d
instructed his manager and his agent after he’d dropped out of the film  in
Russia the previous fall.
   “For  how long?” asked Kit, his agent.
   “I  don’t know,”  he’d said. “At least the next year.”
   “Willem,”   Kit  had said, after a silence, “I understand how close you and
Jude are. But don’t you think you should take advantage of the momentum
you have? You could do  whatever you wanted.”  He was referring  to The
Iliad and The Odyssey, which had both been enormous successes, proof, Kit
liked to point  out, that he could do anything he wanted now. “From what I
know of  Jude, he’d  say the  same thing.”  And  then, when he  didn’t  say
anything, “It’s  not like this  is your wife,  or kid, or  something. This is your
friend.”
   “You  mean ‘Must your friend,’ ” he’d said, testily. Kit was Kit; he thought
like an agent, and he trusted how Kit thought—he had been with him since
the beginning of  his  career; he tried not  to fight  with   him. And  Kit  had
always guided him well. “No fat, no filler,”   he liked to brag about Willem’s

423
career, reviewing the history of his roles. They both knew  that Kit  was far
more ambitious for him  than he was—he always had been. And yet it had
been Kit who’d gotten him on the first flight  out of  Sri Lanka after Richard
had called him;  Kit   who’d  had the  producers shut down  production  for
seven days so he could fly to New York and back.
   “I   don’t mean to offend  you, Willem,”   Kit  had said, carefully. “I  know
you love him. But come on. If he were the love of your life, I’d  understand.
But this seems extreme to me, to inhibit your career like this.”
   And  yet he sometimes wondered if he could ever love anyone as much as
he loved Jude. It was the fact of him, of course, but also the utter comfort of
life with  him, of having someone who had known him for so long and who
could be relied  upon to  always take him  as exactly  who he  was on that
particular day. His work,  his very life,  was one of  disguises and charades.
Everything about him and his context was constantly changing: his hair, his
body, where  he would  sleep  that night.  He  often  felt  he  was made  of
something liquid, something that was being continually poured from bright-
colored bottle to bright-colored bottle, with  a little being lost or  left behind
with each transfer. But  his friendship  with  Jude made him feel that  there
was something real and immutable about who he was, that despite his life
of guises, there was something elemental about him, something that Jude
saw even when he could not,  as if  Jude’s very witness of  him made him
real.
   In  graduate school he’d  had a teacher who  had told  him  that the best
actors are the most boring people. A strong sense of self was detrimental,
because an actor had to  let the  self  disappear; he had to  let  himself be
subsumed by a character. “If you want to  be a personality, be a pop star,”
his teacher had said.
   He  had understood the wisdom of this, and still  did,  but really, the  self
was what  they all  craved,  because the more you  acted, the  further  and
further you  drifted  from  who you  thought you  were, and the  harder and
harder it was to find your way back. Was it any wonder that so many of his
peers were such wrecks? They made their money, their lives, their identities
by impersonating others—was it a surprise, then, that they needed one set,
one stage after the next, to give their lives shape? Without them, what and
who were they? And so they took up religions,  and girlfriends, and causes
to give them something that could be their own: they never slept, they never
stopped, they were terrified to be alone, to have to ask themselves who they

424
were. (“When an actor talks  and there’s no one to hear him, is  he still  an
actor?” his friend Roman had once asked. He sometimes wondered.)
   But  to  Jude, he  wasn’t an  actor: he  was his  friend,  and that  identity
supplanted everything else. It was a role he had inhabited for so long that it
had become, indelibly, who he was. To Jude, he was no more primarily an
actor than Jude was primarily a lawyer—it was never the first or second or
third way  that either  of them  would  describe the other. It  was Jude who
remembered who he had been before he had made a life pretending to be
other people: someone with a brother, someone with  parents, someone to
whom everything  and everyone seemed so impressive and beguiling. He
knew other  actors who didn’t  want  anyone to  remember them as they’d
been, as someone so determined to be someone else, but he  wasn’t that
person. He wanted to be reminded of who he was; he wanted to be around
someone for whom  his career would  never be the most  interesting thing
about him.
   And  if   he was to  be  honest, he loved  what  came with  Jude as well:
Harold and Julia. Jude’s adoption had been the first  time he had ever felt
envious of  anything Jude had. He  admired  a lot  of  what  Jude had—his
intelligence and thoughtfulness and resourcefulness—but he had never been
Mealous of him. But watching Harold and Julia with him, watching how they
watched him even when he wasn’t  looking at  them, he had felt  a kind of
emptiness: he was parentless, and while most of the  time he didn’t  think
about this at all, he felt that, for as remote as his parents had been, they had
at least been something  that had  anchored him to  his  life.  Without  any
family, he was a scrap of paper floating through the air, being picked up and
tossed aloft with every gust. He and Jude had been united in this.
   Of  course, he knew this envy was ridiculous, and beyond mean: he had
grown up with parents, and Jude hadn’t. And he knew that Harold and Julia
felt an affection for him as well, as much as he did for them. They had both
seen every one of his films, and both sent him long and detailed reviews of
them, always praising  his performance and making  intelligent  comments
about his costars and the cinematography. (The only  one they  had never
seen—or at least  never commented on—was  The  Prince  of  Cinnamon,
which  was the  film   he had  been shooting when  Jude had  tried  to  kill
himself. He had never seen it himself.) They read every article about him—
like  his reviews,  he avoided these articles—and bought a  copy of  every
maga]ine that featured him. On his  birthday, they would  call and ask him

425
what he was going to do to celebrate, and Harold would remind him of how
old he was getting. At Christmas, they always sent him something—a book,
along with  a  Mokey little gift,  or a  clever toy  that  he would  keep in  his
pocket to fiddle with  as he talked on the phone or sat in the makeup chair.
At Thanksgiving, he and Harold would  sit in the living  room  watching the
game, while Julia kept Jude company in the kitchen.
   “We’re  running low on chips,” Harold would say.
   “I  know,” he’d say.
   “Why  don’t you go get more?” Harold would say.
   “You’re the host,” he’d remind Harold.
   “You’re the guest.”
   “Yeah, exactly.”
   “Call  Jude and get him to bring us more.”
   “You  call him!”
   “No,  you call him.”
   “Fine,”  he’d say. “Jude! Harold wants more chips!”
   “You’re  such a confabulator, Willem,” Harold would say, as Jude came in
to refill the bowl. “Jude, this was completely Willem’s idea.”
   But  mostly, he knew  that Harold and Julia loved  him because he loved
Jude; he knew they trusted him to take care of Jude—that was who he was
to them, and he didn’t mind it. He was proud of it.
   Lately,  however,  he had  been feeling  differently   about Jude,  and he
wasn’t sure what to do about it. They had been sitting on the sofa late one
Friday night—he Must home from the theater, Jude Must home from the office
—and talking,  talking   about nothing  in  particular,  when he  had almost
leaned over and kissed him. But he had stopped himself, and the moment
had passed. But since then, he had been revisited by  that impulse  again:
twice, three times, four times.
   It  was beginning to  worry him.  Not  because Jude was a man: he’d had
sex with men before, everyone he knew had, and in college, he and JB had
drunkenly made out one night out of boredom and curiosity (an experience
that had  been, to  their   mutual  relief,  entirely  unsatisfying:  “It’s   really
interesting how someone so good-looking can be such a turnoff,” had been
JB’s exact words to him).  And not because he hadn’t always felt a sort of
low-key hum of  attraction for Jude, the way he felt for  more or less all his
friends. It was because he knew that if he tried anything, he would have to

426
be certain  about it,  because he sensed, powerfully,  that  Jude, who  was
casual about nothing, certainly wouldn’t be casual about sex.
   Jude’s sex life,  his sexuality, had been a subMect of ongoing fascination
for  everyone  who   knew  him,   and  certainly  for   Willem’s   girlfriends.
Occasionally, it had come up  among the three of them—he and Malcolm
and JB—when Jude wasn’t around: Was he having sex? Had he ever? With
whom? They had all seen people looking at him at parties, or flirting   with
him, and in every case, Jude had remained oblivious.
   “That  girl was all  over you,” he’d say to Jude as they walked home from
one party or another.
   “What  girl?”  Jude would say.
   They talked about it  with one another because Jude had made it clear he
wouldn’t discuss it with  any of them: when the topic  was raised, he would
give  them   one  of   his   stares  and  then   change  the  subMect with   a
declarativeness that was impossible to misinterpret.
   “Has he ever spent the night away from home?” asked JB (this was when
he and Jude were living on Lispenard Street).
   “Guys,”   he’d say (the conversation made him  uncomfortable), “I  don’t
think we should be talking about this.”
   “Willem!”    JB would say. “Don’t   be such a pussy! You’re not betraying
any confidences. Just tell us: yes or no. Has he ever?”
   He’d  sigh. “No,” he’d say.
   There  would be  a silence. “Maybe  he’s asexual,” Malcolm  would  say,
after a while.
   “No,  that’s you, Mal.”
   “Fuck  off, JB.”
   “Do  you think he’s a virgin?” JB would ask.
   “No,”   he’d say. He didn’t know why  he knew this, but he was certain he
wasn’t.
   “It’s   such a waste,” JB  would say, and he and Malcolm  would  look  at
each other, knowing what was coming next. “His looks’ve  been wasted on
him. I should’ve gotten his looks. I would’ve  had a good time with them, at
least.”
   After  a while, they grew to accept it as part of who Jude was; they added
the subMect to the list of things they  knew not to  discuss. Year after year
passed and he dated no one, they saw him with no one. “Maybe he’s living
some hot double life,”  Richard once suggested, and Willem had shrugged.

427
“Maybe,” he said. But really, although he had no proof of this, he knew that
Jude wasn’t. It was in this same, proof-less way that he assumed Jude was
probably  gay  (though   maybe  not),  and   probably  hadn’t   ever  had  a
relationship (though  he really  hoped he  was wrong  about this).  And  as
much as Jude claimed  otherwise, Willem  wasn’t  ever convinced  that he
wasn’t lonely, that he didn’t, in some small dark part of himself, want to be
with someone. He remembered Lionel and Sinclair’s wedding, where it had
been Malcolm with Sophie and he with Robin and JB—though they hadn’t
been speaking then—with Oliver, and Jude with no one. And although Jude
hadn’t seemed bothered by this, Willem had looked at him across the table
and had felt sad for him.  He didn’t  want Jude to get old alone; he wanted
him to  be with  someone who would take care of  him  and be attracted to
him. JB was right: it was a waste.
   And  so was this what this was, this attraction? Was it fear and sympathy
that had morphed itself  into  a more palatable shape? Was he convincing
himself  he was attracted  to Jude  because he couldn’t  stand to  see him
alone? He didn’t think so. But he didn’t know.
   The person he would’ve once discussed this with was JB, but he couldn’t
speak to JB about  this, even though  they were  friends again, or  at least
working  toward friendship.  After  they had  returned from  Morocco, Jude
had called JB and the two  of them  had gone out for  dinner, and a month
later, Willem and JB had gone out on their own. Oddly, though, he found it
much more difficult to forgive  JB than Jude had, and their first meeting had
been a disaster—JB showily, exaggeratedly blithe; he seething—until they
had left  the restaurant and started yelling   at each other. There  they had
stood on deserted Pell Street—it had been snowing, lightly, and no one else
was out—accusing each other of  condescension and cruelty; irrationality
and self-absorption;  self-righteousness  and narcissism;  martyrdom   and
cluelessness.
   “You  think anyone hates themselves as much as I do?” JB had shouted at
him. (His fourth  show, the one that documented his time on drugs and with
Jackson, had been titled “The  Narcissist’s Guide to  Self-Hatred,” and  JB
had referenced it  several times during  their  dinner as  proof that  he had
punished himself mightily and publicly and had now been reformed.)
   “Yeah, JB,  I do,”  he’d shouted back at him. “I  think  Jude hates himself
far more than you could ever hate yourself, and I think  you knew that and
you made him hate himself even more.”

428
   “You  think I don’t  know that?” JB had yelled. “You think I  don’t fucking
hate myself for that?”
   “I   don’t  think  you hate yourself  enough for  it,  no,”  he’d  yelled  back.
“Why did you do that, JB? Why did you do that to him, of all people?” And
then, to his surprise, JB had sunk, defeated, to the curb. “Why  didn’t  you
ever love me the way you love him, Willem?” he asked.
   He  sighed. “Oh, JB,”  he said, and sat down  next to him  on the chilled
pavement. “You never needed me as much as he did.”  It  wasn’t the only
reason, he knew, but it was part of  it. No  one else in his life  needed him.
People wanted him—for sex, for  their proMects, for his friendship, even—
but only Jude needed him. Only to Jude was he essential.
   “You  know,  Willem,”  said JB,  after a silence, “maybe  he doesn’t need
you as much as you think he does.”
   He had thought about this for  a while. “No,”  he said, finally,  “I  think he
does.”
   Now  JB sighed. “Actually,” he had said, “I think you’re right.”
   After   that, things had,  strangely, improved. But  as much  as he was—
cautiously—learning to  enMoy JB again, he wasn’t sure he  was ready to
discuss this particular topic with him. He wasn’t sure he wanted to hear JB’s
Mokes about  how   he   had   already  fucked   everything   with    two   X
chromosomes and  so  was  now   moving  on  to   the  Ys,   or  about  his
abandonment of heteronormative standards, or, worst of all, about how this
attraction he thought he was feeling for  Jude was really something else: a
misplaced guilt  for   the suicide  attempt,  or  a form   of  patroni]ation,   or
simple, misdirected boredom.
   So  he did  nothing  and said nothing.  As the  months passed, he dated,
casually, and he examined his  feelings  as he did.  This is  crazy,  he told
himself. This is not a good idea. Both were true. It would be so much easier
if he didn’t have these feelings at all. And so what if he did? he argued with
himself.  Everyone had  feelings that  they  knew  better than  to  act upon
because they  knew   that  doing   so  would   make   life   so  much  more
complicated. He had whole pages of dialogue with  himself, imagining  the
lines—his and JB’s, both spoken by him—typeset on white paper.
   But    still,    the   feelings   persisted.  They    went   to   Cambridge   for
Thanksgiving, the first time  in two years that they’d  done so. He and Jude
shared his room because Julia’s brother was visiting from Oxford  and had
the upstairs  bedroom. That  night,  he  lay  awake on  the  bedroom  sofa,

429
watching Jude sleep. How easy would  it  be, he thought, to  simply  climb
into bed next to him and fall asleep himself? There was something about it
that seemed almost preordained, and the absurdity was not in the fact of it
but in his resistance to the fact of it.
   They  had taken the car to Cambridge, and Jude drove them home so he
could sleep. “Willem,”   Jude said as they were  about to enter the  city, “I
want to ask you  about something.” He looked  at him.  “Are  you okay? Is
something on your mind?”
   “Sure,”  he said. “I’m fine.”
   “You’ve  seemed really—pensive, I guess,” Jude said. He was quiet. “You
know, it’s been a huge gift having you live with  me. And not Must live with
me, but—everything. I  don’t  know what  I would  have done without  you.
But I know it  must be draining for you. And I Must want you to know: if you
want to  move back  home, I’ll   be fine.  I  promise. I’m  not  going  to hurt
myself.” He had been staring at the road as he spoke, but now he turned to
him. “I don’t  know how I got so lucky,” he said.
   He  didn’t  know  what  to  say for  a while.  “Do   you want  me to  move
home?” he asked.
   Jude was silent. “Of course not,” he said, very quietly. “But I want you to
be happy, and you haven’t seemed very happy recently.”
   He  sighed. “I’m  sorry,”  he said. “I’ve  been distracted, you’re right. But
it’s certainly  not because I’m living  with  you. I  love living  with  you.”  He
tried to think of the right, the perfect next thing to add, but he couldn’t. “I’m
sorry,” he said again.
   “Don’t   be,” Jude said. “But if you  want to talk about any of it, ever, you
always can.”
   “I  know,” he said. “Thanks.” They were quiet the rest of the way home.
   And  then  it  was December. His  run  finished.  They  went to  India  on
holiday, the four  of them: the  first trip  they’d  taken as a unit  in years. In
February, he began filming Uncle Vanya. The set was the kind he treasured
and sought but only  rarely  found—he had worked  with  everyone before,
and they all liked  and respected one another, and the director was shaggy
and mild and gentle, and the adaptation, which had been done by a novelist
Jude admired, was beautiful and simple, and the dialogue was a pleasure to
get to speak.
   When  Willem  was young, he  had been in a play  called The House on
Thistle Lane,  which  had been about  a family   that  was packing  up and

430
leaving a house in St. Louis that had been owned by the father’s family for
generations, but which they could no longer afford to maintain. But instead
of a set, they had staged the play on one floor of a dilapidated brownstone
in Harlem, and the audience had been allowed to wander between the rooms
as long as they remained outside a roped-off area; depending on where you
stood to  watch, you  saw the  actors, and the  space itself, from  different
perspectives. He had played the eldest, most damaged son, and had spent
most of the first act mute and in the dining room, wrapping dishes in pieces
of newspaper. He had developed a nervous tic  for  the son, who couldn’t
imagine leaving his childhood house, and as the character’s parents fought
in the living  room, he would put down the plates and press himself into the
far corner of the dining room near the kitchen and peel off the wallpaper in
shreds. Although most of that act took place in the living room, there would
always be  a  few   audience members who  would   remain  in  his  room,
watching him, watching him  scraping off the paper—a blue so dark it was
almost black,  and printed  with   pale pink  cabbage roses—and rolling  it
between his fingers and dropping  it to  the floor,  so that every  night, one
corner would become littered with little cigars of  wallpaper, as if he were a
mouse inexpertly building its tiny  nest. It had been an exhausting play, but
he had loved it: the intimacy of  the audience, the unlikeliness of the stage,
the small, detailed physicality of the role.
   This  production felt  very much like  that play. The house, a Gilded Age
mansion on the Hudson,  was grand but  creaky and shabby—the kind  of
house his ex-girlfriend Philippa had once imagined they’d live in when they
were married  and ancient—and the  director  used only  three rooms:  the
dining room,  the living   room, and the  sunporch. Instead of an  audience,
they had the crew, who  followed  them as they moved through  the space.
But although he relished the work, part  of him  also recogni]ed that Uncle
Vanya was not  exactly the  most helpful  thing  he  could be  doing at  the
moment. On set, he was Dr. Astrov, but once he was back at Greene Street,
he was Sonya, and Sonya—as much as he loved the play and always had, as
much as he loved and pitied poor Sonya herself—was not a role he had ever
thought he might perform,  under any circumstance. When he had told the
others about the film, JB had said, “So  it’s a gender-blind cast, then,” and
he’d said, “What do you  mean?” and JB had said, “Well, you’re obviously
Elena, right?” and everyone had laughed, especially him. This was what he
loved about JB, he had thought; he was always smarter than even he knew.

431
“He’s  far  too  old   to  play  Elena,”  Jude had  added, affectionately,  and
everyone had laughed again.
   Vanya was an efficient shoot, Must thirty-six days, and was over by the last
week in March. One day shortly after it had ended, he met an old friend and
former girlfriend   of his,  Cressy, for lunch  in TriBeCa,  and as he walked
back to Greene Street in the light, dry snow, he was reminded of how much
he enMoyed the city in the  late winter,  when the  weather was suspended
between one season and the next, and when Jude cooked every weekend,
and when you could walk the streets for hours and never see anyone but a
few lone people taking their dogs out for a stroll.
   He was heading north on Church Street and had Must crossed Reade when
he glanced into a café on his  right and saw  Andy sitting  at a table in  the
corner, reading. “Willem!”  said Andy, as he approached him. “What’re you
doing here?”
   “I  Must had lunch with a friend and I’m walking home,” he said. “What’re
you doing here? You’re so far downtown.”
   “You  two and your walks,”  Andy said, shaking his head. “George is at a
birthday party a few  blocks from  here, and I’m  waiting until  I  have to go
pick him up.”
   “How  old is George now?”
   “Nine.”
   “God,  already?”
   “I  know.”
   “Do  you want some company?” he asked. “Or do you want to be alone?”
   “No,”   said Andy.  He tucked a napkin  into his  book to  mark his  place.
“Stay. Please.” And so he sat.
   They talked for  a while of, of course, Jude, who was on a business trip in
Mumbai,   and  Uncle   Vanya  (“I   Must remember  Astrov   as  being   an
unbelievable tool,” Andy  said), and his next proMect, which began shooting
in Brooklyn at the end of April,  and Andy’s wife, Jane, who was expanding
her practice, and their children: George, who had Must been diagnosed with
asthma, and Beatrice, who wanted to go to boarding school the following
year.
   And  then, before he could  stop himself—not that  he felt  any particular
need to try—he was telling  Andy about his  feelings for Jude, and how he
wasn’t sure what  they  meant or  what to  do  about them.  He talked  and
talked, and Andy listened, his face expressionless. There was no one else in

432
the café but the two of  them, and outside, the snow fell faster and thicker,
and he  felt,  despite his  anxiety,  deeply  calm,  and glad  he  was  telling
somebody, and that that somebody was a person who knew him and Jude
both, and had for many years. “I  know this seems strange,” he said. “And
I’ve  thought about what it  could  be, Andy, I  really  have. But  part of  me
wonders if it was always meant to be this way; I mean, I’ve dated and dated
for decades now, and maybe the reason it’s never worked out is because it
was never meant to, because I was supposed to be with him all along. Or
maybe I’m telling  myself  this. Or maybe it’s  simple curiosity.  But I  don’t
think it is; I  think I know myself better than that.” He sighed. “What do you
think I should do?”
   Andy  was quiet for  a while.  “First,”  he said, “I  don’t  think  it’s strange,
Willem. I  think  it makes sense in a lot of ways. You two  have always had
something different, something unusual. So—I  always  wondered, despite
your girlfriends.
   “Selfishly,  I  think  it’d  be wonderful:  for  you,  but especially for  him.  I
think if  you  wanted to be in  a relationship with  him,  it’d  be the greatest,
most restorative gift he could ever get.
   “But  Willem,  if you do this, you should go in prepared to make some sort
of commitment to him, and to being with him,  because you’re right: you’re
not going to be able to Must fool around and then get out of it. And I  think
you should know that it’s going to be very, very hard. You’re going to have
to get him to  trust you all  over again, and to see you in a different  way. I
don’t think  I’m   betraying anything when  I  say that it’s  going to  be very
tough for him to be intimate with you, and you’re going to have to be really
patient with him.”
   They were both silent. “So if  I do it,  I should do so thinking it’s  going to
be forever,” he told Andy,  and Andy looked  at him for  a few seconds and
then smiled.
   “Well,”  Andy  said, “there are worse life sentences.”
   “True,”  he said.
   He  went back to Greene Street. April  arrived, and Jude returned home.
They celebrated Jude’s birthday—“Forty-three,” Harold sighed, “I  vaguely
remember forty-three”—and  he began shooting his  next  proMect. An old
friend of  his, a woman he’d known  since graduate school, was starring in
the production as well—he  was playing  a corrupt  detective, and she was
playing his wife—and they slept together a few times. Everything marched

433
along as it  always had. He  worked;  he came home to  Greene Street; he
thought about what Andy had said.
   And  then one Saturday morning he woke very early, Must as the sky was
brightening. It was late May, and the weather was unpredictable: some days
it felt like  March, other days, like July. Ninety feet away from him lay Jude.
And suddenly his timidity, his confusion, his dithering seemed silly. He was
home, and home was Jude. He loved him; he was meant to be with him; he
would never hurt him—he trusted himself with that much. And so what was
there to fear?
   He  remembered a conversation he’d had with Robin when he had been
preparing to shoot The Odyssey and was rereading it and The Iliad, neither
of which  he had looked  at since he was a freshman in  college. This  was
when they had first begun dating, and were both still trying to impress each
other, when a sort of  giddiness was derived from  deferring to  the other’s
expertise. “What’re the most overrated lines from  the poem?” he’d  asked,
and Robin had rolled her eyes and recited: “ ‘We have still not reached the
end of  our  trials.  One  more labor  lies  in  store—boundless, laden with
danger, great and long, and I must brave it out from  start to finish.’  ”  She
made some retching noises. “So obvious.  And  somehow, that’s been co-
opted by every losing football team in the country as their pregame rallying
cry,” she added, and he’d laughed. She looked at him,  slyly. “You  played
football,” she said. “I’ll  bet those’re your favorite lines as well.”
   “Absolutely  not,”  he’d said, in mock outrage. This was part of their game
that wasn’t always a game: he was the dumb  actor, the dumber Mock, and
she was the smart girl who went out with him and taught him what he didn’t
know.
   “Then  tell  me what  they are,”  she’d challenged him,  and after he did,
she’d looked at him, intently. “Hmm,” she said. “Interesting.”
   Now  he got out of bed and wrapped his blanket around himself, yawning.
That evening, he’d talk to Jude. He didn’t know where he was going, but he
knew he would  be  safe; he would  keep them both  safe. He went  to  the
kitchen to make himself coffee, and as he did, he whispered the lines back
to  himself,  those lines  he  thought of   whenever he  was coming  home,
coming back to Greene Street after a long time away—“And tell me this: I
must be absolutely sure. This place I’ve reached, is it truly Ithaca?”—as all
around him, the apartment filled with light.

434
   Every  morning he  gets up and swims two  miles, and then comes back
upstairs and sits down and has breakfast and reads the papers. His friends
make fun  of  him for  this—for   the fact  that he  actually prepares a meal
instead of  buying  something on  the  way  to  work;  for  the  fact  that  he
actually still  gets the papers delivered, in paper form—but  the ritual  of  it
has always calmed him: even in  the home, it  was the one time  when the
counselors were too  mild,  the other  boys too  sleepy to  bother  him.  He
would sit in the corner of the dining area and read and eat his breakfast, and
for those minutes he would be left alone.
   He  is  an efficient   reader, and he skims  first  through  The Wall  Street
Journal, and then the Financial Times, before beginning with The New York
Times, which   he  reads front   to  back,  when  he  sees  the  headline in
Obituaries:  “Caleb   Porter,  52,   Fashion  Executive.”   Immediately,   his
mouthful of scrambled eggs and spinach turns to cardboard and glue, and he
swallows hard, feeling  sick, feeling  every nerve ending thrumming  alive.
He has to read the article three times before he can make sense of any of the
facts: pancreatic cancer. “Very fast,” said his colleague and longtime friend.
Under his   stewardship, emerging fashion  label  Rothko   saw aggressive
expansion into  the  Asian  and  Middle  Eastern  markets, as  well  as  the
opening of   their  first   New  York  City   boutique.  Died  at  his  home  in
Manhattan. Survived by his sister, Michaela Porter de Soto of Monte Carlo,
six nieces and  nephews, and his  partner, Nicholas  Lane, also  a fashion
executive.
   He  is still  for  a  moment, staring at the page until  the  words rearrange
themselves into an abstraction of gray before his eyes, and then he hobbles
as fast as he can  to the  bathroom near the kitchen,  where he vomits  up
everything he’s Must eaten, gagging over the toilet until  he’s coughing up
long strands of saliva. He lowers the toilet seat and sits, resting his face in
his hands, until he feels better. He wishes, desperately, for his ra]ors, but he
has always been careful not to cut himself during the day, partly because it
feels wrong  and partly  because he knows he has  to impose  limits  upon
himself, however artificial, or he’d be cutting himself all  day. Lately, he has
been trying very hard not to cut himself at all. But tonight, he thinks, he will
grant himself an exception. It is seven a.m. In around fifteen hours, he’ll be
home again. All he has to do is make it through the day.
   He  puts  his  plate  in   the dishwasher  and walks   quietly  through  the
bedroom and into the bathroom, where he showers and shaves and then gets

435
dressed in the closet, first making sure that the door between the closet and
the bedroom is completely closed. At this point, he has added a new step to
his morning routine:  now, if  he were to  do what he has been for the past
month, he would open the door and walk over to the bed, where he’d perch
on its left side and put his hand on Willem’s  arm, and Willem  would open
his eyes and smile at him.
   “I’m   off,”   he’d  say, smiling  back, and Willem   would  shake his head.
“Don’t  go,” Willem would  say, and he’d say, “I have to,” and Willem would
say, “Five minutes,” and he’d say, “Five.”  And  then Willem  would lift  his
end of the blanket and he’d crawl  beneath it, with  Willem  pressed against
his back, and he would close his eyes and wait for Willem to wrap his arms
around him and wish he could stay forever. And then, ten or fifteen minutes
later, he would at last, reluctantly, get up, and kiss Willem somewhere near,
but not on, his mouth—he is still having trouble with this, even four months
later—and leave for the day.
   This  morning,  however,  he skips  this  step. He  instead pauses at  the
dining-room table to  write  Willem  a note explaining  that he had to  leave
early and didn’t want to wake him, and then, as he’s walking to the door, he
comes back and grabs the Times off  the table and  takes it with   him. He
knows how irrational it is, but he doesn’t want Willem to see Caleb’s name,
or picture, or  any evidence of him.  Willem  still  doesn’t know about what
Caleb did to him, and he doesn’t want him to. He doesn’t even want him to
be aware of Caleb’s very existence—or, he reali]es, his once-existence, for
Caleb no longer exists. Beneath his arm, the paper feels almost alive with
heat, Caleb’s name a dark knot of poison cradled inside its pages.
   He decides to drive to work so he’ll  be able to be alone for a little while,
but before he leaves the garage, he takes out the paper and reads the article
one more time before folding it  up again and shoving it  into his briefcase.
And then suddenly, he is crying,  frantic, breathy sobs, the kind  that come
from his diaphragm, and as he leans his head on the steering wheel, trying
to  regain control,   he  is  finally   able to   admit  to  himself  how   plainly,
profoundly relieved he is, and how frightened he has been for the past three
years, and how humiliated and ashamed he is still. He retrieves the paper,
hating himself, and reads the obituary again, stopping at “and by his partner,
Nicholas Lane, also  a fashion executive.”  He  wonders: Did  Caleb do  to
Nicholas Lane  what  he  did  to  him,   or  is  Nicholas—as he  must  be—
someone undeserving of  such treatment? He  hopes that Nicholas  never

436
experienced what he had, but he’s also certain he hasn’t, and the knowledge
of that  makes him cry  harder. That had  been one of Harold’s  arguments
when he  was  trying   to  get  him  to  report  the  attack;  that  Caleb  was
dangerous, and that by reporting him, by having him arrested, he would be
protecting other people from him. But he had known that wasn’t true: Caleb
wouldn’t do to other people what he did to him. He hadn’t hit and hated him
because he hit and hated other people; he had hit and hated him because of
who he was, not because of who Caleb was.
   Finally,  he’s able to compose himself, and he wipes his eyes and blows
his nose. The crying: another leftover from  his time with  Caleb. For years
and years he was able  to control  it,  and  now—ever since that  night—it
seems he is always crying, or on the verge of it,  or actively  trying  to stop
himself from  doing it. It’s  as if  all his progress from the past few  decades
has been erased, and he is again that boy in Brother Luke’s care, so teary
and helpless and vulnerable.
   He’s about to start the car when his hands begin shaking. Now he knows
he can do nothing but wait, and he folds them in  his lap and tries to make
his breaths deep and regular, which sometimes helps. By the time his phone
rings a  few  minutes  later, they’ve   slowed somewhat, and  he hopes  he
sounds normal as he answers. “Hi, Harold,” he says.
   “Jude,”  says Harold. His voice is flattened, somehow. “Have you read the
Times today?”
   Immediately, the shaking intensifies. “Yes,” he says.
   “Pancreatic  cancer is  a  terrible  way to  go,”   says Harold.  He  sounds
grimly satisfied. “Good. I’m  glad.” There’s a pause. “Are you all right?”
   “Yes,”  he says, “yes, I’m fine.”
   “The  connection keeps cutting out,” says Harold, but  he knows it’s not:
it’s because he’s shaking so badly that he can’t hold the phone steady.
   “Sorry,”  he says. “I’m   in the garage. Look, Harold,  I’d  better get up to
work. Thanks for calling.”
   “Okay.”  Harold sighs. “You’ll  call me if you want to talk, right?”
   “Yes,”  he says. “Thanks.”
   It’s  a busy day, for  which  he’s grateful, and he tries to  give himself  no
time to think  about anything but work.  Late in the morning,  he gets a text
from  Andy—Assume you’ve  seen that  the  asshole is   dead. Pancreatic
cancer = maMor suffering. You okay?—and writes back to assure him he’s

437
fine, and over lunch he reads the obituary one last time before stuffing the
entire paper into the shredder and turning back to his computer.
   In  the afternoon he gets a text from Willem  saying that the director he’s
meeting with  about his  next proMect has pushed back their dinner, so he
doesn’t think he’ll  be home before eleven, and he is  relieved. At  nine, he
tells  his  associates he’s leaving  early, and  then  drives home  and  goes
directly to the bathroom, shucking his Macket and rolling up his sleeves and
unstrapping his watch as he goes; he’s almost hyperventilating with desire
by the time he makes the first cut. It has been nearly two months since he’s
made more than two cuts in a single sitting, but now he abandons his self-
discipline and cuts and cuts and cuts, until finally  his  breathing slows and
he feels the old, comforting emptiness settle inside him. After he’s done, he
cleans up and washes his face and goes to the kitchen,  where he reheats
some soup he’d made the weekend before and has his first real meal of the
day, and then brushes his teeth and collapses into bed. He is weak from the
cutting, but he knows if he rests for a few minutes, he’ll be fine. The goal is
to be normal by the time Willem  comes home, to not give him anything to
worry about, to not do  anything else to upset this impossible and delirious
dream he’s been living in for the past eighteen weeks.
   When Willem  had told  him of  his feelings, he had been so discomfited,
so disbelieving, that it  was only  the fact that it  was Willem  saying it  that
convinced him it  wasn’t some terrible Moke: his faith in Willem  was more
powerful than the absurdity of what Willem was suggesting.
   But  only barely. “What  are you saying?”  he asked Willem for  the tenth
time.
   “I’m   saying I’m attracted to you,” Willem said, patiently. And then, when
he didn’t say anything, “Judy—I don’t think it’s  all that odd, really. Haven’t
you ever felt that way about me, in all these years?”
   “No,”   he  said instantly, and  Willem  had laughed. But  he  hadn’t been
Moking. He would never, ever have been so presumptuous as to even picture
himself with  Willem.   Besides, he wasn’t what  he had ever  imagined for
Willem: he had imagined someone beautiful (and female) and intelligent for
Willem, someone who would  know how  fortunate she was, someone who
would make him feel fortunate as well. He knew this was—like so many of
his imaginings about adult  relationships—somewhat gau]y and naïve, but
that didn’t mean it couldn’t happen. He was certainly not the kind of person

438
Willem  should be  with;  for  Willem  to  be  with  him  over the  theoretical
fantasy woman he’d conMured for him was an unbelievable tumble.
   The next day, he presented Willem with  a list of  twenty reasons why he
shouldn’t want to  be with  him. As  he handed it to him,  he could see that
Willem  was  amused,  slightly,  but   then he  started  to  read  it   and  his
expression changed, and he retreated to his study so he wouldn’t  have to
watch him.
   After  a while,  Willem  knocked. “Can I come in?”  he asked, and he told
him he could.
   “I’m   looking at point number two,”  said Willem, seriously. “I  hate to tell
you this, Jude, but we have the same body.” He looked at him. “You’re an
inch taller, but can I remind you that we can wear each other’s clothes?”
   He sighed. “Willem,”  he said, “you know what I mean.”
   “Jude,”   Willem  said,  “I   understand that this  is  strange for   you,  and
unexpected. If you really don’t want  this, I’ll  back off  and leave you alone
and I promise things won’t change between us.” He stopped. “But if you’re
trying to  convince me not to  be with  you because you’re scared and self-
conscious—well, I  understand that. But  I don’t  think  it’s  a good  enough
reason not to try. We’ll go as slowly as you want, I promise.”
   He was quiet. “Can I  think about it?”  he asked, and Willem nodded. “Of
course,” he said, and left him alone, sliding the door shut behind him.
   He  sat in his office  in silence for  a long time, thinking.  After  Caleb, he
had sworn he would never again do this to himself. He knew Willem would
never do anything bad to him, and yet his imagination was limited: he was
incapable of conceiving of a relationship  that wouldn’t  end with his  being
hit, with his being kicked down  the stairs, with his being made to do things
he had told himself he would never have to do again. Wasn’t it possible, he
asked himself, that he could push even someone as good as Willem to that
inevitability? Wasn’t it foregone that he would inspire a kind of hatred from
even Willem? Was he so greedy for  companionship that he would  ignore
the lessons that history—his own history—had taught him?
   But  then there was another voice inside him, arguing back. You’re crazy
if you turn this opportunity down, said the voice. This is the one person you
have always trusted. Willem isn’t Caleb; he would never do that, not ever.
   And  so, finally,  he had gone to the kitchen,  where Willem  was making
dinner. “Okay,” he said. “Let’s do it.”

439
   Willem  had looked at him and smiled. “Come here,” he said, and he did,
and Willem kissed him. He had been scared, and panicky, and once again he
had thought of Brother Luke, and he had opened his eyes to remind himself
that this  was Willem   after all,  not  someone to fear.  But Must as he was
relaxing into it,  he had seen Caleb’s face flashing through his mind like  a
pulse, and he pulled away from Willem,  choking, rubbing  his hand across
his mouth. “I’m   sorry,” he said, pivoting  away from  him.  “I’m  sorry. I’m
not very good at this, Willem.”
   “What   do  you mean?”  Willem   had asked, turning  him  back  around.
“You’re  great at it,”   and he had felt  himself  sag with  relief  that  Willem
wasn’t angry at him.
   Since  then, he  has been constantly pitting   what he  knows of  Willem
against what he expects of someone—anyone—who has any physical desire
for him. It  is as if  he somehow expects that the Willem he has known will
be replaced by another; as if there will be a different  Willem  for what is  a
different relationship. In the first  few weeks, he was terrified that he might
upset or disappoint Willem  in  some way, that he might  drive him  toward
anger. He had waited for days, summoning his courage, to tell Willem that
he couldn’t  tolerate the  taste of coffee  in  his mouth  (although he  didn’t
explain to him why: Brother Luke,  his awful, muscular tongue, the grain of
coffee grounds that had permanently furred his gumline. This had been one
of the things he had appreciated about Caleb: that he hadn’t drunk coffee).
He apologi]ed  and apologi]ed  until  Willem   told  him  to stop. “Jude,  it’s
fine,” he said. “I should’ve reali]ed: really. I  Must won’t drink it.”
   “But  you love coffee,” he said.
   Willem  had smiled.  “I  enMoy it, yes,” he said, “but I  don’t need it.”  He
smiled again. “My dentist will be thrilled.”
   Also  in  that first  month, he had  talked to Willem  about  sex. They had
these conversations at night, in bed, when it  was easier to say things. He
had always associated night with cutting,  but now it  was becoming about
something else—those talks with Willem in a darkened room, when he was
less self-conscious about touching him, and where he could see every one
of Willem’s  features and yet was also able to pretend that Willem couldn’t
see his.
   “Do  you want  to have sex someday?” he asked him one night, and even
as he was saying it, he heard how stupid he sounded.
   But Willem  didn’t  laugh at him. “Yes,” he said, “I’d like to.”

440
   He  nodded. Willem waited.  “It’s  going to  take me a while,”  he said, at
last.
   “That’s  okay,” Willem said. “I’ll   wait.”
   “But  what if it  takes me months?”
   “Then  it’ll  take months,” Willem said.
   He thought about that. “What if it takes longer?” he asked, quietly.
   Willem  had reached over and touched the side of his face. “Then it will,”
he said.
   They  were  quiet  for  a  long  time.  “What’re   you  going  to  do  in  the
meantime?” he asked, and Willem laughed. “I   do have some self-control,
Jude,” he said, smiling at him. “I  know this comes as a shock to you, but I
can go for stretches without having sex.”
   “I  didn’t  mean anything,” he began, remorseful, but Willem grabbed him
and kissed him, noisily,  on the  cheek. “I’m  kidding,”   he said. “It’s  okay,
Jude. You’ll take as long as you need.”
   And  so  they still   haven’t had  sex, and sometimes he  is even  able to
convince himself that maybe they never will.  But  in the meantime, he has
grown to enMoy, to crave even, Willem’s physicality, his affection, which is
so easy and natural and spontaneous that it makes him feel easier and more
spontaneous as well. Willem sleeps on the left side of the bed, and he on the
right, and the first night they slept in the same bed, he turned to his right on
his side, the way he always did, and Willem pressed up against him, tucking
his right arm under his neck and then across his shoulders, and his left arm
around his stomach, moving his legs between his legs. He was surprised by
this, but once he overcame his initial discomfort, he found he liked it, that it
was like being swaddled.
   One night  in June, however, Willem didn’t  do it,  and he worried he had
done something wrong. The next morning—early mornings were the other
time they talked about things that seemed too tender, too difficult, to be said
in the daylight—he  asked Willem  if  he was upset with  him, and Willem,
looking surprised, said no, of course not.
   “I  Must wondered,” he began, stammering, “because last night you didn’t
—” But he couldn’t finish  the sentence; he was too embarrassed.
   But  then he could see Willem’s expression clear, and he rolled into him
and wrapped his arms around him.  “This?”  he asked, and he nodded. “It
was Must because it was so hot last night,” Willem said, and he waited for
Willem to laugh at him, but he didn’t.  “That’s the only reason, Judy.” Since

441
then, Willem has held him in the same way every night, even through July,
when not even the air-conditioning could erase the heaviness from the air,
and when they both woke  damp with  sweat. This, he reali]es,  is what he
wanted from a relationship all along. This is what he meant when he hoped
he might someday be touched. Sometimes Caleb had hugged him, briefly,
and he always had to resist the impulse to ask him  to do it  again, and for
longer. But now,  here it  is: all  the  physical contact that  he knows exists
between healthy people who love each other and are having sex, without the
dreaded sex itself.
   He  cannot bring himself  to initiate  contact with  Willem,  nor ask for  it,
but he waits for  it, for  every time  that Willem  grabs his arm as he passes
him in the living  room and pulls him close to kiss him, or comes up behind
him as he stands at the  stove and puts his arms around him  in  the same
position—chest, stomach—that he does in bed. He has always admired how
physical JB and Willem are, both with each other and with everyone around
them; he knew they knew not to  do it with  him, and as grateful as he was
for  their   carefulness  with   him,   it   sometimes made  him   wistful:    he
sometimes wished they would disobey  him, that they  would  lay claim  to
him with  the  same friendly  confidence they did  with  everyone else. But
they never did.
   It  took him  three months, until the end of August, to  finally  take off his
clothes in front of Willem.  Every night he came to bed in his long-sleeve T-
shirt and sweatpants, and every night Willem came to bed in his underwear.
“Is this uncomfortable for you?” Willem  asked, and he shook his head, even
though it was—uncomfortable, but not entirely  unwelcome. Every day the
month before, he promised himself:  he would take  off his  clothes and be
done with it.  He  would do  it  that night,  because he had to do it  at some
point. But  that was  as far  as his imagination  would  let him  proceed; he
couldn’t think about what Willem’s  reaction might be, or what he might do
the following  day. And then night would  come, and they would be in bed,
and his resolve would fail him.
   One  night, Willem   reached beneath his shirt and put  his hands on  his
back, and he yanked himself  away so forcefully   that he fell  off  the  bed.
“I’m  sorry,” he told  Willem,  “I’m  sorry,”  and he climbed back in, keeping
himself Must at the edge of the mattress.
   They  were quiet, the two of  them. He lay  on his back and stared at the
chandelier. “You know, Jude,” Willem said at last. “I have seen you without

442
your shirt on.”
   He  looked  at Willem,   who  took a  breath. “At   the  hospital,”  he said.
“They were changing your dressings, and giving you a bath.”
   His  eyes turned hot, and he looked back up  at the ceiling.  “How  much
did you see?” he asked.
   “I  didn’t  see everything,” Willem  reassured him. “But  I know  you have
scars on your back. And I’ve  seen your arms before.” Willem  waited, and
then, when he didn’t   say anything, sighed. “Jude,  I promise  you it’s  not
what you think it is.”
   “I’m   afraid you’re  going to be disgusted by me,”  he was finally  able to
say. Caleb’s words floated back to him: You really are deformed; you really
are. “I don’t suppose I could Must never take my clothes off at all, right?” he
asked, trying to laugh, to turn it into a Moke.
   “Well,   no,”  Willem  said. “Because I  think—although  it’s  not going  to
feel like it, initially—it’ll    be a good thing for you, Judy.”
   And  so the  next night,  he did  it.  As  soon as Willem  came to  bed, he
undressed quickly, under the covers, and then flung the blanket away and
rolled onto his side, so his back was facing Willem.  He kept  his eyes shut
the entire time, but  when he felt  Willem  place his palm  on his back, Must
between his shoulder blades, he began to cry, savagely, the kind of bitter,
angry weeping he hadn’t done in years, tucking into himself with shame. He
kept remembering  the night   with  Caleb,  the last  time  he  had been  so
exposed, the last time  he had cried  this  hard, and he  knew that  Willem
would only  understand part of the  reason he was so upset, that he didn’t
know that  the shame of  this very  moment—of  being naked, of  being  at
another’s mercy—was  almost  as great  as  his  shame for  what   he had
revealed. He heard, more from  the  tone than the words  themselves, that
Willem  was being kind  to  him, that  he was dismayed and was  trying  to
make him  feel  better,  but  he  was so  distraught  that  he couldn’t   even
comprehend what Willem was saying. He tried to get out  of the bed so he
could go to the bathroom and cut himself, but Willem caught him and held
him so tightly  that he couldn’t  move, and eventually he somehow calmed
himself.
   When  he woke the following   morning—late: it  was a Sunday—Willem
was staring at him. He looked tired. “How are you?” he asked.
   The  night returned to him.  “Willem,”   he said, “I’m  so, so sorry. I’m  so
sorry. I don’t  know what happened.” He reali]ed,  then, that he still wasn’t

443
wearing any clothes, and he put his arms beneath the sheet, and pulled the
blanket up to his chin.
   “No,  Jude,” Willem  said. “I’m  sorry. I didn’t  know it  was going to be so
traumatic for you.”  He reached over and stroked his hair. They were quiet.
“That was the first time I’ve ever seen you cry, you know.”
   “Well,”   he said, swallowing.  “For  some reason it’s  not as successful a
seduction method as I’d hoped,” and smiled at Willem, a little, and Willem
smiled back.
   They lay in  bed that morning and talked. Willem asked him about certain
scars, and he told him.  He explained how  he had gotten the scars on his
back: about the day he had been caught trying to run away from the home;
the beating that had followed; the resulting infection, the way his back had
wept pus for days, the bubbles of blisters that had formed around the stray
splinters from  the broom  handle that  had embedded themselves into his
flesh; what he had been left with  when it  was all over. Willem  asked him
when he was  last naked before anyone and  he lied  and told  him  that—
except for Andy—it  had been when he was fifteen. And  then Willem  said
various kind  and unbelievable things  about his body,  which  he chose to
ignore, because he knew they weren’t true.
   “Willem,   if you want out, I  understand,” he said. It had been his idea not
to tell anyone that their friendship  might be changing into  something else,
and although he had told Willem it would  give them space, and privacy, to
figure out  how to  be with  each other, he had also  thought it  would  give
Willem time to reconsider, opportunities to change his mind without fear of
everyone else’s opinions. Of course, with this decision he cannot help but
hear the echoes of his last relationship, which had also been conducted in
secrecy, and he had to remind himself  that this  one was different;  it  was
different unless he made it the same.
   “Jude, of course I don’t,” Willem  said. “Of course not.”
   Willem   was running  his  fingertip   over his  eyebrow, which   for  some
reason he found a comforting gesture: it was affectionate without being in
the least sexual. “I Must feel like I’m going to be this series of nasty surprises
for you,” he said at last, and Willem shook his head. “Surprises, maybe,” he
said. “But not nasty ones.”
   And  so every night, he tries to remove his clothes. Sometimes he can do
it; other times, he can’t.  Sometimes he can allow Willem  to touch him  on
his back and arms, and other times, he can’t. But he has been unable to be

444
naked before Willem in  the daytime, or  even in light,  or to  do any of  the
things that he knows from movies and eavesdropping on other people that
couples are supposed to do around each other: he cannot get dressed in front
of Willem,  or shower with  him,  which he’d  had to do with  Brother Luke,
and which he had hated.
   His  own self-consciousness has not, however, proven contagious, and he
is fascinated by how often,  and how matter-of-factly,  Willem  is naked. In
the morning,   he  pulls  back  Willem’s   side  of  the  blanket  and  studies
Willem’s sleeping form  with  a clinical  rigor, noting  how perfect it  is, and
then remembers, with a strange queasy giddiness, that he is the one seeing
it, that it is being bestowed upon him.
   Sometimes, the improbability of  what has happened wallops him, and he
is stilled.  His  first  relationship (can it  be called  a relationship?): Brother
Luke. His  second: Caleb  Porter. And  his  third:  Willem  Ragnarsson, his
dearest friend, the best person he knows, a person who could have virtually
anyone he wanted, man or woman, and yet for some bi]arre set of reasons
—a warped curiosity? madness? pity? idiocy?—has settled on him. He has
a dream one night of  Willem  and Harold  sitting  together at a table, their
heads bent over a piece of paper, Harold adding up figures on a calculator,
and he knows, without being told, that Harold is  paying Willem to  be with
him. In the dream, he feels humiliation along with  a kind of  gratitude: that
Harold should  be so generous, that Willem  should  play along.  When he
wakes, he is about to say something to Willem when logic  reasserts itself,
and he has to remind himself that Willem certainly doesn’t need the money,
that he has plenty  of  his own,  that however  perplexing and unknowable
Willem’s reasons are for being with him, for  choosing him, that he has not
been coerced, that he has made the decision freely.
   That night he reads in bed as he waits for Willem to come home, but falls
asleep anyway and wakes to Willem’s hand on the side of his face.
   “You’re  home,” he says, and smiles at him, and Willem smiles back.
   They  lie   awake in   the dark  talking   about Willem’s   dinner  with  the
director, and the shoot, which  begins in  late January in  Texas. The film,
Duets, is based on a novel he likes,  and follows  a closeted lesbian and a
closeted gay man, both music teachers at a small-town high school, through
a twenty-five-year   marriage that  spans the  nineteen-sixties through  the
nineteen-eighties. “I’m   going  to  need your  help,”  Willem   tells  him.  “I
really, really have to brush up on my piano playing.  And I  am going to be

445
singing in  it,  after all.  They’re getting  me a coach, but  will  you  practice
with me?”
   “Of  course,” he says. “And you don’t need to worry: you have a beautiful
voice, Willem.”
   “It’s  thin.”
   “It’s  sweet.”
   Willem   laughs, and squee]es his hand. “Tell   Kit  that,”  he says. “He’s
already freaking out.” He sighs. “How was your day?” he asks.
   “Fine,”  he says.
   They begin to kiss, which he still  has to do with his eyes open, to remind
himself that it  is Willem  he  is kissing, not  Brother Luke, and he  is doing
well until  he remembers the first night he had come back to the apartment
with Caleb, and Caleb’s pressing him against the wall, and everything that
followed, and he pulls himself abruptly away from Willem,  turning his face
from him. “I’m  sorry,” he says. “I’m sorry.”  He has not taken off his clothes
tonight, and now  he pulls  his  sleeves down over his  hands. Beside him,
Willem  waits, and into  the silence,  he hears himself saying, “Someone  I
know died yesterday.”
   “Oh,  Jude,” says Willem. “I’m so sorry. Who was it?”
   He is silent for a long time, trying  to speak the words. “Someone I was in
a relationship with,”   he says at  last, and  his tongue feels  clumsy  in his
mouth. He can feel Willem’s focus intensify, can feel him  move an inch or
two closer to him.
   “I   didn’t  know  you  were in  a  relationship,”  says Willem,  quietly.  He
clears his throat. “When?”
   “When  you  were shooting  The Odyssey,” he says, Must as quietly, and
again, he feels the air change. Something happened while I was away, he
remembers Willem   saying.  Something’s wrong.   He  knows   Willem   is
remembering the same conversation.
   “Well,”   says Willem,  after a long  pause. “Tell me.  Who was the lucky
person?”
   He  can barely  breathe now,  but he  keeps going.  “It  was  a man,”  he
begins, and although he’s not looking at Willem—he’s concentrating on the
chandelier—he can feel him nod,  encouragingly, willing  him  to continue.
But he can’t; Willem will  have to prompt him, and he does.
   “Tell  me about him,” Willem says. “How long did you go out for?”
   “Four  months,” he says.

446
   “And  why did it  end?”
   He thinks of  how to answer this. “He didn’t  like me very much,” he says
at last.
   He  can feel  Willem’s  anger before he hears it.  “So  he was a  moron,”
Willem says, his voice tight.
   “No,”   he says. “He was a  very smart guy.”  He opens his mouth to  say
something else—what, he  doesn’t know—but  he  can’t continue,  and he
shuts it, and the two of them lie there in silence.
   Finally,  Willem prompts him again. “Then what happened?” he asks.
   He  waits, and  Willem  waits with  him.  He  can hear them breathing  in
tandem, and it is as if they are bringing all the air from  the room, from the
apartment, from the world,  into  their lungs  and then releasing it, Must the
two of them, all by themselves. He counts their breaths: five, ten, fifteen. At
twenty, he says, “If I tell you, Willem, do you promise you won’t get mad?”
and he feels Willem shift again.
   “I  promise,” Willem  says, his voice low.
   He takes a deep breath. “Do you remember the car accident I was in?”
   “Yes,”   says Willem.  He  sounds uncertain, strangled. His  breathing  is
quick. “I do.”
   “It   wasn’t a car accident,” he says, and as if on cue, his  hands begin to
shake, and he plunges them beneath the covers.
   “What  do you mean?” Willem asks, but he remains silent, and eventually
he feels, rather than sees, Willem reali]e what he’s saying. And then Willem
is flopping  onto his side, facing  him, and reaching beneath the covers for
his  hands. “Jude,”   Willem   says,  “did   someone do  that  to   you?  Did
someone”—he can’t say the words—“did someone beat you?”
   He nods, barely, thankful that he’s not crying, although he feels like he’s
going to explode: he imagines bits of flesh  bursting like shrapnel from his
skeleton,  smacking  themselves  against  the   wall,   dangling   from   the
chandelier, bloodying the sheets.
   “Oh  god,”  Willem says, and drops his hands, and he watches as Willem
hurries out of bed.
   “Willem,”   he calls after  him, and then gets up and follows  him into  the
bathroom, where Willem is bent over the sink, breathing hard, but when he
tries to touch his shoulder, Willem shrugs his hand off.
   He  goes back to their room and waits on the edge of the bed, and when
Willem comes out, he can tell he’s been crying.

447
   For several long minutes they sit next to each other, their arms touching,
but not saying anything. “Was there an obituary?” Willem asks, finally, and
he nods. “Show me,” Willem says, and they go to the computer in his study
and he stands back and watches Willem read it. He watches as Willem reads
it twice,  three times. And then Willem  stands and holds him, very  tightly,
and he holds Willem back.
   “Why  didn’t  you tell me?” Willem says into his ear.
   “It  wouldn’t  have made a difference,” he says, and Willem steps back and
looks at him, holding him by the shoulders.
   He can see Willem trying  to control himself, and he watches as he holds
his long mouth firm,  his  Maw muscles moving against themselves. “I want
you to tell me everything,”  Willem  says. He takes his hand and walks him
to the sofa in  his study and sits  him down.  “I’m  going  to make myself  a
drink in the kitchen, and then I’m  coming back,”  Willem says. He looks at
him. “I’ll  make you one, too.” He can do nothing but nod.
   As  he waits,  he thinks of  Caleb. He never heard from  Caleb after  that
night, but  every few  months, he  would  look  him  up. There he  was, for
anyone to see: pictures of Caleb smiling at  parties, at openings, at shows.
An article  about Rothko’s  first  freestanding boutique, with  Caleb talking
about the challenges a young label encounters when trying to break out in a
crowded market. A  maga]ine piece about the  reemergence of the Flower
District,  with  a  quote from   Caleb about  living  in  a  neighborhood that,
despite its hotels and boutiques, still felt appealingly rough-edged. Now, he
thinks: Did Caleb ever look  him up as well? Did  he show a picture of him
to Nicholas? Did he say, “I once went out with him; he was grotesque”? Did
he demonstrate to Nicholas—whom  he  imagines as blond  and neat  and
confident—how he had walked, did they laugh  with each other about how
terrible, how lifeless, he had been in bed? Did he say, “He disgusted me”?
Or did he say nothing at all? Did Caleb forget him, or at least choose never
to consider him—was he a mistake, a brief sordid moment, an aberration to
be wrapped in plastic and shoved to  the far corner  of Caleb’s mind,  with
broken toys from  childhood and long-ago embarrassments? He wishes he
too could forget,  that he too could  choose never to consider Caleb again.
Always,  he  wonders  why   and  how  he  has  let  four   months—months
increasingly distant from him—so affect him,  so alter his life. But  then, he
might as well ask—as he often does—why he has let the first fifteen years
of  his life   so dictate  the  past twenty-eight.  He  has been lucky  beyond

448
measure; he has an adulthood that people dream about: Why, then, does he
insist on revisiting  and replaying events that happened so long ago? Why
can he not simply take pleasure in his present? Why must he so honor his
past? Why does it become more vivid, not less, the further he moves from
it?
   Willem   returns with  two  glasses of ice and  whiskey. He has put  on a
shirt. For a while,  they sit on the sofa, sipping at their drinks,  and he feels
his veins fill  with  warmth. “I’m  going to  tell you,”  he says to Willem, and
Willem nods, but before he does, he leans over and kisses Willem. It is the
first time in his life that he has ever initiated a kiss, and he hopes that with it
he is conveying to Willem  everything he cannot say, not even in the dark,
not even in the early-morning gray: everything he is ashamed of, everything
he is grateful for. This time, he keeps his eyes closed, imagining that soon,
he too will   be able to go  wherever people go when they kiss,  when they
have sex: that land he  has never visited, that  place he wants to  see, that
world he hopes is not forbidden to him forever.


   When  Kit  was  in  town, they  met either  for  lunch or  dinner  or at  the
agency’s New   York  offices,   but  when  he  came  to  the  city   in   early
December, Willem suggested they meet instead at Greene Street. “I’ll make
you lunch,” he told Kit.
   “Why?”   asked Kit, instantly wary:  although the two of  them were close
in their own  way, they weren’t friends,  and Willem  had never invited him
over to Greene Street before.
   “I  need to talk  to you  about something,” he said, and he could hear Kit
making his breaths long and slow.
   “Okay,”  said Kit.  He knew better than to ask what that something might
be, and whether something was wrong; he Must assumed it. “I need to talk to
you about something” was not, in Kit’s universe, a prelude to good news.
   He  knew this, of  course, and although he could have reassured Kit, the
slightly  diabolical  part of  him  decided not to.  “Okay!”   he said, brightly.
“See you  next week!”  On  the other  hand, he thought  after  he hung up,
maybe his refusal to reassure Kit wasn’t Must childishness: he thought what
he had to tell Kit—that  he and Jude were now together—wasn’t bad news,
but he wasn’t sure Kit would see it the same way.

449
   They  had decided to tell Must a few people about their relationship. First
they told  Harold and Julia,  which was the  most rewarding and enMoyable
reveal, although Jude had been very  nervous for  some reason. This  had
been Must a couple of weeks ago, at Thanksgiving, and they had both been
so happy, so excited, and they had both hugged him and Harold had cried, a
little,  while  Jude sat on the sofa and  watched the three of  them, a small
smile on his face.
   Then   they  told   Richard,  who   hadn’t   been as  surprised  as  they’d
anticipated. “I think  this is  a fantastic idea,” he’d said, firmly,  as if  they’d
announced they were investing in a piece of property together. He hugged
them both. “Good  Mob,” he said. “Good Mob, Willem,” and he knew what
Richard was trying to communicate to him:  the same thing he had tried to
communicate to Richard  when he told  him,  years ago, that  Jude needed
somewhere safe to live, when really,  he was asking Richard to  look  over
Jude when he could not.
   Then  they told  Malcolm  and JB,  separately. First, Malcolm,  who  they
thought would either be shocked or sanguine, and who had turned out to be
the latter. “I’m   so happy  for  you guys,”  he said,  beaming at them both.
“This is so great. I love the idea of you two together.” He asked them how it
had happened, and how long ago, and, teasingly, what  they’d  discovered
about the  other that  they  hadn’t  known  before. (The  two  of  them  had
glanced at each other then—if only Malcolm knew!—and had said nothing,
which Malcolm had smiled at, as if it was evidence of a rich cache of sordid
secrets that he would someday unearth.) And then he’d  sighed. “I’m   Must
sad about one thing, though,”  he’d said,  and they had asked him  what it
was. “Your  apartment, Willem,”  he said. “It’s   so beautiful. It  must  be so
lonely by  itself.”  Somehow, they  had managed not to laugh,  and he had
reassured Malcolm that he was actually renting it to a friend of his, an actor
from Spain who had been shooting a proMect in Manhattan and had decided
to stay on for another year or so.
   JB was trickier,  as they’d known he would  be: they knew he would feel
betrayed, and neglected, and possessive, and that all of these feelings would
be exacerbated by the fact that  he and Oliver  had recently  split  up after
more than four years. They took him out to dinner, where there was less of a
chance (though, as Jude pointed out, no guarantee) that he would make a
scene, and Jude—around whom JB was still slightly  careful and to whom
JB was  less likely  to  say  something inappropriate—delivered the  news.

450
They watched as JB put his fork down and put his head in his hands. “I feel
sick,” he said, and they waited until he looked up and said, “But I’m  really
happy for  you guys,”  before they  exhaled. JB forked  into his  burrata. “I
mean, I’m  pissed that you didn’t  tell  me earlier,  but happy.”  The entrées
came, and JB stabbed at his sea bass. “I mean, I’m actually really  pissed.
But. I. Am.  Happy.” By the time dessert arrived, it was clear that JB—who
was frantically  spooning up  his guava soufflé—was  highly  agitated, and
they kicked each other under the table, half on the verge of hysterics, half
genuinely concerned that JB might erupt right there in the restaurant.
   After  dinner they stood outside and Willem and JB had a smoke and they
discussed JB’s upcoming show, his fifth, and his students at Yale, where JB
had been teaching for the past few years: a momentary truce that was ruined
by some girl coming up to him  (“Can I  get a picture with you?”),  at which
JB made a sound that was somewhere between a snort and a groan. Later,
back at Greene Street, he and Jude did laugh: at JB’s befuddlement, at his
attempts at graciousness, which had clearly cost him, at his consistent and
consistently applied self-absorption. “Poor  JB,”  Jude said. “I  thought  his
head was going to blow off.”  He sighed. “But  I understand it. He’s always
been in love with you, Willem.”
   “Not  like that,”  he said.
   Jude looked at him. “Now  who can’t  see themselves for who they are?”
he asked, because that was what Willem was always telling him: that Jude’s
vision, his version of himself was singular to the point of being delusional.
   He sighed, too. “I should call him,”  he said.
   “Leave him  alone tonight,” Jude said. “He’ll call you when he’s ready.”
   And  so he had. That  Sunday, JB had come over to  Greene Street, and
Jude had let him in and then had excused himself, saying he had work to do,
and closed himself in his study  so Willem and JB  could be alone. For the
next two hours, Willem had sat and listened as JB delivered a disorgani]ed
roundelay whose many accusations and questions were punctuated by his
refrain of  “But   I  really  am happy for  you.”   JB was  angry: that  Willem
hadn’t told him earlier, that he hadn’t even consulted him, that they had told
Malcolm and Richard—Richard!—before him. JB was upset: Willem could
tell him the truth; he’d always liked Jude more, hadn’t he? Why couldn’t he
Must admit it? Also, had he always felt this way? Were his years of fucking
women Must some colossal lie that Willem had created to distract them? JB
was Mealous: he got the attraction  to Jude, he  did,  and he  knew it   was

451
illogical and maybe a tiny bit self-involved,  but it wouldn’t  be truthful if  he
didn’t tell  Willem that part of  him was miffed that Willem  had picked Jude
and not him.
   “JB,”   he said, again and  again, “it  was very  organic. I  didn’t  tell  you
because I needed time to figure it  out in  my own  head. And as for  being
attracted to you, what can I  say? I’m not. And  you aren’t  attracted to me,
either! We made out once, remember? You said it  was a huge turnoff  for
you, remember?”
   JB  ignored  all  this,  however. “I   still   don’t  understand why  you  told
Malcolm  and Richard  first,”   he said, sullenly,  to  which  Willem  had  no
response. “Anyway,” JB  said, after a silence, “I   really am  happy for  you
two. I am.”
   He sighed. “Thank you, JB,” he said. “That means a lot.” They were both
quiet again.
   “JB,”   said Jude, coming out of his study, looking  surprised that JB was
still there. “Do you want to stay for dinner?”
   “What’re  you having?”
   “Cod.  And I’ll  roast some potatoes the way you like them.”
   “I  guess,” JB said, sulkily, and Willem grinned at Jude over JB’s head.
   He Moined Jude in the kitchen and began making a salad, and JB slumped
to the dining-room table and started flipping  through a novel Jude had left
there. “I  read this,”  he called  over to  him.  “Do  you  want to  know  what
happens in the end?”
   “No,  JB,” said Jude. “I’m only halfway  through.”
   “The  minister character dies after all.”
   “JB!”
   After   that, JB’s  mood seemed to improve.  Even his  final  salvos were
somewhat listless, as if  he were delivering  them  out of  obligation  rather
than true depth of feeling. “In ten years, I’ll bet you two will  have made the
full  transition to lesbiandom. I  predict cats,” was one, and “Watching  you
two  in  the kitchen  is  like  watching  a  slightly  more  racially  ambiguous
version of that John Currin painting. Do you know what I’m  talking  about?
Look it up,” was another.
   “Are  you going to come out or keep it quiet?” JB asked over dinner.
   “I’m   not sending out  a press release, if that’s what you mean,”  Willem
said. “But I’m not going to hide it, either.”

452
   “I   think   it’s  a  mistake,”  Jude  added, quickly.   Willem   didn’t  bother
answering; they had been having this argument for a month.
   After   dinner, he and  JB lounged  on the  sofa and drank  tea and  Jude
loaded the dishwasher. By this time,  JB seemed almost appeased, and he
recalled that  this  was  the  arc of   most  dinners with   JB,  even back  at
Lispenard Street: he began the evening as something sharp and tart,  and
ended it as something soothed and gentled.
   “How’s  the sex?” JB asked him.
   “Ama]ing,”   he said, immediately.
   JB looked glum. “Dammit,”  he said.
   But  of  course, this was a  lie. He  had no idea if   the sex was ama]ing,
because they hadn’t had sex. The previous Friday, Andy had come over, and
they’d told him, and Andy  had stood and hugged them both very solemnly,
as if he was Jude’s father and they had told  him that  they had Must gotten
engaged. Willem had walked him to the door, and as they were waiting for
the elevator, Andy said to him, quietly, “How’s it going?”
   He  paused. “Okay,”  he said  at last,  and Andy,  as if  he could  discern
everything he wasn’t saying, squee]ed his shoulder. “I  know it’s  not easy,
Willem,”  he said. “But you must be doing something right—I’ve never seen
him more relaxed or happier, not  ever.” He looked as if  he wanted to say
something else, but what  could he say? He  couldn’t  say, Call me  if  you
want to talk about him,  or Let me know  if  there’s anything I can help you
with, and so instead he left, giving Willem a little salute as the elevator sank
out of sight.
   That  night, after  JB had gone home, he thought of  the conversation he
and Andy had had in  the café that  day, and how even as Andy  had been
warning him  how  difficult  it  would  be,  he hadn’t fully   believed him.  In
retrospect, he was  glad he  hadn’t:  because believing  Andy  might  have
intimidated him, because he might have been too scared to try.
   He turned and looked at Jude, who was asleep. This was one of the nights
he’d taken off  his clothes, and he was lying  on his  back, one of his arms
crooked near his head, and Willem, as he often did, ran his fingers down the
inside of this arm, its  scars rendering it into a miserable terrain, a place of
mountains and valleys singed by fire. Sometimes, when he was certain Jude
was very deeply asleep, he would switch  on the light  near his side of  the
bed and study his body more closely, because Jude refused to let himself be
examined in daylight. He would uncover him  and move his palms over his

453
arms, his legs, his back, feeling the texture of the skin change from rough to
glossy, marveling at all the permutations flesh could take, at all the ways the
body healed itself, even when attempts had been made to destroy it. He had
once shot a film on the Big  Island of Hawaii,  and on their day off,  he and
the rest of  the cast had trekked  across the lava fields,  watching the land
change from rock as porous and dry as petrified bone into a gleaming black
landscape, the lava fro]en into exuberant swirls of frosting. Jude’s skin was
as diverse, as wondrous, and  in  places so unlike  skin  as he had  felt  or
understood it that it  too  seemed something otherworldly and  futuristic,  a
prototype of what flesh might look like ten thousand years from now.
   “You’re  repulsed,” Jude had said, quietly, the second time he had taken
his clothes off, and he had shaken his head. And he hadn’t been: Jude had
always been so secretive, so protective of his body that to see it for real was
somehow anticlimactic; it was so normal, finally, so less dramatic than what
he had imagined. But  the scars were difficult  for  him  to see not because
they were aesthetically offensive,  but because each one was evidence of
something withstood or inflicted.  Jude’s arms were for that reason the part
of his body that upset him the most. At nights, as Jude slept, he would turn
them over in  his hands, counting the cuts, trying  to  imagine himself  in a
state in which he would willingly  inflict  pain on himself, in which he would
actively try  to erode his  own being. Sometimes there were new  cuts—he
always knew when Jude had cut himself,  because he slept in his shirt  on
those nights, and he would have to push up his sleeves as he slept and feel
for the bandages—and he would wonder when  Jude had made them, and
why he hadn’t noticed. When he had moved in  with Jude after the suicide
attempt, Harold had told him where Jude hid his bag of ra]ors, and he, like
Harold, had  begun throwing  them away.  But  then they  had disappeared
entirely, and he couldn’t figure out where Jude was keeping them.
   Other times, he would  feel not curiosity, but awe: he was so much more
damaged than Willem  had comprehended. How could  I  have not  known
this? he would ask himself. How could I not have seen this?
   And  then there was the matter of  sex. He knew Andy  had warned him
about sex,  but   Jude’s fear   of  and  antipathy  toward   it  disturbed  and
occasionally frightened him. One night toward  the end of November, after
they’d been together six  months, he  had reached his hands down Jude’s
underwear and Jude had made a strange, strangled noise, the kind of noise
an animal makes when it’s being caught in another animal’s Maws, and had

454
Merked himself away with such violence that he had cracked his head against
his nightstand. “I’m  sorry,” they had apologi]ed to each other, “I’m  sorry.”
And that was the first moment that Willem,  too, had felt a certain fear. All
along he had assumed that Jude was shy, profoundly so, but that eventually,
he would   abandon some of  his  self-consciousness, that  he would   feel
comfortable enough to have sex. But in that moment, he reali]ed that what
he had thought was a reluctance to have sex was actually a terror of it: that
Jude would  perhaps never  be  comfortable,  that  if  and  when  they  did
eventually have sex, it would be because Jude decided he had to or Willem
decided he had to force him.  Neither option  appealed to him. People had
always given themselves to him; he had never had to wait, never had to try
to convince someone that he wasn’t dangerous, that he wasn’t going to hurt
them. What am I going to do? he asked himself. He wasn’t smart enough to
figure this out on his own—and yet there was no one else he could ask. And
then there was the fact that with  every week, his desire grew  sharper and
less ignorable, his determination greater. It had been a long time  since he
had wanted to  have sex with  anyone so keenly, and  the fact  that it  was
someone he loved made the waiting both more unbearable and more absurd.
   As  Jude slept that night, he watched him.  Maybe I  made a mistake, he
thought.
   Aloud,  he said, “I didn’t know  it was going to be this complicated.” Next
to him, Jude breathed, ignorant of Willem’s treachery.
   And  then the morning arrived and he was reminded why he had decided
to pursue this  relationship to  begin with,  his  own naïveté and  arrogance
aside. It was early, but he had woken anyway, and he watched as, through
the  half-open  closet  door,  Jude got   dressed. This  had  been  a  recent
development, and Willem knew how  difficult  it  was for him.  He saw how
hard Jude tried; he saw how everything he and everyone he knew took for
granted—getting dressed in front of someone; getting undressed in front of
someone—were things Jude had to practice again and again: he saw how
determined he was, he saw how brave he was being. And this reminded him
that he, too, had to keep trying. Both of them were uncertain; both of them
were trying as much as they could; both of  them would doubt themselves,
would progress and recede. But they would both keep trying, because they
trusted the other, and because the other person was the only other person
who would ever be worth such hardships, such difficulties, such insecurities
and exposure.

455
   When he opened his eyes again, Jude was sitting on the edge of the bed
and smiling  at  him,  and he  was filled   with  affection  for  him:  for   how
beautiful he was, for  how  dear he was, for how  easy it was  to love him.
“Don’t go,”  he said.
   “I  have to,” Jude said.
   “Five  minutes,” he said.
   “Five,”   Jude said, and slid beneath the covers, and Willem wrapped his
arms around him, careful not to wrinkle  his suit, and closed his eyes. And
this too he loved: he loved knowing that in those moments, he was making
Jude happy, loved knowing that Jude wanted affection and that he was the
person who was allowed to provide it. Was this arrogance? Was this pride?
Was this self-congratulation? He didn’t think so; he didn’t care. That night,
he told Jude that he thought they should tell Harold and Julia that they were
together when they went  up for  Thanksgiving  that week. “Are   you sure,
Willem?” Jude had asked him, looking worried, and he knew that Jude was
really asking  if  he was sure about  the relationship  itself:  he was always
holding the door  open for him,  letting  him know  he could leave. “I   want
you to  really think  about this,  especially before we tell  them.”  He didn’t
need to say it, but Willem knew, once again, what the consequences would
be if they told Harold and Julia and, later, he changed his mind: they would
forgive  him,  but things  would  never  be the  same. They  would  always,
always pick Jude over him. He knew this: it was the way it should be.
   “I’m   positive,” he’d said, and so they had.
   He  thought of  this conversation as he poured Kit   a glass of water  and
carried the plate  of  sandwiches to the  table. “What   is this?”  Kit   asked,
looking suspiciously at the sandwiches.
   “Grilled   peasant bread with Vermont cheddar and figs,”  he  said. “And
escarole salad with pears and Mamón.”
   Kit   sighed. “You  know  I’m  trying  not  to eat bread, Willem,”   he said,
although  he  didn’t  know.   Kit   bit  into   a  sandwich.  “Good,”   he  said,
reluctantly. “Okay,” he continued, putting it down, “tell me.”
   And  so he did, and added that while he wasn’t  planning on announcing
the relationship, he wasn’t going to  pretend otherwise about it, either, and
Kit groaned. “Fuck,” he said. “Fuck. I thought it might be this. I don’t know
why, I Must did. Fuck, Willem.”  He put his forehead down on the table. “I
need a minute,” Kit said to the table. “Have you told Emil?”

456
   “Yeah,”  he said. Emil was Willem’s  manager. Kit and Emil worked with
each other best when they were united against Willem. When they agreed,
they liked each other. When they didn’t, they didn’t.
   “And  what did he say?”
   “He  said, ‘God,  Willem,  I’m  so happy that you’ve finally  committed  to
someone you truly  love  and feel  comfortable  around, and I  couldn’t  be
happier for you as your  friend and longtime  supporter.’ ” (What  Emil had
actually said was, “Christ, Willem.  Are you  sure? Did you talk to  Kit  yet?
What did he say?”)
   Kit  lifted  his head and glared at him (he didn’t  have much of a sense of
humor). “Willem,  I am happy for you,” he said. “I care about you. But have
you thought about what’s going to happen to your career? Have you thought
about how you’re going to be typecast? You don’t know what it’s like being
a gay actor in this business.”
   “I  don’t  really think  of myself  as gay, though,” he began, and Kit rolled
his eyes. “Don’t  be  so naïve, Willem,”   he said. “Once  you’ve touched a
dick, you’re gay.”
   “Said with  subtlety and grace, as always.”
   “Whatever, Willem;  you can’t afford to be cavalier about this.”
   “I’m   not, Kit,”  he said. “But I’m not a leading man.”
   “You  keep saying that!  But you  are, whether you like  it  or not. You’re
Must acting like your career is going to keep going on the same traMectory it’s
been on—do you not remember what happened to Carl?” Carl was a client
of a colleague of Kit’s,  and one of the biggest movie  stars of the previous
decade. Then he had been forced out of the closet, and his career had faded.
Ironically,  it  was Carl’s  obsolescence, his sudden unpopularity, that  had
encouraged the rise of Willem’s own career—at least two roles that Willem
had gotten were ones that would once have gone, reflexively, to Carl. “Now,
look: you’re far  more talented than Carl, and more diversified as well. And
it’s  a different  climate  now  than when  Carl  came out—domestically,  at
least. But I’d  be doing you a disservice if I  didn’t  tell you to  prepare for a
certain chill. You’re private as it is: Can’t you Must keep this under wraps?”
   He didn’t  reply, Must reached for another sandwich, and Kit studied him.
“What does Jude think?”
   “He  thinks I’m going to end up performing in a Kander and Ebb revue on
a cruise ship to Alaska,” he admitted.

457
   Kit  snorted. “Somewhere between how Jude thinks and how you think is
how you  need to think,  Willem,”   he said.  “After  everything  we’ve  built
together,” he added, mournfully.
   He sighed, too. The first time Jude had met Kit, almost fifteen years ago,
he’d turned to Willem  afterward and said, smiling, “He’s your Andy.”  And
over the years, he had come to reali]e how true this was. Not only  did Kit
and Andy actually, creepily know each other—they were in the same class,
and had lived in the same dorm their freshman year—but they both liked to
present themselves as, to some extent, Willem’s and Jude’s creators. They
were their  defenders and  their  guardians, but  they  also  tried,  at  every
opportunity, to determine the shape and form of their lives.
   “I  thought you’d be a little more supportive of this, Kit,”  he said, sadly.
   “Why?  Because I’m gay? Being a gay agent is far different than being a
gay actor of  your  stature, Willem,”  said  Kit.  He  grunted. “Well,  at least
someone’s going to  be  happy about  this.  Noel”—the  director  of  Duets
—“will   be fucking thrilled.  This is going  to be great publicity for  his little
proMect. I hope you like doing gay movies, Willem, because that’s what you
might end up doing for the rest of your life.”
   “I  don’t  really think  of Duets as a gay movie,” he said, and then, before
Kit  could roll  his eyes and start lecturing him  again, “and if  that’s how  it
ends up, that’s fine.” He told  Kit  what he had told Jude: “I’ll   always have
work; don’t worry.”
   (“But  what if your film  work  dries up?” Jude had asked.
   “Then  I’ll   do plays.  Or I’ll   work  in Europe:  I’ve  always wanted to do
more work in Sweden. Jude, I promise you, I will always, always work.”
   Jude had been silent, then. They had been lying in bed; it had been late.
“Willem,  I really  won’t  mind—not at all—if   you want to keep this quiet,”
he said.
   “But  I don’t  want to,” he said. He didn’t. He didn’t have the energy for it,
the sense of planning for it, the endurance for it. He knew a couple of other
actors—older, much more commercial than he—who actually were gay and
yet were married to women, and he saw how hollow, how fabricated, their
lives were. He didn’t  want that life  for  himself:  he didn’t want  to step off
the set and still feel he was in character. When he was home, he wanted to
feel he was truly at home.
   “I’m   Must afraid you’re going to resent me,” Jude admitted, his voice low.
   “I’ll   never resent you,” he promised him.)

458
   Now,  he listened to Kit’s gloomy  predictions for another hour, and then,
finally,  when  it  was  clear  that  Willem  wouldn’t   change his  mind,  Kit
seemed to change his. “Willem,  it’ll  be fine,”   he said, determinedly, as if
Willem had been the one who was concerned all along. “If  anyone can do
this, you can. We’re going to make this work for you. It’s going to be fine.”
Kit tilted his head, looking at him. “Are you guys going to get married?”
   “Jesus, Kit,”  he said, “you were Must trying to break us up.”
   “No,  I wasn’t, Willem.  I wasn’t.  I was Must trying to get you to keep your
mouth shut, that’s all.”  He sighed again, but resignedly this  time. “I  hope
Jude appreciates the sacrifice you’re making for him.”
   “It’s   not  a sacrifice,”  he protested, and Kit   cut his  eyes at him.  “Not
now,” he said, “but it may be.”
   Jude  came home early  that  night.  “How’d   it  go?”  he  asked Willem,
looking closely at him.
   “Fine,”  he said, staunchly. “It went fine.”
   “Willem—”   Jude began, and he stopped him.
   “Jude,”  he said, “it’s done. It’s going to be fine, I swear to you.”
   Kit’s  office  managed to keep the story quiet for  two  weeks, and by the
time the first  article was published, he and Jude were on a plane to Hong
Kong to  see Charlie Ma, Jude’s old  roommate from Hereford  Street, and
from  there to  Vietnam, Cambodia,  and Laos. He  tried  not  to check  his
messages while he was on vacation, but Kit had gotten a call from a writer
at New York maga]ine, and so he knew there would be a story. He was in
Hanoi when  the  piece was  published: Kit   forwarded  it  to  him  without
comment, and he skimmed  it,  quickly,  when Jude was in  the  bathroom.
“Ragnarsson is  on vacation  and  was unavailable  for  comment, but  his
representative confirmed the actor’s relationship  with  Jude St. Francis, a
highly regarded and prominent litigator with the powerhouse firm of Rosen
Pritchard and Klein  and  a close friend  since they  were roommates their
freshman year of college,” he read, and “Ragnarsson is the highest-profile
actor by   far  to  ever  willingly    declare himself   in  a  gay  relationship,”
followed,  obituary-like,  with  a recapping of  his films  and various  quotes
from various agents and publicists congratulating him on his bravery while
simultaneously predicting  the almost-certain  diminishment of  his  career,
and nice quotes from actors and directors he knew promising his revelation
wouldn’t change a thing, and a concluding  quote from an unnamed studio
executive who  said that his  strength had  never been as a romantic  lead

459
anyway, and so he’d probably be fine. At the end of  the story, there was a
link to  a picture of him  with  Jude at the opening of Richard’s show at the
Whitney in September.
   When Jude came out, he handed him the phone and watched him read the
article as well. “Oh, Willem,”  he said, and then, later, looking stricken, “My
name’s in here,”  and for the  first  time, it  occurred to  him that  Jude may
have wanted him to keep quiet as much for his own privacy as for Willem’s.
   “Don’t  you  think you should ask Jude first if I can confirm his identity?”
Kit  had asked him when they were deciding what he’d say to  the reporter
on Willem’s behalf.
   “No,  it’s fine,”  he’d said. “He won’t mind.”
   Kit  had been quiet. “He might, Willem.”
   But  he really hadn’t thought he would.  Now, though, he wondered if he
had been arrogant. What, he asked himself, Must because you’re okay with it,
you thought he would be, too?
   “Willem,   I’m   sorry,” Jude said,  and although he  knew that  he should
reassure Jude, who was probably feeling  guilty, and  apologi]e  to him  as
well, he wasn’t in the mood for it, not then.
   “I’m   going for  a run,” he announced, and although he wasn’t looking at
him, he could feel Jude nod.
   It  was so early that outside, the city was still quiet and still cool, the air a
dirtied white, with  only  a few cars gliding down the streets. The hotel was
near the old French opera house, which he ran around, and then back to the
hotel and toward the colonial-era district, past vendors squatted near large,
flat, woven-bamboo baskets piled with tiny,  bright green limes, and stacks
of cut herbs that smelled of lemon and roses and peppercorns. As the streets
grew threadlike, he slowed to  a walk,  and turned down an alley  that was
crowded with stall after stall of small, improvised restaurants, Must a woman
standing behind a kettle roiling   with  soup or oil,  and four  or  five plastic
stools on which customers sat, eating quickly  before hurrying back to  the
mouth of  the alley, where  they got  on their  bikes and pedaled away. He
stopped at the far end of the alley, waiting to let a man cycle past him, the
basket strapped to the back of his seat loaded with spears of baguettes, their
hot, steamed-milk  fragrance filling    his  nostrils,  and then  headed down
another alley, this one busy with  vendors crouched over more bundles of
herbs, and black hills of mangosteens, and metal trays of silvery-pink fish,
so fresh  that  he could  hear  them gulping,  could  see their  eyes  rolling

460
desperately back in  their  sockets. Above  him,  necklaces of  cages were
strung like lanterns, each containing a vibrant, chirping bird. He had a little
cash with him, and he bought Jude one of the herb bouquets; it looked like
rosemary but smelled pleasantly soapy, and although he didn’t know what it
was, he thought Jude might.
   He was so naïve, he thought as he made his slow way back to the hotel:
about his career, about Jude. Why did he always think he knew what he was
doing? Why did  he think he could  do whatever he wanted and everything
would work  out the way  he imagined it?  Was it a failure  of  creativity, or
arrogance, or (as he assumed) simple stupidity? People, people he trusted
and respected, were always  warning  him—Kit,   about his  career; Andy,
about Jude; Jude, about himself—and yet he always ignored them. For the
first time, he wondered if Kit was right, if  Jude was right, if he would never
work again, or  at least not the kind  of work  he enMoyed. Would he resent
Jude? He didn’t think so; he hoped not. But he had never thought he would
have to find out, not really.
   But  greater than that fear was the one he was rarely able to ask himself:
What if  the things he was making Jude do weren’t good for him  after all?
The day before, they  had taken a shower together for  the  first  time, and
Jude had been so silent afterward, so deep inside one of his fugue states, his
eyes so flat and blank, that  Willem  had been momentarily frightened. He
hadn’t wanted to do it, but Willem had coerced him, and in the shower, Jude
had been rigid and grim, and Willem  had been able to tell from  the set of
Jude’s mouth that he was enduring it, that he was waiting for it to  be over.
But he hadn’t let him get out of  the shower; he had made him stay. He had
behaved (unintentionally, but who cared) like Caleb—he had made Jude do
something he didn’t want to, and Jude had done it because he had told him
to do it. “It’ll   be good for you,” he’d said, and remembering this—although
he had believed it—he felt almost nauseated. No one had ever trusted him
as unquestioningly as Jude did. But he had no idea what he was doing.
   “Willem’s   not a health-care professional,” he remembered Andy saying.
“He’s an actor.” And although both he and Jude had laughed at the time, he
wasn’t sure Andy  was wrong. Who  was he to  try to  direct Jude’s mental
health? “Don’t trust me so much,” he wanted to say to Jude. But how could
he? Wasn’t this what he had wanted from Jude, from this relationship? To
be so  indispensable  to  another person  that  that  person  couldn’t  even
comprehend his life without him?  And now he had it,  and the demands of

461
the  position   terrified   him.   He   had  asked  for   responsibility   without
understanding completely how much damage he could do. Was he able to
do this? He thought of Jude’s horror of sex and knew that behind that horror
lay another, one he had always surmised but had never inquired about: So
what was he supposed to do? He wished there was someone who could tell
him  definitively  if   he was  doing  a good  Mob or not; he  wished he  had
someone guiding him  in this  relationship the  way Kit   guided him  in  his
career, telling him  when to take a  risk and when to  retreat, when to  play
Willem the Hero and when to be Ragnarsson the Terrible.
   Oh, what  am I doing? he chanted to himself as his feet smacked against
the road, as he ran past men and women and children readying themselves
for the day, past buildings as narrow as closets, past little shops selling stiff,
brick-like  pillows   made of  plaited  straw,  past a  small  boy  cradling  an
imperious-looking  li]ard   to his  chest, What  am  I  doing,  oh what  am  I
doing?
   By  the time  he returned to the hotel an hour  later, the sky was shading
from white  to  a delicious, minty  pale  blue. The travel  agent had booked
them a suite with two  beds, as always (he hadn’t remembered to have his
assistant correct this), and Jude was lying on the one they had both slept in
the night before, dressed for the day, reading, and when Willem came in, he
stood and came over and hugged him.
   “I’m   all sweaty,” he mumbled, but Jude didn’t let go.
   “It’s   okay,” Jude said. He stepped back and looked at him, holding him
by the  arms. “It’s  going  to  be fine,  Willem,”   he said, in  the same firm,
declarative way Willem sometimes heard him speak to clients on the phone.
“It really is. I’ll   always take care of you, you know that, right?”
   He smiled. “I  know,”  he said, and what comforted him was not so much
the reassurance itself, but that Jude seemed so confident, so competent, so
certain that he, too, had something to offer.  It  reminded Willem  that their
relationship wasn’t  a  rescue mission after  all,  but  an extension of  their
friendship, in which  he had saved Jude and, Must as often, Jude had saved
him. For  every time he  had gotten to help  Jude when he was in  pain, or
defend him against people asking too many questions, Jude had been there
to listen to him  worrying  about his work,  or to talk  him out  of his misery
after  he  hadn’t   gotten  a  part,   or  to   (for   three  consecutive  months,
humiliatingly)  pay his college loans when a Mob had fallen through and he
didn’t have enough money to cover them himself. And yet somehow in the

462
past seven months he had decided that he was going to repair Jude, that he
was going to fix  him,  when really, he didn’t  need fixing. Jude had always
taken him at face value; he needed to try to do the same for him.
   “I   ordered  breakfast,”  Jude  said.  “I   thought  you  might  want   some
privacy. Do you want to take a shower?”
   “Thanks,”  he  said, “but  I think  I’ll   wait  until  after we  eat.” He took  a
breath. He could feel  his anxiety  fade; he could feel  himself returning  to
who he was. “But  would  you sing with  me?”  Every morning  for the past
two months, they had been singing with each other in preparation for Duets.
In the film,  his character and the character’s wife led an annual Christmas
pageant, and both he and the actress playing his wife would be performing
their own vocals. The director had sent him a list of songs to work on, and
Jude had been practicing with him: Jude took the melody, and he took the
harmony.
   “Sure,”  Jude said. “Our usual?” For the past week, they’d been working
on “Adeste Fideles,”  which he would  have to sing a cappella, and for  the
past week, he’d  been pitching  sharp at the  exact same point, at  “Venite
adoremus,” right   in  the  first  stan]a.  He’d  wince  every  time  he did  it,
hearing the error, and Jude would shake his head at him  and keep going,
and he’d follow him until the end. “You’re overthinking it,”  Jude would say.
“When you go sharp, it’s because you’re concentrating too hard on staying
on key; Must don’t think about it, Willem, and you’ll get it.”
   That morning,  though, he felt certain he’d get it  right. He  gave Jude the
bunch of herbs, which he was still holding, and Jude thanked him, pinching
its little  purple flowers between his fingers to release its perfume. “I  think
it’s a kind of perilla,”  he said, and held his fingers up for Willem to smell.
   “Nice,”  he said, and they smiled at each other.
   And  so Jude began, and he followed,  and  he made it  through without
going sharp.  And  at the  end of  the  song, Must after the last  note, Jude
immediately began singing the next song on the list, “For Unto Us a Child
Is Born,”   and after  that, “Good  King  Wenceslas,” and  again and again,
Willem  followed.  His voice  wasn’t as full   as Jude’s, but he could  tell  in
those moments that it was good enough, that it was maybe better than good
enough: he could tell it sounded better with Jude’s, and he closed his eyes
and let himself appreciate it.
   They  were still  singing  when the doorbell  chimed with  their breakfast,
but as he was standing, Jude put his hand on his wrist, and they remained

463
there, Jude sitting, he standing, until  they had sung the  last words of  the
song, and only after they had finished did he go to answer the door. Around
him, the  room was redolent of  the  unknown herb he’d  found,  green and
fresh and yet somehow familiar,  like  something he hadn’t  known he  had
liked until it had appeared, suddenly and unexpectedly, in his life.

464
                                                         2

THE FIRST TIME Willem left him—this was some twenty months ago, two
Januarys ago—everything went  wrong.  Within   two  weeks  of  Willem’s
departure to Texas to begin filming Duets, he’d had three episodes with his
back (including  one at the office,  and another, this one at home, that had
lasted a full two hours). The pain in his feet returned. A cut (from  what, he
had no idea)  opened up on  his right   calf. And  yet  it  had all  been fine.
“You’re so damn cheerful  about all of  this,” Andy  had said, when he was
forced  to  make   his  second  appointment  with   him  in   a  week.   “I’m
suspicious.”
   “Oh,  well,”   he’d said,  even though he could  hardly speak because the
pain was so intense. “It  happens, right?” That  night, though, as he lay  in
bed, he thanked his body for keeping itself  in  check, for controlling  itself
for so long.  For those months he secretly thought  of as his and Willem’s
courtship, he  hadn’t  used his  wheelchair  once.  His  episodes had been
seldom, and brief, and never in Willem’s presence. He knew it was silly—
Willem knew what was wrong with  him, he had seen him at his worst—but
he was grateful that as the two of them were beginning to view each other
in a different  way, he had been allowed a period of reinvention, a spell of
being able to impersonate an able-bodied person. So when he was returned
to his normal state, he didn’t tell Willem about what had been happening to
him—he was so bored by the subMect that he couldn’t imagine anyone else
wouldn’t be as well—and by the time Willem came home in March, he was
more or  less better, walking  again, the  wound  once again mostly  under
control.
   Since  that first  time,  Willem  has been gone for  extended periods four
additional times—twice  for  shooting, twice for  publicity  tours—and each
time,  sometimes the very   day Willem   left,  his  body  had  broken  itself
somehow. But he had appreciated its sense of timing, its courtesy: it was as
if his body, before his mind, had decided for him that he should pursue this
relationship, and had  done its  part  by  removing as  many obstacles and
embarrassments as possible.

465
   Now  it is mid-September, and Willem is preparing to leave again. As has
become their ritual—ever since the Last Supper, a lifetime ago—they spend
the  Saturday   before   Willem’s    departure  having   dinner    somewhere
extravagant and then the rest of the  night talking.  Sunday they sleep late
into the morning, and Sunday afternoon, they review practicalities: things to
be done while Willem is away, outstanding matters to be resolved, decisions
to be made. Ever since their relationship has changed from what it had been
into what  it  now is,  their conversations have become both more intimate
and more mundane, and that final weekend is always a perfect, condensed
reflection of  that:  Saturday is  for  fears and secrets and confessions and
remembrances; Sunday is for  logistics,  the daily  mapmaking  that keeps
their life together inching along.
   He likes  both types of conversations with Willem, but he appreciates the
mundane ones more than  he’d  imagined he  would.  He had  always felt
bound to Willem  by the big things—love;  trust—but he likes  being bound
to him by the small things as well:  bills and taxes and dental checkups. He
is always reminded of  a visit  to Harold  and Julia’s he’d  made years ago,
when he had come down with a terrible  cold and had wound up  spending
most of  the weekend on the  living-room  sofa, wrapped in  a blanket  and
sliding  in and  out of  sleep. That  Saturday evening, they  had watched a
movie together, and at one point, Harold and Julia had begun talking about
the Truro house’s kitchen renovation. He half do]ed, listening to their quiet
talk, which  had been so dull that he couldn’t follow   any of the details but
had also filled  him with  a great sense of peace: it had seemed to him the
ideal expression of an adult relationship, to have someone with whom you
could discuss the mechanics of a shared existence.
   “So  I left  a message with the tree guy and told him you’re going  to call
this week, right?” Willem  asks. They are in the bedroom, doing the last of
Willem’s packing.
   “Right,”  he says. “I wrote myself a note to call him tomorrow.”
   “And   I  told Mal  you’d  go  up with  him  to  the site next  weekend, you
know.”
   “I  know,” he says. “I have it in my schedule.”
   Willem  has been dropping stacks of clothes into his bag as he talks, but
now he stops and looks at him. “I feel bad,” he says. “I’m leaving you with
so much stuff.”

466
   “Don’t,”   he says. “It’s not a problem, I swear.” Most of the scheduling in
their lives is handled by Willem’s  assistant, by his secretaries: but they are
managing the details of the house upstate themselves. They never discussed
how this happened, but he senses it’s important for them both to be able to
participate in   the creation  and  witness of   this  place they  are  building
together, the first place they will have built together since Lispenard Street.
   Willem  sighs. “But you’re so busy,” he says.
   “Don’t   worry,”   he  says. “Really,  Willem.   I  can  handle it,”   although
Willem continues to look worried.
   That night,  they lie awake. For as long as he has known Willem,  he has
always had the same feeling  the day  before he leaves, when even as he
speaks to Willem he is already anticipating how much he’ll miss him when
he’s gone. Now that they are actually, physically together, that feeling has,
curiously, intensified;  now  he  is  so used  to Willem’s   presence that his
absence feels more profound, more debilitating. “You  know what  else we
have to talk about,” Willem says, and when he doesn’t say anything, Willem
pushes down his sleeve and holds his left wrist, loosely, in his hand. “I want
you to promise me,” Willem says.
   “I   swear,” he says. “I  will.”   Next to  him,  Willem  releases his arm and
rolls onto his back, and they are quiet.
   “We’re  both tired,”  Willem  yawns, and they are: in less than two years,
Willem has been reclassified as gay; Lucien has retired from the firm and he
has taken over  as  the  chair  of  the  litigation  department;  and they  are
building a house in the country, eighty minutes north of the city. When they
are together on the weekends—and when Willem is home, he too tries to be,
going into the office even earlier on the weekdays so he doesn’t have to stay
as late on Saturdays—they sometimes spend the early evening simply lying
together on the sofa in the living   room, not speaking, as around them the
light leaves the room. Sometimes they go out, but  far less frequently than
they used to.
   “The  transition to lesbiandom took much less time than I anticipated,” JB
observed one evening when they had him and his new boyfriend, Fredrik,
over for dinner, along with Malcolm  and Sophie and Richard and India and
Andy and Jane.
   “Give  them a break, JB,” said Richard, mildly, as everyone else laughed,
but he didn’t  think  Willem  minded, and he certainly didn’t  himself.  After
all, what did he care about anything but Willem?

467
   For a while  he waits to see if Willem will  say anything else. He wonders
if  he will  have  to have sex; he  is still  mostly  unable to  determine when
Willem  wants to  and  when he  doesn’t—when an  embrace will   become
something more invasive and unwanted—but he is always prepared for it to
happen. It is—and he hates admitting  this, hates thinking it,  would  never
say it  aloud—one of  the  very  few  things he  anticipates about Willem’s
departures: for those weeks or months that he is away, there is no sex, and
he can finally relax.
   They have been having sex for eighteen months now (he reali]es he has
to make himself stop counting, as if his sexual life is a prison term, and he
is working   toward its  completion),  and  Willem  had waited  for  him  for
almost ten. During  those months, he had been intensely aware that  there
was a clock somewhere counting itself  down, and that although he didn’t
know how  much time he had left,  he did  know  that as patient as Willem
was, he wouldn’t be patient forever. Months before, when he had overheard
Willem  lie to  JB about how  ama]ing their  sex life  was, he had vowed to
himself that he would tell Willem  he was ready that night. But he had been
too frightened, and  had allowed himself  to  let the  moment pass. A  little
more than a month after that, when they were on holiday in Southeast Asia,
he once again  promised himself  he’d  try,  and once again,  he had done
nothing.
   And  then it was January, and Willem had left for Texas to film Duets, and
he had spent the weeks alone readying himself, and the night after Willem
came home—he was still astonished that Willem had come back to him at
all; astonished and ecstatic, so happy he had wanted to lean his head out the
window and scream for no other reason but the improbability of  it  all—he
had told Willem that he was ready.
   Willem  had looked at him. “Are you sure?” he’d asked him.
   He  wasn’t, of course. But he knew that if  he wanted to be with  Willem,
he would have to do it eventually. “Yes,” he said.
   “Do  you want to, really?” Willem  asked next, still looking at him.
   What  was this, he wondered: Was this  a challenge? Or was this  a real
question? It was better to be safe, he thought. So “Yes,” he said. “Of course
I do,” and he knew by Willem’s smile that he’d chosen the correct answer.
   But  first he’d had to tell  Willem about his diseases. “When you have sex
in the future, you’d better make sure you always disclose beforehand,” one
of the doctors in Philadelphia had told him,  years ago. “You don’t want  to

468
be responsible for passing these on to someone else.” The doctor had been
stern, and he had never forgotten the shame he had felt, nor the fear that he
might share his filth with another. And so he had written down a speech for
himself and recited it until  he had it  memori]ed, but  the actual telling had
been much more  difficult   than he  had expected, and he  had spoken so
quietly that he’d had to repeat himself, which was somehow even worse. He
had given this talk only once before, to Caleb, who had been silent and then
had said in his low  voice,  “Jude St. Francis. A  slut after all,”  and he had
made himself smile and agree. “College,” he had managed to say, and Caleb
had smiled back at him, slightly.
   Willem  too had been silent, watching him, and had asked, “When did you
get these, Jude?” and then, “I’m so sorry.”
   They  had been lying next to each other, Willem on his side, facing him,
he on his back. “I   had a lost year  in D.C.,”  he said at  last, although that
hadn’t been true,  of  course. But  telling   the truth  would  mean a  longer
conversation, and he wasn’t ready to have that conversation, not yet.
   “Jude, I’m  sorry,”  Willem  had said, and had reached for him. “Will  you
tell me about it?”
   “No,”   he’d  said, stubbornly.  “I  think  we  should do  it.  Now.”  He  had
already prepared himself. Another day of  waiting  wasn’t going  to change
things, and he would only lose his nerve.
   So they  had. A large part of  him  had hoped, expected even, that things
would be different  with  Willem,  that he would, finally,  enMoy the process.
But once it had begun, he could feel every bad old sensation returning. He
tried to direct his attention to how this time was clearly better: how Willem
was more gentle than Caleb  had been, how he  didn’t  get impatient  with
him, how it was, after all, Willem, someone he loved. But when it was over,
there was the same shame, the same nausea, the same desire to hurt himself,
to scoop  out his  insides  and hurl  them  against the  wall  with  a  bloody
thwack.
   “Was  it   okay?”  Willem  asked, quietly,  and  he  turned and  looked  at
Willem’s face, which he loved so much.
   “Yes,”  he said. Maybe, he thought, it would be better the next time. And
then, the next time, when it had been the same, he thought it might be better
the time after that. Every  time, he hoped things would  be different. Every
time, he told himself it  would be. The sorrow he felt  when he reali]ed that

469
even Willem   couldn’t   save  him,   that  he  was  irredeemable,  that  this
experience was forever ruined for him, was one of the greatest of his life.
   Eventually, he made some rules for himself. First, he would never refuse
Willem,  ever. If  this was  what Willem  wanted,  he could have it,  and  he
would never turn him away. Willem had sacrificed so much to be with him,
and had brought him such peace, that he was determined to try to thank him
however he could. Second, he would try—as Brother Luke had once asked
him—to show a  little  life,  a little  enthusiasm. Toward the end of his time
with Caleb, he had begun reverting to what he had done all his life:  Caleb
would turn him  over, and pull down  his pants, and he would lie  there and
wait. Now, with  Willem,  he tried to  remember Brother Luke’s commands,
which he had always obeyed—Roll over; Now make some noise; Now tell
me you like it—and incorporate them when he could, so he would seem like
an active participant. He hoped his competency would somehow conceal his
lack of  enthusiasm, and as Willem  slept, he made himself  remember the
lessons that Brother Luke taught him,  lessons he had spent his adulthood
trying to forget. He knew Willem was surprised by his fluency: he, who had
always remained silent  when the  others had bragged about  what  they’d
done in bed, or what  they hoped to; he, who could  and did tolerate every
conversation his friends  had about the subMect but had never engaged in
them himself.
   The third  rule was that he would  initiate  sex once for every three times
Willem  did,  so it  didn’t   seem so uneven. And  fourth,  whatever Willem
wanted him to do, he would  do. This is Willem, he would  remind himself,
again and again. This is someone who would never intentionally hurt  you.
Whatever he asks you to do is within reason.
   But  then he would see Brother Luke’s face before him. You trusted him,
too, the voice nagged him. You thought he was protecting you, too.
   How  dare you, he would  argue with  the voice. How  dare you compare
Willem to Brother Luke.
   What’s the difference? the voice snapped back. They both want the same
thing from you. You’re the same thing to them in the end.
   Eventually  his fear of  the process diminished, though not his dread. He
had always known that Willem enMoyed sex, but he had been surprised and
dismayed that he seemed to enMoy it so much with him. He knew how unfair
he was being, but  he found  himself  respecting Willem  less for  this, and
hating himself more for those feelings.

470
   He  tried  to  focus  on  what had  improved  about the  experience since
Caleb. Although it was still painful, it  was less painful than it had been with
anyone else, and surely that was a good thing. It  was still  uncomfortable,
although again, less so. And it was still shameful, although with Willem, he
was able to comfort himself with the knowledge that he was giving at least
a small   bit  of   pleasure to  the  person  he cared  about  most,  and  that
knowledge helped sustain him every time.
   He  told Willem  that he had lost the ability  to  have erections because of
the car inMury, but that wasn’t true. According to Andy (this was years ago),
there was no physical reason why he couldn’t have them. But at any rate, he
couldn’t, and hadn’t for  years, not since he was in college, and even then,
they had been rare and uncontrollable. Willem asked if there was something
he could do—a shot, a pill—but  he told him that he was allergic to  one of
the ingredients in those shots and pills, and that it didn’t make a difference
to him.
   Caleb hadn’t  been so bothered by this inability  of  his, but Willem  was.
“Isn’t  there something we can do to help you?” he asked, again and again.
“Have  you  talked  to Andy?   Should we  try  something  different?”  until
finally  he snapped at Willem to stop asking him,  that he was making him
feel like a freak.
   “I’m   sorry, Jude; I  didn’t  mean to,” Willem  said after  a silence. “I  Must
want you to enMoy this.”
   “I   am,” he  said. He hated lying  so much to  Willem,  but  what was the
alternative? The alternative meant losing him, meant being alone forever.
   Sometimes, often,  he cursed himself,  and how  limited  he  was, but  at
other times, he was kinder: he recogni]ed how much his mind had protected
his body, how it had shut down his sexual drive in order to shelter him, how
it  had calcified  every  part  of  him  that  had caused him  such pain.  But
usually, he knew he  was wrong. He  knew his  resentment of Willem  was
wrong. He knew his impatience with  Willem’s  affection for foreplay—that
long, embarrassing period of throat-clearing that preceded every interaction,
the small physical gestures of intimacy that he knew were Willem’s way of
experimenting with the depths of his  own ability  for  arousal—was wrong.
But sex in his experience was something to be gotten through as quickly as
possible, with  an efficiency  and brusqueness that bordered on the brutal,
and when he sensed Willem was trying to prolong their encounters he began
offering direction  with a  sort of decisiveness that he later reali]ed Willem

471
must mistake for ]eal.  And then he would hear Brother Luke’s  triumphant
declaration in his head—I could hear you enMoying yourself—and cringe. I
don’t, he had always wanted to say, and he wanted to say it  now: I  don’t.
But he didn’t dare. They were in a relationship. People in relationships had
sex. If he wanted to keep Willem,  he had to fulfill   his side of the bargain,
and his dislike for his duties didn’t change this.
   Still,  he didn’t give up. He promised himself he would work on repairing
himself, for  Willem’s  sake if not  his own. He  bought—surreptitiously, his
face prickling as he placed the order—three self-help books on sex and read
them while  Willem  was on  one of  his publicity  tours,  and when Willem
returned, he tried to use what he had learned, but the results had been the
same. He bought maga]ines  meant for  women with  articles  about being
better in bed,  and studied them carefully.  He even ordered a book  about
how victims of sexual abuse—a term he hated and didn’t apply to himself—
dealt with sex, which he read furtively one night, locking  his study door so
Willem wouldn’t   discover him. But  after about a year, he decided to alter
his ambitions: he might not ever be able to enMoy sex, but that didn’t mean
he couldn’t make it  more enMoyable for Willem, both as an expression of
gratitude and, more selfishly, a way to keep him close. So he fought past his
feelings of shame; he concentrated on Willem.
   Now  that he was having  sex again, he reali]ed how  much he had been
surrounded by it  all these years, and how completely  he had managed to
banish thoughts of it from  his waking life.  For decades, he had shied from
discussions of sex, but now he  listened to them wherever he encountered
them: he eavesdropped on his colleagues, on women in restaurants, on men
walking past him on the street, all talking about sex, about when they were
having it, about how they wanted it more (no one wanted it less, it seemed).
It  was as if  he  was back in  college,  his peers once again  his unwitting
teachers: always, he was alert for information, for lessons on how to be. He
watched talk shows on television, many of which  seemed to be about how
couples eventually stop having  sex; the guests were married people  who
hadn’t had  sex in  months, occasionally  in  years. He  would  study these
shows, but none of them  ever gave him the information  he wanted: How
long into the relationship did the sex last? How much longer would he have
to wait   until  this  happened to him  and  Willem,  too?  He  looked at  the
couples: Were they happy? (Obviously not; they were on talk shows telling
strangers about their sex lives and asking for help.) But they seemed happy,

472
didn’t they, or a version of happy at least, that man and woman who hadn’t
had sex in three years and yet, through the touch of the man’s hand on the
woman’s arm, obviously still had affection for each other, obviously stayed
together for  reasons more  important  than  sex.  On  planes, he  watched
romantic comedies, farces about married  people not  having sex.  All  the
movies with young people were about wanting sex; all the movies with old
people were  about wanting  sex.  He  would  watch  these films  and  feel
defeated. When did you get to stop wanting to have sex? At times he would
appreciate the irony of this: Willem, the ideal partner in every way, who still
wanted to have sex, and he, the unideal partner in every way, who didn’t.
He,  the  cripple,  who  didn’t,   and  Willem,   who  somehow  wanted him
anyway. And  still,  Willem  was  his own  version  of  happiness; he was a
version of happiness he never thought he’d have.
   He assured Willem that if  he missed having sex with women, he should,
and that he wouldn’t mind. But “I  don’t,”  Willem  said. “I  want to have sex
with you.” Another  person would have been moved by this, and he was too,
but he also despaired: When would this end? And then, inevitably: What if
it never did? What if he was never allowed to stop? He was reminded of the
years in the motel rooms, although even then he’d had a date to anticipate,
however false: sixteen. When he turned sixteen, he would be able to stop.
Now he was forty-five,  and it was as if  he was eleven once again, waiting
for  the  day  when  someone—once Brother  Luke,   now  (unfair,  unfair)
Willem—would  tell  him “That’s  it.  You’ve fulfilled   your duty.  No more.”
He wished someone would  tell  him that  he was still  a  full  human being
despite his feelings; that there was nothing wrong with who he was. Surely
there was someone, someone in the world who felt  as he did? Surely  his
hatred for the act was not a deficiency to be corrected but a simple matter of
preference?
   One night,  he and Willem  were lying  in  bed—both of  them tired  from
their respective days—and Willem  had begun talking, abruptly,  of an  old
friend he’d had lunch with,  a woman named Molly he’d met once or twice
over the years, and who, Willem said, had been having a difficult time; now,
after decades, she had finally told her mother that her father, who had died
the year before, had sexually abused her.
   “That’s  terrible,” he said, automatically. “Poor Molly.”
   “Yes,”  said Willem, and there was a silence. “I Must told her that she had
nothing to be ashamed of, that she hadn’t done anything wrong.” He could

473
feel himself  getting  hot. “You  were  right,”  he  said at  last, and yawned,
extravagantly. “Good night, Willem.”
   For  a minute or two,  they were quiet. “Jude,” Willem  said, gently. “Are
you ever going to tell me about it?”
   What could he say, he thought, as he held himself still. Why was Willem
asking about this now? He thought he had been doing such a good Mob being
normal—but maybe he hadn’t. He would  have to try harder. He never had
told Willem  about what had happened to him with Brother Luke, but along
with being unable to speak of it, part of him  knew he didn’t need to: in the
past two years, Willem  had tried  to approach the subMect through various
directions—through stories  of  friends   and acquaintances, some named,
some not (he had to assume some of these people were creations, as surely
no one person could have such a vast collection of sexually abused friends),
through stories  about pedophilia  he read  in  maga]ines, through  various
discourses on the nature of shame, and how it  was often unearned. After
each speech, Willem would stop, and wait, as if he were mentally extending
a hand and asking him to  dance. But he never took  Willem’s  hand. Each
time, he  would  remain  silent, or  change the  subMect, or simply pretend
Willem had never spoken at all. He didn’t  know  how Willem  had come to
learn this  about him;  he  didn’t  want  to know.  Obviously  the  person he
thought he was presenting wasn’t the person Willem—or Harold—saw.
   “Why  are you asking me this?” he asked.
   Willem   shifted.  “Because,” he  said, and  then stopped. “Because,”  he
continued, “I  should’ve  made you  talk  about this  a long  time  ago.”  He
stopped again. “Certainly before we started having sex.”
   He  closed his  eyes. “Am  I  not  doing  a good enough Mob?” he asked,
quietly, and regretted the question as soon as he said it: it was something he
would have asked Brother Luke, and Willem was not Brother Luke.
   He  could  tell  from  Willem’s   silence that  he was  taken aback by  the
question as well. “No,” he said. “I  mean, yes. But Jude—I know something
happened to you. I wish you’d tell me. I wish you’d let me help you.”
   “It’s  over, Willem,”  he said at last. “It  was a long time ago. I don’t  need
help.”
   There was another silence. “Was Brother Luke the person who hurt you?”
Willem asked, and then, when he was quiet, the seconds ticking past, “Do
you like having sex, Jude?”

474
   If  he spoke, he would cry, and so he didn’t speak. The word no, so short,
so easy to say, a child’s sound, a noise more than a word, a sharp exhalation
of air: all he had to do was part his lips, and the word would come out, and
—and what?  Willem  would  leave, and  take everything  with  him.  I  can
endure this, he would think when they had sex, I can endure this. He could
endure it for  every morning  he woke next  to Willem,  for  every affection
Willem  gave him,   for  the comfort   of  his  company. When  Willem  was
watching television  in  the  living  room  and he  was walking   by, Willem
would reach out  his  hand and he would  take  it,  and they would  remain
there, Willem watching  the screen and sitting, he standing, their  hands in
each other’s, and finally he would  let go and continue moving. He needed
Willem’s presence; every day since Willem had moved back in with him, he
had experienced that same feeling of calm he had when Willem had stayed
with him  before he left to  shoot The Prince of Cinnamon. Willem  was his
ballast, and he clung  to  him, even though  he was always  aware of  how
selfish he was being. If   he truly  loved Willem,  he knew,  he would  leave
him. He would  allow  Willem—he  would force  him, if  he had to—to  find
someone better to love, someone who would  enMoy having sex with him,
someone who actually desired him, someone with fewer problems, someone
with greater charms. Willem was good for him, but he was bad for Willem.
   “Do  you like having sex with me?” he asked when he could finally speak.
   “Yes,”  said Willem, immediately. “I love it.  But do you like it?”
   He  swallowed,   counted to  three.  “Yes,”   he said,  quietly,  furious   at
himself and relieved as well.  He had won himself  more time: of  Willem’s
presence, but also of sex. What, he wonders, if he had said no?
   And  so  on  they went.  But  in  compensation for  the  sex, there  is  the
cutting, which he has been doing more and more: to help ease the feelings
of shame, and to rebuke himself for his feelings of resentment. For so long,
he had been so disciplined: once a week, two cuts each time, no more. But
in the past six months, he has broken his rules again and again, and now he
is cutting himself  as much as he had when he was with Caleb, as much as
he had in the weeks before the adoption.
   His  accelerated cutting was the topic of their  first  truly awful  fight,  not
only as a couple  but ever, in  their entire twenty-nine  years of friendship.
Sometimes the cutting has no place in their relationship. And sometimes it
is their relationship, their every conversation, the thing they are discussing
even when they’re not saying anything. He never knows when he’ll come to

475
bed in  his  long-sleeved  T-shirt  and Willem   will   say nothing,  or  when
Willem will   begin interrogating him. He has explained to Willem  so many
times that he needs it, that it helps him, that he is unable to stop, but Willem
cannot or will not comprehend him.
   “Don’t  you understand why this upsets me so much?” Willem asks him.
   “No,  Willem,”  he says. “I know what I’m doing. You have to trust me.”
   “I  do trust you,  Jude,” Willem says. “But  trust is not the issue here. The
issue is you hurting yourself.” And then the conversation deadends itself.
   Or  there is  the  conversation that leads to  Willem   saying, “Jude, how
would you feel if  I  did this to myself?”  and him saying, “It’s  not the same
thing, Willem,”   and  Willem  saying, “Why?”   and  him  saying, “Because,
Willem—it’s  you. You don’t deserve it,” and Willem saying, “And you do?”
and him being unable to answer, or at least not able to provide  an answer
that Willem would find adequate.
   About  a month before the fight, they’d had a different fight. Willem  had,
of course, noticed that he was cutting himself  more, but he hadn’t  known
why, only  that  he was, and  one night,  after he  was certain Willem   was
asleep, he was creeping toward the bathroom, when suddenly, Willem had
grabbed him hard around the wrist, and he had gasped from fright. “Jesus,
Willem,”  he’d said. “You scared me.”
   “Where are you going, Jude?” Willem had asked, his voice tense.
   He’d  tried to pull  his arm free, but Willem’s grip was too strong. “I  have
to go to  the bathroom,” he said. “Let  go, Willem,  I’m  serious.”  They had
stared at each other in the dark until finally  Willem  had released him, and
then had gotten out of bed as well.
   “Let’s  go, then,” he’d said. “I’m  going to watch you.”
   They  had quarreled, then, hissing at each other, each of them furious at
the other, each of them feeling betrayed, he accusing Willem of treating him
like  a child,  Willem  accusing him  of  keeping secrets from  him, each as
close as they had ever been to yelling at the other. It  had ended with him
wrenching out of  Willem’s grasp and trying  to run toward  his study so he
could lock himself in and cut himself with a pair of scissors, but in his panic
he had stumbled and fallen and split his  lip, and Willem  had hurried  over
with a bag of  ice and they had sat there on the living-room  floor, halfway
between their   bedroom and  his   study,  their  arms  around  each other,
apologi]ing.
   “I  can’t have you doing this to yourself,” Willem had said the next day.

476
   “I   can’t  not,”  he said, after  a long  silence. You don’t  want  to see me
without it, he wanted to tell  Willem, as well as: I  don’t know how I’d make
my way through life without it.  But he didn’t. He was never able to explain
to Willem  what the cutting  did  for him  in  a way he’d  understand: how it
was a form  of  punishment and also of  cleansing, how it  allowed  him  to
drain everything  toxic  and spoiled  from  himself,  how  it  kept  him  from
being irrationally   angry  at  others, at  everyone,  how  it  kept  him   from
shouting, from violence, how  it made him  feel like  his body, his life,  was
truly his  and no one else’s. Certainly  he could never have sex without  it.
Sometimes he wondered:  If  Brother  Luke  hadn’t  given  it   to  him  as a
solution, who would he have become? Someone who hurt other people, he
thought; someone who tried  to make everyone feel  as terrible as he  did;
someone even worse than the person he was.
   Willem  had been silent  for even longer. “Try,”   he said. “For  me, Judy.
Try.”
   And  he did. For the next few weeks, when he woke in the night, or after
they’d had sex and he was waiting for Willem to fall  asleep so he could go
to  the bathroom,  he  instead made  himself  lie  still,   his  hands in   fists,
counting his  breaths, the back of  his neck perspiring,  his mouth  dry. He
pictured one of the motels’  stairwells, and throwing himself  against it, the
thud he  would  make, how  satisfyingly  tiring  it  would  be,  how  much it
would hurt. He both wished Willem  knew how hard he was trying and was
grateful that he didn’t.
   But  sometimes this wasn’t enough, and on those nights, he would skulk
down to the ground floor, where he would swim, trying  to exhaust himself.
In the mornings, Willem demanded to look at his arms, and they had fought
over that as well, but in  the end it had been easier to Must let Willem look.
“Happy?”  he barked at him,  Merking his arms back from Willem’s  hands,
rolling  his sleeves back down  and buttoning the  cuffs, unable to  look  at
him.
   “Jude,”  Willem said, after a pause, “come lie down next to me before you
go,” but he shook his head and left, and all day he had regretted it, and with
every passing day that Willem didn’t ask him again, he hated himself more.
Their new morning ritual  was Willem examining his arms, and every time,
sitting next to Willem  in bed as Willem looked for  evidence of cuts, he felt
his frustration and humiliation increase.

477
   One night a month after he had promised Willem he would try harder, he
had known that he was in trouble, that there would be nothing he could do
to quell  his desires. It had  been an unexpectedly, peculiarly memory-rich
day, one in which  the curtain that separated his past from his present had
been oddly  gau]y.  All   evening he  had seen, as if   in  peripheral  vision,
fragments of scenes drifting before him, and over dinner  he had fought to
stay rooted, to not let himself wander into that frightening, familiar shadow
world of memories. That night was the first night he had almost told Willem
he didn’t want to have sex, but in the end he had managed not to, and they
had.
   Afterward,   he was  exhausted. He always struggled  to  remain present
when they were having sex, to not let  himself float  away. When he was a
child  and   had  learned  that  he  could   leave  himself,   the  clients  had
complained to  Brother Luke.  “His  eyes look  dead,”  they  had said; they
hadn’t liked it. Caleb had said the same thing to him. “Wake up,” he’d once
said, tapping him  on  the side of  his  face. “Where  are you?”  And  so he
worked to stay  engaged, even though it made the experience more vivid.
That night he lay  there, watching Willem  asleep on his stomach, his arms
tucked under  his  pillow,  his  face  more  severe in  sleep than  it  was  in
wakefulness. He waited, counting to three hundred, and then three hundred
again, until an hour had passed. He snapped on the light next to his side of
the bed and tried to read, but all he could see was the ra]or, and all he could
feel was his arms tingling  with  need, as if  he had not veins but  circuitry,
fi]]ing   and blipping with electricity.
   “Willem,”   he whispered, and when Willem  didn’t  answer, he placed his
hand on Willem’s neck, and when Willem didn’t move, he finally got out of
bed and walked as softly as he could into their closet, where he retrieved his
bag, which he had learned to store in the interior pocket of one of his winter
coats, and then out of the room and across the apartment to the bathroom at
the opposite end, where  he closed the  door. Here too  there was  a large
shower, and he sat down inside of it  and took off  his shirt  and leaned his
back against the cool stone. His forearms were now so thickened from scar
tissue that from a  distance, they appeared to have been dipped in plaster,
and you could barely distinguish where he had made the cuts in his suicide
attempt: he  had cut  between and around  each stripe,  layering the  cuts,
camouflaging the scars. Lately  he  had begun concentrating more  on his
upper arms (not the biceps, which were also scarred, but the triceps, which

478
were somehow less satisfying; he  liked to  see the cuts as he made them
without twisting his neck), but now he made long, careful cuts down his left
tricep, counting the seconds it took  to make each one—one, two, three—
against his breaths.
   Down  he cut, four times on his  left, and three times on his right,  and as
he was making the fourth, his hands fluttery from  that delicious weakness,
he had looked up and had seen Willem in the doorway, watching him. In all
his decades of cutting himself, he had never been witnessed in the act itself,
and he  stopped, abruptly,  the violation   as shocking  as  if  he  had been
slugged.
   Willem  didn’t  say anything,  but as he walked toward him,  he cowered,
pressing himself against the shower wall,  mortified  and  terrified, waiting
for what might happen. He watched Willem crouch, and gently remove the
ra]or  from his  hand, and for a  moment they remained in  those positions,
both of  them  staring at  the ra]or.  And  then  Willem  stood  and, without
preamble or warning, sliced the ra]or across his own chest.
   He  snapped alive, then. “No!”   he shouted, and tried  to  get up, but  he
didn’t have the strength, and he fell back. “Willem, no!”
   “Fuck!”   Willem yelled.  “Fuck!”  But he made a second cut anyway, right
under the first.
   “Stop  it,  Willem!”  he shouted, almost in tears. “Willem,  stop it!  You’re
hurting yourself!”
   “Oh,  yeah?”  asked Willem,  and he could  tell  by  how bright  Willem’s
eyes were that he was almost crying himself.  “You  see what it  feels like,
Jude?” And he made a third cut, cursing again.
   “Willem,”   he moaned, and lunged for his feet, but Willem stepped out of
his way. “Please stop. Please, Willem.”
   He had begged and begged, but it was only after the sixth cut that Willem
stopped, slumping down against the opposite wall. “Fuck,” he said, quietly,
bending over at the  waist and wrapping  his arms around himself.  “Fuck,
that hurts.” He scooted over to Willem  with  his bag to help  clean him up,
but Willem moved away from him. “Leave me alone, Jude,” he said.
   “But  you need to bandage them,” he said.
   “Bandage  your own  goddamn arms,”  Willem  said, still  not  looking  at
him. “This   isn’t  some fucked-up ritual  we’re  going  to share, you  know:
bandaging each other’s self-inflicted cuts.”

479
   He  shrank back. “I  wasn’t  trying  to suggest that,” he  said, but Willem
didn’t answer him,  and finally, he did  clean off  his cuts, and then slid the
bag over toward Willem, who at last did the same, wincing as he did.
   They sat there in silence for a long, long  time, Willem  still bent over, he
watching Willem. “I’m  sorry, Willem,”  he said.
   “Jesus, Jude,” Willem  said, a while later. “This  really  hurts.” He finally
looked at him. “How can you stand this?”
   He shrugged. “You get used to it,” he said, and Willem shook his head.
   “Oh,  Jude,”  Willem  said, and he saw that Willem   was crying, silently.
“Are you even happy with me?”
   He  felt something in  him  break and fall. “Willem,”   he began, and then
started again. “You’ve made me happier than I’ve ever been in my life.”
   Willem  made a sound that he later reali]ed was a laugh. “Then why  are
you cutting yourself so much?” he asked. “Why has it gotten so bad?”
   “I  don’t  know,” he said, softly. He swallowed. “I  guess I’m afraid you’re
going to leave.” It  wasn’t the entire story—the entire story he couldn’t  say
—but it was part of it.
   “Why   am I going  to leave?” Willem  asked, and then, when he couldn’t
answer, “So is this a test, then? Are you trying to see how far you can push
me and whether I’ll stay with you?” He looked up, wiping  his eyes. “Is that
it?”
   He  shook his head. “Maybe,”  he said, to the marble floor.  “I  mean, not
consciously. But—maybe. I don’t know.”
   Willem  sighed. “I   don’t know  what I  can say to  convince you I’m   not
going to leave, that  you don’t  need to test me,” he  said. They were quiet
again, and then Willem took a deep breath. “Jude,” he said, “do  you think
you should maybe go back to the hospital for a while? Just to, I don’t know,
sort things out?”
   “No,”   he said, his throat tightening with panic. “Willem,   no—you won’t
make me, will you?”
   Willem   looked  at him.   “No,”   he said.  “No,  I  won’t   make you.”   He
paused. “But I wish I could.”
   Somehow, the night ended, and somehow, the next day began. He was so
tired he was tipsy, but he went to work. Their fight  had never ended in any
conclusive  way—there   were   no  promises   extracted,  there  were   no
ultimatums given—but for  the next few days, Willem  didn’t  speak to him.
Or rather: Willem  spoke, but he spoke about nothing. “Have a good day,”

480
he’d say when he left in  the morning, and “How  was your day?” when he
came home at night.
   “Fine,”  he’d say. He knew Willem was wondering what to do and how he
felt about the situation, and he tried to be as unobtrusive as possible in the
meantime. At  night they  lay in  bed, and where  they usually  talked, they
were both quiet, and their silence was like a third  creature in bed between
them, huge and furred and ferocious when prodded.
   On  the fourth  night,  he couldn’t  tolerate it  any longer,  and after lying
there for an hour or so, both of them silent, he rolled over the creature and
wrapped his arms around  Willem.  “Willem,”   he whispered, “I   love  you.
Forgive me.” Willem didn’t  answer him, but he plowed on. “I’m trying,”  he
told him. “I  really  am. I slipped up; I’ll   try harder.” Willem  still  didn’t  say
anything, and he held  him  tighter. “Please, Willem,”   he said. “I   know it
bothers you. Please give me another chance. Please don’t be mad at me.”
   He  could feel Willem  sigh. “I’m  not  mad at you, Jude,” he said. “And I
know you’re  trying. I  Must wish you didn’t have to try; I  wish this weren’t
something you had to fight against so hard.”
   Now  it was his turn to be quiet. “Me too,” he said, at last.
   Since that night, he has tried different methods: the swimming, of course,
but also baking,  late at night.  He  makes sure there’s always flour  in  the
kitchen, and sugar, and eggs and yeast, and as he waits for whatever’s in the
oven to finish, he sits at the dining-room table working, and by the time the
bread or cake or cookies (which  he has Willem’s assistant send to Harold
and Julia) are done, it’s almost daylight, and he slips back into  bed for an
hour or two of sleep before his alarm wakes him. For the rest of the day, his
eyes burn with exhaustion. He knows that Willem doesn’t like his late-night
baking, but he also knows he prefers it to the alternative, which is  why he
says nothing. Cleaning  is  no longer  an option:  since moving  to  Greene
Street, he has had a housekeeper, a Mrs. =hou, who now comes four times a
week and  is  depressingly  thorough, so  thorough  that  he  is  sometimes
tempted to dirty things up intentionally,  only so he can clean them. But he
knows this is silly, and so he doesn’t.
   “Let’s   try something,”  Willem  says one evening. “When  you  wake up
and want to cut yourself, you wake me up, too, all  right? Whatever time it
is.” He looks at him. “Let’s try it,  okay? Just humor me.”
   So he does, mostly because he is curious to see what Willem will do. One
night, very  late,  he rubs Willem’s   shoulder and when  Willem  opens his

481
eyes, he apologi]es to him. But Willem shakes his head, and then moves on
top of  him,  and holds him  so tightly  that  he finds  it difficult   to  breathe.
“You hold  me back,”  Willem  tells  him. “Pretend we’re  falling  and we’re
clinging together from fear.”
   He  holds Willem  so close that he can feel muscles from his back to his
fingertips  come alive,  so  close that  he can  feel  Willem’s  heart  beating
against his, can feel his rib cage against his, and his stomach deflating and
inflating  with  air. “Harder,”  Willem  tells him,  and he does until  his arms
grow first fatigued and then numb, until his body is sagging with tiredness,
until he feels that he really is falling: first through the mattress, and then the
bed frame, and  then the  floor  itself,  until  he  is sinking  in  slow  motion
through all  the floors  of  the building,  which  yield  and swallow  him like
Melly. Down he goes through the fifth floor, where Richard’s family is now
storing stacks of Moroccan  tiles, down through  the fourth  floor, which  is
empty, down through Richard and India’s apartment, and Richard’s studio,
and then to the ground floor, and into  the pool, and then down and down,
farther and farther, past the subway tunnels, past bedrock and silt, through
underground lakes and oceans of oil,  through layers of  fossils and shale,
until  he is  drifting  into  the fire  at  the earth’s core. And  the  entire time,
Willem  is  wrapped around  him,  and as  they enter  the fire,   they aren’t
burned but melted into one being, their legs and chests and arms and heads
fusing into one. When he wakes the next morning, Willem  is no longer on
top of  him   but beside him,   but they  are  still  intertwined,  and he  feels
slightly drugged, and relieved, for he has not only not cut himself but he has
slept, deeply, two things he hasn’t done in  months. That morning he feels
fresh-scrubbed and cleansed, as if he is being given yet another opportunity
to live his life correctly.
   But  of course he can’t wake Willem up whenever he feels he needs him;
he limits himself to  once every ten days. The other six or seven bad nights
in those ten-day periods he gets through  on his  own: swimming,  baking,
cooking. He  needs physical work  to  stave off  the  craving—Richard has
given him a key  to his studio, and some nights he heads downstairs in his
paMamas, where Richard has left him a task that is both helpfully, mindlessly
repetitive and at the same time utterly mysterious: he sorts bird vertebrae by
si]es one week, and separates a stack of gleaming and faintly greasy ferret
pelts by color another. These tasks remind him of how, years ago, the four
of them would spend their weekends untangling hair for JB, and he wishes

482
he could  tell  Willem  about them,  but he  can’t, of  course. He  has made
Richard promise not to say anything to Willem either, but he knows Richard
isn’t exactly comfortable with the situation—he has noticed that he is never
given  Mobs that involve  ra]ors   or  scissors or  paring   knives,  which  is
significant considering how much of Richard’s work demands sharp edges.
   One  night,  he peers into  an old  coffee  can that  has been left  out  on
Richard’s desk and sees that it is  full  of  blades: small angled ones, large
wedge-shaped ones, and plain rectangles of the sort he prefers. He dips his
hand cautiously into the can, scoops up a loose fistful of the blades, watches
them pour from his palm. He takes one of the rectangular blades and slips it
into his pants pocket, but when he’s finally ready to leave for the night—so
exhausted that the floor tilts  beneath him—he returns it  gently to  the can
before he  goes. In  those hours  he  is  awake and  prowling  through  the
building, he sometimes feels he is a demon who has disguised himself as a
human, and only at night  is it  safe to  shed the costume he must wear by
daylight, and indulge his true nature.
   And  then it is Tuesday, a day that feels like summer, and Willem’s last in
the city.   He  leaves for   work   early  that  morning  but  comes  home  at
lunchtime so he can say goodbye.
   “I’m   going to miss you,” he tells Willem, as he always does.
   “I’m   going to miss you more,” Willem says, as he always does, and then,
also as he always does, “Are you going to take care of yourself?”
   “Yes,”  he says, not letting go of him. “I promise.” He feels Willem sigh.
   “Remember you  can always call me, no matter what time it  is,”  Willem
tells him, and he nods.
   “Go,”  he says. “I’ll  be fine,” and Willem sighs again, and goes.
   He hates to have Willem leave, but he is excited, too: for selfish reasons,
and also because he is relieved, and happy, that Willem is working so much.
After  they had returned from  Vietnam that January, Must before he left to
film Duets, Willem  had been alternately anxious and bluffly confident, and
although he tried  not to  speak of  his insecurities,  he knew how  worried
Willem  was.  He  knew   Willem   worried  that  his  first   movie  after  the
announcement of their relationship was, no matter how much he protested
otherwise, a gay movie. He  knew Willem  worried  when the director  of a
science-fiction thriller he wanted to do didn’t call him back as quickly as he
had thought he might (though he had in the end, and everything had worked
out the way he had hoped). He knew Willem  worried about the seemingly

483
endless series  of   articles,  the   ceaseless requests for   interviews,   the
speculations and television segments, the gossip columns and the editorials,
about his revelation that had greeted them on their return to the States, and
which, as Kit told them, they were powerless to control or stop: they would
simply have to wait until  people grew bored of the subMect, and that might
take months. (Willem didn’t read stories about himself in general, but there
were Must so many of them: when they turned on the television, when they
went online, when  they opened the paper, there they were—stories about
Willem, and what  he now represented.) When they spoke on the phone—
Willem in  Texas, he at Greene Street—he could feel Willem trying  not  to
talk too much about how nervous he was and knew it was because Willem
didn’t want him to feel guilty. “Tell  me, Willem,”  he finally said. “I promise
I’m  not going  to blame  myself. I  swear.” And  after he  had repeated this
every day for a week, Willem  did at last tell  him, and although he did feel
guilty—he cut himself after every one of these conversations—he didn’t ask
Willem for  reassurances, he didn’t make Willem feel worse than he already
did; he only  listened and tried  to be as soothing as he could.  Good, he’d
praise himself after they’d  hung up, after  every time he’d  kept his mouth
closed against his own fears. Good Mob. Later, he’d burrow the tip  of  the
ra]or into one of his scars, flicking the tissue upward with the ra]or’s corner
until he had cut down to the soft flesh beneath.
   He thinks  it a good sign that the film Willem  is shooting in  London now
is, as Kit would say, a gay film. “Normally  I’d  say not to,” Kit  told Willem.
“But  it’s  too good  a script  to  pass up.” The  film  is  titled  The Poisoned
Apple, and is about the last  few years of  Alan  Turing’s life,  after he  was
arrested for indecency and was chemically castrated. He idoli]ed Turing, of
course—all mathematicians did—and had been moved almost to tears by
the script. “You have to do it, Willem,” he had said.
   “I  don’t know,”  Willem had said, smiling, “another gay movie?”
   “Duets  did  really  well,”  he  reminded Willem—and  it  had: better  than
anyone had thought it would—but it  was a la]y  sort of  argument, because
he knew Willem  had already decided to do the film,  and he was proud of
him, and childishly  excited  to see him in  it,  the way  he was about all  of
Willem’s movies.
   The Saturday after Willem  leaves, Malcolm  meets him at the apartment
and he drives the two of them north, to Must outside Garrison, where they are
building a house. Willem had bought the land—seventy acres, with its own

484
lake and its  own  forest—three years ago,  and for  three years it  had  sat
empty. Malcolm had drawn plans, and Willem  had approved them, but he
had never actually told  Malcolm  he could begin. But  one morning, about
eighteen months  ago, he  had  found  Willem   at  the  dining-room  table,
looking at Malcolm’s drawings.
   Willem  held out his hand to him, not lifting his eyes from the papers, and
he took it and allowed Willem to pull him  to his side. “I think we should do
this,” Willem said.
   And  so they had met with Malcolm  again, and Malcolm had drawn new
plans: the original house had been two stories, a modernist saltbox, but the
new house was a single level and mostly glass. He had offered to pay for it,
but Willem  had refused. They argued back and forth, Willem pointing  out
that he  wasn’t contributing  anything  toward  the maintenance of  Greene
Street, and he pointing out that he didn’t care. “Jude,”  Willem said at last,
“we’ve  never  fought  about money. Let’s  not  start  now.”  And  he  knew
Willem  was right:  their  friendship  had never  been measured by money.
They had never talked  about money  when they hadn’t  had any—he  had
always considered whatever he earned Willem’s as well—and now that they
had it, he felt the same way.
   Eight  months ago, when Malcolm  was breaking ground, he and Willem
had gone up  to the  property and  had wandered around it.  He  had been
feeling unusually well  that day, and had even allowed Willem  to  hold his
hand as they walked down the gentle hill that sloped from where the house
would sit, and then left, toward the forest that held the lake in its  embrace.
The forest was denser than they  had imagined, the ground  so thick  with
pine needles that their every footfall sank, as if the earth beneath them was
made of something rubbery and squashy and pumped half full of air. It was
difficult  terrain for him, and he grasped Willem’s hand in earnest, but when
Willem  asked him if  he wanted to stop, he shook his head. About  twenty
minutes later, when they were almost halfway around the lake, they came to
a clearing that looked like something out of a fairy tale, the sky above them
all dark  green fir  tops, the floor  beneath them that  same soft pelt  of the
trees’ leavings. They stopped then, looking around them, quiet until Willem
said, “We   should  Must build  it  here,”   and he  smiled,   but  inside  him
something wrenched, a feeling  like  his entire  nervous system was being
tugged out of his  navel, because he was remembering that other forest he
had once thought he’d live in, and was reali]ing that he was to finally have

485
it  after all:  a house in  the woods,  with  water nearby, and someone who
loved him. And then he shuddered, a tremor that rippled its way through his
body, and Willem looked at him. “Are  you cold?”  he asked. “No,” he said,
“but let’s keep walking,” and so they had.
   Since then, he has avoided the woods, but he loves coming up to the site,
and is enMoying working with Malcolm  again. He  or Willem  go  up every
other weekend, though he knows Malcolm prefers it when he goes, because
Willem  is  largely   uninterested in  the  details  of  the  proMect. He trusts
Malcolm, but  Malcolm  doesn’t want trust: he wants someone to show the
silvery, stripey  marble he’s found  from a  small quarry  outside I]mir   and
argue about how much of  it  is too  much; and to  make smell the  cypress
from  Gifu  that  he’s sourced for   the bathroom  tub; and  to  examine the
obMects—hammers; wrenches; pliers—he’s embedded like trilobites in the
poured concrete floors. Aside  from the  house and the garage, there is an
outdoor pool and, in the barn, an indoor pool:  the house will  be done in a
little more than three months, the pool and barn by the following spring.
   Now  he walks through the house with Malcolm,  running his hands over
its surfaces, listening to Malcolm instruct the contractor on everything that
needs fixing. As  always, he  is impressed watching Malcolm  at  work:  he
never  tires  of   watching  any   of  his   friends  at  work,   but   Malcolm’s
transformation has been the most gratifying to witness, more so than even
Willem’s. In these moments, he remembers how carefully and meticulously
Malcolm built  his imaginary houses, and with such seriousness; once, when
they were sophomores, JB had (accidentally, he claimed later) set one on
fire when he was high, and Malcolm had been so angry and hurt that he had
almost started crying. He had followed Malcolm as he ran out of Hood, and
had sat  with  him  on  the  library  steps in  the  cold.  “I   know  it’s  silly,”
Malcolm had said  after he’d calmed down.  “But  they mean something to
me.”
   “I  know,”  he’d said. He had always loved Malcolm’s houses; he still has
the  first   one  Malcolm   ever  made  him   all   those years  ago,  for   his
seventeenth birthday. “It’s not  silly.”  He  knew what  the houses meant to
Malcolm:  they  were an assertion of  control,  a  reminder that  for  all  the
uncertainties of  his  life,  there  was one  thing  that  he could  manipulate
perfectly, that would always express what he was unable to in words. “What
does Malcolm have to worry  about?”  JB would  ask them when Malcolm
was anxious about something, but he knew: he was worried because to be

486
alive was to  worry.  Life  was scary; it  was unknowable. Even  Malcolm’s
money wouldn’t immuni]e  him completely. Life  would happen to him, and
he would  have to try  to  answer it, Must like the rest of  them. They  all—
Malcolm with his houses, Willem with his girlfriends,  JB with his paints, he
with   his   ra]ors—sought   comfort,   something  that   was   theirs  alone,
something to  hold  off  the  terrifying  largeness, the  impossibility,  of  the
world, of the relentlessness of its minutes, its hours, its days.
   These days, Malcolm works on fewer and fewer residences; in fact, they
see far less of him than they once did. Bellcast now has offices in London
and Hong  Kong,  and although  Malcolm  handles most  of  the American
business—he is now  planning  a new  wing  of  the  museum at  their  old
college—he is increasingly scarce. But he has overseen their house himself,
and he has never missed or rescheduled one of their appointments. As they
leave the property, he puts his hand on Malcolm’s shoulder. “Mal,” he says,
“I  can’t  thank  you enough,”  and  Malcolm  smiles. “This   is  my  favorite
proMect, Jude,” he says. “For my favorite people.”
   Back  in the  city, he drops Malcolm  off  in  Cobble Hill   and then drives
over the bridge and north, to his office. This is the final piece of pleasure he
finds in Willem’s  absences: because it means he can stay at work later, and
longer. Without Lucien, work  is simultaneously more and less enMoyable—
less, because although he still sees Lucien, who has retired to a life of, as he
says, pretending to enMoy golf in  Connecticut,  he misses talking  to  him
daily, misses Lucien’s attempts to appall and provoke him;  more, because
he has found that he enMoys chairing the department, that he enMoys being on
the firm’s  compensation committee, deciding  how  the company’s profits
will  be divvied  up each year. “Who knew you  were such a powermonger,
Jude?” Lucien asked him when  he admitted this, and he had protested: it
wasn’t that, he told Lucien—it  was that he took satisfaction in seeing what
had actually been brought in each year, how his hours and days at the office
—his and  everyone else’s—had translated themselves into numbers, and
then those numbers  into  cash, and then  that  cash into  the  stuff  of  his
colleagues’ lives:  their  houses and tuitions  and vacations and  cars. (He
didn’t tell  Lucien this part. Lucien would  think he was being romantic, and
there   would   be    a   wry,    ironic    lecture   on   his    tendency   toward
sentimentalism.)
   Rosen Pritchard had always been important to him, but after Caleb it had
become essential. In  his  life  at  the firm,   he  was assessed only by  the

487
business he secured, by the work he did: there, he had no past, he had no
deficiencies. His life there began with where he had gone to law school and
what he had done there; it  ended with  each day’s accomplishments, with
each year’s tallies of billable  hours, with each new client  he could attract.
At Rosen Pritchard, there was no room for  Brother Luke, or  Caleb, or Dr.
Traylor, or  the monastery, or  the home;  they were  irrelevant, they  were
extraneous details, they had nothing to do with  the person he had created
for  himself.  There, he  wasn’t  someone who  cowered  in  the bathroom,
cutting himself, but instead a series of numbers: one number to signify how
much money he brought in, and another for the number of hours he billed; a
third representing how many people he oversaw, a fourth for how much he
rewarded them. It was something he had never been able to explain to his
friends, who marveled at and pitied him for how much he worked; he could
never tell them that it was at that office, surrounded by work and people he
knew they found almost  stultifyingly  dull,  that he felt  at his most human,
his most dignified and invulnerable.
   Willem   comes home  twice  during   the course  of  the  shoot for   long
weekends; but one weekend he is  sick with  a  stomach flu,  and the next
Willem is  sick with  bronchitis. But  both times—as he feels every time  he
hears Willem walk  into the  apartment, calling his name—he must remind
himself that this is his life,  and that in this  life, Willem  is coming  home to
him. In  those moments, he feels that his dislike  of sex is  miserly, that he
must be misremembering how bad it  is,  and that even if  he isn’t,  he has
simply to try  harder, that he has to pity himself less. Toughen up, he scolds
himself as he kisses Willem goodbye at the end of  these weekends. Don’t
you dare ruin  this.  Don’t  you dare  complain about  what you  don’t  even
deserve.
   And  then  one night, less than  a month  before Willem  is  due to  come
home for  good, he wakes  and believes he is  in  the trailer  of  a  massive
semitruck, and that the bed beneath him is a dirtied blue quilt folded in half,
and that his every bone is being Mounced as the truck trundles its way down
the highway. Oh  no, he thinks,  oh no,  and he gets up and hurries  to the
piano and begins playing as many Bach partitas as he can remember, out of
sequence and too loud and too fast. He is reminded of a fable Brother Luke
had once told him during one of  their piano lessons of an old woman in  a
house who played her lute  faster and faster so the imps  outside her door
would dance themselves into a sludge. Brother Luke had told him this story

488
to illustrate a point—he  needed to pick up his  tempo—but he had always
liked the image, and sometimes, when he feels a memory encroaching, Must
a single one, easy to  control and  dismiss, he sings or  plays until  it  goes
away, the music a shield between him and it.
   He  was in his first  year of  law school when his life  began appearing to
him  as  memories.  He  would   be  doing  something  everyday—cooking
dinner, filing  books at the library,  frosting a cake at Batter, looking  up an
article for Harold—and suddenly, a scene would appear before him, a dumb
show meant only for him.  In those years, the memories were tableaux, not
narratives, and he would see a single one repeatedly for days: a diorama of
Brother Luke on top of  him, or one of  the counselors from the home, who
used to grab him as he walked by, or a client emptying his change from his
pants pockets and setting it in the dish on the nightstand that Brother Luke
had placed  there for  that  purpose. And   sometimes the  memories were
briefer and vaguer still: a client’s blue sock patterned with horse heads that
he had worn even in bed; the first meal in Philadelphia that Dr. Traylor had
ever given him (a burger; a paper sleeve of French fries); a peachy woolen
pillow in his room at Dr. Traylor’s house that he could never look at without
thinking  of  torn  flesh. When  these memories announced themselves, he
would find  himself disoriented: it always took him  a moment to remember
that these scenes were not only from  his  life,  but his  life  itself.  In those
days, he would let them interrupt him, and there would be times in which he
would come out of  his spell and would find  his hand still  wrapped around
the plastic  cone of  frosting  poised  over  the cookie  before him,   or still
holding the  book  half  on, half  off   the shelf.  It  was then  that he  began
comprehending how much of his life  he had learned to simply erase, even
days after it had happened, and also that somehow, somewhere, he had lost
that ability. He knew  it was the price of  enMoying life, that if he was to be
alert to the things  he now found  pleasure in, he would  have to accept its
cost as well. Because as assaultive as his memories were, his life coming
back to him in pieces, he knew he would endure them if it  meant he could
also have friends, if  he  kept being granted the ability   to take comfort  in
others.
   He thought of  it as a slight parting of worlds, in  which something buried
wisped up from the loamy, turned earth and hovered before him, waiting for
him to  recogni]e it  and claim it  as his own.  Their very  reappearance was
defiant: Here we are, they seemed to say to him.  Did  you really think  we

489
would let you  abandon us? Did you  really think  we wouldn’t come back?
Eventually, he was also made to recogni]e how much he had edited—edited
and reconfigured, refashioned into something easier to accept—from even
the past few years: the film  he had seen his Munior year of two detectives
coming to tell a student at college that the man who had hurt him had died
in prison hadn’t been a film at all—it had been his life, and he had been the
student, and he had stood there in the 4uad outside of Hood,  and the two
detectives were the people who had found him and arrested Dr. Traylor in
the field that  night, and they had taken him  to the hospital  and had made
sure Dr. Traylor had gone to prison, and they had come to find him  to tell
him in person that he had nothing to fear again. “Pretty fancy stuff,” one of
the detectives had said, looking around him at the beautiful  campus, at its
old brick  buildings  where  you  could go  and be  absolutely safe. “We’re
proud of you, Jude.” But  he had fu]]ed  this memory, he had changed it to
the detective simply  saying  “We’re  proud  of  you,”  and had  left  off  his
name, Must as he had left out the panic he now remembered he had vividly
felt despite their  news, the dread that later  someone would ask him  who
those people  were  that  he  had  been  talking  to,  the   almost  nauseous
wrongness of his past life intruding so physically on his present.
   Eventually  he had  learned how to  manage the memories. He  couldn’t
stop them—after they had begun, they had never ended—but he had grown
more adept at anticipating their arrival. He became able to diagnose it, that
moment or day in which he could tell that something was going to visit him,
and he would have to figure out how it wanted to be addressed: Did it want
confrontation, or soothing, or  simply attention? He would  determine what
sort of hospitality  it wanted, and then he would  determine how to make it
leave, to retreat back to that other place.
   A  small memory he could contain, but as the days go by and he waits for
Willem,  he recogni]es  that this  is a  long eel  of  a memory, slippery  and
uncatchable, and it whipsaws its way through him, its tail  slapping against
his organs so that he feels the memory as something alive and wounding,
feels its meaty, powerful smack against his intestines, his heart, his lungs.
Sometimes they were like   this, and  these were the hardest to  lasso and
corral, and  with  every  day it   seems to grow  inside  him,  until  he  feels
himself stuffed not with blood and muscle and water and bone but with the
memory itself,  expanding balloon-like to  inflate  his very  fingertips. After
Caleb, he had reali]ed that  there were some memories he was simply not

490
going to be able to control, and so his only recourse was to wait until  they
had tired   themselves out,  until   they  swam back  into   the  dark  of  his
subconscious and left him alone again.
   And  so he waits, letting the memory—the nearly two weeks he had spent
in trucks, trying to get from Montana to Boston—occupy him, as if his very
mind, his body, is a motel, and this memory his sole guest. His challenge in
this period is to fulfill   his promise to Willem,  to not cut himself, and so he
creates a strict and consuming schedule for the hours between midnight and
four a.m., which  are the most dangerous. On Saturday he makes a list of
what he will do each night for the next few weeks, rotating swimming with
cooking and piano-playing  and baking and work  at Richard’s and sorting
through all of  his and Willem’s old  clothes and pruning the bookcases and
resewing the loose buttons on Willem’s shirt that he was going to have Mrs.
=hou do  but  is perfectly  capable of  doing  himself  and cleaning out  the
detritus that has accumulated in the  drawer near the stove: twist  ties and
sticky rubber  bands and safety pins and  matchbooks. He makes pints of
chicken stock and ground-lamb meatballs for  Willem’s  return and free]es
them, and bakes loaves of  bread for Richard  to take  to the  food kitchen
where they are both on the board and whose finances he helps administer.
After feeding the starter, he sits at the table and reads novels, old favorites
of  his, the  words and  plots  and characters comforting  and lived-in   and
unchanged. He wishes he had a  pet—a dumb, grateful  dog, panting  and
smiling; a frigid  cat, glaring Mudgmentally at him through her slitted orange
eyes—some other breathing thing in the apartment that he could speak to,
the sound of whose soft padding footsteps would bring him back to himself.
He works all night, and Must before he drops off to sleep, he cuts himself—
once on the left arm, once on the right—and when he wakes, he is tired but
proud of himself for making it through intact.
   But  then it is two  weeks before Willem is to come home, and Must as the
memory is fading, checking out of him until  the next time it comes to visit,
the hyenas return. Or perhaps return is the wrong word, because once Caleb
introduced them into  his  life,  they  have never left.  Now,  however, they
don’t chase him, because they know they  don’t need to:  his life  is a vast
savanna, and he is surrounded by  them. They  lie  splayed in  the  yellow
grass, drape themselves la]ily  over  the  baobab trees’ low  branches that
spread from their  trunks  like  tentacles, and stare at him  with  their  keen
yellow eyes. They are always there, and after he and Willem began having

491
sex, they multiplied, and on bad days, or on days when he was particularly
dreading it, they multiply  further. On those days, he can feel their whiskers
twitch as he moves slowly through their territory, he can feel their careless
derision: he knows he is theirs, and they know it, too.
   And   although he  craves the  vacations  from  sex  that Willem’s   work
provides him, he knows  too that he ought not  to, for  the reentry into  that
world is  always difficult;   it had been that way  when he was a child,  too,
when the only thing worse than the rhythms of sex had been readMusting to
the rhythms of sex. “I  can’t wait to come home and see you,” Willem says
when they next  speak, and although there is  nothing leering  in  his tone,
although he hasn’t mentioned sex at all, he knows from past experience that
Willem will  want to  have it the night of his return, and that he will  want to
have it more times than usual for the remainder of his first week back home,
and that he will especially want to  have it because both of them had taken
turns being sick on his  two furloughs and so nothing  had happened either
time.
   “Me  too,” he says.
   “How’s   the cutting?”  Willem  asks, lightly,  as if he’s  asking about how
Julia’s maple trees are faring, or how the weather is. He always asks this at
the end of  their  conversations, as if   the subMect is something he’s only
mildly interested in and is inquiring about to be polite.
   “Fine,”  he says, as he always does. “Only twice this week,” he adds, and
this is true.
   “Good,  Judy,” Willem says. “Thank god. I know it’s  hard. But I’m  proud
of  you.”  He  always  sounds so  relieved  in  these moments, as  if  he  is
expecting to hear—which he probably is—some other answer entirely: Not
well, Willem. I cut  myself so much last night that my arm fell off  entirely. I
don’t want you to be surprised when you see me. He feels a mix of genuine
pride, then,  both that  Willem   should trust  him  so  much and  that he  is
actually getting to tell  him the truth,  and an enervating, bone-deep sorrow,
that Willem should have to ask him at all, that this should be something that
they are actually  proud  of.  Other  people are proud  of  their  boyfriends’
talents or looks or athleticism;  Willem,  however, gets to be proud that his
boyfriend has managed to pass another night without slicing himself with a
ra]or.
   And  then, finally,  there  comes an evening in  which he  knows that his
efforts will  not satisfy him any longer: he needs to cut himself, extensively

492
and severely. The hyenas are beginning to make little  howls,  sharp yelps
that seem to come from some other creature within them, and he knows that
they will  be quieted only by his pain. He considers what to do: Willem will
be home in a  week. If  he cuts himself  now, the cuts won’t  heal  properly
before he returns, and Willem will be angry. But if he doesn’t do something
—then he doesn’t know. He has to, he has to. He has waited too  long, he
reali]es;  he  has  thought  he  could   see himself   through;  he  has  been
unrealistic.
   He  gets up from  bed and walks  through the empty apartment, into  the
quiet kitchen. The night’s schedule—cookies for Harold; organi]e Willem’s
sweaters; Richard’s studio—glows whitely  from  the  counter, ignored but
beckoning, pleading to be heeded, the salvation it  offers  as flimsy  as the
paper it’s printed  on. For a  moment he stands, unable to move, and then
slowly, reluctantly, he walks to the door above the staircase and unbolts it,
and then, after another moment’s pause, swings it open.
   He hasn’t opened this door since the night with Caleb, and now he leans
into its mouth, looking down into its black, clutching  its frame as he had on
that night, wondering if  he can bring  himself to  do it.  He knows this will
appease the hyenas. But  there  is  something so  degrading  about it,   so
extreme, so sick, that he knows that if he were to do it, he will have crossed
some line, that  he will,   in  fact, have become someone who needs to  be
hospitali]ed. Finally,  finally, he unsticks himself from  the frame, his hands
shaking, and slams the  door shut,  slams the bolt  back into  its  slot,  and
stumps away from it.
   At  work  the next day, he goes downstairs with  another of the partners,
SanMay, and a client so the client can smoke. They have a few clients who
smoke, and when they go downstairs, he goes with them, and they continue
their meeting on the sidewalk. Lucien  had a theory that smokers are most
comfortable, and relaxed, while smoking, and therefore easier to manipulate
in the moment, and although he had laughed when Lucien had told him that,
he knows he’s probably correct.
   He is  in his wheelchair that day because his feet are throbbing, although
he hates to  have the  clients  see him  so  impaired. “Believe   me, Jude,”
Lucien had said when he  had worried aloud  about this to  him years ago,
“the  clients think  you’re  the  same ball-crushing  asshole whether you’re
sitting down or standing up, so for god’s sake, stay in your chair.” Outside it
is cold and dry, which makes his feet hurt a little less for some reason, and

493
as the three of them talk, he finds himself staring, hypnoti]ed,  at the small
orange flame  at  the  tip  of  the  client’s  cigarette,  which  winks  at  him,
growing duller and brighter, as the client exhales and inhales. Suddenly, he
knows what  he  is  going  to  do,  but  that  revelation  is  followed  almost
instantly by  a blunt  punch to  his abdomen, because he knows that he  is
going to betray Willem,  and  not only  is he going  to betray him  but he is
going to lie to him as well.
   That day  is a Friday, and as he drives to Andy’s, he works out  his plan,
excited and relieved  to have  a solution.  Andy  is in  one  of  his cheerful,
combative moods, and he allows  himself to  be distracted by  him, by  his
brisk energy. Somewhere along the way, he and Andy have begun speaking
of his legs the way one would of a troublesome and wayward relative who
is nonetheless impossible to abandon and in need of constant care. “The old
bastards,” Andy calls them, and the first time he did, he had begun laughing
at the accuracy of  the nickname, with  its  suggestion of exasperation that
always threatened to overshadow the underlying and reluctant fondness.
   “How’re   the old bastards?” Andy asks him now, and he smiles and says,
“La]y  and sucking up all my resources, as usual.”
   But  his mind is also full  of  what he is about to do, and when Andy asks
him, “And  what does your better half have to say for himself  these days?”
he snaps at him: “What do you mean by that?” and Andy stops and looks at
him, curiously. “Nothing,”   he says. “I  Must wanted to know how Willem’s
doing.”
   Willem, he thinks, and simply  hearing his name said aloud fills him with
anguish. “He’s great,” he says, quietly.
   At  the end of the appointment, as always, Andy examines his arms, and
this time,  as he has for  the last  few times,  grunts his  approval. “You’ve
really cut back,” he says. “No pun intended.”
   “You  know  me—always trying  to  better myself,”  he says, keeping his
tone Mocular, but Andy looks him in the eyes. “I know,”  he says, softly. “I
know it must be hard, Jude. But I’m glad, I really am.”
   Over  dinner, Andy complains about his brother’s  new boyfriend, whom
he hates. “Andy,” he tells him, “you can’t hate all of Beckett’s boyfriends.”
   “I  know, I  know,”  Andy says. “It’s  Must that he’s such a lightweight, and
Beckett could do  so much better. I  did  tell you  he pronounced Proust as
Prowst, right?”

494
   “Several times,”  he says, smiling to himself. He had met this new reviled
boyfriend of  Beckett’s—a sweet, Movial aspiring landscape architect—at a
dinner party  at Andy’s  three months ago. “But   Andy—I  thought  he was
nice. And he loves Beckett. And anyway, are you really going to sit around
having conversations about Proust with him?”
   Andy  sighs. “You sound like Jane,” he says, grouchily.
   “Well,”   he says, smiling  again. “Maybe  you should listen  to Jane.” He
laughs, then, feeling lighter than he has in  weeks, and not Must because of
Andy’s  sulky  expression. “There are  worse crimes  than not  being  fully
conversant with Swann’s Way, you know.”
   As he drives home, he thinks of his plan, but then reali]es he will have to
wait, because he is going to claim that he has burned himself in a cooking
accident, and if something goes wrong and he has to see Andy, Andy will
ask him why  he was cooking  on the same night they  were eating dinner.
Tomorrow, then, he thinks; I’ll do it tomorrow. That way, he can write an e-
mail to Willem tonight in  which he’ll  mention that he’s going to try to make
the fried   plantains JB  likes:   a  semi-spontaneous decision that  will   go
terribly wrong.
   You do know that  this is how mentally  ill  people make their plans, says
the dry and belittling  voice  inside him. You do know that  this planning  is
something only a sick person would do.
   Stop it, he tells it. Stop it. The fact that I  know this is sick means I’m not.
At that, the voice hoots with  laughter: at his defensiveness, at his six-year-
old’s illogic,   at his  revulsion  for  the word  “sick,”   his fear  that it   might
attach itself to him. But even the voice, its mocking, swaggering distaste for
him, isn’t enough to stop him.
   The next evening he changes into a short-sleeve T-shirt, one of Willem’s,
and goes to the kitchen. He arranges everything he needs: the olive oil;  a
long wooden match. He places his left forearm in the sink, as if it’s a bird to
be plucked, and chooses an area a few inches above where his palm begins,
before taking the paper towel he’s wet with oil and rubbing it  onto his skin
in  an apricot-si]ed  circle.  He  stares for  a few  seconds at  the gleaming
grease stain, and then he takes a breath and strikes the match against the
side of its box and holds the flame to his skin until he catches on fire.
   The pain is—what is the pain? Ever since the inMury, there has not been a
single day in which  he is not  in some sort of  pain. Sometimes the pain is
infrequent, or mild, or  intermittent. But it  is always there. “You have to be

495
careful,” Andy  is  always telling  him.  “You’ve  gotten so  inured to  it  that
you’ve lost the ability to  recogni]e when it’s a sign of something worse. So
even if it’s only a five or a six, if it looks like  this”—they had been speaking
about one of the wounds on his legs around which he had noticed that the
skin was turning  a  poisonous blackish gray, the  color of  rot—“then  you
have to imagine that for most  people it would  be a nine or a ten, and you
have to, have to come see me. Okay?”
   But  this  pain is a  pain he has not  felt in  decades, and he screams and
screams. Voices, faces, scraps of memories, odd associations whir through
his mind: the smell of smoking olive oil leads him to a memory of a meal of
roasted funghi he and Willem   had had in  Perugia, which  leads him to  a
Tintoretto exhibit  that  he and Malcolm  had  seen in their  twenties at  the
Frick, which  leads him to a boy in the home everyone called Frick, but he
never knew why, as the boy’s name was Jed, which leads him to the nights
in the  barn, which  leads him to  a bale  of hay  in  an empty, fog-smeared
meadow outside Sonoma against which he and Brother Luke had once had
sex, which leads him to, and to, and to,  and to, and to. He smells burning
meat, and he breaks out of his trance and looks wildly at the stove, as if he
has left something there, a slab of steak seething to itself in a pan, but there
is nothing,  and he reali]es  he is  smelling  himself, his  own  arm cooking
beneath him, and this makes him turn  on the faucet at  last and the water
splashing against the burn, the oily smoke rising from it, makes him scream
again. And then he is reaching, again wildly, with his right arm, his left still
lying useless in the sink, an amputation in a kidney-shaped metal bowl, and
he is grabbing the container of sea salt from the cupboard above the stove,
and he is sobbing, rubbing  a handful of  the sharp-edged crystals into the
burn, which reactivates the pain into something whiter than white, and it is
as if he is staring into the sun and he is blinded.
   When he wakes, he is on the floor, his head against the cupboard beneath
the sink. His limbs are Merking; he is feverish, but he is cold, and he presses
himself against the cupboard as if it is something soft, as if it will  consume
him. Behind his closed eyelids he sees the hyenas, licking their snouts as if
they have literally  fed  upon him.  Happy? he asks them. Are  you happy?
They cannot answer, of course, but they are da]ed and satiated; he can see
their vigilance waning, their large eyes shutting contentedly.
   The next day he has a fever. It takes him an hour to get from the kitchen
to his bed; his feet are too sore, and he cannot pull himself on his arms. He

496
doesn’t sleep so  much  as move  in  and  out  of  consciousness, the pain
sloshing through him  like  a  tide, sometimes receding enough to  let  him
wake, sometimes consuming him beneath a grayed, filthy wave. Late  that
night he rouses himself enough to look  at his  arm, where there is a  large
crisped circle, black and venomous, as if it is a piece of land where he has
been practicing a terrifying   occult ritual:  witch-burning,  perhaps. Animal
sacrifice. A summoning of spirits. It looks not like skin at all (and indeed, it
no longer is) but like something that never was skin: like wood, like  paper,
like tarmac, all burned to ash.
   By  Monday, he knows it will  become infected. At lunchtime  he changes
the bandage he had applied the night before, and as he eases it off, his skin
tears as well, and he stuffs  his pocket square into his  mouth so he won’t
scream out  loud.  But  things are  falling   out  of  his  arm, clots  with   the
consistency of blood but  the color of  coal, and he sits on  the floor  of his
bathroom, rocking himself  back and forth,  his stomach heaving forth  old
food and acids, his arm heaving forth its own disease, its own excretia.
   The next day the pain is worse, and he leaves work early to go see Andy.
“My  god,” Andy  says, seeing the wound, and for once, he is silent, utterly,
which terrifies him.
   “Can  you  fix  it?”  he  whispers, because until that  point,  he had never
thought himself capable of hurting himself in  a way that couldn’t be fixed.
He has,  suddenly, a  vision  of   Andy  telling   him  he will    lose the  arm
altogether, and the next thing he thinks is: What will I tell Willem?
   But  “Yes,” Andy says. “I’ll   do what I can, and then you need to go to the
hospital. Lie back.”  He does, and lets Andy  irrigate  the wound and clean
and dress it, lets Andy apologi]e to him when he cries out.
   He  is there for  an  hour, and when he  is finally   able to sit—Andy   has
given him a shot to numb the area—the two of them are silent.
   “Are   you going  to tell  me  how you  got a  third-degree burn in  such a
perfect circle?”   Andy   asks him  at  last,  and  he  ignores  Andy’s  chilly
sarcasm, and instead recites to him his  prepared story: the plantains,  the
grease fire.
   Then  there is  another  silence, this  one different  in   a way  he  cannot
explain but does not like. And then Andy says, very quietly, “You’re  lying,
Jude.”
   “What  do you mean?” he asks, his throat suddenly dry despite the orange
Muice he has been drinking.

497
   “You’re  lying,”  Andy  repeats, still in that same quiet voice, and he slides
off  the examining  table, the  bottle of  Muice slipping from  his  grasp and
shattering on the floor, and moves for the door.
   “Stop,”  Andy  says, and he is cold,  and furious. “Jude, you  fucking  tell
me now. What did you do?”
   “I  told you,”  he says, “I told you.”
   “No,”   Andy  says. “You tell  me what you did,  Jude. You say the words.
Say them. I want to hear you say them.”
   “I   told  you,”  he  shouts, and he  feels  so terrible,  his  brain  thumping
against his skull, his feet thrust full of  smoldering iron ingots, his arm with
its simmering cauldron burned into it. “Let me go, Andy. Let me go.”
   “No,”   Andy  says, and he too is shouting. “Jude, you—you—” He stops,
and he stops  as well,  and  they both  wait  to  hear  what Andy   will  say.
“You’re sick,  Jude,” he says, in a low, frantic voice. “You’re  cra]y.  This is
cra]y behavior. This is behavior that could and should get you locked away
for years. You’re sick, you’re sick and you’re cra]y and you need help.”
   “Don’t   you dare call me cra]y,”   he yells, “don’t  you dare. I’m  not,  I’m
not.”
   But  Andy  ignores him.  “Willem   gets back on  Friday, right?”  he  asks,
although he knows the answer already. “You have one week from tonight to
tell him, Jude. One week. And after that, I’m telling him myself.”
   “You  can’t legally do that, Andy,”  he shouts, and everything spins before
him. “I’ll  sue you for so much that you won’t even—”
   “Better  check your recent case law, counselor,” Andy hisses back at him.
“Rodriguez  versus  Mehta.  Two   years  ago.  If    a  patient  who’s   been
involuntarily  committed  attempts  serious self-inMury again, the  patient’s
doctor has the right—no, the obligation—to inform  the patient’s partner or
next of kin, whether that patient has fucking given consent or not.”
   He is struck silent then, reeling from pain and fear and the shock of what
Andy has Must told him. The two of them are still standing in the examining
room, that room he has visited so many, so many times, but he can feel his
legs pleating beneath him, can feel  the misery overtake him,  can feel his
anger ebb. “Andy,”  he says, and he can hear the beg in his voice, “please
don’t tell  him. Please don’t. If you tell  him, he’ll  leave me.” As  he says it,
he knows it is true. He doesn’t know why Willem  will  leave him—whether
it will  be because of what he has done or because he has lied about it—but
he knows he is  correct. Willem  will  leave him,  even though he has done

498
what he has done so he can keep having sex, because if he stops having sex,
he knows Willem will leave him anyway.
   “Not   this  time,  Jude,”  says Andy,  and although  he isn’t   yelling  any
longer, his voice  is grim  and determined. “I’m   not  covering for  you this
time. You have one week.”
   “It’s  not his business, though,” he says, desperately. “It’s my own.”
   “That’s  the thing,  though, Jude,” Andy  says. “It  is  his business. That’s
what being in a goddamned relationship is—don’t you understand that yet?
Don’t  you get that  you Must can’t do what you  want? Don’t  you  get that
when you hurt yourself, you’re hurting him as well?”
   “No,”   he says, shaking his head, gripping the side of the examining table
with his  right hand to  try to  remain upright. “No.  I  do this to  myself so I
won’t hurt him. I’m doing it to spare him.”
   “No,”   Andy says. “If  you ruin  this, Jude—if you keep lying  to someone
who loves you, who really loves you, who has only ever wanted to see you
exactly as you are—then you will   only have yourself  to blame. It  will  be
your fault. And it’ll  be your fault not because of who you are or what’s been
done to you or the diseases you have or what you think you look  like, but
because of how you behave, because you won’t trust Willem enough to talk
to him honestly, to extend to him the same sort of generosity and faith that
he has always, always extended to you. I  know  you think  you’re  sparing
him, but you’re not. You’re  selfish. You’re selfish and you’re stubborn and
you’re proud and you’re  going to ruin  the best thing that has happened to
you. Don’t you understand that?”
   He is speechless for the second time that evening, and it is only when he
begins, finally, to fall,  so tired  is he, that Andy reaches out and grabs him
around his waist and the conversation ends.
   He  spends the next  three nights  in the  hospital, at  Andy’s  insistence.
During the day, he goes to work, and then he comes back in the evening and
Andy readmits him. There are two plastic bags dangling above him, one for
each arm. One, he knows, has only glucose in it. The second has something
else, something that makes the pain furry and gentle and that makes sleep
something inky and still,  like the dark blue skies in  a Japanese woodblock
print of  winter,  all snow  and a silent traveler  wearing a woven-straw  hat
beneath.
   It  is Friday. He returns home. Willem  will  be arriving  at around ten that
night,  and although  Mrs.  =hou  has already cleaned, he  wants  to make

499
certain there is no evidence, that he has hidden every clue, although without
context, the clues—salt, matches, olive oil, paper towels—are not clues at
all, they are symbols of  their life  together, they are things they both reach
for daily.
   He  still   hasn’t  decided what  he will   do.  He  has until   the following
Sunday—he has begged nine extra days from Andy, has convinced him that
because of the holidays, because they are driving to Boston next Wednesday
for  Thanksgiving,   that  he  needs  the  time—to   either  tell   Willem,   or
(although he doesn’t say this) to convince Andy  to change his mind. Both
scenarios seem equally impossible. But  he  will   try  anyway. One of  the
problems with having slept so much these past few nights is that he has had
very little  time to think  about how he can negotiate this situation. He feels
he has become a spectacle to himself, with all the beings who inhabit him—
the ferret-like  creature; the hyenas; the voices—watching  to see what he
will do, so they can Mudge him and scoff at him and tell him he’s wrong.
   He  sits down  on the living-room   sofa to  wait, and when  he opens his
eyes, Willem is sitting next to him, smiling at him and saying his name, and
he puts  his arms  around him,  careful  not  to  let  his  left  arm exert  any
pressure, and for that one moment, everything  seems both possible—and
indescribably difficult.
   How could I  go on without this? he asks himself.
   And  then: What am I going to do?
   Nine days, the voice inside him nags. Nine days. But he ignores it.
   “Willem,”    he  says aloud,  from  within   the huddle  of  Willem’s   arms.
“You’re  home, you’re  home.”  He  gives  a long  exhalation of  air;  hopes
Willem doesn’t hear its shudder. “Willem,”  he says again and again, letting
his name fill  his  mouth. “Willem,   Willem—you  don’t  know  how much  I
missed you.”


   The best part about going away is coming home. Who said that? Not him,
but  it  might   as well   have  been, he  thinks   as he  moves  through  the
apartment. It is noon: a Tuesday, and tomorrow they will drive to Boston.
   If  you love home—and even if you don’t—there is nothing quite as co]y,
as comfortable, as delightful, as that first  week back. That week, even the
things that would irritate you—the alarm waahing from some car at three in
the morning; the pigeons who come to clutter and cluck on the windowsill

500
behind your bed when you’re trying to sleep in—seem instead reminders of
your own permanence, of how life,  your life,  will  always graciously allow
you to step back inside of it, no matter how far you have gone away from it
or how long you have left it.
   Also  that week, the things you like anyway seem, in their very existence,
to be worthy  of  celebration: the candied-walnut vendor  on Crosby Street
who always returns your  wave as you  Mog past him; the falafel sandwich
with extra pickled  radish from the truck down  the block that you woke  up
craving one night  in  London;  the  apartment itself, with   its sunlight  that
lopes from one end to the other in the course of a day, with your things and
food and bed and shower and smells.
   And,  of course, there is the person you come back to: his face and body
and voice and scent and touch, his way of waiting until you finish whatever
you’re saying, no matter how lengthy, before he speaks, the way his smile
moves so slowly   across his face  that it  reminds  you  of  moonrise, how
clearly he has missed you and how clearly  happy he is to have you  back.
Then there are the things, if you are particularly lucky, that this person has
done for you  while you’re  away: how  in  the pantry, in the free]er,  in  the
refrigerator will  be all the food you like to eat, the scotch you like to drink.
There will  be  the sweater you thought  you  lost the previous  year at  the
theater, clean and folded and back on its shelf. There will be the shirt with
its dangling buttons, but the buttons will be sewn back in place. There will
be your mail stacked on one side of his desk; there will be a contract for an
advertising campaign you’re going to do in  Germany for an Austrian beer,
with his notes in the margin to discuss with your lawyer. And  there will  be
no mention of it, and you will  know that it was done with genuine pleasure,
and you will  know  that part  of the reason—a small part, but  a part—you
love being in  this apartment and in  this relationship  is because this other
person is always making a home for you, and that when you tell him this, he
won’t  be offended but pleased, and you’ll  be  glad, because you meant it
with  gratitude. And  in  these moments—almost a week back  home—you
will  wonder why you leave so often, and you will wonder whether, after the
next year’s  obligations  are fulfilled,   you  ought  not Must stay here for  a
period, where you belong.
   But  you will also know—as he knows—that part of your constant leaving
is reactive. After his relationship with  Jude was made public, while he and
Kit   and Emil   were  waiting   to  see  what  would  happen  next,  he  had

501
experienced that same insecurity that had visited  him  as a younger man:
What if  he never worked again? What if  this was it? And  although things
had, he could now see, continued with almost no discernible hitch at all, it
had taken him a year to be reassured that his circumstances hadn’t changed,
that he was  still  as he had  been, desirable to some directors  and not to
others (“Bullshit,”   Kit   had  said, and he  was  grateful for   him;  “anyone
would want to work with  you”), and at any rate, the same actor, no better or
worse, that he had been before.
   But  if he was allowed to be the same actor, he was not allowed to be the
same person, and in  the  months after  he was  declared gay—and never
refuted it;  he  didn’t  have a publicist   to issue these sorts of  denials  and
avowals—he found himself in  possession of more identities than he’d had
in a  very  long  time. For  much  of  his adult  life,  he  had been placed in
circumstances that required the  shedding of  selves: no  longer was  he a
brother; no longer was he a son. But with  a single revelation, he had now
become a gay man; a  gay actor; a  high-profile  gay actor; a  high-profile,
nonparticipating gay actor; and, finally,  a high-profile traitorous  gay actor.
A year or so ago he had gone to dinner with  a director named Max whom
he’d known for  many years, and over dinner Max  had tried to  get him  to
give a speech at a gala dinner benefiting a gay-rights organi]ation at which
he would  announce himself   as gay. Willem   had  always supported  this
organi]ation, and he told Max that although he would be pleased to present
an award or sponsor a table—as he had every year for the past decade—he
wouldn’t come out,  because he didn’t believe there was anything to come
out of: he wasn’t gay.
   “Willem,”    Max  said, “you’re   in  a relationship,  a serious relationship,
with a man. That is the very definition of gay.”
   “I’m   not in  a relationship with a man,”  he said, hearing how absurd the
words were, “I’m in a relationship with Jude.”
   “Oh  my god,” Max muttered.
   He’d  sighed. Max was sixteen years older than he; he had come of age in
a time when  identity  politics  were your  very identity,  and he understood
Max’s—and the other people who pecked at and pleaded with him to come
out, and then accused him of self-loathing,  and cowardice, and hypocrisy,
and denial, when he didn’t—arguments; he understood that he had come to
represent something he had never asked to represent; he understood that

502
whether he wanted this representation or not was almost incidental. But he
still couldn’t do it.
   Jude had told him that he and Caleb had told no one in their  lives about
the other, and although Jude’s secretiveness had been motivated by shame
(and Caleb’s, Willem could only hope, by at least some small glint of guilt),
he too felt that his relationship with Jude existed to no one but themselves:
it seemed something sacred, and fought-for, and unique to them. Of course,
this was ridiculous, but it was the way he felt—to be an actor in his position
was to be, in many ways, a possession, to be fought over and argued about
and critici]ed by  anyone who wanted to say something, anything, about his
abilities or appearance or performance. But his relationship was different: in
it,  he played a  role  for  one other  person, and that person was  his only
audience, and no one else ever saw it, no matter  how much they  thought
they might.
   His  relationship also felt sacred because he had Must recently—in the last
six months or so—felt he had gotten the rhythm of it. The person he thought
he knew had turned out to be, in some ways, not the person before him, and
it had taken him time to figure out how many facets he had yet to see: it was
as if the shape he had all along thought  was a pentagram was in reality a
dodecahedron, many sided and many fractaled and much more complicated
to  measure. Despite this,  he  had  never considered  leaving:  he  stayed,
unquestioningly, out of love,  out of  loyalty, out  of curiosity.  But it  hadn’t
been easy. In truth, it had been at times aggressively difficult, and in some
ways remained so. When he had promised himself that he wouldn’t  try to
repair Jude, he had forgotten  that to  solve someone is  to want  to repair
them: to diagnose a problem and then not try to fix that problem seemed not
only neglectful but immoral.
   The primary  issue was sex: their sexual life, and Jude’s attitude about it.
Toward the end of  the ten-month period  in  which he  and Jude had been
together and he had been waiting for him to be ready (the longest sustained
period of celibacy he had endured since he was fifteen, and which  he had
accomplished as partly a challenge to himself, the way other people stopped
eating bread or pasta because their boyfriends or  girlfriends  had stopped
eating them as well), he had begun to seriously worry about where this was
all  going,  and about  whether sex  was something  Jude was  simply  not
capable of. Somehow he knew, and had always known, that Jude had been
abused, that something awful (maybe several things awful) had happened to

503
him, but to  his shame, he was unable to find  the words to discuss it  with
him. He told  himself  that even if  he could find  the words,  Jude wouldn’t
talk about it until he was ready, but the truth, Willem knew, was that he was
too much of a coward, and that cowardice was really the only reason for his
inaction. But then he had come home from Texas, and they’d had sex after
all, and he  had been relieved, and relieved too  that he  had enMoyed it as
much as he had, that there had been nothing strained or unnatural about it,
and when it turned out that Jude was much more sexually dextrous than he
had assumed he would be, he allowed himself to be relieved a third  time.
He  couldn’t   bring  himself,   however,  to  determine  why  Jude  was  so
experienced: Had Richard been right, and had Jude been leading some sort
of double life  all this time? It  seemed too tidy an explanation. And yet the
alternative—that this was knowledge Jude had accumulated before they had
met, which  meant these would have been lessons learned in childhood—
was overwhelming to him.  And  so, to his great guilt,  he said nothing. He
chose to believe the theory that made his life less complicated.
   One night,  though, he’d had a dream that he and Jude had Must had sex
(which they had) and that Jude was next to him  and crying, trying  to stay
silent and failing,   and he knew, even  in the  dream, why  he was crying:
because he hated what he was doing; he hated what Willem  was making
him do. The next night he had asked Jude, outright: Do you like this? And
he had waited, not knowing what the answer would be, until Jude had said
yes, and then he had been relieved yet again: that the fiction could continue,
that their equilibrium   would remain unchanged, that he wouldn’t   have to
have a conversation that he didn’t know how to begin, much less lead. He
had an image of a  little  boat, a dinghy, rocking  wildly  on  the waves, but
then righting  itself again  and sailing placidly  on,  even though the waters
beneath it were black  and filled  with  monsters and floes of  seaweed that
threatened with  every  current  to  pull  the  poor  small  boat  beneath the
ocean’s surface, where it would glug out of sight and be lost.
   But  every so often, too sporadically and randomly to  track, there would
be moments when he would see Jude’s face as he pushed into him, or, after,
would feel his silence, so black and total that it was almost gaseous, and he
would know that Jude had lied to him: that he had asked him a question to
which  only  one  answer was  acceptable, and Jude  had  given  him  that
answer, but that he hadn’t meant it. And then he would argue with himself,

504
trying to Mustify his behavior, and reproving himself for it as well. But when
he was being very honest, he knew there was a problem.
   Though he couldn’t  quite articulate what the problem was: after all, Jude
always seemed to want to have sex whenever he did. (Though wasn’t that
suspicious in itself?) But he had never met anyone who was so opposed to
foreplay, who  didn’t  want to  even discuss sex, who  never said  the very
word. “This  is embarrassing, Willem,”  Jude would say whenever he tried.
“Let’s  Must do it.” He felt,  often,  as if  their sessions together were being
timed, and that  his Mob was to perform  as quickly  and thoroughly  as he
could and then never talk about it. He was less concerned with Jude’s lack
of  erections  than   he  was  with   the   curious  sensation  he  sometimes
experienced—too indefinable  and  contradictory   to  even  name  it  with
language—that with every  encounter they had, he was drawing  closer to
Jude, even as Jude pulled further from him. Jude said all the right things; he
made all the right sounds; he was affectionate and willing: but still, Willem
knew something, something was wrong.  He found  it  bewildering;  people
had always enMoyed having sex with him—so what was  happening here?
Perversely, it made him want to have it more, if only so he could find some
answers, even if he also dreaded them.
   And  in the same way he knew there was a problem with their sex life, he
also knew—knew without  knowing,  without  ever being told—that  Jude’s
cutting was  related to  the sex. This  reali]ation  would  always  make him
shiver, as  would   his  old,  careworn  way  of   excusing himself—Willem
Ragnarsson, what do you think you’re doing? You’re too dumb to figure this
out—from  further exploration,  from plunging  an arm into  the snake- and
centipede-squirming muck of  Jude’s past to  find  that  many-paged book,
sheathed in yellowed plastic, that would explain someone he had thought he
had fundamentally understood. And then he would think how none of them
—not he, not Malcolm, not JB or Richard or even Harold—had been brave
enough to  try.  They  had found  other  reasons to keep  themselves from
having to  dirty   their  hands. Andy  was  the only  person  who  could say
otherwise.
   And  yet it was easy for him to pretend, to ignore what he knew, because
most of the time, pretending was easy: because they were friends, because
they liked  being around each other, because he loved Jude, because they
had a life together, because he was attracted to him, because he desired him.
But there was the Jude he knew in the daylight,  and even in the dusk and

505
dawn, and then there was the Jude who possessed his friend for a few hours
each night, and that Jude, he sometimes feared, was the real Jude: the one
who haunted their apartment alone, the one whom he had watched draw the
ra]or so slowly  down his arm, his eyes wide with agony, the one whom he
could never reach, no matter how  many reassurances he made, no matter
how many threats he levied. It sometimes seemed as if it was that Jude who
truly directed their relationship, and when he was present, no one, not even
Willem, could dispel him. And still,  he remained stubborn: he would banish
him, through the intensity and the force and the determination of  his love.
He knew  this was childish,  but  all  stubborn acts are childish  acts. Here,
stubbornness was his only weapon. Patience; stubbornness; love: he had to
believe these would  be  enough. He  had to  believe  that  they  would  be
stronger than  any  habit   of  Jude’s,  no  matter  how  long   or  diligently
practiced.
   Sometimes he was given progress reports of sorts from Andy and Harold,
both of   whom  thanked him   whenever they  saw  him,  which  he  found
unnecessary but reassuring, because it meant that the changes he thought he
saw  in    Jude—a  heightened   sense  of   demonstrativeness;  a  certain
diminishment  of   physical   self-consciousness—weren’t  things  he   was
imagining  after  all.  But  he  also felt   keenly alone,  alone with   his  new
suspicions about Jude and  the depths of  his  difficulties,   alone with  the
knowledge that  he  was  unable or  unwilling    to  properly  address those
difficulties.  A  few  times he had been very  close to contacting Andy  and
asking him  what  to  do,  asking  him  whether  he  was making  the  right
decisions. But he hadn’t.
   Instead, he  allowed his  native optimism  to  obscure his fears, to  make
their relationship into something essentially Moyous and sunny. Often he was
struck by the sensation—which he had experienced at Lispenard Street as
well—that  they  were playing   house, that he  was  living  some  boyhood
fantasy of running  away from the  world and its  rules with  his best friend
and living  in some unsuitable but perfectly  commodious structure (a train
car; a tree  house) that wasn’t  meant to  be a home  but had become one
because of its occupants’ shared conviction to make it so. Mr. Irvine hadn’t
been entirely wrong, he  would think  on  those days when life  felt like  an
extended slumber party, one they’d been having for almost three decades,
one that  gave him  the  thrilling   feeling  that they  had gotten  away with
something large, something they were meant to have abandoned long ago:

506
you went  to parties and when  someone said something ridiculous, you’d
look across the table, and he’d look back at  you, expressionless, with Must
the barest hint of a raised eyebrow, and you’d have to hurriedly drink some
water to keep from spewing out  your mouthful  of food  with  laughter, and
then back at your apartment—your ridiculously beautiful apartment, which
you both appreciated an almost embarrassing amount, for reasons you never
had to  explain  to  the  other—you would   recap the  entire awful   dinner,
laughing so much that you began to equate happiness with pain. Or you got
to  discuss your  problems every  night  with   someone smarter and more
thoughtful than you,  or talk  about the continued awe and discomfort  you
both felt,  all  these years later, about having money, absurd, comic-book-
villain  money, or drive up to  his parents’ house, one of you plugging  into
the car’s  stereo an outlandish playlist,  with   which  you would  both  sing
along, loudly, being extravagantly silly as adults the way you never were as
children. As  you got  older, you  reali]ed  that really,  there were very  few
people you truly wanted to  be around for more than a few  days at a time,
and yet here you were with  someone you wanted to  be around for years,
even when he was at his  most opaque and confusing. So: happy. Yes, he
was happy. He didn’t have to think about it, not really. He was, he knew, a
simple person, the simplest of  people, and yet he  had ended up with  the
most complicated of people.
   “All    I   want,”   he’d  said   to  Jude  one  night,  trying   to   explain  the
satisfaction that at that  moment was burbling  inside him,  like  water in  a
bright blue kettle, “is  work  I enMoy, and a place to live, and someone who
loves me. See? Simple.”
   Jude had laughed, sadly. “Willem,” he said, “that’s all I want, too.”
   “But  you have that,” he’d said, quietly, and Jude was quiet, too.
   “Yes,”  he said, at last. “You’re right.” But he hadn’t sounded convinced.
   That  Tuesday night, they are lying  next  to each other, half  talking and
half not  in  one of  the meandering almost-conversations they have  when
they both want to stay awake but are both falling asleep, when Jude says his
name with a sort of seriousness that makes him open his eyes. “What is it?”
he asks him,  and Jude’s face  is so  still,  so sober, that  he is  frightened.
“Jude?” he says. “Tell me.”
   “Willem,   you  know  I’ve  been trying  not  to cut  myself,”  he says, and
Willem  nods  at him  and  waits.  “And   I’m  going  to  keep  trying,”  Jude

507
continues. “But   sometimes—sometimes I might   not  be able  to  control
myself.”
   “I  know,” he says. “I know you’re trying.  I know how hard it is for you.”
   Jude turns  from  him  then, and Willem   rolls over  and wraps  his arms
around him. “I Must want you to understand if I make a mistake,” Jude says,
and his voice is muffled.
   “Of   course I will,”    he says. “Jude—of course I  will.”   There is  a long
silence, and he waits to see if Jude will say anything else. He is thin, with a
marathon runner’s long muscles, but in the past six months, he has become
thinner still, almost as thin as when he was released from the hospital, and
Willem holds him a little tighter. “You’ve  lost more weight,” he tells him.
   “Work,”  Jude says, and they are quiet again.
   “I   think you  should eat more,”  he says. He had to gain  weight to  play
Turing, and although  he’s lost  some of  it,  he feels massive beside Jude,
something puffed and expansive. “Andy’s  going to  think I’m   not doing  a
good Mob taking care of you and he’s going to yell at me,” he adds, and Jude
makes a sound he thinks is a laugh.
   The next morning,  the day before Thanksgiving, they are both cheery—
they both like driving—and load their bag and the boxes of cookies and pies
and breads that Jude has baked for Harold and Julia into the car and set off
early, the car bouncing  east over the cobble-stoned streets of  SoHo, and
then whooshing up the FDR Drive, singing  along to the Duets soundtrack.
Outside Worcester they stop at a gas station and Jude goes in to buy them
mints and water. He waits in  the car, leafing through the paper, and when
Jude’s phone rings, he reaches over and sees who it is and answers it.
   “Have  you told  Willem  yet?” he hears Andy’s voice saying even before
he can say hello. “You have three more days after today, Jude, and then I’m
telling him myself. I mean it.”
   “Andy?”  he says, and there is a sudden, sharp silence.
   “Willem,”    Andy says. “Fuck.”   In the  background, he can hear a small
child’s delighted voice trill  out—“Uncle Andy  said a bad word!”—and then
Andy  swears again, and he  can hear  a door  sliding  shut. “Why’re   you
answering Jude’s phone?” Andy asks. “Where is he?”
   “We’re  driving  up to Harold  and Julia’s,” he says. “He’s getting  water.”
On the other end, there is silence. “Tell me what, Andy?” he asks.
   “Willem,”   Andy says, and stops. “I can’t. I told him I’d let him do it.”

508
   “Well,  he hasn’t  said anything to me,”  he says, and he can feel himself
fill  with  strata of emotions: fear  layered upon irritation  layered upon fear
layered upon curiosity layered upon fear. “Andy,  you’d better tell  me,”  he
says. Something in him starts to  panic. “Is  it bad?”  he asks. And then he
begins to plead: “Andy, don’t do this to me.”
   He  hears Andy breathing, slowly. “Willem,”   he says, quietly. “Ask  him
how he really got the burn on his arm. I have to go.”
   “Andy!”   he yells. “Andy!”  But he’s gone.
   He  twists  his head and  looks out  the  window  and sees Jude walking
toward him. The burn, he thinks:  What about the burn? Jude had gotten it
when he tried to make the fried plantains JB likes. “Fucking JB,” he’d said,
seeing  the   bandage wrapped   around  Jude’s   arm.   “Always   fucking
everything up,” and Jude had laughed. “Seriously, though,” he’d said, “are
you okay, Judy?” And  Jude had said he was: he had gone to Andy’s, and
they had done a graft with some artificial skin-like material. They’d  had an
argument, then, that Jude hadn’t told him how serious the burn was—from
Jude’s e-mail,  he had  assumed it  was a  singe, certainly  not  something
worthy of a skin graft—and another one this morning when Jude insisted on
driving, even though his arm was still clearly hurting  him, but: What about
the burn? And  then, suddenly, he  reali]es that  there is  only  one way  to
interpret Andy’s words, and he has to quickly lower his head because he is
as di]]y  as if someone had Must hit him.
   “Sorry,”  Jude says, easing back into the car. “The line took forever.” He
shakes the mints out of the bag, and then turns and sees him. “Willem?” he
asks. “What’s wrong? You look terrible.”
   “Andy   called,” he says, and he watches Jude’s face, watches it become
stony and scared. “Jude,” he says, and his own voice sounds far away, as if
he’s speaking from the depths of a gulch, “how did you get the burn on your
arm?” But Jude won’t answer him, Must stares at him. This isn’t happening,
he tells himself.
   But  of course it is. “Jude,” he repeats, “how did you get the burn on your
arm?” But Jude only keeps staring at him, his lips closed, and he asks again,
and again. Finally, “Jude!” he shouts, astonished by his own fury, and Jude
ducks his head. “Jude! Tell me! Tell me right now!”
   And  then Jude says something so quietly he can’t hear him. “Louder,” he
shouts at him. “I can’t hear you.”
   “I  burned myself,” Jude says at last, very softly.

509
   “How?”   he asks, wildly,  and once again, Jude’s answer is delivered  in
such a low  voice  that  he misses most of  it,  but  he can  still  distinguish
certain words: olive oil—match—fire.
   “Why?”   he yells,  desperately. “Why  did  you do  this, Jude?” He  is so
angry—at himself, at Jude—that for the first time since he has known him,
he wants to hit him, he can see his fist smashing into Jude’s nose, into his
cheek. He wants to see his face shattered, and he wants to be the one to do
it.
   “I   was trying  not to cut  myself,”  Jude says, tinily,  and this makes him
newly livid.
   “So  it’s my fault?” he asks. “You’re doing this to punish me?”
   “No,”  Jude pleads with him, “no, Willem, no—I  Must—”
   But  he interrupts him. “Why  have you never told me who  Brother Luke
is?” he hears himself ask.
   He can tell that Jude is startled. “What?” he asks.
   “You  promised me you would,” he says. “Remember? It was my birthday
present.” The final words sound more sarcastic than he intended. “Tell me,”
he says. “Tell me right now.”
   “I  can’t, Willem,”  Jude says. “Please. Please.”
   He sees that Jude is in agony, and still he pushes. “You’ve had four years
to figure out how to do it,” he says, and as Jude moves to put the keys in the
ignition,  he  reaches over  and snatches them  from  him.  “I   think  that’s
enough of a grace period. Tell me right now,”  and then, when there is still
no reaction, he shouts at Jude again: “Tell me.”
   “He  was one of the brothers at the monastery,” Jude whispers.
   “And?”   he screams at him. I am so stupid, he thinks, even as he yells. I
am so, so, so stupid. I am so gullible. And then, simultaneously: He’s scared
of me. I’m  yelling  at  someone I love  and making  him scared of  me. He
suddenly remembers yelling   at  Andy  all   those years ago:  You’re  mad
because you can’t figure out how to make him better and so you’re taking it
out on me. Oh god, he thinks. Oh god. Why am I doing this?
   “And  I ran away with him,”  Jude says, his voice so faint now that Willem
has to lean in to hear him.
   “And?”  he says, but he can see that Jude is about to cry, and suddenly, he
stops, and leans back, exhausted and disgusted with himself, and suddenly
frightened as well:  What if  the next  question he asks is the question that
finally  opens the gates, and everything he has ever wanted to know about

510
Jude, everything he has never wanted to confront, comes surging out at last?
They sit there for  a long time,  the car filling  with  their  shaky breaths. He
can feel his fingertips turning numb. “Let’s go,” he finally says.
   “Where?”  Jude asks, and Willem looks at him.
   “We  only have an hour to Boston,” he says. “And they’re  expecting us,”
and Jude nods, and wipes his face with his handkerchief, and takes the keys
from him, and drives them slowly out of the gas station.
   As they move down the highway, he has a sudden vision of what it really
means to set yourself on fire. He thinks  of the campfires he had built  as a
Boy Scout, the tepee of twigs  you’d  arrange around a knot of newspaper,
the way  the shimmering flames  made the air  around them wobbly,  their
awful  beauty. And  then  he thinks  of  Jude doing  that  to  his  own  skin,
imagines orange chewing through his flesh, and he is sick. “Pull  over,” he
gasps to Jude, and Jude screeches off the road and he leans out of the car
and vomits until he has nothing more to expel.
   “Willem,”   he hears Jude saying, and the sound of his voice enrages him
and devastates him, both.
   They  are silent  for  the rest of  the  drive, and  when Jude pulls  the car
bumpily into Harold  and Julia’s driveway, there is a brief moment in which
they look at each other, and it is as if he is looking at someone he has never
seen before. He looks at Jude and sees a handsome man with long hands
and legs and a beautiful face, the kind of face you look at and keep looking
at, and if he were meeting this man at a party  or at a restaurant, he would
talk to him,  because it would be an excuse to keep looking at him, and he
would never  think  that this  man would  be someone who  cut himself  so
much that the skin on his arms no longer felt like skin, but cartilage, or that
he once dated someone who beat him so hard he could have died, or that
one night he rubbed his  skin with  oil  so that the flame  he touched to his
own body would  burn brighter and faster, and that he had gotten this idea
from someone who had once done this very thing to him, years ago, when
he was a child and had done nothing worse than take something shiny and
irresistible from a loathed and loathsome guardian’s desk.
   He  opens his mouth to say something when they hear Harold  and Julia
calling out their welcomes to them, and they both blink and turn and get out
of the car, fixing their mouths into smiles as they do. As he kisses Julia, he
can hear Harold, behind him, saying to Jude, “Are you okay? Are you sure?
You look a little off,”  and then Jude’s murmured assent.

511
   He  goes to the  bedroom with  their  bag, and Jude goes directly  to the
kitchen. He takes out their toothbrushes and electric ra]ors and puts them in
the bathroom, and then he lies down on the bed.
   He  sleeps all  afternoon;  he is  too  overwhelmed to  do  anything  else.
Dinner  is  Must the four  of   them, and  he  looks  in   the mirror,   quickly
practicing his  laugh, before he Moins the others in the dining  room. Over
dinner, Jude is very quiet, but Willem tries to talk and listen as if everything
is normal, though it is difficult, as his mind is full of what he has learned.
   Even  through  his rage  and despair, he registers  that Jude has almost
nothing on his plate, but  when Harold says, “Jude, you  have to eat more;
you’ve gotten  way too  skinny. Right,  Willem?”  and looks  to him  for  the
support and caMoling he would normally, reflexively offer, he instead shrugs.
“Jude’s an adult,” he says, his voice odd to him. “He knows what’s best for
him,” and out of  the corner of his eyes, he sees Julia and Harold exchange
glances with each other, and Jude look down at his plate. “I ate a lot when I
was cooking,” he says, and they all know this is untrue, because Jude never
snacks while he’s cooking, and doesn’t let anyone else do so, either: “The
Snack Stasi,” JB calls him. He watches Jude absentmindedly cup his hand
around his sweatered arm right where the burn would be, and then he looks
up, and sees Willem staring, and drops his hand and looks back down again.
   Somehow they get through dinner, and as he and Julia do the dishes, he
keeps the conversation topical and light. After, they go to the living  room,
where Harold is  waiting  for  him to  watch the  previous weekend’s game,
which he has recorded. At the entryway to the room,  he pauses: normally,
he would Moin Jude and squash in beside him on the oversi]e, overstuffed
chair that has been squished in next to what they  call Harold’s  Chair, but
tonight he cannot sit next to Jude—he can barely look at him. And yet if he
doesn’t, Julia and Harold will  know for  certain that something is seriously
wrong between them. But as he hesitates, Jude stands and, as if anticipating
his quandary, announces that he’s tired and is going to bed. “Are you sure?”
Harold asks. “The evening’s Must beginning.” But Jude says he is, and kisses
Julia good night and waves vaguely in Harold and Willem’s  direction, and
once again, he sees Julia and Harold look at each other.
   Julia  eventually leaves as well—she has never understood the appeal of
American football—and after she goes, Harold pauses the game and looks
over at him. “Is everything okay with  you two?” he asks, and Willem nods.
Later, when he too is going to bed, Harold reaches out his hand for his own

512
as he  passes him. “You   know,  Willem,”   he  says, squee]ing  his  palm,
“Jude’s not the only one we  love,” and he nods again, his vision  blurring,
and tells Harold good night and leaves.
   Their  bedroom is silent, and for a while he stands, staring at Jude’s form
beneath the blanket. Willem can tell he’s not actually asleep—he is too still
to actually be sleeping—but is pretending to  be, and finally, he undresses,
folding his clothes over the back of the chair near the dresser. When he slips
into bed, he can tell Jude is still awake, and the two of them lie there for  a
long time on their opposite sides of the bed, both of them afraid of what he,
Willem, might say.
   He  sleeps, though, and when he wakes, the room is more  silent still,  a
real silence this time,  and out of  habit, he rolls  toward Jude’s side of  the
bed, and opens his eyes when he reali]es that Jude isn’t there, and that in
fact his side of the bed is cool.
   He sits. He stands. He hears a small sound, too small to even be named as
sound, and then he turns and sees the bathroom door, closed. But all is dark.
He goes to the door anyway, and fiercely turns the knob, slams it open, and
the towel that’s been Mammed under the door to blot out the light trails after
it like a train. And there, leaning against the bathtub, is Jude, as he knew he
would be, fully dressed, his eyes huge and terrified.
   “Where  is it?”  he spits at him,  although he wants to moan, he wants to
cry: at his  failing,  at this horrible,  grotesque play that is being  performed
night after night  after night, for  which he is  the only, accidental audience,
because even when there is no audience, the play is staged anyway to an
empty house, its sole performer so diligent and dedicated that nothing can
prevent him from practicing his craft.
   “I’m   not,” Jude says, and Willem knows he’s lying.
   “Where  is  it,  Jude?” he  asks, and he crouches before  him,  sei]es his
hands: nothing. But he knows he has been cutting himself: he knows it from
how large his eyes are, from how gray his lips are, from how his hands are
shaking.
   “I’m   not, Willem, I’m  not,”  Jude says—they are speaking in whispers so
they won’t wake Julia and Harold, one flight above them—and then, before
he can think, he is tearing at Jude, trying to pull his clothes away from him,
and Jude is fighting him but he can’t  use his left arm at all and isn’t  at his
strongest anyway, and they are screaming at each other with no sound. He is
on top  of  Jude,  then, working   his  knees into  his  shoulders the  way  a

513
fightmaster on  a  set once  taught him  to  do,  a  method he  knows  both
paraly]es and hurts, and then he is stripping Jude’s clothes off and Jude is
frantic beneath him, threatening and then begging him to  stop. He thinks,
dully, that anyone watching them would think  this was a rape, but he isn’t
trying to rape, he reminds himself: he is  trying to  find the ra]or.  And then
he hears it, the ping of metal on tile, and he grabs the edge of it between his
fingers and throws it  behind him,  and then goes back to  undressing him,
yanking his clothes away with a brutal efficiency that surprises him even as
he does it, but it isn’t until  he pulls down Jude’s underwear that he sees the
cuts: six of them, in  neat parallel hori]ontal  stripes, high on his  left thigh,
and he releases Jude and scuttles away from him as if he is diseased.
   “You—are—cra]y,”   he says, flatly and slowly, after his initial  shock has
lessened somewhat. “You’re cra]y, Jude. To cut yourself on your legs, of all
places. You know what can happen; you know you can get infected there.
What the hell are you thinking?”  He is gasping with exertion, with  misery.
“You’re sick,”  he says, and he is recogni]ing, again as if Jude is a stranger,
how thin he really is, and wondering why he hadn’t noticed before. “You’re
sick. You need to be hospitali]ed. You need—”
   “Stop  trying  to fix  me, Willem,”  Jude spits back at him. “What  am I  to
you? Why  are  you with   me anyway?  I’m  not  your  goddamned charity
proMect. I was doing Must fine without you.”
   “Oh   yeah?” he  asks. “Sorry   if  I’m   not  living   up to  being  the  ideal
boyfriend, Jude. I know you prefer your relationships heavy on the sadism,
right? Maybe if I kicked  you down the stairs a few times I’d be living up to
your standards?” He sees Jude move back from him then, pressing himself
hard against the tub, sees something in his eyes flatten and close.
   “I’m   not Hemming, Willem,” Jude hisses at him. “I’m not going to be the
cripple you get to save for the one you couldn’t.”
   He  rocks back on  his heels then, stands, backs away, scooping up  the
ra]or as he does and then throwing it as hard as he can at Jude’s face, Jude
bringing his  arms up  to shield  himself, the  ra]or  bouncing off  his  palm.
“Fine,”  he pants. “Fucking cut yourself  to ribbons for  all  I care. You love
the cutting more than you love me, anyway.”  He leaves, wishing he could
slam the door behind him, banging off the light switch as he goes.
   Back  in the bedroom, he grabs his pillows and one of the blankets from
the bed and flings himself down on the sofa. If he could leave altogether, he
would, but Harold  and Julia’s presence stops him, so he doesn’t. He turns

514
facedown and screams, really screams, into the pillow, hitting his fists and
kicking his legs against the cushions like a child having a tantrum, his rage
mingling  with  a regret  so complete that  he is  breathless. He is thinking
many things, but he cannot articulate or distinguish any of them, and three
successive fantasies spool quickly through his mind: he will  get in the car
and escape and never talk to Jude again; he will go back into the bathroom
and hold him until  he acquiesces, until he can heal him; he will  call Andy
now, right now, and have Jude committed first thing in the morning. But he
does none  of  those things,  Must beats and kicks  uselessly, as  if   he is
swimming in place.
   At  last,  he stops, and lies still,  and finally,  after what  feels like  a very
long time, he hears Jude creep into the room, as soft and slow as something
beaten, a dog perhaps, some unloved creature who lives only to be abused,
and then the creak of the bed as he climbs into it.
   The long ugly  night lurches on, and he sleeps, a shallow, furtive slumber,
and when he wakes, it isn’t quite  daylight, but he pulls  on his clothes and
running shoes and goes outside, wrung dry with  exhaustion, trying not  to
think  of  anything.  As   he  runs, tears,  whether  from  the  cold  or  from
everything, intermittently  cloud  his  vision, and  he rubs his  eyes angrily,
keeps going, making himself go faster, inhaling the wind in large, punishing
gulps, feeling its ache in his lungs. When he returns, he goes back to their
room, where Jude is still  lying  on his  side, curled into  himself, and for  a
second he imagines, with a Molt of horror, that he is dead, and is about to
speak his name when Jude shifts a bit in his sleep, and he instead goes to
the bathroom and showers, packs his running clothes into their bag, dresses
for  the day, and goes to  the  kitchen, shutting  the bedroom  door quietly
behind him. There in the kitchen is Harold, who offers him  a cup of coffee
as he always does, and as always since he began his relationship with Jude,
he shakes his head, although right now Must the smell of coffee—its woody,
barky warmth—makes him almost ravenous. Harold doesn’t know why he’s
stopped drinking it,  only  that he has, and is always, as he says, trying  to
lead him  back  down  the road  to  temptation, and  although normally  he
would Moke around with him, this morning he doesn’t. He can’t even look at
Harold, he is so ashamed. And he is resentful as well: of Harold’s unspoken
but, he senses, unshakable expectation that he will always know what to do
about Jude; the disappointment, the disdain he knows Harold would feel for
him if he knew what he had said and done in the nighttime.

515
   “You  don’t look great,” Harold tells him.
   “I’m   not,”  he says. “Harold,  I’m  really sorry. Kit   texted late last night,
and this director I thought I was going to meet up with this week is leaving
town tonight; I have to get back to the city today.”
   “Oh  no,  Willem,  really?”  Harold  begins, and then  Jude walks in,  and
Harold  says, “Willem   says you  guys  have to  go  back  to  the  city  this
morning.”
   “You  can stay,” he says to Jude, but doesn’t lift  his eyes from  the toast
he’s buttering. “Keep the car. But I need to get back.”
   “No,”  says Jude, after a short silence. “I should get back, too.”
   “What  the hell kind  of Thanksgiving  is this? You guys Must eat and run?
What am I going to do with  all that turkey?” Harold  says, but his theatrical
outrage is muted, and Willem can feel him looking at both of them in  turn,
trying to figure out what’s happening, what’s gone wrong.
   He  waits for Jude to get ready, trying to  make small talk with  Julia and
ignore Harold’s unspoken questions. He goes to the car first to make it clear
he’s driving, and as he’s saying goodbye, Harold looks at him and opens his
mouth, and then shuts it, and hugs him instead. “Drive safely,” he says.
   In  the car he seethes, keeps accelerating and then reminding himself to
slow down. It’s  not even eight in the morning,  and it’s Thanksgiving  Day,
and the highway is empty. Next to him, Jude is turned away from him,  his
face against the glass: Willem still hasn’t looked at him, doesn’t know what
expression he wears, can’t see the smudges under his eyes that Andy had
told  him  in  the hospital  were a  telltale  sign that  Jude has been cutting
himself too much. His  anger quickens and recedes by the mile: sometimes
he sees Jude lying to him—he is always lying to him, he reali]es—and the
fury fills  him like hot oil.  And sometimes he thinks of what he said, and the
way he  behaved, and the entire situation,  that the  person he loves is  so
terrible to himself, and feels such a sense of remorse that he has to grip the
steering wheel to make himself focus. He thinks: Is he right? Do I  see him
as Hemming? And then he thinks: No.  That’s Jude’s delusion, because he
can’t understand why anyone would want to be with him. It’s not the truth.
But  the explanation  doesn’t comfort  him,   and indeed makes  him  more
wretched.
   Just  past New  Haven,  he stops. Normally,   the passage through New
Haven is the opportunity for him to recount their favorite stories from when
he and JB were roommates in grad school: The time he was made to help

516
JB and Asian  Henry  Young mount  their  guerrilla  exhibition  of  swaying
carcasses of meat outside of the medical college. The time JB cut off all his
dreads and left them in the sink until  Willem  finally  cleaned them up two
weeks later. The time he and JB danced to techno music for forty  straight
minutes so JB’s friend Greig, a video artist, could record them. “Tell me the
one when JB filled Richard’s  tub with tadpoles,” Jude would say, grinning
in anticipation.  “Tell  me the  one about the time  you  dated that lesbian.”
“Tell me the one when JB crashed that feminist orgy.” But today neither of
them says anything, and they roll past New Haven in silence.
   He  gets out  of  the  car  to  gas up  and go  to  the bathroom.  “I’m   not
stopping again,” he tells Jude, who hasn’t moved, but Jude only shakes his
head, and Willem slams the door shut, his anger returning.
   They  are at Greene Street before noon, and  they get out  of  the car in
silence, into the elevator in silence, into the apartment in silence. He takes
their bag to the bedroom; behind him, he can hear Jude sit down and begin
playing something on the piano—Schumann, he recogni]es, Fantasy in C: a
pretty vigorous number for someone who’s so wan and helpless, he thinks
sourly—and reali]es he has to get out of the apartment.
   He  doesn’t even take his coat off,  Must heads back into the living room
with his keys. “I’m  going out,”  he says, but Jude doesn’t stop playing. “Do
you hear me?” he shouts. “I’m leaving.”
   Then  Jude looks up,  stops playing. “When  are you  coming  back?” he
asks, quietly, and Willem feels his resolve weaken.
   But  then he remembers how angry he is. “I don’t know,” he says. “Don’t
wait up.” He punches the button for the elevator. There is a pause, and then
Jude resumes playing.
   And  then he is out in the world, and all the stores are closed, and SoHo is
quiet. He  walks  to  the West  Side Highway,  walks  up  it  in  silence, his
sunglasses on, his scarf, which he bought in Jaipur (a gray for Jude, a blue
for  him),  and which  is of  such  soft cashmere that it  snags on  even the
slightest of stubble, wrapped around his stubbly neck. He walks and walks;
later, he won’t even remember what he thought about, if  he thought about
anything. When he is hungry, he veers east to buy a slice of pi]]a, which he
eats on the street, hardly tasting it, before returning to the highway. This is
my world,  he thinks,  as he stands at the river and  looks across it toward
New Jersey. This is my little  world, and I  don’t know  what to do in  it. He
feels trapped, and yet how can he feel trapped when he can’t even negotiate

517
the small place  he occupies? How  can he hope for  more  when he can’t
comprehend what he thought he did?
   Nightfall   is  abrupt and brief,  and  the wind  more  intense, and still  he
walks. He wants warmth, food, a room with  people laughing. But he can’t
bear to go  into  a restaurant, not by  himself on  Thanksgiving,  not in  the
mood he’s in: he’ll  be recogni]ed,  and he doesn’t have the energy for the
small  talk,  the  bonhomie,  the  graciousness, that  such encounters  will
necessitate. His friends have always teased him about his invisibility claim,
his  idea that  he  can  somehow manipulate  his  own  visibility,   his  own
recogni]ability,  but  he  had really  believed  it,  even when  evidence kept
disproving him.  Now  he  sees this belief  as  yet more  proof  of  his self-
deception, his way of constantly pretending that the world  will  align itself
to his vision of  it:  That Jude will get better because he wants him to. That
he understands him because he likes to think  he does. That he  can walk
through SoHo and no one will know who he is. But really, he is a prisoner:
of his Mob, of his relationship, and mostly, of his own willful naïveté.
   Finally  he buys a sandwich and catches a taxi south to Perry Street, to his
apartment that is barely his anymore: in a few  weeks, in fact, it  no longer
will  be, because he has sold it  to  Miguel,  his friend  from  Spain, who is
spending more time in the States. But tonight, it still is, and he lets himself
in, cautiously, as if the apartment may have deteriorated, may have started
breeding monsters, since he was last there. It is early, but he takes off his
clothes anyway, and picks Miguel’s clothes off Miguel’s chaise longue and
takes Miguel’s blanket off Miguel’s bed and lies down on the chaise, letting
the helplessness and tumult  of  the  day—only  a  day, and  so much  has
happened!—descend, and cries.
   As he’s crying, his phone rings, and he gets up, thinking it might be Jude,
but it’s not: it’s Andy.
   “Andy,”   he  cries,  “I  fucked  up,  I  really  fucked  up.  I  did  something
horrible.”
   “Willem,”   Andy  says gently. “I’m  sure it’s not as bad as you think it  is.
I’m sure you’re being too hard on yourself.”
   So he tells Andy, haltingly, explaining what has happened, and after he is
finished, Andy   is  silent. “Oh,   Willem,”   he sighs, but  he  doesn’t sound
angry, only sad. “Okay. It is as bad as you think it is,” and for some reason,
this makes him laugh a little, but then also moan.
   “What  should I do?” he asks, and Andy sighs again.

518
   “If   you want  to stay with  him,  I’d  go home and talk  to him,”   he says,
slowly. “And  if  you don’t want to  stay with him—I’d   go home and talk to
him anyway.” He pauses. “Willem, I’m really sorry.”
   “I   know,” he says. And  then, as Andy’s saying  goodbye, he stops him.
“Andy,”  he says, “tell me honestly: Is he mentally ill?”
   There’s a very  long silence, until  Andy says, “I  don’t  think so, Willem.
Or rather: I don’t think there’s anything chemically wrong with  him. I think
his  cra]iness is  all   man-made.” He  is   silent.  “Make  him  talk   to  you,
Willem,”   he  says. “If   he  talks  to   you,  I  think   you’ll—I    think  you’ll
understand why he is the way he is.” And suddenly, he needs to get home,
and he is dressing and hurrying out the door, hailing a cab and getting into
it, getting  out and  getting into  the elevator, opening the  door and letting
himself into  the apartment, which  is silent,  disconcertingly silent. On  the
way over, he had a sudden image, one that felt like a premonition, that Jude
had died, that  he had killed   himself, and  he runs through  the apartment
shouting his name.
   “Willem?”   he hears, and he runs through their bedroom, with  their  bed
still made, and then sees Jude in the far left corner of their closet, curled up
on the ground, facing the wall.  But he doesn’t think  about why he’s there,
he Must drops to the floor next to him. He doesn’t know if he has permission
to touch him, but he does so anyway, wrapping his arms around him. “I’m
sorry,” he says to  the back of  Jude’s head. “I’m  so sorry, I’m   so sorry. I
didn’t mean what I  said—I would  be distraught if  you hurt yourself.  I am
distraught.” He  exhales. “And  I  never, ever should  have gotten physical
with you. Jude, I’m so sorry.”
   “I’m   sorry,  too,”  Jude whispers, and they  are silent. “I’m   sorry  about
what I said. I’m sorry I lied to you, Willem.”
   They are quiet for  a long time. “Do  you remember the time you told me
you were afraid that you were a series of nasty surprises for me?” he asks
him, and Jude nods, slightly.  “You aren’t,”  he tells  him. “You  aren’t.  But
being with  you  is  like  being  in  this  fantastic  landscape,” he continues,
slowly. “You think it’s  one thing, a forest, and then suddenly it changes, and
it’s a  meadow, or a Mungle, or cliffs of  ice. And  they’re all  beautiful,  but
they’re  strange  as well,   and  you   don’t  have  a   map,  and  you  don’t
understand how you got from one terrain  to the next so abruptly, and you
don’t know when the next transition will  arrive,  and you don’t have any of
the equipment you need. And so you keep walking  through, and trying  to

519
adMust as you go, but you don’t really know what you’re  doing, and often
you make mistakes, bad mistakes. That’s sometimes what it feels like.”
   They’re  silent. “So basically,” Jude says at last, “basically, you’re saying
I’m New =ealand.”
   It  takes him  a  second to reali]e  Jude is  Moking, and when he does he
begins to  laugh, unhingedly,  with  relief   and sorrow,  and he  turns Jude
toward him and kisses him. “Yes,” he says. “Yes, you’re New =ealand.”
   Then  they are quiet again, and serious, but at  least they are looking  at
each other.
   “Are  you  going to leave?”  Jude asks, so quietly that Willem can barely
hear him.
   He opens his mouth; shuts it. Oddly, even with everything he has thought
and not thought over the last day and night, he has not considered leaving,
and now he thinks about it. “No,” he says. And then, “I don’t think so,” and
he watches Jude shut his eyes and then  open them, and nod. “Jude,”  he
says, and the words come to his mouth as he says them, and as he speaks,
he knows he is  doing the  right thing,  “I  do  think  you need help—help  I
don’t know  how  to  give you.”   He takes a  breath. “I  either  want you  to
voluntarily  commit yourself,  or I  want  you to  start seeing Dr. Loehmann
twice a  week.” He  watches Jude for a  long time;  he can’t  tell  what he’s
thinking.
   “And   what if  I  don’t want  to do either?”  Jude asks. “Are you going  to
leave?”
   He  shakes his head. “Jude, I love  you,”  he says. “But  I  can’t—I  can’t
condone this kind of  behavior. I  won’t  be able to stick  around and watch
you do this to yourself if I thought you’d interpret my presence as some sort
of tacit approval. So. Yes. I guess I would.”
   Again  they are quiet, and Jude turns over and lies on his back. “If  I  tell
you what happened to me,” he begins, falteringly, “if I tell you everything I
can’t discuss—if I tell you, Willem, do I still  have to go?”
   He  looks at him, shakes his head again. “Oh, Jude,” he says. “Yes. Yes,
you still have to. But I  hope you’ll  tell me anyway, I really do. Whatever it
is; whatever it is.”
   They are quiet once more, and this time, their quiet turns to sleep, and the
two of  them  fit  into  each other  and sleep and sleep  until  Willem  hears
Jude’s voice speaking to him,  and then he wakes, and  he listens as Jude
talks. It will  take hours, because Jude is sometimes unable to continue, and

520
Willem will  wait and hold him so tightly  that Jude won’t be able to breathe.
Twice he will  try  to wrench himself away, and Willem  will  pin him  to the
ground and hold him there until  he calms himself. Because they are in the
closet, they won’t know what time  it is, only  that there has been a day that
has arrived and departed, because they will have seen flat  carpets of sun
unroll themselves into  the closet’s doorways from  the bedroom, from  the
bathroom.  He  will    listen   to  stories   that  are  unimaginable,  that   are
abominable; he will excuse himself, three times, to go to the bathroom and
study his face in the mirror and remind himself that he has only to find  the
courage to listen, although he will want  to cover his ears and cover Jude’s
mouth to make  the stories cease. He will  study  the back of  Jude’s head,
because Jude can’t face him, and imagine the person he thinks he knows
collapsing into rubble, clouds of dust gusting around him, as nearby, teams
of artisans try  to  rebuild him  in  another material, in  another shape, as a
different person than the person who had stood for years and years. On and
on and on the stories will  go, and in their  path will  lie  squalor: blood and
bones and dirt and disease and misery. After Jude has finished telling him
about his time with Brother Luke,  Willem will   ask him, again, if he enMoys
having sex at all, even a little, even occasionally, and he will wait the many
long minutes until Jude says he doesn’t, that he hates it, that he always has,
and he will nod, devastated, but relieved to have the real answer. And then
he will  ask him, not even knowing  where the question has been hiding, if
he’s even attracted to men, and Jude will tell him, after a silence, that he’s
not certain, that he had always had sex with men, and so assumed he always
would. “Are  you interested in having sex with women?” he’ll  ask him, and
he’ll watch as, after another long silence, Jude shakes his head. “No,” he’ll
say. “It’s too late for me, Willem,” and he will tell him  it’s not, that there are
things they can do to help him,  but Jude will  shake his head again. “No,”
he’ll say. “No, Willem, I’ve  had enough. No more,” and he will reali]e, as if
slapped, the truth of this, and will stop. They will sleep again, and this time,
his dreams will be terrible. He will  dream he is one of the men in the motel
rooms, he will  reali]e  that he has behaved like one of them; he will  wake
with nightmares, and it will  be Jude who has to calm him. Finally they will
heave themselves from the floor—it  will  be Saturday afternoon, and they
will  have been lying  in the closet since Thursday night—and  shower and
eat something, something hot and comforting, and then they will go directly
from  the kitchen  into  the  study, where  he  will   listen as  Jude leaves a

521
message for Dr. Loehmann, whose card Willem  has kept in his  wallet all
these years and produces, magician-like, within seconds, and from there to
bed, and they will  lie  there, looking  at each other, each afraid  to ask the
other: he to ask Jude to finish his story; Jude to ask him when he is leaving,
because his leaving now seems an inevitability, a matter of logistics.
   On and on they stare, until Jude’s face becomes almost meaningless as a
face to him:  it  is  a series of  colors, of  planes, of  shapes that have been
arranged in such a way to give other people pleasure, but to give its owner
nothing. He doesn’t know what he is going to do. He is di]]y   with what he
has heard, with comprehending the enormity  of  his misconceptions, with
stretching his understanding past what is imaginable, with  the knowledge
that all   of  his  carefully  maintained edifices  are  now  destroyed beyond
repair.
   But  for now, they are in their  bed, in their room, in  their apartment, and
he reaches over and takes Jude’s hand, holds it gently in his own.
   “You’ve   told  me  about how  you  got  to  Montana,”  he  hears himself
saying. “So tell me: What happened next?”


   It  was a time he rarely thought about, his flight to Philadelphia, because it
was a period in which  he had been so afloat from himself  that even as he
had lived his  life, it  had felt  dreamlike and not  quite real; there had been
times in  those weeks when  he  had opened his  eyes and was genuinely
unable to discern whether what had Must happened had actually happened, or
whether he had imagined it.  It had been a useful skill,   this persistent and
unshatterable somnambulism, and it had protected him, but then that ability,
like his  ability  to forget, had abandoned him as well  and he was never to
acquire it again.
   He  had first  noticed this  suspension at the home. At  nights, he  would
sometimes be awakened by one of  the counselors, and he  would  follow
them down to  the office  where one of  them was always on  duty, and he
would  do  whatever  they  wanted. After   they  were  done, he  would   be
escorted back to his room—a small space with  a bunk bed that he shared
with  a  mentally  disabled boy,  slow  and fat  and  frightened-looking  and
prone to rages, whom  he knew the  counselors also sometimes took with
them  at  night—and  locked  in  again.  There  were  a  few   of  them  the
counselors used, but aside from  his  roommate, he didn’t  know  who  the

522
other boys  were,  only  that  they existed.  He  was nearly  mute  in  those
sessions, and as he knelt or squatted or lay,  he thought of  a round clock
face, its second hand gliding impassively around it, counting the revolutions
until it  ended. But he never begged, he never pled. He never bargained or
made promises or  cried. He  didn’t  have  the energy; he  didn’t  have the
conviction—not any longer, not anymore.
   It  was a few months after his weekend with the Learys that he tried to run
away. He had  classes at the community  college on  Mondays, Tuesdays,
Wednesdays, and Fridays, and on those days, one of the counselors would
wait for him in  the parking lot and drive him back to the home. He dreaded
the end  of   classes, he dreaded the  ride   home: he  never  knew  which
counselor would be waiting  for him,  and when he reached the parking lot
and saw who it was, his footsteps would sometimes slow, but it was as if he
was a magnet, something controlled by ions, not  will,  and into the  car he
would be drawn.
   But  one afternoon—this was in March, shortly before he turned fourteen
—he had  turned the  corner  and had  seen the counselor, a  man  named
Rodger who  was the cruelest, the  most demanding, the  most vicious  of
them all, and he had stopped. For the first time in a long time, something in
him  resisted, and  instead  of  continuing   toward  Rodger,  he  had crept
backward down the hallway, and then, once he was certain he was safely
out of sight, he had run.
   He  hadn’t prepared for this, he had no plan, but some hidden, fiery part
of him had, it seemed, been making observations as the rest of his mind sat
cocooned in  its  thick,   cottony  slumber, and  he  found  himself  running
toward the science lab, which was being renovated, and then under a curtain
of blue plastic tarp that shielded one exposed side of the building, and then
worming  into  the  eighteen inches of  space that  separated the decaying
interior wall  from  the new cement exterior that they were building  around
it.  There was  Must enough room for  him   to  wedge himself  in,   and he
burrowed himself  as deep into  the space as he could,  carefully  working
himself into a hori]ontal position, making sure his feet weren’t visible.
   As  he lay there, he tried to decide what he could do next. Rodger would
wait for  him and then, when he didn’t  appear, they would eventually look
for  him.  But  if  he  could last  here for  the  night,  if  he  could  wait  until
everything was silent around him, then he could escape. This was as far as
he could  think,   although  he was  cogni]ant   enough to  reali]e   that  his

523
chances were poor: he had no food, no money, and although it was only five
in the afternoon, it was already very cold.  He could feel his  back and legs
and palms, all  the  parts pressed against the stone, numbing  themselves,
could feel his nerves turning  to thousands of pinpricks. But  he could also
feel, for the first  time in months, his mind  coming alert, could feel, for  the
first  time  in  years,  the giddy   thrill  of   being  able to  make  a  decision,
however poor or ill-conceived or unlikely.  Suddenly, the pinpricks felt like
not a punishment but  a celebration, like  hundreds of miniature  fireworks
exploding within  him  and for  him, as if  his body  were reminding  him of
who he was and of what he still owned: himself.
   He  lasted two hours before  the security guard’s dog found  him  and he
was dragged out by his feet, his palms scraping against the cement blocks
he clung to even then, by this time so cold that he tripped as he walked, that
his fingers were too iced to open the car door, and as soon as he was inside,
Rodger had turned around and hit him in the face, and the blood  from his
nose was thick and hot and reassuring and the taste of it on his lips oddly
nourishing, like  soup, as if his body  were something miraculous and self-
healing, determined to save itself.
   That evening they had taken him to the barn, where they sometimes took
him  at  night,  and  beat him   so badly  that  he  had  blacked  out  almost
immediately after  it had  begun. He had been hospitali]ed  that night,  and
then again a few  weeks later, when the  wounds had gotten infected.  For
those weeks, he had been left alone, and although they had been told at the
hospital that  he was  a  delinquent, that  he was  troubled, that  he  was a
problem and a liar,  the nurses were kind to  him:  there was one, an older
woman, who had sat by his bed and held a glass of apple Muice with a straw
in it so he could sip  from it  without lifting  his  head (he’d had to lie on his
side so they could clean his back and drain the wounds).
   “I   don’t  care  what  you  did,”  she  told  him  one  night,  after  she had
changed his bandages. “No  one  deserves this. Do  you  hear me,  young
man?”
   Then help me, he wanted to say. Please help me. But he didn’t. He was
too ashamed.
   She sat  next to  him  again and put  her hand  on his  forehead. “Try  to
behave yourself, all right?” she had said, but her voice had been gentle. “I
don’t want to see you back here.”

524
   Help  me, he wanted to say again, as she left  the room. Please. Please.
But he couldn’t. He never saw her again.
   Later, as an adult, he would  wonder if  he had invented this nurse, if  he
had conMured her out of desperation, a simulacrum of  kindness that was
almost as good as the real thing. He would argue with  himself: If  she had
existed, truly existed, wouldn’t she have told someone about him? Wouldn’t
someone have been sent to help him? But his  memories from this  period
were something slightly  blur-edged and unreliable, and as the years went
by, he was to come to reali]e  that he was, always, trying to  make his life,
his childhood, into something more acceptable, something more normal. He
would startle himself from  a dream about the counselors, and would try to
comfort himself: There were only two of them who used you, he would tell
himself. Maybe three. The others didn’t. They weren’t all cruel to you. And
then he would try, for days, to remember how many there had actually been:
Was it two? Or was it three? For years, he couldn’t understand why this was
so important to him, why  it  mattered to him so much, why he was always
trying to argue against his own memories, to spend so much time debating
the details of what had happened. And then he reali]ed that it was because
he thought that if he could convince himself  that it was less awful  than he
remembered, then he could also convince himself that he was less damaged,
that he was closer to healthy, than he feared he was.
   Finally  he was sent back to the home, and the first time he had seen his
back, he had recoiled, moving so quickly  away from  the bathroom mirror
that he had slipped and fallen on a section of wet tile. In those initial weeks
after the  beating, when the  scar tissue was still   forming,  it  had made a
puffed mound of flesh on his back, and at lunch he would sit alone and the
older boys would whip  damp pellets of  napkin at it,  trying  to get them to
ping off  of  it  as against a target, cheering when  they hit  him.  Until  that
point, he had never thought too specifically about his appearance. He knew
he was ugly. He knew he was ruined. He knew he was diseased. But he had
never considered himself grotesque. But now he was. There seemed to be
an inevitability to this, to his life: that every year he would become worse—
more  disgusting,  more  depraved. Every   year, his   right  to   humanness
diminished; every year, he became less and less of a person. But he didn’t
care any longer; he couldn’t allow himself to.
   It  was  difficult  to  live  without  caring,  however, and he found  himself
curiously  unable to   forget  Brother  Luke’s  promise,  that  when he  was

525
sixteen, his old life would  stop and his new life would  begin. He knew, he
did, that Brother Luke  had been lying, but he couldn’t  stop thinking about
it. Sixteen, he would think to himself  at night. Sixteen. When I am sixteen,
this will end.
   He  had asked Brother Luke, once, what their life would  be like  after he
turned sixteen. “You’ll  go to college,”  Luke had said, immediately, and he
had thrilled to this. He had asked where he would go, and Luke had named
the college he had attended as well (although when  he had gotten to that
college after all, he had looked up Brother Luke—Edgar Wilmot—and had
reali]ed there was no record of him having ever attended the school, and he
had been relieved, relieved  to  not  have something in  common  with  the
brother, although it was he who had let him imagine that he might someday
be there). “I’ll  move to Boston, too,”  Luke said. “And  we’ll  be married, so
we’ll  live in an apartment off campus.” Sometimes they discussed this: the
courses he would take, the things Brother Luke had done when he was at
college, the places they would travel  to after  he graduated. “Maybe we’ll
have a son together one day,” Luke said once, and he had stiffened, for he
knew without  Luke saying so that Luke  would  do to this  phantom son of
theirs what had been done to  him, and he  remembered thinking that that
would never happen, that he would never let this ghost child, this child who
didn’t  exist, ever  exist, that  he would  never let  another child  be around
Luke. He remembered thinking that he would protect this son of theirs, and
for a  brief, awful  moment, he wished  he would  never turn sixteen at all,
because he knew that once he did, Luke would need someone else, and that
he couldn’t let that happen.
   But  now Luke  was dead. The phantom child was safe. He could  safely
turn sixteen. He could turn sixteen and be safe.
   The  months passed. His back healed. Now a security  guard waited for
him after  his  classes and walked him  to  the parking  lot  to  wait  for  the
counselor on  duty.  One day  at  the  end of   the fall   semester, his math
professor talked to him after class had ended: Had he thought about college
yet? He   could  help  him;  he  could   help  him  get  there—he  could  go
somewhere excellent, somewhere top-flight. And oh,  he wanted to go, he
wanted to get away, he wanted to go  to college. He  was tugged, in those
days, between trying to resign himself to the fact that his life would forever
more be what it was, and the hope, small and stupid and stubborn as it was,
that it could be something else. The balance—between resignation and hope

526
—shifted by the day, by the hour, sometimes by the minute. He was always,
always trying  to decide how  he should  be—if  his thoughts should  be of
acceptance or of escape. In that moment he had looked at his professor, but
as he was about to  answer—Yes; yes, help me—something stopped him.
The professor had always been kind  to  him,  but wasn’t  there something
about that kindness that  made him  resemble Brother Luke?  What  if  the
professor’s offer of help cost him? He argued with himself as the professor
waited for his answer. One more time won’t hurt you, said the desperate part
of him, the part that wanted to  leave, the part that was counting every day
until sixteen, the part the other part of him Meered at. It’s one more time. He’s
another client. Now is not the time to start getting proud.
   But  in  the end, he had ignored that  voice—he was so tired,  he was so
sore, he was so exhausted from being  disappointed—and had shaken his
head. “College isn’t for  me,” he told  the professor, his voice thin from the
strain of lying. “Thank you. But I don’t  need your help.”
   “I   think you’re  making a  big mistake, Jude,” said his  professor, after a
silence. “Promise  me  you’ll   reconsider?”  and he  had  reached out  and
touched his arm, and he had Merked away, and the professor had looked at
him, strangely, and he had turned and fled the room,  the hallway blurring
into planes of beige.
   That  night he was taken to the barn. The barn was no longer a working
barn, but a place to store the shop class’s and the auto repair class’s proMects
—in the  stalls were half-assembled carburetors, and hulls of half-repaired
trucks, and half-sanded rocking chairs  that the home sold  for money. He
was in  the  stall  with  the  rocking  chairs, and  as one  of  the  counselors
seesawed into him, he left himself and flew above the stalls, to the rafters of
the barn, where he paused, looking at the scene below him, the machinery
and furniture  like  alien sculpture, the  floor  dusty with  dirt  and the  stray
pieces of hay, reminders of the barn’s original life  that they  never seemed
able to   fully   erase, at  the  two  people  making  a  strange  eight-legged
creature, one silent, one noisy and grunting  and thrusting  and alive. And
then he was flying out of the round window cut high into the wall, and over
the home, over its fields that were so beautiful  and green and yellow with
wild mustard in the summer, and now, in December, were still beautiful  in
their own way, a shimmering expanse of lunar white, the snow so fresh and
new that no  one had yet  trampled it.  He  flew  above this all,  and across
landscapes he had read about but had never seen, across mountains so clean

527
that they made him feel clean Must to contemplate them, over lakes as big as
oceans, until he was floating above Boston, and circling down and down to
that series of buildings that trimmed the side of the river, an expansive ring
of structures punctuated by squares of green, where he  would go  and be
remade, and where  his  life  would   begin,  where he  could  pretend that
everything that had come before had been someone else’s life, or a series of
mistakes, never to be discussed, never to be examined.
   When he came back to himself, the counselor was on top of him, asleep.
His name was Colin,  and he was often  drunk, as he was tonight,  his hot
yeasty breath puffing against his face. He was naked; Colin was wearing a
sweater but nothing else, and for a while he lay there under Colin’s weight,
breathing too,  waiting  for  him  to  wake  so he  could be  returned to  his
bedroom and cut himself.
   And   then, unthinkingly,  almost  as if   he  was a  marionette, his  limbs
moving without  thought, he was  wriggling  out from  beneath Colin, quiet
and quick, and hurrying his clothes back on, and then, again before he knew
it, grabbing Colin’s puffed coat from the hook on the inside of the stall and
shrugging it   on. Colin   was much  larger  than  he was,  fatter  and more
muscular, but he was almost as tall, and it was less wieldy  than it looked.
And then he was grabbing Colin’s Means from the ground, and snatching out
his wallet, and then the money within it—he didn’t count how much it was,
but he  could tell   by how  thin  a  sheaf it  was that  it  wasn’t  much—and
shoving that into  his own Means pocket, and then he was running. He had
always been a good runner, swift and silent and certain—watching him  at
the track, Brother Luke had always said he must be part Mohican—and now
he ran out of the barn, its doors open to the sparkling, hushed night, looking
about him as he left, and then, seeing no one, toward the field  behind the
home’s dormitory.
   It  was half a mile from the dormitory  to the road, and although he would
normally have been in pain after what  happened in the barn, that night he
felt no pain, only elation, a sense of hyper-wakefulness that seemed to have
been conMured particularly for this night, for this adventure. At the edge of
the property he dropped to the ground and rolled carefully under the barbed
wire, wrapping Colin’s Macket sleeves around his hands and then holding the
coils of wire above him so he could scoot beneath them. Once he was safely
free, his elation only intensified, and he ran and ran in the direction he knew
was east,  toward  Boston,  away from   the  home,  from  the  West, from

528
everything. He knew  he would  eventually have to  leave this road, which
was narrow and mostly dirt, and move toward the highway, where he would
be more exposed but also more anonymous, and he moved quickly  down
the hill that led toward the black dense woods that separated the road from
the interstate. Running on grass was more difficult, but  he did so anyway,
keeping close to the edge of the forest so that if a car passed, he could duck
within it and hide behind a tree.
   As  an adult, as a  crippled adult, and then  as a crippled adult  who was
truly crippled, as someone who could no longer even walk, as someone for
whom running was a  magic trick,  as impossible as flying,  he would  look
back on that night with awe: how fleet he had been, how fast, how tireless,
how lucky. He would wonder how long  he had run that night—at least two
hours, he thought, maybe  three—although at the  time he  hadn’t thought
about that at all,  only  that he  needed to get as far  as he could  from  the
home. The sun began to appear in the sky, and he ran into the woods, which
were the source of  many of  the younger boys’  fears, and which  were so
crowded  and  lightless  that  even  he  was  frightened,  and  he  was  not
frightened in general by  nature, but he had gone as deep into them as he
could, both because he had to go through the woods to reach the interstate
and because he knew that the deeper he hid within them, the less likely he
was to be discovered, and finally   he had chosen a large tree,  one of  the
largest, as if its  si]e  offered some promise of  reassurance, as if it  would
guard and protect him, and had tucked himself between its roots and slept.
   When he woke it  was dark again, although whether it was late afternoon
or late evening or  early morning  he wasn’t certain. He  began moving his
way through the trees again, humming to comfort himself and to announce
himself  to  whatever might   be waiting   for  him,  to   show them  he  was
unafraid, and by the time he had been spat out by the woods on the  other
side, it was still dark, so he knew it was in fact  nighttime, and he had slept
all day, and  that knowledge made him  feel  stronger and more energetic.
Sleep is more important than food, he remonstrated himself, because he was
very hungry, and then to his legs: Move. And  he did, running again uphill
toward the interstate.
   He  had reali]ed at some point in  the forest that there was only one way
he would be able to get to Boston, and so he stood by the side of the road,
and when the first truck  stopped for him and he climbed  aboard, he knew
what he would have to do when the truck stopped, and he did it.  He did it

529
again and again and again; sometimes the drivers gave him food or money,
and sometimes they didn’t.   They all  had  little  nests they  had made for
themselves in the trailers of their trucks, and they lay there, and sometimes
after it was over, they would drive  him a little  farther, and he would sleep,
the world moving beneath him in a perpetual earthquake. At filling stations
he would buy things to eat and would wait around, and eventually someone
would  choose him—someone always did—and  he would  climb  into  the
truck.
   “Where’re  you headed?” they would ask him.
   “Boston,”  he would say. “My uncle’s there.”
   Sometimes he  felt  the  shame of  what  he was  doing  so intensely  he
wanted to vomit: he knew he would  never be able to claim to himself  that
he had been coerced; he’d had sex with these men freely, he had let them do
whatever they wanted,  he had performed  enthusiastically and well.   And
sometimes he was unsentimental: he was doing what he had to do. There
was no other way. This was his skill, his one great skill, and he was using it
to get somewhere better. He was using himself to save himself.
   Sometimes the men  would  want him  for  longer and they  would  get a
motel room, and he would imagine  Brother Luke waiting  in  the bathroom
for him. Sometimes they would talk to  him—I have a son your age, they’d
say; I   have a  daughter  your  age—and he  would  lie   there  and listen.
Sometimes they would watch television until  they were ready to go again.
Some of them were cruel to him; some of them made him fear he would be
killed, or hurt so badly he wouldn’t be able to escape, and in those moments
he would be terrified, and he would wish, desperately, for Brother Luke, for
the monastery, for the nurse who had been so kind to him. But most of them
were neither cruel  nor kind.  They  were clients,  and he was giving  them
what they wanted.
   Years later, when he was able to review these weeks more obMectively, he
would be dumbstruck by how stupid he had been, by how small his oculus:
Why hadn’t  he simply  escaped? Why hadn’t he taken the  money he had
earned and bought a bus ticket? He  would  try and  try to  remember how
much he had earned, and although he knew it hadn’t been much, he thought
that it might  have been enough for a ticket somewhere, anywhere, even if
not Boston. But then, it simply hadn’t occurred to him. It was as if the entire
store of resourcefulness he had possessed, every piece of courage, had been
spent on his flight from  the home, and once on his own, he had simply let

530
his life be dictated to him  by others, following  one man after the next, the
way he had been taught to do.  And of  all  the ways in  which  he changed
himself as an adult, it would  be this, this idea that he could  create at least
some part of his own future, that would be the most difficult lesson to learn,
as well as the most rewarding.
   Once there had been a man who had smelled so terribly and had been so
sweatily large that he had almost  changed his mind, but although the  sex
had been horrific, the man had been gentle with him afterward, had bought
him a sandwich and a soda and had asked him real questions about himself
and had listened carefully to his made-up answers. He had stayed with the
man for  two  nights, and as he  drove, the  man had listened to  bluegrass
music and had sung along: he had had a lovely voice, low and clear, and he
had taught him the words, and he had found himself singing along with this
man, the road smooth beneath them. “God, you have a nice  voice, Joey,”
the man had said, and he had—how weak he was, how pathetic!—allowed
himself to be warmed by this  comment, had gobbled up this affection as a
rat would a piece of molding bread. On the second day, the man had asked
him if he wanted to stay with him;  they were in Ohio, and unfortunately he
wasn’t going any farther east, he was headed south now, but if he wanted to
stay with  him, he would  be delighted, he would  make sure he was taken
care of. He had declined the man’s offer, and the man had nodded, as if he
had expected he would, and given him a fold of money and kissed him, the
first of them who had. “Good luck to you, Joey,” he said, and later, after the
man had left, he had counted the money and reali]ed it  was more than he
thought, it  was more than he’d  made in his  previous ten days altogether.
Later, when the next man was brutish, when he was violent and rough, he
had wished he had gone with the other man: suddenly, Boston seemed less
important than tenderness, than someone who would  protect him  and be
good to  him.  He  lamented his  poor choices, how  he  seemed unable to
appreciate the people who were actually decent to him: he thought again of
Brother Luke, how  Luke had never hit  him  or yelled  at him; how  he had
never called him names.
   Somewhere he had gotten sick, but he didn’t know if it was from his time
on the road or from the home. He made the men use condoms, but a few of
them had  said they  would   and then  hadn’t,  and he  had  struggled and
shouted but  there had  been nothing  he  could  do. He  knew,  from  past
experience, that he would need a doctor. He stank; he was in so much pain

531
he could barely walk. On the outskirts of Philadelphia he decided he’d take
a break—he had to. He had torn a small hole in the sleeve of Colin’s Macket
and had rolled his money into a tube and shoved it  inside and then closed
the hole with   a safety pin  he had  found in  one of  the  motel rooms. He
climbed out of the last truck, although at the time he hadn’t known it would
be the last truck; at the time he had thought: one more. One more and I’ll
make it to Boston. He hated that he had to stop now when he was so close,
but he knew he needed help; he had waited as long as he could.
   The  driver had stopped at a filling   station near Philadelphia—he didn’t
want to drive into the city. There, he made his slow way to the bathroom; he
tried to clean himself. The illness made him  tired; he had a fever. The last
thing he remembered from that day—it had been late January, he thought;
still  cold, and now  with  a wet, stinging  wind that  seemed to slap against
him—was walking  to the edge of  the gas station, where there had been a
small tree, barren and unloved and alone, and sitting down against it, resting
his back  in   Colin’s  now-filthy   Macket against its spindly,  unconvincing
trunk, and shutting his  eyes, hoping that if  he slept for  a while,  he might
feel at least a little stronger.
   When he woke he knew he was in the backseat of a car, and the car was
moving, and  there was  Schubert playing,  and he allowed  himself  to  be
comforted by that, because it was something he knew, something familiar in
such unfamiliarity, in a strange car being driven by a stranger, a stranger he
was too weak  to sit  up  and examine, through  a strange landscape to an
unknown destination. When he woke again he was in a room, a living room,
and he looked around him: at the sofa he was on, the coffee table in front of
it, two  armchairs, a stone fireplace, all in shades of brown. He  stood, still
di]]y  but less di]]y,  and as he did, he noticed there was a man standing in a
doorway, watching him, a man a little  shorter than he, and thin, but with a
sloping stomach and fertile,  swelling hips.  He had glasses that had black
plastic bracketing their top half but were clear glass beneath, and a tonsure
of hair trimmed very short and soft, like a mink’s coat.
   “Come  to the kitchen and have something to eat,” the man said in a quiet
toneless voice, and he did, walking slowly after him and into a kitchen that,
except for   its   tiles  and  walls,   was  also  brown:  brown   table,  brown
cupboards, brown chairs. He sat in the chair at the foot of the table, and the
man put a plate before him  with a  hamburger and a slide of fries,  a glass

532
filled with  milk.  “I  normally don’t  get fast food,” the man said, and looked
at him.
   He wasn’t  sure what to say. “Thank you,”  he said, and the man nodded.
“Eat,”  he said, and he  did, and the  man sat at the  head of the table  and
watched him. Normally  this  would have made him  self-conscious, but he
was too hungry to care this time.
   When  he was finished he sat back and thanked the man again, and the
man nodded again, and there was a silence.
   “You’re  a prostitute,”  the man said, and he flushed, and looked down at
the table, at its shined brown wood.
   “Yes,”  he admitted.
   The man made a little noise, a little  snuffle. “How  long have you been a
prostitute?” he asked, but he couldn’t answer him  and was silent. “Well?”
the man asked. “Two years? Five years? Ten years? Your whole life?” He
was impatient, or almost impatient,  but his voice  was soft, and he wasn’t
yelling.
   “Five  years,” he said, and the man made the same small noise again.
   “You  have a venereal disease,” the man said, “I can smell it on you,” and
he cringed, and bent his head, and nodded.
   The man sighed. “Well,”  he said, “you’re  in  luck, because I’m a doctor,
and I happen to have some antibiotics in the house.” He got up and padded
over to one of the cupboards, and came back with an orange plastic bottle,
and took out a pill. “Take this,” he said, and he did. “Finish your milk,”  the
man said, and he did, and then the man left the room and he waited until he
came back. “Well?” the man said. “Follow me.”
   He  did,  his legs stringy  beneath him, and followed  the  man to  a door
across from the living   room, which  the man unlocked and  held open for
him. He hesitated, and the man made an impatient clucking noise. “Go on,”
he said. “It’s  a  bedroom,” and he  shut his eyes, weary, and then  opened
them again. He began preparing himself for the man to be cruel; the quiet
ones always were.
   When he reached the doorway, he saw that it led to a basement, and there
was a  set of  wooden  steps, steep like  a ladder,  that he  would  have to
descend, and he paused once more, wary, and the man made his strange
insect-like sound again and shoved him, not hard, against the small of his
back, and he stumbled down the stairs.

533
   He  had been expecting a dungeon, slippery and leaking and dank, but it
really was a bedroom, with a mattress made up with a blanket and sheets,
and a blue circular rug beneath it, and lining the left-hand  wall, bookcases
of the same unfinished wood the staircase had been made from, with books
on them.  The space was  bright-lit  in  that  aggressive, relentless way  he
remembered from  hospitals and  police  stations, and  there was  a  small
window, about the si]e of a dictionary, cut high into the far wall.
   “I  put out some clothes for you,” the man said, and he saw that folded on
the mattress  was  a  shirt  and  a  pair  of   sweatpants, and a  towel   and
toothbrush as well. “The bathroom’s there,” the man said, pointing to the far
right-hand corner of the room.
   And  then he began to leave. “Wait,” he called after the man, and the man
stopped his climb and looked at him, and he began, under the man’s ga]e, to
unbutton his  shirt.  Something changed in  the  man’s face,  then, and  he
climbed another few steps. “You’re sick,”  he said. “You  have to get better
first,” and then he left the room, the door clicking shut after him.
   He  slept  that night,  both  from  lack  of  anything  else to  do and  from
exhaustion. The next morning he woke and smelled food, and he groaned to
his feet and walked slowly up the stairs, where he found a plastic tray with
a plate of eggs, poached, and two lengths of bacon, a roll, a glass of milk, a
banana, and another of the white pills. He was too wobbly to bring it down
without falling,  so he sat there, on one of the unfinished wooden steps, and
ate the food and swallowed the pill. After resting, he stood to open the door
and take the tray to the kitchen, but the knob wouldn’t turn because the door
was locked. There was a small square cut into the bottom of the door, a cat
door, he assumed, although he hadn’t seen a cat, and he held back its curtain
of rubber and poked his head out. “Hello?” he called. He reali]ed he didn’t
know the man’s name, which wasn’t unusual—he never knew their names.
“Sir? Hello?”  But there was no answer, and he could tell from the way the
house was silent that he was alone.
   He  should have felt  panic, he should have felt  fear, but he felt  neither,
only a crush of  tiredness, and he left  the tray at  the top of  the stairs and
worked his way slowly down again, and then into bed, where he slept once
more.
   He  do]ed for  that entire day, and when he woke, the man was standing
above him again, watching him, and he sat up, abruptly. “Dinner,” the man
said, and he followed him upstairs, still in his borrowed clothes, which were

534
too wide in the waist and too short in the sleeves and legs, because when he
had looked for his own clothes, they were missing. My money, he thought,
but he was too addled to think beyond that.
   Once again he sat in the brown kitchen, and the man brought him his pill,
and a plate  with  brown  meat loaf,  and  a slop  of  mashed potatoes, and
broccoli, and another plate  for himself,  and they  began to eat in  silence.
Silence didn’t make him nervous—usually, he was grateful for it—but  this
man’s silence was closer to  inwardness, the way a cat  will  be silent  and
watching, watching, watching so fixedly  that you don’t  know what it  sees,
and then suddenly it will Mump, and trap something beneath its paw.
   “What  kind of doctor are you?” he asked, tentatively, and the man looked
at him.
   “A  psychiatrist,” the doctor said. “Do you know what that is?”
   “Yes,”  he said.
   The  man made his  noise again.  “Do  you  like  being a  prostitute?”  he
asked, and he felt, unaccountably, tears in his eyes, but then he blinked and
they were gone.
   “No,”  he said.
   “Then   why  do  you  do  it?”  the  man  asked, and he  shook  his head.
“Speak,” the man said.
   “I  don’t  know,”  he said, and the man made a huffing noise. “It’s  what I
know how to do,” he said at last.
   “Are  you  good at it?”  the man asked, and once again, he felt that sting,
and he was quiet for a long time.
   “Yes,”  he  said, and it  was the worst  admission he had ever made, the
hardest word for him to say.
   After  they were done, the doctor escorted him once again to the door, and
gave him the same little shove inside. “Wait,” he said to the man, as he was
closing the door. “My  name’s Joey,” and when the man said nothing, only
stared at him, “what’s yours?”
   The  man  kept  looking  at  him,  but  now  he  was, he  thought,  almost
smiling, or at least he was about to make some sort of expression. But then
he didn’t. “Dr. Traylor,”  the man said, and then pulled the door quickly shut
behind him, as if that very information  was a bird that might  fly away if  it
too were not trapped inside with him.
   The  next day he felt  less sore, less febrile. When  he stood, though, he
reali]ed he was still weak, and he swayed and grabbed at the air and in the

535
end, he didn’t fall. He moved toward the bookshelves, examining the books,
which were paperbacks, swollen and buckling from heat and moisture and
smelling sweetly of mildew. He found a copy of Emma, which he had been
reading in class at  the college before  he ran away, and  carried the book
slowly up  the stairs with  him, where he found  the place he’d left  off  and
read as he  ate  his  breakfast and  took  his  pill.   This  time  there was  a
sandwich as well, wrapped in a paper towel, with the word “Lunch” written
on the towel in  small letters. After  he had eaten, he went downstairs with
the book and sandwich and lay in bed, and he was reminded of how much
he had missed reading, of how grateful he was for this opportunity to leave
behind his life.
   He slept again; woke again. By  evening, he was very tired, and some of
the pain had returned, and when Dr. Traylor held open the door for him, it
took him a long time to mount the stairs. At dinner, he didn’t  say anything,
and neither did Dr. Traylor, but when he offered to help Dr. Traylor with the
dishes or the cooking, Dr. Traylor had looked at him. “You’re sick,” he said.
   “I’m   better,” he said. “I can help you in the kitchen if you want.”
   “No,  I  mean—you’re  sick,”  Dr. Traylor  said. “You’re  diseased. I can’t
have a  diseased person touching  my  food,”  and  he  had looked  down,
humiliated.
   There was a silence. “Where are your parents?” Dr. Traylor asked, and he
shook his  head again. “Speak,”   Dr. Traylor   said, and this  time  he was
impatient, although he still hadn’t raised his voice.
   “I  don’t know,”  he stammered, “I never had any.”
   “How   did you  become a prostitute?” Dr. Traylor  asked. “Did  you  start
yourself, or did someone help you do it?”
   He   swallowed,  feeling   the  food   in   his  stomach  turning   to  paste.
“Someone helped me,” he whispered.
   There was a silence. “You don’t  like it  when I call you  a prostitute,” the
man said, and he managed, this time,  to raise  his head and look  at him.
“No,”  he said. “I understand,” the man said. “But that is what you are, isn’t
it? Although I  could call you something else, if you like:  a whore, maybe.”
He was quiet again. “Is that better?”
   “No,”  he whispered again.
   “So,”  the man said, “a prostitute it is, then, right?” and looked at him, and
finally, he nodded.

536
   That night  in the bedroom, he looked for something to cut himself  with,
but there was nothing sharp in the room, nothing at all; even the books had
only soft bloated pages. So he pressed his fingernails into his calves as hard
as he could,  bent over and  wincing  from  the effort  and discomfort,  and
finally  he was able to puncture the skin,  and then work his  nail back and
forth in the cut to  make it wider. He was only able to  make three incisions
in his right leg, and then he was too tired, and he fell asleep again.
   The  third morning  he felt  demonstrably better: stronger, more alert. He
ate his breakfast and read his book, and then he moved the tray aside and
stuck his  head through the  flapped  cutout and  tried  and tried  to  fit  his
shoulders through it. But no matter what angle he tried, he was simply too
large and the opening too small and at last he had to stop.
   After  he had rested, he poked his head through the hole again. He had a
direct view of  the living  room to his left,  and the kitchen area to his right,
and he looked and looked as if for clues. The house was very tidy; he could
tell from how tidy  it was that Dr. Traylor lived  alone. If he craned his neck,
he could see, on the far left, a staircase leading to a second story, and Must
beyond that, the front  door,  but he couldn’t  see how  many locks  it  had.
Mainly, though, the house was defined by its silence: there was no ticking
of clocks, no  sound of cars or people outside. It  could have been a house
]ooming through space, so quiet was it. The only noise was the refrigerator,
purring its intermittent whir, but when it stopped, the silence was absolute.
   But  as featureless as the house was, he was also fascinated by it: it was
only the third house he had ever been in. The second had been the Learys’.
The first  house had been a client’s, a very important client,  Brother Luke
had told him, outside Salt Lake City, who had paid extra because he didn’t
want to  come  to  the  motel  room.  That  house had been  enormous, all
sandstone and glass,  and Brother  Luke   had come  with   him,  and  had
secreted himself in the bathroom—a bathroom as big as one of their motel
rooms—off the bedroom where he and the client had had sex. Later, as an
adult, he would fetishi]e  houses, especially his own house, although even
before he had Greene Street, or Lantern House, or the flat  in  London, he
would treat himself  every few  months to a  maga]ine about homes, about
people who  spent their  lives making  pretty  places even prettier,  and he
would turn the pages slowly, studying every picture. His friends laughed at
him for this, but he didn’t care: he dreamed of the day he’d have someplace
of his own, with things that were absolutely his.

537
   That night Dr. Traylor  let him out again, and again it was the kitchen, and
the meal, and the  two  of them  eating in  silence. “I  feel  better now,”  he
ventured, and then, when Dr. Traylor didn’t say anything, “if you want to do
something.” He was  realistic enough to know  that he  wasn’t going  to be
allowed to leave without repaying Dr. Traylor in some way; he was hopeful
enough to think that he might be allowed to leave at all.
   But  Dr.  Traylor  shook his head. “You  may  feel better, but  you’re  still
diseased,” he said. “The antibiotics take ten days to eliminate the infection.”
He took a fish bone, so fine it was transluscent, out of his mouth, placed it
on the edge of  his plate.  “Don’t  tell  me this  is  the first  venereal disease
you’ve ever had,” he said, looking up at him, and he flushed again.
   That night  he thought about what to do. He was almost strong enough to
run, he thought. At the next  dinner, he would follow  Dr. Traylor,  and then
when his back was turned, he would run to  the door and outside and look
for help. There were some problems with this plan—he still didn’t have his
clothes; he didn’t have any shoes—but he knew that there was something
wrong with  this house, that there was something wrong  with  Dr. Traylor,
that he had to get out.
   He tried  to conserve his energy the next day. He was too twitchy to read,
and he had  to keep  himself  from  pacing the  floor.  He saved that  day’s
sandwich and stuffed it into  the pocket of  the borrowed sweatpants so he
would have something to eat if he had to hide for a long period. In the other
pocket he shoved the plastic bag that lined the trash can in the bathroom—
he thought he could tear it in half and make shoes for himself once he was
safely out of Dr. Traylor’s reach. And then he waited.
   But that night he wasn’t let out of the room at all. From his perch near the
flap, he could  see the living  room lights  turning  on, he could  smell food
cooking. “Dr. Traylor?” he called. “Hello?”  But there was silence except for
the sound of meat frying in a pan, the evening’s news on the television. “Dr.
Traylor!”   he called.  “Please, please!”  But   nothing  happened, and after
calling and calling, he was spent, and slumped back down the stairs.
   That  night he  had a dream that on  the upper floor  of  the house was a
series of other bedrooms, all with low  beds and round tufted rugs beneath
them, and that each bed held a boy: some of the boys were older, because
they had been in the house for a long time, and some were younger. None of
them knew that the others existed; none of them could hear one another. He
reali]ed that he  didn’t know  the physical dimensions of  the house, and in

538
the dream the house became a skyscraper, filled with hundreds of rooms, of
cells, each containing a different boy, each waiting for Dr. Traylor to let him
out. He woke, then, gasping, and ran to the top  of the stairs, but when he
pushed against the flap, it didn’t move. He lifted it up and saw that the hole
had been closed with  a piece  of  gray plastic,  and as hard as he  pushed
against it, it wouldn’t budge.
   He didn’t  know  what to do. He tried to  stay up the rest of the night, but
he fell asleep, and when he woke, there was the tray with his breakfast and
his lunch and two pills:  one for  the morning, one for evening. He pinched
the pills between his fingers and considered them—if he didn’t  take them,
he wouldn’t  get better, and Dr. Traylor wouldn’t  touch him  unless he was
well. But  if  he didn’t take them, then he wouldn’t  get better, and he knew
from prior  experience how awful he would feel, how  almost unimaginably
filthy  he would  be, as if  his entire self,  inside and out, had been sprayed
with excrement. He began to rock  himself, then. What  do I  do, he asked,
what do I do? He thought of the fat truck driver, the one who had been kind
to him. Help me, he begged him, help me.
   Brother Luke, he pled, help me, help me.
   Once  again, he thought:  I  have made the  wrong decision.  I  have left
somewhere where I at least had the outdoors, and school, and where I knew
what was going to happen to me. And now I have none of those things.
   You’re so stupid, the voice inside him said, you’re so stupid.
   For  six more days it went on  like this:  his food would  appear sometime
when he was sleeping. He took the pills; he couldn’t not.
   On the tenth day, the door opened, and Dr. Traylor was standing there. He
was so alarmed, so surprised, that he hadn’t been prepared, but before he
could stand, Dr. Traylor had closed the door and was coming toward him.
Over one  shoulder he held  an  iron  fire  poker, loosely,  as one  would  a
baseball bat, and as he came toward him, he was terrified by it: What did it
mean? What would be done to him with it?
   “Take  off  your clothes,” Dr.  Traylor  said, still  in his same bland voice,
and he did, and Dr. Traylor swung the poker off his shoulder and he ducked,
reflexively, lifting   his  arms over his head. He  heard the doctor make his
small wet noise. And then Dr.  Traylor unbelted his pants and stood before
him. “Take  them down,”  he  said, and he did,  but before  he was able to
begin, Dr.   Traylor  nudged  him  in  the  neck  with   the  poker. “You   try

539
anything,” he said, “biting,  anything,  and I will  beat you  in the head with
this until you become a vegetable, do you understand me?”
   He  nodded, too petrified  to say anything.  “Speak,”  Dr.  Traylor yelled,
and he startled.
   “Yes,”  he gulped. “Yes, I understand.”
   He was scared of Dr. Traylor, of course; he was scared of all of them. But
it had never occurred to him to fight with the clients, had never occurred to
him to challenge them. They were  powerful and he was not. And  Brother
Luke had trained him too well. He was too obedient. He was, as Dr. Traylor
had made him admit, a good prostitute.
   Every  day was like  this, and although the sex was no  worse than what
he’d had before, he remained convinced that it was a prelude, that it would
eventually get very  bad, very strange. He had heard stories from  Brother
Luke—he had seen videos—about things people did to one another: obMects
they used, props and weapons. A few times he had experienced these things
himself. But he knew that in many ways he was lucky: he had been spared.
The terror of what  might be ahead of him was, in  many ways, worse than
the terror of the sex itself. At  night he would imagine what he didn’t  know
to imagine  and begin gasping with  panic,  his clothes—a  different set  of
clothes now, but still not his clothes—becoming clammy with perspiration.
   At   the  end of  one  session, he  asked Dr.  Traylor  if   he could  leave.
“Please,” he said. “Please.” But Dr. Traylor said that he had given him  ten
days of hospitality, and that he needed to repay those ten days. “And then
can I go?” he asked, but the doctor was already walking out the door.
   On  the sixth  day of  his  repayment he thought of  a plan.  There was a
second or two—Must that—in which Dr. Traylor tucked the fire poker under
his left arm and unbelted his pants with  his right  hand. If he could time  it
correctly, he could hit the doctor in the face with a book, and try to run out.
He would have to be very quick; he would have to be very agile.
   He  scanned the books on their shelves, wishing yet  again that some of
them were hardcovers, not these thick bricks of paperbacks. A small one, he
knew, would feel more like a slap, would be more wieldy, and so finally he
chose a copy  of  Dubliners:  it  was thin  enough for  him  to  grip,  pliable
enough to crack against a face. He tucked it  under his mattress, and then
reali]ed  he didn’t  even need to  bother with  the  deception; he could  Must
leave it by his side. So he did, and waited.

540
   And  then there was Dr.  Traylor and the  fire poker,  and as he began to
unbelt his pants, he sprang up and smacked the doctor as hard as he could
across his face, and he  heard and felt  the doctor  screaming and the fire
poker falling   to  the  cement floor   with  a  clang,  and the  doctor’s  hand
grabbing at his ankle, but he kicked away and stumbled up the stairs, tugged
open the door, and ran. At the  front door  he saw a mess of locks, and he
nearly sobbed, his fingers clumsy, throwing the bolts this way and that, and
then he was outside and running, running faster than he ever had. You can
do it, you can do it,  screamed the voice in his head, encouraging for once,
and then, more urgently, Faster, faster, faster. As he had gotten better, Dr.
Traylor’s meals for  him had gotten smaller and smaller, which  meant that
he was always weak, always tired, but now he was vividly alert and he was
running, shouting for  help as he did.  But even as he ran  and shouted, he
could see that no  one would  hear his calls:  there was no  other house in
sight, and although he had expected there might be trees, there weren’t, Must
flat blank  stretches of land, with nothing  to hide behind. And  then he felt
how cold it was, and how things were embedding themselves into the soles
of his feet, but still he ran.
   And  then behind him he heard another pair of footsteps slapping against
the pavement, and a familiar Mangling noise, and he knew it was Dr. Traylor.
He didn’t  even shout at him, he didn’t  even threaten, but as he turned his
head to see how close the doctor was—and he was very close, Must a few
yards behind him—he tripped and fell, his cheek banging against the road.
   After  he had fallen, all of his energy deserted him, a flock of birds rising
noisily and swiftly  flying  away, and he saw that the Mangling noise was Dr.
Traylor’s unbuckled belt, which he was sliding out from  his pants and then
using to beat him, and he huddled into himself as he was hit and hit and hit.
All  that  time,  the  doctor said  nothing,  and all   he could  hear were  Dr.
Traylor’s  breaths, his gasps from  exertion  as he  brought the  belt  down
harder and harder on his back, his legs, his neck.
   Back at the house, the beating continued, and over the next days, the next
weeks, he was beat more.  Not  regularly—he never knew  when  it  might
happen next—but often enough so that coupled with  his  lack of  food, he
was always di]]y,   he was always weak:  he felt  he would  never have the
strength to run again. As he feared, the sex also got worse, and he was made
to do things that he was never able to talk about, not to anyone, not even to
himself, and again, although it wasn’t always terrifying, it was often enough

541
so that he lived  in  a constant half  da]e  of  fear, so that he  knew that  he
would die in Dr. Traylor’s  house. One night he had a dream of himself as a
man, a real  adult,  but he  was still  in  the  basement and waiting  for  Dr.
Traylor, and he knew in the dream that something had happened to him, that
he had lost his mind,  that he was like  his roommate in  the home, and he
woke and prayed that he might die soon. During the daytime, as he slept, he
dreamed of Brother Luke, and when he woke from those dreams he reali]ed
how much Luke  had always protected him, how  well he had treated him,
how kind  he had been to  him.  He had limped  to  the top  of the  wooden
staircase then, and thrown himself down it, and then had pulled himself up
and had done it again.
   And  then one day (Three months later? Four? Later, Ana would tell him
that Dr. Traylor had said it was twelve weeks after he had found him at the
gas station), Dr.  Traylor   said, “I’m   tired  of  you.  You’re  dirty   and you
disgust me and I want you to leave.”
   He  couldn’t  believe it.  But  then he  remembered to speak. “Okay,”  he
said, “okay. I’ll leave now.”
   “No,”  said Dr. Traylor, “you’ll  leave how I want you to leave.”
   For  several days, nothing happened, and he assumed that this too  had
been a lie, and he was grateful that he hadn’t gotten too excited, that he was
finally able to recogni]e a lie  when he was told it. Dr. Traylor had begun to
serve him  his meals on  a fold   of  the day’s newspaper, and one  day he
looked at  the  date and  reali]ed  it  was  his  birthday. “I   am  fifteen,”  he
announced to the quiet  room, and hearing himself  say those words—the
hopes, the fantasies, the impossibilities that only he knew lay behind them
—he was  sick.  But  he  didn’t  cry:   his ability   to  not  cry  was  his  only
accomplishment, the only thing he could take pride in.
   And  then one night Dr. Traylor came downstairs with his fire poker. “Get
up,” he said, and Mabbed him in the back with the poker as he fumblingly
climbed the stairs, falling   to his  knees and getting up  again and tripping
again and standing again. He was prodded all  the way  to the  front  door,
which was aMar, Must slightly, and then outside, into the night. It was still
cold, and still  wet,  but even through his  fear he could  recogni]e  that the
weather was changing, that even as time had suspended itself for him, it had
not  for  the  rest  of  the  world,   in  which  the  seasons had  marched on
uncaringly; he could  smell the air  turning  green. Next to him  was a bare
bush with a black branch, but at its very tip it was sprouting buboes of pale

542
lilac, and he stared at it frantically, trying to sei]e  a picture of it and hold it
in his mind, before he was poked forward.
   At  the car Dr. Traylor held open the trunk and Mabbed him again with the
fire  poker, and  he could  hear himself  making  sounds like  sobs, but  he
wasn’t crying,  and he climbed  inside, although  he was so weak  that Dr.
Traylor had to help him, pinching the sleeve of his shirt between his fingers
so he wouldn’t have to actually touch him.
   They  drove. The  trunk was  clean and large, and he rolled  about in  it,
feeling them go around corners and up hills and down hills, and then along
long stretches of plain, even road. And then the car swerved left and he was
being bounced along some uneven surface and then the car stopped.
   For  a  while,   three minutes—he  counted—nothing  happened, and he
listened and listened but he could  hear nothing, Must his own breaths, his
own heart.
   The trunk opened, and Dr. Traylor helped him out, plucking his shirt, and
shoved him to the front of the car with the fire poker. “Stay there,” he said,
and he did, shivering, watching the doctor get back into the car, roll  down
the window, lean  out at him.  “Run,”   the doctor said, and when  he stood
there, fro]en, “you  like  running so much, right?  So run.” And  Dr. Traylor
started the engine and finally, he woke and ran.
   They were in a field,  a large barren square of dirt where there would in a
few weeks be grass but now there was nothing, Must patches of shallow ice
that broke under  his bare feet  like  pottery, and small  white  pebbles that
glowed like  stars. The field dipped in  the middle, Must slightly, and on his
right was the road. He couldn’t  see how big  the road was, only that there
was one, but there were no cars passing. To his  left the  field  was fenced
with wire, but it  was farther away, and he couldn’t see what lay beyond the
wire.
   He  ran,  the car  Must behind him. At   first  it  actually  felt   good to  be
running, to be outdoors, to be away from that house: even this, the ice under
his feet like glass, the wind smacking against his face, the tap of the fender
as it nudged against the back of his legs, even all this was better than that
house, that room with its cinder-block walls and window so small it was no
window at all.
   He  ran. Dr. Traylor  followed  him,  and sometimes he would accelerate,
and he would run faster. But he couldn’t run like he used to run, and he fell,
and fell again. Each time he fell, the car would slow, and Dr. Traylor would

543
call out—not angrily, not even loudly—“Get up. Get up and run; get up and
run or we’re  going back to  the house,” and he would make himself  stand
and run again.
   He ran. He didn’t  know then that this was the last time in his life  that he
would ever  run, and  much later  he would  wonder: If  I  had  known that,
would I  have been able to run faster? But  of course it  was an impossible
question, a non-question, an  axiom  with  no  solution. He  fell  again  and
again, and on the  twelfth  time,  he was moving  his mouth,  trying  to  say
something, but nothing would  come out. “Get  up,” he heard the man say.
“Get up. The next time you fall will be the last,” and he got up again.
   By  this time he was no longer running, he was walking and stumbling, he
was crawling from the car and the car was bumping against him harder and
harder. Make this stop, he thought, make this stop. He remembered—who
had told him this? one of the brothers, but which one?—a story of a piteous
little boy, a boy, he had been told, in much worse circumstances than he was
in, who after  being so good for so long  (another way in which  he and the
boy had been different), prayed one night to God to take him: I’m ready, the
boy said in the story, I’m  ready, and an angel, terrible and golden-winged,
with eyes that burned with fire, appeared and wrapped his wings around the
boy and the boy turned to cinders and was gone, released from this world.
   I’m  ready, he said, I’m ready, and he waited for the angel with his awful,
fearsome beauty to come save him.
   The  last time he fell,  he couldn’t  get up  again. “Get  up!”  he heard Dr.
Traylor yell. “Get  up!”  But he couldn’t. And  then he heard the engine start
again, and he felt  the headlights coming toward  him, two  streams of fire
like the angel’s eyes, and he turned his head to the side and waited, and the
car came toward him and then over him and it was done.
   And  that was the end. After  that, he became an adult. As  he lay in  the
hospital, Ana sitting by his side, he made promises to himself. He evaluated
the mistakes he had made. He  never had  known whom  to  trust: he  had
followed  anyone who  had  shown  him  any  kindness. After,  though,  he
decided that he  would change this.  No  longer would  he  trust people  so
quickly. No  longer would  he have sex. No  longer would  he expect to  be
saved.
   “It’ll    never  be  this  bad,”   Ana  used to  say  to  him   in  the  hospital.
“Things’ll  never be this  bad again,” and although he knew  she meant the
pain, he also liked  to think  she meant his life  in  general: that with  every

544
year, things would get better. And she had been right: things did get better.
And Brother Luke had been right as well, because when he was sixteen, his
life changed. A year after Dr. Traylor, he was in the college he had dreamed
of; with every day he didn’t have sex, he was becoming cleaner and cleaner.
His life  became more improbable by  the year. Every  year, his own  good
fortunes multiplied and intensified, and he was astonished again and again
by the things and generosities that were bequeathed to him, by the people
who entered his life, people so different from the people he had known that
they seemed to  be another species altogether: How,  after  all,  could  Dr.
Traylor and  Willem  both  be named the same sort  of  being? How  could
Father Gabriel and Andy? How could Brother Luke  and Harold? Did what
existed in the first  group also exist in  the second, and if so, how  had that
second group chosen otherwise, how  had they  chosen what to  become?
Things had not Must corrected themselves; they had reversed themselves, to
an almost absurd degree. He had gone  from  nothing to  an embarrassing
bounty. He would remember, then, Harold’s claim that life compensated for
its losses, and he  would  reali]e  the truth  of  that, although  sometimes it
would seem like  life  had not Must compensated for itself but had done so
extravagantly, as if his very life was begging him to forgive  it, as if it  were
piling   riches  upon  him,   smothering  him   in   all  things   beautiful   and
wonderful and hoped-for so he wouldn’t  resent it, so he would  allow it  to
keep moving  him  forward.  And  so, as the  years went  by, he  broke his
promises to himself again and again. He did end up following  people who
were kind to him. He did trust people again. He did have sex again. He did
hope to be saved. And he was right to do so: not every time, of course, but
most of the time. He ignored what the past had taught him and more often
than he should have been, he was rewarded for it. He regretted none of it,
not even the sex, because he had had it with hope, and to  make someone
else happy, someone who had given him everything.
   One  night shortly  after he and Willem   had become a couple, they had
been at a dinner party at Richard’s, a raucous, casual affair of  Must people
they loved and people they liked—JB and Malcolm and Black Henry Young
and Asian Henry Young and Phaedra and Ali and all of their boyfriends and
girlfriends,  their   husbands and wives.   He  was  in  the  kitchen  helping
Richard prepare dessert, and JB came in—he was a little  drunk—and put
his arm around his neck and kissed him on the cheek. “Well, Judy,” he said,
“you  really  ended up with  it  all  in  the end,  didn’t  you? The  career, the

545
money, the apartment, the man. How’d you get so lucky?” JB had grinned
at him,  and he  had grinned  back. He  was  glad Willem   wasn’t there  to
overhear that comment, because he knew Willem would get testy at what he
saw as JB’s Mealousy, at his conviction that everyone else had, and had had,
life easier than he did, that he, Jude, was blessed in a way that no one else
was.
   But  he didn’t  see it like this.  He knew it  was in part JB’s  way of  being
ironic,  of  congratulating him  for  fortune  that  they both  knew  was, yes,
excessive but also deeply appreciated. And if he was to be honest, he was
also flattered by JB’s  Mealousy: to JB, he wasn’t a cripple who was being
cosmically repaid for a lousy run; he was JB’s equal, someone in whom JB
saw only the things to  envy and never the things to pity.  And besides, JB
was right: How did he get so lucky? How did he end up with everything he
had? He was never to know; he was always to wonder.
   “I   don’t  know,  JB,”  he said,  handing him  the  first  slice  of  cake and
smiling  at him,  as from  the  dining  room, he  could hear  Willem’s  voice
saying something, and then a blast of laughter from everyone else, a sound
of pure delight. “But you know, I’ve been lucky all my life.”

546
                                                         3

THE WOMAN’S NAME is Claudine and she is a friend of  a  friend   of  an
acquaintance, a Mewelry designer, which is something of a deviation for him,
as he  usually  only  sleeps  with  people  in  the  industry,  who  are  more
accustomed to, more forgiving of, temporary arrangements.
   She is thirty-three,  with  long dark hair that  lightens at its tips, and very
small hands, hands like a  child’s,  on which  she wears rings that she has
made, dark with  gold and glinting  with  stones; before they have sex, she
takes them off last, as if these rings, not her underwear, are what conceal the
most private parts of her.
   They  have been sleeping together—not  seeing each other, because he
sees no one—for almost two months, which  again is a deviation  for  him,
and he knows he will  have to end it soon. He had told  her when they had
begun that it was only sex, that he was in love with someone else, and that
he couldn’t spend the night, not ever, and she had seemed fine with that; she
had said  she was fine   with  it,  anyway,  and that  she was  in  love  with
someone else herself. But he has seen no evidence of another man in her
apartment, and whenever he texts, she is always available. Another warning
sign: he will have to end it.
   Now  he kisses her on her forehead, sits up. “I have to go,” he says.
   “No,”  she says. “Stay. Just a little longer.”
   “I  can’t,”  he says.
   “Five  minutes,” she says.
   “Five,”   he agrees, and lies back down. But after five  minutes he kisses
her again on the side of the face. “I really do  have to go,” he tells her, and
she makes a noise, one of protest and resignation, and turns over onto her
side.
   He goes to her bathroom, showers and rinses out his mouth, comes back
and kisses her again. “I’ll text you,”  he says, disgusted by how he has been
reduced to a vocabulary consisting almost entirely of  clichés. “Thank  you
for letting me come over.”
   At  home, he walks  silently  through the darkened apartment, and in the
bedroom he takes off his clothes, gets into bed with a groan, rolls over and

547
wraps his arms around Jude, who  wakes and turns to  him. “Willem,”   he
says, “you’re home,” and Willem  kisses him to cover the guilt  and sorrow
he always feels when he hears the relief and happiness in Jude’s voice.
   “Of   course,” he says. He always  comes home; he has never not.  “I’m
sorry it’s so late.”
   It  is a hot night, humid and still, and yet he presses against Jude as if he is
trying to  warm  himself, threading their  legs together. Tomorrow, he  tells
himself, he will end it with Claudine.
   They have never discussed it, but he knows Jude knows he is having sex
with other people. He has even given Willem his permission. This was after
that terrible   Thanksgiving,  when  after  years  of  obfuscation,  Jude was
revealed to him completely, the shreds of cloud  that had always obscured
him from view abruptly wiped away. For many days, he hadn’t known what
to do (other than run back into therapy himself; he had called his shrink the
day after Jude had  made his first  appointment with  Dr.  Loehmann), and
whenever he looked at Jude, scraps of his  narrative would return  to him,
and he would study him covertly, wondering how he had gotten from where
he had been to where he was, wondering how he had become the person he
had when everything in his life had argued that he shouldn’t be. The awe he
had felt for  him,  then, the despair and horror, was something one felt  for
idols, not for other humans, at least no other humans he knew.
   “I   know  how you  feel, Willem,”   Andy  had said in  one of  their  secret
conversations, “but he doesn’t want you to admire him; he wants you to see
him as he is. He wants you to tell him that his life, as inconceivable as it is,
is still a life.”  He paused. “Do you know what I mean?”
   “I  do know,” he said.
   In  the first  bleary days after Jude’s story, he could feel Jude being very
quiet around him, as if he was trying not to call attention to himself, as if he
didn’t want to remind Willem of  what he now knew. One night a week or so
later, they were eating a muted dinner at the apartment, and Jude had said,
softly, “You  can’t even look  at me anymore.” He  had looked up then and
had seen his pale, frightened face, and had dragged his chair close to Jude’s
and sat there, looking at him.
   “I’m    sorry,”  he  murmured. “I’m    afraid  I’m   going  to  say something
stupid.”
   “Willem,”   Jude said, and was quiet. “I  think I  turned out pretty normal,
all things considered, don’t you?” and Willem had heard the strain, and the

548
hope, in his voice.
   “No,”  he said, and Jude winced. “I think you turned out extraordinary, all
things considered or not,” and finally, Jude smiled.
   That  night, they had discussed what they were going to  do. “I’m  afraid
you’re stuck with me,”  he began, and when he saw how relieved Jude was,
he cursed himself for not making it clearer earlier that he was going to stay.
Then he gathered himself and they talked about physical matters: how far
he could go, what Jude didn’t want to do.
   “We can do whatever you want, Willem,” Jude said.
   “But  you don’t like  it,” he’d said.
   “But  I owe it to you,”  Jude had said.
   “No,”   he told  him.  “It  shouldn’t  feel like  something you owe  me; and
besides, you don’t owe it to me.” He stopped. “If  it’s not  arousing for you,
it’s not for me, either,” he added, although, to his shame, he did still want to
have sex with Jude. He wouldn’t, not  anymore, not if Jude didn’t  want to,
but it didn’t mean he would be able to suddenly stop craving it.
   “But  you’ve sacrificed so much to be with me,” Jude said after a silence.
   “Like  what?” he asked, curious.
   “Normalcy,”  Jude said. “Social acceptability. Ease of life. Coffee, even. I
can’t add sex to that list.”
   They had talked and talked, and he had finally managed to convince him,
had managed to get Jude to define what he actually liked.  (It  hadn’t been
much.) “But what are you going to do?” Jude asked him.
   “Oh,  I’ll  be fine,” he said, not really knowing himself.
   “You  know,  Willem,”  Jude had said, “you  should obviously  sleep with
whomever you want. I Must”—he fumbled—“I know this is selfish, but I Must
don’t want to hear about it.”
   “It’s   not  selfish,”   he said,  reaching across the  bed  for  him.  “And   I
wouldn’t do that, not ever.”
   That was eight months ago, and in those eight months, things had gotten
better: not,  Willem   thought,  his  former  version of   better, in  which   he
pretended everything was fine  and  ignored all  inconvenient  evidence or
suspicions that suggested otherwise, but actually better. He could tell Jude
really was  more relaxed:  he was less inhibited   physically, he  was more
affectionate, and he was both of those things because he knew that Willem
had released him from what he thought were his obligations. He was cutting
himself far less frequently. Now he didn’t  need Harold or Andy to confirm

549
for him that Jude was better: now he knew it to be true. The only difficulty
was that he did still desire Jude, and at times he had to remind himself not
to go any further, that he was getting close to the boundaries of what Jude
could tolerate, and he would make himself stop. In those moments he would
be angry, not at  Jude or even at  himself—he had never  felt guilty   about
wanting to have sex, and he didn’t feel guilty about wanting to have it now
—but at life, at how it  had conspired to make Jude afraid of something that
he had always associated with nothing but pleasure.
   He  was  careful about  who  he chose to  sleep with:  he  picked people
(women, really: they had almost all  been women) who he either sensed or
knew, from previous experience, were truly only  interested in him  for sex
and were going  to be discreet. Often,  they were  confused, and he didn’t
blame them. “Aren’t you in a relationship with a man?” they would ask, and
he would tell them that he was, but that they had an open relationship. “So
are you  not  really  gay?”  they would   ask, and  he would  say, “No,   not
fundamentally.” The younger women  were more accepting of this:  they’d
had boyfriends (or had boyfriends) who  had slept with other men as well;
they had slept with other women. “Oh,”  they’d say, and that would usually
be it—if  they  had other concerns, other questions, they didn’t  ask. These
younger women—actresses, makeup assistants, costume assistants—also
didn’t want a relationship with him; often, they didn’t  want a relationship at
all. Sometimes the women asked him questions about Jude—how they had
met, what he was like—and he answered them, and felt wistful, and missed
him.
   But  he was vigilant about not letting this life  intrude on his life  at home.
Once there had been a blind item in a gossip column—forwarded to him by
Kit—that   was  clearly  about  him,   and  after  debating  whether  to   say
something to Jude or  not, he had in  the end  decided not to;  Jude would
never see the story, and there was no reason to make what Jude knew was
happening in theory something he was forced to confront in reality.
   JB, however, had seen the item (he supposed other people he knew had
seen it as well, but JB was the only one to actually mention it to  him), and
had asked him   if  it   was true.  “I   didn’t   know  you  guys  had  an open
relationship,” he said, more curious than accusatory.
   “Oh  yeah,” he said, casually. “Right from the start.”
   It  saddened him, of course, that his sex life and his home life should have
to be two distinct  realms, but he was old enough now to know that within

550
every relationship was something unfulfilled  and disappointing, something
that had  to  be sought  elsewhere. His  friend  Roman,  for  example, was
married  to  a   woman  who,  while   beautiful   and  loyal,   was  famously
unintelligent: she didn’t understand the films Roman was in, and when you
talked to her, you found yourself consciously recalibrating the velocity and
complexity and content of your  conversation, because she so often looked
confused when the talk turned to politics, or finance, or literature, or art, or
food, or architecture, or the environment. He knew that Roman was aware
of this deficiency, in  both Lisa  and in his relationship. “Ah,   well,”  he had
once said to Willem, unprompted, “if I want good conversation, I can talk to
my friends, right?”  Roman had been among the first  of  his friends to  get
married, and at the time, he had been fascinated by and disbelieving of his
choice. But now he knew:  you always sacrificed something. The question
was what  you  sacrificed.  He  knew  that  to  some  people—JB;  Roman,
probably—his own sacrifice would be unthinkable. It would have been once
to him as well.
   He  thought  frequently  these days of  a  play he  had done  in  graduate
school, by a beetley, plodding woman in the playwriting  division  who had
gone on to have great success as a writer of spy movies but who in graduate
school had  tried   to  write   Pinteresque dramas about  unhappy  married
couples. If This Were a Movie was about an unhappy married  couple—he
was a professor of classical music; she was a librettist—who lived in New
York. Because the couple was in their  forties (at  the time, a gray-colored
land, impossibly far  and unimaginably grim),  they were  devoid of  humor
and in a constant state of yearning for their younger selves, back when life
had actually seemed so full of promise and hope, back when they had been
romantic, back when  life  itself  had  been a romance. He  had played the
husband, and while he  had long ago  reali]ed  that it  had been, really, an
awful play (it  had included lines like  “This  isn’t  Tosca, you know! This is
life!”),  he had never forgotten the final monologue he had delivered in the
second act, when  the wife  announces that  she wants to  leave,  that she
doesn’t feel fulfilled   in their  marriage, that she’s convinced that someone
better awaits her:

       SETH: But don’t you understand, Amy? You’re wrong. Relationships
       never provide you with everything. They provide you with some
       things. You take all the things you want from a person—sexual

551
       chemistry, let’s say, or good conversation, or financial support, or
       intellectual compatibility,  or niceness, or loyalty—and you get to pick
       three of those things. Three—that’s it. Maybe four, if you’re very
       lucky. The rest you have to look for elsewhere. It’s only in the movies
       that you find someone who gives you all of those things. But this isn’t
       the movies. In the real world, you have to identify which three
       qualities you want to spend the rest of your life with, and then you
       look for  those qualities in another person. That’s real life. Don’t you
       see it’s a trap? If you keep trying to find everything, you’ll wind up
       with  nothing.
       AMY: [crying] So what did you pick?
       SETH: I don’t know. [beat] I don’t know.

   At   the  time,  he  hadn’t   believed these  words,  because at  the  time,
everything really did seem possible: he was twenty-three, and everyone was
young and  attractive  and smart  and glamorous.  Everyone thought  they
would be friends for  decades, forever. But for most people, of course, that
hadn’t happened. As  you  got  older, you  reali]ed   that the  qualities  you
valued in the people you  slept with  or dated weren’t  necessarily the ones
you wanted to live with,  or be with, or plod through your  days with. If you
were smart, and if you were lucky, you learned this and accepted this. You
figured out what was most important to you and you looked for it,  and you
learned to  be  realistic.  They  all  chose  differently:  Roman  had  chosen
beauty, sweetness, pliability; Malcolm,  he thought, had chosen reliability,
and  competence (Sophie   was  intimidatingly    efficient),   and   aesthetic
compatibility. And  he? He had chosen friendship. Conversation. Kindness.
Intelligence. When he was in his thirties, he had looked at certain people’s
relationships and  asked the  question  that  had  (and  continued to)   fuel
countless dinner-party conversations: What’s going on there? Now, though,
as  an   almost-forty-eight-year-old,   he   saw   people’s  relationships   as
reflections of  their keenest yet most inarticulable  desires, their hopes and
insecurities taking shape physically, in the form of another person. Now he
looked at couples—in restaurants, on the street, at parties—and wondered:
Why are you together? What did  you identify  as essential to you? What’s
missing in you  that you want someone else to provide? He now viewed  a
successful relationship as one in which both people had recogni]ed the best
of what the other person had to offer and had chosen to value it as well.

552
   And  perhaps not coincidentally, he also found himself doubting  therapy
—its  promises,  its  premises—for  the  first  time.   He  had  never before
questioned that therapy was, at  worst, a  benign treatment: when  he was
younger, he had even considered it  a form  of  luxury,  this right  to  speak
about his life, essentially uninterrupted, for fifty   minutes proof that he had
somehow become someone whose life deserved such lengthy consideration,
such  an  indulgent  listener.  But   now,  he   was  conscious of   his   own
impatience with  what  he  had  begun to  see as  the sinister  pedantry  of
therapy, its suggestion that life was somehow reparable, that there existed a
societal norm and that the patient was being guided toward conforming to
it.
   “You  seem to be holding back, Willem,”  said Idriss—his shrink now  for
years—and he was quiet. Therapy, therapists, promised a rigorous lack of
Mudgment (but wasn’t that an impossibility, to talk  to a person and not be
Mudged?), and yet behind every question was a nudge, one that pushed you
gently but inexorably toward a recognition  of some flaw, toward solving  a
problem you hadn’t  known existed. Over the years, he’d  had friends who
had been convinced that  their  childhoods were  happy, that their  parents
were basically loving, until therapy had awakened them to the fact that they
had not been, that they were not. He didn’t want that to happen to him; he
didn’t want to be told  that his contentment wasn’t contentment after all but
delusion.
   “And  how do you feel  about the fact that Jude doesn’t ever want to have
sex?” Idriss had asked.
   “I   don’t know,”  he’d  said. But he did  know, and he said it:  “I   wish he
wanted to, for  his sake. I  feel sad that he’s missing  one of life’s  greatest
experiences. But I  think  he’s earned the right  not to.”  Across  from  him,
Idriss was silent.  The truth  was, he didn’t  want  Idriss to  try  to diagnose
what was wrong  with  his relationship.  He didn’t  want  to be told  how  to
repair it.  He  didn’t  want to  try  to  make Jude, or  himself,  do something
neither of them wanted to because they were supposed to. Their relationship
was, he felt, singular but workable:  he didn’t want  to be taught otherwise.
He sometimes wondered if it was simple lack of creativity—his  and Jude’s
—that had made them both think that their relationship had to include sex at
all. But  it  had  seemed, then, the only  way  to express a deeper level  of
feeling. The word “friend”  was so vague, so undescriptive and unsatisfying
—how could he use the same term to describe what Jude was to him that he

553
used for India or the Henry Youngs? And so they had chosen another, more
familiar  form of  relationship, one that hadn’t  worked. But  now they were
inventing  their   own   type   of   relationship,  one  that   wasn’t   officially
recogni]ed by  history  or  immortali]ed  in  poetry  or song, but  which  felt
truer and less constraining.
   He  didn’t,  however, mention  his  growing  skepticism about therapy to
Jude, because some part of him did still believe in it  for  people who were
truly ill,  and Jude—he was finally  able to admit  to himself—was truly  ill.
He knew that Jude hated going to the therapist; after the first few  sessions
he had come  home so  quiet, so  withdrawn,  that Willem   had to  remind
himself that he was making Jude go for his own good.
   Finally   he  couldn’t   stand  it   any  longer.  “How’s   it   been  with   Dr.
Loehmann?” he asked one night about a month after Jude had begun.
   Jude sighed. “Willem,”   he said, “how  much longer  do you want  me to
go?”
   “I  don’t know,”  he said. “I hadn’t really thought about it.”
   Jude had studied him. “So you were thinking I’d go forever,” he said.
   “Well,”   he  said. (He  actually had  been thinking  that.) “Is   it  really  so
awful?” He paused. “Is it Loehmann? Should we get you someone else?”
   “No,  it’s not Loehmann,” Jude said. “It’s the process itself.”
   He sighed, too. “Look,”  he said. “I know this is hard for you. I know it is.
But—give it  a year, Jude, okay? A year. And try hard. And then we’ll see.”
Jude had promised.
   And  then in the spring he had been away, filming,  and he and Jude had
been talking  one night  when  Jude said, “Willem,   in  the  interest of  full
disclosure, I have something I have to tell you.”
   “Okay,”   he said, gripping  the  phone tighter.  He had  been in London,
shooting Henry & Edith. He was playing—twelve  years too early and sixty
pounds too thin, Kit pointed out, but who  was counting?—Henry James, at
the beginning of his friendship with  Edith  Wharton. The film  was actually
something of   a  road-trip  movie,   shot  mostly  in   France and  southern
England, and he was working his way through his final scenes.
   “I’m   not proud of this,” he heard Jude say. “But I’ve missed my last four
sessions with Dr. Loehmann. Or rather—I’ve been going, but not going.”
   “What  do you mean?” he asked.
   “Well,  I  go,” Jude said, “but then—then I  sit outside in the car and read
through the session, and then when the session’s over, I drive back to the

554
office.”
   He  was quiet,  and so  was Jude, and then  they both  started laughing.
“What’re you reading?” he asked when he could finally speak again.
   “On  Narcissism,” Jude admitted, and they both started laughing again, so
hard that Willem had to sit down.
   “Jude—”  he began at last, and Jude interrupted him. “I  know, Willem,”
he said, “I know. I’ll   go back. It was stupid. I Must couldn’t bring myself to
go in these past few times; I’m not sure why.”
   When he hung up, he was still smiling,  and when he heard Idriss’s voice
in his head—“And Willem,  what do you think about the fact that Jude isn’t
going when he said he would?”—he waved his  hand before his face, as if
fanning the words  away. Jude’s lying;  his own  self-deceptions—both, he
reali]ed,  were forms  of  self-protection, practiced since  childhood, habits
that had helped them make the world into something more digestible than it
sometimes was. But now Jude was trying to lie  less, and he was trying to
accept that there were certain things that would never conform to his idea of
how life  should be,  no matter how  intensely he hoped or  pretended they
might. And so really, he knew that therapy would be of limited use to Jude.
He knew Jude would keep cutting himself. He knew he would never be able
to cure him. The person he loved was sick, and would always be sick, and
his responsibility was not to make him better but to make him less sick. He
was never to make Idriss understand this shift in perspective; sometimes, he
could hardly understand it himself.
   That  night he’d had a woman over, the deputy production designer, and
as they lay there, he answered all the same questions: he explained how he
had met Jude; he explained who he was, or at least the version of who he
was that he had created for answers such as these.
   “This   is  a lovely   space,” said  Isabel, and  he glanced  at her,  a  little
suspiciously; JB, upon seeing the flat,  had said it  looked like  it  had been
raped by  the  Grand  Ba]aar,  and  Isabel, he  had  heard  the director   of
photography proclaim, had  excellent taste. “Really,”  she said,  seeing his
face. “It’s pretty.”
   “Thanks,”  he said. He owned the flat—he  and Jude. They had bought it
only two months ago, when it had become evident that both of them would
be  doing  more  work   in  London.   He  had  been in   charge  of  finding
something, and because it had been his responsibility, he had deliberately
chosen quiet,  deeply  dull  Marylebone—not   for  its  sober  prettiness or

555
convenience but because of the neighborhood’s surplus of doctors. “Ah,”
Jude had said, studying the directory of the building’s tenants as they waited
for the  estate agent to show  them the  apartment Willem  had settled on,
“look  at what’s downstairs from  the unit:  an orthopedic surgeon’s clinic.”
He looked at Willem, raised an eyebrow. “That’s an interesting coincidence,
isn’t it?”
   He  had  smiled.  “Isn’t   it?”   he  asked. But   beneath their  Moking was
something that neither of  them had been able to discuss, not Must in their
relationship but almost in their  friendship as a whole—that at some point,
they didn’t  know  when but  that it  would  happen, Jude would get worse.
What that might mean, specifically, Willem wasn’t certain, but as part of his
new dedication to honesty, he was trying to prepare himself, themselves, for
a future he couldn’t predict, for a future in which  Jude might not be able to
walk, might  not  be able to  stand. And so finally,   the fourth-floor  Harley
Street space had been the only possible option; of all the flats he had seen,
this had been the one that had best approximated Greene Street: a single-
story apartment with large doors and wide hallways, big square rooms, and
bathrooms that  could  be  converted to  accommodate a  wheelchair  (the
downstairs orthopedist’s office  had been the  final,  unignorable argument
that this apartment should be theirs). They bought  the flat; he  had moved
into it all the rugs and lamps and blankets that he had spent his working life
accumulating and  that had  been packed  in  boxes in  the  Greene Street
basement; and before he returned to New York after the shoot ended, one of
Malcolm’s  young former  associates who had moved  back to  London  to
work in Bellcast’s satellite office would begin renovating it.
   Oh, he thought whenever he looked at the plans for Harley Street, it was
so difficult,    it  was  so  sad  sometimes, living   in  reality.  He   had been
reminded of this the last  time he had met with  the architect, when he had
asked Vikram why they weren’t retaining the old wood-framed windows in
the kitchen that overlooked the brick patio, with its views of the rooftops of
Weymouth Mews beyond it.  “Shouldn’t  we  keep them?” he’d  wondered.
“They’re so beautiful.”
   “They  are  beautiful,”  Vikram  agreed, “but  these windows are actually
very difficult  to open from a sitting  position—they demand a good amount
of lift  from the legs.” He reali]ed then that Vikram had taken seriously what
he had instructed him  to  do  in their  initial   conversation: to  assume that

556
eventually one of the people who lived in the apartment might have a very
limited range of motion.
   “Oh,”   he’d  said,  and  had blinked  his  eyes,  rapidly.  “Right.  Thanks.
Thanks.”
   “Of  course,” Vikram  had said. “I promise you, Willem,  it’s going  to feel
like home for  both of  you.”  He had a  soft, gentle voice, and Willem   had
been unsure whether the sorrow he had felt in  that moment was from  the
kindness of what Vikram said, or the kindness with which he said it.
   He remembers this now, back in New  York. It is  the end of July; he has
convinced Jude to  take a  day  off,  and they  have driven  to  their  house
upstate. For weeks,  Jude had been tired  and  unusually weak,  but  then,
suddenly, he hadn’t been, and it was on days like this—the sky above them
vivid  with  blue, the air  hot and dry, the  fields around their  house buttery
with clumps of yarrow and cowslip, the stones around the pool cool beneath
his feet, Jude singing to  himself  in the  kitchen as he made lemonade for
Julia and Harold,  who  had come to  stay with   them—that Willem  found
himself slipping  back into  his old  habit of  pretending. On  these days, he
succumbed to a sort of enchantment, a state in which his life seemed both
unimprovable  and,   paradoxically,   perfectly   fixable:   Of    course  Jude
wouldn’t  get worse.  Of  course he could  be  repaired. Of  course Willem
would be the person to repair him.  Of  course this was possible; of course
this was probable. Days  like  this seemed to have no  nights, and if  there
were no  nights,  there was no  cutting,  there  was no  sadness, there was
nothing to dismay.
   “You’re   dreaming of  miracles,  Willem,”  Idriss  would  say  if  he knew
what he was thinking, and he knew he was. But then again, he would think,
what about his  life—and  about Jude’s life,  too—wasn’t it  a  miracle? He
should have stayed in Wyoming, he should have been a ranch hand himself.
Jude should have wound up—where? In prison, or in a hospital, or dead, or
worse. But they hadn’t. Wasn’t it a miracle that someone who was basically
unexceptional could live a life  in which he made millions  pretending to be
other people, that in that life that person would fly  from city  to city, would
spend his days having his every need fulfilled, working in artificial contexts
in which   he was treated like   the potentate of  a  small, corrupt  country?
Wasn’t it a miracle to be adopted at thirty, to find people who loved you so
much that they wanted to call  you their  own? Wasn’t it  a miracle to have
survived the unsurvivable? Wasn’t friendship its own miracle, the finding of

557
another person who  made  the entire  lonely  world   seem somehow less
lonely? Wasn’t this house, this beauty, this comfort, this life a miracle? And
so who could blame him  for hoping  for one more, for  hoping that despite
knowing better, that despite biology, and time, and history, that they would
be the exception, that what  happened to other people with  Jude’s sort of
inMury wouldn’t happen to him, that even with all that Jude had overcome,
he might overcome Must one more thing?
   He  is sitting by  the pool and talking  to Harold and Julia when abruptly,
he  feels  that  strange  hollowing   in   his  stomach  that  he  occasionally
experiences even when he and Jude are in the same house: the sensation of
missing him, an odd sharp desire to see him. And although he would never
say it to him, this is the way in which Jude reminds him of Hemming—that
awareness that sometimes touches him, as lightly as wings, that the people
he loves are more temporal, somehow, than others, that he  has borrowed
them, and that someday they will  be reclaimed from  him. “Don’t   go,”  he
had told Hemming  in their  phone calls, back when  Hemming was dying.
“Don’t  leave me, Hemming,” even though the nurses who were holding the
receiver to Hemming’s ear hundreds of  miles away had instructed him  to
tell Hemming exactly the opposite: that it was all right for him to leave; that
Willem was releasing him. But he couldn’t.
   And  he  hadn’t been able  to  either when  Jude was in  the hospital,  so
delirious from  the drugs that his eyes had skittered back and forth  with  a
rapidity that  had frightened him almost more  than anything else. “Let  me
go, Willem,” Jude had begged him then, “let me go.”
   “I  can’t, Jude,” he had cried. “I can’t do that.”
   Now  he shakes his head to clear the memory. “I’m going to go check on
him,” he tells Harold and Julia, but then he hears the glass door slide open,
and all three of them turn and look up the sloping hill to see Jude holding a
tray of  drinks, and all  three of  them stand to go help  him. But  there is a
moment before they begin heading uphill and Jude begins walking toward
them in which they  all hold their  positions, and it reminds him of  a set, in
which every  scene can be redone, every mistake can be corrected, every
sorrow reshot. And in that moment, they are on one edge of the frame, and
Jude is on the other, but they are all smiling at one another, and the world
seems to hold nothing but sweetness.

558
   The last time in  his life he would walk  on his own—really walk:  not Must
edging along the wall  from  one room to the next;  not shuffling  down the
hallways of Rosen Pritchard; not inching his  way through the lobby to  the
garage, sinking into  the  car seat with  a  groan of  relief—had  been their
Christmas vacation. He was forty-six. They were in Bhutan: a good choice,
he would later reali]e,  for his final  sustained spell of walking  (although of
course he hadn’t known that at the time), because it was a country in which
everyone walked. The people they met there, including an old acquaintance
of theirs from college, Karma, who was now the minister of forestry, spoke
of walking   not in  terms  of kilometers  but  in  terms of  hours. “Oh  yes,”
Karma had said, “when  my father  was growing up,  he used to walk  four
hours to visit his aunt on the weekends. And then he would walk four hours
back home.” He and Willem  had marveled at this, although later, they had
also agreed: the  countryside was  so pretty,  a series of   swooping, treed
parabolas, the sky above a thin clear blue, that time spent walking here must
move more quickly and pleasantly than time spent walking anywhere else.
   He hadn’t  felt at his best on that trip, although at least he was mobile. In
the months  before,  he  had been  feeling  weaker,  but  not  in  any  truly
specifiable way,  not  in  any  way  that  seemed to  suggest some  greater
problem. He simply lost energy faster; he was achey instead of sore, a dull,
constant thud of pain that  followed  him into  sleep and was there to greet
him when he woke. It  was the difference, he told  Andy, between a month
speckled by  thundershowers and a month  in  which  it   rained daily:  not
heavily but ceaselessly, a kind of dreary, enervating discomfort. In October,
he’d  had  to  use his  wheelchair  every  day,  which  had  been  the most
consecutive days he had ever been dependent on it. In November, although
he had been well enough to make Thanksgiving dinner at Harold’s, he had
been in too much pain to actually sit at the table to eat it, and he had spent
the evening in his bedroom, lying as still as he could, semi-aware of Harold
and Willem   and Julia  coming  in   to  check on  him,   semi-aware of  his
apologi]ing  for  ruining   the holiday  for   them, semi-aware of  the  muted
conversation among the three of them and Laurence and Gillian, James and
Carey, that he half heard coming from the dining room. After  that, Willem
had wanted to cancel their trip, but he had insisted, and he was glad he had
—for  he  felt  there  was  something restorative  about the  beauty  of  the
landscape, about the cleanliness and quiet of the mountains, about getting to

559
see Willem surrounded by streams and trees, which was always where he
looked most comfortable.
   It  was a good vacation, but by the end, he was ready to leave. One of the
reasons he had been able to convince Willem that they could go on this trip
at all  was because his friend  EliMah, who now ran a  hedge fund that  he
represented, was going on holiday to Nepal with his family, and they caught
flights both from  and back to New York on  his plane. He had worried that
EliMah might be in a talkative mood, but he hadn’t been, and he had slept,
gratefully, almost the entire way home, his feet and back bla]ing with pain.
   The day after  they returned to Greene Street he couldn’t lift himself  out
of bed. He was in such distress that his body seemed to be one long exposed
nerve, frayed at either end; he had the sense that if he were to be touched
with a drop of water, his entire being would si]]le   and hiss in response. He
was rarely so exhausted, so sore that he couldn’t even sit up, and he could
tell that Willem—around whom  he made a particular effort, so he wouldn’t
worry—was alarmed, and he had to plead with him  not to call  Andy. “All
right,”  Willem had said, reluctantly, “but  if  you’re not better by  tomorrow,
I’m calling  him.”  He nodded, and Willem sighed. “Dammit, Jude,” he said,
“I knew we shouldn’t’ve gone.”
   But  the next day, he was better: better enough to get out of bed, at least.
He couldn’t  walk;  all day, his  legs and feet and back felt  as if  they were
being driven through with  iron  bolts, but  he made himself smile  and talk
and move about, though when Willem  left  the room or turned away  from
him, he could feel his face drooping with fatigue.
   And  then that was how it was, and they both grew used to it: although he
now needed his wheelchair daily, he tried to walk every day for as much as
he could, even if   it  was Must to the bathroom, and he was careful  about
conserving his  energy. When  he was  cooking,  he made certain  he  had
everything assembled on the counter in front of him before he started so he
wouldn’t  have to keep going back and forth  to  the refrigerator; he turned
down invitations to  dinners, parties, openings, fund-raisers, telling people,
telling Willem that he had too much work to attend them, but really he came
home and wheeled his way  slowly  across the apartment, the punishingly
large apartment, stopping to rest when he needed to, do]ing in bed so he’d
have enough life in him to talk to Willem when he returned.
   At  the end of  January he finally went to  see Andy, who listened to him
and then examined him,  carefully.  “There’s  nothing wrong  with  you,  as

560
such,” he said when he was finished. “You’re Must getting older.”
   “Oh,”   he said, and they were both quiet, for what was there for them to
say? “Well,”  he said, at  last, “maybe I’ll   get so weak  that I’ll   be able to
convince Willem  I don’t  have the energy to go to Loehmann any longer,”
because one night that fall he had—stupidly, drunkenly, romantically even
—promised Willem he’d see Dr. Loehmann for another nine months.
   Andy  had sighed but had smiled, too. “You’re such a brat,” he said.
   Now, though, he thinks back on this period fondly, for in every other way
that mattered, that winter  was a glorious  time. In  December, Willem  had
been nominated for a maMor award for his work in The Poisoned Apple; in
January, he won it. Then he was nominated again, for an even bigger and
more prestigious award, and  again, he won.  He had  been in London  on
business the night Willem  won, but  had set his alarm for  two  a.m. so he
could wake  and watch  the  ceremony online;  when  Willem’s  name was
called, he shouted out loud, watched Willem,  beaming, kiss Julia—whom
he had brought as his date—and bound up the stairs to the stage, listened as
he thanked the  filmmakers,  the studio,  Emil,  Kit,   Alan  Turing  himself,
Roman and Cressy and Richard  and Malcolm  and JB,  and “my  in-laws,
Julia Altman and Harold Stein, for  always making me feel like  I was their
son as well,  and, finally   and most  important,  Jude St. Francis, my  best
friend and the love  of  my life,  for  everything.”  He’d  had to stop himself
from crying then, and when he got through to Willem half  an hour later, he
had to stop himself again. “I’m so proud of you,  Willem,”  he said. “I knew
you would win, I knew it.”
   “You  always think  that,”  Willem  laughed, and he laughed too, because
Willem  was right:  he always did.  He always thought Willem   deserved to
win awards for whatever he was nominated for; on the occasions he didn’t,
he was genuinely perplexed—politics and preferences aside, how could the
Mudges, the voters, deny what was so obviously a superior performance, a
superior actor, a superior person?
   In  his meetings the next morning—in which he had to stop himself from
not   crying,    but    smiling,    dopily     and   incessantly—his    colleagues
congratulated him   and  asked him   again  why   he  hadn’t  gone  to  the
ceremony, and he had shaken his head. “Those things aren’t  for  me,” he
said, and they weren’t; of  all  the awards shows, all the premieres, all  the
parties that Willem  went to  for  work, he had  attended only two  or three.
This past year, when Willem  was being interviewed  by a serious, literary

561
maga]ine for  a  long  profile,  he  vanished whenever he knew  the  writer
would  be  present. He  knew  Willem   wasn’t  offended  by  this,   that  he
attributed his scarcity to  his sense of privacy. And  while  this was true,  it
wasn’t the only reason.
   Once, shortly after they had become a couple, there had been a picture of
them that had run with a Times story about Willem and the first installment
he had completed in a spy movie trilogy.  The photo had been taken at the
opening of JB’s fifth, long-delayed show, “Frog and Toad,” which had been
exclusively images of  the two of  them, but  very blurred, and much  more
abstract than JB’s previous work. (They hadn’t quite  known what to  think
of  the series title,   though JB  had  claimed  it  was affectionate.  “Arnold
Lobel?” he had screeched at them when they asked him about it. “Hello?!”
But neither he nor Willem  had read Lobel’s books as children, and they’d
had to go out and buy them  to make sense of the reference.) Curiously, it
had been this show, even more than the  initial  New York maga]ine  story
about Willem’s  new  life,  that  had made  their relationship  real  for  their
colleagues and peers, despite the fact that most of the paintings had been
made from photographs taken before they had become a couple.
   It  was also this show that would  mark, as JB later said, his ascendancy:
they knew that despite his sales, his reviews, his fellowships and accolades,
he was tormented that Richard had had a mid-career museum retrospective
(as had Asian Henry  Young), and he  hadn’t. But  after “Frog  and  Toad,”
something shifted for  JB,  the way  that The  Sycamore Court had shifted
things for  Willem,  the way  that the Doha museum had shifted  things for
Malcolm, even the way—if  he was to  be boastful—that the Malgrave and
Baskett suit had shifted things for him. It was only when he stepped outside
his firmament of friends that he reali]ed that that shift, that shift they had all
hoped for and received, was rarer and more precious than they even knew.
Of all  of them, only JB  had been certain that he deserved that shift, that it
was absolutely going to happen for him;  he and Malcolm and Willem  had
had no  such  certainty, and  so  when  it  was  given  to  them,  they  were
befuddled. But  although  JB had  had to  wait  the  longest for  his  life  to
change, he was calm  when it   finally  did—something  in  him  seemed to
become defanged; he became, for the first time since they had known him,
mellowed, and the constant prickly humor that fi]]ed   off of  him like  static
was demagneti]ed and quieted. He was glad for JB; he was glad he now had

562
the kind of  recognition  he wanted, the kind  of recognition  he thought JB
should have received after “Seconds, Minutes, Hours, Days.”
   “The  question is  which  one of  us is  the  frog and  which  is the  toad,”
Willem had said after they’d first seen the show, in JB’s studio, and read the
kindhearted books to each other late that night, laughing helplessly as they
did.
   He’d  smiled; they had been lying  in bed. “Obviously,  I’m  the toad,”  he
said.
   “No,”   Willem said, “I  think you’re the frog; your  eyes are the same color
as his skin.”
   Willem  sounded so serious that he grinned. “That’s your  evidence?” he
asked. “And so what do you have in common with the toad?”
   “I   think I  actually have a Macket like the one he has,” Willem said, and
they began laughing again.
   But  really, he knew: he was the toad, and seeing the picture in the Times
of  the two   of  them  together had  reminded him   of  this.  He  wasn’t  so
bothered by this for his own sake—he was trying to care less about his own
anxieties—but for  Willem’s,  because he was aware of  how  mismatched,
how distorted a couple  they made, and he was embarrassed for him, and
worried that his mere presence might be somehow harmful to Willem. And
so he tried to  stay away from  him  in public.  He had always  thought that
Willem was capable of making him  better, but over the years he feared: If
Willem  could make him  better, didn’t  that also mean that he could  make
Willem sick? And in the same way, if Willem could make him into someone
less difficult to  regard, couldn’t he also make Willem into something ugly?
He knew this  wasn’t logical,  but he thought it  anyway, and sometimes as
they were getting  ready to  go out,  he glimpsed himself  in  the bathroom
mirror, his stupid, pleased expression, as absurd and grotesque as a monkey
dressed in expensive clothes, and would want to punch the glass with  his
fist.
   But  the other reason he was worried about being seen with Willem was
because of the exposure it entailed. Ever since his first  day of college, he
had feared that someday someone from his past—a client; one of the boys
from the home—would  try  to contact him,  would try  to  extort something
from him  for  their silence. “No  one will,  Jude,”  Ana had assured him. “I
promise. To do  so would  be to admit  how  they know  you.”  But  he was
always afraid, and over  the years, there had been a few  ghosts who  had

563
announced themselves. The first arrived shortly after he’d started at Rosen
Pritchard: Must a postcard, from someone who claimed he had known him
from  the home—someone with  the  unhelpfully   indistinct  name of  Rob
Wilson, someone he didn’t  remember—and for a week, he had  panicked,
barely able to  sleep, his mind  scrolling through  scenarios that seemed as
terrifying  as  they  were  inevitable.  What  if   this  Rob  Wilson  contacted
Harold, contacted his colleagues at the firm, and told them who he was, told
them about the things he had done? But he made himself not react, not do
what he wanted to do—write  a  near-hysterical cease-and-desist letter that
would prove nothing but his own existence, and the existence of his past—
and he never heard from Rob Wilson again.
   But  after a few pictures of him with Willem  had appeared in the press, he
received two more letters and an  e-mail, all  sent to his work.  One of  the
letters and the e-mail were again from men who claimed  they had been at
the home with him, but  once again, he hadn’t recogni]ed their names, and
he never responded, and they never contacted him again. But  the second
letter  had  contained a   copy  of  a  photograph,  black-and-white,  of   an
undressed boy on a bed, and of such low quality  that he couldn’t  tell if  it
was him or not. And with  this letter, he had done what he had been told to
do  all   those years  ago,  when  he  was  a   child  in   a  hospital  bed  in
Philadelphia, should any of  the clients  figure out  who  he was and try  to
establish communication with him: he had put the letter in an envelope and
had sent it to  the FBI.  They always knew  where he was, that office,  and
every four or  five  years an agent would appear at his workplace to  show
him pictures, to ask him  if  he remembered one man or another, men who
were decades later still being uncovered as Dr. Traylor’s,  Brother Luke’s,
friends and fellow  criminals. He  rarely had advance warning before these
visits, and over the years he had learned what he needed to do in the days
afterward in order to  neutrali]e  them, how he needed to surround himself
with people, with events, with noise and clamor, with evidence of the life he
now inhabited.
   In  this period, the one in which he had received and disposed of the letter,
he had felt vividly   ashamed and intensely alone—this had been before he
had told Willem about his childhood, and he had never given Andy enough
context so that he would  appreciate the terror that he was experiencing—
and after, he had finally made himself hire an investigative agency (though
not the one that  Rosen Pritchard used) to uncover  everything they could

564
about him. The investigation  had taken a month, but at its  end, there was
nothing conclusive, or at least nothing that could conclusively identify  him
as who he had been. It was only  then that he allowed himself  to relax, to
believe, finally, that Ana had been right, to accept that, for the most part, his
past had been erased so completely that it was as if it had never existed. The
people who  knew the  most about  it,  who had  witnessed and made it—
Brother Luke; Dr. Traylor; even Ana—were dead, and the dead can speak to
no one. You’re safe, he  would  remind himself.  And  although  he was, it
didn’t mean he wasn’t still  cautious; it  didn’t mean that he should want to
have his photograph in maga]ines and newspapers.
   He accepted that this was what his life with Willem  would  be, of course,
but  sometimes he  wished it   could  be  different,  that  he  could  be  less
circumspect about claiming Willem in  public the way  Willem had claimed
him. In idle moments, he played the clip of Willem making his speech over
and over, feeling that same giddiness he had when Harold had first named
him as his son to another person. This has really happened, he had thought
at the time. This isn’t something I’ve made up. And now, the same delirium:
he really was Willem’s. He had said so himself.
   In  March,  at  the  end of  awards  season, he and Richard  had  thrown
Willem a party at Greene Street. A large shipment of carved-teak doorways
and benches had Must been moved out of the fifth floor,  and Richard had
strung the ceiling with  ropes of lights  and had lined every wall  with glass
Mars containing candles. Richard’s studio manager had brought two of their
largest worktables upstairs, and he had called the caterers and a bartender.
They had  invited  everyone  they could  think   of:  all  of   their  friends  in
common, and all of  Willem’s  as well. Harold  and Julia, James and Carey,
Laurence and Gillian, Lionel and Sinclair had come down from Boston; Kit
had come out from  L.A.,   Carolina from  Yountville,  Phaedra and Citi]en
from Paris, Willem’s   friends Cressy and Susannah from London,  Miguel
from Madrid. He made himself stand and walk through that party, at which
people he  knew  only  from   Willem’s   stories—directors and  actors and
playwrights—approached him and said they’d been hearing about him for
years, and that it was so nice to finally meet him, that they’d been thinking
that Willem  had invented him, and although he had laughed, he had been
sad as well, as if  he  should have ignored his  fears and involved  himself
more in Willem’s life.

565
   So many  people there hadn’t seen one another in so many years that it
was a very busy party, the kind of  party they had gone to when they were
young, with  people  shouting at  one another over  the music  that one  of
Richard’s assistants, an amateur DJ, was playing, and a few hours into it he
was exhausted, and leaned against the northern wall of the space to watch
everyone dance. In the middle of  the scrum he could see Willem  dancing
with Julia, and he smiled, watching  them, before noticing that Harold was
standing on the other side of the room, watching  them as well, smiling  as
well. Harold saw him, then, and raised his glass to him, and he raised his in
return, and then watched as Harold worked his way toward him.
   “Good  party,” Harold shouted into his ear.
   “It’s   mostly Richard’s doing,”  he shouted back, but as he was about to
say something else, the music became louder, and he and Harold looked at
each other and laughed and shrugged. For a while they simply stood, both
of them smiling, watching the dancers heave and blur before them. He was
tired, he was in pain, but  it didn’t  matter; his tiredness felt like  something
sweet and warm, his pain was familiar and expected, and in those moments
he was aware that he was capable of Moyfulness, that life was honeyed. Then
the music turned, grew  dreamy and slow, and  Harold yelled  that he was
going to reclaim Julia from Willem’s clutches.
   “Go,”  he told him, but before Harold left him, something made him reach
out  and  put  his  arms  around  him,  which   was  the  first  time   he  had
voluntarily touched Harold since the incident with Caleb. He could see that
Harold was stunned, and then delighted,  and he felt  guilt  course through
him, and  moved away  as quickly  as he  could, shooing  Harold onto  the
dance floor as he did.
   There  was a nest of  cotton-stuffed burlap  sacks in one of  the corners,
which  Richard had put  down  for  people to  lounge  against, and he  was
headed toward them when Willem appeared, and grabbed his hand. “Come
dance with me,” he said.
   “Willem,”   he admonished him, smiling, “you know I can’t dance.”
   Willem  looked at  him then, appraisingly. “Come with  me,” he said, and
he followed  Willem  toward the east end of the loft,  and to  the bathroom,
where Willem  pulled  him  inside and closed  and locked the  door behind
them, placing his drink  on the  edge of the sink.  They could still  hear the
music—a  song  that   had  been  popular   when  they   were  in   college,
embarrassing and yet somehow moving in its unapologetic sentimentalism,

566
in its syrup and sincerity—but in the bathroom it was dampened, as if it was
being piped  in  from   some far-off   valley.  “Put  your  arms around  me,”
Willem told  him, and he did. “Move  your right foot  back when I move my
left one toward it,” he said next, and he did.
   For a while they moved slowly and clumsily, looking at each other, silent.
“See?” Willem said, quietly. “You’re dancing.”
   “I’m   not good at it,” he mumbled, embarrassed.
   “You’re   perfect at it,”  Willem   said, and although his feet  were by this
point so sore that he was beginning to  perspire from the discipline  it  was
taking not to scream, he kept moving, but so minimally that toward the end
of  the song they  were  only  swaying, their  feet  not  leaving the  ground,
Willem holding him so he wouldn’t fall.
   When they emerged from the bathroom, there was a whooping from the
groups of people nearest to them, and he blushed—the last, the final, time
he’d had sex with Willem had been almost sixteen months ago—but Willem
grinned and raised his arm as if he was a pri]efighter  who had Must won a
bout.
   And  then it  was April,   and his forty-seventh  birthday, and then it  was
May, and he developed a wound on each calf, and Willem left for  Istanbul
to shoot the second installment in his spy trilogy. He had told Willem about
the wounds—he was trying to tell him things as they happened, even things
he didn’t consider that important—and Willem had been upset.
   But  he hadn’t been concerned. How many of  these wounds had he had
over the years? Tens; do]ens.  The only  thing  that  had changed was the
amount of time  he spent trying  to resolve them. Now  he went  to Andy’s
office twice  a week—every Tuesday lunchtime and Friday evening—once
for debriding and once for a wound vacuum treatment, which Andy’s nurse
performed. Andy had always thought that his  skin was too fragile  for that
treatment, in which a piece of  sterile foam was fitted  above the open sore
and a no]]le moved above it that sucked the dead and dying tissues into the
foam like a sponge, but in recent years he had tolerated it well, and it  had
proven more successful than simply debriding alone.
   As  he had grown older, the wounds—their frequency, their severity, their
si]e, the level of discomfort that attended them—had grown steadily worse.
Long gone, decades gone, were the days in which he was able to walk any
great  distance  when  he   had  them.  (The   memory  of   strolling    from
Chinatown to  the  Upper East Side—albeit  painfully—with   one  of  these

567
wounds was so strange and remote that it  didn’t  even seem to belong  to
him, but  to  somebody else.) When he was younger,  it  might take  a few
weeks for one to heal. But now it  took months. Of all  the things that were
wrong with  him, he was the most dispassionate about these sores; and yet
he was  never able  to  accustom himself  to  their  very  appearance. And
although of course he wasn’t scared of blood, the sight of pus, of rot, of his
body’s desperate attempt to heal itself  by trying  to  kill  part  of  itself still
unsettled him even all these years later.
   By  the time  Willem  came home for good, he wasn’t better. There were
now four wounds on his calves, the most he had ever had at one time, and
although he was still trying to walk daily, it was sometimes difficult enough
to  simply  stand,  and he  was  vigilant   about  parsing his  efforts,   about
determining when he was trying to walk  because he thought he could, and
when he was trying to walk to prove to himself  that he was still capable of
it. He could feel he had lost weight, he could feel he had gotten weaker—he
could no longer even swim every morning—but he knew it for sure once he
saw Willem’s face. “Judy,”  Willem had said, quietly, and had knelt next to
him on the sofa. “I  wish  you had told me.”  But in  a funny way, there had
been nothing to tell: this was who he was. And besides his legs, his feet, his
back, he felt fine. He felt—though he hesitated to say this about himself: it
seemed so bold a  statement—mentally healthy.  He was  back to  cutting
himself only  once a week. He heard himself  whistling  as he removed his
pants at night, examining the area around the bandages to make sure none
of them were leaking fluids.  People got used to anything their bodies gave
them; he  was no  exception. If   your body  was  well,  you  expected it  to
perform  for  you,  excellently,  consistently. If   your  body  was  not,  your
expectations were different. Or  this,  at least, was  what he was  trying  to
accept.
   Shortly  after he returned at the end of July, Willem gave him permission
to terminate his  mostly  silent relationship  with  Dr. Loehmann—but  only
because he genuinely didn’t have the  time any  longer. Four hours of  his
week  were  now  spent at   doctors’  offices—two   with  Andy,   two  with
Loehmann—and he needed to reclaim two of  those hours so he could go
twice a week to the hospital, where he took off his pants and flipped his tie
over his shoulder and  was slid  into a  hyperbaric chamber, a glass coffin
where he lay and did work and hoped that the concentrated oxygen that was
being piped in  all around him  might  help hasten his healing. He  had felt

568
guilty  about his  eighteen months  with  Dr.  Loehmann, in  which  he  had
revealed almost nothing, had spent most of  his time  childishly  protecting
his privacy, trying  not  to say anything, wasting  both his and  the doctor’s
time. But one of the few subMects they had discussed was his legs—not how
they had been damaged but the logistics of caring for them—and in his final
session, Dr. Loehmann had asked what would happen if he didn’t get better.
   “Amputation,  I  guess,” he had said, trying  to sound casual, although of
course he wasn’t casual, and there was nothing to guess: he knew that as
surely as he would someday die, he would do so without  his legs. He Must
had to hope it wouldn’t  be soon. Please, he would sometimes beg his legs
as he lay in the glass chamber. Please. Give me Must a few more years. Give
me another decade. Let me get through my forties, my fifties, intact. I’ll take
care of you, I promise.
   By  late summer, his new bout of sicknesses, of treatments had become so
commonplace to him that he hadn’t reali]ed how affected Willem might  be
by them. Early  that August, they were discussing what to  do (something?
nothing?) for Willem’s forty-ninth  birthday, and Willem had said he thought
they should Must do something low-key this year.
   “Well,  we’ll   do something big  next year, for your  fiftieth,”   he said. “If
I’m still  alive by then, that is,” and it wasn’t until  he heard Willem’s silence
that he had looked up from the stove and seen Willem’s expression and had
recogni]ed his mistake. “Willem,  I’m sorry,”  he said, turning off the burner
and making his slow, painful way over to him. “I’m sorry.”
   “You  can’t Moke like that, Jude,” Willem said, and he put his arms around
him.
   “I  know,”  he said. “Forgive me. I was being stupid. Of course I’m  going
to be around next year.”
   “And  for many years to come.”
   “And  for many years to come.”
   Now  it  is September, and he is lying  on the examining table in  Andy’s
office, his wounds uncovered and still split open like  pomegranates, and at
nights he  is lying   in  bed next  to  Willem.  He  is often  conscious of  the
unlikeliness of  their relationship,  and often guilty  at  his unwillingness  to
fulfill  one of the core duties of couplehood. Every once in a while, he thinks
he will  try again, and then, Must as he is trying to say the words to Willem,
he stops, and another opportunity quietly slides away. But his guilt, as great
as it is, cannot overwhelm his sense of relief, nor his sense of gratitude: that

569
he should have been able to keep Willem despite his inabilities is a miracle,
and he tries, in every other way he can, to always communicate to Willem
how thankful he is.
   He  wakes one night sweating so  profusely that the  sheets beneath him
feel as if they’ve been dragged through a puddle, and in his ha]e, he stands
before he reali]es he can’t, and falls. Willem  wakes, then, and fetches him
the thermometer, standing over him as he holds it under his tongue. “One
hundred and  two,”  he  says, examining  it,   and places his  palm  on  his
forehead. “But you’re  free]ing.”   He looks at  him, worried.  “I’m   going to
call Andy.”
   “Don’t  call  Andy,” he says, and despite the fever, the chills, the sweating,
he feels normal; he doesn’t feel sick. “I Must need some aspirin.” So Willem
gets it, brings him a shirt,  strips and remakes the bed, and they fall asleep
again, Willem wrapped around him.
   The next night he wakes again with a fever, again with chills, again with
sweating. “There’s something going around the office,” he tells Willem this
time. “Some  forty-eight-hour  bug.  I  must’ve  caught it.”   Again  he takes
aspirin; again it helps; again he goes back to sleep.
   The  day after that is a Friday  and he goes to Andy to  have his wounds
cleaned, but he doesn’t mention  the fever, which  disappears by daylight.
That night Willem  is away, having dinner with Roman, and he goes to bed
early, swallowing some aspirin before he does. He sleeps so deeply that he
doesn’t even  hear Willem   come  in,  but  when he  wakes  the following
morning, he is  so sweaty that it  looks  as if  he’s been standing under the
shower, and his  limbs  are numb  and shaky. Beside him,  Willem   gently
snores, and he sits, slowly, running his hands through his wet hair.
   He really  is better that Saturday. He goes to work. Willem goes to meet a
director for  lunch.  Before he leaves the  offices for  the evening,  he texts
Willem and tells him to ask Richard and India if they want to meet for sushi
on the Upper East Side, at a little restaurant he and Andy sometimes go to
after their appointments. He and Willem have two favorite sushi places near
Greene Street, but both of  them have flights  of descending stairs, and so
they have been unable to go for months because the steps are too difficult
for  him.  That night  he  eats well,  and even  as the  fatigue punches him
midway through the meal, he is conscious that he is enMoying himself, that
he is grateful  to be in  this small,  warm place, with  its  yellow-lit  lanterns
above him and the  wooden geta-like slab atop which  are laid  tongues of

570
mackerel sashimi—Willem’s  favorite—before him.  At  one point  he leans
against Willem’s side, from exhaustion and affection, but isn’t  even aware
he’s done so until he feels Willem move his arm and put it around him.
   Later, he wakes in their  bed, disoriented, and sees Harold sitting next to
him,  staring at  him.  “Harold,”   he says, “what’re   you  doing here?”  But
Harold doesn’t speak, Must lunges at him, and he reali]es with a sickening
lurch that Harold is trying  to take his clothes off.  No, he tells himself.  Not
Harold. This can’t be. This is one of his  deepest, ugliest, most secret fears,
and now it  is  coming  true. But  then his  old  instincts awaken: Harold  is
another client, and he will fight  him away. He yells, then, twisting himself,
pinwheeling his arms and what he can of  his legs, trying  to intimidate,  to
fluster this  silent,  determined Harold  before him,  screaming for  Brother
Luke’s help.
   And  then, suddenly, Harold vanishes and is replaced by Willem, his face
near his, saying something he can’t understand. But behind Willem’s head
he sees Harold’s again, his strange, grim  expression, and he resumes his
fight.  Above him,  he can hear words,  can hear that Willem  is  talking  to
someone, can register, even through his own fright, Willem’s fright as well.
“Willem,”   he calls  out. “He’s   trying  to hurt  me;  don’t  let him  hurt  me,
Willem.  Help me. Help  me. Help  me—please.” Then there is nothing—a
stretch of blackened time—and when he wakes again, he is in the hospital.
“Willem,”   he announces to the room,  and there, immediately, is  Willem,
sitting at the edge of his  bed, taking his hand. There is a length  of plastic
tubing snaking out of  the back of  this hand, and out of  the other as well.
“Careful,” Willem  tells him, “the IVs.”
   For  a while  they are silent,  and Willem  strokes his forehead. “He  was
trying to attack me,” he finally confesses to Willem, stumbling as he speaks.
“I never thought Harold would do that to me, not ever.”
   He  can see Willem  stiffen. “No,   Jude,” he says. “Harold  wasn’t  there.
You were delirious from the fever; it didn’t happen.”
   He  is relieved and terrified  to  hear this. Relieved to hear that  it wasn’t
true; terrified  because it seemed so real, so actual. Terrified because what
does it say about him, about how he thinks and what his fears are, that he
should even imagine this about Harold? How cruel can his own mind be to
try to  convince him  to turn  against someone he has struggled so hard to
trust, someone who has only ever shown him kindness? He can feel tears in

571
his eyes, but he has to ask Willem: “He wouldn’t  do that to me, would  he,
Willem?”
   “No,”  says Willem, and his voice is strained. “Never, Jude. Harold would
never, ever do that to you, not for anything.”
   When  he wakes again, he reali]es he doesn’t know  what day  it is,  and
when Willem tells him  it’s Monday, he panics. “Work,”  he says, “I have to
go.”
   “No  fucking way,”  Willem says, sharply. “I called them, Jude. You’re not
going anywhere, not until Andy figures out what’s going on.”
   Harold   and Julia  arrive  later,  and he  makes himself   return Harold’s
embrace, although he cannot look at him. Over Harold’s shoulder, he sees
Willem, who nods at him reassuringly.
   They  are all together when Andy  comes in. “Osteomyelitis,”  he says to
him, quietly.  “A   bone infection.”  He  explains what will   happen: he will
have to stay in the hospital for at least a week—“A week!” he exclaims, and
the four  of them  start shouting at  him before  he has a chance to protest
further—or  possibly  two,   until  they   get  the  fever  under  control.  The
antibiotics will  be dispensed through a central line, but the remaining ten to
eleven weeks of  treatment will   be given  to  him  on an  outpatient basis.
Every day, a nurse will come administer the IV drip: the treatment will take
an hour, and he is not to miss a single one of these. When he tries, again, to
protest, Andy stops him. “Jude,” he says. “This is serious. I mean it. I don’t
fucking care about Rosen Pritchard. You want to keep your legs, you do this
and you follow my instructions, do you understand me?”
   Around him,  the others are silent. “Yes,” he says, at last.
   A  nurse comes to prep him  so Andy  can administer the central venous
catheter, which will  be inserted into  the subclavian vein,  directly beneath
his right collarbone. “This  is a tricky  vein  to access because it’s so deep,”
the nurse says, pulling down the neck of his gown and cleaning a square of
his skin.  “But  you’re  lucky  to have Dr.  Contractor. He’s very  good with
needles; he never misses.” He isn’t worried, but he knows Willem is, and he
holds Willem’s  hand  as Andy  first  pierces his  skin  with  the cold  metal
needle and then threads the coil of guide wire  into  him. “Don’t   look,”  he
tells Willem. “It’s  okay.” And so Willem  stares instead at his face, which he
tries to  keep still  and composed until  Andy  is finished  and is taping  the
catheter’s length of slender plastic tubing to his chest.

572
   He  sleeps. He had thought he might be able to work  from  the hospital,
but he is more exhausted than he thought he would be, cloudier, and after
talking to the chairs of the various committees and some of his colleagues,
he doesn’t have the strength to do anything else.
   Harold  and Julia leave—they have classes and office hours—but except
for  Richard  and a  few  people  from  work,  they  don’t  tell   anyone he’s
hospitali]ed; he won’t  be there for long, and Willem  has decided he needs
sleep more than he needs visitors. He is still febrile,  but less so, and there
have been no further  episodes of delirium.  And  strangely, for  all  that  is
happening, he feels, if not optimistic,  then at least calm. Everyone around
him  is  so sober, so  thin-lipped,  that  he feels  determined to  defy  them
somehow, to defy the severity of the situation they keep telling him he’s in.
   He can’t  remember when he and Willem started referring to the hospital
as the Hotel Contractor, in honor of  Andy, but it  seems they always have.
“Watch out,” Willem  would say to him even back at Lispenard Street, when
he was hacking at a piece of steak some enraptured sous-chef at Ortolan had
sneaked Willem at the end of his  shift, “that  cleaver’s really  sharp, and if
you chop off a thumb, we’ll   have to go to the Hotel Contractor.”  Or once,
when he was hospitali]ed  for  a skin infection,  he had sent Willem  (away
somewhere, shooting) a text reading “At Hotel  Contractor. Not a big deal,
but didn’t want you  to hear through M or JB.”  Now, though, when he tries
to   make   Hotel    Contractor    Mokes—complaining about   the    Hotel’s
increasingly poor  food  and beverage services; about  its poor  quality  of
linens—Willem doesn’t respond.
   “This  isn’t  funny,  Jude,” he snaps on Friday  evening, as they wait  for
Harold and Julia to arrive with  dinner. “I  wish  you’d fucking  stop kidding
around.” He is quiet  then, and they look  at each other. “I was so scared,”
Willem says, in a low voice. “You were so sick and I didn’t know what was
going to happen, and I was so scared.”
   “Willem,”   he says, gently, “I  know. I’m  so grateful for you.”  He hurries
on before Willem can tell him  he doesn’t need him to be grateful, he needs
him to take the situation seriously. “I’m going to listen to Andy, I promise. I
promise you I’m  taking  this seriously. And  I promise  you I’m  not  in any
discomfort. I feel fine. It’s going to be fine.”
   After  ten days, Andy is  satisfied that the fever has been eliminated, and
he is discharged and sent home for two days to rest; he is back at the office
on Friday.  He  had  always  resisted having  a  driver—he  liked  to  drive

573
himself;  he  liked   the   independence, the  solitude—but   now  Willem’s
assistant has hired a driver for him, a small, serious man named Mr. Ahmed,
and on his way to and from the office, he sleeps. Mr. Ahmed also picks up
his nurse, a woman named Patri]ia who rarely speaks but is very gentle, and
every day at one p.m., she meets him at Rosen Pritchard. His office there is
all glass and looks out onto the floor, and he lowers the shades for privacy
and takes off his Macket and tie and shirt, and lies down on the sofa in his
undershirt and  covers  himself  with   a  blanket,  and  Patri]ia  cleans  the
catheter and checks the skin around it to  make sure there are no signs of
infection—no swelling,  no  redness—and then inserts the IV and waits  as
the medicine drips into the catheter and slides into his veins. As they wait,
he works and she reads a nursing Mournal or knits. Soon this too becomes
normal: every  Friday  he sees Andy, who  debrides his  wounds and then
examines him, sending him to the hospital after their session for X-rays so
he can track the infection and make sure it isn’t spreading.
   They  cannot go  away on  the weekends because he needs to have his
treatment, but  in  early  October,  after  four  weeks  of  antibiotics,  Andy
announces that he’s been talking to Willem, and if he doesn’t mind, he and
Jane are going to come up to stay with them in Garrison for  the weekend,
and he’ll administer the drip himself.
   It  is wonderful, and rare, being out of the city, being back at their house,
and the four  of  them  enMoy one another’s company. He even feels well
enough to give Andy an abbreviated tour of  the property, which Andy  has
visited only in springtime or summer, but which is different in autumn: raw,
sad, lovely, the barn’s roof plastered with fallen  yellow  gingko leaves that
make it look as if it’s been laid with sheets of gold leaf.
   Over  dinner that Saturday night, Andy asks him, “You  do reali]e  we’ve
now known each other for thirty years, right?”
   “I   do,”  he  smiles.  He  has in  fact  bought  Andy  something—a  safari
vacation for  him  and his family,  to  go on  whenever he wants—for  their
anniversary, although he hasn’t told him about it yet.
   “Thirty   years of  being disobeyed,”  Andy  moans, and the rest of  them
laugh. “Thirty  years of  dispensing priceless medical advice gleaned from
years of experience and training at top institutions, only to  have it ignored
by a corporate litigator, who’s decided his understanding of human biology
is superior to my own.”

574
   After  they’ve  stopped laughing, Jane says, “But  you know,  Andy, if  it
weren’t for  Jude, I never would have married you.”  To him,  she says, “In
medical school, I always thought Andy was sort of  a self-absorbed douche
bag, Jude; he was so arrogant, so borderline callow”—“What!” Andy  says,
feigning inMury—“that I assumed he was going to be one of  those typical
surgeons—you know, ‘not  always  right,  but  always certain.’  But  then  I
heard him talk  about you,  how much  he loved  and respected you, and I
thought there might be something more to him. And I was right.”
   “You  were,” he tells her, after they all laugh again. “You were right,” and
they all  look  at Andy,  who  gets embarrassed and pours himself  another
glass of wine.
   The week after that, Willem  begins rehearsals for his new film. A month
ago, when he got sick,  he had backed out of  the proMect, and then it had
been delayed to wait for him, and now things are stable enough that he has
signed on again. He doesn’t understand why Willem had backed out in the
first place—the film  is a remake of Desperate Characters, and most of the
filming  will  be done Must across the river, in Brooklyn Heights—but he is
relieved to have Willem at work  again and not hovering over him, looking
worried and asking him if he’s sure he has the energy to do any of the very
basic things (going  to  the grocery  store; making  a meal;  staying late  at
work) that he wants to do.
   In  early November he goes back into the hospital with another fever, but
only  stays for  two  nights before  he’s released again. Patri]ia   draws his
blood every week, but Andy has told him that he’ll have to be patient; bone
infections take a long time to eradicate, and he probably won’t have a sense
of whether he’s been healed for  good or  not until  the end of  the twelve-
week cycle. But  otherwise, everything  trudges on:  He goes to  work.  He
goes to have his treatments in the hyperbaric chamber. He goes to have his
wounds vacuum-treated. He goes to have them debrided. One of the  side
effects from  the  antibiotics  is  diarrhea; another is  nausea. He is  losing
weight at a rate even he can tell is problematic; he has eight of his shirts and
two of  his suits retailored. Andy  prescribes him high-calorie drinks meant
for malnourished children, and he swallows them five times a day, gulping
water afterward to erase their chalky, tongue-coating flavor. Except for the
hours he keeps at the office, he is conscious of being more obedient than he
ever has been, of heeding every one of Andy’s warnings, of  following  his
every piece of  advice. He is  still  trying  not to  think  of how  this  episode

575
might end,  trying  not  to worry  himself,  but  in  dark,  quiet moments, he
replays what  Andy  said to  him  on  one of  his  recent checkups: “Heart:
perfect. Lungs: perfect. Vision, hearing, cholesterol, prostate, blood sugar,
blood pressure, lipids, kidney function, liver  function, thyroid  function:  all
perfect. Your body’s equipped to work as hard as it can for you, Jude; make
sure you let it.”  He knows that isn’t  the complete measure of who he is—
circulation, for example: not perfect; reflexes: not perfect; anything south of
his   groin:   compromised—but   he  tries   to   take   comfort    in   Andy’s
reassurances, to remind himself  that  things  could be  worse,  that he  is,
essentially, still a healthy person, still a lucky person.
   Late   November.  Willem   finishes  Desperate Characters.   They  have
Thanksgiving at Harold  and Julia’s uptown,  and although they have been
coming into  the city  every other weekend to  see him, he can sense them
both trying  very  hard  not  to say  anything about  his  appearance, not to
bother him about how little  he’s eating at  dinner. Thanksgiving week also
marks his final  week  of  antibiotic  treatments, and he submits to  another
round of blood work and X-rays before Andy tells him he can stop. He says
goodbye to Patri]ia for what he hopes is the last time; he gives her a gift to
thank her for her care.
   Although  his wounds have shrunk, they haven’t shrunk as much as Andy
had  hoped,  and  on   his  recommendation,  they   stay  in   Garrison  for
Christmas. They promise Andy it  will  be a quiet week; everyone else will
be out of town anyway, so it  will  be only the two  of them and Harold and
Julia.
   “Your  two  goals are: sleeping and eating,” says Andy,  who is going  to
visit  Beckett in  San Francisco for  the  holidays. “I   want to  see you five
pounds heavier by the first Friday in January.”
   “Five  pounds is a lot,” he says.
   “Five,”  Andy  repeats. “And then ideally, fifteen more after that.”
   On  Christmas itself, a year to the day he and Willem  had walked along
the spine of  a  low,  wavy mountainside  in Punakha, one  that took  them
behind the king’s hunting lodge, a simple wooden structure that looked like
it might be full  of Chaucerian pilgrims, not the royal family, he tells Harold
he wants to take a walk. Julia and Willem have gone horseback riding at an
acquaintance’s nearby ranch, and he is feeling stronger than he has in a long
time.
   “I  don’t know, Jude,” says Harold, warily.

576
   “Come  on,  Harold,”   he says. “Just  to  the first   bench.”  Malcolm  has
placed three benches along the path he has hacked through the forest to the
house’s rear; one is located  about a third  of  a way  around the  lake; the
second at the halfway point; and the third at the two-thirds point. “We’ll go
slowly, and I’ll  take my  cane.” It has been years since he has had to use a
cane—not since he was a teenager—but now he needs it for any distance
longer than fifty  yards or so. Finally, Harold agrees, and he grabs his scarf
and coat before Harold can change his mind.
   Once they are outdoors, his euphoria increases. He loves this house: he
loves how it looks, he loves its quiet, and most of all, he loves that it is his
and Willem’s,  as far  from  Lispenard  Street as imaginable,  but as  much
theirs as that  place was,  something they  made together  and share. The
house, which faces a second, different forest, is a series of glass cubes, and
preceding it is a long  driveway that switchbacks through the woods, so at
certain angles you  can  see only  swatches of  it,   and at  other  angles it
disappears completely. At night, when it is lit, it glows like a lantern, which
was what Malcolm  had named it  in  his monograph: Lantern  House. The
back of the house looks out onto a wide lawn and beyond it, a lake. At the
bottom of the lawn  is a pool, which  is lined with  slabs of slate so that the
water is always cold  and clear, even on the  hottest days, and in the barn
there is an indoor  pool and a living   room; every wall  of  the barn can be
lifted up and away from  the structure, so that the entire interior is exposed
to the outdoors, to the tree peonies and lilac bushes that bloom around it in
the early spring;  to the panicles of  wisteria  that drip  from its  roof  in  the
early summer. To the right of the house is a field that paints itself red with
poppies in July; to the left is another through which he and Willem scattered
thousands of wildflower seeds: cosmos and daisies and foxglove and 4ueen
Anne’s lace. One weekend shortly after they had moved in, they spent two
days making their  way  through the forests before  and behind the  house,
planting lilies of  the valley near the mossy hillocks around the oak and elm
trees, and  sowing  mint  seeds throughout.  They  knew   Malcolm  didn’t
approve of their landscaping efforts—he thought them sentimental and trite
—and although they  knew Malcolm  was probably  right,  they also didn’t
really care. In  spring and  summer, when the air  was fragrant, they  often
thought of Lispenard Street, its aggressive ugliness, and of how then they
wouldn’t even have had the visual imagination to conMure a place like this,

577
where the beauty was so uncomplicated,  so undeniable that it  seemed at
times an illusion.
   He and Harold set off toward the forest, where the rough walkway means
that it  is  easier for  him  to navigate  than it  had been when  construction
began. Even so, he has to concentrate, for the path is only cleared once a
season, and in the months between it becomes cluttered with saplings and
ferns and twigs and tree matter.
   They aren’t quite halfway  to the first bench when he knows he has made
a mistake. His legs began throbbing as soon as they finished walking down
the lawn, and now his feet are throbbing as well, and each step is agoni]ing.
But he doesn’t say anything, Must grips his cane more tightly, trying to re-
center the discomfort, and pushes forward, clenching his teeth and squaring
his Maw. By the time they reach the bench—really, a  dark-gray limestone
boulder—he is di]]y,   and they sit for a long  time, talking  and looking out
onto the lake, which is silvery in the cold air.
   “It’s  chilly,”   Harold says eventually, and it is; he can feel the cool of the
stone through his pants. “We should get you back to the house.”
   “Okay,”  he swallows, and stands, and immediately, he feels a hot stake of
pain being thrust  upward through his  feet and  gasps, but Harold doesn’t
notice.
   They are only thirty  steps into the forest when he stops Harold. “Harold,”
he says, “I need—I need—” But he can’t finish.
   “Jude,”  Harold says, and he can tell Harold is worried.  He takes his left
arm, slings it around his neck, and holds his hand in his own. “Lean on me
as much as you can,” Harold says, putting his other arm around his waist,
and he nods. “Ready?” He nods again.
   He’s able to take twenty more steps—such slow steps, his feet tangling in
the mulch—before he simply  can’t move  any more. “I  can’t,  Harold,”  he
says, and by this time he can barely speak, the pain is so extreme, so unlike
anything he has felt in such a long time. Not since he was in the hospital in
Philadelphia have his legs, his back, his feet hurt so profoundly, and he lets
go of Harold and falls to the forest floor.
   “Oh  god, Jude,” Harold says, and bends over him, helping him to sit  up
against a tree,  and he  thinks  how  stupid, how  selfish,  he is.  Harold  is
seventy-two. He should not be asking a seventy-two-year-old man, even an
admirably healthy  seventy-two-year-old man, for  physical  assistance. He
cannot open his eyes because the world is torquing itself around him, but he

578
hears Harold take out his phone, hears him try to call Willem, but the forest
is so dense that the reception is poor, and Harold curses. “Jude,” he hears
Harold say, but his voice is very faint, “I’m  going to have to go back to the
house and get your wheelchair. I’m so sorry. I’m   going to be right  back.”
He nods, barely, and feels Harold button his coat closed, feels him push his
hands into his coat’s pockets, feels him wrap something around his legs—
Harold’s own  coat, he reali]es.  “I’ll   be right  back,”  Harold says. “I’ll   be
right back.”  He hears Harold’s feet running away from  him, the crunch of
the sticks and leaves as they snap and crumple beneath him.
   He   turns  his  head to   the  side and  the  ground  beneath  him  shifts,
dangerously, and he vomits, coughing up everything he has eaten that day,
feels it slide off  of  his lips  and drool down his  cheek. Then he feels a bit
better, and he leans his head against the tree again. He is reminded of his
time in the forest  when he was running away from the home, how  he had
hoped the trees might protect him, and now he hopes for it again. He takes
his hand out of his pocket, feels for his cane, and squee]es it as hard as he
can. Behind his eyelids, bright  spangled drops of light  burst into  confetti,
and then blink  out into  oily  smears. He concentrates on the sound of his
breath, and on his legs, which he imagines as large lumpen shards of wood
into which have been drilled do]ens of long metal screws, each as thick as a
thumb. He pictures the screws being drawn out in reverse, each one rotating
slowly out  of him  and landing with  a ringing clang on a  cement floor. He
vomits again. He is so cold. He can feel himself begin to spasm.
   And  then he hears someone running toward him, and he can smell it  is
Willem—his  sweet sandalwood scent—before he hears his voice. Willem
gathers him, and when he lifts him, everything  sways again, and he thinks
he is  going  to  be sick,  but  he isn’t,   and he  puts his  right  arm  around
Willem’s neck and turns his vomity  face into his shoulder and lets himself
be carried. He can hear Willem panting—he may weigh  less than Willem,
but they are still the same height, and he knows how unwieldy he must be,
his cane,  still  in  his  hand,  banging against Willem’s   thighs,  his  calves
knocking against Willem’s rib  cage—and is grateful when he feels himself
being lowered into his chair, hears Willem’s and Harold’s voices above him.
He bends over, resting his forehead on his knees, and is pushed back out of
the forest and up the hill to the house, and once inside, he is lifted into bed.
Someone takes off his  shoes, and he  screams out and is  apologi]ed  to;
someones wipes his face;  someone wraps his hands around  a hot-water

579
bottle; someone wraps  his legs  with  blankets.  Above  him,  he can hear
Willem being angry—“Why  did you fucking  go along with this? You know
he can’t fucking  do this!”—and  Harold’s  apologetic, miserable replies: “I
know, Willem. I’m  so sorry. It was moronic. But he wanted to go so badly.”
He tries to speak, to defend Harold, to tell  Willem  it was his fault,  that he
made Harold come with him, but he can’t.
   “Open  your  mouth,”  Willem  says, and he feels  a pill,  bitter  as metal,
being placed on his tongue. He feels a glass of water being tipped toward
his lips.  “Swallow,”  Willem  says, and he does, and soon after, the  world
ceases to exist.
   When  he wakes, he turns and sees Willem  in bed  with  him, staring at
him. “I’m    so sorry,”  he whispers,  but Willem   doesn’t say anything.  He
reaches over and runs his hand through Willem’s hair. “Willem,”   he says,
“it wasn’t Harold’s fault.  I made him do it.”
   Willem  snorts. “Obviously,”  he says. “But he still  shouldn’t have agreed
to it.”
   They  are quiet for  a long  time, and he thinks  of what  he needs to say,
what he has always thought but never articulated. “I know  this is going to
sound illogical to you,”  he tells Willem,  who looks back at him. “But  even
all these years later,  I  still  can’t  think  of  myself as disabled.  I mean—I
know I am. I know I am. I have been for twice as long as I haven’t been. It’s
the only way you’ve  known me: as someone who—who needs help. But I
remember myself as someone who used to be  able to walk  whenever he
wanted to, as someone who used to be able to run.
   “I  think  every person who becomes disabled thinks they were robbed of
something. But I suppose I’ve always felt that—that if I acknowledge that I
am disabled, then I’ll  have conceded to Dr. Traylor,  then I’ll   have let Dr.
Traylor determine the shape of my life. And so I pretend I’m not; I pretend I
am who I was before I met him. And I know it’s not logical or practical. But
mostly,  I’m   sorry  because—because I  know  it’s   selfish.  I   know   my
pretending has consequences for you. So—I’m going to stop.”  He takes a
breath,  closes  and   opens  his   eyes.  “I’m    disabled,”   he  says.   “I’m
handicapped.” And as foolish  as it is—he  is forty-seven, after  all; he has
had thirty-two years to admit this to himself—he feels himself about to cry.
   “Oh,  Jude,”  says Willem,  and  pulls him  toward  him.  “I   know you’re
sorry. I know this  is hard. I understand why you’ve never wanted to admit

580
it; I  do. I  Must worry about you; I sometimes think I care more about your
being alive than you do.”
   He shivers, hearing this. “No, Willem,”  he says. “I mean—maybe, at one
point. But not now.”
   “Then  prove it to me,” Willem says, after a silence.
   “I  will,”   he says.
   January;  February. He   is  busier  than  he  has ever  been.  Willem   is
rehearsing a play. March: Two new wounds open up, both on his right leg.
Now the pain is excruciating; now he never leaves his wheelchair except to
shower and go to the bathroom and dress and undress. It has been a year,
more, since he has had a reprieve from the pain in his feet. And yet every
morning when he wakes, he places them on the floor and is, for a second,
hopeful. Maybe today he will   feel better. Maybe today the pain  will  have
abated. But he never does; it  never  does. And still   he hopes. April:  His
birthday. The  play’s run  begins. May:  Back  come  the night  sweats, the
fever, the  shaking, the  chills,  the  delirium.  Back  he  goes to  the  Hotel
Contractor. Back goes the catheter, this time into the left side of his chest.
But there is a change this time: this time the bacteria is different; this time,
he will  need an  antibiotic  drip  every eight hours,  not every  twenty-four.
Back comes Patri]ia, now two times a day: at six a.m., at Greene Street; at
two p.m. at Rosen Pritchard; and at ten p.m. again at Greene Street, a night
nurse, Yasmin. For  the  first  time  in  their  friendship,  he  sees only  one
performance of Willem’s play: his  days are so segmented, so controlled by
his medication, that he is simply  unable to go a second time. For the first
time since this  cycle began a year ago, he feels himself  tumbling  toward
despair; he feels himself giving up. He has to remind himself he must prove
to Willem  that he wants to remain alive, when all  he really wants to  do is
stop. Not  because he is depressed, but because he is  exhausted. At  the
conclusion  of   one  appointment,  Andy   looks   at  him   with   a  strange
expression and tells him that he’s not sure if  he’s reali]ed,  but it’s  been a
month since he last cut himself, and he thinks about this. Andy is right. He
has been too tired, too consumed to think about cutting.
   “Well,”   Andy says. “I’m  glad. But I’m  sorry this is why  you’ve stopped,
Jude.”
   “I  am, too,” he says. They are both quiet, both, he fears, nostalgic for the
days when cutting was his most serious problem.

581
   Now  it  is June, now  it  is July. The  wounds on his legs—the  old ones,
which he has had for more than a year, and the more recent ones, which he
has had since March—have not healed. They have barely diminished. And
it is then, Must after the Fourth of July weekend, Must after Willem’s run ends,
that Andy  asks if  he can come talk  to him  and Willem.  And  because he
knows what Andy is going to say, he lies and says that Willem is busy, that
Willem doesn’t have the time, as if by  delaying the conversation, he might
delay his future  as well,  but early  one Saturday evening he comes home
from the office and there they are in the apartment, waiting for him.
   The   speech  is   what  he   expects.  Andy   recommends—he  strongly
recommends—amputation. Andy is gentle, very gentle, but he can tell, from
how rehearsed his delivery is, from how formal he is, that he is nervous.
   “We  always knew this day would come,” Andy  begins, “but that doesn’t
make it   any easier. Jude,  only  you  know  how  much  pain,  how  much
inconvenience, you can tolerate. I  can’t  tell  you that.  I  can tell  you  that
you’ve gone on far  longer than most people would.  I can tell  you  you’ve
been extraordinarily courageous—don’t make that face: you have been; you
are—and I can tell you that I can’t imagine what you’ve been suffering.
   “But  all of  that aside—even if you feel you have the wherewithal to keep
going—there are  some realities  to  consider here. The  treatments aren’t
working.  The wounds aren’t  healing. The fact  that you’ve  had two  bone
infections in less than a year is alarming to me. I’m worried you’re going to
develop an allergy to one of the antibiotics, and then we’ll  be really, really
fucked. And even if you don’t, you’re not tolerating the drugs as well as I’d
hoped you would: you’ve lost way too much weight, a troubling  amount of
weight, and every time I see you, you’ve gotten a little weaker.
   “The  tissue in your upper legs seems to be healthy enough that I’m pretty
certain we’ll be able to spare both knees. And Jude, I promise you that your
quality of  life  will  improve  instantly if  we  amputate. There won’t be any
more pain in  your feet. You’ve  never had a wound  on your  thighs, and I
don’t think  there’s any immediate fear you  will.  The prosthetics available
now are so infinitely  superior than what they were even ten years ago that
honestly, your gait will probably be better, more natural, with them than it is
with your actual legs. The surgery is very straightforward—Must four hours
or so—and I’ll  do it myself. And  the inpatient recovery is brief: less than a
week  in   the  hospital,   and  we’ll    fit   you   with   temporary  prostheses
immediately.”

582
   Andy  stops, placing his hands on his knees, and looks at them. For a long
while, none of them speaks, and then Willem begins to ask questions, smart
questions, questions he  should  be  asking:  How  long  is  the  outpatient
recovery period? What kind of  physical therapy would he be doing? What
are the risks associated with the surgery? He half listens to the responses,
which  he  already  knows,  more  or  less,  having  researched these very
questions, this very scenario, every year since Andy had first suggested it to
him, seventeen years ago.
   Finally,  he interrupts them. “What happens if I  say no?” he asks, and he
can see the dismay move across both of their faces.
   “If   you say no, we’ll  keep pushing forward with  everything we’ve  been
doing and hope  it  works eventually,”  Andy  says. “But   Jude, it’s  always
better to have an amputation when you get to decide to  have it, not when
you’re forced to  have it.”  He pauses. “If you  get a blood infection,  if  you
develop sepsis, then we  will   have to  amputate, and I  won’t   be able  to
guarantee that you’ll keep the knees. I won’t be able to guarantee that you
won’t lose some other extremity—a finger; a hand—that the infection won’t
spread far beyond your lower legs.”
   “But  you  can’t guarantee me that I’ll even keep the knees this time,” he
says, petulant. “You can’t guarantee I won’t develop sepsis in the future.”
   “No,”  Andy  admits. “But as I said, I think there’s a very good chance you
will  keep them. And I  think if  we  remove this part of your  body that’s so
gravely infected that it’ll help prevent further disease.”
   They  are all quiet again. “This  sounds like a choice that isn’t a choice,”
he mutters.
   Andy  sighs. “As  I said, Jude,” he says, “it  is a choice. It’s  your  choice.
You don’t have to make it tomorrow, or  even this week. But I want  you to
think about it, carefully.”
   He leaves, and he and Willem are left alone. “Do we have to talk about it
now?” he asks, when he can finally look at Willem,  and Willem shakes his
head. Outside the sky is turning  rose-colored; the sunset will be long  and
beautiful. But  he doesn’t want beauty. He wishes, suddenly, that he could
swim, but  he hasn’t swum  since the first  bone infection.  He hasn’t  done
anything. He hasn’t gone anywhere. He has had to turn his London clients
over to  a colleague, because his IV  has tethered him  to  New York.  His
muscles have disappeared: he is soft flesh on bone; he moves like an old
man. “I’m  going to  bed,” he tells Willem,  and when Willem  says, quietly,

583
“Yasmin’s coming in a couple of hours,”  he wants to cry. “Right,”  he says,
to the floor. “Well. I’m  going to take a nap, then. I’ll wake up for Yasmin.”
   That  night, after Yasmin has left,  he cuts himself for  the first  time in  a
long time; he watches the blood weep across the marble and into the drain.
He knows how irrational  it seems, his desire to keep his legs, his legs that
have caused him so many problems, that have cost him how many hours,
how much money, how much pain to maintain? But still: They are his. They
are his  legs. They  are  him.  How  can  he willingly    cut  away a  part  of
himself? He knows that he has already cut away so much of  himself over
the years: flesh, skin, scars. But somehow this is different. If  he sacrifices
his legs, he will   be admitting  to Dr.  Traylor  that he has won;  he will  be
surrendering to him, to that night in the field with the car.
   And  it is also different because he knows that once he loses them, he will
no longer  be able to  pretend. He  will  no  longer be  able to  pretend that
someday he will  walk  again, that someday he will   be better. He  will  no
longer be able to pretend that he isn’t disabled. Up, once more, will go his
freak-show factor. He will be someone who is defined, first and always, by
what he is missing.
   And  he is tired. He doesn’t want to have to learn how to walk  again. He
doesn’t want to work at regaining weight he knows he will  lose, weight on
top of the weight he has struggled to replace from the first  bone infection,
weight that he has re-lost with the second. He doesn’t want to go back into
the hospital, he doesn’t want to wake disoriented and confused, he doesn’t
want to  be  visited  by  night  terrors,  he  doesn’t want  to  explain  to  his
colleagues that he is sick yet again, he doesn’t want the months and months
of  being weak,  of  fighting   to  regain  his equilibrium.   He  doesn’t  want
Willem to  see him without his legs, he doesn’t want to give him  one more
challenge, one more grotesquerie to overcome. He wants to be normal, he
has only ever wanted to be normal, and yet with each year, he moves further
and further from  normalcy. He knows it  is fallacious to  think  of the mind
and the body as two separate, competing entities, but he cannot help it. He
doesn’t want his body to win one more battle, to make the decision for him,
to make him feel so helpless. He doesn’t want to be dependent on Willem,
to have to ask him to lift him in and out of bed because his arms will be too
useless and watery, to help him use the bathroom, to see the remains of his
legs rounded into stumps. He had always assumed that there would be some
sort of warning  before this  point, that his  body would  alert him  before it

584
became seriously worse. He knows, he does, that this past year and a half
was his warning—a  long,  slow, consistent, unignorable warning—but  he
has chosen, in his arrogance and stupid hope, not to see it for what it is. He
has chosen to believe that because he had always recovered, that he would
once again, one more time. He has given himself the privilege of assuming
that his chances are limitless.
   Three nights  later he wakes again with  a  fever; again he goes into  the
hospital; again he is discharged. This fever has been caused by an infection
around his  catheter, which  is  removed. A  new  one  is inserted  into  his
internal Mugular vein, where it forms a bulge that not even his shirt collars
can wholly camouflage.
   His  first  night  back home, he is  coasting through his  dreams when he
opens his eyes and sees that Willem isn’t in bed next to him, and he works
himself into his wheelchair and glides out of the room.
   He sees Willem before Willem  sees him; he is sitting at the dining table,
the light on above him, his back to the bookcases, staring out into the room.
There is a glass of water before him, and his elbow is resting on the table,
his hand supporting his chin. He looks  at Willem  and sees how exhausted
he is, how old,  his bright hair  gone whitish. He  has known Willem  for so
long, has looked at his face so many times, that he is never able to see him
anew: his face is  better known to  him  than his own.  He knows its  every
expression. He knows what  Willem’s  different  smiles  mean; when he  is
watching him being interviewed on television, he can always tell when he is
smiling because he’s truly amused and when he is smiling to be polite. He
knows which of  his teeth are capped, and he knows which ones Kit made
him straighten when it was clear that he was going to be a star, when it was
clear that he  wouldn’t  Must be in plays and independent films  but would
have a different kind of career, a different kind of life.  But now he looks at
Willem, at  his face that is  still  so handsome but also so tired, the kind of
tiredness he thought only he was feeling, and reali]es that Willem is feeling
it  as well,  that  his life—Willem’s    life  with  him—has  become a sort  of
drudgery, a slog of illnesses and hospital visits and fear, and he knows what
he will do, what he has to do.
   “Willem,”   he says, and watches Willem Merk out of his trance and look at
him.
   “Jude,”  Willem says. “What’s wrong? Are you feeling sick? Why are you
out of bed?”

585
   “I’m   going to do it,”  he says, and he thinks that they are like two actors
on a stage, talking  to  each other across a great  distance, and he wheels
himself close to him. “I’m  going to do it,” he repeats, and Willem nods, and
then they  lean their  foreheads into each other’s,  and both  of  them start
crying.  “I’m   sorry,”  he  tells  Willem,  and  Willem   shakes his  head, his
forehead rubbing against his.
   “I’m   sorry,” Willem tells him back. “I’m  sorry, Jude. I’m so sorry.”
   “I  know,” he says, and he does.
   The next day he calls Andy,  who is relieved but also muted, as if  out of
respect to him. Things move briskly  after  that. They pick  a date: the first
date Andy proposes is Willem’s birthday,  and even though he and Willem
have agreed that they’ll celebrate Willem’s fiftieth birthday once he’s better,
he doesn’t want to have the surgery on the actual day. So instead he’ll have
it at the end of  August, the week before Labor Day,  the week before they
usually go to Truro. In the next management committee meeting, he makes
a brief  announcement, explaining that  this is  a voluntary  operation, that
he’ll only  be out of the office for a week, ten days at the most, that it isn’t a
big deal,  that he’ll   be fine.  Then he  announces it to  his department; he
normally wouldn’t,  he tells them, but he doesn’t want their clients to worry,
he doesn’t want them to think that it’s something more serious than it is, he
doesn’t want to be the subMect of rumors and chatter (although he knows he
will  be). He reveals so little about himself  at work that whenever he does,
he can see people sit up and lean forward in their seats, can almost see their
ears lift  a little   higher. He  has met all  of  their  wives and  husbands and
girlfriends and boyfriends, but  they have never met Willem.  He has never
invited Willem   to one  of the  company’s retreats, to their  annual holiday
parties, to their annual summer picnics. “You’d hate them,” he tells Willem,
although he knows that isn’t really  the case: Willem can have a good time
anywhere. “Believe  me.” And  Willem  has always  shrugged. “I’d  love  to
come,” he has always said, but he  has never let him.  He has always told
himself that he is protecting Willem  from  a series of events that he would
surely find tedious, but he has never considered that Willem might be hurt
by his refusal to  include him,  might  actually want to  be a part of  his life
beyond Greene Street and their friends. He flushes now, reali]ing this.
   “Any  questions?” he asks, not really expecting any, when he sees one of
the younger  partners, a  callous  but  scarily  effective  man  named Gabe
Freston, raise his hand. “Freston?” he says.

586
   “I   Must wanted to say that  I’m   really  sorry, Jude,”  says Freston, and
around him, everyone murmurs their agreement.
   He wants to  make the moment light, to say—because it is true—“That’s
the first time I’ve  heard you be so sincere since I told you what your bonus
would  be last  year, Freston,”  but  he  doesn’t, Must takes a deep breath.
“Thank you, Gabe,” he says. “Thanks, all of  you. Now  everyone—back to
work,” and they scatter.
   The surgery will  be on a Monday, and although he stays at the office late
on Friday, he doesn’t go in on Saturday. That afternoon, he packs a bag for
the hospital; that evening, he and Willem have dinner at the tiny sushi place
where they first celebrated the Last Supper. His final sessions with Patri]ia
and Yasmin had been on Thursday; Andy calls early on Saturday to tell him
that he has the X-rays back, and that although the infection hasn’t budged, it
also hasn’t spread. “Obviously,  it  won’t  be a problem  after Monday,”  he
says, and he swallows, hard, Must as he had when Andy had said earlier that
week, “You won’t  have this  foot pain after  next Monday.”  He remembers
then that it is not the problem that is being eradicated; it is the source of the
problem that is being eradicated. One is not the same as the other, but he
supposes he has  to  be grateful,   finally,  for   eradication, however  it   is
delivered.
   He eats his final meal on Sunday at seven p.m.; the surgery is at eight the
next morning,  and so he  is to  have no  more food,  no more  medication,
nothing to drink, for the rest of the night.
   An  hour later, he and Willem descend in the elevator to the ground floor,
for his  last walk  on his own  legs. He has made Willem  promise him this
walk, and even before they begin—they will go south on Greene one block
to Grand, then west  Must another block to Wooster, then up Wooster four
blocks to Houston, then back east to Greene and south to their apartment—
he isn’t  sure he’ll  be able to  finish.  Above them,  the sky is  the color  of
bruises, and he  remembers, suddenly, being  forced out  onto  the  street,
naked, by Caleb.
   He lifts  up his left leg and begins. Down the quiet street they walk, and at
Grand, as they are turning right,  he takes Willem’s  hand, which  he never
does in public,  but  now he  holds it  close, and they  turn right  again and
begin moving up Wooster.
   He  had  wanted so  badly to  complete  this  circuit,  but  perversely, his
inability  to  do so—at Spring,  still  two  blocks south  of Houston,  Willem

587
glances at him and, without  even asking, starts walking  him  back east to
Greene Street—reassures him: he is  making  the  right  decision. He  has
pressed up against the inevitable, and he has made the only choice he could
make, not Must for Willem’s sake, but for his own. The walk has been almost
unbearable, and when he gets back to the apartment, he is surprised to feel
that his face is wet with tears.
   The  next morning, Harold  and Julia meet them at  the hospital, looking
gray and frightened. He can tell they are trying to remain stoic for  him; he
hugs and kisses them both, assures them he’ll be fine, that there’s nothing to
worry about. He is taken away to be prepped. Since the inMury, the hair on
his legs has always grown unevenly, around and between the scars, but now
he is shaved clean above and below his kneecaps. Andy comes in, holds his
face in his hands, and kisses him on his forehead. He doesn’t say anything,
Must takes out a marker and  draws a  series of  dashes, like Morse  code
signals, in inverted arcs a few inches below the bottoms of both knees, then
tells him he’ll be back, but that he’ll send Willem in.
   Willem  comes over and sits on the edge of his  bed, and they hold each
other’s hands in silence. He is about to  say something, make some stupid
Moke, when Willem begins to cry, and not Must cry, but keen, bending over
and moaning, sobbing like  he  has never seen anyone sob. “Willem,”   he
says, desperately, “Willem, don’t  cry:  I’m   going to  be fine.  I  really  am.
Don’t cry. Willem,  don’t cry.”  He sits up in the bed, wraps his arms around
Willem. “Oh,  Willem,”  he sighs, near tears himself. “Willem,  I’m going  to
be okay. I  promise you.”  But he  can’t soothe him,  and Willem  cries and
cries.
   He  senses that Willem is trying to  say something, and he rubs his back,
asking him to repeat himself. “Don’t go,” he hears Willem say. “Don’t leave
me.”
   “I   promise I won’t,”   he says. “I promise. Willem—it’s   an easy surgery.
You know  I have to  come out on  the other side so Andy  can lecture  me
some more, right?”
   It  is  then that Andy  walks in.  “Ready, campers?” he asks, and then he
sees and hears Willem. “Oh god,” he says, and he comes over, Moins their
huddle. “Willem,”   he says, “I  promise I’ll   take care of  him  like  he’s my
own, you know that, right? You know I won’t let anything happen to him?”
   “I  know,” they hear Willem gulp, at last. “I know, I  know.”

588
   Finally,  they are able to calm Willem down, who apologi]es and wipes at
his eyes. “I’m   sorry,” Willem  says, but  he shakes his head, and pulls on
Willem’s  hand until  he brings  his  face to  his own,  kisses him  goodbye.
“Don’t be,”  he tells him.
   Outside the operating room, Andy brings his head down to his, and kisses
him again, this time  on his cheek. “I’m  not  going to be able to  touch you
after this,”  he says. “I’ll   be sterile.”  The two of  them grin,  suddenly, and
Andy  shakes his head. “Aren’t   you  getting  a little   old  for  this  kind  of
puerile humor?” he asks.
   “Aren’t  you?” he asks. “You’re almost sixty.”
   “Never.”
   Then they are in the operating room, and he is ga]ing at the bright white
disk of light above him. “Hello,  Jude,” says a voice behind him, and he sees
it’s the anesthesiologist, a friend of Andy’s named Ignatius Mba, whom he’s
met before at one of Andy and Jane’s dinner parties.
   “Hi,  Ignatius,” he says.
   “Count  backward from ten for  me,” says Ignatius, and he begins to, but
after seven, he is unable to  count any further;  the last thing  he feels is  a
tingling in his right toes.
   Three months  later. It is  Thanksgiving again,  and they are having it  at
Greene Street. Willem   and  Richard  have  cooked  everything,  arranged
everything,  while   he  slept.  His   recovery  has  been  harder and   more
complicated than anticipated, and he has contracted infections, twice. For a
while  he was on  a feeding  tube. But  Andy  was right:  he  has kept both
knees. In  the hospital,  he would  wake,  telling  Harold  and Julia,  telling
Willem,  that it  felt  like there was  an elephant sitting on his  feet, rocking
back and forth  on its  rump until  his  bones turned into  cracker dust, into
something finer than ash. But  they never told  him that  he was imagining
this; they only told  him that the nurse had Must added a painkiller to his IV
drip for this very purpose, and that he would be feeling better soon. Now he
has these  phantom  pains  less  and   less  frequently,  but   they  haven’t
disappeared entirely. And he is still very tired, he is still very  weak, and so
Richard has placed a mauve  velvet wingback  chair on  casters—one that
India sometimes uses for sittings—for  him at the  head of the table, so he
can lean his head against its wings when he feels depleted.
   That dinner is Richard and India, Harold and Julia, Malcolm and Sophie,
JB and his mother, and Andy and Jane, whose children are visiting Andy’s

589
brother in San Francisco. He starts to  give a toast, thanking everyone for
everything they have given him and done for him, but before he gets to the
person he wants to thank most—Willem,  sitting  to his  right—he finds  he
cannot continue, and he looks up from his paper at his friends and sees that
they are all going to cry, and so he stops.
   He  is  enMoying the dinner, amused even by  how  people keep adding
scoops of different food to  his plate, even though he hasn’t eaten much of
his first serving, but he is so sleepy, and eventually he burrows back into the
chair and closes his eyes, smiling as he listens to the familiar conversation,
the familiar voices, fill the air around him.
   Eventually  Willem  notices  that he  is falling   asleep, and he hears him
stand. “Okay,” he says, “time for  your diva exit,”  and turns the chair from
the table and begins pushing it away toward their bedroom, and he uses the
last of his strength to answer everyone’s laughter, their song of goodbyes, to
peek out around the wing of the chair and smile at them, letting his fingers
trail behind  him  in an  airy, theatrical wave.  “Stay,”  he calls out  as he is
taken from them.  “Please stay. Please stay and give Willem  some decent
conversation,” and they agree they will; it  isn’t even seven, after all—they
have hours and hours. “I love you,” he calls to them, and they shout it back
at him,  all  of  them  at once, although  even in  their  chorus, he  can still
distinguish each individual voice.
   At  the doorway to their bedroom, Willem lifts  him—he has lost so much
weight, and without his prostheses is so less storklike a form, that now even
Julia can lift  him—and  carries him to  their bed, helps him  undress, helps
him remove his temporary prostheses, folds the covers back over him. He
pours him a glass of  water, hands him his  pills:  an antibiotic,  a fistful  of
vitamins. He swallows  them all  as Willem  watches, and then for a  while
Willem sits on the bed next to him, not touching him, but simply near.
   “Promise  me you’ll  go out there and stay up late,”  he tells Willem,  and
Willem shrugs.
   “Maybe  I’ll  Must stay here with you,” he says. “They seem to be having a
fine time without  me.”  And sure enough, there is a burst of laughter from
the dining room, and they look at each other and smile.
   “No,”   he  says, “promise  me,” and  finally,  Willem   does. “Thank  you,
Willem,”  he says, inadequately, his eyes closing. “This was a good day.”
   “It   was, wasn’t  it?”   he hears Willem   say, and then  he begins to  say
something else, but he doesn’t hear it because he has fallen asleep.

590
   That  night  his  dreams wake him.  It  is  one of  the  side effects  of  the
particular antibiotic  he is on,  these dreams, and this time, they are worse
than ever. Night after night,  he dreams. He dreams that he is in the motel
rooms, that he is in Dr.  Traylor’s house. He dreams that he is still  fifteen,
that the previous thirty-three  years haven’t even happened. He dreams of
specific  clients, specific  incidents,  of  things  he  hadn’t  even known  he
remembered. He dreams that  he has become Brother  Luke  himself.  He
dreams, again and again, that Harold is Dr. Traylor, and when he wakes, he
feels  ashamed for   attributing   such  behavior  to   Harold,   even  in   his
subconscious, and at the same time fearful  that the  dream might  be real
after all,  and he has to remind  himself of  Willem’s  promise: Never, ever,
Jude. He would never do that to you, not for anything.
   Sometimes the dreams are so vivid, so real, that it takes minutes, an hour
for him to  return to his life,  for him to  convince himself that the life of  his
consciousness is in fact real life,  his real life.  Sometimes he wakes so far
from himself  that he can’t  even remember who he is.  “Where  am I?”  he
asks, desperate, and then, “Who am I? Who am I?”
   And   then he  hears, so  close to  his  ear  that  it  is  as if   the  voice  is
originating inside  his own  head, Willem’s whispered incantation. “You’re
Jude St. Francis.  You  are my  oldest,  dearest friend.  You’re  the son  of
Harold Stein  and Julia  Altman.  You’re the  friend  of  Malcolm  Irvine,  of
Jean-Baptiste Marion, of Richard Goldfarb, of Andy  Contractor, of Lucien
Voigt, of Citi]en  van Straaten, of Rhodes Arrowsmith, of EliMah Ko]ma, of
Phaedra de los Santos, of the Henry Youngs.
   “You’re   a New  Yorker.  You live   in  SoHo. You  volunteer  for  an arts
organi]ation; you volunteer for a food kitchen.
   “You’re  a swimmer. You’re a baker. You’re a cook. You’re a reader. You
have a beautiful voice, though you never sing anymore. You’re an excellent
pianist. You’re  an art collector.  You write  me lovely  messages when I’m
away. You’re  patient. You’re  generous. You’re  the best listener  I  know.
You’re the smartest person I know, in every way. You’re the bravest person
I know, in every way.
   “You’re  a lawyer. You’re  the chair of the litigation  department at Rosen
Pritchard and Klein. You love your Mob; you work hard at it.
   “You’re   a mathematician. You’re a  logician. You’ve  tried  to teach me,
again and again.

591
   “You  were  treated horribly. You  came out on the  other end. You  were
always you.”
   On  and  on  Willem   talks, chanting  him  back  to  himself,  and  in  the
daytime—sometimes days later—he remembers pieces of what Willem has
said and holds them close to him, as much as for what he said as for what
he didn’t, for how he hadn’t defined him.
   But  in the nighttime he is too terrified, he is too lost to recogni]e this. His
panic is too real, too  consuming. “And who  are you?” he asks, looking  at
the man  who   is  holding  him,   who  is  describing  someone he  doesn’t
recogni]e, someone who seems to have so much, someone who seems like
such an enviable, beloved person. “Who are you?”
   The   man  has  an   answer  to   this  question   as  well.   “I’m    Willem
Ragnarsson,” he says. “And I will never let you go.”


   “I’m   going,”  he  tells Jude, but  then he doesn’t move.  A  dragonfly, as
shiny as a scarab, hums above them. “I’m  going,”  he repeats, but he still
doesn’t move, and it is only the third time he says it that he’s finally able to
stand up from the lounge chair, drunk on the hot air, and shove his feet back
into his loafers.
   “Limes,”   says Jude, looking up at him and shielding his eyes against the
sun.
   “Right,”   he says, and bends down, takes Jude’s sunglasses off him, kisses
him on his eyelids, and replaces his glasses. Summer, JB has always said, is
Jude’s season: his skin darkens and his hair  lightens to  almost the  same
shade, making his eyes turn an  unnatural green, and Willem  has to keep
himself from touching him too much. “I’ll  be back in a little while.”
   He  trudges up the hill   to the house, yawning,  places his glass of  half-
melted ice and tea in the sink, and crunches down the pebbled driveway to
the car. It is one of those summer days when the air is so hot, so dry, so still,
the sun overhead so white, that one doesn’t so much see one’s surroundings
as hear and smell and taste them:  the lawn-mower  bu]]  of  the  bees and
locusts, the faint peppery scent of the sunflowers, the oddly mineral flavor
the heat leaves on the tongue, as if he’s Must sucked on stones. The heat is
enervating, but not in  an oppressive way, only in  a way  that makes them
both sleepy and defenseless, in a way that makes torpor not Must acceptable
but necessary. When it is hot  like this  they lie  by the  pool for  hours, not

592
eating but   drinking—pitchers  of   iced  mint  tea  for  breakfast,  liters  of
lemonade for  lunch,  bottles  of  Aligoté   for  dinner—and  they leave  the
house’s every window, every door open, the ceiling fans spinning, so that at
night, when  they finally   seal it shut,  they trap  within  it  the fragrance of
meadows and trees.
   It   is the  Saturday before Labor  Day,  and they  would  normally  be in
Truro, but this year they have rented Harold and Julia a house outside Aix-
en-Provence for the entire summer, and the two of  them are spending the
holiday  in  Garrison  instead. Harold  and  Julia will   arrive—maybe  with
Laurence and Gillian, maybe not—tomorrow, but  today Willem  is picking
up Malcolm   and  Sophie and  JB  and his  on-again,  off-again  boyfriend
Fredrik from  the train station. They’ve  seen very little  of  their friends for
months now: JB has been on a fellowship in Italy  for  the past six months,
and Malcolm and Sophie have been so busy with the construction of a new
ceramics museum in Shanghai that the last time they saw them all was in
April,  in Paris—he was filming  there, and Jude had come in from London,
where he was working, and JB in from Rome, and Malcolm and Sophie had
laid over for a couple of days on their way back to New York.
   Almost   every  summer he  thinks:  This  is  the  best summer. But   this
summer, he knows, really is the best. And not Must the summer: the spring,
the winter, the fall. As he gets older, he is given, increasingly, to thinking of
his life as a series of retrospectives, assessing each season as it passes as if
it’s a vintage of wine, dividing  years he’s Must lived into historical eras: The
Ambitious  Years. The Insecure Years. The  Glory  Years. The  Delusional
Years. The Hopeful Years.
   Jude had smiled when he told him  this. “And  what era are we in now?”
he asked, and Willem had smiled back at him. “I   don’t know,”  he said. “I
haven’t come up with a name for it yet.”
   But  they both agreed that they had at least exited The Awful Years. Two
years ago, he had  spent this  very weekend—Labor  Day weekend—in  a
hospital on the Upper East Side, staring out  the window  with  a hatred so
intense it  nauseated him at the orderlies  and nurses and doctors in  their
Made-green paMamas congregating outside the building, eating and smoking
and talking  on their  phones as if  nothing  were wrong,  as if  above them
weren’t people in various  stages of dying, including  his own  person, who
was at that moment in  a medically  induced coma, his skin prickling   with

593
fever, who had  last opened his eyes four  days ago, the day  after he had
gotten out of surgery.
   “He’s  going  to be  fine, Willem,”   Harold  kept babbling at  him,  Harold
who  was in  general  even more  of  a  worrier  than  Willem  himself   had
become. “He’s going to  be fine.  Andy  said so.” On  and on Harold  went,
parroting back to Willem   everything that he had already heard Andy  say,
until finally  he had snapped at him, “Jesus, Harold, give it a fucking break.
Do  you  believe everything  Andy  says? Does  he look   like  he’s getting
better? Does he look like  he’s  going to  be fine?”  And  then he  had seen
Harold’s face change, his expression of  pleading, frantic  desperation, the
face of an old, hopeful man, and he had been punched with remorse and had
gone over and held him.  “I’m  sorry,”  he said to  Harold, Harold  who had
already lost one son, who was trying  to reassure himself that he wouldn’t
lose another. “I’m   sorry,  Harold,  I’m   sorry.  Forgive  me. I’m   being  an
asshole.”
   “You’re  not an asshole, Willem,” Harold had said. “But you can’t tell  me
he’s not going to get better. You can’t tell me that.”
   “I  know,”  he said. “Of course he’s going to get better,” he said, sounding
like Harold, Harold echoing Harold to Harold. “Of  course he is.” But inside
of him, he felt the beetley scrabble of fear: of course there was no of course.
There never had been. Of  course had vanished eighteen months ago. Of
course had left their lives forever.
   He  had always been an optimist, and yet in those months, his optimism
deserted him. He had canceled all of his proMects for the rest of the year, but
as the fall dragged on, he wished he had them; he wished he had something
to distract himself. By  the end of September, Jude was out of the hospital,
and yet he was so thin, so frail, that Willem  had been scared to touch him,
scared to even look at him, scared to see the way that his cheekbones were
now so pronounced that they  cast permanent shadows around his mouth,
scared to see the way he could watch Jude’s pulse beating in the scooped-
out hollow of  his throat, as if there was something living inside of him that
was trying to  kick its  way out.  He could feel  Jude trying to comfort  him,
trying  to make Mokes, and that made him even more scared. On the  few
occasions he left  the apartment—“You  have to,”   Richard had  told  him,
flatly, “you’re   going to  go cra]y  otherwise, Willem”—he   was tempted to
turn his phone off, because every time it chirped and he saw it was Richard
(or Malcolm,  or Harold, or  Julia, or JB, or Andy,  or the Henry Youngs, or

594
Rhodes, or EliMah, or India, or Sophie, or Lucien,  or whoever was sitting
with Jude for the hour or  so that he was distractedly wandering the streets
or working   out downstairs  or, a  few  times, trying   to lie  still   through a
massage or sit through lunch with Roman or Miguel), he would tell himself,
This is  it.  He’s dying.  He’s  dead, and he  would  wait  a second, another
second, before answering the phone and hearing that the call  was only  a
status report: That  Jude had eaten a meal.  That he hadn’t.  That  he was
sleeping. That he seemed nauseated. Finally he had to tell them: Don’t call
me unless it’s serious. I don’t care if you have questions and calling’s faster;
you have to text me. If you call me, I’ll  think the worst. For the first time in
his life,  he  understood, viscerally, what  it  meant when people said  their
hearts were in their throats, although it  wasn’t Must his heart he could feel
but all his  organs thrusting upward, trying to  exit him  through his mouth,
his innards scrambled with anxiety.
   People always spoke of healing as if it were predictable and progressive,
a decisive diagonal line pointing from the lower left-hand corner of a graph
to the upper right.  But Hemming’s  healing—which  hadn’t ended with  his
healing at all—hadn’t been like that, and Jude’s hadn’t either: theirs were a
mountain range of peaks and trenches, and in the middle of October, after
Jude had gone back to work (still scarily thin, still  scarily weak), there had
been a night when he had woken with  a fever so high  that he had started
sei]ing, and Willem had been certain that this was the moment, that this was
the end. He  had reali]ed  then  that despite his  fear, he  had never  really
prepared himself, that he had never really thought of what it  would  mean,
and although  he wasn’t  a  bargainer by  nature, he  bargained now, with
someone or something he didn’t  even know he believed  in. He  promised
more patience, more  gratitude, less  swearing, less vanity,  less sex,  less
indulgence, less  complaining,  less self-absorption,  less selfishness, less
fearfulness. When Jude had  lived,  Willem’s  relief  had been  so total,  so
punishing,  that  he  had   collapsed, and   Andy  had   prescribed him   an
antianxiety pill  and sent him  up to Garrison  for the weekend with  JB for
company, leaving Jude in his  and Richard’s care. He had always  thought
that unlike Jude, he had known how to accept help when it was offered, but
he had forgotten this  skill  at the most  crucial time,  and he was glad  and
grateful that his friends had made the effort to remind him.
   By  Thanksgiving, things had become—if not good, then they had at least
stopped being bad, which they accepted as the same thing. But it was only

595
in retrospect that they had been able to recogni]e it as a sort of fulcrum, as
the period in which there were first days, and then weeks, and then an entire
month in  which  nothing  got  worse, in  which  they regained the  trick  of
waking each  day with  not  dread but  with  purpose, in  which  they  were
finally,  cautiously, able to  talk  about the  future, to  worry  not  Must about
making it   successfully through  the day  but  into  days they  couldn’t  yet
imagine. It was only then that they were able to talk  about what needed to
be done, only then that Andy  began making serious schedules—schedules
with goals set one month, two months, six months away—that tracked how
much weight he wanted Jude to gain, and when he would be fitted with his
permanent prostheses, and when he wanted him to take his first steps, and
when he wanted to see him walking  again. Once again, they reMoined the
slipstream of   life;  once  again,  they  learned to   obey the  calendar.  By
February Willem  was reading scripts again. By  April,  and his  forty-ninth
birthday, Jude was walking  again—slowly, inelegantly, but  walking—and
looking once again like a normal person. By Willem’s birthday that August,
almost a year after his surgery, his walk was, as Andy had predicted, better
—silkier,  more  confident—than it   had been with   his own  legs,  and he
looked, once again, better  than a normal  person: he looked  like  himself
again.
   “We  still haven’t had your fiftieth  birthday blowout,”  Jude had reminded
him over his  fifty-first   birthday dinner—his birthday  dinner that Jude had
made, standing by himself  at the stove for  hours, displaying  no apparent
signs of fatigue—and Willem had smiled.
   “This  is all I  want,” he’d said, and he meant it. It felt silly to compare his
experience of such a depleting, brutal two years to Jude’s own experience,
and yet he felt transformed by them. It was as if his despair had given rise
to a sense of invincibility;   he felt  that everything extraneous and soft had
been burned  off   of   him  and  he  was  left   as  an  exposed  steel core,
indestructible and yet pliant, able to withstand anything.
   They spent his birthday in Garrison, Must the two of them, and that night,
after dinner, they went  down to  the lake, and he took  off  his clothes and
Mumped off the dock into the water, which smelled and looked like a great
pool of tea. “Come in,”  he told  Jude, and then, when he hesitated, “As the
birthday boy, I command it.” And Jude had slowly undressed, and taken off
his prostheses, and then had finally pushed off the edge of the dock with his
hands, and Willem had caught him. As Jude had gotten physically healthier,

596
he had  also grown  more  and  more self-conscious about  his  body, and
Willem knew, from how withdrawn  Jude would become at times, from how
carefully he shielded himself when he was taking off or putting on his legs,
how much he struggled with accepting how he now appeared. When he had
been weaker, he had let  Willem  help undress him,  but now  that  he was
stronger, Willem saw him unclothed only in glimpses, only by accident. But
he had  decided to  view  Jude’s  self-consciousness as a certain  kind  of
healthiness, for it was at least proof of  his physical strength, proof that he
was able to get in and out of the shower by himself, to climb  in and out of
bed by himself—things he’d had to relearn how to do, things he once hadn’t
had the energy to do on his own.
   Now  they drifted through the lake, swimming or clinging to each other in
silence, and after Willem got out, Jude did as well, heaving himself onto the
deck with his  arms, and they sat there for a while  in  the soft summer air,
both of them naked, both of them staring at the tapered ends of Jude’s legs.
It was the first time he had seen Jude naked in months, and he hadn’t known
what to say, and in the end had simply put his arm around him  and pulled
him close, and that had (he thought) been the right thing to say after all.
   He was still  frightened, intermittently. In  September, a few weeks before
he left for his first proMect in more than a year, Jude had woken again with a
fever, and this  time, he didn’t   ask Willem  not to  call  Andy, and  Willem
didn’t ask him  for  permission to do so. They had gone directly  to Andy’s
office, and Andy had ordered X-rays, blood work, everything, and they had
waited there, each of them lying on the bed in a different examining room,
until the radiologist had called and said that there was no sign of any bone
infection, and the lab had called and said that there was nothing wrong.
   “Rhinopharyngitis,”   Andy   had  said to  them,  smiling.   “The  common
cold.” But  he had rested his hand on the back of Jude’s head, and they had
all been relieved. How fast, how distressingly fast, had their instinct for fear
been reawakened, the fear itself a virus that lay dormant but that they would
never be able to permanently dispel. Joyfulness, abandon: they had had to
relearn those, they had had to re-earn them. But they would never have to
relearn fear; it  would  live  within   the three  of  them, a shared disease, a
shimmery strand that had woven itself through their DNA.
   And  so off  he went to Spain, to  Galicia, to  film.  For as long as he had
known him, Jude had wanted to someday walk the Camino de Santiago, the
medieval pilgrimage route  that ended in Galicia.  “We’ll   start at the Aspe

597
Pass in the Pyrenees,” Jude had said (this was before either  of them  had
ever even been to France), “and we’ll   walk west. It’ll   take weeks!  Every
night we’ll   stay in  these communal  pilgrim  hostels I’ve   read about and
we’ll   survive   on   black   bread  with   caraway  seeds  and  yogurt   and
cucumbers.”
   “I  don’t  know,” he said, although back then he had thought less of Jude’s
limitations—he was too young at the time, they both were, to truly  believe
that Jude might have limitations—and more of himself.  “That sounds kind
of exhausting, Judy.”
   “Then  I’ll   carry you,”  Jude had said promptly, and Willem  had smiled.
“Or we’ll  get a donkey, and he’ll carry you. But really, Willem,  the point is
to walk the road, not ride it.”
   As  they grew older,  as it became clearer and clearer that this dream of
Jude’s would  forever remain  simply  that,  their  fantasies of  the Camino
became more elaborate. “Here’s the pitch,” Jude would say. “Four strangers
—a Chinese Daoist  nun  coming to  terms  with  her sexuality;  a  recently
released British  convict  who  writes  poetry;  a Ka]akhstani  former  arms
dealer grieving his wife’s death; and a handsome and sensitive but troubled
American college  dropout—that’s you,  Willem—meet  along  the Camino
and develop friendships of a lifetime. You’ll shoot in real time, so the shoot
will  only last as long as the walk does. And you’ll   have to walk the entire
time.”
   By  this time, he would  always be laughing. “What happens in the end?”
he asked.
   “The  Daoist nun ends up falling in  love with  an ex–Israeli Army officer
she meets along the way, and the two of them return to Tel Aviv to open a
lesbian bar called  Radclyffe’s.  The  convict and  the arms  dealer end up
together. And  your  character will   meet some virginal   but,  it  turns  out,
secretly slutty Swedish girl along the route and open a high-end B&B in the
Pyrenees, and every year, the original group will gather there for a reunion.”
   “What’s  the movie called?” he asked, grinning.
   Jude thought. “Santiago Blues,” he said, and Willem laughed again.
   Ever  since, they had referred in  passing to Santiago Blues, whose cast
morphed to accommodate him as he  grew older,  but whose premise and
location never  did.  “How’s   the script?”   Jude would  ask him   whenever
something new came in, and he would  sigh. “Okay,”   he would say. “Not
Santiago Blues good, but okay.”

598
   And  then, shortly after that pivotal Thanksgiving, Kit, whom Willem  had
at one point told  of his  and Jude’s interest in the Camino, had sent him a
script with  a  note that read only  “Santiago  Blues!”  And  while  it  wasn’t
exactly Santiago Blues—thank god, he and Jude agreed, it was far better—
it was in fact set on the Camino, it would in fact be shot partly in real time,
and it  did  in  fact begin  in  the Pyrenees, at Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port, and
ended in Santiago de Compostela. The Stars Over St. James followed two
men, both named Paul, both of whom would be played by  the same actor:
the first  was  a sixteenth-century  French monk  traveling  the  route from
Wittenberg on  the eve of  the  Protestant Reformation;  the second was a
contemporary-day pastor from a small American town who was beginning
to question his own faith.  Aside from  a few  minor characters, who would
drift in and out of the two Pauls’ lives, his would be the only role.
   He  gave Jude the script to read, and after he finished, Jude had sighed.
“Brilliant,”  he said, sadly. “I wish I could come on this with you, Willem.”
   “I   wish  you  could, too,”  he  said, quietly.  He  wished Jude had  easier
dreams for himself, dreams he could accomplish, dreams Willem could help
him accomplish.  But  Jude’s dreams were always  about movement: they
were about walking impossible distances or traversing impossible terrains.
And although he could walk now, and although he felt less of it than Willem
could remember him feeling  for years, he would,  they knew, never live  a
life without pain. The impossible would remain the impossible.
   He  had dinner with  the Spanish director, Emanuel, who was young but
already highly acclaimed and who, despite the complexity and melancholy
of his script,  was buoyant and bright, and kept repeating his astonishment
that he, Willem, was going to be in  his film,  that it was his dream to work
with  him.  He,  in  turn,  told   Emanuel of  Santiago  Blues (Emanuel  had
laughed when Willem described the plot.  “Not  bad!”  he said, and Willem
had laughed, too. “It’s supposed to be bad!” he corrected Emanuel). He told
him about how Jude had always wanted to walk this path; how humbled he
was that he would get to do it for him.
   “Ah,”   Emanuel said, teasingly. “I   think  this is  the man for  whom  you
ruined your career, am I right?”
   He had smiled back. “Yes,” he said. “That’s him.”
   The days on The Stars Over St. James were very long and, as Jude had
promised, there was lots of walking (and a caravan of slow-moving trailers
instead of donkeys). The cell-phone reception was patchy in parts, and so

599
he would  instead write  Jude messages, which seemed more appropriate
anyway, more pilgrim-like,  and in the morning, he sent him pictures of his
breakfast (black bread with caraway seeds, yogurt, cucumbers) and of the
stretch of road he would walk that day. Much of  the road cut through busy
towns, and so in places they were rerouted into the countryside. Each day,
he chose a few white pebbles from the side of the road and put them in a Mar
to take home; at night, he sat in his hotel room with his feet wrapped in hot
towels.
   They  finished   filming   two  weeks before  Christmas,  and he  flew   to
London for  meetings, and then back to Madrid  to  meet Jude, where they
rented a car and drove south, through Andalusia. In a town on a cliff  high
above the  sea they  stopped  to  meet Asian  Henry   Young,  whom  they
watched trudging uphill, waving at them with both arms when he saw them,
and finishing the last hundred yards in a sprint.  “Thank god you’re  giving
me an excuse to get the fuck out  of that house,” he said. Henry  had been
living  for the past month at an artists’ residency down the hill,  in  a valley
filled with  orange trees, but unusually for him, he hated the other six people
at the colony, and as they ate dishes of orange rounds floating in a liqueur
of their  own  Muice and topped with cinnamon and pulveri]ed  cloves  and
almonds, they laughed at Henry’s stories about his fellow artists. Later, after
telling him goodbye and that they’d see him next month in New York, they
walked slowly  together through the medieval town, whose every structure
was a glittering white salt cube, and where striped cats lay in the streets and
flicked  the tips  of  their  tails  as people  with  wheel carts  ground slowly
around them.
   The next evening, outside Granada, Jude said he had a surprise for him,
and they got into the car that was waiting for them in front of the restaurant,
Jude with the brown envelope he’d kept by his side all through dinner.
   “Where’re  we going?” he asked. “What’s in the envelope?”
   “You’ll   see,” Jude said.
   Up  and downhill  they swooped, until  the car stopped before the arched
entryway to the Alhambra, where Jude handed the guard a letter, which the
guard studied and then nodded at, and the car slid through the doorway and
stopped and the two of them got out and stood there in the quiet courtyard.
   “Yours,”  Jude said, shyly,  nodding at the buildings  and gardens below.
“For the  next three hours, anyway,”  and then, when Willem  couldn’t  say
anything, he continued, quietly, “Do you remember?”

600
   He nodded, barely. “Of course,” he said, Must as quietly. This was always
how their own  trip  on the Camino was supposed to end: with a  train ride
south to visit the Alhambra. And over the years, even as he knew their walk
would never happen, he had never gone to the Alhambra, had never taken a
day at the end of one shoot or another and come, because he was waiting
for Jude to do it with him.
   “One   of  my  clients,”   Jude said,  before  he  could  ask. “You   defend
someone, and their godfather turns out to be the Spanish minister of culture,
who lets  you make  a generous donation to  the Alhambra’s  maintenance
fund for the privilege of  seeing it alone.” He grinned at Willem. “I  told you
I’d do something for your fiftieth—albeit  a year and a half later.” He placed
his hand on Willem’s arm. “Willem, don’t cry.”
   “I’m   not going to,” he said. “I can do other things in life besides cry, you
know,” although he was no longer sure that was even true.
   He  opened the envelope that Jude handed him, and inside there was  a
package, and he undid the  ribbon  and tore the  paper away and found  a
handmade book,  organi]ed   by  chapters—“The   Alca]aba”;   “The   Lion
Palace”; “The  Gardens”;  “Generalife”—each  with  pages of  handwritten
notes by Malcolm, who had written his thesis on the Alhambra and who had
visited it every year since he was nine. Between each chapter was a drawing
of one of the complex’s details—a Masmine bush blooming with small white
flowers, a stone façade stippled with cobalt tilework—tipped into the pages,
each dedicated to him  and signed  by someone they  knew: Richard;  JB;
India; Asian Henry Young; Ali.  Now he really did begin to cry, smiling and
crying,  until  Jude told   him  that  they  had better  get moving,   that they
couldn’t spend their entire time at the entryway, crying, and he grabbed him
and kissed him, not caring about the silent, black-clad guards behind them.
“Thank you,” he said. “Thank you, thank you, thank you.”
   Off  they moved through the silent night, Jude’s flashlight bouncing a line
of light before them. Into palaces they walked, where the marble was so old
that the structure appeared to be  carved from  soft white  butter, and  into
reception halls with  vaulted ceilings  so high  that birds  arced soundlessly
through the space, and with windows so symmetrical and perfectly  placed
that the room was bright with  moonlight. As  they walked, they stopped to
consult Malcolm’s  notes, to examine details they  would have missed had
they not been alerted to them, to reali]e that they were standing in the room
where, a  thousand years  ago, more,  a  sultan  would  have  dictated  his

601
correspondence. They studied the illustrations, matching the images to what
they saw before them. Facing each of  their  friends’ drawings  was a note
each had written explaining  when they  had first  seen the Alhambra,  and
why they  had chosen to draw  what they  had. They had  that feeling,  the
same one they had often had as young men, that everyone they knew had
seen so much of the world and that they hadn’t, and although they knew this
was no longer true, they  still  felt that  same sense of awe at their friends’
lives, at how much they had done and experienced, at how well they knew
to appreciate it, at how talented they were at recording it. In the gardens of
the Generalife section, they walked  into  a room that  had been cut into  a
labyrinth  hedgerow  of   cypresses, and   he  began  to  kiss   Jude,  more
insistently than he had allowed himself  to do in  a long  time, even though
they could hear, faintly,  one of  the guard’s shoes tapping along the stone
walkway.
   Back in the hotel room they continued, and he heard himself thinking that
in the movie  version of this  night, they would  be having sex now, and he
was almost,  almost  about  to  say  this  out  loud,  when  he  remembered
himself, and stopped, pulling back from Jude as he did. But it was as if he
had spoken anyway, because for a while they  were silent, staring at  each
other, and then Jude said, quietly, “Willem, we can if you want to.”
   “Do  you want to?” he asked, finally.
   “Sure,”  Jude said, but Willem could tell, by the way he had looked down
and the slight catch in his voice, that he was lying.
   For a second he thought he would pretend, that he would allow himself to
be convinced that Jude was telling him  the truth. But he couldn’t.  And  so
“No,”   he  said, and  rolled  off   of  him.   “I   think  this  has  been enough
excitement for one evening.” Next to him,  he heard Jude exhale, and as he
fell asleep, heard him whisper, “I’m sorry, Willem,” and he tried to tell Jude
that he understood, but by this time he was more unconscious than not and
couldn’t speak the words.
   But  that was that period’s only sadness, and the source of their sadnesses
were different: For Jude, he knew, the sadness rose from a sense of failure,
a  certainty—one  Willem   was  never  able  to  displace—that  he  wasn’t
fulfilling   his   obligations.  For  him,  the  sadness was  for  Jude  himself.
Occasionally Willem  allowed  himself  to  wonder what  Jude’s life  would
have been like if sex had been something he had been left to discover, rather
than forced to learn—but it  was not a helpful line  of thought, and it  made

602
him too upset. And so he tried  not to consider it.  But it  was always there,
running through their friendship, their lives, like a vein of turquoise forking
through stone.
   In  the  meantime, though, there  was normalcy,  routine, both  of  which
were better than sex or excitement. There was the reali]ation that Jude had
walked—slowly, but  assuredly—for almost three straight hours that night.
There was, back  in  New  York,  their  lives,  the  things they  used to  do,
resuming because Jude now had the energy to do so, because he could now
stay awake through a play or an opera or a dinner, because he could climb
the stairs to reach Malcolm’s front  door in  Cobble Hill,  could  walk down
the pitched sidewalk to reach JB’s building in  Vinegar Hill.  There was the
comfort of hearing Jude’s alarm blip at five thirty, of hearing him set off for
his morning swim,  the relief  of looking  into a  box on the kitchen  counter
and seeing it was full of medical supplies—extra packets of catheter tubing
and sterile gau]e patches and leftover high-calorie protein drinks that Andy
had only recently said Jude could stop ingesting—that Jude would return to
Andy,  who  would  donate them  to  the  hospital.  In  moments he  would
remember how two  years ago from this  very date, he would  come home
from the theater to find Jude in bed asleep, so fragile that it seemed at times
that the catheter under his shirt  was actually an artery, that  he was being
steadily and irreversibly whittled down to only nerves and vessels and bone.
Sometimes  he  would   think   of    those  moments  and  feel   a   sort   of
disorientation: Was that them, really,  those people back then? Where had
those people gone? Would they reappear? Or were they now other people
entirely? And  then he would  imagine that  those people weren’t so  much
gone as they were within  them, waiting  to bob back up  to the surface, to
reclaim their bodies and minds; they were identities now in  remission, but
they would always be with them.
   Sickness had visited them recently enough so that they still remembered
to be grateful for every day that passed so uneventfully, even as they grew
to expect them. The first time Willem saw Jude in his wheelchair in months,
saw him leave the sofa when they were watching a movie because he was
having an episode and wanted to be alone, he had been disquieted, and he’d
had to make himself  remember that this, too, was who  Jude was: he was
someone whose body betrayed him, and he always would be. The surgery
hadn’t changed this after all—it  had changed Willem’s reaction to  it. And
when he reali]ed that  Jude was cutting himself again—not frequently, but

603
regularly—he had to  remind himself  that, once again, this was  who Jude
was, and that the surgery hadn’t changed this, either.
   Still,  “Maybe  we should call  these The Happy Years,” he told Jude one
morning. It  was  February, it  was snowing,  and they  were lying   in  bed,
which they now did until late every Sunday morning.
   “I  don’t  know,” Jude said, and although he could only see the edge of his
face, Willem  could tell  he was  smiling. “Isn’t   that tempting  fate a little?
We’ll call  it  that and then both of my  arms will  fall off.  Also,  that name’s
taken already.”
   And  it was—it  was the title of  Willem’s next  proMect, in fact, the one he
would be leaving for  in  Must a week: six weeks of rehearsals, followed by
eleven weeks of filming.  But  it wasn’t  the original  title. The  original title
had been The Dancer  on  the Stage, but  Kit   had Must told him  that  the
producers had changed it to The Happy Years.
   He  hadn’t  liked   this  new title.   “It’s   so cynical,”   he  told  Jude, after
complaining first  to  Kit   and then to  the director.  “There’s  something so
curdled and ironic about it.” This had been a few nights ago; they had been
lying on the sofa after his  daily, thoroughly draining  ballet class, and Jude
was massaging his feet. He would be playing Rudolf  Nureyev in  the final
years of his  life,  from  his appointment as the ballet  director of  the Paris
Opéra in nineteen-eighty-three, through his HIV diagnosis, and until he first
noticed the symptoms of his disease, a year before he actually died.
   “I   know  what you  mean,” Jude had  said after  he had finally   finished
ranting. “But maybe they really were the happy years for him. He was free;
he had a Mob he loved; he was mentoring  young dancers; he had  turned
around an entire company. He was doing some of his greatest choreography.
He and that Danish dancer—”
   “Erik  Bruhn.”
   “Right.  He and Bruhn were still together, at least for a little while longer.
He had experienced everything he had probably never dreamed he would
have as a younger  man, and he  was still   young enough to  enMoy it all:
money and renown  and artistic  freedom. Love.  Friendship.”  He  dug his
knuckles into Willem’s sole, and Willem winced. “That sounds like a happy
life to me.”
   They were both quiet for a while. “But he was sick,” Willem  said, at last.
   “Not  then,” Jude reminded him. “Not actively, at least.”
   “No,  maybe not,” he said. “But he was dying.”

604
   Jude had smiled  at him.  “Oh,  dying,”  he said  dismissively. “We’re  all
dying. He Must knew his death would come sooner than he had planned. But
that doesn’t mean they weren’t happy years, that it wasn’t a happy life.”
   He  had  looked  at  Jude,  then,  and  had felt   that  same sensation he
sometimes did when he thought, really  thought of  Jude and what his  life
had been: a sadness, he might have called it, but it wasn’t a pitying sadness;
it was a larger sadness, one that seemed to encompass all the poor striving
people, the billions  he  didn’t  know,  all  living  their  lives,  a sadness that
mingled with  a wonder and awe at how  hard humans everywhere tried to
live,  even  when   their  days  were  so  very   difficult,   even  when   their
circumstances were so wretched. Life  is so sad, he would  think  in  those
moments. It’s so sad, and yet we all do it. We all  cling to  it; we all  search
for something to give us solace.
   But  he didn’t say this, of course, Must sat up and grabbed Jude’s face and
kissed him  and then  fell   back against the  pillows.  “How’d    you  get so
smart?” he asked Jude, and Jude grinned at him.
   “Too  hard?” he asked in response, still kneading Willem’s foot.
   “Not  hard enough.”
   Now  he turned Jude around to face him in bed. “I think we have to stick
with  The Happy Years,”  he told him.  “We’ll   Must have to risk your arms
falling off,”  and Jude laughed.
   The next  week, he left for  Paris. It was one of  the most difficult  shoots
he’d ever done; he had a double, an actual dancer, for the more elaborate
sequences, but he did some of his own dancing as well, and there were days
—days spent lifting  real  ballerinas into  the air,  marveling at  how  dense,
how ropy  with   muscle they  were—that were  so exhausting that  by  the
evening he had only the energy to drop himself into the bathtub and then lift
himself out of it. In the past few years, he had found himself subconsciously
drawn to ever-more physical roles, and he was always astonished by, and
appreciative of, how heroically his body met its every demand. He had been
given a new awareness of it, and now, as he stretched his arms behind him
as he leaped, he could feel how every sore muscle came alive for him, how
it allowed  him  to  do whatever he  wanted, how nothing  within  him  ever
broke, how it indulged him every time. He knew he wasn’t alone in feeling
this, this gratitude: when they visited Cambridge, he and Harold would play
tennis every day, and he knew without them ever discussing it how grateful
they had both become for their own bodies, how much the act of smacking

605
heavily, unthinkingly across the court to lunge for a ball had come to mean
to them both.
   Jude came to visit him in  Paris at the end of April,  and although Willem
had promised him  that he wouldn’t  do  anything elaborate for  his fiftieth
birthday, he had arranged a surprise dinner anyway, and in addition to JB
and Malcolm  and Sophie, Richard and EliMah and Rhodes and Andy and
Black Henry  Young and Harold  and Julia  had all  come over, along with
Phaedra and Citi]en, who had helped him with the planning. The next  day
Jude had come to watch him on set, one of the very few times he had ever
done so. The scene they were working on that morning  was one in which
Nureyev  was  trying   to  correct   a  young  dancer’s  cabriole,  and  after
instructing him again and again, finally demonstrates how to do it; but in an
earlier scene, one they hadn’t yet shot but that would directly  precede this
one, he has Must been diagnosed with HIV, and as he Mumps, scissoring his
legs, he falls, and the studio goes quiet around him. The scene ended on his
face, a moment in which  he had to  convey Nureyev’s sudden recognition
that he understood how  he  would  die and  then, Must a second later, his
decision to ignore that understanding.
   They shot take after take of this scene, and after each take, Willem would
have to step away and wait until he could breathe normally again, and hair
and makeup would flutter around him, blotting the sweat from his face and
neck, and when he was ready, back to his mark he would step. By the time
the director was satisfied, he was panting but satisfied as well.
   “Sorry,”   he  apologi]ed,  going  over  to  Jude  at  last. “The   tedium  of
filmmaking.”
   “No,   Willem,”  Jude said. “It   was ama]ing.  You  were so beautiful  out
there.” He looked tentative for a moment. “I  almost couldn’t believe it was
you.”
   He  took Jude’s hand and clasped it in his, which he knew was the most
affection Jude would tolerate in  public.  But he never knew  how Jude felt
about witnessing such displays of physicality. The previous spring,  during
one of his breakups with Fredrik, JB had dated a principal in a well-known
modern dance company, and they  had all  gone  to  see his performance.
During Josiah’s solo, he had glanced over at Jude and had seen that he was
leaning forward slightly, resting his chin in his hand, and watching the stage
so intently that when Willem put his hand on his back, he startled. “Sorry,”
Willem had whispered. Later, in bed, Jude had been very quiet, and he had

606
wondered what he was thinking: Was he upset? Wistful? Sorrowful? But it
had seemed unkind to ask Jude to say aloud what he might not have been
able to articulate to himself, and so he hadn’t.
   It  was the middle  of June by the time  he returned to New York,  and in
bed Jude had looked  at him,  closely.  “You  have a  ballet dancer’s  body
now,” he said, and the next day, he’d  examined himself in  the mirror  and
reali]ed that Jude was correct. Later that week, they had dinner on the roof,
which they and Richard and India had finally renovated, and which Richard
and Jude had planted with grasses and fruit trees, and he had shown them
some of   what  he’d   learned, feeling   his  self-consciousness change to
giddiness as he Metéed across the decked surface, his friends applauding
behind him, the sun bleeding into nighttime above them.
   “Another  hidden talent,”  Richard had said afterward, and had smiled at
him.
   “I  know,”  Jude had said, smiling at him, too. “Willem is full  of surprises,
even all these years later.”
   But  they were all full of surprises, he had come to learn. When they were
young, they had only  their  secrets to give one  another: confessions were
currency, and divulgences were a form of intimacy. Withholding the details
of your  life  from  your friends was  considered first a sort  of mystery  and
then a kind of  stinginess, one that it  was understood would preclude true
friendship. “There’s  something you’re not  telling  me, Willem,”  JB  would
occasionally accuse him, and, “Are  you  keeping secrets from me? Don’t
you trust me? I thought we were close.”
   “We  are, JB,” he’d said. “And I’m  not keeping anything from  you.” And
he hadn’t been: there was nothing to keep. Of  all  of them, only  Jude had
secrets, real secrets, and while Willem had  in the past been frustrated by
what had seemed his unwillingness to reveal them, he  had never felt that
they weren’t close because of that; it had never impaired his ability to love
him. It had been a difficult lesson for him to accept, this idea that he would
never fully  possess Jude, that he would love someone who would remain
unknowable and inaccessible to him in fundamental ways.
   And  yet Jude was still  being discovered by  him, even thirty-four   years
after they had met, and he was still fascinated by what he saw. That July, for
the first time, he invited him to Rosen Pritchard’s annual summer barbeque.
“You  don’t  have  to come,  Willem,”   Jude had  added immediately  after
asking him. “It’s going to be really, really boring.”

607
   “I  doubt that,” he said. “And I’m  coming.”
   The  picnic  was  held  on  the grounds  of  a large  old  mansion  on the
Hudson, a more polished cousin of the house in which  he had shot Uncle
Vanya, and the entire firm—partners, associates, staff, and their families—
had been invited. As they walked down the clover-thick  back lawn toward
the gathering, he had felt abruptly and unusually shy, keenly aware that he
was an interloper, and when Jude was Must minutes later plucked away from
him by the  firm’s  chairman, who said he had some business he needed to
discuss, quickly but urgently, he had to resist actually reaching out for Jude,
who turned and gave him an apologetic smile and held up his hand—Five
minutes—as he left.
   So he was grateful for the sudden presence of SanMay, one of the very few
colleagues of Jude’s he had met, and who had the year before Moined him as
co-chair of  his department so Jude could concentrate on bringing  in new
business while SanMay handled the administrative and managerial details.
He and SanMay remained at the top of the hill, looking at the crowd beneath
them, SanMay pointing out to him  various  associates and young partners
whom he and Jude hated. (Some of these doomed lawyers would turn and
see SanMay looking in their direction and SanMay would wave back at them,
cheerfully,  muttering  dark  things  about  their   lack  of  competence  and
resourcefulness to Willem as he did.) He  began noticing that people were
glancing up at him and then looking away, and one woman, who had been
walking uphill,  had ungracefully  veered off in  the opposite direction after
noticing him standing there.
   “I   can see I’m a  big hit  here,” he Moked to SanMay, who smiled back at
him.
   “They’re  not intimidated  by you, Willem,”  he said. “They’re  intimidated
by Jude.” He grinned. “Okay, and by you as well.”
   Finally,  Jude was returned to him, and they stood talking to the chairman
(“I’m   a big  fan”)  and  SanMay for a while before  moving  down the  hill,
where Jude introduced him to some of the people he’d heard about over the
years. One of the paralegals asked to take a picture with him, and after he
had, other people asked as well, and when Jude was pulled away from him
again, he   found  himself   listening  to   one  of  the  partners  in   the  tax
department, who began describing to him his own stunt sequences from the
second of his spy movies. At  one point  during Isaac’s monologue he had
looked  across the lawn   and had  caught  Jude’s eye,  who  mouthed his

608
apologies, and he had shaken his head and grinned back at him, but then
had tugged  on  his  left   ear—their  old  signal—and  although  he  hadn’t
expected it, when he had looked over  again, it  was to see Jude marching
toward him.
   “Sorry,  Isaac,” he’d said, firmly, “I’ve  got to borrow Willem for  a while,”
and off he had pulled him. “I’m  really sorry, Willem,”  he whispered as they
moved away, “the social ineptitude on display is particularly bad today; are
you feeling like a panda at the ]oo? On the other hand, I did tell you it was
going to be awful. We can go in ten minutes, I promise.”
   “No,   it’s  okay,”  he  said. “I’m   enMoying myself.” He  always  found  it
revealing to witness Jude in  this other life  of  his, around the people who
owned him for  more hours a day than Willem  himself did. Earlier,  he had
watched as Jude walked  toward a  group of  young  associates who were
braying loudly over  something on one of their phones. But when they saw
Jude approaching them, they had nudged one another and grown silent and
polite, greeting him with a heartiness so robust and obvious that Willem had
cringed, and only  once  Jude had passed them did  they huddle  over the
phone again, but more quietly this time.
   By  the time Jude was taken away from him a third  time, he was feeling
confident enough to begin introducing himself  to the small pack of  people
who orbited him in a loose ring, smiling in his direction. He met a tall Asian
woman  named  Clarissa  whom   he  remembered  Jude  speaking  about
approvingly. “I’ve   heard  a lot  of  great  things about  you,”  he  said, and
Clarissa’s face changed into a radiant, relieved smile. “Jude’s talked about
me?” she asked. He met an associate whose name he couldn’t remember
who told him that Black Mercury  3081 had been the first R-rated movie he
had ever seen, which  made him  feel  tremendously old.  He met  another
associate in Jude’s department who said that he’d taken two  classes with
Harold in  law school and wondered what Harold  was like,  really. He met
Jude’s secretaries’ children, and SanMay’s son, and do]ens of other people, a
few of whom he had heard about by name but most of whom he hadn’t.
   It  was a hot, bree]eless, brilliant day, and although he had drunk steadily
all afternoon—limonata, water, prosecco, iced tea—it had been such a busy
gathering that by the  time they  left, two  hours later, neither  of them  had
actually had the  opportunity to  eat anything,  and they stopped at a  farm
stand to buy corn  so they could  grill  it  with  ]ucchini  and tomatoes from
their garden up at the house.

609
   “I   learned a lot about you  today,” he told  Jude as they ate their dinner
under the dark blue sky. “I learned that most of the firm  is terrified  of you
and think that if they kiss up to me, I  might put in a good word with  you. I
learned that I’m even older than I had reali]ed.  I learned that you’re right:
you do work with a bunch of nerds.”
   Jude had been smiling, but now he laughed. “See?” he asked. “I told you,
Willem.”
   “But  I  had a great time,” he said. “I did!  I want  to come again. But next
time I  think  we  should invite  JB,  and blow  Rosen Pritchard’s collective
mind,” and Jude had laughed again.
   That had been almost two months ago, and since then, he has spent most
of his  time  at Lantern  House. As an  early fifty-second  birthday  present,
he’d asked Jude to take off every Saturday for the rest of the summer, and
Jude has: every Friday he drives up to the house; every Monday morning,
he drives back  to the  city.  Because Jude would have the  car during  the
week, he’d  rented—partly  as  a  Moke, though he was  secretly enMoying
driving around in it—a  convertible, in  an alarming color that Jude referred
to as “harlot red.” During the weekdays, he reads and swims and cooks and
sleeps; he has a very busy  autumn coming  up, and he  knows from  how
replenished and calm he feels that he’ll be ready.
   At  the grocery  store he fills  a paper bag with limes,  and then a second
one with  lemons, buys  some extra selt]er  water, and  drives to  the train
station, where he waits, leaning his head on the  seat and closing his eyes
until he hears Malcolm calling his name and sits up.
   “JB  didn’t  come,”  Malcolm  says, sounding annoyed, as Willem  kisses
him and Sophie hello.  “He  and Fredrik broke  up—maybe—this morning.
But maybe they didn’t, because he said he was going to come up tomorrow.
I couldn’t really figure out what was going on.”
   He groans. “I’ll   call him  from the house,” he says. “Hi, Soph. Have you
guys eaten lunch yet? We can start cooking as soon as we get back.”
   They  haven’t, so he calls Jude to tell him  he can start boiling  the water
for the pasta, but Jude’s already begun. “I got the limes,” he tells him. “And
JB’s not  coming  until  tomorrow;  some difficulty    with  Fredrik  that Mal
couldn’t  quite  follow.   Do  you   want  to  call   him  and  find  out   what’s
happening?”
   He  loads  his  friends’  bags  into  the  backseat, and Malcolm   gets  in,
glancing at the car’s trunk as he does. “Interesting color,” he says.

610
   “Thanks,”  he says. “It’s called ‘harlot red.’ ”
   “Really?”
   Malcolm’s  persistent credulity makes him  grin. “Yes,”  he says. “Ready,
guys?”
   As  he drives, they talk about how  long it’s  been since they’ve seen one
another, about  how  glad  Sophie and  Malcolm   are to   be home,  about
Malcolm’s  disastrous driving  lessons, about how  perfect the  weather is,
how sweet and haylike the air smells. The best summer, he thinks again.
   It  is a thirty-minute drive back to the house from the station, a little faster
if  he hurries, but he doesn’t  hurry, because the drive itself  is pretty.  And
when he crosses the final large intersection, he doesn’t even see the truck
coming toward him, barreling into  traffic against the light, and by  the time
he feels it, a tremendous crush crumpling the passenger-seat side of the car,
where Sophie is sitting next to  him, he is  already aloft, being eMected into
the air. “No!”  he shouts, or thinks he does, and then, in an instant, he sees a
flash of Jude’s face: Must his face, his expression still unresolved, torn from
his body and suspended against a black sky. His ears, his head, fill with the
roar of pleating metal, of exploding glass, of his own useless howls.
   But  his  final  thoughts are not  of  Jude, but  of  Hemming. He  sees the
house he lived in as a child and, sitting in his wheelchair in the center of the
lawn, Must before it slopes down toward the stables, Hemming,  staring at
him with a steady, constant ga]e, the kind he was never able to give him in
life.
   He is  at the end of their driveway, where the dirt road meets the asphalt,
and seeing Hemming, he is overcome with longing. “Hemming!” he shouts,
and then, nonsensically, “Wait for  me!”  And  he begins to run  toward his
brother, so fast  that after  a while,  he  can’t  even feel  his feet  strike  the
ground beneath him.

611
     [ VI ]

Dear Comrade

612
                                                         1

ONE OF THE first movies Willem ever starred in was a proMect called Life After
Death. The film was a take on the story of Orpheus and Eurydice, and was
told  from   alternating  perspectives  and  shot  by   two  different,   highly
regarded directors. Willem   played  O.,  a young  musician  in  Stockholm
whose girlfriend  had Must died, and who had begun having delusions that
when he played certain melodies, she would appear beside him. An Italian
actress, Fausta, played E., O.’s deceased girlfriend.
   The Moke of the movie was that while O. stared and wept and mourned for
his love from  earth, E. was having a terrific time  in hell,  where she could,
finally,  stop behaving:  stop looking   after her  querulous mother  and her
harassed father; stop listening to the whining of the clients she tried to help
as a lawyer for the indigent but who  never thanked her; stop indulging her
self-absorbed friends’ endless patter;  stop trying  to  cheer her  sweet but
perpetually morose boyfriend. Instead, she was in the underworld, a place
where the food was plentiful and where the trees were always sagging with
fruit,  where she could  make catty comments about  other people without
consequence, a place where  she even  attracted the  attention  of  Hades
himself, who  was being played  by a  large, muscular Italian  actor named
Rafael.
   Life  After  Death had  divided  the critics.  Some of  them loved  it:  they
loved   how   the   film    said   so  much   about   two    different   cultures’
fundamentally different  approach to  life  itself  (O.’s  story was  shot by  a
famous Swedish director in somber grays and blues; E.’s story was told by
an Italian director  known for  his aesthetic exuberance), while at the same
time offering  glints of  gentle self-parody; they  loved its  tonal shifts;  they
loved how tenderly, and unexpectedly, it offered solace to the living.
   But  others had hated it: they thought it Marring in both timbre and palette;
they hated its tone of ambivalent satire; they hated the musical number that
E.  participates  in   while   in   hell,  even   as  her  poor  O.   plinks   away
aboveground on his chilly, spare compositions.
   But  although the debate over the movie (which practically no one in the
States saw, but about which  everyone had an opinion)  was impassioned,

613
there was  unanimity   about at  least  one  thing:  the  two   leads, Willem
Ragnarsson and Fausta San Filippo, were fantastic,  and would  go  on to
have great careers.
   Over  the years, Life After  Death had been reconsidered, and rethought,
and reevaluated, and restudied, and by the  time Willem  was  in his  mid-
forties,  the movie  had  become officially   beloved,  a favorite   among its
directors’  oeuvres,  a  symbol  of   the  kind   of  collaborative,   irreverent,
fearless, and  yet  playful   filmmaking   that  far  too   few  people  seemed
interested in doing any longer. Willem had been in such a diverse collection
of films and plays that he had always been interested in hearing what people
named as their favorite, and then reporting his findings back to Willem: the
younger male  partners and  associates at Rosen Pritchard  liked  the  spy
movies, for example. The women liked  Duets. The temps—many of them
actors themselves—liked The Poisoned Apple. JB liked The Unvanquished.
Richard liked The Stars Over St. James. Harold and Julia liked The Lacuna
Detectives and Uncle Vanya. And  film  students—who had been the least
shy about approaching Willem  in  restaurants or on the street—invariably
liked Life  After  Death. “It’s   some of  Doni]etti’s   best work,”  they’d  say,
confidently, or “It must’ve been ama]ing to be directed by Bergesson.”
   Willem  had always been polite. “I  agree,” he’d say, and the film student
would beam. “It was. It was ama]ing.”
   This  year marks the twentieth anniversary of  Life After  Death, and one
day in February he steps outside to find that Willem’s thirty-three-year-old
face has been plastered across the sides of buildings, on the backs of bus-
stop shelters, in Warholian multiples along long stretches of scaffolding. It
is a Saturday, and although he has been intending to take a walk, he instead
turns around and retreats upstairs, where he  lies down  in  bed again and
closes his eyes until he falls asleep once more. On Monday, he sits in  the
back of the car as Mr. Ahmed drives him up Sixth Avenue, and after he sees
the first  poster, wheat-pasted onto the window of an  empty storefront, he
shuts his eyes and keeps them shut until he feels the car stop and hears Mr.
Ahmed announce that they are at the office.
   Later that week he receives an invitation from MoMA;   it seems that Life
After Death will  be the first  to be screened in a weeklong festival  in June
celebrating Simon   Bergesson’s films,   and  that  there  will   be  a   panel
following  the movie at which both of the directors as well as Fausta will be
present, and they are hopeful he will attend and—although they know they

614
had extended the offer before—would be thrilled if he might Moin the panel
too and speak about Willem’s experiences during shooting. This stops him:
Had  they  invited   him   earlier?  He  supposes they   had.  But  he   can’t
remember. He can remember very little from the past six months. He looks
now at the dates of the festival:  June third through June eleventh. He will
make plans to be out of town then; he has to be. Willem had shot two other
films with  Bergesson—they had been friendly. He doesn’t want to have to
see more posters with Willem’s face, to  read his name in the paper again.
He doesn’t want to have to see Bergesson.
   That night, before bed, he goes first to Willem’s side of the closet, which
he still has not emptied. Here are Willem’s shirts on their  hangers, and his
sweaters on their shelves, and his shoes lined up beneath. He takes down
the shirt he needs, a burgundy plaid woven through with threads of yellow,
which Willem  used to wear around the house in the springtime, and shrugs
it on over his  head. But instead of putting his arms through its  sleeves, he
ties  the  sleeves in   front  of   him,  which   makes the   shirt  look   like  a
straitMacket, but which he can pretend—if he  concentrates—are Willem’s
arms in an embrace around him. He climbs into bed. This ritual embarrasses
and shames him, but he only does it when he really needs it, and tonight he
really needs it.
   He lies  awake. Occasionally he brings his nose down to the collar so he
can try to smell what remains of Willem  on the shirt,  but with every wear,
the fragrance grows fainter. This is the fourth shirt of Willem’s he has used,
and he is very careful about preserving its scent. The first three shirts, ones
he wore almost nightly for months, no longer smell like Willem;  they smell
like him.  Sometimes he tries to comfort himself with  the fact that his very
scent is something given to him by  Willem,  but he is never comforted for
long.
   Even  before they  became a  couple, Willem   would  always bring  him
something from wherever he’d been working, and when he came back from
The Odyssey, it was with  two bottles of  cologne that he’d  had made at a
famous perfumer’s atelier  in  Florence. “I  know  this  might seem kind  of
strange,” he’d   said.  “But   someone”—he had  smiled  to   himself,  then,
knowing Willem   meant some girl—“told   me  about this  and I  thought it
sounded interesting.” Willem explained how he’d had to describe him to the
nose—what colors he liked, what tastes, what parts of the world—and that
the perfumer had created this fragrance for him.

615
   He had smelled it:  it was green and slightly peppery, with  a raw, aching
finish. “Vetiver,”  Willem  had said. “Try it  on,” and he had, dabbing it onto
his hand because he didn’t let Willem see his wrists back then.
   Willem  had sniffed  at him.  “I  like  it,”  he said, “it  smells nice on  you,”
and they were both suddenly shy with each other.
   “Thanks, Willem,”  he’d said. “I  love it.”
   Willem   had  had  a  scent  made  for  himself   as well.   His   had  been
sandalwood-based, and he soon grew  to  associate the  wood  with  him:
whenever he smelled it—especially  when  he was  far away:  in  India  on
business; in Japan; in  Thailand—he  would  always think  of  Willem   and
would feel  less alone. As  the years passed, they both continued to  order
these scents from the Florence perfumer, and two months ago, one of the
first things he did  when he had the presence of mind to think  of it  was to
order a large quantity of  Willem’s  custom-made cologne. He had been so
relieved, so fevered, when the package had finally  arrived, that his  hands
had tremored as he tore off its wrappings and slit open the box. Already, he
could feel Willem  slipping from  him; already, he knew he needed to try to
maintain him.  But although he  had sprayed—carefully; he didn’t  want  to
use too much—the fragrance on Willem’s shirt, it  hadn’t been the same. It
wasn’t Must the cologne after all that had made Willem’s clothes smell like
Willem: it  had been him, his very self-ness. That night he had laid in bed in
a  shirt  gone  sugary  with   sandalwood, a  scent  so  strong  that  it   had
overwhelmed every other odor, that it had destroyed what had remained of
Willem entirely.  That night he had cried,  for the first  time  in a long  time,
and the next day he had retired that shirt, folding it and packing it into a box
in  the  corner of   the closet  so  it  wouldn’t   contaminate Willem’s   other
clothes.
   The  cologne,  the  ritual   with   the  shirt:  they  are  two   pieces of   the
scaffolding, rickety and fragile as it  is, that he has learned to erect in order
to keep moving forward, to keep living  his life.  Although often he feels he
isn’t so much living as he is merely existing, being moved through his days
rather than moving through them himself. But he doesn’t punish himself too
much for this; merely existing is difficult enough.
   It  had taken months to  figure out  what worked.  For a while  he gorged
nightly on  Willem’s  films,  watching them until  he fell  asleep on the sofa,
fast-forwarding to the scenes with Willem  speaking. But  the dialogue, the
fact of Willem’s  acting,  made him seem farther from him,  not closer, and

616
eventually he learned  it  was better to  simply  pause on a  certain image,
Willem’s face trapped and staring at him, and he would look and look at it
until his  eyes burned. After a month of  this, he reali]ed  that he had to be
more vigilant  about parsing out these movies, so they wouldn’t  lose their
potency. And so he had begun in order, with Willem’s very first  film—The
Girl  with   the Silver  Hands—which   he had  watched obsessively, every
night,  stopping and  starting the  movie,  free]ing   on certain  images. On
weekends he would watch it  for  hours, from when  the sky was changing
from night  to day  until long  after it  had turned black  again. And then he
reali]ed  that  it   was dangerous to  watch  these  movies  chronologically,
because with each film, it  would  mean he was getting closer to  Willem’s
death. And  so he now  chose the  month’s film   at random,  and that  had
proven safer.
   But  the biggest, the most sustaining fiction he has devised for himself is
pretending that Willem is simply away filming.  The shoot is very long, and
very taxing, but it  is finite,  and eventually he will   return. This had been a
difficult  delusion, because there had never been a shoot through which he
and Willem didn’t  speak, or e-mail,  or text  (or all  three) every day. He is
grateful that he has saved so many of Willem’s e-mails, and for a period, he
was able  to  read these old  messages at night  and  pretend he  had Must
received them: even when he wanted to binge on them, he hadn’t, and he
was careful to read Must one in a sitting. But he knew that wouldn’t satisfy
him forever—he would need to be more Mudicious about how he doled these
e-mails out to himself. Now he reads one, Must one, every week. He can read
messages he’s read in previous weeks, but not messages he hasn’t. That is
another rule.
   But    it   didn’t   solve   the   larger   issue  of   Willem’s    silence:  What
circumstances, he pu]]led  to  himself  as he swam in  the  morning, as  he
stood, unseeingly, over the stove at night, waiting for the teakettle to shriek,
would prevent  Willem  from  communicating with  him  while  on  a shoot?
Finally, he was able to invent a scenario. Willem would be shooting a film
about a  crew of  Russian  cosmonauts during the  Cold  War, and  in  this
fantasy movie, they would actually be in space, because the film was being
funded by a perhaps-cra]y Russian industrialist billionaire. So away Willem
would be, circling  miles above him all  day and all night, wanting  to come
home and unable to communicate with  him.  He was embarrassed by this
imaginary  movie  as  well,  by  his  desperation,  but  it  also  seemed Must

617
plausible enough  that  he could  fool   himself  into  believing  it   for  long
stretches, sometimes for  several  days.  (He  was  grateful  then  that  the
logistics and  realities  of  Willem’s  Mob had, in  many cases, been barely
credible: the industry’s very improbability helped him to believe now, when
he needed it.)
   What’s the movie called? he imagined Willem  asking, imagined Willem
smiling.
   Dear Comrade, he told Willem, because that was how Willem and he had
sometimes addressed their e-mails to  each other—Dear  Comrade; Dear
Jude Haroldovich;  Dear  Willem  Ragnaravovich—which  they had  begun
when Willem was shooting the first installment in his spy trilogy, which had
been set in  nineteen-sixties Moscow.  In  his  imaginings, Dear  Comrade
would take a year to complete, although he knew he would  have to adMust
that: it  was March  already, and in  his fantasy, Willem  would  be coming
home in November, but he knew he wouldn’t  be ready to end the charade
by then. He knew he would have to imagine reshoots, delays. He knew he
would have to  invent a  sequel, some reason that Willem  would be  away
from him for longer still.
   To heighten the fantasy’s believability, he wrote Willem  an e-mail every
night telling  him what had happened that day, Must as he would have done
had Willem been alive. Every message always ended the same way: I hope
the shoot’s going well. I miss you so much. Jude.
   It  had been the previous November when he had finally emerged from his
stupor, when the finality of Willem’s absence had truly begun to resonate. It
was then that he had known  he was in  trouble. He remembers very little
from the months before;  he remembers very little  from  the day itself.  He
remembers finishing  the pasta salad,  tearing the  basil  leaves above the
bowl, checking his  watch and wondering where they  were. But he hadn’t
been worried: Willem liked  to drive home on the back roads, and Malcolm
liked to take pictures, and so they might have stopped, they might have lost
track of the time.
   He called JB, listened to him complain about Fredrik; he cut some melon
for dessert. By this time they really were late, and he called Willem’s phone
but it  only  rang, emptily.  Then he  was irritated:  Where could  they have
been?
   And  then it  was later still.  He was pacing. He called Malcolm’s  phone,
Sophie’s phone: nothing. He called Willem  again. He called JB: Had  they

618
called him? Had he heard from them? But JB hadn’t. “Don’t  worry, Judy,”
he said. “I’m sure they Must went for ice cream or something. Or maybe they
all ran off together.”
   “Ha,”   he said, but he knew  something was wrong. “Okay.  I’ll   call you
later, JB.”
   And  Must as he had hung up with JB, the doorbell chimed, and he stopped,
terrified, because no one ever rang their doorbell. The house was difficult to
find; you  had to really  look for  it,  and then you had to  walk  up from the
main road—a long,  long  walk—if   no one bu]]ed   you  in, and  he hadn’t
heard the front gate bu]]er sound. Oh god, he thought. Oh, no. No. But then
it  rang again, and he  found himself  moving  toward  the door, and  as he
opened it, he registered not so much the policemen’s expressions but that
they were removing their caps, and then he knew.
   He  lost  himself  after that.  He was  conscious only  in flashes, and  the
people’s faces he saw—Harold’s, JB’s, Richard’s, Andy’s, Julia’s—were the
same faces he remembered from when he had tried to kill himself: the same
people, the same tears. They had cried  then, and they  cried now, and  at
moments he was bewildered; he  thought that  the past decade—his years
with Willem, the loss of his legs—might have been a dream after all, that he
might still be in  the psychiatric ward. He remembers learning things during
those days, but  he doesn’t  remember how he  learned them, because he
doesn’t remember having any conversations. But he must have. He learned
that he  had identified   Willem’s  body,  but  that they  hadn’t  let  him  see
Willem’s face—he had been tossed from the car and had landed, headfirst,
against an elm thirty feet across the road and his face had been destroyed,
its every bone broken. So he had identified him from a birthmark on his left
calf, from a mole  on his right shoulder. He learned that Sophie’s body had
been crushed—“obliterated” was the word he remembered someone saying
—and that  Malcolm  had  been declared brain  dead and  had lived  on  a
ventilator for  four  days until  his parents had had his  organs donated. He
learned that they had all been wearing their seat belts; that the rental car—
that stupid, fucking rental car—had had defective air bags; that the driver of
the truck, a beer company truck, had been wildly drunk and had run through
a red light.
   Most  of  the time,  he was drugged. He  was drugged when  he went to
Sophie’s service, which he couldn’t remember at all, not one detail; he was
drugged when he went to Malcolm’s.  From Malcolm’s,  he remembers Mr.

619
Irvine grabbing him  and shaking him  and then hugging him  so tightly  he
was smothered, hugging him  and sobbing  against him,  until  someone—
Harold, presumably—said something and he was released.
   He  knew  there had been some  sort of  service for  Willem,   something
small;  he knew  Willem   had  been cremated. But  he  doesn’t  remember
anything from it. He doesn’t know who organi]ed it.  He doesn’t even know
if  he attended it,  and he is  too frightened  to ask.  He remembers Harold
telling him at one point that it was okay that he wasn’t giving a eulogy, that
he could have a  memorial for  Willem   later, whenever he was ready. He
remembers nodding, remembers thinking: But I won’t ever be ready.
   At  some point he went back to work:  the end of September, he thought.
By this point,  he knew what had happened. He did. But he was trying  not
to, and back  then, it  was still  easy. He didn’t  read  the papers; he didn’t
watch the news. Two  weeks after  Willem  died, he  and Harold  had been
walking down the street and they had passed a newspaper kiosk and there,
before him, was a maga]ine with Willem’s face on it, and two dates, and he
reali]ed  that the  first  date was the  year Willem  had  been born, and the
second was the year he had died. He had stood there, staring, and Harold
had taken his arm. “Come on, Jude,” he’d said, gently. “Don’t  look. Come
with me,” and he had followed, obediently.
   Before he returned to the office,  he had instructed SanMay: “I don’t want
anyone offering me their condolences. I don’t want anyone mentioning it. I
don’t want anyone saying his name, ever.”
   “Okay, Jude,” SanMay had said, quietly, looking scared. “I understand.”
   And  they  had obeyed him.  No one said  they were sorry.  No one  said
Willem’s name. No one ever says Willem’s name. And now he wishes they
would  say it.  He  cannot say it  himself.  But  he wishes  someone would.
Sometimes, on the street, he hears someone say something that sounds like
his name—“William!”:  a mother, calling to her son—and he turns, greedily,
in the direction of her voice.
   In   those   first   months,  there  were   practicalities,   which   gave  him
something to do, which gave his days anger, which in turn gave them shape.
He  sued the  car  manufacturer,  the  seat-belt manufacturer,  the  air-bag
manufacturer, the  rental-car   company. He   sued  the  truck   driver,  the
company the driver worked  for. The driver,  he heard through the driver’s
lawyer, had a chronically ill  child;  a lawsuit would  ruin the family.  But he
didn’t care. Once he would  have; not now. He felt  raw and merciless. Let

620
him be destroyed, he thought. Let him be ruined. Let him  feel what I  feel.
Let him lose everything, the  only things, that matter. He wanted to siphon
every dollar from all  of them, all the companies, all the people working for
them. He wanted to leave them hopeless. He wanted to leave them empty.
He wanted them to live in squalor. He wanted them to feel lost in their own
lives.
   They  were being sued, each of them, for everything Willem would  have
earned had  he been  allowed  to  live   a  normal  lifespan,  and  it  was  a
ridiculous  number,  an astonishing  number, and  he  couldn’t   look  at  it
without despair: not because of the figure itself but because of the years that
figure represented.
   They would  settle with him, said his lawyer, a notoriously aggressive and
venal torts expert named Todd with whom he had been on the law review,
and the settlements would be generous.
   Generous; not generous. He didn’t  care. He only cared if  it  made them
suffer. “Obliterate   them,”  he  commanded Todd,  his  voice  croaky  with
hatred, and Todd had looked startled.
   “I  will,  Jude,” he said. “Don’t worry.”
   He  didn’t  need the money, of course. He had his  own. And  except for
monetary gifts  to his  assistant and his godson, and sums that he  wanted
distributed to various  charities—the same charities Willem  gave to  every
year, along  with  an  additional  one:  a foundation  that  helped  exploited
children—everything that  Willem  had he had left  to  him:  it  was a photo
negative of his own  will.  Earlier  that year, he and Willem had set up  two
scholarships at their college for Harold’s and Julia’s seventy-fifth birthdays:
one at the law school under Harold’s name; one at the medical school under
Julia’s. They had funded them  together, and Willem had left  enough in  a
trust so  that  they always  would  be.  He  disbursed the rest  of  Willem’s
bequests: he  signed  the  checks to   the  charities  and  foundations  and
museums and organi]ations that Willem  had designated his beneficiaries.
He  gave to  Willem’s   friends—Harold  and  Julia;  Richard;  JB;  Roman;
Cressy; Susannah; Miguel; Kit; Emil; Andy; but not Malcolm,  not anymore
—the items (books,  pictures, mementoes from films  and plays, pieces of
art)  that he  had  left  them.  There  were  no  surprises in  Willem’s   will,
although sometimes he wished there would  have  been—how grateful he
would have been for a secret child whom he’d get to meet and would have
Willem’s smile;  how scared and yet how excited he would have been for a

621
secret letter containing a long-held confession. How thankful he would have
been for an excuse to hate Willem, to resent him, for a mystery to solve that
might occupy  years of his  life.  But there was  nothing. Willem’s  life  was
over. He was as clean in death as he had been in life.
   He thought  he was doing well, or well  enough anyway. One day Harold
called and asked what he wanted to do for Thanksgiving, and for a moment
he couldn’t understand what Harold was talking about, what the very word
—Thanksgiving—meant. “I don’t know,”  he said.
   “It’s  next week,”  Harold said, in the new quiet voice everyone now used
around him. “Do you want to come here, or we can come over, or we can go
somewhere else?”
   “I  don’t think  I can,” he said. “I have too much work, Harold.”
   But  Harold had insisted. “Anywhere, Jude,” he’d  said. “With  whomever
you want. Or no one. But we need to see you.”
   “You’re  not going to have a good time with me,” he finally said.
   “We  won’t have a good time without you,”  Harold said. “Or  any kind of
time. Please, Jude. Anywhere.”
   So they  went to London. They  stayed in the flat. He  was relieved to be
out of the country, where there would have been scenes of families on the
television, and  his colleagues happily  grousing  about their  children  and
wives and husbands and in-laws. In London, the day was Must another day.
They took  walks, the three of  them. Harold  cooked ambitious, disastrous
meals, which he ate. He slept and slept. Then they went home.
   And   then one  Sunday in   December he had  woken  and  had known:
Willem  was gone. He was gone from  him forever.  He was never coming
back. He would never see him again. He would never hear Willem’s voice
again, he would never smell him again, he would never feel Willem’s arms
around him. He would  never again be able to unburden himself of  one of
his memories, sobbing with shame as he did, would never again Merk awake
from one of his dreams, blind with terror, to feel Willem’s hand on his face,
to hear Willem’s voice above him: “You’re safe, Judy, you’re safe. It’s over;
it’s over; it’s  over.”  And then he had cried,  really cried, cried  for the first
time since the  accident. He had cried  for  Willem,  for  how frightened  he
must have been, for how he must have suffered, for his poor short life. But
mostly he had cried for himself.  How was he going to keep living  without
Willem?  His  entire  life—his   life  after  Brother  Luke,  his  life   after  Dr.
Traylor, his life after the monastery and the motel rooms and the home and

622
the trucks,  which  was  the only   part of   his life   that  counted—had had
Willem in it.  There had not been a day since he was sixteen and met Willem
in their room at Hood Hall in  which he had not communicated with Willem
in some way. Even  when they were  fighting,  they spoke. “Jude,”  Harold
had said, “it will get better. I swear. I swear. It won’t seem like it now, but it
will.”  They  all said this: Richard and JB and Andy;  the people who wrote
him cards. Kit.  Emil.  All   they told  him was  that it  would get  better. But
although he knew enough to  never say so aloud, privately  he thought:  It
won’t. Harold  had had Jacob for five years. He had had Willem for  thirty-
four. There was no comparison. Willem had been the first person who loved
him, the first person who had seen him not as an obMect to be used or pitied
but as something else, as a friend; he had been the second person who had
always, always been kind to him. If he hadn’t had Willem, he wouldn’t have
had any of  them—he  would never  have been able to  trust  Harold if   he
hadn’t trusted Willem first.  He was unable to conceive of life without  him,
because Willem had so defined what his life was and could be.
   The next day he did what he never did: he called SanMay and told him he
wasn’t coming in  for  the next two days. And  then he had lain in  bed and
cried, screaming into the pillows until he lost his voice completely.
   But  from  those two days he had found  another solution. Now  he stays
very late at work,  so late that he has seen the sun rise from his office. He
does this every  weekday, and on Saturdays as well.  But  on  Sundays he
sleeps as late as he can, and when he wakes, he takes a pill, one that not
only  makes him  fall   asleep again  but  bludgeons into  obsolescence all
glimmers of  wakefulness. He sleeps until  the pill  wears off,  and then he
takes a shower and gets back into bed and takes a different  pill,  one that
makes sleep shallow  and glassy, and sleeps until   Monday  morning. By
Monday, he has not eaten in twenty-four hours, sometimes more, and he is
trembly and thoughtless. He swims, he goes to work. If he is lucky, he has
spent Sunday dreaming of Willem, for at least a little while. He has bought
a long, fat pillow,  as long as a man is tall, one meant to be pressed against
by pregnant women or by people with back problems, and he drapes one of
Willem’s shirts over it  and holds it as he sleeps, even though in life, it was
Willem who held him. He hates himself for this, but he cannot stop.
   He  is  aware, dimly,   that his  friends  are watching  him,  that  they  are
worried about him. At some point it had emerged that one of the reasons he
remembers so little from  the  days after the accident was because he had

623
been in the hospital, on a suicide watch. Now he stumbles through his days
and wonders why he isn’t, in fact, killing himself.  This is, after all, the time
to do it. No one would blame him. And yet he doesn’t.
   At  least no  one tells him  that he  should move on.  He doesn’t want  to
move on, he doesn’t want to move into something else: he wants to remain
exactly at this stage, forever. At least no one tells him he’s in denial. Denial
is what sustains him,  and he is dreading the day  when his delusions will
lose their power  to  convince him.  For the  first  time in  decades, he isn’t
cutting himself  at all. If  he doesn’t  cut himself, he remains numb, and he
needs to remain numb; he needs the world to not come too close to him. He
has finally managed to achieve what Willem had always hoped for him; all
it took was Willem being taken from him.
   In  January he had a dream that he and Willem were in the house upstate
making dinner and talking:  something they’d done hundreds of times. But
in  the dream,  although he  could  hear his  own  voice,  he  couldn’t  hear
Willem’s—he could  see his mouth moving, but  he couldn’t  hear anything
he was  saying. He  had  woken,  then, and  had thrown  himself   into  his
wheelchair and moved  as quickly   as he could  into  his  study, where he
scrolled through  all  of his  old  e-mails, searching and searching until   he
found a few  voice messages from Willem that  he had forgotten to delete.
The messages were brief, and unrevealing, but  he played them  over and
over, weeping, bent double with grief, the messages’ very banality—“Hey.
Judy. I’m going to the farmers’  market to pick up those ramps. But do you
want anything else? Let  me know”—something  precious, because it was
proof of their life together.
   “Willem,”    he said aloud to  the apartment, because sometimes, when it
was very bad, he spoke to him. “Come back to me. Come back.”
   He    feels    no   sense   of    survivor’s    guilt    but    rather    survivor’s
incomprehension: he  had  always, always  known   he  would  predecease
Willem.  They  all  knew  it.   Willem,  Andy,   Harold,  JB,  Malcolm,  Julia,
Richard: he would  die before all  of them. The  only question was how  he
would die—it  would be by  his own hand, or it  would be by infection.  But
none of them had ever thought that Willem, of all people, would die before
he did. There had been no plans made for  that, no contingencies. Had he
known this was a possibility,  had it  been less absurd a concept, he would
have stockpiled. He would have made recordings of Willem’s voice talking
to him and kept them. He would have taken more pictures. He would have

624
tried to  distill  Willem’s  very  body chemistry.  He would  have taken him,
Must-woken, to the perfumer in Florence. “Here,” he would’ve said. “This.
This scent. I want you to bottle this.”  Jane had once told him that as a girl
she had been terrified  her  father would  die,  and she had  secretly made
digital copies of  her father’s dictation  (he had been a doctor as well)  and
stored them on flash drives. And when her father finally did die, four years
ago, she had  rediscovered them, and  had  sat in  a  room  playing  them,
listening to her  father dictating orders in  his calm,  patient voice. How  he
envied Jane this; how he wished he had thought to do the same.
   At  least he had Willem’s films, and his e-mails, and letters he had written
him over  the years, all of  which  he had saved. At  least he had Willem’s
clothes, and articles about Willem, all of which he had kept. At least he had
JB’s paintings of Willem;  at least he had photographs of Willem: hundreds
of them, though he only  allotted himself  a certain number. He decided he
would allow himself  to look at ten of them every week, and he would look
and look at them for hours. It was his decision whether he wanted to review
one a day or look at all ten in a single sitting. He was terrified his computer
would  be destroyed and he  would  lose these images; he made  multiple
copies of the photographs and stored the discs in various places: in his safe
at Greene  Street, in  his  safe  at  Lantern  House, in   his  desk at  Rosen
Pritchard, in his safe-deposit box at the bank.
   He  had never considered Willem a thorough cataloger of his own life—
he isn’t   either—but  one Sunday  in  early  March  he  skips  his  drugged
slumber and instead drives to Garrison. He has only been to the house twice
since that September day, but the gardeners still come, and the  bulbs are
beginning to bud around the driveway, and when he steps inside, there is a
vase of cut plum  branches on the kitchen counter and he stops, staring at
them: Had he texted the housekeeper to tell her he was coming? He must
have. But for  a  moment he fancies  that at  the beginning of  every  week
someone comes and places a new arrangement of flowers on the counter,
and at the end of every week, another week in which no one comes to see
them, they are thrown away.
   He goes to his study, where they had installed extra cabinetry so Willem
could store  his files  and  paperwork there as  well.  He  sits on  the floor,
shrugging off his coat, then takes a breath and opens the first drawer. Here
are file folders, each labeled with the name of a play  or movie, and inside
each folder is  the shooting version  of the  script, with  Willem’s  notes on

625
them. Sometimes there are call sheets from days when an  actor he knew
Willem   particularly   admired  was  going  to   be  filming    with   him:  he
remembers how excited Willem had been on The Sycamore Court, how he
had sent him a photo of that day’s  call sheet with his  name typed directly
beneath Clark Butterfield’s. “Can you believe it?!” his message had read.
   I  can totally believe it, he’d written back.
   He  flips  through  these files, lifting   them  out at  random and carefully
sorting through  their  contents. The next  three drawers  are all  the  same
things: films, plays, other proMects.
   In  the fifth  drawer  is a file  marked “Wyoming,”   and in this  are mostly
photos, most of which he has seen before: pictures of Hemming; pictures of
Willem  with  Hemming; pictures  of their  parents; pictures of  the siblings
Willem never knew:  Britte and Aksel.  There is a separate envelope with a
do]en pictures of Must Willem, only Willem: school photos, and Willem in a
Boy Scout uniform,  and Willem  in  a football  uniform.  He stares at these
pictures, his hands in fists, before placing them back in their envelope.
   There are a few  other things in  the Wyoming file  as well:  a third-grade
book report, written in  Willem’s  careful cursive, on The Wizard of Oz that
makes him smile; a hand-drawn birthday card to Hemming that makes him
want to cry. His mother’s death announcement; his father’s. A copy of their
will.  A few  letters, from him  to his parents, from his parents to him, all  in
Swedish—these he sets aside to have translated.
   He  knows  Willem  had  never kept  a  Mournal, and yet when he  looks
through  the  “Boston”   file,   he  thinks  for   some reason  he  might  find
something. But  there is  nothing.  Instead there are  more pictures,  all  of
which he has seen before: of Willem, so shiningly handsome; of Malcolm,
looking suspicious and slightly feral, with the stringy, unsuccessful Afro he
had tried to cultivate throughout college; of JB, looking essentially the same
as he does now, merry and fat-cheeked; of him, looking scared and drowned
and very skinny, in  his awful  too-big  clothes and with his  awful too-long
hair, in his braces that imprisoned his legs in  their black,  foamy embrace.
He stops at a picture of the two of them sitting  on the sofa in their suite in
Hood, Willem leaning into  him and looking at him,  smiling, clearly  saying
something, and him, laughing with his hand over his mouth, which  he had
learned to do  after the  counselors at the home told  him  he had  an ugly
smile. They look like  two different  creatures, not Must two different people,
and he has to quickly refile the picture before he tears it in half.

626
   Now   it  is  becoming difficult    to  breathe, but  he keeps going.  In  the
“Boston”  file,   in  the  “New   Haven”  file,  are  reviews  from  the  college
newspapers of plays Willem had been in; there is the story about JB’s Lee
Lo]ano–inspired  performance  art  piece.  There  is,  touchingly,   the  one
calculus exam on which  Willem  had made a B, an exam he had coached
him on for months.
   And  then he reaches into the drawer again, most of which is occupied not
by a hanging file but by a large, accordion-shaped one, the kind they use at
the firm. He hefts it  out and sees that it is marked only with his name, and
slowly opens it.
   Inside  it  is everything:  every letter  he had ever  written  Willem,  every
substantial e-mail printed out. There are birthday cards he’d given Willem.
There are photographs of him, some of which he has never seen. There is
the Artforum issue with  Jude with Cigarette on  the cover. There is a card
from Harold written shortly  after the adoption, thanking Willem for coming
and for the gift. There is an article about him winning a pri]e in law school,
which he certainly hadn’t sent Willem  but someone clearly had. He hadn’t
needed to catalog his life  after all—Willem  had been doing  it for  him  all
along.
   But  why had Willem  cared about him so much? Why  had he wanted to
spend so much time around him? He had never been able to understand this,
and now he never will.
   I  sometimes think I  care more about  your being alive  than  you do, he
remembers Willem saying, and he takes a long, shuddering breath.
   On and on it goes, this detailing of his life, and when he looks in the sixth
drawer, there is another accordion file, the same as the first, marked “Jude
II,”  and behind it,  “Jude III”   and “Jude  IV.”  But by  this point  he can no
longer look.  He gently  replaces the files,  closes the drawers, relocks the
cabinets. He puts Willem’s  and his  parents’ letters into  an envelope, and
then another  envelope, for  protection.  He  removes  the plum   branches,
wraps their cut ends in a plastic bag, dumps the water from their vase into
the sink, locks up the house, and drives home, the branches on the seat next
to him. Before  he goes up to his apartment, he lets himself into Richard’s
studio, fills   one  of   the empty  coffee  cans  with  water  and  inserts  the
branches, leaves it on his worktable for him to find in the morning.
   Then it is the end of March; he is at the office. A Friday night, or rather, a
Saturday morning. He  turns  away from  his  computer and looks  out  the

627
window. He has a clear view to the Hudson, and above the river he can see
the sky turning white. For a long time he stands and stares at the dirty gray
river, at the wheeling flocks  of birds.  He returns to his work.  He can feel,
these past few months, that he has changed, that people are frightened of
him. He has never been a Molly presence in the office, but now he can tell he
is mirthless. He can feel he has become more ruthless. He can feel he has
become chillier. He and SanMay used to have lunch together, the two of them
griping about their colleagues, but now he cannot talk to anyone. He brings
in business. He does his Mob, he does more than he needs to—but he can tell
no one enMoys being around him. He needs Rosen Pritchard; he would be
lost without his work. But  he no longer derives any pleasure from it. That’s
all right,  he  tries to  tell  himself.  Work is  not  for  pleasure, not for  most
people. But it had been for him, once, and now it no longer is.
   Two  years ago, when he was healing from  his surgery and so tired,  so
tired that Willem had to lift  him in  and out of bed, he and Willem had been
talking one morning. It must have been cold outside, because he remembers
feeling warm and safe, and hearing himself say, “I wish I could Must lie here
forever.”
   “Then  do,”  Willem  had said. (This was one of  their regular exchanges:
his alarm would  sound and he would  get  up. “Don’t   go,” Willem   would
always say. “Why do  you need to get up anyway? Where are you  always
rushing off to?”)
   “I  can’t,”  he said, smiling.
   “Listen,”  Willem  had said, “why don’t you Must quit your Mob?”
   He had laughed. “I can’t quit my Mob,” he said.
   “Why    not?”  Willem   had  asked.  “Besides  total   lack  of   intellectual
stimulation and the prospect of having me as your sole company, give me
one good reason.”
   He had smiled again. “Then there is no good reason,” he said. “Because I
think I’d  like having you as my sole company. But what would I do all day,
as a kept man?”
   “Cook,”   Willem  said. “Read.  Play the piano.  Volunteer. Travel around
with me. Listen to me complain about other actors I hate. Get facials. Sing
to me. Feed me a constant stream of approbations.”
   He  had laughed, and Willem had laughed with him.  But now he thinks:
Why didn’t  I  quit? Why  did  I let  Willem  go  away from  me for  all those
months, for all  those years, when I  could  have been traveling with  him?

628
Why have I spent more hours at Rosen Pritchard than I spent with Willem?
But now the  choice has been made for him, and Rosen Pritchard is all he
has.
   Then he thinks: Why  did I  never give Willem  what I should have? Why
did I  make him go  elsewhere for sex? Why couldn’t  I  have been braver?
Why couldn’t I have done my duty? Why did he stay with me anyway?
   He  goes back to Greene Street to shower and sleep for a few hours; he
will  return to the office that afternoon. As he rides home, his eyes lowered
against the  Life  After  Death  posters, he  looks  at  his  messages: Andy,
Richard, Harold, Black Henry Young.
   The last message is from JB, who calls or texts him at least twice a week.
He does not know why, but  he cannot tolerate seeing JB. He in fact hates
him, hates him more purely than he has hated anyone in a long time. He is
fully  aware of  how irrational  this  is.  He is  fully  aware that JB  is  not to
blame, not in the slightest. The hatred makes no sense. JB wasn’t even in
the car that day; in no way, even in the most deformed logic, does he bear
any responsibility. And yet the first  time  he saw JB in his conscious state,
he heard a voice in  his head say, clearly and calmly, It  should have been
you, JB.  He  didn’t  say  it,  but  his  face must  have betrayed  something,
because JB had been  stepping forward  to  hug  him  when  suddenly, he
stopped. He has seen JB only  twice  since then,  both times  in  Richard’s
company, and  both   times,  he  has  had  to  keep  himself   from   saying
something malignant, something unforgivable. And still  JB  calls him, and
always leaves messages, and his messages are always the same: “Hey Judy,
it’s me. I’m  Must checking in on you. I’ve been thinking about you a lot. I’d
like to see you. Okay. Love you. Bye.” And as he always does, he will write
back to JB the same message: “Hi JB, thanks for your message. I’m sorry
I’ve been so out of touch; it’s been really busy at work. I’ll talk to you soon.
Love, J.”  But  despite this message, he has no intention of  talking  to JB,
perhaps not ever again. There is something very wrong with this world, he
thinks,  a world   in  which  of   the  four  of  them—him,  JB,  Willem,   and
Malcolm—the two  best people, the two kindest and most thoughtful, have
died, and the two poorer examples of humanity have survived. At least JB is
talented; he deserves to live. But he can think of no reason why he might.
   “We’re  all we have left, Jude,” JB had said to him at some point, “at least
we have each other,” and he had thought, in another of those statements that
leapt quickly   to  mind  but  that  he successfully  prevented himself  from

629
voicing: I  would trade you for  him. He would have traded any of them for
Willem. JB, instantly. Richard and Andy—poor Richard and Andy, who did
everything  for   him!—instantly.   Julia,   even.  Harold.   He   would   have
exchanged any of them, all  of  them, to  have Willem  back.  He thinks  of
Hades, with his shiny Italian brawn, swooning E. around the underworld. I
have a proposition for you, he says to Hades. Five souls for one. How can
you refuse?
   One Sunday in  April  he is sleeping when he hears a banging, loud and
insistent, and he wakes, groggily, and then turns onto his side, holding the
pillow  over  his  head  and keeping  his  eyes closed,  and  eventually the
banging stops. So when he feels someone touch him, gently, on his arm, he
shouts and flops over and sees it is Richard, sitting next to him.
   “I’m   sorry, Jude,” says Richard. And then, “Have  you been sleeping all
day?”
   He  swallows,  sits  up  halfway.  On  Sundays he  keeps all  the  shades
lowered, all the curtains drawn; he can never tell, really, whether it is night
or day. “Yes,” he says. “I’m tired.”
   “Well,”   says Richard after a silence. “I’m sorry to  barge in like this. But
you weren’t answering your  phone, and I wanted you to  come downstairs
and have dinner with me.”
   “Oh,   Richard, I   don’t  know,”  he  says, trying  to  think  of  an  excuse.
Richard  is  right:   he turns  off   his  phone,  all   phones, for   his  Sunday
cocooning, so  nothing  will   interrupt   his  slumber, his  attempts  to  find
Willem in  his dreams. “I’m not feeling that great. I’m  not going to be good
company.”
   “I’m   not expecting entertainment, Jude,” Richard says, and smiles at him
a bit. “Come  on. You have to eat something. It’s Must going to be you and
me; India’s upstate at her friend’s this weekend.”
   They are both quiet for  a long time. He looks about the room, his messy
bed. The air smells close, of sandalwood and steam heat from the radiator.
“Come on, Jude,”  Richard says, in a low  voice.  “Come have dinner with
me.”
   “Okay,”  he says at last. “Okay.”
   “Okay,”  Richard says, standing. “I’ll see you downstairs in half an hour.”
   He  showers, and then down  he goes, with  a  bottle of  Tempranillo  he
remembers that Richard likes. In the apartment he is waved away from the
kitchen, and so he sits at the long table that dominates the space, which can

630
and has sat twenty-four,  and strokes Richard’s cat,  Mustache, which has
Mumped into his lap. He remembers the first time he saw this apartment with
its dangling chandeliers and its large beeswax sculptures; over the years it
has become more domesticated, but it is still, indisputably, Richard’s, with
its palette of  bone-white and wax-yellow, although  now India’s  paintings,
bright, violent abstractions of female nudes, hang on the walls, and there are
carpets on  the  floor.   It  has  been months  since  he’s  been  inside  this
apartment, where he used to visit at least once a week. He still sees Richard,
of course, but  only  in  passing; mostly, he  tries to  avoid him,  and  when
Richard calls him to have dinner or asks to stop by, he always says he is too
busy, too tired.
   “I  couldn’t  remember how you felt  about my famous seitan stir-fry, so I
actually got scallops,” Richard says, and places a dish before him.
   “I  like  your famous stir-fry,” he says, although he can’t remember what it
is, and if he likes it or not. “Thank you, Richard.”
   Richard pours them both a glass of wine, and then holds his up. “Happy
birthday, Jude,” he  says, solemnly, and he reali]es  that  Richard is  right:
today is his  birthday. Harold  has been calling  and e-mailing  him all  this
week with a frequency that is unusual even for him, and except for the most
cursory of replies, he has not spoken to him at all. He knows Harold will be
worried about him.  There have been more texts  from  Andy  as well,  and
from some other people, and now he knows why, and he begins to cry: from
everyone’s kindness, which he has repaid so  poorly, from  his  loneliness,
from the proof that life has, despite his efforts to let it, gone on after all. He
is fifty-one, and Willem has been dead for eight months.
   Richard doesn’t say anything, Must sits next to him on the bench and holds
him. “I  know this  isn’t going to  help,” he says at last, “but I  love you too,
Jude.”
   He  shakes his head, unable to speak. In recent years he has gone from
being embarrassed about crying at  all to  crying  constantly to  himself  to
crying around Willem to now, in the final falling  away of his dignity, crying
in front of anyone, at any time, over anything.
   He  leans  against Richard’s  chest and  sobs into  his  shirt.  Richard  is
another person whose unstinting, unwavering  friendship  and compassion
for  him  has  always perplexed  him.  He  knows  that  some of  Richard’s
feelings for   him  are twined   with  his  feelings  for  Willem,   and this  he
understands: he had made Willem a promise, and Richard is serious about

631
his obligations.  But   there is  something  about  Richard’s steadiness, his
complete reliability,  that—coupled with  his  height, his  very si]e—makes
him think of him as some sort of massive tree-god, an oak come into human
form, something solid and ancient and indestructible. Theirs is not a chatty
relationship, but it is Richard who  has become the friend of his adulthood,
who has become, in a way, not Must a friend but a parent, although he is only
four years older. A  brother, then: someone whose dependability and sense
of decency are inviolable.
   Finally,  he is able to stop, and apologi]e, and after he cleans himself up
in the bathroom, they eat, slowly, drinking the wine, talking about Richard’s
work.  At  the end  of  the meal,  Richard returns from  the  kitchen  with  a
lumpy little   cake, into  which he  has thrust six  candles. “Five  plus one,”
Richard explains. He makes himself smile, then; he blows out the candles;
Richard cuts them both slices. The cake is crumbly and figgy,  more scone
than cake, and they both eat their pieces in silence.
   He stands to help Richard with the dishes, but when Richard tells him to
go  upstairs, he  is   relieved,  because he’s  exhausted; this  is   the  most
sociali]ing he has done since Thanksgiving. At the door, Richard hands him
something, a package wrapped in  brown paper, and then  hugs him.  “He
wouldn’t  want  you to  be  unhappy, Judy,” he  says, and he  nods against
Richard’s cheek. “He would hate seeing you like this.”
   “I  know,” he says.
   “And  do  me a favor,” Richard says, still  holding him.  “Call  JB, okay? I
know it’s  difficult  for  you, but—he loved Willem  too,  you know. Not  like
you, I know, but still. And Malcolm.  He misses him.”
   “I  know,” he repeats, tears coming to his eyes once more. “I know.”
   “Come  back next Sunday,” Richard  says, and kisses him. “Or any  day,
really. I miss seeing you.”
   “I  will,”   he says. “Richard—thank you.”
   “Happy  birthday, Jude.”
   He  takes the  elevator upstairs.  It’s  suddenly grown  late.  Back  in  his
apartment, he goes to his  study, sits on  the sofa. There is  a box  that he
hasn’t opened that was messengered over to him  from  Flora weeks ago;
inside it  are Malcolm’s  bequests to him, and  to Willem—which   are now
also his. The  only  thing  Willem’s  death has helped with  is  blunting  the
shock, the horror of  Malcolm’s,  and still,  he has been unable to open the
box.

632
   But  now  he will.  First,  though, he unwraps Richard’s present and sees
that it is a small bust, carved from wood and mounted on a heavy black-iron
cube, of Willem,  and he gasps as if slugged. Richard has always claimed
that he’s terrible with  figurative sculpture, but he knows  he’s not, and this
piece is  proof  of it.   He glides  his  fingers over  Willem’s  sightless eyes,
across Willem’s crest of hair, and after doing so, lifts them to  his nose and
smells sandalwood. On the bottom of the base is etched “To J on his 51st.
With love. R.”
   He  starts to cry again; stops. He places the bust on the cushion next  to
him and opens the box. At first he sees nothing but wads of newspaper, and
he gropes carefully inside until  his hands close on something solid, which
he lifts out: it  is the scale model of Lantern House, its walls rendered from
boxwood, that had once sat in Bellcast’s offices, alongside the scale models
of every  other proMect the firm had ever built,  in  form  or  in reality.  The
model is about two feet square, and he settles it on his lap before holding it
to his face, looking through its thin Plexiglas windows, hoisting the roof up
and walking his fingers through its rooms.
   He  wipes his  eyes and reaches into the  box again.  The next  thing he
retrieves is an envelope fat with pictures of them, the four of  them, or Must
of  him  and  Willem:   from  college,  from  New  York,  from   Truro,  from
Cambridge, from  Garrison, from  India,  from  France, from  Iceland, from
Ethiopia—places they’d lived, trips they’d taken.
   The  box isn’t  very large, and still  he removes things: two delicate, rare
books of  drawings  of  Japanese houses by a French  illustrator;  a  small
abstract painting by  a young British  artist  he’d  always admired; a  larger
drawing of a man’s face by a well-known American painter that Willem had
always liked; two of  Malcolm’s  earliest sketchbooks, filled with page after
page of his imaginary structures. And finally, he lifts the last thing from the
box, something wrapped in layers of newspaper, which he removes, slowly.
   Here,  in  his  hands, is Lispenard  Street: their  apartment, with  its  odd
proportions  and  slapdash  second  bedroom;  its   narrow  hallways   and
miniature kitchen.  He  can tell   that this  is  an  early piece  of  Malcolm’s
because the windows are made of glassine, not vellum or Plexiglas, and the
walls are made of cardboard, not wood. And in this apartment Malcolm has
placed furniture, cut and folded from stiff  paper: his lumpy  twin futon  bed
on its cinder-block base; the broken-springed couch they had found on the

633
street; the squeaking wheeled easy chair given them by JB’s aunts. All that
is missing is a paper him, a paper Willem.
   He puts Lispenard Street on the floor by his  feet. For a long time he sits
very still,  his  eyes closed, allowing  his mind  to  reach back and wander:
there is much he doesn’t romantici]e about those years, not now, but at the
time, when he hadn’t  known what  to hope for,  he hadn’t  known that life
could be better than Lispenard Street.
   “What  if  we’d never left?” Willem  would occasionally ask him. “What if
I had never made it? What  if  you’d stayed at the U.S.  Attorney’s Office?
What if I was still working  at Ortolan? What would our lives be like now?”
   “How   theoretical  do  you  want  to  get here,  Willem?”   he’d  ask him,
smiling. “Would we be together?”
   “Of  course we’d be together,” Willem would say. “That part would be the
same.”
   “Well,”   he’d say, “then the first thing we’d  do is tear down that wall and
reclaim the living room. And the second thing we’d do is get a decent bed.”
   Willem   would  laugh.  “And   we’d  sue the  landlord  to  get  a  working
elevator, once and for all.”
   “Right,  that’d be the next step.”
   He  sits, waiting for  his breathing to  return to normal.  Then he turns on
his phone, checks his missed calls: Andy,  JB, Richard,  Harold and  Julia,
Black Henry Young, Rhodes, Citi]en,  Andy  again, Richard again, Lucien,
Asian Henry  Young,  Phaedra, EliMah, Harold again, Julia again, Harold,
Richard, JB, JB, JB.
   He calls  JB. It’s late, but JB stays up late. “Hi,”   he says, when JB picks
up, hears the surprise in his voice. “It’s me. Is this a good time to talk?”

634
                                                         2

AT LEAST ONE Saturday a month now he takes half a day off from work and
goes  to  the   Upper  East   Side.  When   he  leaves  Greene  Street,  the
neighborhood’s boutiques and stores haven’t yet opened for the day; when
he returns, they are closed for the night. On these days, he can imagine the
SoHo Harold  knew as a  child:  a place shuttered and unpeopled, a place
without life.
   His  first stop is the building  on Park and Seventy-eighth, where he takes
the elevator to the sixth floor. The maid lets him into  the apartment and he
follows her to the back study, which is sunny and large, and where Lucien is
waiting—not waiting for  him, necessarily, but waiting.
   There is always a late breakfast laid out for him:  thin wedges of smoked
salmon and tiny buckwheat pancakes one time; a  cake gla]ed white  with
lemon icing the next. He can never bring himself to  eat anything, although
sometimes when he is feeling especially helpless he accepts a slice of cake
from the maid and holds the plate in his lap for the entire visit. But although
he doesn’t eat anything, he does drink cup after cup of tea, which is always
steeped exactly how he likes it. Lucien eats nothing either—he has been fed
earlier—nor does he drink.
   Now  he goes to Lucien and takes his hand. “Hi, Lucien,” he tells him.
   He had been in London when Lucien’s wife, Meredith, called him: it  was
the week of Bergesson’s retrospective at MoMA, and he had arranged to be
out of the city on business. Lucien had had a massive stroke, Meredith said;
he would live, but the doctors didn’t yet know how great the damage would
be.
   Lucien  was in the hospital for  two weeks, and when he was released, it
was clear that his impairment  was severe. And although it  is not  yet five
months later, it  has remained so: the features on the left  side of  his  face
seem to be melting off of him, and he cannot use his left arm or leg, either.
He can still speak, remarkably well, but his memory has vanished, the past
twenty years deserting him completely. In early July, he fell and hit his head
and was in a coma; now, he is too unsteady to even walk, and Meredith has

635
moved them back from their house in Connecticut to their apartment in the
city, where they can be closer to the hospital and their daughters.
   He thinks Lucien  likes, or at least doesn’t mind, his visits, but he doesn’t
know this for sure. Certainly Lucien doesn’t know who he is: he is someone
who  appears in  his  life  and  then  disappears, and every  time  he  must
reintroduce himself.
   “Who  are you?” Lucien asks.
   “Jude,”  he says.
   “Now,  remind  me,”  Lucien says, pleasantly, as if  they’re  meeting at a
cocktail party, “how do I know you?”
   “You  were my mentor,” he tells him.
   “Ah,”   says Lucien. And then there is a silence.
   In  the first  weeks, he tried  to make Lucien  remember his own  life:  he
talked about Rosen Pritchard, and about people they knew, and cases they
used to  argue about.  But  then  he  reali]ed  that  the  expression he  had
mistaken—in his own stupid hopefulness—for thoughtfulness was in reality
fear. And so now he discusses nothing from the past, or nothing from their
past together, at least. He lets Lucien direct the conversation, and although
he doesn’t understand the references Lucien makes, he smiles and tries to
pretend he does.
   “Who  are you?” Lucien asks.
   “Jude,”  he says.
   “Now,  tell me, how do I know you?”
   “You  were my mentor.”
   “Oh,  at Groton!”
   “Yes,”  he says, trying to smile back. “At Groton.”
   Sometimes, though, Lucien  looks at  him. “Mentor?”   he says. “I’m  too
young to  be your  mentor!”   Or sometimes he  doesn’t ask  at all,  simply
begins a conversation in its middle, and he has to wait until he has enough
clues and  can  determine what  role  he  has  been assigned—one of  his
daughters’ long-ago boyfriends, or  a college classmate, or a friend  at the
country club—before he can respond appropriately.
   In  these hours he learns more about Lucien’s earlier life than Lucien had
ever revealed to him before. Although Lucien is  no longer Lucien, at least
not the  Lucien he  knew. This  Lucien  is  vague and featureless; he is  as
smooth and cornerless as an egg. Even his voice, that  droll  croaking roll
with which  Lucien used to deliver his sentences, each one a statement, the

636
pause he used to leave between them  because he had grown so used to
people’s laughter; the particular way he had of  structuring his paragraphs,
beginning and ending each with  a  Moke that wasn’t really a Moke, but an
insult cloaked in a silken  cape, is different. Even when they were working
together, he knew that the Lucien of  the office  was not the Lucien  of  the
country club, but he never saw that other Lucien. And now, finally, he has,
he does; it is the only person he sees. This Lucien talks about the weather,
and golf,  and sailing,  and taxes, but  the tax  laws he  discusses are from
twenty years ago. He never  asks him anything about  himself: who  he is,
what he does, why he is  sometimes in a wheelchair. Lucien talks,  and he
smiles and nods back at him, wrapping his hands around his cooling cup of
tea. When Lucien’s  hands tremble, he  takes them in  his  own, which  he
knows helps him when his hands shake: Willem used to do this, and breathe
with him, and it would  always calm him. When Lucien drools, he takes the
edge of his napkin and blots the saliva away. Unlike him, however, Lucien
doesn’t seem embarrassed by his  own  shaking and  drooling,  and he  is
relieved that he doesn’t. He’s not embarrassed for Lucien, either, but he is
embarrassed by his inability to do more for him.
   “He  loves seeing you, Jude,” Meredith always says, but he doesn’t think
this is  true, really.  He  sometimes thinks he continues to  come more  for
Meredith’s sake than for Lucien’s, and he reali]es that this is the way it  is,
the way it must be: you don’t visit  the lost, you visit the people who search
for the lost. Lucien is  not conscious of this, but he can remember being so
when he was  sick,  both the  first  time  and the second, and  Willem  was
taking care of  him.  How  grateful he was  when he would  wake and  find
someone other than  Willem   sitting  next  to  him.  “Roman’s  with   him,”
Richard or Malcolm  would  say, or  “He  and JB went  out for  lunch,”  and
he’d relax. In  the weeks after  his amputations, when all  he wanted to do
was give up, those moments in which he could imagine that Willem  might
be being comforted were  his only  moments of happiness. And so  he sits
with Meredith after sitting  with Lucien and they talk, although she too asks
him nothing  about his life,  and this is  fine  with him.  She is lonely;  he is
lonely, too. She and Lucien have two daughters, one of whom lives in New
York but is forever going in and out of rehab; the other lives in Philadelphia
with her husband and three children and is a lawyer herself.
   He has met both of these daughters, who are a decade or so younger than
he is, although Lucien is Harold’s age. When he went to visit Lucien in the

637
hospital, the older of them, the one who lives  in New  York, had looked at
him with such hatred that he had almost stepped back, and then had said to
her sister, “Oh, and look who it is: Daddy’s pet. What a surprise.”
   “Grow  up, Portia,”  the younger one had hissed. To him she said, “Jude,
thanks for coming. I’m so sorry about Willem.”
   “Thank  you for coming, Jude,” Meredith says now, kissing him goodbye.
“I’ll   see you soon?” She always asks this, as if he might someday tell her
she won’t.
   “Yes,”  he says. “I’ll e-mail you.”
   “Do,”  she says, and waves as he walks down the hall toward the elevator.
He always has the sense that no one else visits, and yet how can that be?
Don’t let  that be, he pleads. Meredith and Lucien have always had lots of
friends. They threw dinner parties. It wasn’t  unusual to see Lucien leaving
the offices  in  black  tie,  rolling  his  eyes as  he waved  goodbye to  him.
“Benefit,”  he’d say as an explanation. “Party.” “Wedding.” “Dinner.”
   After  these visits he is always exhausted, but still he walks, seven blocks
south and a quarter  of  a block  east, to  the Irvines’.  For  months he  had
avoided the Irvines, and then last month, on the one-year anniversary, they
had asked him and Richard and JB to dinner at their house, and he knew he
would have to go.
   It   was the weekend after  Labor  Day. The  previous  four  weeks—four
weeks that had included the day Willem would have turned fifty-three;  the
day that  Willem   had  died—had been  some of   the worst   he had  ever
experienced. He  had known  they  would   be bad;  he  had tried   to  plan
accordingly. The firm  had needed someone to go to BeiMing, and although
he knew he should have stayed in New  York—he was working  on a case
that needed him  more than  the business in  BeiMing did—he volunteered
anyway, and off he went. At first he had hoped he might be safe: the woolly
numbness of  Met lag was sometimes indistinguishable  from   the woolly
numbness of his grief, and there were other things that were so physically
uncomfortable—including the  heat, which  was woolly   itself, woolly   and
sodden—that he had thought he would be able to distract himself. But then
one night near the end of the trip he was being driven back to the hotel from
a long day of meetings, and he had looked out of the car window  and had
seen, glittering over the road, a massive billboard of Willem’s face. It was a
beer ad that Willem  had shot two years ago, one that was only  displayed
throughout east Asia. But hanging from the top of the billboard were people

638
on pulleys, and he reali]ed  that they  were painting over  the ad, that they
were erasing Willem’s   face. Suddenly,  his  breath left  him,  and  he had
almost asked the driver to  stop, but he wouldn’t  have been able to—they
were on a loop of  a road, one with  no exits or places to pull  over, and so
he’d had to sit very still, his heart erupting within him, counting the beats it
took to reach the hotel,  thank the driver, get out,  walk  through the lobby,
ride the elevator, walk down the hallway, and enter his room, where before
he could think, he was throwing himself against the cold marble wall of the
shower, his mouth open and his eyes shut, tossing and tossing himself until
he was in so much pain that his every vertebrae felt as if it had been Molted
out of its sockets.
   That  night   he cut   himself  wildly,   uncontrollably,  and  when  he was
shaking too badly to continue, he waited, and cleaned the floor, and drank
some Muice to give himself energy, and then started again. After three rounds
of this he crept to the corner of the shower stall and wept, folding his arms
over his head, making  his hair  tacky  with  blood, and that  night he  slept
there, covered  with   a  towel   instead of   a  blanket.  He  had  done  this
sometimes when  he was  a  child  and  had  felt  like   he  was exploding,
separating from himself like  a dying star, and would  feel the need to tuck
himself into the smallest space he could find so his very bones would stay
knit  together. Then, he  would  carefully  work  himself  out  from  beneath
Brother Luke  and ball  himself  on the  filthy  motel  carpet under the  bed,
which was prickly with  burrs and dropped thumbtacks and slimy with used
condoms and strange damp spots, or he would sleep in the bathtub or in the
closet, beetled up as tight as he was able. “My  poor potato bug,”  Brother
Luke would  say when he  found him  like  this.  “Why  are you  doing this,
Jude?” He had been gentle,  and worried,  but he  had never been able to
explain it.
   Somehow he made it through that trip; somehow he had made it through
a year. The night of Willem’s death he dreamed of glass vases imploding, of
Willem’s body being proMected through the air, of his face shattering against
the tree. He woke missing Willem  so profoundly that he felt  he was going
blind. The day after he returned home, he saw the first of the posters for The
Happy Years, which had reverted to its original  title:  The Dancer and  the
Stage. Some of these posters were of Willem’s  face, his hair  longish like
Nureyev’s  and his   top  scooped low   on  his  chest, his   neck  long  and
powerful. And  some were of Must monumental images of a foot—Willem’s

639
actual foot, he happened to know—in  a toe shoe, en pointe, shot so close
you could see its veins and hairs, its thin straining muscles and fat bulging
tendons. Opening Thanksgiving Day, the posters read. Oh god, he thought,
and had gone back inside,  oh god. He  wanted the reminders to  stop; he
dreaded the day when they would. In recent weeks he’d had the sense that
Willem  was receding from  him,  even as his grief  refused to  diminish  in
intensity.
   The  next week  they went  to  the Irvines’.  They  had decided, in  some
unspoken way, that they should go up together, and they met at Richard’s
apartment and he gave Richard the keys to the car and Richard drove them.
They were all silent,  even JB, and he was very nervous. He had the sense
that the Irvines were angry at him; he had the sense he deserved their anger.
   Dinner was all of  Malcolm’s favorite foods, and as they ate, he could feel
Mr. Irvine  staring at him  and wondered whether he was thinking  what he
himself always thought: Why Malcolm? Why not him?
   Mrs.  Irvine  had suggested that they all go around the table and share a
memory of Malcolm,  and he had sat, listening to  the others—Mrs. Irvine,
who had told a story about how they had been visiting  the Pantheon when
Malcolm  was  six  and how,  five   minutes after  they  had  left,  they  had
reali]ed that Malcolm  was missing and had rushed back to find him sitting
on the ground,  ga]ing  and ga]ing  at the  oculus; Flora,  who told  a  story
about how  as a  second-grader Malcolm  had appropriated her  dollhouse
from the attic, removed all the dolls, and filled  it with  little  obMects, do]ens
of chairs and tables and sofas and even pieces of furniture that had no name,
that he had made with clay;  JB, the story of  how they  had all returned to
Hood one Thanksgiving a day early and had broken into  the dormitory  so
they could have it to  themselves, and how Malcolm had built  a fire in  the
living room’s fireplace so they could roast sausages for dinner—and when it
was his turn, he told  the story of  how  back at Lispenard Street, Malcolm
had built them a set of  bookcases, which had partitioned their squish of a
living room into such a meager sliver that when you were sitting on the sofa
and stretched your legs out, you stretched them into the bookcase itself. But
he had wanted the  shelves, and Willem  had said he could.  And  so over
Malcolm  had come with  the  cheapest wood possible, leftovers  from  the
lumberyard, and  he  and  Willem  had  taken  the  wood  to  the  roof  and
assembled the bookcase there, so the neighbors wouldn’t complain about
the banging, and then they had brought it back down and installed it.

640
   But  when they did, Malcolm had reali]ed that he’d mismeasured, and the
bookcases were three inches too wide, which caused the edge of the unit to
Mut into the  hallway.  He  hadn’t  minded,  and  neither  had  Willem,  but
Malcolm had wanted to fix it.
   “Don’t,  Mal,”  they had both told him. “It’s great, it’s fine.”
   “It’s  not great,” Malcolm had said, mopily. “It’s  not fine.”
   Finally  they had managed to convince him, and Malcolm had left. He and
Willem painted the case a bright vermilion  and loaded it with  their books.
And  then   early  the   next  Sunday,  Malcolm   appeared  again,  looking
determined. “I can’t stop thinking about this,” he said. And he’d set his bag
down on the floor and drawn out a hacksaw and had started gnawing away
at the structure, the two of them shouting at him until  they reali]ed that he
was going to alter it whether they helped him or not. So back up to the roof
went the bookcase; back down, once again, it came, and this time,  it  was
perfect.
   “I  always think of  that incident,” he said, as the others listened. “Because
it says so much about how seriously Malcolm  took  his work,  and how he
always strove to  be perfect in  it,  to  respect the material, whether it  was
marble or plywood.  But I  also think  it  says so much about how much he
respected space, any space, even a horrible, unfixable, depressing apartment
in Chinatown: even that space deserved respect.
   “And   it  says so much about  how much  he respected his friends, how
much he wanted us all to live somewhere he imagined for us: someplace as
beautiful and vivid as his imaginary houses were to him.”
   He  stopped. What he wanted to say—but what he didn’t think  he could
get through—was  what  he had  overheard Malcolm  say  as Willem   was
complaining about hefting the bookcase back into place and he was in the
bathroom gathering the brushes and paint from beneath the sink. “If I  had
left  it  like   it  was,  he  could’ve  tripped  against it   and  fallen,  Willem,”
Malcolm had whispered. “Would you want that?”
   “No,”   Willem had said, after a pause, sounding ashamed. “No, of course
not. You’re  right,  Mal.”  Malcolm,  he  reali]ed,  had been the first  among
them to  recogni]e  that he  was disabled;  Malcolm  had known  this  even
before he did. He had always been conscious of it, but he had never made
him feel self-conscious. Malcolm had sought, only, to make his life  easier,
and he had once resented him for this.

641
   As  they  were  leaving  for  the  night,  Mr.  Irvine   put  his  hand on  his
shoulder. “Jude,  will   you  stay behind  for  a  bit?”   he asked.  “I’ll    have
Monroe drive you home.”
   He had to agree and so he did, telling Richard he could take the car back
to Greene Street. For a while they  sat in the living  room,  Must he and Mr.
Irvine—Malcolm’s  mother remained in the dining room with  Flora and her
husband and children—talking about his health, and Mr. Irvine’s health, and
Harold, and his work, when Mr. Irvine began to cry. He had stood then, and
had sat down again next to Mr. Irvine, and placed his hand hesitantly on his
back, feeling awkward and shy, feeling the decades slip away from beneath
him.
   Mr.  Irvine  had always  been such an intimidating  figure  to all  of  them
throughout their adulthoods. His height, his self-possession, his large, hard
features—he looked like something from an Edward Curtis photograph, and
that was what they all  called him:  “The  Chief.”  “What’s  the Chief  gonna
say about this, Mal?” JB had asked when Malcolm told them he was going
to quit Ratstar, and they were all trying to urge temperance. Or (JB again):
“Mal,  can you ask the Chief  if  I can use the apartment when I’m  passing
through Paris next month?”
   But  Mr. Irvine  was no longer the Chief: although he was still logical and
upright,  he  was  eighty-nine,  and his   dark  eyes had  turned  that  same
unnamable gray that only the very young or the very old possess: the color
of the sea from which one comes, the color of the sea to which one returns.
   “I   loved him,”   Mr. Irvine   told him.  “You  know  that, Jude, right?  You
know I did.”
   “I  do,” he said. It was what he had always told Malcolm: “Of course your
dad loves you, Mal. Of course he does. Parents love their kids.” And once,
when Malcolm was very upset (he could no longer remember why), he had
snapped at him, “Like you’d know anything about that, Jude,” and there had
been a silence, and then Malcolm, horrified, had begun apologi]ing to him.
“I’m  sorry, Jude,” he’d said, “I’m   so sorry.” And  he’d had nothing  to say,
because Malcolm was right: he didn’t  know anything  about that. What he
knew, he knew from books, and books lied, they made things prettier. It had
been the worst thing Malcolm  had ever said to  him, and although he had
never mentioned it to  Malcolm  again, Malcolm  had mentioned it  to him,
once, shortly after the adoption.
   “I  will  never forget that thing I said to you,” he’d said.

642
   “Mal,  forget  it,”  he’d told him,  although he knew exactly what Malcolm
was referring to, “you were upset. It was a long time ago.”
   “But   it  was wrong,”  Malcolm  had said.  “And  I  was wrong.  On every
level.”
   As  he sat with  Mr. Irvine,  he thought:  I wish  Malcolm  could have had
this moment. This moment should have been Malcolm’s.
   And  so now he visits the Irvines  after visiting  Lucien, and the visits are
not dissimilar.  They are both  drifts  into  the past, they  are both old  men
talking at him about memories he doesn’t share, about contexts with which
he is unfamiliar.  But  although these visits depress him,  he feels he must
fulfill   them: both  are with   people who  had always  given him  time  and
conversation when he had needed it but  hadn’t known  how to  ask for  it.
When he was twenty-five and new to the city,  he had lived at the Irvines’,
and Mr. Irvine would  talk to him  about the market, and law, and had given
him advice: not advice about how to think as much as advice about how to
be, about how to be a curiosity in a world in which curiosities weren’t often
tolerated. “People are going to  think  certain things about  you because of
how you walk,”  Mr. Irvine  had once said to him, and he had looked down.
“No,”  he’d  said. “Don’t  look  down,  Jude. It’s nothing  to be  ashamed of.
You’re a brilliant  man, and you’ll   be brilliant,  and you’ll  be rewarded for
your brilliance. But  if  you act like you  don’t belong, if  you act like  you’re
apologetic for your  own self,  then people will  start to  treat you that way,
too.” He’d  taken a deep breath. “Believe me.” Be as steely as you want to
be, Mr. Irvine  had  said. Don’t try  to  get people to  like you. Never  try to
make yourself  more palatable   in  order  to  make your   colleagues more
comfortable. Harold  had taught him  how  to  think  as a litigator,  but  Mr.
Irvine had taught him  how to  behave as one. And Lucien had recogni]ed
both of these abilities, and had appreciated them both as well.
   That afternoon his visit at the Irvines’  is brief because Mr. Irvine is tired,
and on his way out he sees Flora—Fabulous Flora, of whom Malcolm was
so proud  and so envious—and  they speak for  a  few  minutes before  he
leaves. It is early October but still warm, the mornings like summer but the
afternoons turning dark and wintry, and as he walks up Park to his  car, he
remembers how he used to  spend his  Saturdays here twenty  years ago:
more. Then he would  walk home, and on  his way  he would occasionally
stop by a famous, pricey bakery on Madison Avenue that he liked and buy a
loaf of walnut bread—a single loaf cost as much as he was willing to spend

643
on a dinner back then—that he and Willem would  eat with butter and salt.
The bakery is still  there, and now he veers west off Park to go buy a loaf,
which  somehow seems to have  remained fixed  in  price,  at  least in  his
memory, while everything else has grown so much  more expensive. Until
he  began his  Saturday  visits   to  Lucien   and  the  Irvines,  he  couldn’t
remember the  last  time  he  was  in  this  neighborhood  in  daytime—his
appointments with Andy are in the evenings—and now he lingers, looking
at the pretty children  running down the wide  clean sidewalks, their pretty
mothers strolling  behind them,  the linden  trees above him  shading their
leaves into a pale, reluctant yellow. He passes Seventy-fifth Street, where he
once tutored Felix,  Felix  who  is  now, unbelievably,  thirty-three,  and no
longer a singer in a punk band but, even more unbelievably, a hedge fund
manager as his father once was.
   At  the apartment he cuts the bread, slices some cheese, brings the plate to
the table and stares at it.  He is  making a real  effort to  eat real meals, to
resume the  habits and  practices of   the  living.  But   eating has  become
somehow difficult  for  him.  His  appetite has disappeared, and everything
tastes like paste, or like the powdered mashed potatoes they had served at
the home. He tries, though. Eating is easier when he has to perform for an
audience, and so he has dinner every Friday with Andy, and every Saturday
with JB. And he has started appearing every Sunday evening at Richard’s—
together the two of them cook one of Richard’s kaley vegetarian meals, and
then India Moins them at the table.
   He  has also resumed reading the  paper, and now he  pushes aside the
bread and cheese and opens the arts section cautiously, as if it might bite
him. Two Sundays ago he had been feeling confident and had snapped open
the first page and been confronted with a story about the film  that Willem
was to have begun shooting the previous September. The piece was about
how the  movie had been recast, and how  there was  strong early critical
support for it,  and how the main  character had been renamed for Willem,
and he had shut the paper and had gone to his bed and had held a pillow
over his head until he was able to stand again. He knows that for  the next
two years he will be confronted by articles, posters, signs, commercials, for
films Willem  was to  have been shooting in these past twelve months. But
today there is nothing in the paper other than a full-page advertisement for
The Dancer and the Stage, and he stares at Willem’s almost life-si]e  face
for a long, long time, holding his hand over its eyes and then lifting it off. If

644
this were a movie, he thinks,  the face would start speaking to him.  If  this
were a movie, he would look up and Willem would be standing before him.
   Sometimes he thinks: I  am doing better. I  am getting better. Sometimes
he wakes full of fortitude and vigor. Today will be the day, he thinks. Today
will  be the first day I really get better. Today will be the day I miss Willem
less. And then something will happen, something as simple as walking into
his closet and seeing the lonely, waiting stand of  Willem’s  shirts that will
never be worn again, and his ambition, his hopefulness will dissolve, and he
will  be cast into despair once again. Sometimes he thinks: I can do this. But
more and more now, he knows: I can’t. He has made a promise to himself to
every day find a new reason to keep going. Some of these reasons are little
reasons, they are tastes he likes, they  are symphonies he likes,  they  are
paintings he likes, buildings he likes, operas and books he likes, places he
wants to see, either again or for  the first  time. Some of  these reasons are
obligations: Because he should. Because he can. Because Willem  would
want him to. And some of the reasons are big reasons: Because of Richard.
Because of JB. Because of Julia. And, especially, because of Harold.
   A  little  less than a year after he had tried to kill  himself,  he and Harold
had taken a walk. It was Labor Day; they were in Truro. He remembers that
he was  having  trouble  walking   that  weekend;  he remembers  stepping
carefully  through the  dunes; he remembers feeling  Harold  trying  not  to
touch him, trying not to help him.
   Finally   they had sat  and rested and looked  out toward  the ocean and
talked: about a case he was working on, about Laurence, who was retiring,
about Harold’s new book. And  then suddenly Harold had said, “Jude, you
have to promise me you won’t  do that again,” and it  was Harold’s tone—
stern, where Harold was rarely stern—that made him look at him.
   “Harold,”  he began.
   “I   try not  to ask you for  anything,”  Harold said, “because I  don’t want
you to think you owe me anything: and you don’t.” He turned and looked at
him, and his expression too was stern. “But I’m asking you this. I’m asking
you. You have to promise me.”
   He hesitated. “I promise,” he said, finally, and Harold nodded.
   “Thank  you,” he said.
   They had never discussed this conversation again, and although he knew
it wasn’t  quite logical, he didn’t  want  to break this promise to  Harold. At
times, it seemed that this promise—this verbal contract—was the only real

645
deterrent to his trying again, although he knew that if he were to do it again,
it wouldn’t  be an attempt: this  time, he would  really  do it.  He knew how
he’d do it; he knew it  would work.  Since Willem  had died, he had thought
about it almost daily.  He knew the timeline  he’d need to  follow,  he knew
how he would arrange to be found. Two months ago, in a very bad week, he
had even rewritten his will so that it now read as the document of someone
who had died with apologies to make, whose bequests would be attempts to
ask for forgiveness. And although he isn’t intending to  honor this will—as
he reminds himself—he hasn’t changed it, either.
   He hopes for infection, something swift and fatal, something that will kill
him  and  leave   him  blameless.  But   there  is  no   infection.  Since   his
amputations, there have been no wounds. He is still in pain, but no more—
less, actually—than he had been in before. He is cured, or at least as cured
as he will ever be.
   So there is no real reason for him to see Andy once a week, but he does
anyway, because he knows Andy  is  worried  he  will  kill   himself.  He  is
worried he will  kill  himself. And  so every Friday he goes uptown. Most of
these Fridays are Must dinner dates, except for the  second Friday  of  the
month, when their dinner is preceded by an appointment. Here, everything
is the same: only his missing feet, his missing calves, are proof that things
have changed. In other ways, he has reverted to the person he was decades
before. He is self-conscious again. He is scared to be touched. Three years
before Willem  died  he had finally   been able to  ask him  to massage the
cream into the scars on his back, and Willem had done so, and for a while,
he had felt different, like  a snake who had grown a new skin. But  now, of
course, there is no one to help him and the scars are once again tight and
bulky, webbing his back in a series of elastic restraints.
   He  knows  now: People don’t  change. He  cannot change. Willem  had
thought himself transformed by the experience of helping him  through his
recovery;  he  had  been  surprised  by   his  own   reserves,  by  his   own
forebearance. But  he—he  and everyone  else—had always  known   that
Willem  had  possessed those characteristics already. Those months may
have clarified Willem   to himself,  but the qualities  he had discovered had
been a surprise to nobody  but Willem.   And in  the  same way, his losing
Willem has been clarifying  as well. In his  years with Willem,  he had been
able to  convince  himself  that  he  was someone else,  someone happier,

646
someone freer and braver. But now Willem is gone, and he is again who he
was twenty, thirty, forty years ago.
   And  so, another Friday. He goes to Andy’s. The scale: Andy sighing. The
questions: his replies, a series of yeses and nos. Yes, he feels fine. No, no
more pain than usual. No,  no sign  of wounds. Yes, an  episode every ten
days to two weeks. Yes, he’s been sleeping. Yes, he’s been seeing people.
Yes, he’s been eating. Yes, three meals a day. Yes, every day. No, he doesn’t
know why  he then keeps losing  weight. No,  he doesn’t want  to consider
seeing Dr. Loehmann again. The inspection of his arms: Andy turning them
in his  hands, looking  for  new  cuts, not  finding  any.  The week  after he
returned from BeiMing, the week after he had lost control, Andy had looked
at them and gasped, and he had looked  down, too,  and had remembered
how bad it  had been at times, how insane it had gotten. But  Andy  hadn’t
said anything, Must cleaned him up, and after he had finished, he had held
both of his hands in both of his.
   “A  year,” Andy had said.
   “A  year,” he had echoed. And they had both been silent.
   After   the  appointment, they  go  around the  corner  to  a small  Italian
restaurant that they like. Andy is always watching him at these dinners, and
if he thinks he’s not ordering enough food, he orders an additional dish for
him and then badgers him until he eats it. But at this dinner he can tell Andy
is anxious  about  something: as  they wait   for  their  food,  Andy   drinks,
quickly, and talks  to him  about football,  which he knows  he doesn’t care
about and never discusses with  him. Andy  had  talked about sports  with
Willem,  sometimes, and he would listen  to them argue over  one team or
another as they sat at  the dining  table eating pistachios and  he prepared
dessert.
   “Sorry,”  Andy  says, at last. “I’m  babbling.”  Their appeti]ers arrive,  and
they eat, quietly, before Andy takes a breath.
   “Jude,”  he says, “I’m giving up the practice.”
   He  has been cutting into his eggplant, but now  he stops, puts down his
fork. “Not  anytime soon,” Andy adds, quickly. “Not  for another three years
or so. But I’m  bringing  in a partner this year so the transition process will
be as smooth as possible: for the staff, but especially for my patients. He’ll
take over more and more of the patient load with each year.” He pauses. “I
think you’ll  like  him. I  know you  will.  I’m  going to stay your doctor  until
the day I leave, and I’ll  give you lots of  notice before I do. But I  want you

647
to meet him,  to see if  there’s any sort  of chemistry  between you two”—
Andy smiles a bit, but he can’t bring himself to smile back—“and if  there’s
not,  for  whatever  reason, then  we’ll   have plenty  of   time  to  find   you
someone else. I have a couple of other people in mind who I  know would
be amenable to giving  you  the full-service  treatment. And  I  won’t  leave
until we get you settled somewhere.”
   He  still  can’t  say  anything, can’t  even lift   his  head to look  at  Andy.
“Jude,” he hears Andy say, softly, pleadingly. “I  wish I  could stay forever,
for your sake. You’re the only one I wish I could stay for. But I’m tired. I’m
almost sixty-two,  and I  always swore to myself  I’d  retire  before I turned
sixty-five. I—”
   But  he stops him.  “Andy,”  he says, “of  course you  should retire when
you want to. You  don’t owe me  an explanation. I’m  happy for you.  I am.
I’m  Must. I’m Must going to miss you.  You’ve  been so good  to me.”  He
pauses. “I’m so dependent on you,” he admits at last.
   “Jude,”  Andy begins, and then is silent. “Jude, I’ll always be your friend.
I’ll   always be  here to  help  you,  medically  or  otherwise. But  you  need
someone who can grow old with you. This guy I’m bringing  in is forty-six;
he’ll be around to treat you for the rest of your life, if you want him.”
   “As  long  as I  die in  the next nineteen years,” he hears himself saying.
There’s another  silence. “I’m    sorry, Andy,”   he  says, appalled  by  how
wretched he feels, how pettily he is behaving. He has always known, after
all, that Andy  would retire  at some point. But he reali]es  now that he had
never thought he would be alive  to see it. “I’m   sorry,”  he repeats. “Don’t
listen to me.”
   “Jude,”  Andy  says, quietly. “I’ll   always be here for  you, in one way  or
another. I promised you way back when, and I still mean it now.
   “Look,  Jude,” he continues, after a pause. “I know this  isn’t going to  be
easy. I know that no one else is going to be able to re-create our history. I’m
not  being  arrogant; I   Must don’t think   anyone else  is  going  to  totally
understand, necessarily. But we’ll get as close as we can. And who couldn’t
love you?” Andy  smiles again, but once more, he can’t smile back. “Either
way, I want you to come meet this new guy: Linus. He’s a good doctor, and
Must as important, a good person. I won’t tell him  any of your  specifics; I
Must want you to meet him, all right?”
   So the next Friday he goes uptown, and in Andy’s office is another man,
short and handsome and with a smile that reminds him of Willem’s.  Andy

648
introduces them and they  shake hands. “I’ve   heard so much  about you,
Jude,” Linus says. “It’s a pleasure to meet you, finally.”
   “You  too,” he says. “Congratulations.”
   Andy  leaves them to talk, and they  do, a little  awkwardly, Moking about
how this meeting seems like a blind date. Linus has been told only about his
amputations, and they discuss them briefly, and the osteomyelitis that had
preceded them. “Those  treatments can be  a  killer,”   Linus  says, but  he
doesn’t offer his sympathy for his lost legs, which he appreciates. Linus had
been a doctor at a group practice that he’d heard Andy mention before; he
seems genuinely admiring of Andy and excited to be working with him.
   There is nothing wrong with  Linus. He can tell, by the questions he asks,
and the respect with which he asks them, that he is indeed a good doctor,
and probably a good person. But  he also knows he  will  never be able to
undress in front of  Linus. He can’t  imagine having the discussions he has
with Andy  with  anyone else. He can’t imagine allowing  anyone else such
access to his body, to his fears. When he thinks of someone seeing his body
anew he quails: ever since the amputation, he has only  looked at himself
once. He  watches Linus’s  face,  his  unsettlingly  Willem-like   smile,  and
although he is  only five  years older  than Linus,  he feels centuries older,
something broken and desiccated, something that anyone would look at and
quickly throw  the tarpaulin over  once more. “Take this one away,” they’d
say. “It’s Munked.”
   He thinks  of the conversations he will need to have, the explanations he
will  need to give: about his back, his arms, his legs, his diseases. He is so
sick of his own fears, his own trepidations, but as tired as he is of them, he
also cannot stop himself from  indulging  them. He thinks  of Linus  paging
slowly through  his chart, of  seeing the years, the decades, of notes Andy
has made about him: lists of his cuts, of his wounds, of the medications he
has been on, of the flare-ups of his infections. Notes on his suicide attempt,
on Andy’s  pleas to  get him  to  see Dr.  Loehmann. He knows  Andy  has
chronicled all of this; he knows how meticulous he is.
   “You  have to tell someone,” Ana used to say, and as he had grown older,
he had decided to interpret this sentence literally: Some One. Someday, he
thought, somehow, he would find a way to tell  some one, one person. And
then he had, someone he had  trusted, and that  person had died, and  he
didn’t  have  the fortitude   to  tell  his  story  ever  again. But   then, didn’t
everyone only tell  their lives—truly   tell  their lives—to  one person? How

649
often could he really be expected to repeat himself, when with each telling
he was stripping the clothes from his skin and the flesh from his bones, until
he was as vulnerable as a small pink mouse? He knows, then, that he will
never be able to go to another doctor. He will go to Andy for  as long as he
can, for as long as Andy will  let him.  And after that, he doesn’t know—he
will  figure out what to do then. For now, his privacy, his life, is still his. For
now, no one else needs to know. His thoughts are so occupied with Willem
—trying to re-create him, to hold his face and voice in his head, to keep him
present—that his past is as far away as it has ever been: he is in the middle
of a  lake, trying  to  stay afloat;  he can’t  think  of  returning  to shore and
having to live among his memories again.
   He doesn’t want to go to dinner with Andy  that night, but they do, telling
Linus goodbye as they leave. They walk to  the sushi restaurant in silence,
sit in silence, order, and wait in silence.
   “What’d  you think?”  Andy finally  asks.
   “He  kind of looks like Willem,”  he says.
   “Does he?” Andy says, and he shrugs.
   “A  little,”  he says. “The smile.”
   “Ah,”   Andy says. “I  guess. I can see that.” There’s another silence. “But
what did you  think? I  know it’s  sometimes hard to tell from  one meeting,
but does he seem like someone you might be able to get along with?”
   “I    don’t   think   so,  Andy,”   he   says  at  last,  and   can  feel   Andy’s
disappointment.
   “Really,  Jude? What didn’t you like  about him?” But  he doesn’t answer,
and finally   Andy  sighs. “I’m    sorry,”  he says. “I   hoped you  might  feel
comfortable enough around him to at least consider it. Will you think about
it anyway? Maybe you’ll   give him  another chance? And in the meantime,
there’s this other guy, Stephan Wu, who  I  think you  should maybe meet.
He’s not an orthopod, but I actually think that might be better; he’s certainly
the best internist I’ve ever worked with. Or there’s this guy named—”
   “Jesus, Andy, stop,” he says, and he can hear the anger in his voice, anger
he hasn’t known he  had. “Stop.”  He looks up,  sees Andy’s stricken face.
“Are you  so eager to get rid of me? Can’t you give me a break? Can’t you
let me take this in  for a while?  Don’t  you understand how hard this is for
me?” He knows  how selfish,  how unreasonable, how self-absorbed he is
being, and  he is  miserable  but  unable to  stop  himself,  and  he stands,

650
bumping against the table. “Leave me alone,” he tells Andy. “If  you’re not
going to be here for me, then leave me alone.”
   “Jude,”  Andy  says, but he has already pushed past the table, and as he
does, the waitress arrives with the food, and he can hear Andy curse and see
him reach for his wallet, and he stumbles out of the restaurant. Mr. Ahmed
doesn’t work  on  Fridays because he drives  himself  to Andy’s,  but  now
instead of returning to the car, which is parked in front of Andy’s office, he
hails a taxi and gets in quickly and leaves before Andy can catch him.
   That  night he  turns off  his phones, drugs himself,  crawls into  bed. He
wakes the next day, texts both JB and Richard that he’s not feeling well and
has to cancel his dinners with  them,  and then re-drugs himself until  it  is
Monday. Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday. He has ignored all of
Andy’s calls and texts and e-mails, all  of his messages, but although he is
no longer angry, only ashamed, he cannot bear to make one more apology,
cannot bear his own meanness, his own weakness. “I’m frightened, Andy,”
he wants to say. “What will I do without you?”
   Andy   loves  sweets, and  on  Thursday  afternoon  he  has  one of   his
secretaries place an order for an absurd, a stupid amount of chocolates from
Andy’s favorite candy shop. “Any  note?” his secretary asks, and he shakes
his head. “No,”  he says, “Must my name.” She nods and starts to leave and
he calls her back, grabs a piece of notepaper from his  desk, and scribbles
Andy—I’m so embarrassed. Please forgive me. Jude, and hands it to her.
   But  the next  night he  doesn’t go to  see Andy;  he goes home to make
dinner for  Harold, who  is in  town on  one of his  unannounced visits. The
previous spring had been Harold’s  final  semester, which he had failed to
register until  it   was September. He  and Willem   had  always spoken  of
throwing Harold a party when he finally  retired, the way they had done for
Julia when she had retired. But he had forgotten, and he had done nothing.
And then he remembered and he still did nothing.
   He is tired.  He doesn’t want to see Harold. But he makes dinner anyway,
a dinner he knows he will not eat, and serves it to Harold and then sits down
himself.
   “Aren’t   you hungry?”  Harold  asks him, and he shakes his head. “I  ate
lunch at five today,” he lies. “I’ll  eat later.”
   He watches Harold eat, and sees that he is old, that the skin on his hands
has become as soft and satiny as a baby’s. He is ever-more aware that he is
one year older, two years older, and now, six years older than Harold was

651
when they met.  And  yet for  all  these years, Harold  has remained in his
perceptions stubbornly forty-five;   the only  thing  that has  changed is his
perception of how old, exactly, forty-five is. It  is embarrassing to admit this
to himself, but it is only  recently that he has begun considering that there is
a possibility, even a probability, that he will outlive  Harold. He has already
lived beyond his imaginings; isn’t it likely he will  live longer still?
   He remembers a conversation they’d had when he turned thirty-five. “I’m
middle-aged,” he’d said, and Harold had laughed.
   “You’re  young,”  he’d said. “You’re so young, Jude. You’re only middle-
aged if you plan on dying  at seventy. And you’d  better not. I’m  really not
going to be in the mood to attend your funeral.”
   “You’re  going  to be  ninety-five,”  he said. “Are  you  really  planning on
still being alive then?”
   “Alive,   and  frisky,  and being attended to  by  an assortment of  buxom
young nurses, and not in any mood to go to some long-winded service.”
   He had finally  smiled. “And  who’s paying for  this fleet of buxom young
nurses?”
   “You,  of course,” said Harold. “You and your big-pharma spoils.”
   But  now  he worries  that this  won’t  happen after  all.  Don’t  leave me,
Harold, he thinks, but it  is a dull,  spiritless request, one he doesn’t expect
will  be answered, made more from rote than from  real hope. Don’t  leave
me.
   “You’re   not   saying  anything,”   Harold  says  now,  and  he  refocuses
himself.
   “I’m   sorry, Harold,” he says. “I was drifting a little.”
   “I  can see that,” Harold says. “I was saying: Julia and I were thinking of
spending some more time here, in the city, of living uptown full-time.”
   He blinks. “You  mean, moving here?”
   “Well,   we’ll  keep the place in  Cambridge,” Harold  says, “but  yes. I’m
considering teaching a seminar at Columbia next fall, and we like spending
time here.” He looks at  him. “We thought it’d   be nice to be closer to you,
too.”
   He  isn’t  sure what he thinks about this.  “But  what about your  lives up
there?” he asks. He  is  discomfited  by this  news;  Harold  and Julia  love
Cambridge—he has never thought they would leave. “What about Laurence
and Gillian?”

652
   “Laurence and Gillian are always coming through the city; so is everyone
else.” Harold  studies him again. “You  don’t  seem very happy about this,
Jude.”
   “I’m   sorry,” he says, looking down.  “But  I Must hope you’re not moving
here because—because of me.” There’s a silence. “I don’t mean to  sound
presumptuous,” he says,  finally.  “But   if  it  is  because of  me,  then you
shouldn’t, Harold. I’m fine. I’m  doing fine.”
   “Are   you,  Jude?” Harold  asks, very  quietly,  and he  suddenly stands,
quickly, and goes to  the bathroom near the kitchen,  where he sits on  the
toilet seat and puts his face in his hands. He can hear Harold waiting on the
other side of the door, but he says nothing, and neither does Harold. Finally,
minutes later, when he’s able to compose himself, he opens the door again,
and the two of them look at each other.
   “I’m   fifty-one,”  he tells Harold.
   “What’s  that supposed to mean?” Harold asks.
   “It   means I can take  care of myself,”   he says. “It  means I  don’t need
anyone to help me.”
   Harold  sighs. “Jude,” he says, “there’s not an expiration date on needing
help, or  needing  people. You  don’t  get  to  a certain  age and  it  stops.”
They’re  quiet  again. “You’re   so thin,”   Harold  continues,  and when  he
doesn’t say anything, “What does Andy say?”
   “I  can’t keep having this conversation,” he says at last, his voice scraped
and hoarse. “I can’t,  Harold.  And you  can’t, either. I  feel  like  all I  do is
disappoint you, and I’m sorry for that, I’m  sorry for all  of it. But  I’m really
trying. I’m  doing the best I can. I’m  sorry if  it’s not good enough.” Harold
tries to interMect, but he talks over him. “This is who I am. This is it, Harold.
I’m   sorry  I’m   such  a  problem  for   you.  I’m   sorry   I’m   ruining   your
retirement. I’m  sorry I’m  not happier. I’m  sorry I’m  not over  Willem. I’m
sorry I  have a Mob you don’t respect. I’m  sorry  I’m  such  a nothing of  a
person.” He no longer knows what he’s saying; he no longer knows how he
feels: he wants to cut himself,  to disappear, to lie  down and never get up
again, to hurl  himself  into space. He hates himself;  he pities himself;  he
hates himself for pitying himself. “I  think  you should go,” he says. “I think
you should leave.”
   “Jude,”  Harold says.
   “Please go,”  he says. “Please. I’m  tired. I  need to be left  alone. Please
leave me alone.” And  he turns from  Harold  and stands, waiting, until  he

653
hears Harold walk away from him.
   After   Harold leaves, he takes the  elevator to the  roof.  Here there is  a
stone wall, chest-high, that lines the perimeter of the building, and he leans
against it, swallowing the cool air, placing his  palms flat against the top of
the wall to try  to stop them from shaking. He thinks  of Willem,  of how  he
and Willem  used to stand on this  roof  at night, not  saying anything, Must
looking down into  other people’s apartments. From the southern end of the
roof, they  could  almost see the  roof  of  their  old building   on Lispenard
Street, and sometimes they would pretend that they could see not Must the
building,  but them  within  it,  their  former selves performing  a  theater of
their daily lives.
   “There  must be a fold in  the space-time continuum,” Willem  would say
in his  action-hero voice. “You’re  here beside me, and yet—I  can see you
moving around in  that  shithole apartment.  My  god, St.  Francis: Do  you
realize what’s going  on  here?!”  Back then,  he would  always  laugh, but
remembering this now, he cannot. These days, his only pleasure is thoughts
of  Willem,  and yet  those same thoughts are  also his  greatest source of
sorrow. He wishes he could forget as completely as Lucien has: that Willem
ever existed, his life with him.
   As  he stands on the roof,  he considers what he has done: He has been
irrational. He has gotten angry at someone who has, once again, offered to
help him, someone he is grateful for, someone he owes, someone he loves.
Why am I acting like this, he thinks. But there’s no answer.
   Let me get better, he asks. Let me get better or let me end it. He feels that
he is in  a cold cement room, from  which  prong several exits, and one by
one, he is shutting the doors, closing himself  in the  room, eliminating  his
chances for escape. But why is he doing this? Why is he trapping himself in
this place he hates and fears when there are other places he could go? This,
he thinks, is his punishment for depending on others: one by one, they will
leave him, and he will be alone again, and this time it will be worse because
he will remember it had once been better. He has the sense, once again, that
his life  is moving  backward, that it  is  becoming smaller and smaller, the
cement box shrinking around him until  he is left  with  a space so cramped
that he must fold himself into a crouch, because if he lies down, the ceiling
will lower  itself upon him and he will be smothered.
   Before  he  goes to  bed  he  writes  Harold  a  note apologi]ing   for   his
behavior. He works through Saturday; he sleeps through Sunday. And a new

654
week begins. On Tuesday, he gets a message from Todd. The first of  the
lawsuits are being settled, for massive figures, but even Todd knows enough
not to  ask him   to celebrate. His  messages, by phone or  by  e-mail,  are
clipped and sober:  the name of  the company  that is  ready to  settle, the
proposed amount, a short “congratulations.”
   On Wednesday, he is meant to stop by the artists’ nonprofit where he still
does pro bono work,  but he  instead meets JB downtown at the  Whitney,
where his retrospective is being hung. This show is another souvenir from
the ghosted past: it has been in the planning  stages for almost two years.
When JB had told them about it, the three of them had thrown a small party
for him at Greene Street.
   “Well,   JB,   you  know  what   this  means, right?”   Willem   had  asked,
gesturing toward the two  paintings—Willem and the Girl   and Willem and
Jude, Lispenard Street, II, from JB’s first show, which hung, side by side, in
their living room. “As  soon as the show comes down, all of these pieces are
going straight to Christie’s,”  and everyone had laughed, JB hardest of all,
proud and delighted and relieved.
   Those pieces, along  with  Willem, London, October  8,  9:08 a.m., from
“Seconds, Minutes, Hours,  Days,” which  he  had bought, and Jude, New
York, October 14, 7:02 a.m., which  Willem  had, along with  the ones they
owned from “Everyone  I’ve Ever  Known”  and “The Narcissist’s Guide to
Self-Hatred” and “Frog and Toad,” and all  the drawings, the paintings, the
sketches of JB’s that the two of  them had been given and had kept, some
since college, will be in the Whitney exhibit, as well as previously unshown
work.
   There will   also be a concurrent show  of new  paintings at JB’s gallery,
and three weekends before, he had gone to JB’s studio in Greenpoint to see
them. The series is called “The Golden Anniversary,”  and it is a chronicle
of JB’s parents’ lives, both together, before he was born, and in an imagined
future, the two of  them living  on and on, together, into old  age. In reality,
JB’s mother is still  alive, as are his aunts, but in these paintings, so too is
JB’s father, who had actually died at the age of thirty-six. The series is Must
sixteen paintings, many of them smaller in scale than JB’s previous works,
and as he walked through JB’s studio, looking at these scenes of domestic
fantasy—his sixty-year-old father coring an apple while his mother made a
sandwich; his seventy-year-old father sitting on the sofa reading the paper,
while in  the background, his mother’s legs can be seen descending a flight

655
of stairs—he couldn’t  help but  see what his life  too  was and might  have
been. It was precisely these scenes he missed the most from his own  life
with Willem,  the forgettable, in-between moments in which nothing seemed
to be happening but whose absence was singularly unfillable.
   Interspersing the  portraits were still  lifes  of  the obMects that had made
JB’s parents’ lives together: two pillows on a bed, both slightly depressed as
if  someone had dragged the back of  a  spoon through a  bowl  of  clotted
cream; two coffee  cups, one’s edge faintly  pinked with   lipstick;  a single
picture frame containing a photograph of a teenaged JB with his father: the
only appearance JB made in these paintings. And seeing these images, he
once again  marveled at  how  perfect  JB’s  understanding was  of  a  life
together, of   his   life,   of   how  everything   in  his   apartment—Willem’s
sweatpants, still  slung  over  the edge  of  the  laundry  hamper; Willem’s
toothbrush, still waiting in  the glass on the bathroom sink; Willem’s watch,
its  face  splintered   from   the  accident,  still   sitting   untouched  on   his
nightstand—had become totemic, a series of runes only he could read. The
table next to Willem’s  side of the bed at Lantern House had become a sort
of unintentional shrine to  him: there was the mug he had last drunk from,
and the black-framed glasses he’d recently started wearing, and the book he
was reading, still splayed, facedown, in the position he’d left it.
   “Oh,  JB,”  he had sighed, and although he had wanted to say something
else, he couldn’t.   But  JB had  thanked him  anyway.  They  were quieter
around each other now, and he didn’t know if this was who JB had become
or if this was who JB had become around him.
   Now  he knocks on the museum’s doors and is let in by one of JB’s studio
assistants, who is waiting for him  and who tells him  that JB is  overseeing
the installation on the top floor,  but says he should start on the sixth floor
and work his way up to meet him, and so he does.
   The  galleries on this floor  are dedicated to JB’s  early works,  including
Muvenilia; there is a whole grid of  framed drawings  from JB’s  childhood,
including a math test over which JB had drawn lovely little  pencil portraits
of, presumably, his  classmates: eight- and nine-year-olds bent  over their
desks, eating candy bars, feeding birds. He had neglected to solve any of
the problems, and at the top of the page was a bright red “F,” along with a
note: “Dear Mrs. Marion—you  see what the problem is here. Please come
see me. Sincerely, Jamie Greenberg. P.S. Your son is an immense talent.”
He smiles looking at this, the first time he can feel himself smiling in a long

656
time. In a lucite cube on a stand in the middle of the room are a few obMects
from “The  Kwotidien,”   including  the  hair-covered hairbrush that JB  had
never returned to him,  and he smiles again, looking  at  them, thinking  of
their weekends devoted to searching for clippings.
   The  rest of the floor  is  given over to  images from “The  Boys,”  and he
walks slowly through the rooms, looking at pictures of Malcolm, of him,  of
Willem. Here are the two of them in their bedroom at Lispenard Street, both
of them sitting on their twin  beds, staring straight into JB’s camera, Willem
with a small  smile; here they are again at the card table, he working  on a
brief, Willem   reading a book. Here  they are at  a party. Here  they are at
another party. Here he is with Phaedra; here Willem is with Richard. Here is
Malcolm  with  his  sister,  Malcolm  with   his  parents. Here is  Jude  with
Cigarette, here is  Jude, After  Sickness. Here is a  wall  with  pen-and-ink
sketches of these images, sketches of them. Here are the photographs that
inspired the paintings. Here is the photograph of him from which Jude with
Cigarette was painted: here he is—that expression on his face, that hunch of
his  shoulders—a stranger to  himself   and yet   instantly  recogni]able  to
himself as well.
   The  stairwells   between the  floors  are  densely  hung  with  interstitial
pieces, drawings and small paintings, studies and experimentations, that JB
made between bodies of work.  He  sees the portrait JB  made of  him for
Harold and Julia, for his adoption; he sees drawings of him in Truro, of him
in Cambridge, of Harold and Julia. Here are the four of them; here are JB’s
aunts and mother and grandmother; here is the Chief and Mrs. Irvine; here
is Flora; here is Richard, and Ali, and the Henry Youngs, and Phaedra.
   The next  floor: “Everyone  I’ve  Ever Known  Everyone I’ve Ever  Loved
Everyone I’ve Ever Hated Everyone I’ve Ever Fucked”; “Seconds, Minutes,
Hours, Days.”   Behind  him,  around  him,  installers  mill,   making   small
adMustments with their white-gloved hands, standing back and staring at the
walls. Once again he enters the stairwell. Once again he looks up, and there
he sees, again and again, drawings of him: of his face, of him standing, of
him in his wheelchair, of  him with  Willem,  of him alone. These are pieces
that JB had made when they weren’t speaking, when he had abandoned JB.
There are drawings of other people as well, but they are mostly of him: him
and Jackson. Again and again, Jackson and him, a checkerboard of the two
of them. The images of him are wistful, faint, pencils and pen-and-inks and
watercolors. The  ones  of  Jackson are  acrylics,  thick-lined,   looser  and

657
angrier. There is one drawing of him that  is very small, on a postcard-si]e
piece of   paper, and  when  he  examines it   more  closely,  he  sees that
something had been written on it, and then erased: “Dear Jude,” he makes
out, “please”—but there is nothing more after that word. He turns away, his
breathing quick, and sees the watercolor of a camellia bush that JB had sent
him when he was in the hospital, after he had tried to kill himself.
   The  next floor:  “The  Narcissist’s Guide to Self-Hatred.”  This had been
JB’s least commercially successful show, and he can understand why—to
look at these works, their insistent anger and self-loathing, was to be both
awed and made almost unbearably uncomfortable. The Coon, one painting
was called; The Buffoon; The BoMangler; The Steppin Fetchit. In each, JB,
his skin shined and dark, his eyes bulging and yellowed, dances or howls or
cackles, his   gums awful   and  huge  and  fish-flesh   pink,  while   in   the
background, Jackson and his friends emerge half formed from a gloom of
Goyan browns  and grays, all  crowing  at  him,  clapping  their  hands and
pointing  and laughing.  The last  painting  in  this  series was called  Even
Monkeys Get the Blues,  and it  was of  JB  wearing  a pert  red fe]  and  a
shrunken red epauletted Macket, pantsless, hopping on one leg in an empty
warehouse. He lingers on this floor, staring at these paintings, blinking, his
throat shutting, and then slowly moves to the stairs a final time.
   Then  he is on  the top floor,  and here there are more people, and for  a
while  he stands to the  side, watching JB  talking  to  the curators and his
gallerist, laughing  and gesturing.  These galleries are hung,  mostly, with
images from “Frog and Toad,” and he moves from each to each, not really
seeing them but rather remembering the experience of viewing them for the
first time, in JB’s studio, when he and Willem were new to each other, when
he felt as if he was growing new body parts—a second heart, a second brain
—to accommodate this excess of feeling, the wonder of his life.
   He is staring at one of the paintings when JB finally  sees him and comes
over, and he hugs JB tightly and congratulates him. “JB,” he says. “I’m  so
proud of you.”
   “Thanks,  Judy,” JB  says, smiling. “I’m   proud  of me  too, goddammit.”
And then he stops smiling. “I wish they were here,” he says.
   He shakes his head. “I do too,” he manages to say.
   For  a while  they are silent. Then, “Come  here,” JB says, and grabs his
hand and pulls  him  to the  far side  of  the floor,  past JB’s  gallerist, who
waves at him, past a final crate of framed drawings that are being unboxed,

658
to a wall  where a  canvas is having its  skin  of bubble  wrap carefully  cut
away from it. JB positions them before it, and when the plastic is unpeeled,
he sees it is a painting of Willem.
   The  piece isn’t  large—Must four feet by  three feet—and is  hori]onally
oriented. It   is  by  far   the  most  sharply  photorealistic  painting  JB  has
produced in years, the colors  rich  and dense, the brushstrokes that made
Willem’s hair  feathery-fine. The Willem  in this painting  looks like  Willem
did shortly  before he  died: he thinks  he is  seeing Willem  in  the months
before or after shooting The Dancer and the Stage, for which his hair  was
longer and darker than it was in life. After  Dancer, he decides, because the
sweater he is wearing, a black-green the color of magnolia leaves, is one he
remembers buying for Willem in Paris when he went to visit him there.
   He  steps back, still  looking. In  the painting,  Willem’s  torso is  directed
toward the viewer, but his face is turned to the right so that he is almost in
profile, and he is  leaning toward something or someone and smiling. And
because he knows Willem’s  smiles, he knows  Willem  has been captured
looking at something he loves, he knows Willem in that instant was happy.
Willem’s face and neck dominate the canvas, and although the background
is suggested rather than shown, he knows that Willem is at  their table; he
knows it  from  the way JB  has drawn the light  and shadows on Willem’s
face. He has the sense that if he says Willem’s name, then the face in the
painting will   turn  toward  him  and  answer; he  has the sense that  if  he
stretches his hand out  and  strokes the  canvas, he will   feel  beneath his
fingertips Willem’s hair, his fringe of eyelashes.
   But  he doesn’t do this, of course, Must looks up at last and sees JB smiling
at him, sadly. “The title card’s been mounted already,” JB says, and he goes
slowly to the wall behind the painting and sees its title—Willem Listening to
Jude Tell a Story, Greene Street—and he feels his breath abandon him; it
feels as if his heart is made of something oo]ing and cold, like ground meat,
and it  is  being  squee]ed inside  a  fist  so  that chunks  of  it  are  falling,
plopping to the ground near his feet.
   He  is abruptly  di]]y.   “I  need to sit,”  he finally  says, and JB takes him
around the corner, to the  other side of  the wall  where Willem  will   hang,
where there’s a small cul-de-sac. He half sits atop one of  the crates that’s
been left here and  hangs his head, resting his  hands on his  thighs. “I’m
sorry,” he manages to say. “I’m sorry, JB.”

659
   “It’s  for  you,”  JB says, quietly. “When the show comes down, Jude. It’s
yours.”
   “Thank   you,  JB,”   he  says.  He  makes  himself  stand  upright,   feels
everything within  him shift.  I need to eat something, he thinks. When was
the last time he ate? Breakfast, he thinks, but yesterday. He reaches his hand
out toward the crate to center himself, to stop the rocking he feels within his
head and spine; he feels this sensation more and more frequently, a floating
away, a state close to ecstasy. Take me somewhere, he hears a voice inside
him say, but he doesn’t know to whom he is saying this, or where he wants
to go. Take me, take me. He is thinking this, crossing his arms over himself,
when JB suddenly grabs him by his shoulders and kisses him on the mouth.
   He  wrenches away. “What   the hell  are  you doing?”   he asks, and he
fumbles backward, rubbing his mouth with the back of his hand.
   “Jude, I’m  sorry, I didn’t mean anything,” JB says. “You Must look so—so
sad.”
   “So  this is what  you do?” he spits at JB, who  steps toward him. “Don’t
you dare touch me, JB.” In  the background, he can hear the chatter of the
installers, JB’s  gallerist,  the  curators.  He  takes another step,  this  time
toward the edge of the wall. I’m going to faint, he thinks, but he doesn’t.
   “Jude,”  JB says, and then, his face changing, “Jude?”
   But  he is moving away from him.  “Get away from  me,” he says. “Don’t
touch me. Leave me alone.”
   “Jude,”  JB says in a low voice, following him,  “you don’t look  good. Let
me help you.”  But  he  keeps walking, trying   to get  away from  JB. “I’m
sorry, Jude,” JB continues. “I’m  sorry.” He is  aware of the pack of people
moving  as a clump  to  the  other  side of  the  floor,  hardly  noticing  him
leaving, JB next to him; it is as if they don’t exist.
   Twenty  more steps to the elevators, he estimates; eighteen more steps;
sixteen; fifteen;  fourteen.  Beneath him,  the floor   has become a  loosely
spinning top, wobbling  on its axis. Ten; nine;  eight. “Jude,” says JB, who
won’t stop talking, “let  me help you. Why won’t  you talk to me anymore?”
He is at the elevator; he smacks the button with his palm; he leans against
the wall, praying he’ll be able to stay upright.
   “Get  away from me,” he hisses at JB. “Leave me alone.”
   The  elevator arrives; the  doors open. He steps toward  them. His  walk
now is different:  he still  leads with his left  leg, always, and he still  lifts  it
unnaturally high—that hasn’t changed, that has been dictated by his inMury.

660
But he no longer drags his right leg, and because his prosthetic feet are so
well-articulated—much more so than his own feet had been—he is able to
feel the roll of  his foot as it  leaves the floor, the complicated, beautiful pat
of it laying itself down on the ground again, section by section.
   But   when   he   is   tired,   when  he   is   desperate, he   finds   himself
unconsciously reverting  to  his   old  gait,  with   each foot   landing  flatly,
slabbily, on the floor, with  his right leg listing  behind him. And as he steps
into the elevator he forgets that  his steel-and-fiberglass legs are made for
more nuance than he is allowing  them, and he trips  and falls. “Jude!”  he
hears JB call out, and because he is so weak, for a moment everything  is
dark and empty, and when he regains his vision, he  sees that the flock of
people have heard JB cry out, that they are now walking in his direction. He
sees as well  JB’s  face  above him,  but  he  is  too  tired  to  interpret  his
expression. Willem Listening to Jude Tell a Story, he thinks, and before him
appears the painting:   Willem’s  face,  Willem’s   smile,  but  Willem   isn’t
looking  at  him,  he is  looking  somewhere else.  What if,   he thinks,  the
Willem of  the painting is in fact  looking for  him? He has a sudden urge to
stand to the painting’s  right,  to sit  in a  chair in  what would  be Willem’s
sightline, to never leave that painting by itself. There is Willem, imprisoned
forever in a one-sided conversation. Here he is, in life, imprisoned as well.
He thinks of  Willem,  alone in his  painting, night  after night  in the empty
museum, waiting and waiting for him to tell him a story.
   Forgive  me, Willem, he tells Willem  in his head. Forgive me, but I have
to leave you now. Forgive me, but I have to go.
   “Jude,”  JB says. The elevator doors are closing, but JB reaches his arm
out to him.
   But  he ignores it, works  himself to his  feet, leans into the corner of the
elevator car. The  people are very  close  now. Everyone moves  so much
faster than he does. “Stay away from  me,” he says to JB, but  he is quiet.
“Leave me alone. Please leave me alone.”
   “Jude,”  JB says again. “I’m sorry.”
   And  he begins to say something else, but as he does, the elevator doors
close—and he is left alone at last.

661
                                                         3

HE DIDN’T BEGIN it consciously, he really didn’t, and yet when he comprehends
what he is doing,  he doesn’t stop it, either. It  is the middle  of  November,
and he is getting out of the pool after his morning swim, and as he’s lifting
himself up on the metal bars that Richard had had installed around the pool
to help him get in and out of his wheelchair, the world disappears.
   When he wakes again, it’s only ten minutes later. One moment it was six
forty-five  a.m., and he was pulling  himself up;  the next it  is six  fifty-five
a.m., and he is prone on the black rubber floor, his arms reaching forward
for the  chair, his  torso leaving  a wet  splotch on  the ground.  He groans,
moving into a sitting  position, and waits until  the room rights  itself again,
before attempting—and this time, succeeding—to hoist himself up.
   The second time comes a few days later. He has Must gotten home from
the office,  and it  is  late.  Increasingly, he has begun to  feel  as if  Rosen
Pritchard  supplies him   with   his  very  energy,  and  once  he  leaves its
premises, so too does his strength: the moment Mr. Ahmed shuts the back
door of the car, he is  asleep, and he doesn’t wake until he is  delivered to
Greene Street. But as he walks into the dark, quiet apartment that night, he
is overcome  by  a sense of  displacement, one  so debilitating  that  for  a
moment he stops, blinking and confused, before he moves to the sofa in the
living  room and lies down.  He means to Must rest, Must for a few minutes,
Must until he can stand again, but when he opens his eyes next it is day, and
the living room is gray with light.
   The  third  time  is  Monday  morning.  He wakes  before his  alarm,  and
although he  is  lying  down,  he feels  everything  around and  within  him
roiling,  as if he is  a bottle half  filled  with  water set adrift on  an ocean of
clouds. In recent weeks, he hasn’t had to drug himself at all on Sundays: he
gets home from dinner with JB on Saturday, and climbs into bed, and only
wakes when Richard comes to find him the next day. When Richard doesn’t
come—as he hadn’t this Sunday; he and  India are visiting  her parents in
New Mexico—he sleeps through the entire day, through the entire night. He
dreams of nothing, and nothing wakes him.

662
   He knows what is happening, of course: he isn’t eating enough. He hasn’t
been for months. Some days he eats very little—a piece of fruit; a piece of
bread—and some days he eats nothing at all. It isn’t as if he has decided to
stop eating—it is simply  that he is  no longer interested, that he no longer
can. He isn’t hungry, so he doesn’t eat.
   That  Monday, though,  he does. He  gets up, he  totters downstairs. He
swims, but  poorly,  slowly.  And  then he comes back  upstairs, he  makes
himself  breakfast. He  sits  and  eats  it,  staring  into  the  apartment,  the
newspapers folded on the table beside him. He opens his mouth, he inserts a
forkful   of   food,   he  chews,  he   swallows.  He   keeps  his  movements
mechanical, but suddenly he thinks of how grotesque a process it is, putting
something into his  mouth, moving  it around with  his  tongue, swallowing
down the saliva-clotted plug of it, and he stops. Still, he promises himself: I
will  eat, even if I don’t want to, because I am alive and this is what I am to
do. But he forgets, and forgets again.
   And  then, two days later, something happens. He has Must come home, so
exhausted that he feels  soluble,  as if  he  is  evaporating into  the  air, so
insubstantial that he feels made not of blood and bone but of vapor and fog,
when he sees Willem standing before him. He opens his mouth to speak to
him, but then he  blinks and Willem  is  gone, and he is teetering, his arms
stretched before him.
   “Willem,”   he says aloud into the empty apartment. “Willem.”   He closes
his eyes, as if he might conMure him that way, but Willem doesn’t reappear.
   The  next day, however, he does. He  is once again at  home. It  is once
again night. He has once again not eaten anything. He is lying in bed, he is
staring into the dark of the room. And there, abruptly, is Willem, shimmery
as a hologram, the edges of him blurring  with  light, and although  Willem
isn’t looking at him—he is looking  elsewhere, looking toward the doorway,
looking so intently  that he wants to follow  Willem’s  sightline, to  see what
Willem  sees, but he  knows  he mustn’t  blink,  he  mustn’t  turn  away, or
Willem will  leave him—it  is enough to see him, to feel that he in some way
still exists, that his disappearance might not be a permanent state after all.
But finally, he has to blink, and Willem vanishes once more.
   However, he isn’t  too upset, because now he knows: if he doesn’t eat, if
he  can  last  to  the   point  Must before  collapse, he   will   begin  having
hallucinations, and his  hallucinations might  be of  Willem.  That  night  he
falls asleep contented, the first time he has felt contentment in nearly fifteen

663
months, because now he knows how to recall  Willem;  now he knows  his
ability to summon Willem is within  his control.
   He   cancels his  appointment  with   Andy   so  he  can  stay  home  and
experiment. This is the third consecutive Friday he hasn’t seen Andy. Since
that night  at the  restaurant, the two of  them  have been polite  with  each
other, and  Andy   hasn’t  mentioned  Linus,  or  any  other  doctor,  again,
although he has said he’ll raise the subMect anew in six months. “It’s not a
matter of wanting to get rid of you,  Jude,” he said. “And I’m  sorry, I really
am, if that’s how it  sounded. I’m Must worried. I Must want to make sure we
find someone you like, someone I know you’ll be comfortable with.”
   “I  know,  Andy,”  he said. “And  I appreciate it; I  do. I’ve  been behaving
badly, and I took it out on you.” But he knows now that he has to be careful:
he has tasted anger, and he  knows he  has to  control  it.  He can  feel it,
waiting to burst from  his mouth in  a swarm of stinging black  flies. Where
has this rage been hiding?  he wonders. How  can  he make it  disappear?
Lately his  dreams have been of  violence, of  terrible  things befalling  the
people he hates, the people he loves: he sees Brother Luke being  stuffed
into a sack full of squealing, starved rats; he sees JB’s head being slammed
against a wall, his brain splashing out in a gray slurry.  In the dreams he is
always  there,  dispassionate and  watchful,   and   after  witnessing   their
destruction, he turns and walks away. He wakes with his nose bleeding the
way it  had when he was a child  and was suppressing a tantrum, with  his
hands shaking, with his face contorted into a snarl.
   That Friday  Willem  doesn’t come to him after all. But  the next evening,
as he is leaving the office  to meet JB  for dinner, he  turns his head to the
right and sees, sitting next to him in the car, Willem. This  time, he fancies,
Willem is  a little harder-edged, a little more solid, and he stares and stares
until he blinks and Willem once again dissolves.
   After  these episodes he is depleted, and the world around him dims as if
all its power and electricity  has gone toward creating Willem. He instructs
Mr. Ahmed to  take him home instead of  to the restaurant; as he is driven
south, he texts JB to tell him he’s feeling sick and can’t make it. He is doing
this more  and more:  canceling plans  with  people, shoddily  and  usually
unforgivably  late—an  hour  before  a  hard-to-secure dinner  reservation,
minutes after a  scheduled meeting time  at a  gallery, seconds before the
curtain rises above a stage. Richard, JB, Andy, Harold and Julia: these are
the final  people who  still  contact him,  persistently, week after week.  He

664
can’t remember when he last heard from  Citi]en  or  Rhodes or the Henry
Youngs or EliMah or Phaedra—it has been weeks, at least. And although he
knows he  should  care, he doesn’t.  His  hope,  his energy  are no  longer
replenishable resources; his reserves are limited,  and he wants  to  spend
them trying to find Willem,  even if the hunt is elusive, even if he is likely to
fail.
   And  so home he goes, and he waits and waits  for Willem   to appear to
him. But he doesn’t, and finally he sleeps.
   The next day he waits in bed, trying to suspend himself between alertness
and da]edness, for that (he thinks) is the state in which he is most likely to
summon Willem.
   On  Monday  he wakes,  feeling  foolish.  This has  got  to  stop, he tells
himself. You have  got to  reMoin the living.  You’re acting  like  an  insane
person. Visions? Do you know what you sound like?
   He  thinks of  the  monastery, where Brother Pavel liked  to  tell him  the
story of an eleventh-century nun named Hildegard. Hildegard had visions;
she closed her eyes and illuminated obMects appeared before her; her days
were aswim with light.  But  Brother Pavel was less interested in Hildegard
than in Hildegard’s instructor, Jutta, who had forsaken the material world to
live as an ascetic in a small cell, dead to the concerns of the living, alive but
not alive. “That’s what will   happen to you if you don’t  obey,” Pavel would
say, and  he  would   be  terrified.   There  was  a  small  toolshed  on   the
monastery’s grounds, dark and chilly and Mumbled with malevolent-looking
iron obMects, each of them ending in a spike, a spear, a scythe, and when the
brother told him of Jutta, he imagined he would be forced into the toolshed,
fed Must enough to survive, and on and on and  on he would  live,  almost
forgotten but  not completely,  almost dead but  not  completely. But  even
Jutta had  had  Hildegard  for   company. He   would  have  no  one.  How
frightened he had been; how certain he was that this, someday, would come
to pass.
   Now,  as he lies  in bed,  he hears the old lied  murmur  to him.  “I   have
become lost to the world,”  he sings, quietly, “in  which I  otherwise wasted
so much time.”
   But  although  he knows how  foolish  he is  being, he  still  cannot bring
himself to eat. The very act of it now repels him. He wishes he were above
want, above need. He has a vision of his life as a sliver of  soap, worn and

665
used and smoothed into a slender, blunt-ended arrowhead, a little more of it
disintegrating with every day.
   And   then  there is  what  he  doesn’t  like   to  admit  to  himself  but   is
conscious of thinking.  He cannot break his promise to Harold—he  won’t.
But if he stops eating, if he stops trying, the end will be the same anyway.
   Usually  he knows how  melodramatic, how  narcissistic, how unrealistic
he is being, and at least once a day he scolds himself. The fact is, he finds
himself less and less able to summon Willem’s specifics without depending
on props: He  cannot remember what Willem’s  voice  sounds like without
first playing one of  the saved voice messages. He can no longer remember
Willem’s scent without first smelling one of his shirts. And so he fears he is
grieving not  so much  for  Willem  but  for  his own  life:  its  smallness, its
worthlessness.
   He  has never been concerned with his legacy, or never thought  he had
been. And it is a helpful thing that he isn’t, for he will leave nothing behind:
not buildings or paintings or films or sculptures. Not books. Not papers. Not
people: not a spouse, not children, probably  not parents, and, if  he keeps
behaving the way  he is,  not friends.  Not  even new  law. He  has created
nothing. He  has  made nothing,  nothing  but  money:  the money  he  has
earned; the money given to him to compensate for Willem being taken from
him. His  apartment will   revert  to  Richard. The  other properties  will  be
given away or sold and their proceeds donated to charities. His art will go to
museums, his books to libraries, his furniture to whoever wants it. It will be
as if he has never existed. He has the feeling, unhappy as it is, that he was at
his most valuable in  those motel rooms, where he was at least something
singular and meaningful  to someone, although what  he had to  offer was
being taken from him,  not given  willingly.  But  there he had at least been
real to another person; what  they saw him  as was actually  what he was.
There, he was at his least deceptive.
   He had never been able to truly believe Willem’s interpretation of him, as
someone who was brave, and resourceful, and admirable. Willem would say
those things and he would  feel  ashamed, as if he’d  been swindling  him:
Who was this person Willem  was describing? Even his  confession hadn’t
changed Willem’s perception  of him—in   fact, Willem   seemed to respect
him more,  not less, because of it,  which he  had never understood but in
which he had allowed himself  to find  solace. But although he hadn’t been

666
convinced, it was somehow sustaining that someone else had seen him as a
worthwhile person, that someone had seen his as a meaningful life.
   The spring  before Willem died,  they’d had some people over for dinner
—Must the four   of   them  and  Richard  and  Asian   Henry  Young—and
Malcolm, in one of the occasional spikes of regret he had been experiencing
over his and Sophie’s decision not to have children, even though, as they all
reminded him,  they  hadn’t   wanted children  to  begin  with,   had  asked,
“Without  them, I  Must wonder: What’s been the point of it all?  Don’t  you
guys ever  worry   about  this?  How  do   any  of  us  know  our   lives  are
meaningful?”
   “Excuse  me, Mal,”  Richard  had said, pouring him  the last of  the wine
from one bottle as Willem uncorked another, “but I find that offensive. Are
you saying our lives are less meaningful because we don’t have kids?”
   “No,”  Malcolm  said. Then he thought. “Well, maybe.”
   “I  know  my life’s  meaningful,”  Willem had said, suddenly, and Richard
had smiled at him.
   “Of   course your   life’s  meaningful,”   JB  had said.  “You  make  things
people actually want to see, unlike me and Malcolm and Richard and Henry
here.”
   “People  want  to  see  our  stuff,”   said Asian  Henry   Young, sounding
wounded.
   “I   meant  people outside  of  New   York  and  London  and  Tokyo  and
Berlin.”
   “Oh,  them. But who cares about those people?”
   “No,”   Willem  said, after they’d all  stopped laughing. “I  know my  life’s
meaningful because”—and here he stopped, and looked shy, and was silent
for a moment before he continued—“because I’m a good friend. I love my
friends, and I care about them, and I think I make them happy.”
   The  room  became quiet, and  for  a  few  seconds, he and Willem   had
looked at  each  other across the  table,  and  the rest  of  the  people,  the
apartment itself, fell away: they were two people on two chairs, and around
them was nothingness. “To Willem,”  he  finally  said, and raised his glass,
and so did everyone else. “To Willem!” they all echoed, and Willem smiled
back at him.
   Later that evening, when everyone had left and they were in bed, he had
told Willem  that he was right. “I’m  glad you know your  life has meaning,”

667
he told him.  “I’m   glad it’s  not something I  have to convince you  of. I’m
glad you know how wonderful you are.”
   “But   your  life  has Must as much meaning as mine,”  Willem  had said.
“You’re wonderful, too. Don’t  you know that, Jude?”
   At  the  time, he had muttered something, something that  Willem  might
interpret as an agreement, but as Willem slept, he lay awake. It had always
seemed to him a very plush kind of problem, a privilege, really, to consider
whether life was meaningful or not. He didn’t think  his was. But this didn’t
bother him so much.
   And  although he hadn’t fretted over whether his life was worthwhile,  he
had always wondered why he, why so many others, went on living at all; it
had been difficult to convince himself at times, and yet so many people, so
many millions, billions  of people, lived  in misery he couldn’t fathom, with
deprivations and illnesses that were obscene in their extremity. And yet on
and on and on  they went. So was  the determination to  keep living  not a
choice at all, but an evolutionary implementation? Was there something in
the mind  itself,  a  constellation of  neurons as  toughened and scarred as
tendon, that prevented humans from doing what logic so often argued they
should? And yet that  instinct wasn’t  infallible—he  had overcome it  once.
But  what had  happened to it  after?  Had it   weakened, or become more
resilient? Was his life even his to choose to live any longer?
   He had known, ever since the hospital, that it was impossible to convince
someone to live for his own sake. But he often thought it would  be a more
effective treatment to make people feel more urgently the necessity of living
for others: that, to him, was always the most compelling argument. The fact
was, he did owe Harold.  He did  owe Willem.  And  if  they wanted him  to
stay alive, then he would. At the time, as he slogged through day after day,
his motivations had been murky to him, but now he could recogni]e that he
had done it for them, and that rare selflessness had been something he could
be proud of after  all. He  hadn’t understood why  they wanted him to  stay
alive, only that they had, and so he had done it. Eventually, he had learned
how to rediscover contentment, Moy, even. But it hadn’t begun that way.
   And  now he is once again finding life  more and more difficult, each day
a little less possible than the last. In his every day stands a tree, black and
dying, with a single branch Mutting to its right, a scarecrow’s sole prosthetic,
and it is from this branch that he hangs. Above him a rain is always misting,
which makes  the branch slippery.  But  he clings  to  it,  as tired  as he is,

668
because beneath him is a hole bored into the earth so deep that he cannot
see where it ends. He is petrified to let go because he will fall into the hole,
but eventually he knows he will, he knows he must: he is so tired. His grasp
weakens a bit, Must a little bit, with every week.
   So it is with  guilt and regret, but also with a sense of inevitability, that he
cheats on his promise to Harold. He cheats when he tells Harold he is being
sent away to Jakarta for  business and will  miss Thanksgiving.  He cheats
when  he  begins growing   a  beard,  which  he  hopes  will   disguise  the
gauntness in his face. He cheats when he tells SanMay he’s fine, he’s Must had
an intestinal flu. He  cheats when he tells his secretary she doesn’t need to
get him lunch because he picked something up on the way into the office.
He cheats when he cancels the next month’s worth of  dates with Richard
and JB and Andy, telling them he has too much work. He cheats every time
he lets the voice whisper to him, unbidden, It won’t be long now, it won’t be
long. He isn’t  so deluded that he thinks  he will  be able  to literally  starve
himself to death—but he does think that there will be a day, closer now than
ever before, in which he will  be so weak that he will  stumble and fall  and
crash his head against the Greene Street lobby’s cement floors, in which he
will contract a virus and not have the resources to make it retreat.
   At  least one of his lies  is true: he does have too much work. He  has an
appellate argument in a month, and he  is relieved to  be able to  spend so
much time at  Rosen Pritchard, where nothing bad has ever befallen  him,
where even Willem knows not to disturb him with  one of his unpredictable
appearances. One night he hears SanMay muttering to himself as he hurries
past his office—“Fuck, she’s going to kill  me”—and looks up and sees it is
no longer night,  but day, and the Hudson is  turning a  smeary orange. He
notes this, but he feels nothing. Here, his life suspends itself; here, he might
be anyone, anywhere. He can stay as late as he likes. No one is waiting for
him, no one will  be disappointed if he doesn’t call, no one will  be angry if
he doesn’t go home.
   The Friday before the trial, he is working late when one of his secretaries
looks in to tell him he has a visitor in the lobby, a Dr. Contractor, and would
he like  him  sent up?  He pauses, unsure of  what to  do;  Andy  has been
calling him,  but he hasn’t been returning his calls, and he knows he won’t
simply leave.
   “Yes,”  he tells her. “Bring him to the southeastern conference room.”

669
   He waits in  this conference room, which has no windows and is the most
private, and when Andy comes in, he sees his mouth tighten, but they shake
hands like strangers, and it’s not until his secretary leaves that Andy gets up
and walks over to him.
   “Stand up,” he commands.
   “I  can’t,”  he says.
   “Why  not?”
   “My   legs hurt,” he says, but this isn’t  true. He cannot stand because his
prostheses no longer fit.  “The  good  thing  about these prostheses is that
they’re very sensitive and lightweight,”   the prosthetist had told him  when
he was fitted for  them. “The bad thing  is that the sockets don’t allow  you
very much  give.  You lose  or  gain more  than ten  percent of  your  body
weight—so for   you, that’s  plus  or minus  fourteen,  fifteen  pounds—and
you’re either going to  need to adMust your weight or have a new set made.
So it’s important you stay at weight.” For the past three weeks, he has been
in his wheelchair, and although he continues to wear his legs, they are only
for show, something to fill  his pants with; they are too ill-fitting   for him to
actually use, and he is too weary to  see the prosthetist, too weary to have
the conversation he  knows  he’ll   need to  have with   him,  too  weary to
conMure explanations.
   “I   think you’re  lying,”  Andy  says. “I  think you’ve  lost so much weight
that your  prostheses are sliding off  of  you,  am I  right?”  But  he doesn’t
answer. “How much weight have you lost, Jude?” Andy asks. “When I last
saw you, you  were already  twelve pounds down.  How  much  is it  now?
Twenty? More?” There’s another silence. “What  the hell  are you doing?”
Andy  asks, lowering  his  voice further.  “What’re  you  doing  to  yourself,
Jude?
   “You  look like  hell,” Andy  continues. “You look terrible. You look sick.”
He stops. “Say something,” he says. “Say something, goddammit, Jude.”
   He  knows how  this interaction  is meant to  go: Andy  yells  at him.  He
yells back at Andy. A détente, one that ultimately changes nothing, one that
is a piece of pantomime, is reached: he will submit to something that isn’t a
solution but that  makes Andy feel  better. And then something worse will
happen, and the pantomime will be revealed to be Must that, and he will be
coerced into a treatment he doesn’t want. Harold will be called. He will  be
lectured and lectured and lectured and he will lie and lie and lie. The same
cycle, the same circle, again and again and again, a churn as predictable as

670
the men in  the motel  rooms coming in,  fitting   their sheets over the bed,
having sex with him, leaving. And then the next one, and the next one. And
the next day: the same. His life  is a series of dreary patterns: sex, cutting,
this, that. Visits to Andy, visits to the hospital. Not this time, he thinks. This
is when he does something different; this is when he escapes.
   “You’re  right,  Andy,”  he says, in as calm  and unemotive a voice as he
can summon, the voice he uses in the courtroom. “I’ve lost weight. And I’m
sorry I haven’t come in earlier. I didn’t because I knew you’d get upset. But
I’ve had a really bad intestinal flu, one I Must can’t shake, but it’s ended. I’m
eating, I promise. I know I  look terrible. But  I promise I’m  working on it.”
Ironically, he has been eating more in the past two weeks; he needs to get
through the trial. He doesn’t want to faint while he’s in court.
   And  after that, what  can Andy say? He is  suspicious, still. But  there is
nothing for him  to do. “If   you don’t  come see me next week, I’m coming
back,” Andy tells him before his secretary sees him out.
   “Fine,”   he says, still pleasantly. “The Tuesday after next. The trial’ll   be
over by then.”
   After  Andy  leaves, he feels momentarily triumphant, as if he is a hero in
a fairy tale and has Must vanquished a dangerous enemy. But of course Andy
isn’t  his enemy, and  he is  being  ridiculous,  and his  sense of victory   is
followed  by  despair. He  feels,  as he  increasingly does,  that his  life   is
something that has happened to him, rather than something he has had any
role in creating. He has never been able to imagine what his life might be;
even as a child, even as he dreamed of other places, of other lives, he wasn’t
able to  visuali]e   what  those other  places  and lives  would   be; he  had
believed everything he  had been taught about  who he  was and what  he
would become. But his  friends, Ana,  Lucien, Harold  and Julia: They  had
imagined his life for him. They had seen him as something different than he
had ever seen himself as; they had allowed him  to believe in  possibilities
that he  would  never have  conceived. He  saw  his life   as the  axiom  of
equality, but they saw it as another riddle, one with  no name—Jude = x—
and they had filled  in  the  x in  ways Brother  Luke, the  counselors at the
home, Dr. Traylor had never written for him or encouraged him to write for
himself. He wishes he could believe their proofs the way they do; he wishes
they had shown him how they had arrived at their solutions. If he knew how
they had solved the proof, he thinks, he would know why to keep living. All

671
he needs is one answer. All he needs is to  be convinced once. The proof
needn’t be elegant; it need only be explicable.
   The trial  arrives. He does well.  At  home that Friday, he wheels himself
into the bedroom, into bed. He spends the entire weekend in a sleep that is
unfamiliar and eerie, less a sleep than a glide, weightlessly moving between
the realms  of   memory  and  fantasy, unconsciousness and wakefulness,
anxiety and hopefulness. This is  not the  world  of  dreams, he thinks, but
someplace else, and although he is aware at moments of waking—he sees
the chandelier above him, the sheets around him, the sofa with  its  wood-
fern print  across from him—he is  unable to distinguish when  things have
happened in his visions from  when they have actually  happened. He sees
himself lifting  a blade to his arm and slicing it  down through his flesh, but
what springs from the slit are coils of metal and stuffing and horsehair, and
he reali]es  that he  has undergone a mutation, that  he is  no longer  even
human, and he feels relief: he won’t  have to  break his promise to Harold
after all;   he has  been enchanted; his  culpability  has  vanished with  his
humanity.
   Is this real? the voice asks him, tiny and hopeful. Are we inanimate now?
   But he can’t answer himself.
   Again  and again  he sees Brother Luke,  Dr.  Traylor. As  he has gotten
weaker, as he  has drifted   from  himself,  he  sees them more  and  more
frequently, and  although  Willem   and  Malcolm  have  dimmed  for  him,
Brother Luke and Dr. Traylor have not. He feels his past is a cancer, one he
should have treated long ago but instead ignored. And  now Brother Luke
and Dr.   Traylor   have  metastasi]ed, now   they  are  too  large  and  too
overwhelming  for  him   to  eliminate.  Now  when  they  appear, they  are
wordless: they stand before him, they  sit, side by  side, on the sofa in  his
bedroom, staring at him, and this  is worse than if  they spoke, because he
knows they are trying  to  decide what to do  with  him, and he knows  that
whatever they decide will  be worse than he can imagine, worse than what
had happened before. At one point he sees them whispering to each other,
and he knows they are talking about him.  “Stop,”  he yells  at them, “stop,
stop,” but they ignore him, and when he tries to get up to make them leave,
he is unable to do so. “Willem,” he hears himself call, “protect me, help me;
make them leave, make them go away.” But Willem  doesn’t come, and he
reali]es  he is  alone  and  becomes afraid,  concealing himself  under  the
blanket and remaining as still as he can, certain that time has doubled back

672
upon itself and he will be made to relive his life in sequence. It’ll get better
eventually, he promises himself. Remember, good years followed the bad.
But he can’t do it again; he can’t live once more through those fifteen years,
those fifteen years whose half-life have been so long and so resonant, that
have determined everything he has become and done.
   By  the time he finally, fully  wakes on Monday morning, he knows he has
crossed some sort of threshold. He  knows he is  close, that he is  moving
from one world  to another. He blacks out twice while  simply trying  to get
into  his  wheelchair.  He  faints  on  his  way   to  the  bathroom.  And  yet
somehow he remains uninMured; somehow he is still alive. He gets dressed,
the suit and shirts he’d  had recut for him  a month ago already loose, and
slides his  stumps into  the  prostheses, and goes downstairs to  meet Mr.
Ahmed.
   At  work, everything  is the same. It is the new year; people are returning
from their  vacations. During the management committee meeting, he Mabs
his fingers  into  his thigh  to  keep himself  alert. He  feels his  grip loosen
around the branch.
   SanMay leaves early that evening; he leaves early, too. Today is Harold
and Julia’s move-in day, and he has promised to go uptown to  visit  them.
He hasn’t seen them in more than a month, and although he feels himself no
longer able to gauge what he looks like, he has dressed in extra layers today
—an undershirt, his shirt, a sweater, a cardigan, his suit Macket, his coat—so
that he’ll appear a little bulkier. At Harold’s, he is waved in by the doorman,
and up he goes, trying  not to blink  because blinking  makes the di]]iness
worse. Outside their door, he stops and puts his head in his hands until he
feels strong enough, and then he turns the knob and rolls inside and stares.
   They  are all  there: Harold  and Julia, of  course, but  Andy  and JB and
Richard and India and the Henry Youngs and Rhodes and EliMah and SanMay
and the  Irvines  as  well,  all   posed and  perched on  different  pieces of
furniture as if  they’re  at a photo shoot, and for  a second he fears he will
start laughing. And then he wonders: Am I dreaming this? Am I awake? He
remembers the vision of himself as a sagging mattress and thinks: Am I still
real? Am I still conscious?
   “Christ,”  he says, when he is able to speak at last. “What the hell is this?”
   “Exactly  what you think it is,”  he hears Andy say.
   “I’m   not staying for  this,”  he tries to say, but can’t.  He can’t move. He
can’t look  at any of  them: he looks  instead at his hands—his scarred left

673
hand, his  normal  right—as   above him   Andy  speaks. They  have  been
watching him for  weeks—SanMay has been keeping track of the days he’s
seen him eat at the office, Richard has been entering his apartment to check
his refrigerator  for  food.  “We  measure weight loss  in  grades,” he hears
Andy saying. “A   loss of one to ten percent of  your body  weight is Grade
One. A loss of eleven to twenty percent is Grade Two. Grade Two is when
we consider putting you  on a feeding tube. You know  this, Jude, because
it’s happened to you before. And I can tell by looking  at you that you’re at
Grade Two—at least.” Andy talks and talks, and he thinks he begins to cry,
but he is unable to produce tears. Everything has gone so wrong, he thinks;
how did everything go so wrong? How has he forgotten so completely who
he was when he was with Willem? It is as if that person has died along with
Willem, and what he is left with is his elemental self, someone he has never
liked, someone so incapable of occupying  the life  he has, the life  he has
somehow made for himself, in spite of himself.
   Finally  he lifts  his head and sees Harold staring at him, sees that Harold
is actually crying,  silently, looking  and looking  at him. “Harold,”   he says,
although Andy is still talking,  “release me. Release me from my promise to
you. Don’t make me do this anymore. Don’t make me go on.”
   But  no one releases him: not Harold, not anyone. He is instead captured
and taken to the hospital, and there, at the hospital, he begins to fight. My
last fight, he thinks, and he fights harder than he ever has, as hard as he had
as a child in the monastery, becoming the monster they always told him he
was, yowling and spitting in Harold’s and Andy’s faces, ripping the IV from
his hand, thrashing his body on the bed, trying to scratch at Richard’s arms,
until finally  a nurse, cursing, sticks him with a needle and he is sedated.
   He  wakes with his wrists  strapped to the bed, with his prostheses gone,
with his clothes gone as well, with  a press of cotton against his collarbone
under which he knows a catheter has been inserted. The same thing all over
again, he thinks, the same, the same, the same.
   But  this  time it  isn’t  the same. This time  he is  given no  choices. This
time, he is put on a feeding tube, which punctures through his abdomen and
into his stomach. This time, he is made to go back and see Dr. Loehmann.
This time, he is  going to be watched, every mealtime: Richard will   watch
him eat breakfast. SanMay will watch him eat lunch and, if he’s at the office
late, dinner. Harold will watch him on the weekends. He isn’t allowed to go
to the bathroom until  an hour  after he’s finished  each meal. He must see

674
Andy every Friday.  He must see JB every Saturday. He must see Richard
every Sunday. He must see Harold whenever Harold says he must. If he is
caught skipping a meal, or a session, or disposing of  food in  any way, he
will  be hospitali]ed, and this hospitali]ation  won’t  be a matter of weeks; it
will  be a matter of months. He will  gain a minimum  of  thirty pounds, and
he will be allowed to  stop only when he has maintained that weight for six
months.
   And   so  begins  his  new   life,   a  life   in  which   he  has  moved  past
humiliation,  past sorrow,  past hope.  This  is  a  life  in  which   his weary
friends’ weary faces watch him as he eats omelets, sandwiches, salads. Who
sit across from  him  and watch as he  twirls  pasta around his fork,  as  he
plows his spoon through polenta, as he slides flesh off bones. Who look at
his plate, at his bowl, and either nod at him—yes, he can go—or shake their
heads: No, Jude,  you  have to  eat  more  than  that.  At  work   he makes
decisions and people follow them, but then at one p.m., lunch is delivered to
his office,  and for  the  next half  hour—although no  one else in  the firm
knows  this—his  decisions mean  nothing,  because SanMay has absolute
power, and he must obey whatever he says. SanMay, with one text to Andy,
can send him to the hospital, where they will tie him down again and force
food into  him. They  all can. No  one seems to care that this isn’t what  he
wants.
   Have you all  forgotten? he yearns to ask. Have you forgotten him? Have
you forgotten how much I need him? Have you forgotten I don’t know how
to be alive without him? Who can teach me? Who can tell me what I should
do now?
   It  was an ultimatum that sent him to Dr. Loehmann the first time; it is an
ultimatum  that brings  him  back.  He  had  always been cordial   with  Dr.
Loehmann, cordial and remote, but now he is hostile and churlish. “I don’t
want to be here,” he says, when the doctor says he’s happy to see him again
and asks him what he would like  to discuss. “And  don’t lie  to me:  you’re
not happy to see me, and I’m not happy to be here. This is a waste of time
—yours and mine. I’m here under duress.”
   “We  don’t have to discuss why you’re  here, Jude, not if you don’t  want
to,” Dr. Loehmann says. “What would you like to talk about?”
   “Nothing,”   he snaps, and there is a silence.
   “Tell    me   about  Harold,”   Dr.   Loehmann   suggests, and   he  sighs,
impatiently.

675
   “There’s nothing to say,” he says.
   He sees Dr. Loehmann every Monday and Thursday. On Monday nights,
he returns to work after  his appointment. But on Thursdays he is made to
see Harold and Julia, and with them he is horrifically rude as well: and not
Must rude but nasty, spiteful. He behaves in ways that astonish him, in ways
he has never dared before in his life, not even when he was a child, in ways
that he would have been beaten for by anyone else. But not by Harold and
Julia. They never rebuke him, they never discipline him.
   “This  is  disgusting,” he says that night, pushing away the chicken  stew
Harold has made. “I won’t eat this.”
   “I’ll    get you something else,”  Julia says quickly,  getting up. “What  do
you want, Jude? Do you want a sandwich? Some eggs?”
   “Anything   else,” he says. “This tastes like dog food.” But he is speaking
to Harold, staring at him, daring him  to flinch,  to break. His pulse leaps in
his throat with anticipation: He can see Harold springing from his chair and
hitting him in  the face. He can see Harold crumpling with tears. He can see
Harold ordering  him  out of  his house. “Get  the fuck  out  of  here, Jude,”
Harold will  say. “Get out of our lives and never come back.”
   “Fine,”   he’ll  say. “Fine, fine.  I don’t  need you anyway, Harold.  I don’t
need any of you.”  What a  relief it  will   be to learn that  Harold had never
really wanted him  after all,  that his  adoption was a whim,  a  folly  whose
novelty tarnished long ago.
   But  Harold does none of those things, Must looks at him. “Jude,” he says
at last, very quietly.
   “Jude,  Jude,” he mocks him,  squawking his own  name back to Harold
like a May. “Jude, Jude.” He is so angry, so furious: there is no word for what
he is. Hatred si]]les  through his veins. Harold wants him  to live,  and now
Harold is getting his wish. Now Harold is seeing him as he is.
   Do  you know how badly  I could  hurt you? he wants to  ask Harold. Do
you know I  could say things that  you would never forget,  that you would
never forgive me for? Do you  know I have that power? Do  you know that
every day I have known you I have been lying to you? Do you know what I
really am? Do you know how many men I  have been with, what I have let
them do to me, the things that have been inside me, the noises I have made?
His life, the only thing that is his, is being possessed: By Harold, who wants
to keep him alive, by the demons who scrabble through his body, dangling

676
off his ribs, puncturing his lungs with  their talons. By Brother Luke, by Dr.
Traylor. What is life for? he asks himself. What is my life for?
   Oh, he thinks, will  I never forget? Is this who I am after all, after all these
years?
   He  can feel his nose start to  bleed, and he pushes back from the table.
“I’m  leaving,”  he tells them, as Julia enters the room with a sandwich. He
sees that she has cut off its crusts and sliced it into triangles, the way you
would for  a child, and for  a second he wavers and almost begins to bawl,
but then he recalls himself and glares again at Harold.
   “No,  you’re  not,”  Harold says, not angrily, but decisively.  He stands up
from  his  chair,  points  his   finger  at  him.   “You’re   staying  and you’re
finishing.”
   “No,  I’m  not,”  he announces. “Call Andy, I don’t  care. I’m going to kill
myself, Harold, I’m  going to kill  myself no matter what you do, and you’re
not going to be able to stop me.”
   “Jude,”  he hears Julia whisper. “Jude, please.”
   Harold  walks over to him, taking  the plate from Julia as he does, and he
thinks: This is  it. He  raises his chin, he waits for Harold  to hit  him in  the
face with  it, but  he doesn’t, Must puts the plate before him. “Eat,”  Harold
says, his voice tight. “You’re going to eat this now.”
   He thinks, unexpectedly, of the day he had his first episode at Harold and
Julia’s. Julia was at the grocery store, and Harold was upstairs printing out a
worrisomely complicated recipe for  a soufflé  he claimed he was going  to
make. There he had lain in the pantry, trying to keep himself from  kicking
his legs out in agony, listening to Harold clatter down the stairs and into the
kitchen. “Jude?” he’d called, not seeing him, and as quiet as he had tried to
be, he had made a noise anyway, and Harold had opened the door and found
him. He had known  Harold for  six years by that point,  but he was always
careful around  him,  dreading but  expecting the  day when  he would  be
revealed to him as he really was. “I’m  sorry,” he’d tried  to tell Harold,  but
he was only able to croak.
   “Jude,”   Harold  had  said, frightened,  “can  you  hear  me?,”  and  he’d
nodded, and Harold had entered the pantry himself, picking his way around
the stacks of   paper towels  and  Mugs of dishwasher detergent, lowering
himself to  the  floor  and gently  pulling   his head into  his  lap,  and for  a
second he had  thought  that  this  was  the moment  he  had  always half
anticipated, the one in which  Harold would  un]ip  his pants and he would

677
have to do what  he had always done. But  he hadn’t, had Must stroked his
head, and after a while, as he twitched and grunted, his body tensing itself
with pain, its  heat filling  his Moints, he reali]ed that Harold was singing to
him.  It  was  a song  he had  never heard  before but  that  he  recogni]ed
instinctually was  a child’s  song, a lullaby,  and he Muddered and chattered
and hissed through his teeth, opening and closing his left hand, gripping the
throat of  a nearby bottle of  olive  oil  with  his right,  as on and on  Harold
sang. As he lay  there, so desperately humiliated,  he knew that  after this
incident Harold would either become distant from him or would draw closer
still. And  because he didn’t know  which would  happen, he found himself
hoping—as he never had before and never would again—that this episode
would  never end, that  Harold’s  song would  never finish,  that  he would
never have to learn what followed it.
   And  now he is so much older, Harold is so much older, Julia is so much
older, they are three old people and he is being given a sandwich meant for
a child, and a directive—Eat—meant for a child as well. We are so old, we
have become young again, he thinks, and he picks up the plate and throws it
against the far wall, where it  shatters, spectacularly. He sees the sandwich
had been grilled cheese, sees one of the triangular slabs slap itself against
the wall  and then  oo]e  down it,   the white  cheese dripping off  in  gluey
clumps.
   Now, he thinks, almost giddily, as Harold comes close to him once more,
now, now, now. And Harold raises his hand and he waits to be hit  so hard
that this night will  end and he will wake in  his own bed and for a while be
able to forget this moment, will be able to forget what he has done.
   But  instead he finds  Harold wrapping  him  in his  arms, and he tries to
push him away, but Julia is  holding him  too, leaning over the carapace of
his wheelchair, and he is trapped between them. “Leave me alone,” he roars
at them, but his energy is dissipating and he is weak and hungry. “Leave me
alone,” he tries again, but his words are shapeless and useless, as useless as
his arms, as his legs, and he soon stops trying.
   “Jude,”    Harold   says  to   him,   quietly.  “My    poor   Jude.  My    poor
sweetheart.” And with that, he starts to cry, for no one has ever called him
sweetheart, not  since  Brother   Luke.   Sometimes Willem   would   try—
sweetheart, Willem would try to call  him, honey—and he would make him
stop;  the  endearment was  filthy   to   him,  a  word   of   debasement and
depravity. “My  sweetheart,” Harold says again, and he wants him to stop;

678
he wants him to  never stop. “My  baby.” And  he cries and cries, cries for
everything he has been, for everything he might  have been, for every old
hurt, for every old happiness, cries for the shame and Moy of finally getting
to be a child, with all of  a child’s whims and wants and insecurities, for the
privilege   of  behaving   badly  and   being  forgiven,   for   the   luxury   of
tendernesses, of fondnesses, of being served a meal and being made to eat
it, for  the  ability,  at last,  at last, of  believing  a parent’s reassurances, of
believing  that  to  someone  he  is  special  despite all   his  mistakes  and
hatefulness, because of all his mistakes and hatefulness.
   It   ends with   Julia  finally   going  to  the  kitchen  and  making  another
sandwich; it  ends with   him  eating it,  truly   hungry for  the  first  time  in
months; it  ends with  him  spending the night  in the  extra bedroom, with
Harold and Julia  kissing him  good  night; it  ends with  him  wondering  if
maybe time really is going to  loop back upon itself after all,  except in this
rendering, he will have Julia and Harold as parents from the beginning, and
who knows  what he  will  be, only  that  he will   be better, that he  will  be
healthier, that he will  be kinder, that he won’t  feel the need to struggle so
hard against his own life.  He has a vision of himself  as a fifteen-year-old,
running into the house in Cambridge, shouting words—“Mom!  Dad!”—he
has never said before,  and although  he can’t  imagine what  would  have
made this dream self so excited (for all his  study of normal children,  their
interests and behaviors, he knows few specifics), he understands that he is
happy. Maybe he  is  wearing a  soccer uniform,  his  arms and legs  bare;
maybe he is  accompanied by a  friend, by  a  girlfriend.  He  has probably
never had sex before; he is probably trying  at every opportunity  to do so.
He would think  sometimes of who  he would  be as an adult, but it  would
never occur to him  that he might not  have someone to love, sex, his own
feet running across a field  of  grass as soft as carpet. All  those hours, all
those hours he has spent cutting, and hiding the cutting, and beating back
his memories, what would he do instead with all those hours? He would be
a better person, he knows. He would be a more loving one.
   But  maybe, he thinks, maybe it isn’t too late. Maybe he can pretend one
more time, and this last bout of pretending will change things for him,  will
make him into the person he might have been. He is fifty-one; he is old. But
maybe he still has time. Maybe he can still be repaired.
   He is still  thinking this on Monday when he goes to see Dr. Loehmann, to
whom  he apologi]es  for  his  awful   behavior the  week  before—and the

679
weeks before that, as well.
   And  this time, for  the first time,  he really tries to talk  to Dr. Loehmann.
He tries to answer his questions, and to do so honestly. He tries to begin to
tell a story  he has only ever told  once before. But  it is  very difficult,   not
only because the story is barely possible for him  to speak, but because he
cannot do so without  thinking of  Willem,  and how  when he had last told
this story, he was  with  someone who had seen him the  way no  one had
since Ana, with someone who had managed to see past who he was, and yet
see him completely as well. And  then he is upset, breathless, and he turns
his wheelchair sharply—he is still six or seven pounds away from using his
prostheses for   walking   again—and   excuses himself   and   leaves  Dr.
Loehmann’s office, spinning down the hall to the bathroom, where he locks
himself in, breathing slowly  and rubbing his palm against his chest as if to
soothe his heart. And  here in the  bathroom, which  is cold  and silent, he
plays his old game of “If”  with  himself: If  I  hadn’t followed Brother Luke.
If I hadn’t let myself be taken by Dr. Traylor. If I hadn’t let Caleb inside. If I
had listened more to Ana.
   On he plays, his recriminations beating a rhythm in his head. But then he
also thinks: If I  had never met Willem. If  I  had never met Harold. If  I had
never met Julia, or Andy, or  Malcolm, or  JB, or Richard, or  Lucien, or so
many other people: Rhodes and Citi]en and Phaedra and EliMah. The Henry
Youngs. SanMay. All the most terrifying  Ifs  involve  people. All  the  good
ones do as well.
   Finally   he is  able to  calm  himself, and  he wheels himself  out  of  the
bathroom. He could leave, he knows. The elevator is there; he could send
Mr. Ahmed back for his coat.
   But  he doesn’t.  Instead he goes the other direction,  and returns to  the
office, where Dr. Loehmann is still sitting in his chair, waiting for him.
   “Jude,”  says Dr. Loehmann. “You’ve come back.”
   He takes a breath. “Yes,” he says. “I’ve decided to stay.”

680
      [ VII ]

Lispenard Street

681
                                                               

ON THE SECOND anniversary of your death,  we  went   to  Rome.   This   was
something of  a coincidence,  and  also not:  he knew  and we knew  he’d  have
to be out of  the city,  far  away from  New  York  State. And  maybe the Irvines
felt the  same way, because that was when  they had scheduled  the ceremony
—at  the very  end  of  August,  when  all  of  Europe had  migrated  elsewhere,
and yet  we were  flying   toward  it,  that  continent  bereft  of  all  its chattering
flocks,  all its native  fauna.
    It  was at  the American   Academy,  where  Sophie  and Malcolm   had  both
once had residencies,  and where  the Irvines  had endowed  a scholarship  for
a young architect.  They  had helped  select the  first  recipient,  a very  tall  and
sweetly  nervous  young  woman  from  London   who  built   mostly  temporary
structures, complex-looking    buildings  of  earth and  sod and paper that  were
meant to disintegrate  slowly   over time,  and there  was the announcement  of
the fellowship,   which  came with  additional  pri]e   money, and a reception,  at
which  Flora   spoke.  Along   with   us,  and  Sophie  and  Malcolm’s    Bellcast
partners, there were Richard  and JB,  both of  whom had  also had residencies
in Rome,  and after  the ceremony  we  went  to a little   restaurant nearby  they
had both  liked   when  they  had lived   there,  and where  Richard   showed us
which  part  of  the building’s   walls   were Etruscan  and  which  were  Roman.
But  although  it  was a  nice  meal, comfortable   and  convivial,   it  was  also a
quiet one, and at one point  I remember  looking  up and reali]ing   that  none of
us were  eating  and all  of  us  were staring—at   the  ceiling,  at  our  plates, at
one another—and  thinking   something  separate and  yet, I  knew,  something
the same as well.
    The next  afternoon   Julia  napped and  we took   a walk.  We  were  staying
across the  river,  near the  Spanish  Steps, but  we  had  the car  take  us back
over the bridge  to  Trastevere and walked  through  streets that  were so  close
and dark  that  they  might   have been  hallways,  until   finally   we  came  to  a
square, tiny  and  precise and  adorned with   nothing  but  sunlight,   where we
sat on  a stone  bench. An   elderly  man,  with   a white   beard and  wearing  a
linen suit,  sat down  on the other end,  and he nodded at us and we  nodded at
him.

682
   For  a long time we  were silent together, sitting in  the heat, and then he
suddenly said that he remembered this square, that he had been here with
you once, and that there was a famous gelato place Must two streets away.
   “Should  I go?” he asked me, and smiled.
   “I  think  you know  the answer,” I said, and he got up. “I’ll   be back,”  he
said. “Stracciatella,” I told him, and he nodded. “I know,” he said.
   We watched him leave, the man and I, and then the man smiled at me and
I smiled  back. He wasn’t  so elderly  after all,  I  saw: probably  Must a few
years older than I. And  yet I was never able (and am still  not)  to think  of
myself as old. I  talked as if I  knew I  was; I bemoaned my age. But it was
only for comedy, or to make other people feel young.
   “Lui   è tuo figlio?”   the man asked, and I nodded. I was always surprised
and pleased when we were recogni]ed for who we were to  each other, for
we looked nothing alike, he and I: and yet I thought—I  hoped—there must
have been something  about  the way   we were  together  that  was more
compelling evidence of our relation than mere physical resemblance.
   “Ah,”   the man said, looking at him again before he turned the corner and
disappeared from sight. “Molto bello.”
   “Sì,”  I said, and was suddenly sad.
   He looked sly, then, and asked, or rather stated, “Tua moglie deve essere
molto bella, no?”  and then grinned to  show me he meant it in  fun, that it
was a compliment, that if I was a plain man, I was also a lucky one, to have
such a beautiful wife  who  had given  me such a handsome son, and so I
couldn’t be offended. I grinned back at him. “She is,” I said, and he smiled,
unsurprised.
   The man had already left  by the time he returned—nodding at me as he
went, leaning on his  cane—with a cone for  me and a container of  lemon
granita for Julia. I wished he had bought something for himself, too, but he
hadn’t. “We should go,” he said, and we did, and that night he went to bed
early, and the following  day—the day you died—we didn’t  see him at all:
he left us a message with the front desk saying he had gone for a walk, and
that he would see us tomorrow, and that he was sorry, and all day long we
walked too, and although I thought there was a chance we might see him—
Rome is not  such a large city,  after all—we  didn’t,  and that  night as we
undressed for bed, I was aware that I  had been looking for  him  on every
street, in every crowd.

683
   The next  morning there he was at breakfast, reading the paper, pale but
smiling at us, and we didn’t ask him what he’d done the day before and he
didn’t volunteer it.  That day we Must walked around the city, the three of us
an unwieldy little  pack—too  wide for  the sidewalks, we strolled  in single
file, each of us taking the position of the leader in turn—but Must to familiar
places, well-trafficked places, places that would have no secret memories,
that held  no  intimacies.  Near  Via   Condotti  Julia  looked  into  the  tiny
window of  a tiny Mewelry store, and we went inside, the three of us filling
the space, and each held the earrings she had admired in the window. They
were exquisite: solid  gold,  dense and heavy and shaped like  birds,  with
small round rubies for  eyes and little gold branches in their  beaks, and he
bought them for  her, and she was  embarrassed and delighted—Julia had
never worn much Mewelry—but he looked happy to be able to,  and I was
happy that he was happy, and that she was happy, too. That night we met JB
and Richard for a final dinner, and the next morning we left to go north,  to
Florence, and he to go home.
   “I’ll   see you in five days,” I told him, and he nodded.
   “Have  a good time,” he said. “Have a wonderful time. I’ll see you soon.”
   He  waved as we were driven away in the car; we  turned in our seats to
wave back at him. I remember hoping my wave was somehow telegraphing
what I couldn’t say: Don’t you dare. The night before, as he and Julia were
talking to  JB,  I  asked Richard if  he would  feel  comfortable sending me
updates while we were away, and Richard  said he would.  He had gained
almost all  the weight  Andy  wanted,  but he’d  had two  setbacks—one in
May, one in July—and so we were all still watching him.
   It  sometimes felt  as if  we  were living  our  relationship in  reverse, and
instead of worrying for  him less, I worried  for him  more; with  each year I
became more aware of  his  fragility,   less convinced of   my  competence.
When Jacob was a baby, I  would  find  myself  feeling more  assured with
each month he lived,  as if   the longer  he stayed in  this world,  the  more
deeply he would become anchored to it, as if by being alive, he was staking
claim to  life   itself.  It  was a  preposterous notion, of  course, and  it  was
proven wrong in  the most horrible  way. But I  couldn’t  stop thinking  this:
that life tethered life. And yet at some point in his life—after Caleb, if I had
to date it—I  had the sense that he was in  a hot-air balloon,  one that was
staked to the  earth with  a  long  twisted rope,  but each year  the balloon
strained and strained against its cords, tugging itself  away, trying  to drift

684
into the skies. And  down below, there was a knot  of us trying  to  pull the
balloon back to the ground, back to safety. And so I was always frightened
for him, and I was always frightened of him, as well.
   Can you have a real relationship with someone you are frightened of? Of
course you can. But he still  scared me, because he was the powerful one
and I was not: if he killed himself, if  he took himself away from me, I knew
I would survive, but  I knew as well that survival  would be a chore; I knew
that forever after I  would  be hunting for  explanations, sifting  through the
past to examine my  mistakes. And of  course I  knew how  badly I  would
miss him,  because although  there had  been trial   runs for   his  eventual
departure, I had never been able to get any better at dealing with them, and I
was never able to get used to them.
   But  then we came home, and everything was the same: Mr. Ahmed met
us at the airport and drove us back to the apartment, and waiting for us with
the doorman were bags of food so we wouldn’t  have to  go to the grocery
store. The next day was a Thursday and he came over and we had dinner,
and he asked what we had seen and done and we told him. That night we
were washing the dishes, and as he was handing me a bowl to  put in  the
dishwasher, it  slipped  through  his  fingers  and broke  against  the floor.
“Goddammit,”   he shouted. “I’m   so sorry, Harold.  I’m  so  stupid, I’m  so
clumsy,” and although we told him it  wasn’t a problem, that it was fine, he
only grew  more and more upset, so upset that his hands started to shake,
that his nose started to bleed. “Jude,” I told him, “it’s okay. It happens,” but
he shook his head. “No,” he said, “it’s me. I mess up everything. Everything
I touch I ruin.”  Julia and I had looked at each other over his head as he was
picking up the pieces, unsure what to say or do: the reaction was so out of
proportion to what had happened. But there had been a few incidents in the
preceding months, ever since he had thrown that plate across the room, that
made me reali]e, for the first  time in my  life with  him, how  truly angry he
was, how hard he must work every day at controlling it.
   After   that first   incident with   the plate  there had been another, a  few
weeks later. This was up at Lantern House, where he hadn’t been in months.
It was morning, Must after breakfast, and Julia and I were leaving to go to the
store, and I went to find him to ask what he wanted. He was in his bedroom,
and the door was slightly  aMar, and when I saw what he was doing, I  for
some reason didn’t call his name, didn’t walk  away, but stood Must outside
the frame, silent and watching. He had one prosthesis on and was putting on

685
the other—I had never seen him without  them—and I watched as he sank
his left  leg into  the socket, drawing the elastic sleeve up around his knee
and thigh, and then pushed his pants leg down over it. As you know, these
prostheses had feet with paneling that resembled the shape of a toe box and
a heel, and I watched as he pulled  on his socks, and then his shoes. And
then he took a breath and stood, and I watched as he took a step, and then
another. But even I  could tell  something was wrong—they  were still  too
big;  he was still   too  thin—and before  I  could  call  out, he  had lost  his
balance and pitched forward onto the bed, where he lay still for a moment.
   And  then he reached down and tore off both legs, one and then the other,
and for   a  second—they  were  still  wearing   their  socks  and shoes—it
appeared as if they were his real legs, and he had Must yanked away a piece
of himself, and I half expected to see an arcing splash of blood. But instead
he picked  one up and  slammed it  against the bed,  again and again  and
again, grunting with the effort, and then he threw it to the ground and sat on
the edge of the  mattress, his face in his  hands, his elbows on  his thighs,
rocking  himself  and  not  making  a  sound.  “Please,”  I   heard him   say,
“please.” But he didn’t  say anything else, and I, to  my shame, crept away
and went to our bedroom, where I sat in a posture that mimicked his own,
and waited as well for something I didn’t know.
   In  those months I thought often of what I was trying to do, of how hard it
is to keep alive someone who doesn’t want to stay alive. First you try logic
(You have so much to live for),  and then you try  guilt  (You owe me), and
then you try anger, and threats, and pleading (I’m old;  don’t  do this to an
old man). But  then, once they agree, it  is necessary that you, the caMoler,
move into the realm of self-deception, because you can see that it is costing
them, you can see how much they don’t want to  be here, you can see that
the mere act of  existing is  depleting for  them, and  then you have to  tell
yourself every day: I am doing the right thing. To let him do what he wants
to do is  abhorrent to the laws of  nature, to the  laws of  love. You pounce
upon the happy moments, you hold them up as proof—See? This is why it’s
worth living.  This is why I’ve  been making him try—even though that one
moment cannot  compensate for all  the  other  moments, the  maMority of
moments. You think, as I had thought with Jacob, what is a child for? Is he
to give me comfort? Is he for me to give comfort  to? And if  a child can no
longer be comforted, is it my Mob to give him permission to leave? And then
you think again: But that is abominable. I can’t.

686
   So I  tried, of course. I tried  and tried. But every month I  could feel him
receding. It wasn’t so much a physical disappearance: by November, he was
back at his weight, the low side of it anyway, and looked better than he had
perhaps ever. But he was quieter, much quieter,  and he had always been
quiet anyway. But now he spoke very little,  and when we were together, I
would sometimes see him looking at something I couldn’t see, and then he
would twitch  his head, very  slightly, like  a horse does its ears, and come
back to himself.
   Once I  saw him for  our Thursday dinner and he had bruises on his face
and neck, Must on one side, as if he was standing near a building in the late
afternoon and the sun had cast a shadow against him. The bruises were a
dark rusty brown, like  dried blood, and I  had gasped. “What happened?” I
asked. “I fell,”  he said, shortly. “Don’t worry,”  he said, although of course I
did. And when I saw him with  bruises again, I tried to hold him. “Tell me,”
I said, and he worked himself free. “There’s nothing to tell,”  he said. I still
don’t know what had happened: Had he done something to himself? Had he
let someone do something to him? I didn’t know which was worse. I didn’t
know what to do.
   He  missed you. I missed you, too. We all  did. I  think you  should know
that, that I didn’t  Must miss you because you made him better: I missed you
for you.  I missed watching the pleasure you took  in doing  the things you
enMoyed, whether it was eating or running  after a  tennis ball  or flinging
yourself into  the  pool.  I  missed talking  with  you,  missed watching you
move through a room, missed watching you fall to the lawn under a passel
of  Laurence’s grandchildren,  pretending that  you  couldn’t  get  up  from
under their weight.  (That  same day, Laurence’s youngest grandchild, the
one who had a crush on you, had made you a bracelet of knotted-together
dandelion flowers, and you had thanked her and worn it all day, and every
time she had spotted it on your wrist, she had run over and buried her face
in her father’s back: I missed that, too.) But mostly, I missed watching you
two together;  I  missed watching  you watch  him,  and him  watch  you; I
missed how thoughtful you were with each other, missed how thoughtlessly,
sincerely affectionate you  were with  him;  missed watching you  listen  to
each other, the way you both did so intently. That painting JB did—Willem
Listening to Jude Tell a Story—was so true, the expression so right: I knew
what was happening in the painting even before I read its title.

687
   And  I don’t want you to  think that there weren’t happy moments as well,
happy days, after you left. They were fewer, of course. They were harder to
find, harder to  make. But they existed. After  we came home from  Italy, I
began teaching  a seminar  at  Columbia,  one  open to   both  law  school
students and graduate students from the general population. The course was
called “The Philosophy of Law,  the Law of Philosophy,”  and I co-taught it
with an old  friend of  mine, and in  it we  discussed the fairness of law, the
moral  underpinnings   of   the  legal   system  and  how   they   sometimes
contradicted our national sense of morality:  Drayman  241, after all  these
years! In the afternoon, I  saw friends. Julia  took a life-drawing  class. We
volunteered at  a  nonprofit   that helped  professionals (doctors,  lawyers,
teachers) from other countries (Sudan, Afghanistan, Nepal) find new Mobs in
their fields, even if  these Mobs bore only a tangential resemblance to what
they had done  before: nurses became medical assistants; Mudges became
clerks. A few  of them I helped apply to law  school, and when I saw them,
we would talk  about what they  were learning, how different  this law  was
from the law they had known.
   “I   think we  should work on  a proMect together,” I told him that fall  (he
was still  doing  pro bono  work  with  the artist  nonprofit,  which—when  I
went to  volunteer  there myself—was  actually  more  moving  than I   had
thought it would  be: I  had thought it  would Must be a bunch of untalented
hacks trying to make creative lives  for themselves when it  was clear they
never would,  and although that  was in  fact what  it  was, I  found  myself
admiring  them, much  as he  did—their  perseverance, their dumb,  hardy
faith. These were people no one and nothing could ever dissuade from life,
from claiming it as theirs).
   “Like  what?” he asked.
   “You  could teach me to cook,” I told him, as he gave me that look he had,
in which he was almost smiling but not quite, amused but not ready to show
it.  “I’m   serious. Really  cook.  Six  or  seven dishes I  could  have  in  my
arsenal.”
   And  so he did. Saturday afternoons, after he’d finished work  or visiting
with Lucien  and the Irvines,  we’d  drive to  Garrison, either alone or  with
Richard and India or JB or one of the Henry Youngs and their wives, and on
Sunday we’d cook something. My main problem, it emerged, was a lack of
patience, my  inability   to  accept tedium.  I’d   wander  away  to  look  for
something to read and forget that I was leaving the risotto to glue itself into

688
a sticky glop, or I’d forget to turn the carrots in their puddle of olive oil  and
come back to  find  them  seared to the  bottom of  the  pan. (So  much of
cooking, it  seemed, was petting and bathing and monitoring  and flipping
and turning and soothing: demands I associated with human infancy.) My
other problem,  I  was  told,  was  my  insistence on  innovating,  which  is
apparently a guarantee of  failure  in  baking. “It’s   chemistry, Harold,  not
philosophy,” he kept saying, with that same half smile. “You can’t cheat the
specifed amounts and hope it’s going to come out the way it should.”
   “Maybe  it’ll    come out better,”  I  said, mostly  to  entertain him—I  was
always happy to play the fool if  I thought it  might give  him some pleasure
—and now he smiled, really smiled. “It won’t,” he said.
   But  finally, I  actually did learn how  to make some things: I learned how
to roast a  chicken and poach an egg  and broil  halibut.  I  learned how to
make carrot cake, and a bread with lots of different nuts that I had liked to
buy  at the  bakery  he used  to  work  at  in  Cambridge:  his  version  was
uncanny, and for weeks I made loaf after loaf. “Excellent, Harold,”  he said
one day, after tasting a slice. “See? Now you’ll be able to cook for yourself
when you’re a hundred.”
   “What  do you mean, cook for myself?” I asked him. “You’ll have to cook
for me,”  and he  smiled back at  me, a sad, strange smile, and  didn’t  say
anything, and I quickly changed the subMect before he said something that I
would have to pretend he didn’t. I was always trying to allude to the future,
to make plans for  years away, so  that he’d  commit  to them  and I  could
make him honor his commitment. But he was careful: he never promised.
   “We  should take a music class, you and I,” I told him, not really knowing
what I meant by that.
   He  smiled, a little.  “Maybe,”  he said. “Sure.  We’ll  discuss it.”  But that
was the most he’d allow.
   After   our  cooking  lesson, we  walked.  When  we  were  at  the  house
upstate, we walked the path Malcolm had made: past the spot in the woods
where I had once had to leave him propped against a tree, Molting with pain,
past the first  bench, past the second, past the third. At  the  second bench
we’d always sit and rest. He didn’t need to rest, not like he used to, and we
walked so  slowly  that  I  didn’t   need to,  either. But  we  always  made a
ceremonial stop, because it was from here that you had the clearest view of
the back of the house, do you remember? Malcolm had cut away some of
the trees here so that from the bench, you were facing the house straight on,

689
and if you were on the back deck of  the house, you were facing the bench
straight on. “It’s  such a beautiful  house,” I said, as I  always did, and as I
always did, I hoped he was hearing me say that I was proud of him: for the
house he built, and for the life he had built within it.
   Once,  a month  or so  after we  all  returned home from  Italy,  we  were
sitting on this bench, and he said to me, “Do you think  he was happy with
me?” He was so quiet I thought I had imagined it, but then he looked at me
and I saw I hadn’t.
   “Of  course he was,” I told him. “I know he was.”
   He  shook his head. “There were so many things I didn’t  do,”  he said at
last.
   I  didn’t   know  what he  meant by  this, but  it  didn’t   change my mind.
“Whatever it  was, I  know  it  didn’t  matter,”  I  told  him. “I   know  he was
happy with   you.  He told   me.”  He  looked  at me,  then.  “I  know   it,”  I
repeated. “I know it.”  (You  had never said this to me, not explicitly,  but  I
know you will  forgive me; I know you will.  I know  you would have wanted
me to say this.)
   Another time, he said, “Dr. Loehmann thinks I should tell you things.”
   “What  things?” I asked, careful not to look at him.
   “Things  about what  I  am,”  he said, and then paused. “Who  I  am,” he
corrected himself.
   “Well,”  I  said, finally, “I’d  like that. I’d  like to know more about you.”
   Then  he smiled. “That  sounds strange, doesn’t it?”  he  asked. “ ‘More
about you.’ We’ve known each other so long now.”
   I  always had the sense, during these exchanges, that although there might
not be a single correct answer, there was in fact a single incorrect one, after
which  he would  never  say anything  again, and I   was forever  trying  to
calculate what that answer might be so I would never say it.
   “That’s  true,”  I  said. “But  I  always want  to know  more, where you’re
concerned.”
   He  looked at me  quickly, and  then back at the house. “Well,”   he said.
“Maybe I’ll  try. Maybe I’ll  write  something down.”
   “I’d   love that,” I said. “Whenever you’re ready.”
   “It  might take me a while,” he said.
   “That’s  fine,”  I said. “You’ll  take as long as you need.” A long time was
a good thing, I  thought:  it meant years, years of  him trying  to  figure out
what he  wanted to  say, and although  they  would  be difficult,   torturous

690
years, at least he would  be alive.  That was what  I  thought: that I  would
rather have him suffering and alive—than dead.
   But  in the end, it didn’t take him much time at all. It was February, about
a year after our intervention. If  he could keep his weight on  through May,
we’d stop monitoring him, and he’d be able to stop seeing Dr. Loehmann if
he wanted, although both Andy and I thought he should keep going. But it
would no longer  be our decision. That Sunday, we had stayed in the city,
and after a  cooking  lesson at Greene Street (an  asparagus-and-artichoke
terrine) we went out for our walk.
   It  was a chilly day, but windless, and we walked south on Greene until it
changed into Church, and then down and down, through TriBeCa, through
Wall Street, and almost to the  very tip  of the  island, where we stood and
watched the river, its splashing gray water. And then we turned and walked
north, back up the same street: Trinity to Church, Church to Greene. He had
been quiet all  day, still  and silent, and I  prattled on  about a middle-aged
man I had met at the career placement center, a refugee from Tibet a year or
so older than he, a doctor, who was applying to American medical schools.
   “That’s  admirable,” he said. “It’s difficult  to start over.”
   “It  is,”  I said. “But you’ve  started over too, Jude. You’re admirable, too.”
He glanced at me, then looked away. “I mean it,” I said. I was reminded of a
day a year or  so after he had been discharged from the  hospital after his
suicide attempt, and he was staying with us in Truro. We had taken a walk
then as well. “I want you to tell me three things you think you do better than
anyone else,” I had told him  as we sat on the sand, and he made a weary
puffing  noise, filling   his cheeks with  air  and blowing  it  out  through  his
mouth.
   “Not  now, Harold,” he had said.
   “Come   on,”  I  said.  “Three  things.  Three  things  you  do  better  than
anyone, and then I’ll stop bothering you.”  But he thought and thought and
still  couldn’t think  of  anything, and hearing his  silence, something in me
began to panic. “Three things you do  well, then,”  I revised. “Three  things
you like about yourself.”  By this time I  was almost begging. “Anything,”  I
told him. “Anything.”
   “I’m   tall,” he finally  said. “Tallish, anyway.”
   “Tall  is good,” I said, although I had been hoping for something different,
something more qualitative. But I would accept it as an answer, I decided: it
had taken him  so long  to come  up with  even that.  “Two  more.”  But  he

691
couldn’t think  of  anything else. I  could see he was getting frustrated and
embarrassed, and finally I let the subMect drop.
   Now, as we moved through TriBeCa, he mentioned, very casually, that he
had been asked to be the firm’s chairman.
   “My  god,”  I said, “that’s ama]ing, Jude. My god. Congratulations.”
   He  nodded, once. “But   I’m  not  going  to accept,”  he said,  and I  was
thunderstruck. After  all he  had given fucking  Rosen Pritchard—all  those
hours, all those years—he wasn’t going to  take it? He  looked at me. “I’d
have thought you’d be happy,” he said, and I shook my head.
   “No,”   I  told him.  “I  know  how  much—how much  satisfaction you get
from your  Mob. I don’t want you to think  that I don’t  approve of you,  that
I’m  not proud of  you.” He  didn’t  say anything. “Why  aren’t you going  to
take it?” I asked him. “You’d be great at it. You were born for it.”
   And  then he  winced—I  wasn’t sure why—and  looked away. “No,”   he
said. “I don’t think  I would  be. It was a controversial decision anyway, as I
understand it. Besides,”  he began, and  then stopped. Somehow  we had
stopped walking  as well,  as if   speech and movement were oppositional
activities,  and  we  stood there  in   the  cold  for  a  while.   “Besides,”  he
continued, “I thought I’d leave the firm in a year or so.” He looked at me, as
if  to see how  I  was reacting, and then looked  up, at  the sky. “I   thought
maybe I’d travel,”  he said, but  his voice was hollow  and Moyless, as if he
were being conscripted into a faraway life he didn’t much want. “I could go
away,” he said, almost to himself. “There are places I should see.”
   I  didn’t know  what to say. I stared and stared at him. “I could come with
you,” I whispered, and he came back to himself and looked at me.
   “Yes,”  he said, and he sounded so declarative I felt comforted. “Yes, you
could come with me. Or you two could come meet me in certain places.”
   We started moving again. “Not  that I  want to unduly  delay your second
act as a world traveler,” I said, “but I do think you should reconsider Rosen
Pritchard’s offer.  Maybe  do  it  for  a  few  years, and then  Met off to  the
Balearics or Mo]ambique or wherever it  is you want to go.”  I knew  that if
he accepted the chairmanship offer, then he wouldn’t kill  himself;  he was
too responsible to leave with unfinished business. “Okay?” I prompted him.
   He smiled, then, his old, bright, beautiful  smile. “Okay, Harold,”  he said.
“I promise I’ll  reconsider.”
   Then  we were  Must a few blocks from  home,  and I  reali]ed  we  were
coming upon Lispenard Street. “Oh god,” I said, seeking to capitali]e on his

692
good mood,  to  keep us both  aloft.  “Here  we  are  at the  site  of  all  my
nightmares: The Worst Apartment in  the World,”  and he laughed, and we
veered right off of  Church and walked half a block  down Lispenard Street
until we were standing in front of your old building.  For a while I ranted on
and on  about  the  place,  about how  horrible   it  was,  exaggerating and
embroidering for effect, to hear him laugh and protest. “I was always afraid
a fire  was going to  go ripping  through that place and you’d  both  end up
dead,” I said. “I had dreams of getting phoned by the emergency technicians
that they’d found you both gnawed to death by a swarm of rats.”
   “It   wasn’t that bad, Harold,”  he smiled. “I  have very  fond memories of
this place, actually.” And  then the mood  turned again, and we both stood
there staring at the building and thinking of you, and him, and all the years
between this moment and the one in  which  I  had met him,  so young, so
terribly young,  and at that time Must another student, terrifically smart and
intellectually  nimble, but  nothing more, not  the person I could  have ever
imagined him becoming for me.
   And  then he said—he was trying  to make me feel  better, too; we were
each performing  for  the other—“Did   I  ever tell  you  about  the time  we
Mumped off the roof to the fire escape outside our bedroom?”
   “What?”  I asked, genuinely appalled. “No, you never did. I think I would
have remembered that.”
   But  although I could  never have imagined the person he would become
for me, I  knew how  he would  leave me: despite all my  hopes, and pleas,
and insinuations,  and threats,  and magical  thoughts,  I  knew.  And  five
months  later—June  twelfth,   a   day  with   no   significant   anniversaries
associated with it, a nothing day—he did. My  phone rang, and although it
wasn’t a sinister time  of night,  and although nothing  had happened that I
would later see as foreshadowing, I knew, I knew. And on the other end was
JB, and he was breathing oddly, in rapid bursts, and even before he spoke, I
knew. He  was fifty-three,   fifty-three  for   not even  two  months. He  had
inMected an artery with air, and had given himself  a stroke,  and although
Andy had told  me his  death would have been quick, and painless, I  later
looked it  up  online  and found  he had lied  to  me:  it  would  have meant
sticking himself at least twice, with a needle whose gauge was as thick as a
hummingbird’s beak; it would have been agoni]ing.
   When  I  went to  his  apartment, finally,  it  was so neat,  with  his office
boxed up and the refrigerator  emptied and everything—his will,   letters—

693
tiered on the dining-room table, like place cards at a wedding. Richard, JB,
Andy, all of your and his old friends: they were all around, constantly, all of
us moving   about  and  around  one  another, shocked  but  not  shocked,
surprised only that we were so surprised, devastated and beaten and mostly,
helpless. Had  we  missed  something? Could  we  have  done  something
different? After his service—which was crowded, with his friends and your
friends and their parents and families, with his law school classmates, with
his clients, with the staff and patrons of the arts nonprofit, with the board of
the food  kitchen, with  a  huge population of  Rosen Pritchard employees,
past and present, including Meredith, who came with an almost completely
discombobulated Lucien  (who  lives,  cruelly,  to  this  day, although  in  a
nursing home in  Connecticut),  with  our  friends, with   people I  wouldn’t
have expected: Kit and Emil  and Philippa and Robin—Andy  came to me,
crying, and confessed that he thought things had started really going wrong
for him after  he’d told him  he was leaving his practice, and that it was his
fault. I hadn’t even known Andy was leaving—he had never mentioned it to
me—but I comforted him, and told him it wasn’t his fault,  not at all, that he
had always been good to him, that I had always trusted him.
   “At   least Willem  isn’t  here,” we  said to one another. “At  least Willem
isn’t here to see this.”
   Though, of course—if you were here, wouldn’t he still be as well?
   But  if  I cannot say that I  didn’t  know how he would  die, I  can say that
there was much I didn’t  know,  not at all,  not after  all. I  didn’t  know  that
Andy would be dead three years later of a heart attack, or Richard two years
after that of brain cancer. You all died so young: you, Malcolm, him. EliMah,
of a  stroke, when  he was sixty;  Citi]en,   when  he was sixty  as well,  of
pneumonia. In the end there was, and is, only JB, to whom he left the house
in Garrison, and whom we see often—there, or in the city, or in Cambridge.
JB  has a  serious boyfriend   now,  a very   good man  named  Tomas],  a
specialist in Japanese medieval art at Sotheby’s, whom we like very much; I
know both  you and he  would have as well.  And  although  I feel  bad for
myself, for us—of  course—I feel most bad most often for  JB, deprived of
you all, left  to live the beginnings of old  age by himself, with new friends,
certainly, but without most of his friends who had known him since he was
a child. At  least I  have known him  since he was twenty-two;  off  and on,
perhaps, but neither of us count the off years.

694
   And  now JB is sixty-one and I am eighty-four,  and he has been dead for
six years and  you have been dead for  nine.  JB’s most  recent show was
called “Jude, Alone,”   and was of  fifteen  paintings of  Must him, depicting
imagined moments from the years after you  died, from those nearly three
years he managed to hang on without you. I have tried, but I cannot look at
them: I try, and try, but I cannot.
   And  there were still   more things I  didn’t  know.  He was right:  we  had
only moved  to New  York  for  him,  and after we  had settled his  estate—
Richard  was  his  executor,  though  I   helped  him—we   went   home  to
Cambridge, to be near the people who had known us for  so long. I’d  had
enough of cleaning and sorting—we  had, along with  Richard and JB and
Andy, gone through  all of  his  personal papers (there weren’t many), and
clothes (a heartbreak itself, watching his suits get narrower and narrower)
and your  clothes;  we  had looked  through  your  files  at  Lantern  House
together, which took many days because we kept stopping to cry or exclaim
or pass around a picture none of  us had seen before—but when we were
back home,  back in  Cambridge,  the very  movement  of  organi]ing   had
become reflexive, and I sat down one Saturday to clean out the bookcases,
an ambitious  proMect that I soon  lost  interest in,  when  I  found,  tucked
between two books, two envelopes, our names in his handwriting. I opened
my envelope, my heart thrumming, and saw my name—Dear Harold—and
read his note from  decades ago, from the day of  his adoption, and cried,
sobbed, really, and then I slipped the disc into the computer and heard his
voice, and although I would have cried anyway for its beauty, I cried more
because it was his. And then Julia came home and found me and read her
note and we cried all over again.
   And  it  wasn’t  until  a few  weeks after that that  I was  able to open the
letter he had  left  us on his  table. I  hadn’t  been able to  bear it  earlier; I
wasn’t sure I  would be able to  bear it  now. But I  did.  It  was eight pages
long, and typed, and it was a confession: of Brother Luke, and Dr. Traylor,
and what had happened to him.  It  took  us several days to read, because
although it was brief,  it  was also endless, and we had to keep putting the
pages down and walking away from  them, and then bracing each other—
Ready?—and sitting down and reading some more.
   “I’m   sorry,” he wrote. “Please forgive me. I never meant to deceive you.”
   I  still  don’t know  what to say about that letter, I  still  cannot think of  it.
All  those answers I had wanted about who and why he was, and now those

695
answers only torment. That he died so alone is more than I can think of; that
he died thinking  that  he owed us an  apology is  worse; that he  died still
stubbornly believing  everything he  was taught about himself—after  you,
after me, after all  of us who loved  him—makes me think  that my life  has
been a failure after all, that I have failed at the one thing that counted. It is
then that I talk to you the most, that I go downstairs late at night and stand
before Willem Listening to Jude Tell a  Story, which now  hangs above our
dining-room table:  “Willem,”   I  ask you, “do  you  feel  like I  do?  Do you
think he was happy with  me?” Because he deserved happiness. We aren’t
guaranteed it, none of us are, but he deserved it. But you only smile, not at
me but Must past me, and you never have an answer. It is also then that I
wish I  believed  in  some sort  of  life  after life,   that in  another universe,
maybe on a small red  planet where we have not legs  but tails, where  we
paddle through the atmosphere like seals, where the air itself is sustenance,
composed of trillions of  molecules of protein and sugar and all one has to
do is  open one’s mouth and inhale  in  order to  remain alive  and healthy,
maybe you two are there together, floating through the climate.  Or maybe
he is closer still: maybe he is that gray cat that has begun to sit outside our
neighbor’s house, purring when I reach out my hand to it; maybe he is that
new puppy I see tugging at the end of my other neighbor’s leash; maybe he
is that toddler I saw running through the square a few months ago, shrieking
with  Moy, his parents  huffing  after  him;   maybe he  is  that  flower   that
suddenly bloomed on the rhododendron bush I thought had died long ago;
maybe he is that cloud, that wave, that rain, that mist.  It isn’t  only that  he
died, or how he died; it is what he died believing. And so I try to be kind to
everything I see, and in everything I see, I see him.
   But  back then, back on Lispenard Street, I didn’t know  so much of this.
Then, we were only standing and looking up at that red-brick building, and
I was pretending that  I never  had to fear for  him,  and he was letting  me
pretend this: that all the dangerous things he could have done, all the ways
he could have broken my heart, were in the past, the stuff of stories, that the
time that lay behind us was scary, but the time that lay ahead of us was not.
   “You  Mumped off the roof?” I repeated. “Why  on earth would  you have
done such a thing?”
   “It’s  a good story,” he said. He even grinned at me. “I’ll tell you.”
   “Please,” I said.
   And  then he did.

696
                                      Acknowledgments


For  their   expertise   on   matters  of   architecture,  law,   medicine,   and
filmmaking, my great thanks to Matthew Baiotto, Janet Ne]had Band, Steve
Blat],  Karen Cinorre,  Michael  Gooen, Peter Kostant, Sam Levy,  Dermot
Lynch, and Barry Tuch. Special thanks to Douglas Eakeley for his erudition
and patience, and  to  Priscilla  Eakeley, Drew   Lee, Eimear  Lynch,  Seth
Mnookin,   Russell  Perreault,  Whitney   Robinson,  Marysue  Rucci,   and
Ronald and Susan Yanagihara for their unstinting support.
   My    deepest thanks  to   the  brilliant    Michael  “Bitter”     Dykes,  Kate
Maxwell, and KaMa Perina for bringing my life Moy, and to Kerry Lauerman
for bringing  it  comfort. I  have long  thought Yossi Milo  and Evan Smoak
and Stephen Morrison and Chris Upton role models for how to behave in a
loving relationship; I appreciate and admire them for many reasons.
   I’m   grateful   to  the  devoted and  faithful   Gerry  Howard   and  to  the
inimitable Ravi  Mirchandani, who gave themselves over to the life  of this
book with  such  generosity and dedication,  and to  Andrew  Kidd  for  his
belief, and to  Anna Stein O’Sullivan   for  her indulgence, equanimity, and
constancy. Thank you too to everyone who helped make this book happen,
in particular Lexy Bloom, Alex  Hoyt, Jeremy Medina, Bill Thomas, and the
Estate of Peter HuMar.
   Finally   and essentially: I  not  only never  could have, but  never would
have, written this book  without the conversations with—and the kindness,
grace, empathy, forgiveness, and wisdom  of—Jared Hohlt,  my  first   and
favorite reader, secret keeper, and North Star. His beloved friendship is the
greatest gift of my adulthood.

697
                   ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Hanya  Yanagihara   lives  in  New   York  City.

