3
            ROALD    DAHL

The Wonderful Story of Henry Sugar
                  and six more







                 PENGUIN BOOKS 

4
                                                   Contents




1 The Boy Who Talked with Animals

2 The Hitch-hiker

 The Mildenhall Treasure

4 The Swan

 The Wonderful Story of Henry Sugar

6 Lucky Break

 A Piece of Cake

5
                                                  PENGUIN BOOKS


                               THE WONDERFUL STORY OF HENRY SUGAR

Roald Dahl  is best known  for his  mischieYous, wildly   inYentiYe stories for
children.  But throughout  his  life he was  also a prolific  and acclaimed  writer
of stories for  adults. These sinister,  surprising  tales continue  to entertain,
amuse and shock generations of  readers eYen today.

6
                                           By the same author


FICTION
Kiss Kiss
Someone Like You
OYer to You
My Uncle Oswald
Switch Bitch
The Wonderful Story of Henry Sugar
Ah, Sweet Mystery of Life
Roald Dahl’s Book of Ghost Stories

NON-FICTION
Boy
Going Solo

COMING IN 2012
The Complete Roald Dahl Short Stories Volume 1
The Complete Roald Dahl Short Stories Volume 2

7
                  The   Boy    Who   Talked     with    Animals



Not so long ago, I decided to spend a few days in the West Indies. I was to
go there for a short holiday. Friends had told me it was marYellous. I would
la]e around all day, they said, sunning myself on the silYer beaches and
swimming in the warm green sea.
   I chose Jamaica, and flew direct from London to Kingston. The driYe
from Kingston airport to my hotel on the north shore took two hours. The
island was full of mountains and the mountains were coYered all oYer with
dark tangled forests. The big Jamaican who droYe the ta[i told me that up in
those forests liYed whole communities of diabolical people who still
practised Yoodoo and witch-doctory and other magic rites. ‘Don’t eYer go
up into those mountain forests,’ he said, rolling his eyes. ‘There’s things
happening up there that’d make your hair turn white in a minute!’
   ‘What sort of things?’ I asked him.
   ‘It’s better you don’t ask,’ he said. ‘It don’t pay eYen to talk about it.’
And that was all he would say on the subject.
   My hotel lay upon the edge of a pearly beach, and the setting was eYen
more beautiful than I had imagined. But the moment I walked in through
those big open front doors, I began to feel uneasy. There was no reason for
this. I couldn’t see anything wrong. But the feeling was there and I couldn’t
shake it off. There was something weird and sinister about the place.
Despite all the loYeliness and the lu[ury, there was a whiff of danger that
hung and drifted in the air like poisonous gas.
   And I wasn’t sure it was just the hotel. The whole island, the mountains
and the forests, the black rocks along the coastline and the trees cascading
with brilliant scarlet flowers, all these and many other things made me feel

8
uncomfortable in my skin. There was something malignant crouching
underneath the surface of this island. I could sense it in my bones.
   My  room in the hotel had a little balcony, and from there I could step
straight down on to the beach. There were tall coconut palms growing all
around, and eYery so often an enormous green nut the si]e of a football
would fall out of the sky and drop with a thud on the sand. It was
considered foolish to linger underneath a coconut palm because if one of
those things landed on your head, it would smash your skull.
   The Jamaican girl who came in to tidy my room told me that a wealthy
American called Mr Wasserman had met his end in precisely this manner
only two months before.
   ‘You’re  joking,’  I said to her.
   ‘Not  joking!’  she cried. ‘No suh! I sees it happening with my Yery own
eyes!’
   ‘But  wasn’t there a terrific fuss about it?’ I asked.
   ‘They  hush it up,’ she answered darkly. ‘The hotel folks hush it up and so
do the newspaper folks because things like that are Yery bad for the tourist
business.’
   ‘And  you say you actually saw it happen?’
   ‘I  actually saw it happen,’ she said. ‘Mr Wasserman, he’s standing right
under that Yery tree oYer there on the beach. He’s got his camera out and
he’s pointing it at the sunset. It’s a red sunset that eYening, and Yery pretty.
Then all at once, down comes a big green nut right smack on to the top of
his bald head. Wham! And that,’ she added with a touch of relish, ‘is the
Yery last sunset Mr Wasserman eYer did see.’
   ‘You  mean it killed him instantly?’
   ‘I  don’t know about instantly,’ she said. ‘I remember the ne[t thing that
happens is the camera falls out of his hands on to the sand. Then his arms
drop down to his sides and hang there. Then he starts swaying. He sways
backwards and forwards seYeral times eYer so gentle, and I’m standing
there watching him, and I says to myself the poor man’s gone all di]]y and
maybe he’s going to faint any moment. Then Yery Yery slowly he keels
right oYer and down he goes.’

9
   ‘Was he dead?’
   ‘Dead as a doornail,’ she said.
   ‘Good  heaYens.’
   ‘That’s  right,’ she said. ‘It neYer pays to be standing under a coconut
palm when there’s a bree]e blowing.’
   ‘Thank  you,’ I said. ‘I’ll   remember that.’
   On the eYening of my second day, I was sitting on my little balcony with
a book on my lap and a tall glass of rum punch in my hand. I wasn’t reading
the book. I was watching a small green li]ard stalking another small green
li]ard on the balcony floor about si[  feet away. The stalking li]ard was
coming up on the other one from behind, moYing forward Yery slowly and
Yery cautiously, and when he came within reach, he flicked out a long
tongue and touched the other one’s tail. The other one jumped round, and
the two of them faced each other, motionless, glued to the floor, crouching,
staring and Yery tense. Then suddenly, they started doing a funny little
hopping dance together. They hopped up in the air. They hopped
backwards. They hopped forwards. They hopped sideways. They circled
one another like two bo[ers, hopping and prancing and dancing all the time.
It was a Tueer thing to watch, and I guessed it was some sort of a courtship
ritual they were going through. I kept Yery still, waiting to see what was
going to happen ne[t.
   But I  neYer saw what happened ne[t because at that moment I became
aware of a great commotion on the beach below. I glanced oYer and saw a
crowd of people clustering around something at the water’s edge. There was
a narrow canoe-type fisherman’s boat pulled up on the sand nearby, and all I
could think of was that the fisherman had come in with a lot of fish and that
the crowd was looking at it.
   A  haul of fish is something that has always fascinated me. I put my book
aside and stood up. More people were trooping down from the hotel
Yeranda and hurrying oYer the beach to join the crowd on the edge of the
water. The men were wearing those frightful Bermuda shorts that came
down to the knees, and their shirts were bilious with pinks and oranges and
eYery other clashing colour you could think of. The women had better taste,

10
and were dressed for the most part in pretty cotton dresses. Nearly eYeryone
carried a drink in one hand.
   I  picked up my own drink and stepped down from the balcony on to the
beach. I made a little detour around the coconut palm under which Mr
Wasserman had supposedly met his end, and strode across the beautiful
silYery sand to join the crowd.
   But it  wasn’t a haul of fish they were staring at. It was a turtle, an upside-
down turtle lying on its back in the sand. But what a turtle it was! It was a
giant, a mammoth. I had not thought it possible for a turtle to be as
enormous as this. How can I describe its si]e? Had it been the right way up,
I think a tall man could haYe sat on its back without his feet touching the
ground. It was perhaps fiYe feet long and four feet across, with a high
domed shell of great beauty.
   The fisherman who had caught it had tipped it on to its back to stop it
from getting away. There was also a thick rope tied around the middle of its
shell, and one proud fisherman, slim and black and naked e[cept for a small
loincloth, stood a short way off holding the end of the rope with both hands.
   Upside down it lay, this magnificent creature, with its four thick flippers
waYing frantically in the air, and its long wrinkled neck stretching far out of
its shell. The flippers had large sharp claws on them.
   ‘Stand back, ladies and gentlemen, please!’ cried the fisherman. ‘Stand
well back! Them claws is dangerous, man! They’ll rip your arm clear away
from your body!’
   The crowd of hotel guests was thrilled and delighted by this spectacle. A
do]en cameras were out and clicking away. Many of the women were
sTuealing with pleasure clutching on to the arms of their men, and the men
were demonstrating their lack of fear and their masculinity by making
foolish remarks in loud Yoices.
   ‘Make  yourself a nice pair of horn-rimmed spectacles out of that shell,
hey Al?’
   ‘Darn  thing must weigh oYer a ton!’
   ‘You  mean to say it can actually float?’
   ‘Sure it  floats. Powerful swimmer, too. Pull a boat easy.’

11
   ‘He’s  a snapper, is he?’
   ‘That’s  no snapper. Snapper turtles don’t grow as big as that. But I’ll tell
you what. He’ll snap your hand off Tuick enough if you get too close to
him.’
   ‘Is  that true?’ one of the women asked the fisherman. ‘Would he snap off
a person’s hand?’
   ‘He  would right now,’ the fisherman said, smiling with brilliant  white
teeth. ‘He won’t eYer hurt you when he’s in the ocean, but you catch him
and pull him ashore and tip him up like this, then man aliYe, you’d better
watch out! He’ll snap at anything that comes in reach!’
   ‘I  guess I’d get a bit snappish myself,’ the woman said, ‘if I was in his
situation.’
   One idiotic  man had found a plank of driftwood on the sand, and he was
carrying it towards the turtle. It was a fair-si]ed plank, about fiYe feet long
and maybe an inch thick. He started poking one end of it at the turtle’s head.
   ‘I  wouldn’t  do that,’ the fisherman said. ‘You’ll only make him madder
than eYer.’
   When the end of the plank touched the turtle’s neck, the great head
whipped round and the mouth opened wide and snap, it took the plank in its
mouth and bit through it as if it were made of cheese.
   ‘Wow!’   they shouted. ‘Did you see that! I’m glad it wasn’t my arm!’
   ‘LeaYe him alone,’ the fisherman said. ‘It don’t help to get him all stirred
up.’
   A  paunchy man with wide hips and Yery short legs came up to the
fisherman and said, ‘Listen, feller. I want that shell. I’ll buy it from you.’
And to his plump wife, he said, ‘You know what I’m going to do, Mildred?
I’m going to take that shell home and haYe it polished up by an e[pert.
Then I’m going to place it smack in the centre of our liYing-room! Won’t
that be something?’
   ‘Fantastic,’  the plump wife said. ‘Go ahead and buy it, baby.’
   ‘Don’t  worry,’  he said. ‘It’s mine already.’ And to the fisherman, he said,
‘How much for the shell?’
   ‘I  already sold him,’ the fisherman said. ‘I sold him shell and all.’

12
   ‘Not  so fast, feller,’ the paunchy man said. ‘I’ll bid you higher. Come on.
What’d he offer you?’
   ‘No  can do,’ the fisherman said. ‘I already sold him.’
   ‘Who  to?’ the paunchy man said.
   ‘To  the manager.’
   ‘What  manager?’
   ‘The  manager of the hotel.’
   ‘Did  you hear that?’ shouted another man. ‘He’s sold it to the manager of
our hotel! And you know what that means? It means turtle soup, that’s what
it means!’
   ‘Right  you are! And turtle steak! You eYer haYe a turtle steak, Bill?’
   ‘I  neYer haYe, Jack. But I can’t wait.’
   ‘A  turtle steak’s better than a beefsteak if you cook it right. It’s more
tender and it’s got one heck of a flaYour.’
   ‘Listen,’  the paunchy man said to the fisherman. ‘I’m not trying to buy
the meat. The manager can haYe the meat. He can haYe eYerything that’s
inside including the teeth and toenails. All I want is the shell.’
   ‘And  if  I know you, baby,’ his wife said, beaming at him, ‘you’re going
to get the shell.’
   I  stood there listening to the conYersation of these human beings. They
were discussing the destruction, the consumption and the flaYour of a
creature who seemed, eYen when upside down, to be e[traordinarily
dignified. One thing was certain. He was senior to any of them in age. For
probably one hundred and fifty years he had been cruising in the green
waters of the West Indies. He was there when George Washington was
President of the United States and Napoleon was being clobbered at
Waterloo. He would haYe been a small turtle then, but he was most certainly
there.
   And  now he was here, upside down on the beach, waiting to be sacrificed
for soup and steak. He was clearly alarmed by all the noise and the shouting
around him. His old wrinkled neck was straining out of its shell, and the
great head was twisting this way and that as though searching for someone
who would e[plain the reason for all this ill-treatment.

13
   ‘How  are you going to get him up to the hotel?’ the paunchy man asked.
   ‘Drag  him up the beach with the rope,’ the fisherman answered. ‘The
staff’ll  be coming along soon to take him. It’s going to need ten men, all
pulling at once.’
   ‘Hey,  listen!’ cried a muscular young man. ‘Why don’t we drag him up?’
The muscular young man was wearing magenta and pea-green Bermuda
shorts and no shirt. He had an e[ceptionally hairy chest, and the absence of
a shirt was obYiously a calculated touch. ‘What say we do a little work for
our supper?’ he cried, rippling his muscles. ‘Come on, fellers! Who’s for
some e[ercise?’
   ‘Great idea!’  they shouted. ‘Splendid scheme!’
   The men handed their drinks to the women and rushed to catch hold of
the rope. They ranged themselYes along it as though for a tug of war, and
the hairy-chested man appointed himself anchor-man and captain of the
team.
   ‘Come on, now, fellers!’  he shouted. ‘When I say heave, then all heaYe at
once, you understand?’
   The fisherman didn’t like  this much. ‘It’s better you leaYe this job for the
hotel,’ he said.
   ‘Rubbish!’  shouted hairy-chest. ‘Heave, boys, heave!’
   They all heaYed. The gigantic turtle wobbled on its back and nearly
toppled oYer.
   ‘Don’t  tip  him!’ yelled the fisherman. ‘You’re going to tip him  oYer if
you do that! And if once he gets back on to his legs again, he’ll escape for
sure!’
   ‘Cool  it, laddie,’ said hairy-chest in a patroni]ing Yoice. ‘How can he
escape? We’Ye got a rope round him, haYen’t we?’
   ‘The  old turtle will  drag the whole lot of you away with him if you giYe
him a chance!’ cried the fisherman. ‘He’ll drag you out into the ocean,
eYery one of you!’
   ‘Heave!’  shouted hairy-chest, ignoring the fisherman. ‘Heave, boys,
heave!’

14
   And  now the gigantic turtle began Yery slowly to slide up the beach
towards the hotel, towards the kitchen, towards the place where the big
kniYes were kept. The womenfolk and the older, fatter, less athletic men
followed alongside, shouting encouragement.
   ‘Heave!’  shouted the hairy-chested anchor-man. ‘Put your backs into it,
fellers! You can pull harder than that!’
   Suddenly, I heard screams. EYeryone heard them. They were screams so
high-pitched, so shrill and so urgent they cut right through eYerything. ‘No-
o-o-o-o!’ screamed the scream. ‘No! No! No! No! No!’
   The crowd fro]e.  The tug-of-war men stopped tugging and the onlookers
stopped shouting and eYery single person present turned towards the place
where the screams were coming from.
   Half  walking, half running down the beach from the hotel, I saw three
people, a man, a woman and a small boy. They were half running because
the boy was pulling the man along. The man had the boy by the wrist,
trying to slow him down, but the boy kept pulling. At the same time, he was
jumping and twisting and wriggling and trying to free himself from the
father’s grip. It was the boy who was screaming.
   ‘Don’t!’   he screamed. ‘Don’t do it! Let him go! Please let him go!’
   The woman, his mother, was trying to catch hold of the boy’s other arm
to help restrain him, but the boy was jumping about so much, she didn’t
succeed.
   ‘Let  him go!’  screamed the boy. ‘It’s horrible what you’re doing! Please
let him go!’
   ‘Stop that, DaYid!’  the mother said, still trying to catch his other arm.
‘Don’t be so childish! You’re making a perfect fool of yourself.’
   ‘Daddy!’  the boy screamed. ‘Daddy! Tell them to let him go!’
   ‘I  can’t do that, DaYid,’ the father said. ‘It isn’t any of our business.’
   The tug-of-war pullers remained motionless, still holding the rope with
the gigantic turtle on the end of it. EYeryone stood silent and surprised,
staring at the boy. They were all a bit off-balance now. They had the slightly
hangdog air of people who had been caught doing something that was not
entirely honourable.

15
   ‘Come on now, DaYid,’ the father said, pulling against the boy. ‘Let’s go
back to the hotel and leaYe these people alone.’
   ‘I’m   not going back!’ the boy shouted. ‘I don’t want to go back! I want
them to let it go!’
   ‘Now,  DaYid,’ the mother said.
   ‘Beat it,  kid,’ the hairy-chested man told the boy.
   ‘You’re  horrible and cruel!’ the boy shouted. ‘All of  you are horrible and
cruel!’ He threw the words high and shrill at the forty or fifty adults
standing there on the beach, and nobody, not eYen the hairy-chested man,
answered him this time. ‘Why don’t you put him back in the sea?’ the boy
shouted. ‘He hasn’t done anything to you! Let him go!’
   The father was embarrassed by his son, but he was not ashamed of him.
‘He’s cra]y about animals,’ he said, addressing the crowd. ‘Back home he’s
got eYery kind of animal under the sun. He talks with them.’
   ‘He  loYes them,’ the mother said.
   SeYeral people began shuffling their feet around in the sand. Here and
there in the crowd it was possible to sense a slight change of mood, a
feeling of uneasiness, a touch eYen of shame. The boy, who could haYe
been no more than eight or nine years old, had stopped struggling with his
father now. The father still held him by the wrist, but he was no longer
restraining him.
   ‘Go  on!’ the boy called out. ‘Let him go! Undo the rope and let him go!’
He stood Yery small and erect, facing the crowd, his eyes shining like two
stars and the wind blowing in his hair. He was magnificent.
   ‘There’s nothing we can do, DaYid,’ the father said gently. ‘Let’s go on
back.’
   ‘No!’   the boy cried out, and at that moment he suddenly gaYe a twist and
wrenched his wrist free from the father’s grip. He was away like a streak,
running across the sand towards the giant upturned turtle.
   ‘DaYid!’  the father yelled, starting after him. ‘Stop! Come back!’
   The boy dodged and swerYed through the crowd like a player running
with the ball, and the only person who sprang forward to intercept him was
the fisherman. ‘Don’t you go near that turtle, boy!’ he shouted as he made a

16
lunge for the swiftly running figure. But the boy dodged round him and
kept going. ‘He’ll  bite you to pieces!’ yelled the fisherman. ‘Stop, boy!
Stop!’
   But it  was too late to stop him now, and as he came running straight at
the turtle’s head, the turtle saw him, and the huge upside-down head turned
Tuickly to face him.
   The Yoice of the boy’s mother, the stricken, agoni]ed wail of the
mother’s Yoice rose up into the eYening sky. ‘DaYid!’ it cried. ‘Oh, David!’
And a moment later, the boy was throwing himself on to his knees in the
sand and flinging his arms around the wrinkled old neck and hugging the
creature to his chest. The boy’s cheek was pressing against the turtle’s head,
and his lips were moYing, whispering soft words that nobody else could
hear. The turtle became absolutely still. EYen the giant flippers stopped
waYing in the air.
   A  great sigh, a long soft sigh of relief, went up from the crowd. Many
people took a pace or two backward, as though trying perhaps to get a little
further away from something that was beyond their understanding. But the
father and mother came forward together and stood about ten feet away
from their son.
   ‘Daddy!’  the boy cried out, still caressing the old brown head. ‘Please do
something, Daddy! Please make them let him go!’
   ‘Can I  be of any help here?’ said a man in a white suit who had just come
down from the hotel. This, as eYeryone knew, was Mr Edwards, the
manager. He was a tall, beak-nosed Englishman with a long pink face.
‘What an e[traordinary thing!’  he said, looking at the boy and the turtle.
‘He’s lucky he hasn’t had his head bitten off.’ And to the boy he said,
‘You’d better come away from there now, sonny. That thing’s dangerous.’
   ‘I  want them to let him go!’ cried the boy, still cradling the head in his
arms. ‘Tell them to let him go!’
   ‘You  reali]e he could be killed any moment,’ the manager said to the
boy’s father.
   ‘LeaYe him alone,’ the father said.

17
   ‘Rubbish,’  the manager said. ‘Go in and grab him. But be Tuick. And be
careful.’
   ‘No,’  the father said.
   ‘What  do you mean, no?’ said the manager. ‘These things are lethal!
Don’t you understand that?’
   ‘Yes,’  the father said.
   ‘Then  for heaYen’s sake, man, get him away!’ cried the manager.
‘There’s going to be a Yery nasty accident if you don’t.’
   ‘Who  owns it?’ the father said. ‘Who owns the turtle?’
   ‘We do,’  the manager said. ‘The hotel has bought it.’
   ‘Then  do me a faYour,’ the father said. ‘Let me buy it from you.’
   The manager looked at the father, but said nothing.
   ‘You  don’t know my son,’ the father said, speaking Tuietly. ‘He’ll go
cra]y if  it’s taken up to the hotel and slaughtered. He’ll become hysterical.’
   ‘Just pull  him away,’ the manager said. ‘And be Tuick about it.’
   ‘He  loYes animals,’ the father said. ‘He really loYes them. He
communicates with them.’
   The crowd was silent, trying to hear what was being said. Nobody moYed
away. They stood as though hypnoti]ed.
   ‘If  we let it  go,’ the manager said, ‘they’ll only catch it again.’
   ‘Perhaps they will,’  the father said. ‘But those things can swim.’
   ‘I  know they can swim,’ the manager said. ‘They’ll catch him all the
same. This is a Yaluable item, you must reali]e that. The shell alone is
worth a lot of money.’
   ‘I  don’t care about the cost,’ the father said. ‘Don’t worry about that. I
want to buy it.’
   The boy was still kneeling in the sand beside the turtle, caressing its
head.
   The manager took a handkerchief from his breast pocket and started
wiping his fingers. He was not keen to let the turtle go. He probably had the
dinner menu already planned. On the other hand, he didn’t want another
gruesome accident on his priYate beach this season. Mr Wasserman and the

18
coconut, he told himself, had been Tuite enough for one year, thank you
Yery much.
   The father said, ‘I would deem it a great personal faYour, Mr Edwards, if
you would let me buy it. And I promise you won’t regret it. I’ll  make Tuite
sure of that.’
   The manager’s eyebrows went up just a fraction of an inch. He had got
the point. He was being offered a bribe. That was a different matter. For a
few seconds he went on wiping his hands with the handkerchief. Then he
shrugged his shoulders and said, ‘Well, I suppose if it will make your boy
feel any better …’
   ‘Thank  you,’ the father said.
   ‘Oh,  thank you!’ the mother cried. ‘Thank you so Yery much!’
   ‘Willy,’   the manager said, beckoning to the fisherman.
   The fisherman came forward. He looked thoroughly confused. ‘I neYer
seen anything like this before in my whole life,’ he said. ‘This old turtle
was the fiercest I eYer caught! He fought like a deYil when we brought him
in! It took all si[  of  us to land him! That boy’s cra]y!’
   ‘Yes, I know,’  the manager said. ‘But now I want you to let him go.’
   ‘Let  him go!’  the fisherman cried, aghast. ‘You mustn’t eYer let this one
go, Mr Edwards! He’s broke the record! He’s the biggest turtle eYer been
caught on this island! Easy the biggest! And what about our money?’
   ‘You’ll   get your money.’
   ‘I  got the other fiYe to pay off as well,’ the fisherman said, pointing down
the beach.
   About  a hundred yards down, on the water’s edge, fiYe black-skinned
almost naked men were standing beside a second boat. ‘All si[ of us are in
on this, eTual shares,’ the fisherman went on. ‘I can’t let him go till we got
the money.’
   ‘I  guarantee you’ll get it,’ the manager said. ‘Isn’t that good enough for
you?’
   ‘I’ll   underwrite that guarantee,’ the father of the boy said, stepping
forward. ‘And there’ll  be an e[tra bonus for all si[ of the fishermen just as
long as you let him go at once. I mean immediately, this instant.’

19
   The fisherman looked at the father. Then he looked at the manager.
‘Okay,’ he said. ‘If that’s the way you want it.’
   ‘There’s one condition,’ the father said. ‘Before you get your money, you
must promise you won’t go straight out and try to catch him again. Not this
eYening, anyway. Is that understood?’
   ‘Sure,’  the fisherman said. ‘That’s a deal.’ He turned and ran down the
beach, calling to the other fiYe fishermen. He shouted something to them
that we couldn’t hear, and in a minute or two, all si[ of them came back
together. FiYe of them were carrying long thick wooden poles.
   The boy was still kneeling beside the turtle’s head. ‘DaYid,’ the father
said to him gently. ‘It’s all right now, DaYid. They’re going to let him go.’
   The boy looked round, but he didn’t take his arms from around the
turtle’s neck, and he didn’t get up. ‘When?’ he asked.
   ‘Now,’  the father said. ‘Right now. So you’d better come away.’
   ‘You  promise?’ the boy said.
   ‘Yes, DaYid, I promise.’
   The boy withdrew his arms. He got to his feet. He stepped back a few
paces.
   ‘Stand back eYeryone!’ shouted the fisherman called Willy. ‘Stand right
back eYerybody, please!’
   The crowd moYed a few yards up the beach. The tug-of-war men let go
the rope and moYed back with the others.
   Willy  got down on his hands and knees and crept Yery cautiously up to
one side of the turtle. Then he began untying the knot in the rope. He kept
well out of the range of the big flippers as he did this.
   When the knot was untied, Willy crawled back. Then the fiYe other
fishermen stepped forward with their poles. The poles were about seYen
feet long and immensely thick. They wedged them underneath the shell of
the turtle and began to rock the great creature from side to side on its shell.
The shell had a high dome and was well shaped for rocking.
   ‘Up  and down!’ sang the fishermen as they rocked away. ‘Up and down!
Up and down! Up and down!’ The old turtle became thoroughly upset, and

20
who could blame it? The big flippers lashed the air frantically, and the head
kept shooting in and out of the shell.
   ‘Roll  him oYer!’ sang the fishermen. ‘Up and oYer! Roll him oYer! One
more time and oYer he goes!’
   The turtle tilted high up on to its side and crashed down in the sand the
right way up.
   But it  didn’t walk  away at once. The huge brown head came out and
peered cautiously around.
   ‘Go,  turtle, go!’ the small boy called out. ‘Go back to the sea!’
   The two hooded black eyes of the turtle peered up at the boy. The eyes
were bright and liYely, full of the wisdom of great age. The boy looked back
at the turtle, and this time when he spoke, his Yoice was soft and intimate.
‘Good-bye, old man,’ he said. ‘Go far away this time.’ The black eyes
remained resting on the boy for a few seconds more. Nobody moYed. Then,
with great dignity, the massiYe beast turned away and began waddling
towards the edge of the ocean. He didn’t hurry. He moYed sedately oYer the
sandy beach, the big shell rocking gently from side to side as he went.
   The crowd watched in silence.
   He entered the water.
   He kept going.
   Soon he was swimming. He was in his element now. He swam gracefully
and Yery fast, with the head held high. The sea was calm, and he made little
waYes that fanned out behind him on both sides, like the waYes of a boat. It
was seYeral minutes before we lost sight of him, and by then he was half-
way to the hori]on.
   The guests began wandering back towards the hotel. They were curiously
subdued. There was no joking or bantering now, no laughing. Something
had happened. Something strange had come fluttering across the beach.
   I  walked back to my small balcony and sat down with a cigarette. I had
an uneasy feeling that this was not the end of the affair.
   The ne[t  morning at eight o’clock, the Jamaican girl, the one who had
told me about Mr Wasserman and the coconut, brought a glass of orange
juice to my room.

21
   ‘Big  Eig fuss in the hotel this morning,’ she said as she placed the glass
on the table and drew back the curtains. ‘EYeryone flying about all oYer the
place like they was cra]y.’
   ‘Why?  What’s happened?’
   ‘That  little boy in number twelYe, he’s Yanished. He disappeared in the
night.’
   ‘You  mean the turtle boy?’
   ‘That’s  him,’ she said. ‘His parents is raising the roof and the manager’s
going mad.’
   ‘How  long’s he been missing?’
   ‘About  two hours ago his father found his bed empty. But he could’Ye
gone any time in the night I reckon.’
   ‘Yes,’  I said. ‘He could.’
   ‘EYerybody in the hotel searching high and low,’ she said. ‘And a police
car just arriYed.’
   ‘Maybe  he just got up early and went for a climb on the rocks,’ I said.
   Her large dark haunted-looking eyes rested a moment on my face, then
traYelled away. ‘I do not think so,’ she said, and out she went.
   I  slipped on some clothes and hurried down to the beach. On the beach
itself, two natiYe policemen in khaki uniforms were standing with Mr
Edwards, the manager. Mr Edwards was doing the talking. The policemen
were listening patiently. In the distance, at both ends of the beach, I could
see small groups of people, hotel serYants as well as hotel guests, spreading
out and heading for the rocks. The morning was beautiful. The sky was
smoke blue, faintly gla]ed with yellow. The sun was up and making
diamonds all oYer the smooth sea. And Mr Edwards was talking loudly to
the two natiYe policemen, and waYing his arms.
   I  wanted to help. What should I do? Which way should I go? It would be
pointless simply to follow the others. So I just kept walking towards Mr
Edwards.
   About  then, I saw the fishing-boat. The long wooden canoe with a single
mast and a flapping brown sail was still some way out to sea, but it was
heading for the beach. The two natiYes aboard, one at either end, were

22
paddling hard. They were paddling Yery hard. The paddles rose and fell at
such a terrific speed they might haYe been in a race. I stopped and watched
them. Why the great rush to reach the shore? 4uite obYiously they had
something to tell. I kept my eyes on the boat. OYer to my left, I could hear
Mr Edwards saying to the two policemen, ‘It is perfectly ridiculous. I can’t
haYe people disappearing just like that from the hotel. You’d better find him
fast, you understand me? He’s either wandered off somewhere and got lost
or he’s been kidnapped. Either way, it’s the responsibility of the police …’
   The fishing-boat skimmed oYer the sea and came gliding up on to the
sand at the water’s edge. Both men dropped their paddles and jumped out.
They started running up the beach. I recogni]ed the one in front as Willy.
When he caught sight of the manager and the two policemen, he made
straight for them.
   ‘Hey,  Mr Edwards!’ Willy  called out. ‘We just seen a cra]y thing!’
   The manager stiffened and jerked back his neck. The two policemen
remained impassiYe. They were used to e[citable people. They met them
eYery day.
   Willy  stopped in front of the group, his chest heaYing in and out with
heaYy breathing. The other fisherman was close behind him. They were
both naked e[cept for a tiny loincloth, their black skins shining with sweat.
   ‘We been paddling full speed for a long way,’ Willy said, e[cusing his
out-of-breathness. ‘We thought we ought to come back and tell it as Tuick
as we can.’
   ‘Tell  what?’ the manager said. ‘What did you see?’
   ‘It  was cra]y, man! Absolutely cra]y!’
   ‘Get  on with it, Willy,  for heaYen’s sake.’
   ‘You  won’t belieYe it,’ Willy  said. ‘There ain’t nobody going to belieYe
it. Isn’t that right, Tom?’
   ‘That’s  right,’ the other fisherman said, nodding Yigorously. ‘If Willy
here hadn’t been with me to proYe it, I wouldn’t haYe belieYed it myself!’
   ‘BelieYed what?’ Mr  Edwards said. ‘Just tell us what you saw.’
   ‘We’d  gone off early,’ Willy  said, ‘about four o’clock this morning, and
we must’Ye been a couple of miles out before it got light enough to see

23
anything properly. Suddenly, as the sun comes up, we see right ahead of us,
not more’n fifty yards away, we see something we couldn’t belieYe not eYen
with our eyes …’
   ‘What?’  snapped Mr Edwards. ‘For heaYen’s sake get on!’
   ‘We sees that old monster turtle swimming away out there, the one on the
beach yesterday, and we sees the boy sitting high up on the turtle’s back and
riding him oYer the sea like a horse!’
   ‘You  gotta belieYe it!’ the other fisherman cried. ‘I sees it too, so you
gotta belieYe it!’
   Mr  Edwards looked at the two policemen. The two policemen looked at
the fishermen. ‘You wouldn’t be haYing us on, would you?’ one of the
policemen said.
   ‘I  swear it!’  cried Willy. ‘It’s  the gospel truth! There’s this little boy
riding high up on the old turtle’s back and his feet isn’t eYen touching the
water! He’s dry as a bone and sitting there comfy and easy as could be! So
we go after them. Of course we go after them. At first we try creeping up on
them Yery Tuietly, like we always do when we’re catching a turtle, but the
boy sees us. We aren’t Yery far away at this time, you understand. No more
than from here to the edge of the water. And when the boy sees us, he sort
of leans forward as if he’s saying something to that old turtle, and the
turtle’s head comes up and he starts swimming like the clappers of hell!
Man, could that turtle go! Tom and me can paddle pretty Tuick when we
want to, but we’Ye no chance against that monster! No chance at all! He’s
going at least twice as fast as we are! Easy twice as fast, what you say,
Tom?’
   ‘I’d   say he’s going three times as fast,’ Tom said. ‘And I’ll tell you why.
In about ten or fifteen minutes, they’re a mile ahead of us.’
   ‘Why  on earth didn’t you call out to the boy?’ the manager asked. ‘Why
didn’t you speak to him earlier on, when you were closer?’
   ‘We neYer stop calling out, man!’ Willy cried. ‘As  soon as the boy sees
us and we’re not trying to creep up on them any longer, then we start
yelling. We yell eYerything under the sun at that boy to try and get him
aboard. “Hey, boy!” I yell at him. “You come on back with us! We’ll giYe

24
you a lift home! That ain’t no good what you’re doing there, boy! Jump off
and swim while you got the chance and we’ll pick you up! Go on boy,
jump! Your mammy must be waiting for you at home, boy, so why don’t
you come on in with us?” And once I shouted at him, “Listen, boy! We’re
gonna make you a promise! We promise not to catch that old turtle if you
come with us!”’
   ‘Did  he answer you at all?’ the manager asked.
   ‘He  neYer eYen looks round!’ Willy said. ‘He sits high up on that shell
and he’s sort of rocking backwards and forwards with his body just like he’s
urging the old turtle to go faster and faster! You’re gonna lose that little boy,
Mr Edwards, unless someone gets out there real Tuick and grabs him
away!’
   The manager’s normally pink face had turned white as paper. ‘Which
way were they heading?’ he asked sharply.
   ‘North,’  Willy  answered. ‘Almost due north.’
   ‘Right!’   the manager said. ‘We’ll take the speed-boat! I want you with us,
Willy. And you, Tom.’
   The manager, the two policemen and the two fishermen ran down to
where the boat that was used for water-skiing lay beached on the sand. They
pushed the boat out, and eYen the manager lent a hand, wading up to his
knees in his well-pressed white trousers. Then they all climbed in.
   I  watched them go ]ooming off.
   Two hours later, I watched them coming back. They had seen nothing.
   All  through that day, speed-boats and yachts from other hotels along the
coast searched the ocean. In the afternoon, the boy’s father hired a
helicopter. He rode in it himself and they were up there three hours. They
found no trace of the turtle or the boy.
   For a week, the search went on, but with no result.
   And  now, nearly a year has gone by since it happened. In that time, there
has been only one significant bit of news. A party of Americans, out from
Nassau in the Bahamas, were deep-sea fishing off a large island called
Eleuthera. There are literally thousands of coral reefs and small uninhabited
islands in this area, and upon one of these tiny islands, the captain of the

25
yacht saw through his binoculars the figure of a small person. There was a
sandy beach on the island, and the small person was walking on the beach.
The binoculars were passed around, and eYeryone who looked through them
agreed that it was a child of some sort. There was, of course, a lot of
e[citement on board and the fishing lines were Tuickly reeled in. The
captain steered the yacht straight for the island. When they were half a mile
off, they were able, through the binoculars, to see clearly that the figure on
the beach was a boy, and although sunburnt, he was almost certainly white-
skinned, not a natiYe. At that point, the watchers on the yacht also spotted
what looked like a giant turtle on the sand near the boy. What happened
ne[t happened Yery Tuickly. The boy, who had probably caught sight of the
approaching yacht, jumped on the turtle’s back and the huge creature
entered the water and swam at great speed around the island and out of
sight. The yacht searched for two hours, but nothing more was seen either
of the boy or the turtle.
   There is no reason to disbelieYe this report. There were fiYe people on the
yacht. Four of them were Americans and the captain was a Bahamian from
Nassau. All of them in turn saw the boy and the turtle through the
binoculars.
   To reach Eleuthera Island from Jamaica by sea, one must first traYel
north-east for two hundred and fifty miles and pass through the Windward
Passage between Cuba and Haiti. Then one must go north-north-west for a
further three hundred miles at least. This is a total distance of fiYe hundred
and fifty miles, which is a Yery long journey for a small boy to make on the
shell of a giant turtle.
   Who knows what to think of  all this?
   One day, perhaps, he will come back, though I personally doubt it. I haYe
a feeling he’s Tuite happy where he is.

26
                                         The    Hitch-hiker



I had a new car. It was an e[citing toy, a big BMW . Li, which means .
litre, long wheelbase, fuel injection. It had a top speed of 129 m.p.h. and
terrific acceleration. The body was pale blue. The seats inside were darker
blue and they were made of leather, genuine soft leather of the finest
Tuality. The windows were electrically operated and so was the sun-roof.
The radio aerial popped up when I switched on the radio, and disappeared
when I switched it off. The powerful engine growled and grunted
impatiently at slow speeds, but at si[ty miles an hour the growling stopped
and the motor began to purr with pleasure.
   I  was driYing up to London by myself. It was a loYely June day. They
were haymaking in the fields and there were buttercups along both sides of
the road. I was whispering along at seYenty miles an hour, leaning back
comfortably in my seat, with no more than a couple of fingers resting
lightly on the wheel to keep her steady. Ahead of me I saw a man thumbing
a lift. I touched the footbrake and brought the car to a stop beside him. I
always stopped for hitch-hikers. I knew just how it used to feel to be
standing on the side of a country road watching the cars go by. I hated the
driYers for pretending they didn’t see me, especially the ones in big cars
with three empty seats. The large e[pensiYe cars seldom stopped. It was
always the smaller ones that offered you a lift, or the old rusty ones, or the
ones that were already crammed full of children and the driYer would say, ‘I
think we can sTuee]e in one more.’
   The hitch-hiker poked his head through the open window and said,
‘Going to London, guY’nor?’
   ‘Yes,’  I said, ‘jump in.’

27
   He got in and I droYe on.
   He was a small ratty-faced man with grey teeth. His eyes were dark and
Tuick and cleYer, like a rat’s eyes, and his ears were slightly pointed at the
top. He had a cloth cap on his head and he was wearing a greyish-coloured
jacket with enormous pockets. The grey jacket, together with the Tuick eyes
and the pointed ears, made him look more than anything like some sort of a
huge human rat.
   ‘What  part of London are you headed for?’ I asked him.
   ‘I’m   goin’ right through London and out the other side,’ he said. ‘I’m
goin’ to Epsom, for the races. It’s Derby Day today.’
   ‘So it  is,’ I said. ‘I  wish I were going with you. I loYe betting on horses.’
   ‘I  neYer bet on horses,’ he said. ‘I don’t eYen watch ’em run. That’s a
stupid silly business.’
   ‘Then  why do you go?’ I asked.
   He didn’t  seem to like that Tuestion. His little ratty face went absolutely
blank and he sat there staring straight ahead at the road, saying nothing.
   ‘I  e[pect you help to work the betting machines or something like that,’ I
said.
   ‘That’s  eYen sillier,’ he answered. ‘There’s no fun working them lousy
machines and selling tickets to mugs. Any fool could do that.’
   There was a long silence. I decided not to Tuestion him any more. I
remembered how irritated I used to get in my hitch-hiking days when
driYers kept asking me Tuestions. Where are you going? Why are you going
there? What’s your job? Are you married? Do you haYe a girl-friend?
What’s her name? How old are you? And so on and so forth. I used to hate
it.
   ‘I’m   sorry,’ I said. ‘It’s none of my business what you do. The trouble is,
I’m a writer, and most writers are terrible nosey parkers.’
   ‘You  write books?’ he asked.
   ‘Yes.’
   ‘Writin’   books is okay,’ he said. ‘It’s what I call a skilled trade. I’m in a
skilled trade too. The folks I despise is them that spend all their liYes doin’
crummy old routine jobs with no skill in ’em at all. You see what I mean?’

28
   ‘Yes.’
   ‘The  secret of life,’ he said, ‘is to become Yery Yery good at somethin’
that’s Yery Yery ’ard to do.’
   ‘Like  you,’  I said.
   ‘E[actly.  You and me both.’
   ‘What  makes you think that I’m any good at my job?’ I asked. ‘There’s
an awful lot of bad writers around.’
   ‘You  wouldn’t be driYin’ about in a car like this if you weren’t no good at
it,’ he answered. ‘It must’Ye cost a tidy packet, this little job.’
   ‘It  wasn’t cheap.’
   ‘What  can she do flat out?’ he asked.
   ‘One hundred and twenty-nine miles an hour,’ I told him.
   ‘I’ll   bet she won’t do it.’
   ‘I’ll   bet she will.’
   ‘All   car makers is liars,’ he said. ‘You can buy any car you like and it’ll
neYer do what the makers say it will in the ads.’
   ‘This  one will.’
   ‘Open ’er  up then and proYe it,’ he said. ‘Go on, guY’nor, open ’er right
up and let’s see what she’ll do.’
   There is a roundabout at Chalfont St Peter and immediately beyond it
there’s a long straight section of dual carriageway. We came out of the
roundabout on to the carriageway and I pressed my foot down on the
accelerator. The big car leaped forward as though she’d been stung. In ten
seconds or so, we were doing ninety.
   ‘LoYely!’  he cried. ‘Beautiful!  Keep goin’!’
   I  had the accelerator jammed right down against the floor and I held it
there.
   ‘One hundred!’  he shouted … ‘A hundred and fiYe! … A hundred and
ten! … A hundred and fifteen! Go on! Don’t slack off!’
   I  was in the outside lane and we flashed past seYeral cars as though they
were standing still – a green Mini, a big cream-coloured Citroën, a white
Land-RoYer, a huge truck with a container on the back, an orange-coloured
Volkswagen Minibus …

29
   ‘A  hundred and twenty!’ my passenger shouted, jumping up and down.
‘Go on! Go on! Get ’er up to one-two-nine!’
   At  that moment, I heard the scream of a police siren. It was so loud it
seemed to be right inside the car, and then a policeman on a motor-cycle
loomed up alongside us on the inside lane and went past us and raised a
hand for us to stop.
   ‘Oh,  my sainted aunt!’ I said. ‘That’s torn it!’
   The policeman must haYe been doing about a hundred and thirty when he
passed us, and he took plenty of time slowing down. Finally, he pulled into
the side of the road and I pulled in behind him. ‘I didn’t know police
motorcycles could go as fast as that,’ I said rather lamely.
   ‘That  one can,’ my passenger said. ‘It’s the same make as yours. It’s a
BMW R90S. Fastest bike on the road. That’s what they’re usin’ nowadays.’
   The policeman got off his motor-cycle and leaned the machine sideways
on to its prop stand. Then he took off his gloYes and placed them carefully
on the seat. He was in no hurry now. He had us where he wanted us and he
knew it.
   ‘This  is real trouble,’ I said. ‘I don’t  like it one bit.’
   ‘Don’t  talk to ’im  any more than is necessary, you understand,’ my
companion said. ‘Just sit tight and keep mum.’
   Like  an e[ecutioner approaching his Yictim, the policeman came strolling
slowly towards us. He was a big meaty man with a belly, and his blue
breeches were skintight around his enormous thighs. His goggles were
pulled up on the helmet, showing a smouldering red face with wide cheeks.
   We sat there like guilty schoolboys, waiting for him to arriYe.
   ‘Watch out for this man,’ my  passenger whispered. ‘’Ee looks mean as
the deYil.’
   The policeman came round to my open window and placed one meaty
hand on the sill. ‘What’s the hurry?’ he said.
   ‘No  hurry, officer,’ I  answered.
   ‘Perhaps there’s a woman in the back haYing a baby and you’re rushing
her to hospital? Is that it?’
   ‘No,  officer.’

30
   ‘Or  perhaps your house is on fire and you’re dashing home to rescue the
family from upstairs?’ His Yoice was dangerously soft and mocking.
   ‘My  house isn’t on fire, officer.’
   ‘In  that case,’ he said, ‘you’Ye got yourself into a nasty mess, haYen’t
you? Do you know what the speed limit is in this country?’
   ‘SeYenty,’ I said.
   ‘And  do you mind telling me e[actly  what speed you were doing just
now?’
   I  shrugged and didn’t say anything.
   When he spoke ne[t, he raised his Yoice so loud that I jumped. ‘One
hundred and tZenty miles per hour!’ he barked. ‘That’s fifty miles an hour
oYer the limit!’
   He turned his head and spat out a big gob of spit. It landed on the wing of
my car and started sliding down oYer my beautiful blue paint. Then he
turned back again and stared hard at my passenger. ‘And who are you?’ he
asked sharply.
   ‘He’s  a hitch-hiker,’ I said. ‘I’m  giYing him a lift.’
   ‘I  didn’t  ask you,’ he said. ‘I asked him.’
   ‘’AYe  I done somethin’ wrong?’ my passenger asked. His Yoice was as
soft and oily as haircream.
   ‘That’s  more than likely,’ the policeman answered. ‘Anyway, you’re a
witness. I’ll deal with you in a minute. DriYing-licence,’ he snapped,
holding out his hand.
   I  gaYe him my driYing-licence.
   He unbuttoned the left-hand breast-pocket of his tunic and brought out
the dreaded book of tickets. Carefully, he copied the name and address from
my licence. Then he gaYe it back to me. He strolled round to the front of the
car and read the number from the number-plate and wrote that down as
well. He filled in  the date, the time and the details of my offence. Then he
tore out the top copy of the ticket. But before handing it to me, he checked
that all the information had come through clearly on his own carbon copy.
Finally, he replaced the book in his tunic pocket and fastened the button.

31
   ‘Now  you,’ he said to my passenger, and he walked around to the other
side of the car. From the other breast-pocket he produced a small black
notebook. ‘Name?’ he snapped.
   ‘Michael  Fish,’ my passenger said.
   ‘Address?’
   ‘Fourteen, Windsor Lane, Luton.’
   ‘Show  me something to proYe this is your real name and address,’ the
policeman said.
   My  passenger fished in his pockets and came out with a driYing-licence
of his own. The policeman checked the name and address and handed it
back to him. ‘What’s your job?’ he asked sharply.
   ‘I’m   an ’od carrier.’
   ‘A  Zhat?’
   ‘An  ’od carrier.’
   ‘Spell  it.’
   ‘H-O-D  C-A-  …’
   ‘That’ll   do. And what’s a hod carrier, may I ask?’
   ‘An  ’od carrier, officer, is a person ’oo carries the cement up the ladder to
the bricklayer. And the ’od is what ’ee carries it in. It’s got a long ’andle,
and on the top you’Ye got two bits of wood set at an angle …’
   ‘All   right, all right. Who’s your employer?’
   ‘Don’t  ’aYe one. I’m unemployed.’
   The policeman wrote all this down in the black notebook. Then he
returned the book to its pocket and did up the button.
   ‘When  I get back to the station I’m going to do a little checking up on
you,’ he said to my passenger.
   ‘Me?  What’Ye I done wrong?’ the rat-faced man asked.
   ‘I  don’t like  your face, that’s all,’ the policeman said. ‘And we just might
haYe a picture of it somewhere in our files.’ He strolled round the car and
returned to my window.
   ‘I  suppose you know you’re in serious trouble,’ he said to me.
   ‘Yes, officer.’

32
   ‘You  won’t be driYing this fancy car of yours again for a Yery long time,
not after Ze’ve finished with you. You won’t be driYing any car again come
to that for seYeral years. And a good thing, too. I hope they lock you up for
a spell into the bargain.’
   ‘You  mean prison?’ I asked, alarmed.
   ‘Absolutely,’  he said, smacking his lips. ‘In the clink. Behind the bars.
Along with all  the other criminals who break the law. And a hefty fine into
the bargain. Nobody will be more pleased about that than me. I’ll see you in
court, both of you. You’ll be getting a summons to appear.’
   He turned away and walked oYer to his motor-cycle. He flipped the prop
stand back into position with his foot and swung his leg oYer the saddle.
Then he kicked the starter and roared off up the road out of sight.
   ‘Phew!’  I gasped. ‘That’s done it.’
   ‘We was caught,’ my passenger said. ‘We was caught good and proper.’
   ‘I  was caught, you mean.’
   ‘That’s  right,’ he said. ‘What you goin’ to do now, guY’nor?’
   ‘I’m   going straight up to London to talk to my solicitor,’ I said. I started
the car and droYe on.
   ‘You  mustn’t belieYe what ’ee said to you about goin’ to prison,’ my
passenger said. ‘They don’t put nobody in the clink just for speedin’.’
   ‘Are  you sure of that?’ I asked.
   ‘I’m   positiYe,’ he answered. ‘They can take your licence away and they
can giYe you a whoppin’ big fine, but that’ll be the end of it.’
   I  felt tremendously relieYed.
   ‘By  the way,’ I said, ‘why did  you lie to him?’
   ‘Who,  me?’ he said. ‘What makes you think I lied?’
   ‘You  told him you were an unemployed hod carrier. But you told me you
were in a highly-skilled trade.’
   ‘So I  am,’ he said. ‘But it don’t pay to tell eYerythin’ to a copper.’
   ‘So what do you do?’ I asked him.
   ‘Ah,’   he said slyly. ‘That’d be tellin’, wouldn’t  it?’
   ‘Is  it something you’re ashamed of?’

33
   ‘Ashamed?’ he cried. ‘Me, ashamed of my job? I’m about as proud of it
as anybody could be in the entire world!’
   ‘Then  why won’t you tell me?’
   ‘You  writers really is nosey parkers, aren’t you?’ he said. ‘And you ain’t
goin’ to be ’appy, I don’t think, until  you’Ye found out e[actly what the
answer is?’
   ‘I  don’t really care one way or the other,’ I told him, lying.
   He gaYe me a crafty little ratty look out of the sides of his eyes. ‘I think
you do care,’ he said. ‘I can see it in your face that you think I’m in some
kind of a Yery peculiar trade and you’re just achin’ to know what it is.’
   I  didn’t like the way he read my thoughts. I kept Tuiet and stared at the
road ahead.
   ‘You’d  be right, too,’ he went on. ‘I am in a Yery peculiar trade. I’m in
the Tueerest peculiar trade of ’em all.’
   I  waited for him to go on.
   ‘That’s  why I ’as to be e[tra careful ’oo I’m  talkin’  to, you see. ’Ow am I
to know, for instance, you’re not another copper in plain clothes?’
   ‘Do  I look like  a copper?’
   ‘No,’  he said. ‘You don’t. And you ain’t. Any  fool could tell that.’
   He took from his pocket a tin of tobacco and a packet of cigarette papers
and started to roll a cigarette. I was watching him out of the corner of one
eye, and the speed with which he performed this rather difficult operation
was incredible. The cigarette was rolled and ready in about fiYe seconds. He
ran his tongue along the edge of the paper, stuck it down and popped the
cigarette between his lips. Then, as if from nowhere, a lighter appeared in
his hand. The lighter flamed. The cigarette was lit. The lighter disappeared.
It was altogether a remarkable performance.
   ‘I’Ye  neYer seen anyone roll a cigarette as fast as that,’ I said.
   ‘Ah,’   he said, taking a deep suck of smoke. ‘So you noticed.’
   ‘Of  course I noticed. It was Tuite fantastic.’
   He sat back and smiled. It pleased him Yery much that I had noticed how
Tuickly he could roll a cigarette. ‘You want to know what makes me able to
do it?’ he asked.

34
   ‘Go  on then.’
   ‘It’s  because I’Ye got fantastic fingers. These fingers of mine,’ he said,
holding up both hands high in front of him, ‘are Tuicker and cleYerer than
the fingers of the best piano player in the world!’
   ‘Are  you a piano player?’
   ‘Don’t  be daft,’ he said. ‘Do I look like  a piano player?’
   I  glanced at his fingers. They were so beautifully shaped, so slim and
long and elegant, they didn’t seem to belong to the rest of him at all. They
looked more like the fingers of a brain surgeon or a watchmaker.
   ‘My  job,’  he went on, ‘is a hundred times more difficult than playin’ the
piano. Any twerp can learn to do that. There’s titchy little kids learnin’ to
play the piano in almost any ’ouse you go into these days. That’s right, ain’t
it?’
   ‘More  or less,’ I said.
   ‘Of  course it’s right. But there’s not one person in ten million can learn to
do what I do. Not one in ten million! ’Ow about that?’
   ‘Ama]ing,’   I said.
   ‘You’re  darn right it’s ama]in’,’  he said.
   ‘I  think I  know what you do,’ I said. ‘You do conjuring tricks. You’re a
conjurer.’
   ‘Me?’  he snorted. ‘A conjurer? Can you picture me goin’ round crummy
kids’ parties makin’ rabbits come out of top ’ats?’
   ‘Then  you’re a card player. You get people into card games and deal
yourself marYellous hands.’
   ‘Me!  A  rotten card-sharper!’ he cried. ‘That’s a miserable racket if eYer
there was one.’
   ‘All   right. I giYe up.’
   I  was taking the car along slowly now, at no more than forty miles an
hour, to make Tuite sure I wasn’t stopped again. We had come on to the
main London–O[ford road and were running down the hill towards
Denham.
   Suddenly, my passenger was holding up a black leather belt in his hand.
‘EYer seen this before?’ he asked. The belt had a brass buckle of unusual

35
design.
   ‘Hey!’   I said. ‘That’s mine, isn’t it? It is mine! Where did you get it?’
   He grinned and waYed the belt gently from side to side. ‘Where d’you
think I got it?’ he said. ‘Off the top of your trousers, of course.’
   I  reached down and felt for my belt. It was gone.
   ‘You  mean you took it off me while we’Ye been driYing along?’ I asked,
flabbergasted.
   He nodded, watching me all the time with those little black ratty eyes.
   ‘That’s  impossible,’ I said. ‘You’d haYe to undo the buckle and slide the
whole thing out through the loops all the way round. I’d haYe seen you
doing it. And eYen if I hadn’t seen you, I’d haYe felt it.’
   ‘Ah,  but you didn’t, did you?’  he said, triumphant. He dropped the belt
on his lap, and now all at once there was a brown shoelace dangling from
his fingers. ‘And what about this, then?’ he e[claimed, waYing the shoelace.
   ‘What  about it?’ I said.
   ‘Anyone  round ’ere missin’ a shoelace?’ he asked, grinning.
   I  glanced down at my shoes. The lace of one of them was missing. ‘Good
grief!’  I said. ‘How did you do that? I neYer saw you bending down.’
   ‘You  neYer saw nothin’,’ he said proudly. ‘You neYer eYen saw me moYe
an inch. And you know why?’
   ‘Yes,’  I said. ‘Because you’Ye got fantastic fingers.’
   ‘E[actly   right!’  he cried. ‘You catch on pretty Tuick, don’t you?’ He sat
back and sucked away at his home-made cigarette, blowing the smoke out
in a thin stream against the windshield. He knew he had impressed me
greatly with those two tricks, and this made him Yery happy. ‘I don’t want
to be late,’ he said. ‘What time is it?’
   ‘There’s a clock in front  of you,’ I told  him.
   ‘I  don’t trust car clocks,’ he said. ‘What does your watch say?’
   I  hitched up my sleeYe to look at the watch on my wrist. It wasn’t there. I
looked at the man. He looked back at me, grinning.
   ‘You’Ye taken that, too,’ I said.
   He held out his hand and there was my watch lying in his palm. ‘Nice bit
of stuff, this,’ he said. ‘Superior Tuality. Eighteen-carat gold. Easy to flog,

36
too. It’s neYer any trouble gettin’ rid of Tuality goods.’
   ‘I’d   like it back, if you don’t mind,’  I said rather huffily.
   He placed the watch carefully on the leather tray in front of him. ‘I
wouldn’t nick anything from you, guY’nor,’ he said. ‘You’re my pal. You’re
giYing me a lift.’
   ‘I’m   glad to hear it,’ I said.
   ‘All   I’m doin’  is answerin’ your Tuestions,’ he went on. ‘You asked me
what I did for a liYin’ and I’m  showin’ you.’
   ‘What  else haYe you got of mine?’
   He smiled again, and now he started to take from the pocket of his jacket
one thing after another that belonged to me – my driYing-licence, a key-ring
with four keys on it, some pound notes, a few coins, a letter from my
publishers, my diary, a stubby old pencil, a cigarette-lighter, and last of all,
a beautiful old sapphire ring with pearls around it belonging to my wife. I
was taking the ring up to the jeweller in London because one of the pearls
was missing.
   ‘Now  there’s another loYely piece of goods,’ he said, turning the ring
oYer in his fingers. ‘That’s eighteenth century, if I’m not mistaken, from the
reign of King George the Third.’
   ‘You’re  right,’  I said, impressed. ‘You’re absolutely right.’
   He put the ring on the leather tray with the other items.
   ‘So you’re  a pickpocket,’ I said.
   ‘I  don’t like  that word,’ he answered. ‘It’s a coarse and Yulgar word.
Pickpockets is coarse and Yulgar people who only do easy little amateur
jobs. They lift money from blind old ladies.’
   ‘What  do you call yourself, then?’
   ‘Me?  I’m a fingersmith. I’m  a professional fingersmith.’ He spoke the
words solemnly and proudly, as though he were telling me he was the
President of the Royal College of Surgeons or the Archbishop of
Canterbury.
   ‘I’Ye  neYer heard that word before,’ I said. ‘Did you inYent it?’
   ‘Of  course I didn’t inYent it,’ he replied. ‘It’s the name giYen to them
who’s risen to the Yery top of the profession. You’Ye ’eard of a goldsmith

37
and a silYersmith, for instance. They’re e[perts with gold and silYer. I’m an
e[pert with my fingers, so I’m  a fingersmith.’
   ‘It  must be an interesting job.’
   ‘It’s  a marYellous job,’ he answered. ‘It’s loYely.’
   ‘And  that’s why you go to the races?’
   ‘Race meetings is easy meat,’ he said. ‘You just stand around after the
race, watchin’ for the lucky ones to Tueue up and draw their money. And
when you see someone collectin’ a big bundle of notes, you simply follows
after ’im and ’elps yourself. But don’t get me wrong, guY’nor. I neYer takes
nothin’ from a loser. Nor from poor people neither. I only go after them as
can afford it, the winners and the rich.’
   ‘That’s  Yery thoughtful of you,’ I said. ‘How often do you get caught?’
   ‘Caught?’  he cried, disgusted. ‘Me get caught! It’s only pickpockets get
caught. Fingersmiths neYer. Listen, I could take the false teeth out of your
mouth if I wanted to and you wouldn’t eYen catch me!’
   ‘I  don’t haYe false teeth,’ I said.
   ‘I  know you don’t,’  he answered. ‘Otherwise I’d ’aYe ’ad ’em out long
ago!’
   I  belieYed him. Those long slim fingers of his seemed able to do
anything.
   We droYe on for a while without talking.
   ‘That  policeman’s going to check up on you pretty thoroughly,’ I said.
‘Doesn’t that worry you a bit?’
   ‘Nobody’s  checkin’ up on me,’ he said.
   ‘Of  course they are. He’s got your name and address written down most
carefully in his black book.’
   The man gaYe me another of his sly, ratty little smiles. ‘Ah,’ he said. ‘So
’ee ’as. But I’ll  bet ’ee ain’t got it all written down in ’is  memory as well.
I’Ye neYer known a copper yet with a decent memory. Some of ’em can’t
eYen remember their own names.’
   ‘What’s  memory got to do with it?’ I asked. ‘It’s written  down in his
book, isn’t it?’

38
   ‘Yes, guY’nor, it is. But the trouble is, ’ee’s lost the book. ’Ee’s lost both
books, the one with my name in it and the one with yours.’
   In  the long delicate fingers of his right hand, the man was holding up in
triumph the two books he had taken from the policeman’s pockets. ‘Easiest
job I eYer done,’ he announced proudly.
   I  nearly swerYed the car into a milk-truck, I was so e[cited.
   ‘That  copper’s got nothin’ on either of us now,’ he said.
   ‘You’re  a genius!’ I cried.
   ‘’Ee’s  got no names, no addresses, no car number, no nothin’,’ he said.
   ‘You’re  brilliant!’
   ‘I  think you’d  better pull in off this main road as soon as possible,’ he
said. ‘Then we’d better build a little bonfire and burn these books.’
   ‘You’re  a fantastic fellow,’ I e[claimed.
   ‘Thank  you, guY’nor,’ he said. ‘It’s always nice to be appreciated.’

39
                         A  Note    About    the   Ne[t    Story



In 1946, more than thirty years ago, I was still unmarried and liYing with
my mother. I was making a fair income by writing two short stories a year.
Each of them took four months to complete, and fortunately there were
people both at home and abroad who were willing to buy them.
   One morning in April of that year, I read in the newspaper about a
remarkable find of Roman silYer. It had been discoYered four years before
by a ploughman near Mildenhall, in the county of Suffolk, but the discoYery
had for some reason been kept secret until then. The newspaper article said
it was the greatest treasure eYer found in the British Isles, and it had now
been acTuired by the British Museum. The name of the ploughman was
giYen as Gordon Butcher.
   True stories about the finding of really big treasure send shiYers of
electricity all the way down my legs to the soles of my feet. The moment I
read the story, I leapt up from my chair without finishing my breakfast and
shouted good-bye to my mother and rushed out to my car. The car was a
nine-year-old Wolseley, and I called it ‘The Hard Black Slinker’. It went
well but not Yery fast.
   Mildenhall was about a hundred and twenty miles from my home, a
tricky cross-country trip along twisty roads and country lanes. I got there at
lunchtime, and by asking at the local police station, I found the small house
where Gordon Butcher liYed with his family. He was at home haYing his
lunch when I knocked on his door.
   I asked him if he would mind talking to me about how he found the
treasure.

40
   ‘No,  thank you,’ he said. ‘I’Ye had enough of reporters. I don’t want to
see another reporter for the rest of my life.’
   ‘I’m   not a reporter,’ I told him. ‘I’m  a short-story writer and I sell my
work to maga]ines. They pay good money.’ I went on to say that if he
would tell me e[actly how he found the treasure then I would write a
truthful story about it. And if I  was lucky enough to sell it, I would split the
money eTually with him.
   In  the end, he agreed to talk to me. We sat for seYeral hours in his
kitchen, and he told me an enthralling story. When he had finished, I paid a
Yisit to the other man in the affair, an older fellow called Ford. Ford
wouldn’t talk to me and closed the door in my face. But by then I had my
story and I set out for home.
   The ne[t  morning, I went up to the British Museum in London to see the
treasure that Gordon Butcher had found. It was fabulous. I got the shiYers
all oYer again just from looking at it.
   I  wrote the story as truthfully as I possibly could and sent it off to
America. It was bought by a maga]ine called the Saturday Evening Post,
and I was well paid. When the money arriYed, I sent e[actly half of it to
Gordon Butcher in Mildenhall.
   One week later, I receiYed a letter from Mr Butcher written upon what
must haYe been a page torn from a child’s school e[ercise-book. It said,
‘… you could haYe knocked me oYer with a feather when I saw your
cheTue. It was loYely. I want to thank you …’
   Here is the story almost e[actly as it was written thirty years ago. I’Ye
changed it Yery little. I’Ye simply toned down some of the more flowery
passages and taken out a number of superfluous adjectiYes and unnecessary
sentences.

41
                               The    Mildenhall         Treasure



Around seYen o’clock in the morning, Gordon Butcher got out of bed and
switched on the light. He walked barefoot to the window and drew back the
curtains and looked out.
   This was January and it was still dark, but he could tell there hadn’t been
any snow in the night.
   ‘That  wind,’ he said aloud to his wife. ‘Just listen to that wind.’
   His wife  was out of bed now, standing beside him near the window, and
the two of them were silent, listening to the swish of the icy wind as it came
sweeping in oYer the fens.
   ‘It’s  a nor’-easter,’ he said.
   ‘There’ll  be snow for certain before nightfall,’ she told him. ‘And  plenty
of it.’
   She was dressed before him, and she went into the ne[t room and leaned
oYer the cot of her si[-year-old daughter and gaYe her a kiss. She called out
a good morning to the two other older childen in the third room, then she
went downstairs to make breakfast.
   At  a Tuarter to eight, Gordon Butcher put on his coat, his cap and his
leather gloYes, and walked out of the back door into the bitter early-
morning winter weather. As he moYed through the half-daylight oYer the
yard to the shed where his bicycle stood, the wind was like a knife on his
cheek. He wheeled out the bike and mounted and began to ride down the
middle of the narrow road, right into the face of the gale.
   Gordon Butcher was thirty-eight. He was not an ordinary farm labourer.
He took orders from no man unless he wished. He owned his own tractor,
and with this he ploughed other men’s fields and gathered other men’s

42
harYests under contract. His thoughts were only for his wife, his son, his
two daughters. His wealth was in his small brick house, his two cows, his
tractor, his skill as a ploughman.
   Gordon Butcher’s head was Yery curiously shaped, the back of it
protruding like the sharp end of an enormous egg, and his ears stuck out,
and a front tooth was missing on the left side. But none of this seemed to
matter Yery much when you met him face to face in the open air. He looked
at you with steady blue eyes that were without any malice or cunning or
greed. And the mouth didn’t haYe those thin lines of bitterness around the
edges which one so often sees on men who work the land and spend their
days fighting the weather.
   His only  eccentricity, to which he would cheerfully admit if you asked
him, was in talking aloud to himself when he was alone. This habit, he said,
grew from the fact that the kind of work he did left him entirely by himself
for ten hours a day, si[ days a week. ‘It keeps me company,’ he said,
‘hearing me own Yoice now and again.’
   He biked on down the road, pedalling hard against the brutal wind.
   ‘All   right,’ he said, ‘all right, why  don’t you blow a bit? Is that the best
you can do? My goodness me, I hardly know you’re there this morning!’
The wind howled around him and snapped at his coat and sTuee]ed its way
through the pores of the heaYy wool, through his jacket underneath, through
his shirt and Yest, and it touched his bare skin with an icy finger-tip.
   ‘Why,’  he said, ‘it’s lukewarm you are today. You’ll haYe to do a sight
better than that if you’re going to make me shiYer.’
   And  now the darkness was diluting into a pale grey morning light, and
Gordon Butcher could see the cloudy roof of the sky Yery low aboYe his
head and flying with the wind. Grey-blue the clouds were, flecked here and
there with black, a solid mass from hori]on to hori]on, the whole thing
moYing with the wind, sliding past aboYe his head like a great grey sheet of
metal unrolling. All  around him lay the bleak and lonely fen-country of
Suffolk, mile upon mile of it that went on for eYer.
   He pedalled on. He rode through the outskirts of the little town of
Mildenhall and headed for the Yillage of West Row where the man called

43
Ford had his place.
   He had left his tractor at Ford’s the day before because his ne[t job was
to plough up four and a half acres on Thistley Green for Ford. It was not
Ford’s land. It is important to remember this, but Ford was the one who had
asked him to do the work.
   Actually,  a farmer called Rolfe owned the four and a half acres.
   Rolfe had asked Ford to get it ploughed because Ford, like Gordon
Butcher, did ploughing jobs for other men. The difference between Ford
and Gordon Butcher was that Ford was somewhat grander. He was a fairly
prosperous small-time agricultural engineer who had a nice house and a
large yard full of sheds filled with farm implements and machinery. Gordon
Butcher had only his one tractor.
   On this occasion, howeYer, when Rolfe had asked Ford to plough up his
four and a half acres on Thistley Green, Ford was too busy to do the work
so he hired Gordon Butcher to do it for him.
   There was no one about in Ford’s yard when Butcher rode in. He parked
his bike, filled up his tractor with paraffin and petrol, warmed the engine,
hitched the plough behind, mounted the high seat and droYe out to Thistley
Green.
   The field  was not half a mile away, and around eight-thirty Butcher droYe
the tractor in through the gate on to the field itself. Thistley Green was
maybe a hundred acres all told, with a low hedge running round it. And
although it was actually one large field, different parts of it were owned by
different men. These separate parts were easy to define because each was
cultiYated in its own way. Rolfe’s plot of four and a half acres was oYer to
one side near the southern boundary fence. Butcher knew where it was and
he droYe his tractor round the edge of the field, then inward until he was on
the plot.
   The plot was barley stubble now, coYered with the short and rotting
yellow stalks of barley harYested last autumn, and only recently it had been
broad-sheared so that now it was ready for the plough.
   ‘Deep-plough it,’  Ford had said to Butcher the day before. ‘It’s for sugar-
beet. Rolfe’s putting sugar-beet in there.’

44
   They only plough about four inches down for barley, but for sugar-beet
they plough deep, to ten or twelYe inches. A horse-drawn plough can’t
plough as deep as that. It was only since motor-tractors came along that the
farmers had been able to deep-plough properly. Rolfe’s land had been deep-
ploughed for sugar-beet some years before this, but it wasn’t Butcher who
had done the ploughing and no doubt the job had been skimped a bit and the
ploughman had not gone Tuite as deep as he should. Had he done so, what
was about to happen today would haYe happened then, and that would haYe
been a different story.
   Gordon Butcher began to plough. Up and down the field he went,
lowering the plough deeper and deeper each trip until at last it was cutting
twelYe inches into the ground and turning up a smooth eYen waYe of black
earth as it went.
   The wind was coming faster now, rushing in from the killer sea,
sweeping oYer the flat Norfolk fields, past Sa[-thorpe and Reepham and
Honingham and Swaffham and Larling and oYer the border to Suffolk, to
Mildenhall and to Thistley Green where Gordon Butcher sat upright high on
the seat of his tractor, driYing back and forth oYer the plot of yellow barley
stubble that belonged to Rolfe. Gordon Butcher could smell the sharp crisp
smell of snow not far away, he could see the low roof of the sky – no longer
flecked with black, but pale and whitish grey – sliding by oYerhead like a
solid sheet of metal unrolling.
   ‘Well,’  he said, raising his Yoice aboYe the clatter of the tractor, ‘you are
surely fashed at somebody today. What an almighty fuss it is now of
blowin’ and whistlin’  and free]in’.  Like a woman,’ he added. ‘Just like a
woman does sometimes in the eYening,’ and he kept his eye upon the line of
the furrow, and he smiled.
   At  noon he stopped the tractor, dismounted and fished in his pocket for
his lunch. He found it and sat on the ground in the lee of one of the huge
tractor-wheels. He ate large pieces of bread and Yery small pieces of cheese.
He had nothing to drink, for his only Thermos had got smashed by the
jolting of the tractor two weeks before, and in wartime, for this was in
January 1942, you could not buy another anywhere. For about fifteen

45
minutes he sat on the ground in the shelter of the wheel and ate his lunch.
Then he got up and e[amined his peg.
   Unlike  many ploughmen, Butcher always hitched his plough to the
tractor with a wooden peg so that if the plough fouled a root or a large
stone, the peg would simply break at once, leaYing the plough behind and
saYing the shares from serious damage. All oYer the black fen country, just
below the surface, lie enormous trunks of ancient oak trees, and a wooden
peg will saYe a ploughshare many times a week out there. Although
Thistley Green was well-cultiYated land, field-land, not fen-land, Butcher
was taking no chances with his plough.
   He e[amined the wooden peg, found it sound, mounted the tractor again,
and went on with his ploughing.
   The tractor nosed back and forth oYer the ground, leaYing a smooth black
waYe of soil behind it. And still the wind blew colder but it did not snow.
   Around three o’clock the thing happened.
   There was a slight jolt, the wooden peg broke, and the tractor left the
plough behind. Butcher stopped, dismounted and walked back to the plough
to see what it had struck. It was surprising for this to haYe happened here,
on field-land. There should be no oak trees underneath the soil in this place.
   He knelt down beside the plough and began to scoop the soil away
around the point of the ploughshare. The lower tip of the share was twelYe
inches down. There was a lot of soil to be scooped up. He dug his gloYed
fingers into the earth and scooped it out with both hands. Si[ inches
down … eight inches … ten inches … twelYe. He slid his fingers along the
blade of the ploughshare until they reached the forward point of it. The soil
was loose and crumbly, and it kept falling back into the hole he was
digging. He could not therefore see the twelYe-inch-deep point of the share.
He could only feel it. And now he could feel that the point was indeed
lodged against something solid. He scooped away more earth. He enlarged
the hole. It was necessary to see clearly what sort of an obstacle he had
struck. If it was fairly small, then perhaps he could dig it out with his hands
and get on with the job. If it was a tree-trunk he would haYe to go back to
Ford’s and fetch a spade.

46
   ‘Come on,’  he said aloud. ‘I’ll haYe you out of there, you hidden demon,
you rotten old thing.’ And suddenly, as the gloYed fingers scraped away a
final handful of black earth, he caught sight of the curYed rim of something
flat, like the rim of a huge thick plate sticking up out of the soil. He rubbed
the rim with his fingers and he rubbed again. Then all at once, the rim gaYe
off a greenish glint, and Gordon Butcher bent his head closer and closer
still, peering down into the little hole he had dug with his hands. For one
last time, he rubbed the rim clean with his fingers, and in a flash of light, he
saw clearly the unmistakable blue-green crust of ancient buried metal, and
his heart stood still.
   It  should be e[plained here that farmers in this part of Suffolk, and
particularly in the Mildenhall area, haYe for years been turning up ancient
objects from the soil. Flint arrowheads from Yery long ago haYe been found
in considerable numbers, but more interesting than that, Roman pottery and
Roman implements haYe also been found. It is known that the Romans
faYoured this part of the country during their occupation of Britain, and all
local farmers are therefore well aware of the possibility of finding
something interesting during a day’s work. And so there was a kind of
permanent awareness among Mildenhall people of the presence of treasure
underneath the earth of their land.
   Gordon Butcher’s reaction, as soon as he saw the rim of that enormous
plate, was a curious one. He immediately drew away. Then he got to his feet
and turned his back on what he had just seen. He paused only long enough
to switch off the engine of his tractor before he walked off fast in the
direction of the road.
   He did not know precisely what impulse caused him to stop digging and
walk away. He will tell you that the only thing he can remember about those
first few seconds was the whiff of danger that came to him from that little
patch of greenish blue. The moment he touched it with his fingers,
something electric went through his body, and there came to him a powerful
premonition that this was a thing that could destroy the peace and happiness
of many people.

47
   In  the beginning, all he had wished was to be away from it, and to leaYe
it behind him and be done with it for eYer. But after he had gone a few
hundred yards or so, he began to slow his pace. At the gate leading out from
Thistley Green, he stopped.
   ‘What  in the world is the matter with you, Mr Gordon Butcher?’ he said
aloud to the howling wind. ‘Are you frightened or something? No, I’m not
frightened. But I’ll  tell you straight, I’m not keen to handle this alone.’
   That was when he thought of Ford.
   He thought of Ford at first because it was for him that he was working.
He thought of him second because he knew that Ford was a kind of
collector of old stuff, of all the old stones and arrowheads which people
kept digging up from time to time in the district, which they brought to Ford
and which Ford placed upon the mantel in his parlour. It was belieYed that
Ford sold these things, but no one knew or cared how he did it.
   Gordon Butcher turned towards Ford’s place and walked fast out of the
gate on to the narrow road, down the road around the sharp left-hand corner
and so to the house. He found Ford in his large shed, bending oYer a
damaged harrow, mending it. Butcher stood by the door and said, ‘Mr
Ford!’
   Ford looked around without straightening his body.
   ‘Well,  Gordon,’ he said, ‘what is it?’
   Ford was middle-aged or a little older, bald-headed, long-nosed, with a
cleYer fo[y look about his face. His mouth was thin and sour, and when he
looked at you, and when you saw the tightness of his mouth and the thin,
sour line of his lips, you knew that this was a mouth that neYer smiled. His
chin receded, his nose was long and sharp and he had the air about him of a
sour old crafty fo[ from  the woods.
   ‘What  is it?’ he said looking up from the harrow.
   Gordon Butcher stood by the door, blue-cheeked with cold, a little out of
breath, rubbing his hands slowly one against the other.
   ‘The  tractor left the plough behind,’ he said Tuietly. ‘There’s metal down
there. I saw it.’
   Ford’s head gaYe a jerk. ‘What kind of metal?’ he said sharply.

48
   ‘Flat.  4uite flat  like a sort of huge plate.’
   ‘You  didn’t dig it  out?’ Ford had straightened up now and there was a
glint of eagles in his eyes.
   Butcher said, ‘No, I left  it alone and came straight on here.’
   Ford walked Tuickly oYer to the corner and took his coat off the nail. He
found a cap and gloYes, then he found a spade and went towards the door.
There was something odd, he noticed, in Butcher’s manner.
   ‘You’re  sure it was metal?’
   ‘Crusted up,’ Butcher said. ‘But it  was metal all right.’
   ‘How  deep?’
   ‘TwelYe inches down. At least the top of it was twelYe inches down. The
rest is deeper.’
   ‘How  d’you know  it was a plate?’
   ‘I  don’t,’  Butcher said. ‘I only saw a little bit of the rim. But it  looked
like a plate to me. An enormous plate.’
   Ford’s fo[y  face went Tuite white with e[citement. ‘Come on,’  he said.
‘We’ll  go back and see.’
   The two men walked out of the shed into the fierce, eYer-mounting fury
of the wind. Ford shiYered.
   ‘Curse this filthy  weather,’ he said. ‘Curse and blast this filthy free]ing
weather,’ and he sank his pointed fo[y face deep into the collar of his coat
and began to ponder upon the possibilities of Butcher’s find.
   One thing Ford knew which Butcher did not know. He knew that back in
192 a man called Lethbridge, a lecturer in Anglo-Sa[on AntiTuities at
Cambridge UniYersity, had been e[caYating in the district and that he had
actually unearthed the foundations of a Roman Yilla on Thistley Green
itself. Ford was not forgetting that, and he Tuickened his pace. Butcher
walked beside him without speaking and soon they were there. They went
through the gate and oYer the field to the plough which lay about ten yards
behind the tractor.
   Ford knelt down beside the front of the plough and peered into the small
hole Gordon Butcher had dug with his hands. He touched the rim of green-
blue metal with a gloYed finger. He scraped away a bit more earth. He

49
leaned further forward so that his pointed nose was right down the hole. He
ran fingers oYer the rough green surface. Then he stood up and said, ‘Let’s
get the plough out of the way and do some digging.’ Although there were
fireworks e[ploding  in his head and shiYers running all oYer his body, Ford
kept his Yoice Yery soft and casual.
   Between them they pulled the plough back a couple of yards.
   ‘GiYe me the spade,’ Ford said, and he began cautiously to dig the soil
away in a circle about three feet in diameter around the e[posed patch of
metal. When the hole was two feet deep, he threw away the spade and used
his hands. He knelt down and scraped the soil away, and gradually the little
patch of metal grew and grew until at last there lay e[posed before them the
great round disc of an enormous plate. It was fully twenty-four inches in
diameter. The lower point of the plough had just caught the raised centre
rim of the plate, for one could see the dent.
   Carefully  Ford lifted it out of the hole. He got to his feet, and stood
wiping the soil away from it, turning it oYer and oYer in his hands. There
was nothing much to see, for the whole surface was crusted oYer with a
thick layer of a hard greenish-blue substance. But he knew that it was an
enormous plate or dish of great weight and thickness. It weighed about
eighteen pounds!
   Ford stood in the field of yellow  barley stubble and ga]ed at the huge
plate. His hands began to shake. A tremendous and almost unbearable
e[citement started boiling up inside him and it was not easy for him to hide
it. But he did his best.
   ‘Some sort of a dish,’ he said.
   Butcher was kneeling on the ground beside the hole. ‘Must be pretty old,’
he said.
   ‘Could  be old,’ Ford said. ‘But it’s all rusted up and eaten away.’
   ‘That  don’t look like rust to me,’ Butcher said. ‘That greenish stuff isn’t
rust. It’s something else …’
   ‘It’s  green rust,’ Ford said rather superbly, and that ended the discussion.
   Butcher, still on his knees, was poking about casually in the now three-
feet-wide hole with his gloYed hands. ‘There’s another one down here,’ he

50
said.
   Instantly, Ford laid the great dish on the ground. He knelt beside Butcher,
and within minutes they had unearthed a second large green-encrusted
plate. This one was a shade smaller than the first, and deeper. More of a
bowl than a dish.
   Ford stood up and held the new find in his hands. Another heaYy one.
And now he knew for certain they were on to something absolutely
tremendous. They were on to Roman Treasure, and almost without Tuestion
it was pure silYer. Two things pointed to its being pure silYer. First the
weight, and second, the particular type of green crust caused by o[idation.
   How  often is a piece of Roman silYer discoYered in the world?
   Almost  neYer any more. And had pieces as large as this ever been
unearthed before?
   Ford wasn’t sure, but he Yery much doubted it.
   Worth millions  it must be.
   Worth literally  millions  of pounds.
   His breath, coming fast, was making little white clouds in the free]ing
atmosphere.
   ‘There’s still  more down here, Mr Ford,’ Butcher was saying. ‘I can feel
bits of it all oYer the place. You’ll need the spade again.’
   The third piece they got out was another large plate, somewhat similar to
the first. Ford placed it in the barley stubble with the other two.
   When Butcher felt the first flake of snow upon his cheek he looked up
and saw oYer to the north-east a great white curtain drawn across the sky, a
solid wall of snow flying  forward on the wings of the wind.
   ‘Here she comes!’ he said, and Ford looked round and saw the snow
moYing upon them and he said, ‘It’s a bli]]ard. It’s a filthy stinking
bli]]ard!’
   The two men stared at the bli]]ard as it raced across the fens towards
them. Then it was on them, and all around was snow and snowflakes in the
eyes and ears and mouth and down the neck and all around. And when
Butcher glanced down at the ground a few seconds later it was already
white.

51
   ‘That’s  all we want,’ Ford said. ‘A filthy  rotten stinking bli]]ard,’   and he
shiYered and sank his sharp and fo[y face deeper into the collar of his coat.
‘Come on,’ he said. ‘See if there’s any more.’
   Butcher knelt down again and poked around in the soil, then in the slow
and casual manner of a man haYing a lucky dip in a barrel of sawdust, he
pulled out another plate and held it out to Ford. Ford took it and placed it
with the other three. Now Ford knelt down beside Butcher and began to dip
into the soil with him.
   For a whole hour the two men stayed out there digging and scratching in
that little three-foot patch of soil. And during that hour they found and laid
upon the ground beside them no less than thirty-four separate pieces! There
were dishes, bowls, goblets, spoons, ladles and seYeral other things, all of
them crusted oYer but each one recogni]able for what it was. And all the
while the bli]]ard  swirled around them and the snow gathered in little
mounds upon their caps and on their shoulders and the flakes melted on
their faces so that riYers of icy water trickled down their necks. A large
globule of half-fro]en liTuid  dangled continually, like a snow drop, from the
end of Ford’s pointed nose.
   They worked in silence. It was too cold to speak. And as one precious
article after the other was unearthed, Ford laid them carefully on the ground
in rows, pausing eYery now and then to wipe the snow away from a dish or
a spoon which was in danger of being completely coYered.
   At  last Ford said, ‘That’s the lot, I think.’
   ‘Yes.’
   Ford stood up and stamped his feet on the ground. ‘Got a sack in the
tractor?’ he said, and while Butcher walked oYer to fetch the sack, he turned
and ga]ed upon the four-and-thirty pieces lying in the snow at his feet. He
counted them again. If they were silYer, which they surely must be, and if
they were Roman, which they undoubtedly were, then this was a discoYery
that would rock the world.
   Butcher called to him from the tractor, ‘It’s only  a dirty old sack.’
   ‘It’ll   do.’

52
   Butcher brought the sack oYer and held it open while Ford carefully put
the articles into it. They all went in e[cept one. The massiYe two-foot plate
was too large for the neck of the sack.
   The two men were really cold now. For oYer an hour they had knelt and
scratched about out there in the open field with the bli]]ard swirling around
them. Already, nearly si[ inches of snow had fallen. Butcher was half-
fro]en. His cheeks were dead-white, blotched with blue, his feet were numb
like wood, and when he moYed his legs he could not feel the ground
beneath his feet. He was much colder than Ford. His coat and clothes were
not so thick, and eYer since early morning he had been sitting high up on
the seat of the tractor, e[posed to the bitter wind. His blue-white face was
tight and unmoYing. All he wanted was to get home to his family and to the
fire that he knew would be burning in the grate.
   Ford, on the other hand, was not thinking about the cold. His mind was
concentrated solely upon one thing – how to get possession for himself of
this fabulous treasure. His position, as he knew Yery well, was not a strong
one.
   In  England there is a Yery curious law about finding any kind of gold or
silYer treasure. This law goes back hundreds of years, and is still strictly
enforced today. The law states that if a person digs up out of the ground,
eYen out of his own garden, a piece of metal that is either gold or silver, it
automatically becomes what is known as Treasure TroYe and is the property
of the Crown. The Crown doesn’t in these days mean the actual King or
4ueen. It means the country or the goYernment. The law also states that it is
a criminal offence to conceal such a find. You are simply not allowed to
hide the stuff and keep it for yourself. You must report it at once, preferably
to the police. And if you do report it at once, you as the finder will be
entitled to receiYe from the goYernment in money the full amount of the
market Yalue of the article. You are not reTuired to report the digging up of
other metals. You are allowed to find as much Yaluable pewter, bron]e,
copper or eYen platinum as you wish, and you can keep it all, but not gold
or silYer.

53
   The other curious part of this curious law is this: it is the person who
discovers the treasure in the first place who gets the reward from the
goYernment. The owner of the land gets nothing – unless of course the
finder is trespassing on the land when he makes the discoYery. But if the
finder of the treasure has been hired by the owner to do a job on his land,
then he, the finder, gets all the reward.
   In  this case, the finder was Gordon Butcher. Furthermore, he was not
trespassing. He was performing a job which he had been hired to do. This
treasure therefore belonged to Butcher and to no one else. All he had to do
was to take it and show it to an e[pert who would immediately identify it as
silYer, then turn it in to the police. In time, he would receiYe from the
goYernment one hundred per cent of its Yalue – perhaps a million pounds.
   All  this left Ford out in the cold and Ford knew it. He had no rights
whatsoeYer to the treasure by law. Thus, as he must haYe told himself at the
time, his only chance of getting hold of the stuff for himself lay in the fact
that Butcher was an ignorant man who didn’t know the law and who did not
anyway haYe the faintest idea of the Yalue of the find. The probability was
that in a few days Butcher would forget all about it. He was too simple-
minded a fellow, too artless, too trusting, too unselfish to giYe the matter
much thought.
   Now, out there in the desolate snowswept field, Ford bent down and took
hold of the huge dish with one hand. He raised it but he did not lift it. The
lower rim remained resting on the snow. With his other hand, he grasped the
top of the sack. He didn’t lift that either. He just held it. And there he
stooped amid the swirling snowflakes, both hands embracing, as it were, the
treasure, but not actually taking it. It was a subtle and a canny gesture. It
managed somehow to signify ownership before ownership had been
discussed. A child plays the same game when he reaches out and closes his
fingers oYer the biggest chocolate éclair on the plate and then says, ‘Can I
haYe this one, Mummy?’ He’s already got it.
   ‘Well,  Gordon,’ Ford said, stooping oYer, holding the sack and the great
dish in his gloYed fingers. ‘I don’t suppose you want any of this old stuff.’
   It  was not a Tuestion. It was a statement of fact framed as a Tuestion.

54
   The bli]]ard   was still raging. The snow was falling so densely the two
men could hardly see one another.
   ‘You  ought to get along home and warm yourself up,’ Ford went on.
‘You look fro]en  to death.’
   ‘I  feel fro]en to death,’ Butcher said.
   ‘Then  you get on that tractor Tuick and hurry home,’ said the thoughtful,
kind-hearted Ford. ‘LeaYe the plough here and leaYe your bike at my place.
The important thing is to get back and warm yourself up before you catch
pneumonia.’
   ‘I  think that’s just what I will  do, Mr Ford,’  Butcher said. ‘Can you
manage all right with that sack? It’s mighty heaYy.’
   ‘I  might not eYen bother about it today,’ Ford said casually. ‘I just might
leaYe it here and come back for it another time. Rusty old stuff.’
   ‘So long then, Mr  Ford.’
   ‘’Bye,  Gordon.’
   Gordon Butcher mounted the tractor and droYe away into the bli]]ard.
   Ford hoisted the sack on to his shoulder, and then, not without difficulty,
he lifted the massiYe dish with his other hand and tucked it under his arm.
   ‘I  am carrying,’ he told himself, as he trudged through the snow, ‘I am
now carrying what is probably the biggest treasure eYer dug up in the whole
history of England.’
   When Gordon Butcher came stamping and blowing through the back
door of his small brick house late that afternoon, his wife was ironing by the
fire. She looked up and saw his blue-white face and snow-encrusted clothes.
   ‘My  goodness, Gordon, you look fro]e to death!’ she cried.
   ‘I  am,’ he said. ‘Help me off with these clothes, loYe. My fingers aren’t
hardly working at all.’
   She took off his gloYes, his coat, his jacket, his wet shirt. She pulled off
his boots and socks. She fetched a towel and rubbed his chest and shoulders
Yigorously all oYer to restore the circulation. She rubbed his feet.
   ‘Sit  down there by the fire,’ she said, ‘and I’ll get you a hot cup of tea.’
   Later, when he was settled comfortably in the warmth with dry clothes on
his back and the mug of tea in his hand, he told her what had happened that

55
afternoon.
   ‘He’s  a fo[y  one, that Mr Ford,’ she said, not looking up from her
ironing. ‘I neYer did like him.’
   ‘He  got pretty e[cited about it all, I can tell you that,’ Gordon Butcher
said. ‘Jumpy as a jack-rabbit he was.’
   ‘That  may be,’ she said. ‘But you ought to haYe had more sense than to
go crawling about on your hands and knees in a free]ing bli]]ard just
because Mr Ford said to do it.’
   ‘I’m   all right,’ Gordon Butcher said, ‘I’m  warming up nicely now.’
   And  that, belieYe it or not, was about the last time the subject of the
treasure was discussed in the Butcher household for some years.
   The reader should be reminded that this was wartime, 1942. Britain was
totally absorbed in the desperate war against Hitler and Mussolini. Germany
was bombing England, and England was bombing Germany, and nearly
eYery night Gordon Butcher heard the roar of motors from the big
aerodrome at nearby Mildenhall as the bombers took off for Hamburg,
Berlin, Kiel, WilhelmshaYen or Frank-furt. Sometimes he would wake in
the early hours and hear them coming home, and sometimes the Germans
flew oYer to bomb the aerodrome, and the Butcher house would shake with
the crumph and crash of bombs not far away.
   Butcher himself was e[empt from military  serYice. He was a farmer, a
skilled ploughman, and they had told him when he Yolunteered for the army
in 199 that he was not wanted. The island’s food supplies must be kept
going, they told him, and it was Yital that men like him stay on their jobs
and cultiYate the land.
   Ford, being in the same business, was also e[empt. He was a bachelor,
liYing alone, and he was thus able to liYe a secret life and to do secret things
within the walls of his home.
   And  so, on that terrible snowy afternoon when they dug up the treasure,
Ford carried it home and laid eYerything out on a table in the back room.
   Thirty-four  separate pieces! They coYered the entire table. And by the
look of it, they were in marYellous condition. SilYer does not rust. The

56
green crust of o[idation can eYen be protection for the surface of the metal
underneath. And with care, it could all be remoYed.
   Ford decided to use an ordinary domestic silYer polish known as SilYo,
and he bought a large stock of it from the ironmonger’s shop in Mildenhall.
Then he took first the great two-foot plate which weighed more than
eighteen pounds. He worked on it in the eYenings. He soaked it all oYer
with SilYo. He rubbed and rubbed. He worked patiently on this single dish
eYery night for more than si[teen weeks.
   At  last, one memorable eYening, there showed beneath his rubbing a
small area of shining silYer, and on the silYer, raised up and beautifully
worked, there was a part of a man’s head.
   He kept at it, and gradually the little patch of shining metal spread and
spread, the blue-green crust crept outward to the edges of the plate until
finally the top surface of the great dish lay before him in its full glory,
coYered all oYer with a wondrous pattern of animals and men and many odd
legendary things.
   Ford was astounded by the beauty of the great plate. It was filled with life
and moYement. There was a fierce face with tangled hair, a dancing goat
with a human head, there were men and women and animals of many kinds
caYorting around the rim, and no doubt all of them told a story.
   Ne[t,  he set about cleaning the reYerse side of the plate. Weeks and
weeks it took. And when the work was completed and the whole plate on
both sides was shining like a star, he placed it safely in the lower cupboard
of his big oak sideboard and locked the cupboard door.
   One by one, he tackled the remaining thirty-three pieces. A mania had
taken hold of him now, a fierce compulsion to make eYery item shine in all
its silYer brilliance. He wanted to see all thirty-four pieces laid out on the
big table in a da]]ling array of silYer. He wanted that more than anything
else, and he worked desperately hard to achieYe his wish.
   He cleaned the two smaller dishes ne[t, then the large fluted bowl, then
the fiYe long-handled ladles, the goblets, the wine-cups, the spoons. EYery
single piece was cleaned with eTual care and made to shine with eTual

57
brilliance, and when they were all done, two years had passed and it was
1944.
   But no strangers were allowed to look. Ford discussed the matter with no
man or woman, and Rolfe, the owner of the plot on Thistley Green where
the treasure had been found, knew nothing e[cept that Ford, or someone
Ford had hired, had ploughed his land e[tremely well and Yery deep.
   One can guess why Ford hid the treasure instead of reporting it to the
police as Treasure TroYe. Had he reported it, it would haYe been taken away
and Gordon Butcher would haYe been rewarded as the finder. Rewarded
with a fortune. So the only thing Ford could do was to hang on to it and
hide it in the hope, presumably, of selling it Tuietly to some dealer or
collector at a later date.
   It  is possible, of course, to take a more charitable Yiew and assume that
Ford kept the treasure solely because he loYed beautiful things and wanted
to haYe them around him. No one will eYer know the true answer.
   Another year went by.
   The war against Hitler was won.
   And  then, in 1946, just after Easter, there was a knock on the door of
Ford’s house. Ford opened it.
   ‘Why  hello, Mr  Ford. How are you after all these years?’
   ‘Hello,  Dr Fawcett,’ Ford said. ‘You been keeping all right?’
   ‘I’m   fine, thank you,’ Dr Fawcett said. ‘It’s been a long time, hasn’t it?’
   ‘Yes,’  Ford said. ‘That old war kept us all pretty busy.’
   ‘May  I come in?’ Dr Fawcett asked.
   ‘Of  course,’ Ford said. ‘Come on in.’
   Dr  Hugh Alderson Fawcett was a keen and learned archaeologist who
before the war had made a point of Yisiting Ford once a year in search of
old stones or arrowheads. Ford had usually collected a batch of such items
during the twelYe months and he was always willing to sell them to
Fawcett. They were seldom of great Yalue, but now and again something
Tuite good had turned up.
   ‘Well,’  said Fawcett, taking off his coat in the little hall. ‘Well,  well, well.
It’s been nearly seYen years since I was here last.’

58
   ‘Yes, it’s been a long time,’ Ford said.
   Ford led him into the front room and showed him a bo[ of flint
arrowheads which had been picked up in the district. Some were good,
others not so good. Fawcett picked through them, sorted them, and a deal
was done.
   ‘Nothing  else?’
   ‘No,  I don’t think  so.’
   Ford wished ferYently that Dr Fawcett had neYer come. He wished eYen
more ferYently that he would go away.
   It  was at this point that Ford noticed something that made him sweat. He
saw suddenly that he had left lying on the mantel oYer the fireplace the two
most beautiful of the Roman spoons from the treasure hoard. These spoons
had fascinated him because each was inscribed with the name of a Roman
girl child to whom it  had been giYen, presumably as a christening present,
by Roman parents who had been conYerted to Christianity. One name was
Pascentia, the other was Papittedo. Rather loYely names.
   Ford, sweating with fear, tried to place himself between Dr Fawcett and
the mantelpiece. He might eYen, he thought, be able to slip the spoons into
his pocket if he got the chance.
   He didn’t  get the chance.
   Perhaps Ford had polished them so well that a little flash of reflected
light from the silYer caught the doctor’s eye. Who knows? The fact remains
that Fawcett saw them. The moment he saw them, he pounced like a tiger.
   ‘Great heaYens aliYe!’ he cried. ‘What are these?’
   ‘Pewter,’  Ford said, sweating more than eYer. ‘Just a couple of old pewter
spoons.’
   ‘Pewter?’ cried Fawcett, turning one of the spoons oYer in his fingers.
‘Pewter! You call this peZter?’
   ‘That’s  right,’ Ford said. ‘It’s pewter.’
   ‘You  know what this is?’ Fawcett said, his Yoice going high with
e[citement. ‘Shall I tell  you what this really is?’
   ‘You  don’t haYe to tell me,’ Ford said, truculent. ‘I know what it is. It’s
old pewter. And Tuite nice, too.’

59
   Fawcett was reading the inscription in Roman letters on the scoop of the
spoon. ‘Papittedo!’ he cried.
   ‘What’s  that mean?’ Ford asked him.
   Fawcett picked up the other spoon. ‘Pascentia,’ he said. ‘Beautiful! These
are the names of Roman children! And these spoons, my friend, are made of
solid silYer! Solid Roman silYer!’
   ‘Not  possible,’ Ford said.
   ‘They’re  magnificent!’  Fawcett cried out, going into raptures. ‘They’re
perfect! They’re unbelieYable! Where on earth did you find them? It’s most
important to know where you found them! Was there anything else?’
Fawcett was hopping about all oYer the room.
   ‘Well  …’  Ford said, licking dry lips.
   ‘You  must report them at once!’ Fawcett cried.
   ‘They’re  Treasure TroYe! The British Museum is going to want these and
that’s for certain! How long haYe you had them?’
   ‘Just a little while,’  Ford told him.
   ‘And  Zho found them?’ Fawcett asked, looking straight at him. ‘Did you
find them yourself or did you get them from somebody else? This is Yital!
The finder will be able to tell us all about it!’
   Ford felt the walls of the room closing in on him and he didn’t Tuite
know what to do.
   ‘Come on, man! Surely you know where you got them! EYery detail will
haYe to come out when you hand them in. Promise me you’ll go to the
police with them at once?’
   ‘Well  …’  Ford said.
   ‘If  you don’t,  then I’m afraid I shall be forced to report it myself,’
Fawcett told him. ‘It’s my duty.’
   The game was up now and Ford knew it. A thousand Tuestions would be
asked. How did you find it? When did you find it? What were you doing?
Where was the e[act spot? Whose land were you ploughing? And sooner or
later, ineYitably, the name of Gordon Butcher would haYe to come into it. It
was unaYoidable. And then, when Butcher was Tuestioned, he would
remember the si]e of the hoard and tell them all about it.

60
   So the game was up. And the only thing to do at this point was to unlock
the doors of the big sideboard and show the entire hoard to Dr Fawcett.
   Ford’s e[cuse for keeping it all and not turning it in would haYe to be that
he thought it was pewter. So long as he stuck to that, he told himself, they
couldn’t do anything to him.
   Dr  Fawcett would probably haYe a heart-attack when he saw what there
was in that cupboard.
   ‘There is actually Tuite a bit more of it,’ Ford said.
   ‘Where?’  cried Fawcett, spinning round. ‘Where, man, where? Lead me
to it!’
   ‘I  really thought it was pewter,’ Ford said, moYing slowly and Yery
reluctantly forward to the oak sideboard. ‘Otherwise I would naturally haYe
reported it at once.’
   He bent down and unlocked the lower doors of the sideboard. He opened
the doors.
   And  then Dr Hugh Alderson Fawcett Yery nearly did haYe a heart-attack.
He flung himself on his knees. He gasped. He choked. He began spluttering
like an old kettle. He reached out for the great silYer dish. He took it. He
held it in shaking hands and his face went as white as snow. He didn’t
speak. He couldn’t. He was literally and physically and mentally struck
absolutely dumb by the sight of the treasure.
   The interesting part of the story ends here. The rest is routine. Ford went
to Mildenhall Police Station and made a report. The police came at once
and collected all thirty-four pieces, and they were sent under guard to the
British Museum for e[amination.
   Then an urgent message from the Museum to the Mildenhall Police. It
was far and away the finest Roman silYer eYer found in the British Isles. It
was of enormous Yalue. The Museum (which is really a public
goYernmental institution) wished to acTuire it. In fact, they insisted upon
acTuiring it.
   The wheels of the law began to turn. An official inTuest and hearing was
arranged at the nearest large town, Bury St Edmunds. The silYer was moYed
there under special police guard. Ford was summoned to appear before the

61
Coroner and a jury of fourteen, while Gordon Butcher, that good and Tuiet
man, was ordered also to present himself to giYe eYidence.
   On Monday, July the first, 1946, the hearing took place, and the Coroner
cross-Tuestioned Ford closely.
   ‘You  thought it was pewter?’
   ‘Yes.’
   ‘EYen after you had cleaned it?’
   ‘Yes.’
   ‘You  took no steps to inform any e[perts of the find?’
   ‘No.’
   ‘What  did you intend to do with the articles?’
   ‘Nothing.  Just keep them.’
   And  when he had concluded his eYidence, Ford asked permission to go
outside into the fresh air because he said he felt faint. Nobody was
surprised.
   Then Butcher was called, and in a few simple words he told of his part in
the affair.
   Dr  Fawcett gaYe his eYidence, so did seYeral other learned
archaeologists, all of whom testified to the e[treme rarity of the treasure.
They said that it was of the fourth century after Christ; that it was the table
silYer of a wealthy Roman family; that it had probably been buried by the
owner’s bailiff to saYe it from the Picts and Scots who swept down from the
north in about A.D. 6– and laid waste many Roman settlements. The man
who buried it had probably been liTuidated either by a Pict or a Scot, and
the treasure had remained concealed a foot below the soil eYer since. The
workmanship, said the e[perts, was magnificent. Some of it may haYe been
e[ecuted in England, but more probably the articles were made in Italy or in
Egypt. The great plate was of course the finest piece. The head in the centre
was that of Neptune, the sea-god, with dolphins in his hair and seaweed in
his beard. All around him, sea-nymphs and sea-monsters gambolled. On the
broad rim of the plate stood Bacchus and his attendants. There was wine
and reYelry. Hercules was there, Tuite drunk, supported by two satyrs, his
lion’s skin fallen from his shoulders. Pan was there, too, dancing upon his

62
goat-legs with his pipes in his hand. And eYerywhere there were maenads,
female deYotees of Bacchus, rather tipsy women.
   The court was told also that seYeral of the spoons bore the monogram of
Christ (Chi-Rho), and that the two which were inscribed with the names
Pascentia and Papittedo were undoubtedly christening presents.
   The e[perts concluded their eYidence and the court adjourned. Soon the
jury returned, and their Yerdict was astonishing. No blame was attached to
anyone for anything, although the finder of the treasure was no longer
entitled to receiYe full compensation from the Crown because the find had
not been declared at once. NeYertheless, there would probably be a measure
of compensation paid, and with this in Yiew, the finders were declared to be
jointly Ford and Butcher.
   Not  Butcher. Ford and Butcher.
   There is no more to tell other than that the treasure was acTuired by the
British Museum, where it now stands proudly displayed in a large glass
case for all to see. And already people haYe traYelled great distances to go
and look upon those loYely things which Gordon Butcher found beneath his
plough on that cold and windy winter afternoon. One day, a book or two
will be compiled about them, full of suppositions and abstruse conclusions,
and men who moYe in archaeological circles will talk for eYer about the
Treasure of Mildenhall.
   As a gesture, the Museum rewarded the co-finders with one thousand
pounds each. Butcher, the true finder, was happy and surprised to receiYe so
much money. He did not reali]e that had he been allowed to take the
treasure home originally, he would almost certainly haYe reYealed its
e[istence and would thus haYe become eligible to receiYe one hundred per
cent of its Yalue, which could haYe been anything between half a million
and a million pounds.
   Nobody knows what Ford thought about it all. He must haYe been
relieYed and perhaps somewhat surprised when he heard that the court had
belieYed his story about pewter. But aboYe all he must haYe been shattered
by the loss of his great treasure. For the rest of his life he would be kicking

63
himself for leaYing those two spoons on the mantel aboYe the fireplace for
Dr Fawcett to see.

64
                                               The    Swan



Ernie had been giYen a .22 rifle for his birthday. His father, who was
already slouching on the sofa watching the telly at nine-thirty on this
Saturday morning, said, ‘Let’s see what you can pot, boy. Make yourself
useful. Bring us back a rabbit for supper.’
   ‘There’s rabbits in that big field the other side of the lake,’ Ernie said. ‘I
seen ’em.’
   ‘Then  go out and nab one,’ the father said, picking breakfast from
between his front teeth with a split matchstick. ‘Go out and nab us a rabbit.’
   ‘I’ll   get yer two,’ Ernie said.
   ‘And  on the way back,’ the father said, ‘get me a Tuart bottle of brown
ale.’
   ‘Gimme  the money, then,’ Ernie said.
   The father, without taking his eyes from the TV screen, fished in his
pocket for a pound note. ‘And don’t try pinchin’ the change like you did
last time,’ he said. ‘You’ll get a thick ear if you do, birthday or no birthday.’
   ‘Don’t  worry,’  Ernie said.
   ‘And  if  you want to practise and get your eye in with that gun,’ the father
said, ‘birds is best. See ’ow many spadgers you can knock down, right?’
   ‘Right,’  Ernie said. ‘There’s spadgers all the way up the lane in the
’edges. Spadgers is easy.’
   ‘If  you think  spadgers is easy,’ the father said, ‘go get yourself a jenny
wren. Jenny wrens is ’alf the si]e of spadgers and they neYer sit still for one
second. Get yourself a jenny wren before you start shootin’ yer mouth off
about ’ow cleYer you is.’

65
   ‘Now,  Albert,’  his wife said, looking up from the sink. ‘That’s not nice,
shootin’ little birds in the nestin’ season. I don’t mind rabbits, but little
birds in the nestin’ season is another thing altogether.’
   ‘Shut your  mouth,’ the father said. ‘Nobody’s askin’ your opinion. And
listen to me, boy,’ he said to Ernie. ‘Don’t go waYing that thing about in the
street because you ain’t got no licence. Stick it down your trouser-leg till
you’re out in the country, right?’
   ‘Don’t  worry,’  Ernie said. He took the gun and the bo[ of bullets and
went out to see what he could kill. He was a big lout of a boy, fifteen years
old this birthday. Like his truck-driYer father, he had small slitty eyes set
Yery close together near the top of the nose. His mouth was loose, the lips
often wet. Brought up in a household where physical Yiolence was an
eYeryday occurrence, he was himself an e[tremely Yiolent person. Most
Saturday afternoons, he and a gang of friends traYelled by train or bus to
football matches, and if they didn’t manage to get into a bloody fight before
they returned home, they considered it a wasted day. He took great pleasure
in catching small boys after school and twisting their arms behind their
backs. Then he would order them to say insulting and filthy things about
their own parents.
   ‘Ow!  Please don’t, Ernie! Please!’
   ‘Say it  or I’ll  twist your arm off!’
   They always said it. Then he would giYe the arm an e[tra twist and the
Yictim would go off in tears.
   Ernie’s best friend was called Raymond. He liYed four doors away, and
he, too, was a big boy for his age. But while Ernie was heaYy and loutish,
Raymond was tall, slim and muscular.
   Outside Raymond’s house, Ernie put two fingers in his mouth and gaYe a
long shrill whistle. Raymond came out. ‘Look what I got for me birthday,’
Ernie said, showing the gun.
   ‘Cripes!’  Raymond said. ‘We can haYe some fun with that!’
   ‘Come on, then,’ Ernie said. ‘We’re goin’  up to the big field the other
side of the lake to get us a rabbit.’

66
   The two boys set off. This was a Saturday morning in May, and the
countryside was beautiful around the small Yillage where the boys liYed.
The chestnut trees were in full flower and the hawthorn was white along the
hedges. To reach the big rabbit field, Ernie and Raymond had first to walk
down a narrow hedgy lane for half a mile. Then they must cross the railway
line, and go round the big lake where wild ducks and moorhens and coots
and ring-ou]els liYed. Beyond the lake, oYer the hill and down the other
side, lay the rabbit field. This was all priYate land belonging to Mr Douglas
Highton and the lake itself was a sanctuary for waterfowl.
   All  the way up the lane, they took turns with the gun, potting at small
birds in the hedges. Ernie got a bullfinch and a hedge-sparrow. Raymond
got a second bullfinch, a whitethroat and a yellowhammer. As each bird
was killed, they tied it by the legs to a line of string. Raymond neYer went
anywhere without a big ball of string in his jacket pocket, and a knife. Now
they had fiYe little birds dangling on the line of string.
   ‘You  know something,’ Raymond said. ‘We can eat these.’
   ‘Don’t  talk so daft,’ Ernie said. ‘There’s not enough meat on one of those
to feed a woodlouse.’
   ‘There is, too,’  Raymond said. ‘The Frenchies eat ’em and so do the
Eyeties. Mr Sanders told us about it in class. He said the Frenchies and the
Eyeties put up nets and catch ’em by the million and then they eat ’em.’
   ‘All   right, then,’ Ernie said. ‘Let’s see ’ow many we can get. Then we’ll
take ’em ’ome and put ’em in the rabbit stew.’
   As they progressed up the lane, they shot at eYery little bird they saw. By
the time they got to the railway line, they had fourteen small birds dangling
on the line of string.
   ‘Hey!’   whispered Ernie, pointing with a long arm. ‘Look oYer there!’
   There was a group of trees and bushes alongside the railway line, and
beside one of the bushes stood a small boy. He was looking up into the
branches of an old tree through a pair of binoculars.
   ‘You  know who that is?’ Raymond whispered back. ‘It’s that little twerp
Watson.’
   ‘You’re  right!’  Ernie whispered. ‘It’s Watson, the scum of the earth!’

67
   Peter Watson was always the enemy. Ernie and Raymond detested him
because he was nearly eYerything that they were not. He had a small frail
body. His face was freckled and he wore spectacles with thick lenses. He
was a brilliant pupil, already in the senior class at school although he was
only thirteen. He loYed music and played the piano well. He was no good at
games. He was Tuiet and polite. His clothes, although patched and darned,
were always clean. And his father did not driYe a truck or work in a factory.
He worked in the bank.
   ‘Let’s  giYe the little perisher a fright,’ Ernie whispered.
   The two bigger boys crept up close to the small boy, who didn’t see them
because he still had binoculars to his eyes.
   ‘’Ands  up!’ shouted Ernie, pointing the gun.
   Peter Watson jumped. He lowered the binoculars and stared through his
spectacles at the two intruders.
   ‘Go  on!’ Ernie shouted. ‘Stick ’em up!’
   ‘I  wouldn’t  point that gun if I were you,’ Peter Watson said.
   ‘We’re giYin’  the orders round ’ere!’ Ernie said.
   ‘So stick  ’em up,’ Raymond said, ‘unless you want a slug in the guts!’
   Peter Watson stood Tuite still, holding the binoculars in front of him with
both hands. He looked at Raymond. Then he looked at Ernie. He was not
afraid, but he knew better than to play the fool with these two. He had
suffered a good deal from their attentions oYer the years.
   ‘What  do you want?’ he asked.
   ‘I  Zant you to stick ’em up!’ Ernie yelled at him. ‘Can’t  you understand
English?’
   Peter Watson didn’t moYe.
   ‘I’ll   count to fiYe,’ Ernie said. ‘And if  they’re not up by then, you get it in
the guts. One … Two … Three …’
   Peter Watson raised his arms slowly aboYe his head. It was the only
sensible thing to do. Raymond stepped forward and snatched the binoculars
from his hands. ‘What’s this?’ he snapped. ‘Who you spyin’ on?’
   ‘Nobody.’

68
   ‘Don’t  lie, Watson. Them things is used for spyin’! I’ll  bet you was
spyin’ on us! That’s right, ain’t it? Confess it!’
   ‘I  certainly wasn’t spying on you.’
   ‘GiYe ’im  a clip oYer the ear,’ Ernie said. ‘Teach ’im not to lie to us.’
   ‘I’ll   do that in a minute,’ Raymond said. ‘I’m just workin’  meself up.’
   Peter Watson considered the possibility of trying to escape. All he could
do would be to turn and run, and that was pointless. They’d catch him in
seconds. And if he shouted for help, there was no one to hear him. All he
could do, therefore, was to keep calm and try to talk his way out of the
situation.
   ‘Keep  them ’ands up!’ Ernie barked, waYing the barrel of the gun gently
from side to side the way he had seen it done by gangsters on the telly. ‘Go
on, laddie, reach!’
   Peter did as he was told.
   ‘So ’oo  was you spyin’ on?’ Raymond asked. ‘Out with it!’
   ‘I  was watching a green woodpecker,’ Peter said.
   ‘A  what?’
   ‘A  male green woodpecker. He was tapping the trunk of that old dead
tree, searching for grubs.’
   ‘Where is ’ee?’ Ernie snapped, raising his gun. ‘I’ll ’aYe ’im!’
   ‘No,  you won’t,’  Peter said, looking at the string of tiny birds slung oYer
Raymond’s shoulder. ‘He flew off the moment you shouted. Woodpeckers
are e[tremely timid.’
   ‘What  you watchin’ ’im  for?’ Raymond asked suspiciously. ‘What’s the
point? Don’t you ’aYe nothin’ better to do?’
   ‘It’s  fun watching birds,’ Peter said. ‘It’s a lot more fun than shooting
them.’
   ‘Why,  you cheeky little bleeder!’ Ernie cried. ‘So you don’t like us
shootin’ birds, eh? Is that what you’re sayin’?’
   ‘I  think it’s  absolutely pointless.’
   ‘You  don’t like anything we do, isn’t that right?’ Raymond said.
   Peter didn’t answer.

69
   ‘Well,  let me tell you something,’ Raymond went on. ‘We don’t like
anything you do either.’
   Peter’s arms were beginning to ache. He decided to take a risk. Slowly,
he lowered them to his sides.
   ‘Up!’   yelled Ernie. ‘Get ’em up!’
   ‘What  if I  refuse?’
   ‘Blimey!   You got a ruddy nerYe, ain’t you?’ Ernie said. ‘I’m tellin’ you
for the last time, if you don’t stick ’em up I’ll  pull the trigger!’
   ‘That  would be a criminal act,’ Peter said. ‘It would be a case for the
police.’
   ‘And  you’d be a case for the ’ospital!’ Ernie said.
   ‘Go  ahead and shoot,’ Peter said. ‘Then they’ll send you to Borstal.
That’s prison.’
   He saw Ernie hesitate.
   ‘You’re  really askin’ for  it, ain’t you?’ Raymond said.
   ‘I’m   simply asking to be left alone,’ Peter said. ‘I haYen’t done you any
harm.’
   ‘You’re  a stuck-up little sTuirt,’ Ernie said. ‘That’s e[actly what you are,
a stuck-up little sTuirt.’
   Raymond leaned oYer and whispered something in Ernie’s ear. Ernie
listened intently. Then he slapped his thigh and said, ‘I like it! It’s a great
idea!’
   Ernie placed his gun on the ground and adYanced upon the small boy. He
grabbed him and threw him to the ground. Raymond took the roll of string
from his pocket and cut off a length of it. Together, they forced the boy’s
arms in front of him and tied his wrists together tight.
   ‘Now  the legs,’ Raymond said. Peter struggled and receiYed a punch in
the stomach. That winded him and he lay still. Ne[t, they tied his ankles
together with more string. He was now trussed up like a chicken and
completely helpless.
   Ernie picked up his gun, and then, with his other hand, he grabbed one of
Peter’s arms. Raymond grabbed the other arm and together they began to
drag the boy oYer the grass towards the railway lines.

70
   Peter kept absolutely Tuiet. WhateYer it was they were up to, talking to
them wasn’t going to help matters.
   They dragged their Yictim down the embankment and on to the railway
lines themselYes. Then one took the arms and the other the feet and they
lifted him up and laid him down again lengthwise right between two lines.
   ‘You’re  mad!’ Peter said. ‘You can’t do this!’
   ‘’Oo  says we can’t? This is just a little lesson we’re teachin’ you not to
be cheeky.’
   ‘More  string,’ Ernie said.
   Raymond produced the ball of string and the two larger boys now
proceeded to tie the Yictim down in such a way that he couldn’t wriggle
away from between the rails. They did this by looping string around each of
his arms and then threading the string under the rails on either side. They
did the same with his middle body and his ankles. When they had finished,
Peter Watson was strung down helpless and Yirtually immobile between the
rails. The only parts of his body he could moYe to any e[tent were his head
and feet.
   Ernie and Raymond stepped back to surYey their handiwork. ‘We done a
nice job,’ Ernie said.
   ‘There’s trains eYery ’arf ’our on this line,’ Raymond said. ‘We ain’t
gonna ’aYe long to wait.’
   ‘This  is murder!’ cried the small boy lying between the rails.
   ‘No  it ain’t,’  Raymond told him. ‘It  ain’t anything of the sort.’
   ‘Let  me go! Please let me go! I’ll be killed if a train comes along!’
   ‘If  you are killed,  sonny boy,’ Ernie said, ‘it’ll  be your own ruddy fault
and I’ll tell  you why. Because if you lift your ’ead up like you’re doin’ now,
then you’Ye ’ad it, chum! You keep down flat and you might just possibly
get away with it. On the other ’and, you might not because I ain’t e[actly
sure ’ow much clearance them trains’Ye got underneath. You ’appen to
know, Raymond, ’ow much clearance them trains got underneath?’
   ‘Very  little,’  Raymond said. ‘They’re built eYer so close to the ground.’
   ‘Might  be enough and it might not,’ Ernie said.

71
   ‘Let’s  put it this way,’ Raymond said. ‘It’d  probably just about be enough
for an ordinary person like me or you, Ernie. But Mister Watson ’ere I’m
not so sure about and I’ll tell you why.’
   ‘Tell  me,’ Ernie said, egging him on.
   ‘Mister  Watson ’ere’s got an e[tra big ’ead, that’s why. ’Ee’s so flippin’
big-’eaded I personally think the bottom bit of the train’s goin’ to scrape
’im whateYer ’appens. I’m not saying it’s goin’ to take ’is ’ead off, mind
you. In fact, I’m pretty sure it ain’t goin’  to do that. But it’s goin’ to giYe ’is
face a good old scrapin’ oYer. You can be Tuite sure of that.’
   ‘I  think you’re  right,’ Ernie said.
   ‘It  don’t do,’  Raymond said, ‘to ’aYe a great big swollen ’ead full of
brains if you’re lyin’  on the railway line with a train comin’ towards you.
That’s right, ain’t it, Ernie?’
   ‘That’s  right,’ Ernie said.
   The two bigger boys climbed back up the embankment and sat on the
grass behind some bushes. Ernie produced a pack of cigarettes and they
both lit up.
   Peter Watson, lying helpless between the rails, reali]ed now that they
were not going to release him. These were dangerous, cra]y boys. They
liYed for the moment and neYer considered the conseTuences. I must try to
keep calm and think, Peter told himself. He lay there, Tuite still, weighing
his chances. His chances were good. The highest part of his head was his
nose. He estimated the end of his nose was sticking up about four inches
aboYe the rails. Was that too much? He wasn’t Tuite sure what clearance
these modern diesels had aboYe the ground. It certainly wasn’t Yery much.
The back of his head was resting upon loose graYel in between two
sleepers. He must try to burrow down a little into the graYel. So he began to
wriggle his head from side to side, pushing the graYel away and gradually
making for himself a small indentation, a hole in the graYel. In the end, he
reckoned he had lowered his head an e[tra two inches. That would do for
the head. But what about the feet? They were sticking up, too. He took care
of that by swinging the two tied-together feet oYer to one side so they lay
almost flat.

72
   He waited for the train to come.
   Would the driYer see him? It was Yery unlikely, for this was the main
line, London, Doncaster, York, Newcastle and Scotland, and they used huge
long engines in which the driYer sat in a cab way back and kept an eye open
only for the signals. Along this stretch of the track trains traYelled around
eighty miles an hour. Peter knew that. He had sat on the bank many times
watching them. When he was younger, he used to keep a record of their
numbers in a little book, and sometimes the engines had names written on
their sides in gold letters.
   Either way, he told himself, it was going to be a terrifying business. The
noise would be deafening, and the swish of the eighty-mile-an-hour wind
wouldn’t be much fun either. He wondered for a moment whether there
would be any kind of Yacuum created underneath the train as it rushed oYer
him, sucking him upward. There might well be. So whateYer happened, he
must concentrate eYerything upon pressing his entire body against the
ground. Don’t go limp. Keep stiff and tense and press down into the ground.
   ‘How’re  you doin’,  rat-face!’ one of them called out to him from the
bushes aboYe. ‘What’s it like waitin’ for the e[ecution?’
   He decided not to answer. He watched the blue sky aboYe his head where
a single cumulus cloud was drifting slowly from left to right. And to keep
his mind off the thing that was going to happen soon, he played a game that
his father had taught him long ago on a hot summer’s day when they were
lying on their backs in the grass aboYe the cliffs at Beachy Head. The game
was to look for strange faces in the folds and shadows and billows of a
cumulus cloud. If you looked hard enough, his father had said, you would
always find a face of some sort up there. Peter let his eyes traYel slowly
oYer the cloud. In one place, he found a one-eyed man with a beard. In
another, there was a long-chinned laughing witch. An aeroplane came
across the cloud traYelling from east to west. It was a small high-winged
monoplane with a red fuselage. An old Piper Cub, he thought it was. He
watched it until it disappeared.
   And  then, Tuite suddenly, he heard a curious little Yibrating sound
coming from the rails on either side of him. It was Yery soft, this sound,

73
scarcely audible, a tiny little humming, thrumming whisper that seemed to
be coming along the rails from far away.
   That’s a train, he told himself.
   The Yibrating along the rails grew louder, then louder still. He raised his
head and looked down the long and absolutely straight railway line that
stretched away for a mile or more into the distance. It was then that he saw
the train. At first it was only a speck, a faraway black dot, but in those few
seconds that he kept his head raised, the dot grew bigger and bigger, and it
began to take shape, and soon it was no longer a dot but the big, sTuare,
blunt front-end of a diesel e[press. Peter dropped his head and pressed it
down hard into the small hole he had dug for it in the graYel. He swung his
feet oYer to one side. He shut his eyes tight and tried to sink his body into
the ground.
   The train came oYer him like an e[plosion. It was as though a gun had
gone off in his head. And with the e[plosion came a tearing, screaming
wind that was like a hurricane blowing down his nostrils and into his lungs.
The noise was shattering. The wind choked him. He felt as if he were being
eaten aliYe and swallowed up in the belly of a screaming murderous
monster.
   And  then it was oYer. The train had gone. Peter opened his eyes and saw
the blue sky and the big white cloud still drifting oYerhead. It was all oYer
now and he had done it. He had surYiYed.
   ‘It  missed ’im,’  said a Yoice.
   ‘What  a pity,’ said another Yoice.
   He glanced sideways and saw the two large louts standing oYer him.
   ‘Cut  ’im loose,’ Ernie said.
   Raymond cut the strings binding him to the rails on either side.
   ‘Undo  ’is feet so ’ee can walk, but keep ’is ’ands tied,’ Ernie said.
   Raymond cut the strings around his ankles.
   ‘Get  up,’ Ernie said.
   Peter got to his feet.
   ‘You’re  still a prisoner, matey,’ Ernie said.

74
   ‘What  about them rabbits?’ Raymond asked. ‘I thought we was goin’ to
try for a few rabbits?’
   ‘Plenty  of time for that,’ Ernie answered. ‘I just thought we’d push the
little bleeder into the lake on the way.’
   ‘Good,’  Raymond said. ‘Cool ’im down.’
   ‘You’Ye had your fun,’ Peter Watson said. ‘Why don’t you let me go
now?’
   ‘Because you’re a prisoner,’ Ernie said. ‘And you ain’t just no ordinary
prisoner neither. You’re a spy. And you know what ’appens to spies when
they get caught, don’t you? They get put up against the wall and shot.’
   Peter didn’t say any more after that. There was no point at all in
proYoking those two. The less he said to them and the less he resisted them,
the more chance he would haYe of escaping injury. He had no doubt
whatsoeYer that in their present mood they were capable of doing him Tuite
serious bodily harm. He knew for a fact that Ernie had once broken little
Wally Simpson’s arm after school and Wally’s parents had gone to the
police. He had also heard Raymond boasting about what he called ‘putting
the boot in’ at the football matches they went to. This, he understood, meant
kicking someone in the face or body when he was lying on the ground.
They were hooligans, these two, and from what Peter read in his father’s
newspaper nearly eYery day, they were not by any means on their own. It
seemed the whole country was full of hooligans. They wrecked the interiors
of trains, they fought pitched battles in the streets with kniYes and bicycle
chains and metal clubs, they attacked pedestrians, especially other young
boys walking alone, and they smashed up roadside cafés. Ernie and
Raymond, though perhaps not Tuite yet fully Tualified hooligans, were most
definitely on their way.
   Therefore, Peter told himself, he must continue to be passiYe. Do not
insult them. Do not aggraYate them in any way. And aboYe all, do not try to
take them on physically. Then, hopefully, in the end, they might become
bored with this nasty little game and go off to shoot rabbits.
   The two larger boys had each taken hold of one of Peter’s arms and they
were marching him across the ne[t field towards the lake. The prisoner’s

75
wrists were still tied together in front of him. Ernie carried the gun in his
spare hand. Raymond carried the binoculars he had taken from Peter. They
came to the lake.
   The lake was beautiful on this golden May morning. It was a long and
fairly narrow lake with tall  willow  trees growing here and there along its
banks. In the middle, the water was clear and clean, but nearer to the land
there was a forest of reeds and bulrushes.
   Ernie and Raymond marched their prisoner to the edge of the lake and
there they stopped.
   ‘Now  then,’ Ernie said. ‘What I suggest is this. You take ’is arms and I
take ’is legs and we’ll swing the little perisher one two three as far out as
we can into them nice muddy reeds. ’Ow’s that?’
   ‘I  like it,’  Raymond said. ‘And leaYe ’is ’ands tied together, right?’
   ‘Right,’  Ernie said. ‘’Ow’s  that with you, snot-nose?’
   ‘If  that’s what you’re going to do, I can’t Yery well stop you,’ Peter said,
trying to keep his Yoice cool and calm.
   ‘Just you try and stop us,’ Ernie said, grinning, ‘and then see what
’appens to you.’
   ‘One last Tuestion,’ Peter said. ‘Did you eYer take on somebody your
own si]e?’
   The moment he said it, he knew he had made a mistake. He saw the flush
coming to Ernie’s cheeks and there was a dangerous little spark dancing in
his small black eyes.
   Luckily,  at that Yery moment, Raymond saYed the situation. ‘Hey! Lookit
that bird swimmin’ in the reeds oYer there!’ he shouted, pointing. ‘Let’s
’aYe ’im!’
   It  was a mallard drake, with a curYy spoon-shaped yellow beak and a
head of emerald green with a white ring round its neck. ‘Now those you
really can eat,’ Raymond went on. ‘It’s a wild duck.’
   ‘I’ll   ’aYe ’im!’  Ernie cried. He let go of the prisoner’s arm and lifted the
gun to his shoulder.
   ‘This  is a bird sanctuary,’ Peter said.
   ‘A  what?’ Ernie asked, lowering the gun.

76
   ‘Nobody  shoots birds here. It’s strictly forbidden.’
   ‘’Oo  says it’s forbidden?’
   ‘The  owner, Mr Douglas Highton.’
   ‘You  must be joking,’ Ernie said and he raised the gun again. He fired.
The duck crumpled in the water.
   ‘Go  get ’im,’  Ernie said to Peter. ‘Cut ’is ’ands free, Raymond, ’cause
then ’ee can be our flippin’ gun-dog and fetch the birds after we shoot ’em.’
   Raymond took out his knife and cut the string binding the small boy’s
wrists.
   ‘Go  on!’ Ernie snapped. ‘Go get ’im!’
   The killing  of the beautiful duck had disturbed Peter Yery much. ‘I
refuse,’ he said.
   Ernie hit him  across the face hard with his open hand. Peter didn’t fall
down, but a small trickle of blood began running out of one nostril.
   ‘You  dirty little  perisher!’ Ernie said. ‘You just try refusin’ me one more
time and I’m goin’ to make you a promise. And the promise is like this. You
refuse me just one more time and I’m goin’ to knock out eYery single one of
them shiny white front teeth of yours, top and bottom. You understand
that?’
   Peter said nothing.
   ‘Answer  me!’ Ernie barked. ‘Do you understand that?’
   ‘Yes,’  Peter said Tuietly. ‘I understand.’
   ‘Get  on with it, then!’ Ernie shouted.
   Peter walked down the bank, into the muddy water, through the reeds,
and picked up the duck. He brought it back and Raymond took it from him
and tied string around its legs.
   ‘Now  we got a retrieYer dog with us, let’s see if we can’t get us a few
more of them ducks,’ Ernie said. He strolled along the bank, gun in hand,
searching the reeds. Suddenly he stopped. He crouched. He put a finger to
his lips and said, ‘Sshh!’
   Raymond went oYer to join him. Peter stood a few yards away, his
trousers coYered in mud up to the knees.

77
   ‘Lookit  in  there!’ Ernie whispered, pointing into a dense patch of
bulrushes. ‘D’you see what I see?’
   ‘Holy  cats!’ cried Raymond. ‘What a beauty!’
   Peter, peering from a little further away into the rushes, saw at once what
they were looking at. It was a swan, a magnificent white swan sitting
serenely upon her nest. The nest itself was a huge pile of reeds and rushes
that rose up about two feet aboYe the waterline, and upon the top of all this
the swan was sitting like a great white lady of the lake. Her head was turned
towards the boys on the bank, alert and watchful.
   ‘’Ow  about that?’ Ernie said. ‘That’s better’n ducks, ain’t it?’
   ‘You  think you can get ’er?’ Raymond said.
   ‘Of  course I can get ’er. I’ll drill  a ’ole right through ’er noggin!’
   Peter felt a wild rage beginning to build up inside him. He walked up to
the two bigger boys. ‘I wouldn’t shoot that swan if I were you,’ he said,
trying to keep his Yoice calm. ‘Swans are the most protected birds in
England.’
   ‘And  what’s that got to do with it?’ Ernie asked him, sneering.
   ‘And  I’ll  tell  you something else,’ Peter went on, throwing all caution
away. ‘Nobody shoots a bird sitting on its nest. Absolutely nobody! She
may eYen haYe cygnets under her! You just can’t do it!’
   ‘’Oo  says we can’t?’ Raymond asked, sneering. ‘Mister bleedin’ snotty-
nose Peter Watson, is that the one ’oo says it?’
   ‘The  whole country says it,’ Peter answered. ‘The law says it and the
police say it and everyone says it!’
   ‘I  don’t say it!’  Ernie said, raising his gun.
   ‘Don’t!’   screamed Peter. ‘Please don’t!’
   Crack!  The gun went off. The bullet hit the swan right in the middle of
her elegant head and the long white neck collapsed on to the side of the
nest.
   ‘Got  ’er!’  cried Ernie.
   ‘Hot  shot!’ shouted Raymond.
   Ernie turned to Peter who was standing small and white-faced and
absolutely rigid. ‘Now go get ’er,’ he ordered.

78
   Once again, Peter didn’t moYe.
   Ernie came up close to the smaller boy and bent down and stuck his face
right up to Peter’s. ‘I’m tellin’  you for the last time,’ he said, soft and
dangerous. ‘Go get ’er!’
   Tears were running down Peter’s face as he went slowly down the bank
and entered the water. He waded out to the dead swan and picked it up
tenderly with both hands. Underneath it were two tiny cygnets, their bodies
coYered with yellow down. They were huddling together in the centre of the
nest.
   ‘Any  eggs?’ Ernie shouted from the bank.
   ‘No,’  Peter answered. ‘Nothing.’ There was a chance, he felt, that when
the male swan returned, it would continue to feed the young ones on its own
if they were left in the nest. He certainly did not want to leaYe them to the
tender mercies of Ernie and Raymond.
   Peter carried the dead swan back to the edge of the lake. He placed it on
the ground. Then he stood up and faced the two others. His eyes, still wet
with tears, were bla]ing with fury. ‘That was a filthy thing  to do!’ he
shouted. ‘It was a stupid pointless act of Yandalism! You’re a couple of
ignorant idiots! It’s you who ought to be dead instead of the swan! You’re
not fit to be aliYe!’
   He stood there, as tall as he could stand, splendid in his fury, facing the
two taller boys and not caring any longer what they did to him.
   Ernie didn’t  hit him this time. He seemed just a tiny bit taken aback at
first by this outburst, but he Tuickly recoYered. And now his loose lips
formed themselYes into a sly, wet smirk and his small close-together eyes
began to glint in a most malicious manner. ‘So you like swans, is that
right?’ he asked softly.
   ‘I  like swans and I hate you!’ Peter cried.
   ‘And  am I right in thinkin’,’   Ernie went on, still smirking, ‘am I
absolutely right in thinkin’ that you wished this old swan down ’ere were
aliYe instead of dead?’
   ‘That’s  a stupid Tuestion!’ Peter shouted.
   ‘’Ee  needs a clip oYer the ear-’ole,’ Raymond said.

79
   ‘Wait,’  Ernie said. ‘I’m  doin’ this e[ercise.’  He turned back to Peter. ‘So
if I could make this swan come aliYe and go flyin’ round the sky all oYer
again, then you’d be ’appy. Right?’
   ‘That’s  another stupid Tuestion!’ Peter cried out. ‘Who d’you think you
are?’
   ‘I’ll   tell you ’oo  I am,’ Ernie said. ‘I’m  a magic man, that’s ’oo I am. And
just to make you ’appy and contented, I am about to do a magic trick that’ll
make this dead swan come aliYe and go flyin’ all oYer the sky once again.’
   ‘Rubbish!’  Peter said. ‘I’m going.’  He turned and started to walk away.
   ‘Grab  ’im!’  Ernie said.
   Raymond grabbed him.
   ‘LeaYe me alone!’ Peter cried out.
   Raymond slapped him on the cheek, hard. ‘Now, now,’ he said. ‘Don’t
fight with auntie, not unless you want to get ’urt.’
   ‘Gimme  your knife,’  Ernie said, holding out his hand. Raymond gaYe
him his knife.
   Ernie knelt down beside the dead swan and stretched out one of its
enormous wings. ‘Watch this,’ he said.
   ‘What’s  the big idea?’ Raymond asked.
   ‘Wait  and see,’ Ernie said. And now, using the knife, he proceeded to
seYer the great white wing from the swan’s body. There is a joint in the
bone where the wing meets the side of the bird, and Ernie located this and
slid the knife into the joint and cut through the tendon. The knife was Yery
sharp and it cut well, and soon the wing came away all in one piece.
   Ernie turned the swan oYer and seYered the other wing.
   ‘String,’  he said, holding out his hand to Raymond.
   Raymond, who was grasping Peter by the arm, was watching fascinated.
‘Where’d you learn ’ow to butcher up a bird like that?’ he asked.
   ‘With  chickens,’ Ernie said. ‘We used to nick chickens from up at
SteYens Farm and cut ’em up into chicken parts and flog ’em to a shop in
Aylesbury. Gimme the string.’
   Raymond gaYe him the ball of string. Ernie cut off si[ pieces, each about
a yard long.

80
   There are a series of strong bones running along the top edge of a swan’s
wing, and Ernie took one of the wings and started tying one end of the bits
of string all the way along the top edge of the great wing. When he had
done this, he lifted the wing with the si[ string-ends dangling from it and
said to Peter, ‘Stick out your arm.’
   ‘You’re  absolutely mad!’ the smaller boy shouted. ‘You’re demented!’
   ‘Make  ’im stick  it out,’ Ernie said to Raymond.
   Raymond held up a clenched fist in front of Peter’s face and dabbed it
gently against his nose. ‘You see this,’ he said. ‘Well I’m goin’ to smash
you right in the kisser with it unless you do e[actly as you’re told, see?
Now, stick out your arm, there’s a good little boy.’
   Peter felt his resistance collapsing. He couldn’t hold out against these
people any longer. For a few seconds, he stared at Ernie. Ernie with the tiny
close-together black eyes gaYe the impression he would be capable of doing
just about anything if he got really angry. Ernie, Peter felt at that moment,
might Tuite easily kill a person if he were to lose his temper. Ernie, the
dangerous backward child, was playing games now and it would be Yery
unwise to spoil his fun. Peter held out an arm.
   Ernie then proceeded to tie the si[ string ends one by one to Peter’s arm,
and when he had finished, the white wing of the swan was securely attached
along the entire length of the arm itself.
   ‘Ow’s  that, eh?’ Ernie said, stepping back and surYeying his work.
   ‘Now  the other one,’ Raymond said, catching on to what Ernie was
doing. ‘You can’t e[pect ’im  to go flyin’  round the sky with only one wing,
can you?’
   ‘Second wing comin’  up,’ Ernie said. He knelt down again and tied si[
more lengths of string to the top bones of the second wing. Then he stood
up again. ‘Let’s ’aYe the other arm,’ he said. Peter, feeling sick and
ridiculous, held out his other arm. Ernie strapped the wing tightly along the
length of it.
   ‘Now!’   Ernie cried, clapping his hands and dancing a little jig on the
grass. ‘Now we got ourselYes a real liYe swan all oYer again! Didn’t I tell
you I was a magic man? Didn’t I tell you I was goin’ to do a magic trick

81
and make this dead swan come aliYe and go flyin’ all oYer the sky? Didn’t I
tell you that?’
   Peter stood there in the sunshine beside the lake on this beautiful May
morning, the enormous, limp and slightly bloodied wings dangling
grotesTuely at his sides. ‘HaYe you finished?’ he said.
   ‘Swans don’t talk,’  Ernie said. ‘Keep your flippin’  beak shut! And saYe
your energy, laddie, because you’re goin’ to need all the strength and
energy you got when it comes to flyin’ round in the sky.’ Ernie picked up
his gun from the ground, then he grabbed Peter by the back of the neck with
his free hand and said, ‘March!’
   They marched along the bank of the lake until they came to a tall and
graceful willow tree. There they halted. The tree was a weeping willow, and
the long branches hung down from a great height and almost touched the
surface of the lake.
   ‘And  now the magic swan is goin’ to show us a bit of magic flyin’,’
Ernie announced. ‘So what you’re goin’ to do, Mister Swan, is to climb up
to the Yery top of this tree, and when you get there you’re goin’ to spread
out your wings like a cleYer little swannee-swan-swan and you’re goin’ to
take off!’
   ‘Fantastic!’  cried Raymond. ‘Terrific!  I like it Yery much!’
   ‘So do I,’  Ernie said. ‘Because now we’re goin’ to find out just e[actly
’ow cleYer this cleYer little swannee-swan-swan really is. ’Ee’s terribly
cleYer at school, we all know that, and ’ee’s top of the class and eYerything
else that’s loYely, but let’s see just e[actly ’ow cleYer ’ee is when ’ee’s at
the top of the tree! Right, Mister Swan?’ He gaYe Peter a push towards the
tree.
   How  much further could this madness go? Peter wondered. He was
beginning to feel a little mad himself, as though nothing was real any more
and none of it was actually happening. But the thought of being high up in
the tree and out of reach of these hooligans at last was something that
appealed to him greatly. When he was up there, he could stay up there. He
doubted Yery much if they would bother to come up after him. And eYen if

82
they did, he could surely climb away from them along a thin limb that
would not take the weight of two people.
   The tree was a fairly easy one to climb, with seYeral low branches to giYe
him a start up. He began climbing. The huge white wings dangling from his
arms kept getting in the way, but it didn’t matter. What mattered now to
Peter was that eYery inch upward was another inch away from his
tormentors below. He had neYer been a great one for tree-climbing and he
wasn’t especially good at it, but nothing in the world was going to stop him
from getting to the top of this one. And once he was there, he thought it
unlikely they would eYen be able to see him because of the leaYes.
   ‘Higher!’   shouted Ernie’s Yoice. ‘Keep goin’!’
   Peter kept going, and eYentually he arriYed at a point where it was
impossible to go higher. His feet were now standing on a branch that was
about as thick as a person’s wrist, and this particular branch reached far out
oYer the lake and then curYed gracefully downward. All the branches aboYe
him were Yery thin and whippy, but the one he was holding on to with his
hands was Tuite strong enough for the purpose. He stood there, resting after
the climb. He looked down for the first time. He was Yery high up, at least
fifty feet. But he couldn’t see the two boys. They were no longer standing at
the base of the tree. Was it possible they had gone away at last?
   ‘All   right, Mister Swan!’ came the dreaded Yoice of Ernie. ‘Now listen
carefully!’
   The two of them had walked some distance away from the tree to a point
where they had a clear Yiew of the small boy at the top. Looking down at
them now, Peter reali]ed how Yery sparse and slender the leaYes of a willow
tree were. They gaYe him almost no coYer at all.
   ‘Listen  carefully, Mister Swan!’ the Yoice was shouting. ‘Start walking
out along that branch you’re standin’ on! Keep goin’ till you’re right oYer
the nice muddy water! Then you take off!’
   Peter didn’t moYe. He was fifty feet aboYe them now and they weren’t
eYer going to reach him again. From down below, there was a long silence.
It lasted maybe half a minute. He kept his eyes on the two distant figures in
the field. They were standing Tuite still, looking up at him.

83
   ‘All   right then, Mister Swan!’ came Ernie’s Yoice again. ‘I’m gonna
count to ten, right? And if you ain’t spread them wings and flown away by
then, I’m gonna shoot you down instead with this little gun! And that’ll
make two swans I’Ye knocked off today instead of one! So here we go,
Mister Swan! One! … Two! … Three! … Four! … FiYe! … Si[!  …’
   Peter remained still. Nothing would make him moYe from now on.
   ‘SeYen! … Eight! …  Nine! … Ten!’
   Peter saw the gun coming up to the shoulder. It was pointing straight at
him. Then he heard the crack of the rifle and the zip of the bullet as it
whistled past his head. It was a frightening thing. But he still didn’t moYe.
He could see Ernie loading the gun with another bullet.
   ‘Last  chance!’ yelled Ernie. ‘The ne[t one’s gonna get you!’
   Peter stayed put. He waited. He watched the boy who was standing
among the buttercups in the meadow far below with the other boy beside
him. The gun came up once again to the shoulder.
   This time he heard the crack at the same instant the bullet hit him in the
thigh. There was no pain, but the force of it was deYastating. It was as
though someone had whacked him on the leg with a sledgehammer, and it
knocked both feet off the branch he was standing on. He scrabbled with his
hands to hang on. The small branch he was holding on to bent oYer and
split.
   Some people, when they haYe taken too much and haYe been driYen
beyond the point of endurance, simply crumble and giYe up. There are
others, though they are not many, who will for some reason always be
unconTuerable. You meet them in time of war and also in time of peace.
They haYe an indomitable spirit and nothing, neither pain nor torture nor
threat of death, will cause them to giYe up.
   Little  Peter Watson was one of these. And as he fought and scrabbled to
preYent himself from falling out of the top of that tree, it came to him
suddenly that he was going to win. He looked up and he saw a light shining
oYer the waters of the lake that was of such brilliance and beauty he was
unable to look away from it. The light was beckoning him, drawing him on,
and he diYed towards the light and spread his wings.

84
   Three different people reported seeing a great white swan circling oYer
the Yillage that morning, a school-teacher called Emily Mead, a man who
was replacing some tiles on the roof of the chemist’s shop whose name was
William Eyles, and a boy called John Underwood who was flying his model
aeroplane in a nearby field.
   And  that morning, Mrs Watson, who was washing up some dishes in her
kitchen sink, happened to glance up through the window at the e[act
moment when something huge and white came flopping down on to the
lawn in her back garden. She rushed outside. She went down on her knees
beside the small crumpled figure of her only son. ‘Oh, my darling!’ she
cried, near to hysterics and hardly belieYing what she saw. ‘My darling boy!
What happened to you?’
   ‘My  leg hurts,’ Peter said, opening his eyes. Then he fainted.
   ‘It’s  bleeding!’  she cried and she picked him up and carried him inside.
4uickly  she phoned for the doctor and the ambulance. And while she was
waiting for help to come, she fetched a pair of scissors and began cutting
the string that held the two great wings of the swan to her son’s arms.

85
                  The   Wonderful         Story    of   Henry      Sugar



Henry Sugar was forty-one years old and unmarried. He was also wealthy.
He was wealthy because he had had a rich father who was now dead. He
was unmarried because he was too selfish to share any of his money with a
wife.
   He was si[  feet two inches tall, but he wasn’t really as good-looking as
he thought he was.
   He paid a great deal of attention to his clothes. He went to an e[pensiYe
tailor for his suits, to a shirtmaker for his shirts, and to a bootmaker for his
shoes.
   He used a costly aftershaYe lotion on his face, and he kept his hands soft
with a cream that contained turtle oil.
   His hairdresser trimmed his hair once eYery ten days, and he always took
a manicure at the same time.
   His upper front teeth had been capped at incredible e[pense because the
originals had had a rather nasty yellowish tinge. A small mole had been
remoYed from his left cheek by a plastic surgeon.
   He droYe a Ferrari car which must haYe cost him about the same as a
country cottage.
   He liYed in London in the summer, but as soon as the first frosts appeared
in October, he was off to the West Indies or the South of France, where he
stayed with friends. All his friends were wealthy from inherited money.
   Henry had neYer done a day’s work in his life, and his personal motto,
which he had inYented himself, was this: It is Eetter to incur a mild reEuke
than to perform an onerous task. His friends thought this was hilarious.

86
   Men like  Henry Sugar are to be found drifting like seaweed all oYer the
world. They can be seen especially in London, New York, Paris, Nassau,
Montego Bay, Cannes and St Trope]. They are not particularly bad men.
But they are not good men either. They are of no real importance. They are
simply a part of the decoration.
   All  of them, all wealthy people of this type, haYe one peculiarity in
common: they haYe a terrific urge to make themselYes still wealthier than
they already are. The million is neYer enough. Nor is the two million.
Always, they haYe this insatiable longing to get more money. And that is
because they liYe in constant terror of waking up one morning and finding
there’s nothing in the bank.
   These people all employ the same methods for trying to increase their
fortunes. They buy stocks and shares, and watch them going up and down.
They play roulette and blackjack for high stakes in casinos. They bet on
horses. They bet on just about eYerything. Henry Sugar had once staked a
thousand pounds on the result of a tortoise race on Lord LiYerpool’s tennis
lawn. And he had wagered double that sum with a man called Esmond
Hanbury on an eYen sillier bet, which was as follows: they let Henry’s dog
out into the garden and they watched it through the window. But before the
dog was let out, each man had to guess beforehand what would be the first
object the dog would lift its leg against. Would it be a wall, a post, a bush or
a tree? Esmond chose a wall. Henry, who had been studying his dog’s habits
for days with a Yiew to making this particular bet, chose a tree, and he won
the money.
   With  ridiculous games such as these did Henry and his friends try to
conTuer the deadly boredom of being both idle and wealthy.
   Henry himself, as you may haYe noticed, was not aboYe cheating a little
on these friends of his if he saw the chance. The bet with the dog was
definitely not honest. Nor, if you want to know, was the bet on the tortoise
race. Henry cheated on that one by secretly forcing a little sleeping-pill
powder into the mouth of his opponent’s tortoise an hour before the race.
   And  now that you’Ye got a rough idea of the sort of person Henry Sugar
was, I can begin my story.

87
   One summer week-end, Henry droYe down from London to Guildford to
stay with Sir William Wyndham. The house was magnificent, and so were
the grounds, but when Henry arriYed on that Saturday afternoon, it was
already pelting with rain. Tennis was out, croTuet was out. So was
swimming in Sir William’s  outdoor pool. The host and his guests sat glumly
in the drawing-room, staring at the rain splashing against the windows. The
Yery rich are enormously resentful of bad weather. It is the one discomfort
that their money cannot do anything about.
   Somebody in the room said, ‘Let’s haYe a game of canasta for loYely
high stakes.’
   The others thought that a splendid idea, but as there were fiYe people in
all, one would haYe to sit out. They cut the cards. Henry drew the lowest,
the unlucky card.
   The other four sat down and began to play. Henry was annoyed at being
out of the game. He wandered out of the drawing-room into the great hall.
He stared at the pictures for a few moments, then he walked on through the
house, bored to death at haYing nothing to do. Finally, he mooched into the
library.
   Sir William’s  father had been a famous book collector, and all the four
walls to this huge room were lined with books from floor to ceiling. Henry
Sugar was not impressed. He wasn’t eYen interested. The only books he
read were detectiYe noYels and thrillers. He ambled aimlessly round the
room, looking to see if he could find any of the sort of books he liked. But
the ones in Sir William’s library were all leather-bound Yolumes with names
on them like Bal]ac, Ibsen, Voltaire, Johnson and Pepys. Boring rubbish,
the whole lot of it, Henry told himself. And he was just about to leaYe when
his eye was caught and held by a book that was Tuite different from all the
others. It was so slim he would neYer haYe noticed it if it hadn’t been
sticking out a little from the ones on either side. And when he pulled it from
the shelf, he saw that it was actually nothing more than a cardboard-coYered
e[ercise-book of the kind children use at school. The coYer was dark blue,
but there was nothing written on it. Henry opened the e[ercise-book. On the
first page, hand-printed in ink, it said:

88
       A REPORT ON AN INTERVIEW
       WITH IMHRAT KHAN, THE MAN WHO
       COULD SEE WITHOUT HIS EYES
       by
       Dr John F. Cartwright
       BOMBAY, INDIA
       DECEMBER, 194

    That sounds mildly   interesting,  Henry  told himself.  He  turned oYer a
page. What followed   was all handwritten   in black  ink. The  writing  was
clear and neat. Henry  read the first  two pages standing up.  Suddenly, he
found himself  wanting  to  read on. This was good  stuff.  It was fascinating.
He carried the little   book oYer to a leather armchair  by  the window  and
settled himself  comfortably.  Then  he started reading again from  the
beginning.

This is what  Henry  read in the little  blue  e[ercise-book:

I, John Cartwright,   am a surgeon at Bombay  General Hospital.  On  the
morning  of the second of  December, 194, I was in  the Doctors’  Rest Room
haYing a cup of tea. There were  three other doctors  there with  me, all
haYing a well-earned  tea-break. They were  Dr Marshall,   Dr Phillips  and Dr
Macfarlane.  There was a knock  on the door. ‘Come  in,’  I  said.
    The door opened and an Indian  came in  who smiled  at us and said,
‘E[cuse  me, please. Could  I ask you  gentlemen a faYour?’
    The Doctors’  Rest Room  was a most priYate place.  Nobody  other than a
doctor was allowed  to enter  it e[cept  in  an emergency.
    ‘This  is a priYate room,’  Dr  Macfarlane  said sharply.
    ‘Yes, yes,’  the Indian  answered. ‘I  know  that and I am Yery  sorry to be
bursting in  like  this, sirs, but  I haYe a most interesting  thing to  show you.’
    All  four  of us were pretty  annoyed and we  didn’t  say anything.
    ‘Gentlemen,’  he said.  ‘I  am a man who can see without  using  his eyes.’
    We still  didn’t  inYite  him to  go on. But  we didn’t  kick  him  out either.
    ‘You  can coYer my eyes in any way  you  wish,’  he said, ‘you  can bandage
my head with  fifty   bandages and I will  still  be able to  read you a book.’

89
   He seemed perfectly serious. I felt my curiosity beginning to stir. ‘Come
here,’ I said. He came oYer to me. ‘Turn round.’ He turned round. I placed
my hands firmly oYer his eyes, holding the lids closed. ‘Now,’ I said. ‘One
of the other doctors in the room is going to hold up some fingers. Tell me
how many he’s holding up.’
   Dr  Marshall held up seYen fingers.
   ‘SeYen,’ the Indian said.
   ‘Once more,’ I  said.
   Dr  Marshall clenched both fists and hid all his fingers.
   ‘No  fingers,’ the Indian said.
   ‘Once more,’ I  said.
   Dr  Marshall clenched both fists and hid all his fingers.
   ‘No  fingers,’ the Indian said.
   I  remoYed my hands from his eyes. ‘Not bad,’ I said.
   ‘Hold  on,’ Dr  Marshall said. ‘Let’s try this.’ There was a white doctor’s
coat hanging from a peg on the door. Dr Marshall took it down and rolled it
into a sort of long scarf. He then wound it round the Indian’s head and held
the ends tight at the back. ‘Try him now,’ Dr Marshall said.
   I  took a key from my pocket. ‘What is this?’ I asked.
   ‘A  key,’ he answered.
   I  put the key back and held up an empty hand. ‘What is this object?’ I
asked him.
   ‘There isn’t  any object,’ the Indian said. ‘Your hand is empty.’
   Dr  Marshall remoYed the coYering from the man’s eyes. ‘How do you do
it?’ he asked. ‘What’s the trick?’
   ‘There is no trick,’  the Indian said. ‘It is a genuine thing that I haYe
managed after years of training.’
   ‘What  sort of training?’ I asked.
   ‘ForgiYe me, sir,’ he said. ‘But that is a priYate matter.’
   ‘Then  why did you come here?’ I asked.
   ‘I  came to reTuest a faYour of you,’ he said.
   The Indian was a tall man of about thirty with light brown skin, the
colour of a coconut. He had a small black moustache. Also, there was a

90
curious matting of black hair growing all oYer the outsides of his ears. Her
wore a white cotton robe, and he had sandals on his bare feet.
   ‘You  see, gentlemen,’ he went on, ‘I am at present earning my liYing by
working in a traYelling theatre, and we haYe just arriYed here in Bombay.
Tonight we giYe our opening performance.’
   ‘Where do you giYe it?’ I asked.
   ‘In  the Royal Palace Hall,’ he answered. ‘In Acacia Street. I am the star
performer. I am billed on the programme as “Imhrat Khan, the man who
sees without his eyes”. And it is my duty to adYertise the show in a big way.
If we don’t sell tickets, we don’t eat.’
   ‘What  does this haYe to do with us?’ I asked him.
   ‘Very  interesting for you,’ he said. ‘Lots of fun. Let me e[plain. You see,
wheneYer our theatre arriYes in a new town, I myself go straight to the
largest hospital and I ask the doctors there to bandage my eyes. I ask them
to do it in the most e[pert fashion. They must make sure my eyes are
completely coYered many times oYer. It is important that this job is done by
doctors, otherwise people will think I am cheating. Then, when I am fully
bandaged, I go out into the streets and I do a dangerous thing.’
   ‘What  do you mean by that?’ I asked.
   ‘What  I mean is that I do something that is e[tremely dangerous for
someone who cannot see.’
   ‘What  do you do?’ I asked.
   ‘It  is Yery interesting,’ he said. ‘And you will see me do it if you will  be
so kind as to bandage me up first. It would be a great faYour to me if you
will do this little  thing, sirs.’
   I  looked at the other three doctors. Dr Phillips said he had to go back to
his patients. Dr Macfarlane said the same. Dr Marshall said, ‘Well, why
not? It might be amusing. It won’t take a minute.’
   ‘I’m   with you,’ I  said. ‘But let’s do the job properly. Let’s make
absolutely sure he can’t peep.’
   ‘You  are e[tremely kind,’ the Indian said. ‘Please do whateYer you wish.’
   Dr  Phillips and Dr Macfarlane left the room.

91
   ‘Before  we bandage him,’ I said to Dr Marshall, ‘let’s first of all seal
down his eyelids. When we’Ye done that, we’ll fill his eye-sockets with
something soft and solid and sticky.’
   ‘Such as what?’ Dr Marshall asked.
   ‘What  about dough?’
   ‘Dough  would be perfect,’ Dr Marshall said.
   ‘Right,’  I  said. ‘If you will  nip down to the hospital bakery and get some
dough, I’ll take him into the surgery and seal his lids.’
   I  led the Indian out of the Rest Room and down the long hospital corridor
to the surgery. ‘Lie down there,’ I said, indicating the high bed. He lay
down. I took a small bottle from the cupboard. It had an eyedropper in the
top. ‘This is something called collodion,’ I told him. ‘It  will  harden oYer
your closed eyelids so that it is impossible for you to open them.’
   ‘How  do I get it off  afterwards?’ he asked me.
   ‘Alcohol  will  dissolYe it Tuite easily,’ I said. ‘It’s perfectly harmless.
Close your eyes now.’
   The Indian closed his eyes. I applied collodion oYer both lids. ‘Keep
them closed,’ I said. ‘Wait for it to harden.’
   In  a couple of minutes, the collodion had made a hard film oYer the
eyelids, sticking them down tight. ‘Try to open them,’ I said.
   He tried but couldn’t.
   Dr  Marshall came in with a basin of dough. It was the ordinary white
dough used for baking bread. It was nice and soft. I took a lump of the
dough and plastered it oYer one of the Indian’s eyes. I filled the whole
socket and let the dough oYerlap on to the surrounding skin. Then I pressed
the edges down hard. I did the same with the other eye.
   ‘That  isn’t too uncomfortable, is it?’ I asked.
   ‘No,’  the Indian said. ‘It’s fine.’
   ‘You  do the bandaging,’ I said to Dr Marshall. ‘My fingers are too
sticky.’
   ‘A  pleasure,’ Dr Marshall said. ‘Watch this.’ He took a thick wad of
cotton-wool and laid it on top of the Indian’s dough-filled eyes. The cotton-

92
wool stuck to the dough and stayed in place. ‘Sit up, please,’ Dr Marshall
said.
   The Indian sat up on the bed.
   Dr  Marshall took a roll of three-inch bandage and proceeded to wrap it
round and round the man’s head. The bandage held the cotton-wool and the
dough firmly in place. Dr Marshall pinned the bandage. After that, he took
a second bandage and began to wrap that one not only around the man’s
eyes but around his entire face and head.
   ‘Please to leaYe my nose free for breathing,’ the Indian said.
   ‘Of  course,’ Dr Marshall answered. He finished the job and pinned down
the end of the bandage. ‘How’s that?’ he asked.
   ‘Splendid,’  I said. ‘There’s no way he can possibly see through that.’
   The whole of the Indian’s head was now swathed in thick white bandage,
and the only thing you could see was the end of his nose sticking out. He
looked like a man who had had some terrible brain operation.
   ‘How  does that feel?’ Dr Marshall asked him.
   ‘It  feels good,’ the Indian said. ‘I must compliment you gentlemen on
doing such a fine job.’
   ‘Off  you go, then,’ Mr  Marshall said, grinning at me. ‘Show us how
cleYer you are at seeing things now.’
   The Indian got off the bed and walked straight to the door. He opened the
door and went out.
   ‘Great Scott!’  I said. ‘Did you see that? He put his hand right on to the
doorknob!’
   Dr  Marshall had stopped grinning. His face had suddenly gone white.
‘I’m  going after him,’ he said, rushing for the door. I rushed for the door as
well.
   The Indian was walking Tuite normally along the hospital corridor. Dr
Marshall and I were about fiYe yards behind him. And Yery spooky it was to
watch this man with the enormous white and totally bandaged head strolling
casually along the corridor just like anyone else. It was especially spooky
when you knew for a certainty that his eyelids were sealed, that his eye-

93
sockets were filled with dough, and that there was a great wad of cotton-
wool and bandages on top of that.
   I  saw a natiYe orderly coming along the corridor towards the Indian. He
was pushing a food-trolley. Suddenly the orderly caught sight of the man
with the white head, and he fro]e. The bandaged Indian stepped casually to
one side of the trolley and went on.
   ‘He  saw it!’ I  cried. ‘He must haYe seen that trolley! He walked right
round it! This is absolutely unbelieYable!’
   Dr  Marshall didn’t answer me. His cheeks were white, his whole face
rigid with shocked disbelief.
   The Indian came to the stairs and started to go down them.
   He went down with no trouble at all. He didn’t eYen put a hand on the
stair-rail. SeYeral people were coming up the stairs. Each one of them
stopped, gasped, stared and Tuickly got out of his way.
   At  the bottom of the stairs, the Indian turned right and headed for the
doors that led out into the street. Dr Marshall and I kept close behind him.
   The entrance to our hospital stands back a little from the street, and there
is a rather grand series of steps leading down from the entrance into a small
courtyard with acacia trees around it. Dr Marshall and I came out into the
bla]ing sunshine and stood at the top of the steps. Below us, in the
courtyard, we saw a crowd of maybe a hundred people. At least half of
them were barefoot children, and as our white-headed Indian walked down
the steps, they all cheered and shouted and surged towards him. He greeted
them by holding both hands aboYe his head.
   Suddenly I saw the bicycle. It was oYer to one side at the bottom of the
steps, and a small boy was holding it. The bicycle itself was Tuite ordinary,
but on the back of it, fi[ed somehow to the rear wheel-frame, was a huge
placard, about fiYe feet sTuare. On the placard were written the following
words:

      IMHRAT KHAN, THE MAN WHO SEES
      WITHOUT HIS EYES!
      TODAY MY EYES HAVE BEEN BANDAGED BY
      HOSPITAL DOCTORS!
      APPEARING TONIGHT AND

94
       ALL THIS WEEK AT
       THE ROYAL PALACE HALL,
       ACACIA STREET, AT  P.M.
       DON’T MISS IT!
       YOU WILL SEE MIRACLES PERFORMED.

Our Indian  had reached the bottom  of the steps and now  he walked straight
oYer to the bicycle.  He said something  to the boy  and the boy smiled.  The
Indian mounted  the bicycle.  The crowd  made way  for him.  Then,  lo and
behold, this fellow   with  the blocked-up,  bandaged eyes now  proceeded to
ride across the courtyard  and straight  out into  the bustling  honking  traffic  of
the street beyond! The  crowd  cheered louder than eYer. The barefoot
children  ran after him,  sTuealing and laughing.  For  a minute or  so, we were
able to keep him  in sight.  We saw him  ride superbly  down the  busy street
with  motor-cars whi]]ing    past him  and a bunch of  children  running  in his
wake. Then he turned  a corner and was gone.
    ‘I  feel Tuite giddy,’   Dr Marshall   said. ‘I  can’t bring  myself  to belieYe it.’
    ‘We haYe to belieYe it,’  I  said. ‘He  couldn’t  possibly  haYe remoYed the
dough from  under the bandages. We neYer let him  out of  our sight. And  as
for unsealing  his eyelids,  that job would  take  him fiYe  minutes with  cotton-
wool and alcohol.’
    ‘Do  you know  what  I think,’   Dr Marshall  said.  ‘I  think  we haYe
witnessed a miracle.’
    We turned and walked  slowly  back  into the hospital.

For the rest of  the day, I was kept  busy with  patients in  the hospital.  At si[
in the eYening, I came off  duty  and droYe back to my  flat  for a shower  and a
change of clothes. It  was the hottest time  of  year in Bombay,  and eYen after
sundown the heat was like  an open furnace.  If you  sat still  in a chair  and did
nothing, the  sweat would  come seeping out of  your skin.  Your  face
glistened with  dampness all day  long and your  shirt  stuck to your  chest. I
took a long  cool shower. I  drank a whisky  and soda sitting  on  the Yeranda,
with  only a towel  round  my waist.  Then I  put on some clean clothes.
    At ten  minutes to seYen, I was outside  the Royal Palace Hall  in  Acacia
Street. It was not  much of  a place. It was one of  those smallish  seedy halls

95
that can be hired ine[pensiYely   for  meetings or dances. There was a fair-
si]ed crowd  of  local Indians  milling   round outside  the ticket  office,  and a
large poster oYer the entrance proclaiming   that THE INTERNATIONAL THEATRE

COMPANY was performing eYery night that week. It said there would  be
jugglers and conjurers  and acrobats and sword-swallowers   and fire-eaters
and snake-charmers and a one-act play  entitled The  RaMah and the Tiger
Lady. But  aboYe all this and in  far the largest  letters, it  said IMHRAT KHAN,

THE MIRACLE MAN WHO SEES WITHOUT HIS EYES.
    I bought  a ticket and went  in.
    The show lasted two  hours. To  my surprise,  I thoroughly  enjoyed  it.  All
the performers were  e[cellent.  I  liked  the man who  juggled with  cooking-
utensils. He had a saucepan, a frying-pan,  a baking  tray, a huge plate  and a
casserole pot all flying   through  the air at the same time.  The snake-charmer
had a big green snake that stood almost  on the tip  of its  tail and swayed  to
the music of  his flute.  The fire-eater  ate fire  and the sword-swallower
pushed a thin pointed  rapier at least four  feet down  his throat  and into his
stomach. Last of  all, to  a great fanfare of  trumpets, our  friend  Imhrat Khan
came on to do his act.  The bandages we had put on him  at the hospital  had
now been remoYed.
    Members of  the audience were called  on to the  stage to blindfold  him
with  sheets and scarYes and turbans, and in the end there was so much
material wrapped  around his head he could  hardly  keep his balance. He  was
then giYen a reYolYer. A small  boy came out and stood  at the left of  the
stage. I recogni]ed  him  as the one who had held  the bicycle  outside the
hospital that  morning.  The boy placed  a tin can on the top  of his  head and
stood Tuite still.  The audience  became deathly silent  as Imhrat Khan  took
aim. He fired.  The bang  made us all jump.  The tin  can flew  off  the boy’s
head and clattered to the floor.  The  boy picked  it up and showed  the bullet-
hole to the audience. EYeryone  clapped and cheered. The boy  smiled.
    Then the boy  stood against a wooden screen and Imhrat  Khan  threw
kniYes all around  his body, most of  them going  Yery close indeed. This  was
a splendid act. Not  many people  could haYe thrown  kniYes with  such

96
accuracy eYen with their eyes uncoYered, but here he was, this
e[traordinary fellow, with  his head so swathed in sheets it looked like a
great snowball on a stick, and he was flicking the sharp kniYes into the
screen within a hair’s breadth of the boy’s head. The boy smiled all the way
through the act, and when it was oYer the audience stamped its feet and
screamed with e[citement.
   Imhrat Khan’s last act, though not so spectacular, was eYen more
impressiYe. A metal barrel was brought on stage. The audience was inYited
to e[amine it, to make sure there were no holes. There were no holes. The
barrel was then placed oYer Imhrat Khan’s already bandaged head. It came
down oYer his shoulders and as far as his elbows, pinning the upper part of
his arms to his sides. But he could still hold out his forearms and his hands.
Someone put a needle in one of his hands and a length of cotton thread in
the other. With no false moYes, he neatly threaded the cotton through the
eye of the needle. I was flabbergasted.
   As soon as the show was oYer, I made my way backstage. I found Mr
Imhrat Khan in a small but clean dressing-room, sitting Tuietly on a wooden
stool. The little Indian boy was unwinding the masses of scarYes and sheets
from around his head.
   ‘Ah,’   he said. ‘It is my friend the doctor from the hospital. Come in, sir,
come in.’
   ‘I  saw the show,’ I said.
   ‘And  what did you think?’
   ‘I  liked it  Yery much. I thought you were wonderful.’
   ‘Thank  you,’ he said. ‘That is a high compliment.’
   ‘I  must congratulate your assistant as well,’ I said, nodding to the small
boy. ‘He is Yery braYe.’
   ‘He  cannot speak English,’ the Indian said. ‘But I will tell him what you
said.’ He spoke rapidly to the boy in Hindustani and the boy nodded
solemnly but said nothing.
   ‘Look,’   I said. ‘I did you a small faYour this morning. Would you do me
one in return? Would you consent to come out and haYe supper with me?’

97
   All  the wrappings were off his head now. He smiled at me and said, ‘I
think you are feeling curious, doctor. Am I not right?’
   ‘Very  curious,’ I said. ‘I’d  like to talk to you.’
   Once again, I was struck by the peculiarly thick matting of black hair
growing on the outsides of his ears. I had not seen anything Tuite like it on
another person. ‘I haYe neYer been Tuestioned by a doctor before,’ he said.
‘But I haYe no objection. It would be a pleasure to haYe supper with you.’
   ‘Shall  I wait in the car?’
   ‘Yes, please,’ he said. ‘I must wash myself and get out of these dirty
clothes.’
   I  told him what my car looked like and said I would be waiting outside.
   He emerged fifteen minutes later, wearing a clean white cotton robe and
the usual sandals on his bare feet. And soon the two of us were sitting
comfortably in a small restaurant that I sometimes went to because it made
the best curry in the city. I drank beer with my curry. Imhrat Khan drank
lemonade.
   ‘I  am not a writer,’ I said to him. ‘I  am a doctor. But if you will tell me
your story from the beginning, if you will e[plain  to me how you deYeloped
this magical power of being able to see without your eyes, I will write it
down as faithfully as I can. And then, perhaps, I can get it published in the
British Medical Journal or eYen in some famous maga]ine. And because I
am a doctor and not just some writer trying to sell a story for money, people
will be far more inclined to take seriously what I say. It would help you,
wouldn’t it, to become better known?’
   ‘It  would help me Yery much,’ he said. ‘But why should you want to do
this?’
   ‘Because I am madly curious,’ I answered. ‘That is the only reason.’
   Imhrat Khan took a mouthful of curried rice and chewed it slowly. Then
he said, ‘Very well, my friend. I will  do it.’
   ‘Splendid!’  I  cried. ‘Let’s go back to my flat as soon as we’Ye finished
eating and then we can talk without anyone disturbing us.’
   We finished our meal. I paid the bill. Then I droYe Imhrat Khan back to
my flat.

98
In the liYing-room, I got out paper and pencils so that I could make notes. I
haYe a sort of priYate shorthand of my own that I use for taking down the
medical history of patients, and with it I am able to record most of what a
person says if he doesn’t speak too Tuickly. I think I got just about
eYerything Imhrat Khan said to me that eYening, word for word, and here it
is. I giYe it to you e[actly as he spoke it:
   ‘I  am an Indian, a Hindu,’ said Imhrat Khan, ‘and I was born in Akhnur,
in Kashmir State, in 190. My family is poor and my father worked as a
ticket inspector on the railway. When I was a small boy of thirteen, an
Indian conjurer comes to our school and giYes a performance. His name, I
remember, is Professor Moor – all conjurers in India call themselYes
“professor” – and his tricks are Yery good. I am tremendously impressed. I
think it is real magic. I feel – how shall I call it – I feel a powerful wish to
learn about this magic myself, so two days later I run away from home,
determined to find and to follow my new hero, Professor Moor. I take all
my saYings, fourteen rupees, and only the clothes I am wearing. I am
wearing a white dhoti and sandals. This is in 191 and I am thirteen years
old.
   ‘I  find out that Professor Moor has gone to Lahore, two hundred miles
away, so all alone, I take a ticket, third class, and I get on the train and
follow him. In  Lahore, I discoYer the Professor. He is working at his
conjuring in a Yery cheap-type show. I tell him of my admiration and offer
myself to him as assistant. He accepts me. My pay? Ah yes, my pay is eight
annas a day.
   ‘The  Professor teaches me to do the linking-rings trick and my job is to
stand in the street before the theatre doing this trick and calling to the
people to come in and see the show.
   ‘For  si[  whole weeks this is Yery fine. It is much better than going to
school. But then what a terrible bombshell I receiYe when suddenly it
comes to me that there is no real magic in Professor Moor, that all is
trickery and Tuickness of the hand. Immediately the Professor is no longer
my hero. I lose eYery bit of interest in my job, but at the same time my
whole mind becomes filled with a Yery strong longing. I long aboYe all

99
things to find out about the real magic and to discoYer something about the
strange power which is called yoga.
   ‘To  do this, I must find a yogi who is willing to let me become his
disciple. This is not going to be easy. True yogis do not grow on trees.
There are Yery few of them in the whole of India. Also, they are fanatically
religious people. Therefore, if I am to haYe success in finding a teacher, I
too will haYe to pretend to be a Yery religious man.
   ‘No,  I am actually not religious. And because of that, I am what you
would call a bit of a cheat. I wanted to acTuire yoga powers purely for
selfish reasons. I wanted to use these powers to get fame and fortune.
   ‘Now  this was something the true yogi would despise more than anything
in the world. In fact, the true yogi belieYes that any yogi who misuses his
powers will die an early and sudden death. A yogi must neYer perform in
public. He must practise his art only in absolute priYacy and as a religious
serYice, otherwise he will be smitten to death. This I did not belieYe and I
still don’t.
   ‘So now my  search for a yogi instructor begins. I leaYe Professor Moor
and go to a town called Amritsar in the Punjab, where I join a traYelling
theatre company. I haYe to make a liYing while I am searching for the
secret, and already I haYe had success in amateur acting at my school. So
for three years I traYel with this theatre group all oYer the Punjab and by the
end of it, when I am si[teen and a half years old, I am playing top of the
bill. All  the time I am saYing money and now I haYe altogether a Yery great
sum, two thousand rupees.
   ‘It  is at this moment that I hear news of a man called Banerjee. This
Banerjee, it is said, is one of the truly great yogis of India, and he possesses
e[traordinary powers. AboYe all, people are telling of how he has acTuired
the rare power of leYitation, so that when he prays his whole body leaYes
the ground and becomes suspended in the air eighteen inches from the soil.
   ‘Ah-ha,  I think. This surely is the man for me. This Banerjee is the one
that I must seek. So at once, I take my saYings and leaYe the theatre
company and make my way to Rishikesh, on the banks of the Ganges,
where rumour says that Banerjee is liYing.

100
   ‘For  si[  months I search for Banerjee. Where is he? Where? Where is
Banerjee? Ah yes, they say in Rishikesh, Banerjee has certainly been in the
town, but that is a while ago, and eYen then no one saw him. And now?
Now Banerjee has gone to another place. What other place? Ah well, they
say, how can one know that. How indeed? How can one know about the
moYements of such a one as Banerjee. Does he not liYe a life of absolute
seclusion? Does he not? And I say yes. Yes, yes, yes. Of course. That is
obYious. EYen to me.
   ‘I  spend all my saYings trying to find this Banerjee, all e[cept thirty-fiYe
rupees. But it is no good. HoweYer, I stay in Rishikesh and make a liYing by
doing ordinary conjuring tricks for small groups and for suchlike. These are
the tricks I haYe learned from Professor Moor and by nature my sleight of
hand is Yery good.
   ‘Then  one day, there I am sitting in the small hotel in Rishikesh and again
I hear talk of the yogi Banerjee. A traYeller is saying how he has heard that
Banerjee is now liYing in the jungle, not so Yery far away, but in the dense
jungle and all alone.
   ‘But  where?
   ‘The  traYeller is not sure where. “Possibly,” he says, “it is oYer there, in
that direction, north of the town,” and he points with his finger.
   ‘Well,  that is enough for me. I go to the market and begin to bargain for
hiring a tonga, which is a horse and cart, and the transaction is just being
completed with the driYer when up comes a man who has been standing
listening nearby and he says that he too is going in that direction. He says
can he come part of the way with me and share the cost. Of course I am
delighted, and off we go, the man and me sitting in the cart, and the driYer
driYing the horse. Off we go along a Yery small path which leads right
through the jungle.
   ‘And  then what truly fantastic luck should happen! I am talking to my
companion and I find that he is a disciple of none other than the great
Banerjee himself and that he is going now on a Yisit to his master. So
straight out I tell him that I too would like to become a disciple of the yogi.

101
   ‘He  turns and looks at me long and slow, and for perhaps three minutes
he does not speak. Then he says, Tuietly, “No, that is impossible.”
   ‘All   right, I say to myself, we shall see. Then I ask if it is really true that
Banerjee leYitates when he prays.
   ‘“Yes,”  he says. “That is true. But no one is allowed to obserYe the thing
happening. No one is eYer allowed to come near Banerjee when he is
praying.”
   ‘So we go on a little further in the tonga, talking all the time about
Banerjee, and I manage by Yery careful casual Tuestioning, to find out a
number of small things about him, such as what time of day he commences
with his praying. Then soon the man says, “I will leaYe you here. This is
where I dismount.”
   ‘I  drop him off and I pretend to driYe on along my journey, but around a
corner I tell the driYer to stop and wait. 4uickly I jump down and I sneak
back along the road, looking for this man, the disciple of Banerjee. He is
not on the road. Already he has disappeared into the jungle. But which
way? Which side of the road? I stand Yery still and listen.
   ‘I  hear a sort of rustling in the undergrowth. That must be him, I tell
myself. If it is not him, then it is a tiger. But it is him. I see him ahead. He is
going forward through thick jungle. There is not eYen a little path where he
is walking, and he is haYing to push his way between tall bamboos and
eYery kind of heaYy Yegetation. I creep after him. I keep about one hundred
yards behind him because I am frightened he may hear me. I can certainly
hear him. It is impossible to proceed in silence through Yery thick jungle,
and when I lose sight of him, which is most of the time, I am able to follow
his sound.
   ‘For  about half an hour this tense game of follow-the-leader goes on.
Then suddenly, I can no longer hear the man in front of me. I stop and
listen. The jungle is silent. I am terrified that I may haYe lost him. I creep on
a little way, and all at once, through the thick undergrowth, I see before me
a little clearing, and in the middle of the clearing are two huts. They are
small huts built entirely of jungle leaYes and branches. My heart jumps and

102
I feel a great surging of e[citement inside me because this, I know for
certain, is the place of Banerjee, the yogi.
   ‘The  disciple has already disappeared. He must haYe gone into one of the
huts. All is Tuiet. So now I proceed to make a most careful inspection of the
trees and bushes and other things all around. There is a small water-hole
beside the nearest hut, and I see a prayer-mat beside it, and that, I say to
myself, is where Banerjee meditates and prays. Close to this water-hole, not
thirty yards away, there is a large tree, a great spreading baobab tree with
beautiful thick branches which spread in such a way you can put a bed on
them and lie on the bed and still not be seen from underneath. That will be
my tree, I say to myself. I shall hide in that tree, and wait until Banerjee
comes out to pray. Then I will be able to see eYerything.
   ‘But  the disciple has told me that the time of prayer is not until fiYe or si[
in the eYening, so I haYe seYeral hours to wait. Therefore I at once walk
back through the jungle to the road and I speak to the tonga driYer. I tell him
he too must wait. For this, I haYe to pay him e[tra money, but it doesn’t
matter because now I am so e[cited I don’t care about anything for the
moment, not eYen money.
   ‘And  all through the great noontime heat of the jungle I wait beside the
tonga, and on through the heaYy wet heat of the afternoon, and then, as fiYe
o’clock approaches, I make my way Tuietly back through the jungle to the
hut, my heart beating so fast I can feel it shaking my whole body. I climb up
my tree and I hide among the leaYes in such a way that I can see but cannot
be seen. And I wait. I wait for forty-fiYe minutes.
   ‘A  watch? Yes, I haYe on a wristwatch. I remember it clearly. It was a
watch I won in a raffle and I was proud to own it. On the face of my watch
it said the maker’s name, The Islamia Watch Co., Ludhiana. And so with
my watch I am careful to be timing eYerything that goes on because I want
to remember eYery single detail of this e[perience.
   ‘I  sit up in the tree, waiting.
   ‘Then, all  at once, a man is coming out of the hut. The man is tall and
thin. He is dressed in an orange-coloured dhoti and he carries before him a
tray with brass pots and incense-burners. He goes oYer and sits down cross-

103
legged on the mat by the water-hole, putting the tray on the ground before
him, and all the moYements that he makes seem somehow Yery calm and
gentle. He leans forward and scoops a handful of water from the pool and
throws it oYer his shoulder. He takes the incense-burner and passes it back
and forth across his chest, slowly, in a gentle, flowing manner. He puts his
hands palm downward on his knees. He pauses. He takes a long breath
through his nostrils. I can see him take a long breath and suddenly I can see
his face is changing, there is a sort of brightness coming oYer all his face, a
sort of … well, a sort of brightness on his skin and I can see his face is
changing.
   ‘For  fourteen minutes he remains Tuite still in that position, and then, as I
look at him, I see, Tuite positiYely I see his body lifting
slowly … slowly  … slowly off  the ground. He is still sitting cross-legged,
the hands palm downward on the knees, and his whole body is lifting
slowly off the ground, up into the air. Now I can see daylight underneath
him. TwelYe inches aboYe the ground he is sitting … fifteen
inches … eighteen … twenty … and soon he is at least two feet aboYe the
prayer-mat.
   ‘I  stay Tuite still up there in the tree, watching, and I keep saying to
myself, now look carefully. There before you, thirty yards away, is a man
sitting in great serenity upon the air. Are you seeing him? Yes, I am seeing
him. But are you sure there is no illusion? Are you sure there is no
deception? Are you sure you are not imagining? Are you sure? Yes, I am
sure, I say. I am sure. I stare at him, marYelling. For a long while I keep
staring, and then the body is coming slowly down again towards the earth. I
see it coming. I see it moYing gently downward, slowly downward,
lowering to the earth until again his buttocks rest upon the mat.
   ‘Forty-si[   minutes by my watch the body has been suspended! I timed it.
   ‘And  then, for a long long while, for oYer two hours, the man remains
sitting absolutely still, like a stone person, with not the slightest moYement.
To me, it does not seem that he is breathing. His eyes are closed, and still
there is this brightness on his face and also this slightly smiling look, a
thing I haYe not seen on any other face in all my life since then.

104
   ‘At  last he stirs. He moYes his hands. He stands up. He bends down
again. He picks up the tray and goes slowly back into the hut. I am
wonderstruck. I feel e[alted. I forget all caution and I climb down Tuickly
from the tree and run straight oYer to the hut and rush in through the door.
Banerjee is bending oYer, washing his feet and hands in a basin. His back is
towards me, but he hears me and he turns Tuickly and straightens up. There
is great surprise on his face and the first thing he says is, “How long haYe
you been here?” He says it sharply, as if he is not pleased.
   ‘At  once I tell the whole truth, the whole story about being up in the tree
and watching him, and at the end I tell him there is nothing I want in life
e[cept to become his disciple. Please will he let me become his disciple?
   ‘Suddenly he seems to e[plode. He becomes furious and he begins
shouting at me: “Get out!” he shouts. “Get out of here! Get out! Get out!
Get out!” and in his fury he picks up a small brick and flings it at me and it
strikes my right leg just below the knee and tears the flesh. I haYe the scar
still. I will  show it to you. There, you see, just below the knee.
   ‘Banerjee’s anger is terrible and I am Yery frightened. I turn and run
away. I run back through the jungle to where the tonga-driYer is waiting,
and we driYe home to Rishikesh. But that night I regain my courage. I make
for myself a decision and it is this: that I will return eYery day to the hut of
Banerjee, and I will keep on and on at him until at last he has to take me on
as a disciple, just to get himself some peace.
   ‘This  I do. Each day I go to see him and each day his anger pours out
upon me like a Yolcano, him shouting and yelling and me standing there
frightened but also obstinate and repeating always to him my wish to
become a disciple. For fiYe days it is like this. Then, all at once, on my si[th
Yisit, Banerjee seems to become Tuite calm, Tuite polite. He e[plains he
cannot himself take me on as a disciple. But he will giYe me a note, he says,
to another man, a friend, a great yogi, who liYes in Hardwar. I am to go
there and I will receiYe help and instruction.’

Imhrat Khan paused and asked me if he might haYe a glass of water. I
fetched it for him. He took a long slow drink, then he went on with his

105
story:
   ‘This  is in 1922 and I am nearly seYenteen years old. So I go to Hardwar.
And there I find the yogi, and because I haYe a letter from the great
Banerjee, he consents to giYe me instruction.
   ‘Now  what is this instruction?
   ‘It  is, of course, the critical part of the whole thing. It is what I haYe been
yearning for and searching for, so you can be sure I am an eager pupil.
   ‘The  first instruction, the most elementary part, consists of haYing to
practise the most difficult physical e[ercises, all of them concerned with
muscle control and breathing. But after some weeks of this, eYen the eager
pupil becomes impatient. I tell the yogi it is my mental powers I wish to
deYelop, not my physical ones.
   ‘He  replies, “If you will  deYelop control of your body, then the control of
your mind will  be an automatic thing.” But I want both at once, and I keep
asking him, and in the end he says, “Very well, I will giYe you some
e[ercises to help you to concentrate the conscious mind.”
   ‘“Conscious  mind?” I ask. “Why do you say conscious mind?”
   ‘“Because each man has two minds, the conscious and the sub-conscious.
The sub-conscious mind is highly concentrated, but the conscious mind, the
one eYeryone uses, is a scattered, unconcentrated thing. It is concerning
itself with thousands of different items, the things you are seeing around
you and the things you are thinking about. So you must learn to concentrate
it in such a way that you can Yisuali]e at will one item, one item only, and
absolutely nothing else. If you work hard at this, you should be able to
concentrate your mind, your conscious mind, upon any one object you
select for at least three and a half minutes. But that will take about fifteen
years.”
   ‘“Fifteen  years!” I  cry.
   ‘“It   may take longer,” he says. “Fifteen years is the usual time.”
   ‘“But  I  will  be an old man by then!”
   ‘“Do  not despair,” the yogi says. “The time Yaries with different people.
Some take ten years, a few can take less, and on e[tremely rare occasions a

106
special person comes along who is able to deYelop the power in only one or
two years. But that is one in a million.”
   ‘“Who  are these special people?” I ask. “Do they look different from
other people?”
   ‘“They  look the same,” he says. “A special person might be a humble
roadsweeper or a factory worker. Or he might be a rajah. There is no way of
telling until the training begins.”
   ‘“Is  it  really so difficult,”  I ask, “to concentrate the mind upon a single
object for three and a half minutes?”
   ‘“It   is almost impossible,’ he answers. “Try it and see. Shut your eyes
and think of something. Think of just one object. Visuali]e it. See it before
you. And in a few seconds your mind will start wandering. Other little
thoughts will creep in. Other Yisions will come to you. It is a Yery difficult
thing.”
   ‘Thus  spoke the yogi of Hardwar.
   ‘And  so my real e[ercises begin. Each eYening, I sit down and close my
eyes and Yisuali]e the face of the person I loYe best, which is my brother. I
concentrate upon Yisuali]ing his face. But the instant my mind begins to
wander, I stop the e[ercise and rest for some minutes. Then I try again.
   ‘After  three years of daily practice, I am able to concentrate absolutely
upon my brother’s face for one and a half minutes. I am making progress.
But an interesting thing happens. In doing these e[ercises, I lose my sense
of smell absolutely. And neYer to this day does it come back to me.
   ‘Then  the necessity for earning my liYing to buy food forces me to leaYe
Hardwar. I go to Calcutta where there are greater opportunities, and there I
soon begin to make Tuite good money by giYing conjuring performances.
But always I continue with the e[ercises. EYery eYening, whereYer I am, I
settle myself down in a Tuiet corner and practise the concentrating of the
mind upon my brother’s face. Occasionally, I choose something not so
personal, like for e[ample an orange or a pair of spectacles, and that makes
it eYen more difficult.
   ‘One day, I traYel from Calcutta to Dacca in East Bengal to giYe a
conjuring show at a college there, and while in Dacca, I happen to be

107
present at a demonstration of walking on fire. There are many people
watching. There is a big trench dug at the bottom of a sloping lawn. The
spectators are sitting in their hundreds upon the slopes of the lawn looking
down upon the trench.
   ‘The  trench is about twenty-fiYe feet long. It has been filled with logs and
firewood and charcoal, and a lot of paraffin has been poured on it. The
paraffin has been lit, and after a while the whole trench has become a
smouldering red-hot furnace. It is so hot that the men who are stoking it are
obliged to wear goggles. There is a high wind and the wind fans the
charcoal almost to white heat.
   ‘The  Indian fire-walker then comes forward. He is naked e[cept for a
small loincloth, and his feet are bare. The crowd becomes silent. The fire-
walker enters the trench and walks the whole length of it, oYer the white-hot
charcoal. He doesn’t stop. Nor does he hurry. He simply walks oYer the
white-hot coals and comes out at the other end, and his feet are not eYen
singed. He shows the soles of his feet to the crowd. The crowd stares in
ama]ement.
   ‘Then  the fire-walker walks the trench once more. This time he goes eYen
slower, and as he does it, I can see on his face a look of pure and absolute
concentration. This man, I tell myself, has practised yoga. He is a yogi.
   ‘After  the performance, the fire-walker calls out to the crowd, asking if
there is anyone braYe enough to come down and walk on the fire. There is a
hush in the crowd. I feel a sudden surge of e[citement in my chest. This is
my chance. I must take it. I must haYe faith and courage. I must haYe a go. I
haYe been doing my concentration e[ercises for oYer three years now and
the time has come to giYe myself a seYere test.
   ‘While  I am standing there thinking these thoughts, a Yolunteer comes
forward from the crowd. It is a young Indian man. He announces that he
would like to try the fire-walk.  This decides me, and I also step forward and
make my announcement. The crowd giYes us both a cheer.
   ‘Now  the real fire-walker becomes the superYisor. He tells the other man
he will go first. He makes him remoYe his dhoti, otherwise, he says, the
hem will catch fire from the heat. And the sandals must be taken off.

108
   ‘The  young Indian does what he is told. But now that he is close to the
trench and can feel the terrible heat coming from it, he begins to look
frightened. He steps back a few paces, shielding his eyes from the heat with
his hands.
   ‘“You  don’t haYe to do it if you don’t want to,” the real fire-walker says.
   ‘The  crowd waits and watches, sensing a drama.
   ‘The  young man, though scared out of his wits, wishes to proYe how
braYe he is, and he says, “Of course I’ll do it.”
   ‘With  that, he runs towards the trench. He steps into it with one foot, then
the other. He giYes a fearful scream and leaps out again and falls to the
ground. The poor man lies there screaming in pain. The soles of his feet are
badly burned and some of the skin has come right away. Two friends of his
run forward and carry him off.
   ‘“Now   it is your turn,” says the fire-walker. “Are you ready?”
   ‘“I   am ready,” I say. “But please be silent while I prepare myself.”
   ‘A  great hush has come oYer the crowd. They haYe seen one man get
badly burned. Is the second one going to be mad enough to do the same
thing?
   ‘Someone in the crowd shouts, “Don’t do it! You must be mad!” Others
take up the shout, all telling me to giYe up. I turn and face them and raise
my hands for silence. They stop shouting and stare at me. EYery eye in that
place is upon me now.
   ‘I  feel e[traordinarily  calm.
   ‘I  pull my  dhoti off oYer my head. I take off my sandals. I stand there
naked e[cept for my underpants. I stand Yery still and close my eyes. I
begin to concentrate my mind. I concentrate on the fire. I see nothing but
white-hot coals and I concentrate on them being not hot but cold. The coals
are cold, I tell myself. They cannot burn me. It is impossible for them to
burn me because there is no heat in them. I allow half a minute to go by. I
know that I must not wait too long because I am only able to concentrate
absolutely upon any one thing for a minute and a half.
   ‘I  keep concentrating. I concentrate so hard that I go into a sort of trance.
I step out on to the coals. I walk fairly fast the whole length of the trench.

109
And behold, I am not burned!
   ‘The  crowd goes mad. They yell and cheer. The original fire-walker
rushes up to me and e[amines the soles of my feet. He can’t belieYe what he
sees. There is not a burn mark on them.
   ‘“Ayee!”   he cries. “What is this? Are you a yogi?”
   ‘“I   am on the way, sir,” I answer proudly. “I am well on the way.”
   ‘After  that, I dress and leaYe Tuickly, aYoiding the crowd.
   ‘Of  course I am e[cited. “It is coming to me,” I  say. “Now at last the
power is beginning to come.” And all the time I am remembering
something else. I am remembering a thing that the old yogi of Hardwar said
to me. He said, “Certain holy people haYe been known to deYelop so great a
concentration that they could see without using their eyes.” I keep
remembering that saying and I keep longing for the power to do likewise
myself. And after my success with the fire-walking, I decided that I will
concentrate eYerything upon this single aim – to see without the eyes.’

For only the second time so far, Imhrat Khan broke off his story. He took
another sip of water, then he leaned back in his chair and closed his eyes.
   ‘I  am trying to get eYerything in the correct order,’ he said. ‘I don’t want
to miss anything out.’
   ‘You’re  doing fine,’ I  told him. ‘Carry on.’
   ‘Very  well,’  he said. ‘So I am still in Calcutta and I haYe just had success
with fire-walking.  And now I haYe decided to concentrate all my energy on
this one thing, which is to see without the eyes.
   ‘The  time has come, therefore, to make a slight change in the e[ercises.
Each night now I light a candle and I begin by staring at the flame. A
candle-flame, you know, has three separate parts, the yellow at the top, the
mauYe lower down, and the black right inside. I place the candle si[teen
inches away from my face. The flame is absolutely leYel with my eyes. It
must not be aboYe or below. It must be dead leYel because then I do not
haYe to make eYen the tiniest little adjustment of the eye muscles by
looking up or down. I settle myself comfortably and I begin to stare at the
black part of the flame, right in the centre. All this is merely to concentrate

110
my conscious mind, to empty it of eYerything around me. So I stare at the
black spot in the flame until eYerything around me has disappeared and I
can see nothing else. Then slowly I shut my eyes and begin to concentrate
as usual upon one single object of my choice, which as you know is usually
my brother’s face.
   ‘I  do this eYery night before bed and by 1929, when I am twenty-four
years old, I can concentrate upon an object for three minutes without any
wandering of my mind. So it is now, at this time, when I am twenty-four,
that I begin to become aware of a slight ability to see an object with my
eyes closed. It is a Yery slight ability, just a Tueer little feeling that when I
close my eyes and look at something hard, with fierce concentration, then I
can see the outline of the object I am looking at.
   ‘Slowly  I  am beginning to deYelop my inner sense of sight.
   ‘You  ask me what I mean by that. I will e[plain it to you e[actly  as the
yogi of Hardwar e[plained it to me.
   ‘All   of us, you see, haYe two senses of sight, just as we haYe two senses
of smell and taste and hearing. There is the outer sense, the highly
deYeloped one which we all use, and there is the inner one also. If only we
could deYelop these inner senses of ours, then we could smell without our
noses, taste without our tongues, hear without our ears and see without our
eyes. Do you not understand? Do you not see that our noses and tongues
and ears and eyes are only … how shall I say it? … are only instruments
which assist in conYeying the sensation itself to the brain.
   ‘And  so it is that I am all the time striYing to deYelop my inner senses of
sight. Each night now I perform my usual e[ercises with the candle-flame
and my brother’s face. After that I rest a little while. I drink a cup of coffee.
Then I blindfold myself and sit in my chair trying to Yisuali]e, trying  to see,
not just to imagine, but actually to see without my eyes eYery object in the
room.
   ‘And  gradually success begins to come.
   ‘Soon I  am working with a pack of cards. I take a card from the top of the
pack and hold it before me, back to front, trying to see through it. Then,
with a pencil in my hand, I write down what I think it is. I take another card

111
and do the same again. I go through the whole of the pack like that and
when it is oYer I check what I haYe written down against the pile of cards
beside me. Almost at once I haYe a si[ty to seYenty per cent success.
   ‘I  do other things. I buy maps and complicated naYigating charts and pin
them up all around my room. I spend hours looking at them blindfold,
trying to see them, trying to read the small lettering of the place-names and
the riYers. EYery eYening for the ne[t four years, I proceed with this kind of
practice.
   ‘By  the year 19 – that is only last year – when I am twenty-eight years
old, I can read a book. I can coYer my eyes completely and I can read a
book right through.
   ‘So now at last I haYe it, this power. For certain I haYe it now, and at
once, because I cannot wait with impatience, I include the blindfold act in
my ordinary conjuring performance.
   ‘The  audience loYes it. They applaud long and loud. But not one single
person belieYes it to be genuine. EYeryone thinks it is just another cleYer
trick. And the fact that I am a conjurer makes them think more than eYer
that I am faking. Conjurers are men who trick you. They trick you with
cleYerness. And so no one belieYes me. EYen the doctors who blindfold me
in the most e[pert way refuse to belieYe that anyone can see without his
eyes. They forget there may be other ways of sending the image to the
brain.’
   ‘What  other ways?’ I asked him.
   ‘4uite   honestly, I don’t know e[actly how it is I  can see without my eyes.
But what I do know is this; when my eyes are bandaged, I am not using the
eyes at all. The seeing is done by another part of my body.’
   ‘Which  part?’ I asked him.
   ‘Any  part at all so long as the skin is bare. For e[ample, if you put a sheet
of metal in front of me and put a book behind the metal, I cannot read the
book. But if you allow me to put my hand around the sheet of metal so that
the hand is seeing the book, then I can read it.’
   ‘Would  you mind if I  tested you on that?’ I asked.
   ‘Not  at all,’ he answered.

112
   ‘I  don’t haYe a sheet of metal,’ I said. ‘But the door will do just as well.’
   I  stood up and went to the bookshelf. I took down the first book that
came to hand. It was Alice in Wonderland. I opened the door and asked my
Yisitor to stand behind it, out of sight. I opened the book at random and
propped it on a chair the other side of the door to him. Then I stationed
myself in a position where I could see both him and the book.
   ‘Can you read that book?’ I asked him.
   ‘No,’  he answered. ‘Of course not.’
   ‘All   right. You may now put your hand around the door, but only the
hand.’
   He slid his hand around the edge of the door until it was within sight of
the book. Then I saw the fingers on the hand parting from one another,
spreading wide, beginning to TuiYer slightly, feeling the air like the
antennae of an insect. And the hand turned so that the back of it was facing
the book.
   ‘Try  to read the left page from the top,’ I said.
   There was silence for perhaps ten seconds, then smoothly, without pause,
he began to read: ‘Have you guessed the riddle yet?’ the Hatter said,
turning to Alice again. ‘1o,  I give it up,’ Alice replied   ‘What’s the
ansZer?’ ‘I  haven’t the slightest idea,’ said the Hatter. ‘1or I,’ said the
Hare. Alice sighed Zearily. ‘I think you might do something Eetter Zith the
time,’ she said, ‘than Zaste it asking riddles Zith no ansZers …’
   ‘It’s  perfect!’  I cried. ‘Now I  belieYe you! You are a miracle!’ I was
enormously e[cited.
   ‘Thank  you, doctor,’ he said graYely. ‘What you say giYes me great
pleasure.’
   ‘One Tuestion,’ I said. ‘It’s  about the playing-cards. When you held up
the reYerse side of one of them, did you put your hand around the other side
to help you to read it?’
   ‘You  are Yery perceptiYe,’ he said. ‘No, I did not. In the case of the cards,
I was actually able to see through them in some way.’
   ‘How  do you e[plain  that?’ I asked.

113
   ‘I  don’t e[plain  it,’  he said. ‘E[cept perhaps that a card is such a flimsy
thing, it is so thin, and not solid like metal or thick like a door. That is all
the e[planation I can giYe. There are many things in this world, doctor, that
we cannot e[plain.’
   ‘Yes,’  I said. ‘There certainly are.’
   ‘Would  you be kind enough to take me home now,’ he said. ‘I feel Yery
tired.’
   I  droYe him home in my car.

That night I didn’t go to bed. I was far too worked up to sleep. I had just
witnessed a miracle. This man would haYe doctors all oYer the world
turning somersaults in the air! He could change the whole course of
medicine! From a doctor’s point of Yiew, he must be the most Yaluable man
aliYe! We doctors must get hold of him and keep him safe. We must look
after him. We mustn’t let him go. We must find out e[actly how it is that an
image can be sent to the brain without using the eyes. And if we do that,
then blind people might be able to see and deaf people might be able to
hear. AboYe all, this incredible man must not be ignored and left to wander
around India, liYing in cheap rooms and playing in second-rate theatres.
   I  got so steamed up thinking about this that after a while I grabbed a
notebook and a pen and started writing down with great care eYerything that
Imhrat Khan had told me that eYening. I used the notes I had made while he
was talking. I wrote for fiYe hours without stopping. And at eight o’clock
the ne[t morning, when it was time to go to the hospital, I had finished the
most important part, the pages you haYe just read.
   At  the hospital that morning, I didn’t see Dr Marshall until we met in the
Doctors’ Rest Room in our tea-break.
   I  told him as much as I could in the ten minutes we had to spare. ‘I’m
going back to the theatre tonight,’ I said. ‘I must talk to him again. I must
persuade him to stay here. We mustn’t lose him now.’
   ‘I’ll   come with you,’ Dr  Marshall said.
   ‘Right,’  I  said. ‘We’ll watch the show first and then we’ll take him out to
supper.’

114
   At  a Tuarter to seYen that eYening, I droYe Dr Marshall in my car to
Acacia Road. I parked the car, and the two of us walked oYer to the Royal
Palace Hall.
   ‘There’s something wrong,’ I said. ‘Where is eYerybody?’
   There was no crowd outside the hall and the doors were closed. The
poster adYertising the show was still in place, but I now saw that someone
had written across it in large printed letters, using black paint, the words
TONIGHT’S PERFORMANCE CANCELLED. There was an old gatekeeper standing
by the locked doors.
   ‘What  happened?’ I asked him.
   ‘Someone died,’ he said.
   ‘Who?’  I asked, knowing already who it was.
   ‘The  man who sees without his eyes,’ the gatekeeper answered.
   ‘How  did he die?’ I cried. ‘When? Where?’
   ‘They  say he died in his bed,’ the gatekeeper said. ‘He went to sleep and
neYer woke up. These things happen.’
   We walked slowly back to the car. I felt an oYerwhelming sense of grief
and anger. I should neYer haYe allowed this precious man to go home last
night. I should haYe kept him. I should haYe giYen him my bed and taken
care of him. I shouldn’t haYe let him out of my sight. Imhrat Khan was a
maker of miracles. He had communicated with mysterious and dangerous
forces that are beyond the reach of ordinary people. He had also broken all
the rules. He had performed miracles in public. He had taken money for
doing so. And, worst of all, he had told some of those secrets to an outsider
– me. Now he was dead.
   ‘So that’s that,’ Dr  Marshall said.
   ‘Yes,’  I said. ‘It’s all oYer. Nobody will eYer know how he did it.’
   This is a true and accurate report of eYerything that took place
concerning my two meetings with Imhrat Khan.
                                                                           

                                                                             signed John F. CartZright, M.D.
                                                                                        .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
                                                                                BomEay, 4th DecemEer, 1934 

115
‘Well, well, well,’  said Henry Sugar. ‘Now that is e[tremely interesting.’
   He closed the e[ercise-book and sat ga]ing at the rain splashing against
the windows of the library.
   ‘This,’  Henry Sugar went on, talking aloud to himself, ‘is a terrific piece
of information. It could change my life.’
   The piece of information Henry was referring to was that Imhrat Khan
had trained himself to read the Yalue of a playing-card from the reYerse
side. And Henry the gambler, the rather dishonest gambler, had reali]ed at
once that if only he could train himself to do the same thing, he could make
a fortune.
   For a few moments, Henry allowed his mind to dwell upon the
marYellous things he would be able to do if he could read cards from the
back. He would win eYery single time at canasta and bridge and poker. And
better still, he would be able to go into any casino in the world and clean up
at blackjack and all the other high-powered card games they played!
   In  gambling casinos, as Henry knew Yery well, nearly eYerything
depended in the end upon the turn of a single card, and if you knew
beforehand what the Yalue of that card was, then you were home and dry!
   But could he do it? Could he actually train himself to do this thing?
   He didn’t  see why not. That stuff with the candle-flame didn’t appear to
be particularly hard work. And according to the book, that was really all
there was to it – just staring into the middle of the flame and trying to
concentrate upon the face of the person you loYed best.
   It  would probably take him seYeral years to bring it off, but then who in
the world wouldn’t be willing  to train for a few years in order to beat the
casinos eYery time he went in?
   ‘By  golly,’  he said aloud, ‘I’ll do it!  I’m  going to do it!’
   He sat Yery still in the armchair in the library, working out a plan of
campaign. AboYe all, he would tell nobody what he was up to. He would
steal the little book from the library so that none of his friends might come
upon it by chance and learn the secret. He would carry the book with him
whereYer he went. It would be his bible. He couldn’t possibly go out and

116
find a real liYe yogi to instruct him, so the book would be his yogi instead.
It would be his teacher.
   Henry stood up and slipped the slim blue e[ercise-book under his jacket.
He walked out of the library and went straight upstairs to the bedroom they
had giYen him for the week-end. He got out his suitcase and hid the book
underneath his clothes. He then went downstairs again and found his way to
the butler’s pantry.
   ‘John,’  he said, addressing the butler, ‘can you find me a candle? Just an
ordinary white candle.’
   Butlers are trained neYer to ask reasons. They simply obey orders. ‘Do
you wish a candle-holder as well, sir?’
   ‘Yes. A  candle and a candle-holder.’
   ‘Very  good, sir. Shall I bring them to your room?’
   ‘No.  I’ll  hang around here till you find them.’
   The butler soon found a candle and a candle-holder. Henry said, ‘And
now could you find me a ruler?’ The butler found him a ruler. Henry
thanked him and returned to his bedroom.
   When he was inside the bedroom, he locked the door. He drew all the
curtains so that the place was in twilight. He put the candle-holder with the
candle in it on the dressing-table and pulled up a chair. When he sat down,
he noticed with satisfaction that his eyes were e[actly leYel with the wick of
the candle. Now, using the ruler, he positioned his face si[teen inches from
the candle, which was what the book said must be done.
   That Indian fellow  had Yisuali]ed the face of the person he loYed best,
which in his case was a brother. Henry didn’t haYe a brother. He decided
instead to Yisuali]e his own face. This was a good choice because when you
are as selfish and self-centred as Henry was, then one’s own face is
certainly the face one loYes best of all. MoreoYer, it was the face he kneZ
best of all. He spent so much time looking at it in the mirror, he knew eYery
twist and wrinkle.
   With  his cigarette-lighter, he lit the wick. A yellow flame appeared and
burned steadily.

117
   Henry sat Tuite still and stared into the candle-flame. The book had been
Tuite right. The flame, when you looked into it closely, did haYe three
separate parts. There was the yellow outside. Then there was the mauYe
inner sheath. And right in the middle was the tiny magic area of absolute
blackness. He stared at the tiny black area. He focused his eyes upon it and
kept staring at it, and as he did so, an e[traordinary thing happened. His
mind went absolutely blank, and his brain ceased fidgeting around, and all
at once it felt as though he himself, his whole body, was actually encased
within the flame, sitting snug and cosy within the little black area of
nothingness.
   With  no trouble at all, Henry allowed the image of his own face to swim
into sight before him. He concentrated upon the face and nothing but the
face. He blocked out all other thoughts. He succeeded completely in doing
this, but only for about fifteen seconds. After that, his mind began to
wander and he found himself thinking about gambling casinos and how
much money he was going to win. At this point, he looked away from the
candle and gaYe himself a rest.
   This was his Yery first effort. He was thrilled. He had done it. Admittedly
he hadn’t kept it up for Yery long. But neither had that Indian fellow on the
first attempt.
   After  a few minutes, he tried again. It went well. He had no stop-watch to
time himself with, but he sensed that this was definitely a longer go than the
first one.
   ‘It’s  terrific!’   he cried. ‘I’m going to succeed! I’m going to do it!’  He had
neYer been so e[cited by anything in his life.
   From that day on, no matter where he was or what he was doing, Henry
made a point of practising with the candle eYery morning and eYery
eYening. Often he practised at midday as well. For the first time in his life
he was throwing himself into something with genuine enthusiasm. And the
progress he made was remarkable. After si[ months, he could concentrate
absolutely upon his own face for no less than three minutes without a single
outside thought entering his mind.

118
   The yogi of Hardwar had told the Indian fellow that a man would haYe to
practise for fifteen years to get that sort of result!
   But wait!  The yogi had also said something else. He had said (and here
Henry eagerly consulted the little blue e[ercise-book for the hundredth
time), he had said that on e[tremely rare occasions a special person comes
along who is able to deYelop the power in only one or two years.
   ‘That’s  me!’ Henry cried. ‘It  must be me! I am the one-in-a-million
person who is gifted with the ability to acTuire yoga powers at incredible
speed! Whoopee and hurray! It won’t be long now before I’m breaking the
bank in eYery casino in Europe and America!’
   But Henry at this point showed unusual patience and good sense. He
didn’t rush to get out a pack of cards to see if he could read them from the
reYerse side. In fact, he kept well away from card games of all kinds. He
had giYen up bridge and canasta and poker as soon as he had started
working with the candle. What’s more, he had giYen up ra]]ing around to
parties and weekends with his rich friends. He had become dedicated to this
single aim of acTuiring yoga powers, and eYerything else would haYe to
wait until he had succeeded.
   Some time during the tenth month, Henry became aware, just as Imhrat
Khan had done before him, of a slight ability to see an object with his eyes
closed. When he closed his eyes and stared at something hard, with fierce
concentration, he could actually see the outline of the object he was looking
at.
   ‘It’s  coming to me!’ he cried. ‘I’m  doing it!  It’s fantastic!’
   Now  he worked harder than eYer at his e[ercises with the candle, and at
the end of the first year he could actually concentrate upon the image of his
own face for no less than fiYe and a half minutes!
   At  this point, he decided the time had come to test himself with the cards.
He was in the liYing-room of his London flat when he made this decision
and it was near midnight. He got out a pack of cards and a pencil and paper.
He was shaking with e[citement. He placed the pack upside down before
him and concentrated on the top card.

119
   All  he could see at first was the design on the back of the card. It was a
Yery ordinary design of thin red lines, one of the commonest playing-card
designs in the world. He now shifted his concentration from the pattern
itself to the other side of the card. He concentrated with great intensity upon
the inYisible underneath of the card, and he allowed no other single thought
to creep into his mind. Thirty seconds went by.
   Then one minute …
   Two minutes …
   Three minutes …
   Henry didn’t  moYe. His concentration was intense and absolute. He was
Yisuali]ing the reYerse side of the playing-card. No other thought of any
kind was allowed to enter his head.
   During  the fourth minute, something began to happen. Slowly, magically,
but Yery clearly, the black symbols became spades and alongside the spades
appeared the figure fiYe.
   The fiYe of spades!
   Henry switched off his concentration. And now, with shaking fingers, he
picked up the card and turned it oYer.
   It  Zas the fiYe of spades!
   ‘I’Ye  done it!’ he cried aloud, leaping up from his chair. ‘I’Ye seen
through it! I’m  on my way!’
   After  resting for a while, he tried again, and this time he used a stop-
watch to see how long it took him. After three minutes and fifty-eight
seconds, he read the card as the king of diamonds. He was right!
   The ne[t  time he was right again and it took him three minutes and fifty-
four seconds. That was four seconds less.
   He was sweating with e[citement and e[haustion. ‘That’s enough for
today,’ he told himself. He got up and poured himself an enormous drink of
whisky and sat down to rest and to gloat oYer his success.
   His job  now, he told himself, was to keep practising and practising with
the cards until he could see through them instantly. He was conYinced it
could be done. Already, on the second go, he had knocked four seconds off

120
his time. He would giYe up working with the candle and concentrate solely
upon the cards. He would keep at it day and night.
   And  that is what he did. But now that he could smell real success in the
offing, he became more fanatical than eYer. He neYer left his flat e[cept to
buy food and drink. All day and often far into the night, he crouched oYer
the cards with the stop-watch beside him, trying to reduce the time it took
him to read from the reYerse side.
   Within  a month, he was down to one and a half minutes.
   And  at the end of si[ months of fierce concentrated work, he could do it
in twenty seconds. But eYen that was too long. When you are gambling in a
casino and the dealer is waiting for you to say yes or no to the ne[t card,
you are not going to be allowed to stare at it for twenty seconds before
making up your mind. Three or four seconds would be permissible. But no
more.
   Henry kept at it. But from  now on, it became more and more difficult to
improYe his speed. To get down from twenty seconds to nineteen took him a
week of Yery hard work. From nineteen to eighteen took him nearly two
weeks. And seYen more months went by before he could read through a
card in ten seconds flat.
   His target was four seconds. He knew that unless he could see through a
card in a ma[imum of four seconds, he wouldn’t be able to work the
casinos successfully. Yet the nearer he got towards the target, the more
difficult  it became to reach it. It took four weeks to get his time down from
ten seconds to nine, and fiYe more weeks to go from nine to eight. But at
this stage, hard work no longer bothered him. His powers of concentration
had now deYeloped to such a degree that he was able to work for twelYe
hours at a stretch with no trouble at all. And he knew with absolute
certainty that he would get there in the end. He would not stop until he did.
Day after day, night after night, he sat crouching oYer the cards with his
stop-watch beside him, fighting with a terrible intensity to knock those last
few stubborn seconds off his time.
   The last three seconds were the worst of all. To get from seYen seconds to
his target of four took him e[actly eleYen months!

121
   The great moment came on a Saturday eYening. A card lay face down on
the table in front of him. He clicked the stop-watch and began to
concentrate. At once, he saw a blob of red. The blob swiftly took shape and
became a diamond. And then, almost instantaneously, a figure si[ appeared
in the top left-hand corner. He clicked the watch again. He checked the
time. It was four seconds! He turned the card oYer. It was the si[ of
diamonds! He had done it! He had read it in four seconds flat!
   He tried again with another card. In four seconds he read it as the Tueen
of spades. He went right through the pack, timing himself with eYery card.
Four seconds! Four seconds! Four seconds! It was always the same. He had
done it at last! It was all oYer. He was ready to go!
   And  how long had it taken him? It had taken him e[actly three years and
three months of concentrated work.
   And  now for the casinos!
   When should he start?
   Why  not tonight?
   Tonight was Saturday. All the casinos were crowded on Saturday nights.
So much the better. There’d be less chance of becoming conspicuous. He
went into his bedroom to change into his dinner-jacket and black tie.
Saturday was a dressy night at the big London casinos.
   He would go, he decided, to Lord’s House. There are well oYer one
hundred legitimate casinos in London, but none of them is open to the
general public. You must become a member before you are allowed to walk
in. Henry was a member of no less than ten of them. Lord’s House was his
faYourite. It was the finest and most e[clusiYe in the country.

Lord’s House was a magnificent Georgian mansion in the centre of London,
and for oYer two hundred years it had been the priYate residence of a Duke.
Now it was taken oYer by the bookmakers, and the superb high-ceilinged
rooms where the aristocracy and often royalty used to gather and play a
gentle game of whist were today filled with a new kind of people who
played a Yery different sort of game.

122
   Henry droYe to Lord’s House and pulled up outside the great entrance.
He got out of the car, but left the engine running. Immediately, an attendant
in green uniform came forward to park it for him.
   Along  the kerb on both sides of the street stood perhaps a do]en Rolls-
Royces. Only the Yery wealthy belonged to Lord’s House.
   ‘Why  hello, Mr  Sugar!’ said the man behind the desk whose job it was
neYer to forget a face. ‘We haYen’t seen you for years!’
   ‘I’Ye  been busy,’ Henry answered.
   He went upstairs, up the marYellous wide staircase with its carYed
mahogany banisters, and entered the cashier’s office. There he wrote a
cheTue for one thousand pounds. The cashier gaYe him ten large pink
rectangular plaTues made of plastic. On each it said £100. Henry slipped
them into his pocket and spent a few minutes sauntering through the Yarious
gaming rooms to get the feel of things again after such a long absence.
There was a big crowd here tonight. Well-fed women stood around the
roulette wheel like plump hens around a feeding hopper. Jewels and gold
were dripping oYer their bosoms and from their wrists. Many of them had
blue hair. The men were in dinner-jackets and there wasn’t a tall one among
them. Why, Henry wondered, did this particular kind of rich man always
haYe short legs? Their legs all seemed to stop at the knees with no thighs
aboYe. Most of them had bellies coming out a long way, and crimson faces,
and cigars between their lips. Their eyes glittered with greed.
   All  this Henry noticed. It was the first time in his life that he had looked
with distaste upon this type of wealthy gambling-casino person. Up until
now, he had always regarded them as companions, as members of the same
group and class as himself. Tonight they seemed Yulgar.
   Could it  be, he wondered, that the yoga powers he had acTuired oYer the
last three years had altered him just a little bit?
   He stood watching the roulette. Upon the long green table people were
placing their money, trying to guess which little slot the small white ball
would fall into on the ne[t spin of the wheel. Henry looked at the wheel.
And suddenly, perhaps more from habit than anything else, he found
himself beginning to concentrate upon it. It was not difficult. He had been

123
practising the art of total concentration for so long that it had become
something of a routine. In a fraction of a second, his mind had become
completely and absolutely concentrated upon the wheel. EYerything else in
the room, the noise, the people, the lights, the smell of cigar smoke, all this
was wiped out of his mind, and he saw only the white numbers around the
rim. The numbers went from 1 to 6, with an 0 between 1 and 6. Very
Tuickly, all the numbers blurred and disappeared in front of his eyes. All
e[cept one, all e[cept the number 1. It was the only number he could see.
At first it  was slightly mu]]y  and out of focus. Then the edges sharpened
and the whiteness of it grew brighter, more brilliant, until it began to glow
as though there was a bright light behind it. It grew bigger. It seemed to
jump towards him. At that point, Henry switched off his concentration. The
room swam back into Yision.
   ‘HaYe you all finished?’ the croupier was saying.
   Henry took a £100 plaTue from his pocket and placed it on the sTuare
marked 1 on the green table. Although the table was coYered all oYer with
other people’s bets, his was the only one on 1.
   The croupier spun the wheel. The little white ball bounced and skittered
around the rim. The people watched. All eyes were on the little ball. The
wheel slowed. It came to rest. The ball jiggled a few more times, hesitated,
then dropped neatly into slot 1.
   ‘Eighteen!’  called the croupier.
   The crowd sighed. The croupier’s assistant scooped up the piles of losing
plaTues with a long-handled wooden scooper. But he didn’t take Henry’s.
They paid him thirty-si[  to one. Three thousand si[ hundred pounds for his
hundred. They gaYe it to him in three one-thousand pound plaTues and si[
hundreds.
   Henry began to feel an e[traordinary sense of power. He felt he could
break this place if he wanted to. He could ruin this fancy high-powered
e[pensiYe joint in a matter of hours. He could take a million off them and
all the stony-faced sleek gentlemen who stood around watching the money
rolling in would be scurrying about like panicky rats.
   Should he do that?

124
   It  was a great temptation.
   But it  would be the end of eYerything. He would become famous and
would neYer be allowed into a casino again anywhere in the world. He
mustn’t do it. He must be Yery careful not to draw attention to himself.
   Henry moYed casually out of the roulette room and passed into the room
where they were playing blackjack. He stood in the doorway watching the
action. There were four tables. They were oddly shaped, these blackjack
tables, each one curYed like a crescent moon, with the players sitting on
high stools around the outside of the half-circle and the dealers standing
inside.
   The packs of cards (at Lord’s House they used four packs shuffled
together) lay in an open-ended bo[ known as a shoe, and the dealer pulled
the cards out of the shoe one by one with his fingers … The reYerse side of
the card in the shoe was always Yisible, but no others.
   Blackjack, as the casinos call it, is a Yery simple game. You and I know it
by one of three other names, pontoon, twenty-one or Yingt-et-un. The player
tries to get his cards to add up to as near twenty-one as possible, but if he
goes oYer twenty-one, he’s bust and the dealer takes the money. In nearly
eYery hand, the player is faced with the problem of whether to draw another
card and risk being bust, or whether to stick with what he’s got. But Henry
would not haYe that problem. In four seconds, he would haYe ‘seen
through’ the card the dealer was offering him, and he would know whether
to say yes or no. Henry could turn blackjack into a farce.
   In  all casinos, they haYe an awkward rule about blackjack betting which
we do not haYe at home. At home, we look at our first card before we make
a bet, and if it’s a good one we bet high. The casinos don’t allow you to do
this. They insist that eYeryone at the table makes his bet Eefore the first card
of the hand is dealt. What’s more, you are not allowed to increase your bet
later on by buying a card.
   None of this would disturb Henry either. So long as he sat on the dealer’s
immediate left, then he would always receiYe the first card in the shoe at the
beginning of each deal. The reYerse side of the card would be clearly Yisible
to him, and he would ‘read through’ it before he made his bet.

125
   Now, standing Tuietly just inside the doorway, Henry waited for a place
to become Yacant on the dealer’s left at any of the four tables. He had to
wait twenty minutes for this to happen, but he got what he wanted in the
end.
   He perched himself on the high stool and handed the dealer one of the
£1,000 plaTues he had won at roulette. ‘All in twenty-fiYes, please,’ he said.
   The dealer was a youngish man with black eyes and grey skin. He neYer
smiled and he spoke only when necessary. His hands were e[ceptionally
slim and there was arithmetic in his fingers. He took Henry’s plaTue and
dropped it in a slot in the table. Rows of different coloured circular chips
lay neatly in a wooden tray in front of him, chips for £2, £10 and £,
maybe a hundred of each. With his thumb and forefinger, the dealer picked
up a wedge of £2 chips and placed them in a tall pile on the table. He
didn’t haYe to count them. He knew there were e[actly twenty chips in the
pile. Those nimble fingers could pick up with absolute accuracy any
number of chips from one to twenty and neYer be wrong. The dealer picked
up a second lot of chips, making forty in all. He slid them oYer the table to
Henry.
   Henry stacked the chips in front of him, and as he did so, he glanced at
the top card in the shoe. He switched on his concentration and in four
seconds he read it as a ten. He pushed out eight of his chips, £200. This was
the ma[imum stake allowed for blackjack at Lord’s House.
   He was dealt the ten, and for his second card he got a nine, nineteen
altogether.
   EYeryone sticks on nineteen. You sit tight and hope the dealer won’t get
twenty or twenty-one.
   So when the dealer came round again to Henry, he said, ‘Nineteen,’ and
passed on to the ne[t player.
   ‘Wait,’  Henry said.
   The dealer paused and came back to Henry. He raised his brows and
looked at him with those cool black eyes. ‘You wish to draw to nineteen?’
he asked somewhat sarcastically. He spoke with an Italian accent and there
was scorn as well as sarcasm in his Yoice. There were only two cards in the

126
pack that would not bust a nineteen, the ace (counting as a one) and the two.
Only an idiot would risk drawing to nineteen, especially with £200 on the
table.
   The ne[t  card to be dealt lay clearly Yisible in the front of the shoe. At
least, the reYerse side of it was clearly Yisible. The dealer hadn’t yet
touched it.
   ‘Yes,’  Henry said. ‘I think I’ll  haYe another card.’
   The dealer shrugged and flipped the card out of the shoe. The two of
clubs landed neatly in front of Henry, alongside the ten and the nine.
   ‘Thank  you,’ Henry said. ‘That will  do nicely.’
   ‘Twenty-one,’  the dealer said. His black eyes glanced up again into
Henry’s face, and they rested there, silent, watchful, pu]]led. Henry had
unbalanced him. He had neYer in his life seen anyone draw on nineteen.
This fellow had drawn on nineteen with a calmness and a certainty that was
Tuite staggering. And he had won.
   Henry caught the look in the dealer’s eyes, and he reali]ed at once that he
had made a silly mistake. He had been too cleYer. He had drawn attention to
himself. He must neYer do that again. He must be Yery careful in future how
he used his powers. He must eYen make himself lose occasionally, and
eYery now and again he must do something a bit stupid.
   The game went on. Henry’s adYantage was so enormous, he had
difficulty  keeping his winnings down to a reasonable sum. EYery now and
again, he would ask for a third card when he already knew it was going to
bust him. And once, when he saw that his first card was going to be an ace,
he put out his smallest stake, then made a great show of cursing himself
aloud for not haYing made a bigger bet in the first place.
   In  an hour, he had won e[actly three thousand pounds, and there he
stopped. He pocketed his chips and made his way back to the cashier’s
office to turn them in for real money.
   He had made £,000 from blackjack and £,600 from roulette, £6,600 in
all. It could just as easily haYe been £660,000. As a matter of fact, he told
himself he was now almost certainly able to make money faster than any
other man in the entire world.

127
   The cashier receiYed Henry’s pile of chips and plaTues without twitching
a muscle. He wore steel spectacles, and the pale eyes behind the spectacles
were not interested in Henry. They looked only at the chips on the counter.
This man also had arithmetic in his fingers. But he had more than that. He
had arithmetic, trigonometry and calculus and algebra and Euclidean
geometry in eYery nerYe of his body. He was a human calculating-machine
with a hundred thousand electric wires in his brain. It took him fiYe seconds
to count Henry’s one hundred and twenty chips.
   ‘Would  you like a cheTue for this, Mr Sugar?’ he asked. The cashier, like
the man at the desk downstairs, knew eYery member by name.
   ‘No,  thank you,’ Henry said. ‘I’ll  take it in cash.’
   ‘As  you wish,’ said the Yoice behind the spectacles, and he turned away
and went to a safe at the back of the office that must haYe contained
millions.
   By  Lord’s House standards, Henry’s win was fairly small potatoes. The
Arab oil boys were in London now and they liked to gamble. So did the
shady diplomats from the Far East and the Japanese businessmen and the
British ta[-dodging  real-estate operators. Staggering sums of money were
being won and lost, mostly lost, in the large London casinos eYery day.
   The cashier returned with Henry’s money and dropped the bundle of
notes on the counter. Although there was enough here to buy a small house
or a large automobile, the chief cashier at Lord’s House was not impressed.
He might just as well haYe been passing Henry a pack of chewing-gum for
all the notice he took of the money he was dishing out.
   You wait, my friend,  Henry thought to himself as he pocketed the money.
You just wait. He walked away.
   ‘Your  car, sir?’ said the man at the door in the green uniform.
   ‘Not  yet,’ Henry told him.  ‘I think  I’ll  take a bit of fresh air first.’
   He strolled away down the street. It was nearly midnight. The eYening
was cool and pleasant. The great city was still wide awake. Henry could
feel the bulge in the inside pocket of his jacket where the big wad of money
was lying. He touched the bulge with one hand. He patted it gently. It was a
lot of money for an hour’s work.

128
    And  what   of  the future?
    What  was  the  ne[t   moYe going   to  be?
    He  could  make  a million    in  a month.
    He  could  make  more  if   he wanted  to.
    There  was  no  limit   to what   he could  make.
    Walking   through   the  streets  of  London   in  the cool  of  the  eYening,  Henry
began to  think   about  the ne[t   moYe.
    Now,   had this  been  a made-up  story   instead  of  a true  one,  it  would  haYe
been necessary  to  inYent  some  sort  of  a surprising   and  e[citing    end  for  it.  It
would  not  be  difficult    to  do that.  Something    dramatic   and unusual.   So
before  telling   you  what  really   did  happen  to  Henry   in  real life,   let  us pause
here for  a moment   to  see what  a competent   fiction    writer   would   haYe done
to wrap  this  story   up.  His  notes would   read  something   like   this:

     1. Henry must die. Like Imhrat Khan before him, he had Yiolated the code of the yogi and had
        used his powers for personal gain.
     2. It will be best if he dies in some unusual and interesting manner that will surprise the reader.
     . For e[ample, he could go home to his flat and start counting his money and gloating oYer it.
        While doing this, he might suddenly begin to feel unwell. He has a pain in his chest.
     4. He becomes frightened. He decides to go to bed immediately and rest. He takes off his
        clothes. He walks naked to the cupboard to get his pyjamas. He passes the full-length mirror
        that stands against the wall. He stops. He stares at the reflection of his naked self in the
        mirror. Automatically, from force of habit he begins to concentrate. And then …
     . All at once, he is ‘seeing through’ his own skin. He ‘sees through’ it in the same way that he
        ‘saw through’ those playing-cards a while back. It is like an X-ray picture, only far better.
        An X-ray can see only the bones and the Yery dense areas. Henry can see eYerything. He
        sees his arteries and Yeins with the blood pumping through him. He can see his liYer, his
        kidneys, his intestines and he can see his heart beating.
     6. He looks at the place in his chest where the pain is coming from … and he sees … or thinks
        he sees … a small dark lump inside the big Yein leading into the heart on the right-hand
        side. What could a small dark lump be doing inside the Yein? It must be a blockage of some
        kind. It must be a clot. A blood-clot!
     . At first, the clot seems to be stationary. Then it moYes. The moYement is Yery slight, no
        more than a millimetre or two. The blood inside the Yein is pumping up behind the clot and
        pushing past it and the clot moYes again. It jerks forward about half an inch. This time, up
        the Yein, towards the heart. Henry watches in terror. He knows, as almost eYeryone else in
        the world knows, that a blood-clot which has broken free and is traYelling in a Yein will
        ultimately reach the heart. If the clot is a large one, it will stick in the heart and you will
        probably die …

129
   That wouldn’t  be such a bad ending for a work of fiction, but this story is
not fiction. It is true. The only untrue things about it are Henry’s name and
the name of the gambling casino. Henry’s name was not Henry Sugar. His
name has to be protected. It still must be protected. And for obYious
reasons, one cannot call the casino by its real name. Apart from that, it is a
true story.
   And  because it is a true story, it must haYe the true ending. The true one
may not be Tuite so dramatic or spooky as a made-up one could be, but it is
nonetheless interesting. Here is what actually happened.

After walking the London streets for about an hour, Henry returned to
Lord’s House and collected his car Then he droYe back to his flat. He was a
pu]]led  man. He couldn’t understand why he felt so little e[citement about
his tremendous success. If this sort of thing had happened to him three
years ago, before he’d started the yoga business, he’d haYe gone cra]y with
e[citement. He’d haYe been dancing in the streets and rushing off to the
nearest nightclub to celebrate with champagne.
   The funny thing was that he didn’t really feel e[cited at all. He felt
melancholy. It had somehow all been too easy. EYery time he’d made a bet,
he’d been certain of winning. There was no thrill, no suspense, no danger of
losing. He knew of course that from now on he could traYel around the
world and make millions. But was it going to be any fun doing it?
   It  was slowly beginning to dawn upon Henry that nothing is any fun if
you can get as much of it as you want. Especially money.
   Another thing. Was it not possible that the process he had gone through
in order to acTuire yoga powers had completely changed his outlook on
life?
   Certainly it  was possible.
   Henry droYe home and went straight to bed.
   The ne[t  morning he woke up late. But he didn’t feel any more cheerful
now than he had the night before. And when he got out of bed and saw the
enormous bundle of money still lying on his dressing-table, he felt a sudden
and Yery acute reYulsion towards it. He didn’t want it. For the life of him,

130
he couldn’t e[plain why this was so, but the fact remained that he simply
did not want any part of it.
   He picked up the bundle. It was all in twenty-pound notes, three hundred
and thirty of them to be e[act. He walked on to the balcony of his flat, and
there he stood in his dark-red silk pyjamas looking down at the street below
him.
   Henry’s flat  was in Cur]on Street, which is right in the middle of
London’s most fashionable and e[pensiYe district, known as Mayfair. One
end of Cur]on Street runs into Berkeley STuare, the other into Park Lane.
Henry liYed three floors aboYe street leYel, and outside his bedroom there
was a small balcony with iron railings that oYerhung the street.
   The month was June, the morning was full of sunshine, and the time was
about eleYen o’clock. Although it was a Sunday, there were Tuite a few
people strolling about on the paYements.
   Henry peeled off a single twenty-pound note from his wad and dropped it
oYer the balcony. A bree]e took hold of it and blew it sideways in the
direction of Park Lane. Henry stood watching it. It fluttered and twisted in
the air and eYentually came to rest on the opposite side of the street, directly
in front of an old man. The old man was wearing a long brown shabby
oYercoat and a floppy hat, and he was walking slowly, all by himself. He
caught sight of the note as it fluttered past his face, and he stopped and
picked it up. He held it with both hands and stared at it. He turned it oYer.
He peered closer. Then he raised his head and looked up.
   ‘Hey  there!’ Henry shouted, cupping a hand to his mouth. ‘That’s for
you! It’s a present!’
   The old man stood Tuite still, holding the note in front of him and ga]ing
up at the figure on the balcony aboYe.
   ‘Put  it in your pocket!’ Henry shouted. ‘Take it home!’ His Yoice carried
far along the street, and many people stopped and looked up.
   Henry peeled off another note and threw it down. The watchers below
him didn’t moYe. They simply watched. They had no idea what was going
on. A man was up there on the balcony and he had shouted something, and
now he had just thrown down what looked like a piece of paper. EYeryone

131
followed the piece of paper as it went fluttering down, and this one came to
rest near a young couple who were standing arm in arm on the paYement
across the street. The man unlinked his arm and tried to catch the paper as it
went past him. He missed it but picked it up from the ground. He e[amined
it closely. The watchers on both sides of the street all had their eyes on the
young man. To many of them, the paper had looked Yery much like a bank-
note of some kind, and they were waiting to find out.
   ‘It’s  twenty pounds!’ the man yelled, jumping up and down. ‘It’s a
twenty-pound note!’
   ‘Keep  it!’  Henry shouted at him. ‘It’s yours!’
   ‘You  mean it?’ the man called back, holding the note out at arm’s length.
‘Can I really keep it?’
   Suddenly there was a rustle of e[citement along both sides of the street
and eYeryone started moYing at once. They ran out into the middle of the
road and clustered underneath the balcony. They lifted their arms aboYe
their heads and started calling out, ‘Me! How about one for me! Drop us
another one, guY’nor! Send down a few more!’
   Henry peeled off another fiYe or si[ notes and threw them down.
   There were screams and yells as the pieces of paper fanned out in the
wind and floated downward, and there was a good old-fashioned scrimmage
in the streets as they reached the hands of the crowd. But it was all Yery
good-natured. People were laughing. They thought it a fantastic joke. Here
was a man standing three floors up in his pyjamas, slinging these
enormously Yaluable notes into the air. 4uite a few of those present had
neYer seen a twenty-pound note in their liYes until now.
   But now something else was beginning to happen.
   The speed with which news will spread along the streets of a city is
phenomenal. The news of what Henry was doing flashed like lightning up
and down the length of Cur]on Street and into the smaller and larger streets
beyond. From all sides, people came running. Within a few minutes, about a
thousand men and women and children were blocking the road underneath
Henry’s balcony. Car-driYers who couldn’t pass got out of their Yehicles and
joined the crowd. And all of a sudden, there was chaos in Cur]on Street.

132
   At  this point, Henry simply raised his arm and swung it out and flung the
entire bundle of notes into the air. More than si[ thousand pounds went
fluttering down towards the screaming crowd below.
   The scramble that followed was really something to see. People were
jumping up to catch the notes before they reached the ground, and eYeryone
was pushing and jostling and yelling and falling oYer, and soon the whole
place was a mass of tangled, yelling, fighting human beings.
   AboYe the noise and behind him in his own flat, Henry suddenly heard
his doorbell ringing long and loud. He left the balcony and opened the front
door. A large policeman with a black moustache stood outside with his
hands on his hips. ‘You!’ he bellowed angrily. ‘You’re the one! What the
deYil d’you think you’re doing?’
   ‘Good  morning, officer,’ Henry said. ‘I’m  sorry about the crowd. I didn’t
think it would turn out like that. I was just giYing away some money.’
   ‘You  are causing a nuisance!’ the policeman bellowed. ‘You are creating
an obstruction! You are inciting a riot and you are blocking the en-tire
street!’
   ‘I  said I was sorry,’ Henry answered. ‘I won’t do it again, I promise.
They’ll soon go away.’
   The policeman took one hand off his hip and from the inside of his palm
he produced a twenty-pound note.
   ‘Ah-ha!’   Henry cried. ‘You got one yourself! I’m so glad! I’m  so happy
for you!’
   ‘Now  you just stop that larking about!’ the policeman said. ‘Because I
haYe a few serious Tuestions to ask you about these here twenty-pound
notes.’ He took a notebook from his breast pocket. ‘In the first place,’ he
went on, ‘where e[actly did you get them from?’
   ‘I  won them,’ Henry said. ‘I had a lucky night.’  He went on to giYe the
name of the club where he had won the money and the policeman wrote it
down in his little book. ‘Check it up,’  Henry added. ‘They’ll tell you it’s
true.’
   The policeman lowered the notebook, and looked Henry in the eye. ‘As a
matter of fact,’ he said, ‘I belieYe your story. I think you’re telling the truth.

133
But that doesn’t e[cuse what you did one little bit.’
   ‘I  didn’t  do anything wrong,’ Henry said.
   ‘You’re  a blithering young idiot!’  the policeman shouted, beginning to
work himself up all oYer again. ‘You’re an ass and an imbecile! If you’Ye
been lucky enough to win yourself a tremendous big sum of money like that
and you want to giYe it away, you don’t throw it out the window!’
   ‘Why  not?’ Henry asked, grinning. ‘It’s as good a way of getting rid of it
as any.’
   ‘It’s  a damned stupid silly way of getting rid of it!’  the policeman cried.
‘Why didn’t  you giYe it where it would do some good? To a hospital, for
instance? Or an orphanage? There’s orphanages all oYer the country that
hardly haYe enough money to buy the kids a present eYen for Christmas!
And then along comes a little twit like you who’s neYer eYen known what
it’s like to be hard up and you throw the stuff out into the street! It makes
me mad, it really does!’
   ‘An  orphanage?’ Henry said.
   ‘Yes, an orphanage!’ the policeman cried. ‘I was brought up in one so I
ought to know what it’s like!’  With that, the policeman turned away and
went Tuickly down the stairs towards the street.
   Henry didn’t  moYe. The policeman’s words, and more especially the
genuine fury with which they had been spoken, smacked our hero right
between the eyes.
   ‘An  orphanage?’ he said aloud. ‘That’s Tuite a thought. But why only one
orphanage? Why not lots of them?’ And now, Yery Tuickly, there began to
come to him the great and marYellous idea that was to change eYerything.
   Henry shut the front door and went back into his flat. All at once, he felt
a powerful e[citement stirring in his belly. He started pacing up and down,
ticking off the points that would make his marYellous idea possible.
   ‘One,’  he said, ‘I can get hold of a Yery large sum of money each day of
my life.
   ‘Two.  I must not go to the same casino more than once eYery twelYe
months.

134
   ‘Three. I  must not win too much from any one casino or somebody will
get suspicious. I suggest I keep it down to twenty thousand pounds a night.
   ‘Four. Twenty thousand pounds a night for three hundred and si[ty-fiYe
days in the year comes to how much?’
   Henry took a pencil and paper and worked this one out.
   ‘It  comes to seYen million, three hundred thousand pounds,’ he said
aloud.
   ‘Very  well. Point number fiYe. I shall haYe to keep moYing. No more than
two or three nights at a stretch in any one city or the word will get around.
Go from London to Monte Carlo. Then to Cannes. To Biarrit]. To
DeauYille. To Las Vegas. To Me[ico City. To Buenos Aires. To Nassau.
And so on.
   ‘Si[.   With the money I make, I will set up an absolutely first-class
orphanage in eYery country I Yisit. I will become a Robin Hood. I will take
money from the bookmakers and the gambling proprietors and giYe it to the
children. Does that sound corny and sentimental? As a dream, it does. But
as a reality, if I can really make it work, it wouldn’t be corny at all, or
sentimental. It would be rather tremendous.
   ‘SeYen. I will  need somebody to help me, a man who will sit at home and
take care of all that money and buy the houses and organi]e the whole
thing. A money man. Someone I can trust. What about John Winston?’

John Winston was Henry’s accountant. He handled his income-ta[ affairs,
his inYestments and all other problems that had to do with money. Henry
had known him for eighteen years and a friendship had deYeloped between
the two men. Remember, though, that up until now, John Winston had
known Henry only as the wealthy idle playboy who had neYer done a day’s
work in his life.
   ‘You  must be mad,’ John Winston said when Henry told him his plan.
‘Nobody has eYer deYised a system for beating the casinos.’
   From his pocket, Henry produced a brand-new unopened pack of cards.
‘Come on,’ he said. ‘We’ll play a little blackjack. You’re the dealer. And
don’t tell me those cards are marked. It’s a new pack.’

135
   Solemnly, for nearly an hour, sitting in Winston’s office whose windows
looked out oYer Berkeley STuare, the two men played blackjack. They used
matchsticks as counters, each match being worth twenty-fiYe pounds. After
fifty minutes, Henry was no less than thirty-four thousand pounds up!
   John Winston couldn’t belieYe it. ‘How do you do it?’ he said.
   ‘Put  the pack on the table,’ Henry said. ‘Face down.’
   Winston obeyed.
   Henry concentrated on the top card for four seconds. ‘That’s a knaYe of
hearts,’ he said. It was.
   ‘The  ne[t one is … a three of hearts.’ It was. He went right through the
entire pack, naming eYery card.
   ‘Go  on,’ John Winston said. ‘Tell me how you do it.’ This usually calm
and mathematical man was leaning forward oYer his desk, staring at Henry
with eyes as big and bright as two stars. ‘You do reali]e you are doing
something completely impossible?’ he said.
   ‘It’s  not impossible,’ Henry said. ‘It is only  Yery difficult. I am the one
man in the world who can do it.’
   The telephone rang on John Winston’s desk. He lifted the receiYer and
said to his secretary, ‘No more calls please, Susan, until I tell you. Not eYen
my wife.’ He looked up, waiting for  Henry to go on.
   Henry then proceeded to e[plain to John Winston e[actly how he had
acTuired the power. He told him how he had found the notebook and about
Imhrat Khan and then he described how he had been working non-stop for
the past three years, training his mind to concentrate.
   When he had finished, John Winston said, ‘HaYe you tried walking on
fire?’
   ‘No,’  Henry said. ‘And  I’m not going to.’
   ‘What  makes you think you’ll be able to do this thing with the cards in a
casino?’
   Henry then told him about his Yisit to Lord’s House the night before.
   ‘Si[   thousand, si[ hundred pounds!’ John Winston cried. ‘Did you
honestly win that much in real money?’

136
   ‘Listen,’  Henry said. ‘I  just won thirty-four thousand from you in less
than an hour!’
   ‘So you did.’
   ‘Si[   thousand was the Yery least I could win,’ Henry said. ‘It was a
terrific effort not to win  more.’
   ‘You  will  be the richest man on earth.’
   ‘I  don’t want to be the richest man on earth,’ Henry said. ‘Not any more.’
He then told him about his plan for orphanages.
   When he had finished, he said, ‘Will you join me, John? Will you be my
money man, my banker, my administrator and eYerything else? There will
be millions coming in eYery year.’
   John Winston, a cautious and prudent accountant, would not agree to
anything at all on the spur of the moment. ‘I want to see you in action first,’
he said.
   So that night, they went together to the Rit] Club on Cur]on Street.
‘Can’t go to Lord’s House again now for some time,’ Henry said.
   On the first spin of the roulette wheel, Henry staked £100 on number
twenty-seYen. It came up. The second time he put it on number four; that
came up too. A total of £,00 profit.
   An  Arab standing ne[t to Henry said, ‘I haYe just lost fifty-fiYe thousand
pounds. How do you do it?’
   ‘Luck,’   Henry said. ‘Just luck.’
   They moYed into the Blackjack Room and there, in half an hour, Henry
won a further £10,000. Then he stopped.
   Outside in the street, John Winston said, ‘I belieYe you now. I’ll come in
with you.’
   ‘We start tomorrow,’ Henry said.
   ‘Do  you really intend to do this eYery single night?’
   ‘Yes,’  Henry said. ‘I shall moYe Yery fast from place to place, from
country to country. And eYery day, I shall send the profits back to you
through the banks.’
   ‘Do  you reali]e how much it will  add up to in a year?’
   ‘Millions,’   Henry said cheerfully. ‘About seYen million a year.’

137
   ‘In  that case, I can’t operate in this country,’ John Winston said. ‘The
ta[man will  haYe it all.’
   ‘Go  anywhere you like,’ Henry said. ‘It makes no difference to me. I trust
you completely.’
   ‘I  shall go to Swit]erland,’  John Winston said. ‘But not tomorrow. I can’t
just pull up and fly away. I’m not an unattached bachelor like you with no
responsibilities. I must talk to my wife and children. I must giYe notice to
my partners in the firm. I must sell my house. I must find another house in
Swit]erland. I must take the kids out of school. My dear man, these things
take time!’
   Henry drew from his pocket the £1,00 he had just won and handed
them to the other man. ‘Here’s some petty cash to tide you oYer until you
get settled,’ he said. ‘But do hurry up. I want to get cracking.’
   Within  a week, John Winston was in Lausanne, with an office high up on
the loYely hillside aboYe Lake GeneYa. His family would follow him as
soon as possible.
   And  Henry went to work in the casinos.

One year later, he had sent a little oYer eight million pounds to John
Winston in Lausanne. The money was sent fiYe days a week to a Swiss
company called ORPHANAGES S.A. Nobody e[cept John Winston and Henry
knew where the money came from or what was going to happen to it. As for
the Swiss authorities, they neYer want to know where money comes from.
Henry sent the money through the banks. The Monday remittance was
always the biggest because it included Henry’s take for Friday, Saturday
and Sunday, when the banks were closed. He moYed with astonishing
speed, and often the only clue that John Winston had to his whereabouts
was the address of the bank which had sent the money on a particular day.
One day it would come perhaps from a bank in Manila. The ne[t day from
Bangkok. It came from Las Vegas, from Curaçao, from Freeport, from
Grand Cayman, from San Juan, from Nassau, from London, from Biarrit].
It came from anywhere and eYerywhere so long as there was a big casino in
the city.

138
For seYen years, all went well. Nearly fifty million pounds had arriYed in
Lausanne, and had been safely banked away. Already John Winston had got
three orphanages established, one in France, one in England, and one in the
United States. FiYe more were on the way.
   Then came a bit of trouble. There is a grapeYine among casino owners,
and although Henry was always e[traordinarily careful not to take too much
from any one place on any one night, the news was bound to spread in the
end.
   They got wise to him one night in Las Vegas when Henry rather
imprudently took one hundred thousand dollars from each of three separate
casinos that all happened to be owned by the same mob.
   What happened was this. The morning after, when Henry was in his hotel
room packing to leaYe for the airport, there was a knock on his door. A bell-
hop came in and whispered to Henry that two men were waiting for him in
the lobby. Other men, the bell-hop said, were guarding the rear e[it. These
were Yery hard men, the bell-hop said, and he did not giYe much for
Henry’s chances of surYiYal if he were to go downstairs at this moment.
   ‘Why  do you come and tell me?’ Henry asked him. ‘Why are you on my
side?’
   ‘I’m   not on anyone’s side,’ the bell-hop said. ‘But we all know you won
a lot of money last night and I figured you might giYe me a nice present for
tipping you off.’
   ‘Thanks,’  Henry said. ‘But how do I get away? I’ll giYe you a thousand
dollars if you can get me out of here.’
   ‘That’s  easy,’ the bell-hop said. ‘Take your own clothes off and put on
my uniform. Then walk out through the lobby with your suitcase. But tie
me up before you leaYe. I’Ye gotta be lying here on the floor tied up hand
and foot so they won’t think I helped you. I’ll say you had a gun and I
couldn’t do nothing.’
   ‘Where’s the cord to tie you up with?’ Henry asked.
   ‘Right  here in my pocket,’ the bell-hop said, grinning.
   Henry put on the bell-hop’s gold and green uniform, which wasn’t too
bad a fit. Then he tied the man up good and proper with the cord and stuffed

139
a handkerchief in his mouth. Finally, he pushed ten one-hundred dollar bills
under the carpet for the bell-hop to collect later.
   Down  in the lobby, two short, thick, black-haired thugs were watching
the people as they came out of the eleYators. But they hardly glanced at the
man in the green and gold bell-hop’s uniform who came out carrying a
suitcase and who walked smartly across the lobby and out through the
swing-doors that led to the street.
   At  the airport, Henry changed his flight and took the ne[t plane to Los
Angeles. Things were not going to be Tuite so easy from now on, he told
himself. But that bell-hop had giYen him an idea.
   In  Los Angeles, and in nearby Hollywood and BeYerly Hills, where the
film people liYe, Henry sought out the Yery best make-up man in the
business. This was Ma[ Engelman. Henry called on him. He liked him
immediately.
   ‘How  much do you earn?’ Henry asked him.
   ‘Oh,  about forty thousand dollars a year,’ Ma[ told him.
   ‘I’ll   giYe you a hundred thousand,’ Henry said, ‘if you will come with me
and be my make-up artist.’
   ‘What’s  the big idea?’ Ma[ asked him.
   ‘I’ll   tell you,’  Henry said. And he did.
   Ma[  was only the second person Henry had told. John Winston was the
first. And when Henry showed Ma[ how he could read the cards, Ma[ was
flabbergasted.
   ‘Great heaYens, man!’ he cried. ‘You could make a fortune!’
   ‘I  already haYe,’ Henry told him. ‘I’Ye made ten fortunes. But I want to
make ten more.’ He told Ma[ about the orphanages. With John Winston’s
help, he had already set up three of them, with more on the way.
   Ma[  was a small dark-skinned man who had escaped from Vienna when
the Na]is went in. He had neYer married. He had no ties. He became wildly
enthusiastic. ‘It’s cra]y!’  he cried. ‘It’s the cra]iest thing I’Ye eYer heard in
my life! I’ll   join you, man! Let’s go!’
   From then on, Ma[  Engelman traYelled eYerywhere with Henry and he
carried with him in a trunk such an assortment of wigs, false beards,

140
sideburns, moustaches and make-up materials as you haYe neYer seen. He
could turn his master into any one of thirty or forty unrecogni]able people,
and the casino managers, who were all watching for Henry now, neYer once
saw him again as Mr Henry Sugar. As a matter of fact, only a year after the
Las Vegas episode, Henry and Ma[ actually went back to that dangerous
city, and on a warm starry night Henry took a cool eighty thousand dollars
from the first of the big casinos he had Yisited before. He went disguised as
an elderly Bra]ilian diplomat, and they neYer knew what had hit them.
   Now  that Henry no longer appeared as himself in the casinos, there were,
of course, a number of other details that had to be taken care of, such as
false identity cards and passports. In Monte Carlo, for e[ample, a Yisitor
must always show his passport before being allowed to enter the casino.
Henry Yisited Monte Carlo eleYen more times with Ma[’s assistance, eYery
time with a different passport and in a different disguise.
   Ma[  adored the work. He loYed creating new characters for Henry. ‘I
haYe an entirely fresh one for you today!’ he would announce. ‘Just wait till
you see it! Today you will be an Arab sheikh from Kuwait!’
   ‘Do  we haYe an Arab passport?’ Henry would ask. ‘And Arab papers?’
   ‘We haYe eYerything,’ Ma[ would answer. ‘John Winston has sent me a
loYely passport in the name of His Royal Highness Sheikh Abu Bin Bey!’
   And  so it went on. OYer the years, Ma[ and Henry became as close as
brothers. They were crusading brothers, two men who moYed swiftly
through the skies, milking the casinos of the world and sending the money
straight back to John Winston in Swit]erland, where the company known as
ORPHANAGES S.A. grew richer and richer.

Henry died last year, at the age of si[ty-three; his work was completed. He
had been at it for just on twenty years.
   His personal reference book listed three hundred and seYenty-one major
casinos in twenty-one different countries or islands. He had Yisited them all
many times and he had neYer lost.
   According  to John Winston’s accounts, he had made altogether one
hundred and forty-four million pounds.

141
   He left  twenty-one well-established well-run orphanages scattered about
the world, one in each country he Yisited. All these were administered and
financed from Lausanne by John and his staff.
   But how do I,  who am neither Ma[ Engelman nor John Winston, happen
to know all this? And how did I come to write the story in the first place?
   I  will  tell you.
   Soon after Henry’s death, John Winston telephoned me from
Swit]erland. He introduced himself simply as the head of a company
calling itself ORPHANAGES S.A., and asked me if I would come out to
Lausanne to see him with a Yiew to writing a brief history of the
organi]ation. I don’t know how he got hold of my name. He probably had a
list of writers and stuck a pin into it. He would pay me well, he said. And he
added, ‘A remarkable man has died recently. His name was Henry Sugar. I
think people ought to know a bit about what he has done.’
   In  my ignorance, I asked whether the story was really interesting enough
to merit being put on paper.
   ‘All   right,’ said the man who now controlled one hundred and forty-four
million pounds. ‘Forget it. I’ll  ask someone else. There are plenty of writers
around.’
   That needled me. ‘No,’ I said. ‘Wait. Could you at least tell me who this
Henry Sugar was and what he did? I’Ye neYer eYen heard of him.’
   In  fiYe minutes on the phone, John Winston told me something about
Henry Sugar’s secret career. It was secret no longer. Henry was dead and
would neYer gamble again. I listened, enthralled.
   ‘I’ll   be on the ne[t plane,’ I said.
   ‘Thank  you,’ John Winston said. ‘I would appreciate that.’
   In  Lausanne, I met John Winston, now oYer seYenty, and also Ma[
Engelman, who was about the same age. They were both still shattered by
Henry’s death. Ma[ eYen more so than John Winston, for Ma[ had been
beside him constantly for oYer thirteen years. ‘I loYed him,’ Ma[ said, a
shadow falling oYer his face. ‘He was a great man. He neYer thought about
himself. He neYer kept a penny of the money he won, e[cept what he
needed to traYel and to eat. Listen, once we were in Biarrit] and he had just

142
been to the bank and giYen them half a million francs to send home to John.
It was lunchtime. We went to a place and had a simple lunch, an omelette
and a bottle of wine, and when the bill came, Henry hadn’t got anything to
pay it with. I hadn’t either. He was a loYely man.’
   John Winston told me eYerything he knew. He showed me the original
dark-blue notebook written by Dr John Cartwright in Bombay in 194, and
I copied it out word for word.
   ‘Henry  always carried it with him,’ John Winston said. ‘In the end, he
knew the whole thing by heart.’
   He showed me the accounts books of ORPHANAGES S.A. with Henry’s
winnings recorded in them day by day oYer twenty years, and a truly
staggering sight they were.
   When he had finished, I said to him, ‘There’s a big gap in this story, Mr
Winston. You’Ye told me almost nothing about Henry’s traYels and about
his adYentures in the casinos of the world.’
   ‘That’s  Ma[’s  story,’ John Winston said. ‘Ma[ knows all about that
because he was with him. But he says he wants to haYe a shot at writing it
himself. He’s already started.’
   ‘Then  why not let Ma[  write the whole thing?’ I asked.
   ‘He  doesn’t want to,’ John Winston said. ‘He only wants to write about
Henry and Ma[. It should be a fantastic story if he eYer gets it finished. But
he is old now, like me, and I doubt he will manage it.’
   ‘One last Tuestion,’ I said. ‘You keep calling him Henry Sugar. And yet
you tell me that wasn’t his name. Don’t you want me to say who he really
was when I do the story?’
   ‘No,’  John Winston said. ‘Ma[  and I promised neYer to reYeal it. Oh, it’ll
probably leak out sooner or later. After all, he was from a fairly well-known
English family. But I’d  appreciate it if you don’t try to find out. Just call
him plain Mr Henry Sugar.’
   And  that is what I haYe done.

143
                                            Lucky      Break



                                         HoZ I Eecame a Zriter


A fiction writer  is a person who inYents stories.
   But how does one start out on a job like this? How does one become a
full-time professional fiction writer?
   Charles Dickens found it easy. At the age of twenty-four, he simply sat
down and wrote PickZick Papers, which became an immediate best-seller.
But Dickens was a genius, and geniuses are different from the rest of us.
   In  this century (it was not always so in the last one), just about eYery
single writer who has finally become successful in the world of fiction has
started out in some other job – a schoolteacher, perhaps, or a doctor or a
journalist or a lawyer. (Alice in Wonderland was written by a
mathematician, and The Wind in the WilloZs by a ciYil serYant.) The first
attempts at writing haYe therefore always had to be done in spare time,
usually at night.
   The reason for this is obYious. When you are adult, it is necessary to earn
a liYing. To earn a liYing, you must get a job. You must if possible get a job
that guarantees you so much money a week. But howeYer much you may
want to take up fiction writing as a career, it would be pointless to go along
to a publisher and say, ‘I want a job as a fiction writer.’ If you did that, he
would tell you to bu]]  off  and write the book first. And eYen if you brought
a finished book to him and he liked it well enough to publish it, he still
wouldn’t giYe you a job. He would giYe you an adYance of perhaps fiYe
hundred pounds, which he would get back again later by deducting it from

144
your royalties.  (A  royalty,  by the way,  is the money  that a writer  gets from
the publisher for  each copy of  his book  that is sold.  The aYerage royalty a
writer  gets is ten per cent of  the price of  the book itself  in  the book shop.
Thus, for  a book selling  at four  pounds, the writer  would  get forty  pence.
For a paperback selling  at fifty   pence, he would get  fiYe pence.)
    It is Yery common  for  a hopeful  fiction  writer  to  spend two years of  his
spare time writing   a book which  no publisher  will  publish.  For  that he gets
nothing at all  e[cept  a sense of frustration.
    If he is  fortunate enough  to haYe a book accepted by a publisher,  the odds
are that as a first noYel it  will  in  the end sell only  about three thousand
copies. That will   earn him maybe  a thousand pounds. Most  noYels take at
least one year to write,  and one thousand pounds a year  is not enough to
liYe on these days. So you can see why  a budding fiction   writer  inYariably
has to start out in  another job first  of  all. If  he doesn’t,  he will  almost
certainly  starYe.
    Here are some of the Tualities  you  should possess or should try  to acTuire
if you  wish to  become a fiction  writer:

     1. You should haYe a liYely imagination.
     2. You should be able to write well. By that I mean you should be able to make a scene come
        aliYe in the reader’s mind. Not eYerybody has this ability. It is a gift, and you either haYe it
        or you don’t.
     . You must haYe stamina. In other words, you must be able to stick to what you are doing and
        neYer giYe up, for hour after hour, day after day, week after week and month after month.
     4. You must be a perfectionist. That means you must neYer be satisfied with what you haYe
        written until you haYe rewritten it again and again, making it as good as you possibly can.
     . You must haYe strong self-discipline. You are working alone. No one is employing you. No
        one is around to giYe you the sack if you don’t turn up for work, or to tick you off if you
        start slacking.
     6. It helps a lot if you haYe a keen sense of humour. This is not essential when writing for
        grown-ups, but for children, it’s Yital.
     . You must haYe a degree of humility. The writer who thinks that his work is marYellous is
        heading for trouble.

    Let me tell  you  how I  myself slid  in  through the back  door and found
myself in  the world  of  fiction.

145
   At  the age of eight, in 1924, I was sent away to boarding-school in a
town called Weston-super-Mare, on the south-west coast of England. Those
were days of horror, of fierce discipline, of no talking in the dormitories, no
running in the corridors, no untidiness of any sort, no this or that or the
other, just rules and still more rules that had to be obeyed. And the fear of
the dreaded cane hung oYer us like the fear of death all the time.
   ‘The  headmaster wants to see you in his study.’ Words of doom. They
sent shiYers oYer the skin of your stomach. But off you went, aged perhaps
nine years old, down the long bleak corridors and through an archway that
took you into the headmaster’s priYate area where only horrible things
happened and the smell of pipe tobacco hung in the air like incense. You
stood outside the awful black door, not daring eYen to knock. You took deep
breaths. If only your mother were here, you told yourself, she would not let
this happen. She wasn’t here. You were alone. You lifted a hand and
knocked softly, once.
   ‘Come in!  Ah yes, it’s Dahl. Well, Dahl, it’s been reported to me that you
were talking during prep last night.’
   ‘Please, sir, I broke my nib and I was only asking Jenkins if he had
another one to lend me.’
   ‘I  will  not tolerate talking in prep. You know that Yery well.’
   Already  this giant of a man was crossing to the tall corner cupboard and
reaching up to the top of it where he kept his canes.
   ‘Boys  who break rules haYe to be punished.’
   ‘Sir  … I …  I had a bust nib … I …’
   ‘That  is no e[cuse. I am going to teach you that it does not pay to talk
during prep.’
   He took a cane down that was about three feet long with a little curYed
handle at one end. It was thin and white and Yery whippy. ‘Bend oYer and
touch your toes. OYer there by the window.’
   ‘But,  sir …’
   ‘Don’t  argue with me, boy. Do as you’re told.’
   I  bent oYer. Then I waited. He always kept you waiting for about ten
seconds, and that was when your knees began to shake.

146
   ‘Bend  lower, boy! Touch your toes!’
   I  stared at the toecaps of my black shoes and I told myself that any
moment now this man was going to bash the cane into me so hard that the
whole of my bottom would change colour. The welts were always Yery
long, stretching right across both buttocks, blue-black with brilliant scarlet
edges, and when you ran your fingers oYer them eYer so gently afterwards,
you could feel the corrugations.
   SZish! … Crack!
   Then came the pain. It was unbelieYable, unbearable, e[cruciating. It was
as though someone had laid a white-hot poker across your backside and
pressed hard.
   The second stroke would be coming soon and it was as much as you
could do to stop putting your hands in the way to ward it off. It was the
instinctiYe reaction. But if you did that, it would break your fingers.
   SZish! … Crack!
   The second one landed right alongside the first and the white-hot poker
was pressing deeper and deeper into the skin.
   SZish! … Crack!
   The third stroke was where the pain always reached its peak. It could go
no further. There was no way it could get any worse. Any more strokes after
that simply prolonged the agony. You tried not to cry out. Sometimes you
couldn’t help it. But whether you were able to remain silent or not, it was
impossible to stop the tears. They poured down your cheeks in streams and
dripped on to the carpet.
   The important thing was neYer to flinch upwards or straighten up when
you were hit. If you did that, you got an e[tra one.
   Slowly,  deliberately, taking plenty of time, the headmaster deliYered three
more strokes, making si[ in all.
   ‘You  may go.’ The Yoice came from a caYern miles away, and you
straightened up slowly, agoni]ingly, and grabbed hold of your burning
buttocks with both hands and held them as tight as you could and hopped
out of the room on the Yery tips of your toes.

147
   That cruel cane ruled our liYes. We were caned for talking in the
dormitory after lights out, for talking in class, for bad work, for carYing our
initials on the desk, for climbing oYer walls, for sloYenly appearance, for
flicking paper-clips, for forgetting to change into house-shoes in the
eYenings, for not hanging up our games clothes, and aboYe all for giYing the
slightest offence to any master. (They weren’t called teachers in those days.)
In other words, we were caned for doing eYerything that it was natural for
small boys to do.
   So we watched our words. And we watched our steps. My goodness, how
we watched our steps. We became incredibly alert. WhereYer we went, we
walked carefully, with ears pricked for danger, like wild animals stepping
softly through the woods.
   Apart from  the masters, there was another man in the school who
frightened us considerably. This was Mr Pople. Mr Pople was a paunchy,
crimson-faced indiYidual who acted as school-porter, boiler superintendent
and general handyman. His power stemmed from the fact that he could (and
he most certainly did) report us to the headmaster upon the slightest
proYocation. Mr Pople’s moment of glory came each morning at seYen-
thirty precisely, when he would stand at the end of the long main corridor
and ‘ring the bell’. The bell was huge and made of brass, with a thick
wooden handle, and Mr Pople would swing it back and forth at arm’s length
in a special way of his own, so that it went clangetty-clang-clang,
clangetty-clang-clang, clangetty-clang-clang. At the sound of the bell, all
the boys in the school, one hundred and eighty of us, would moYe smartly
to our positions in the corridor. We lined up against the walls on both sides
and stood stiffly to attention, awaiting the headmaster’s inspection.
   But at least ten minutes would elapse before the headmaster arriYed on
the scene, and during this time, Mr Pople would conduct a ceremony so
e[traordinary that to this day I find it hard to belieYe it eYer took place.
There were si[ laYatories in the school, numbered on their doors from one
to si[. Mr  Pople, standing at the end of the long corridor, would haYe in the
palm of his hand si[ small brass discs, each with a number on it, one to si[.

148
There was absolute silence as he allowed his eye to traYel down the two
lines of stiffly-standing boys. Then he would bark out a name, ‘Arkle!’
   Arkle  would fall  out and step briskly down the corridor to where Mr
Pople stood. Mr Pople would hand him a brass disc. Arkle would then
march away towards the laYatories, and to reach them he would haYe to
walk the entire length of the corridor, past all the stationary boys, and then
turn left. As soon as he was out of sight, he was allowed to look at his disc
and see which laYatory number he had been giYen.
   ‘Highton!’   barked Mr Pople, and now Highton would fall out to receiYe
his disc and march away.
   ‘Angel!’   …
   ‘Williamson!’   …
   ‘Gaunt!’  …
   ‘Price!’  …
   In  this manner, si[ boys selected at Mr Pople’s whim were dispatched to
the laYatories to do their duty. Nobody asked them if they might or might
not be ready to moYe their bowels at seYen-thirty in the morning before
breakfast. They were simply ordered to do so. But we considered it a great
priYilege to be chosen because it meant that during the headmaster’s
inspection we would be sitting safely out of reach in blessed priYacy.
   In  due course, the headmaster would emerge from his priYate Tuarters
and take oYer from Mr Pople. He walked slowly down one side of the
corridor, inspecting each boy with the utmost care, strapping his wristwatch
on to his wrist as he went along. The morning inspection was an unnerYing
e[perience. EYery one of us was terrified of the two sharp brown eyes under
their bushy eyebrows as they traYelled slowly up and down the length of
one’s body.
   ‘Go  away and brush your hair properly. And don’t let it happen again or
you’ll be sorry.’
   ‘Let  me see your hands. You haYe ink on them. Why didn’t you wash it
off last night?’
   ‘Your  tie is crooked, boy. Fall out and tie it again. And do it properly this
time.’

149
   ‘I  can see mud on that shoe. Didn’t I haYe to talk to you about that last
week? Come and see me in my study after breakfast.’
   And  so it went on, the ghastly early-morning inspection. And by the end
of it all, when the headmaster had gone away and Mr Pople started
marching us into the dining-room by forms, many of us had lost our
appetites for the lumpy porridge that was to come.
   I  haYe still got all my school reports from those days more than fifty
years ago, and I’Ye gone through them one by one, trying to discoYer a hint
of promise for a future fiction writer. The subject to look at was obYiously
English Composition. But all my prep-school reports under this heading
were flat and non-committal, e[cepting one. The one that took my eye was
dated Christmas Term, 192. I was then twelYe, and my English teacher
was Mr Victor Corrado. I remember him YiYidly, a tall, handsome athlete
with black waYy hair and a Roman nose (who one night later on eloped
with the matron, Miss DaYis, and we neYer saw either of them again).
Anyway, it so happened that Mr Corrado took us in bo[ing as well as in
English Composition, and in this particular report it said under English,
‘See his report on bo[ing. Precisely the same remarks apply.’ So we look
under Bo[ing, and there it says, ‘Too slow and ponderous. His punches are
not well-timed and are easily seen coming.’
   But just once a week at this school, eYery Saturday morning, eYery
beautiful and blessed Saturday morning, all the shiYering horrors would
disappear and for two glorious hours I would e[perience something that
came Yery close to ecstasy.
   Unfortunately, this did not happen until one was ten years old. But no
matter. Let me try to tell you what it was.
   At  e[actly ten-thirty  on Saturday mornings, Mr Pople’s infernal bell
would go clangetty-clang-clang. This was a signal for the following to take
place:
   First, all  boys of nine and under (about seYenty all told) would proceed at
once to the large outdoor asphalt playground behind the main building.
Standing on the playground with legs apart and arms folded across her
mountainous bosom was Miss DaYis, the matron. If it was raining, the boys

150
were e[pected to arriYe in raincoats. If snowing or blowing a bli]]ard, then
it was coats and scarYes. And school caps, of course – grey with a red badge
on the front – had always to be worn. But no Act of God, neither tornado
nor hurricane nor Yolcanic eruption was eYer allowed to stop those ghastly
two-hour Saturday morning walks that the seYen-, eight- and nine-year-old
little boys had to take along the windy esplanades of Weston-super-Mare on
Saturday mornings. They walked in crocodile formation, two by two, with
Miss DaYis striding alongside in tweed skirt and woollen stockings and a
felt hat that must surely haYe been nibbled by rats.
   The other thing that happened when Mr Pople’s bell rang out on Saturday
mornings was that the rest of the boys, all those of ten and oYer (about one
hundred all told) would go immediately to the main Assembly Hall and sit
down. A junior master called S. K. Jopp would then poke his head around
the door and shout at us with such ferocity that specks of spit would fly
from his mouth like bullets and splash against the window panes across the
room. ‘All  right!’  he shouted. ‘No talking! No moYing! Eyes front and
hands on desks!’ Then out he would pop again.
   We sat still and waited. We were waiting for the loYely time we knew
would be coming soon. Outside in the driYeway we heard the motor-cars
being started up. All were ancient. All had to be cranked by hand. (The
year, don’t forget, was around 1922.) This was a Saturday morning
ritual. There were fiYe cars in all, and into them would pile the entire staff
of fourteen masters, including not only the headmaster himself but also the
purple-faced Mr Pople. Then off they would roar in a cloud of blue smoke
and come to rest outside a pub called, if I remember rightly, ‘The
Bewhiskered Earl’. There they would remain until just before lunch,
drinking pint after pint of strong brown ale. And two and a half hours later,
at one o’clock, we would watch them coming back, walking Yery carefully
into the dining-room for lunch, holding on to things as they went.
   So much for the masters. But what of us, the great mass of ten-, eleYen-
and twelYe-year-olds left sitting in the Assembly Hall in a school that was
suddenly without a single adult in the entire place? We knew, of course,
e[actly what was going to happen ne[t. Within a minute of the departure of

151
the masters, we would hear the front door opening, and footsteps outside,
and then, with a flurry of loose clothes and jangling bracelets and flying
hair, a woman would burst into the room shouting, ‘Hello, eYerybody!
Cheer up! This isn’t a burial serYice!’ or words to that effect. And this was
Mrs O’Connor.
   Blessed beautiful Mrs O’Connor with her whacky clothes and her grey
hair flying in all  directions. She was about fifty years old, with a horsey
face and long yellow teeth, but to us she was beautiful. She was not on the
staff. She was hired from somewhere in the town to come up on Saturday
mornings and be a sort of baby-sitter, to keep us Tuiet for two and a half
hours while the masters went off boo]ing at the pub.
   But Mrs  O’Connor was no baby-sitter. She was nothing less than a great
and gifted teacher, a scholar and a loYer of English Literature. Each of us
was with her eYery Saturday morning for three years (from the age of ten
until we left the school) and during that time we spanned the entire history
of English Literature from A.D. 9 to the early nineteenth century.
   Newcomers to the class were giYen for keeps a slim blue book called
simply The Chronological TaEle, and it contained only si[ pages. Those si[
pages were filled with a Yery long list in chronological order of all the great
and not so great landmarks in English Literature, together with their dates.
E[actly one hundred of these were chosen by Mrs O’Connor and we
marked them in our books and learned them by heart. Here are a few that I
still remember:


        A.D.         St Augustine lands in Thanet and brings Christianity to
        9         Britain
        1         Bede’s Ecclesiastical History
        121       Signing of  the Magna Carta
        199       Langland’s Vision of Piers PloZman
        146       Ca[ton  sets up first printing press at Westminster
        14       Chaucer’s CanterEury Tales
        14       Malory’s Morte d’Arthur
        190       Spenser’s Faërie Queene

152
        162       First  Folio of Shakespeare
        166       Milton’s  Paradise Lost
        166       Dryden’s Essays
        16       Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress
        111       Addison’s Spectator
        119       Defoe’s RoEinson Crusoe
        126       Swift’s  *ulliver’s   Travels
        1      Pope’s Essay on Man
        1      Johnson’s Dictionary
        191       Boswell’s  Life of Johnson
        1      Carlyle’s Sartor Resartus
        19       Darwin’s Origin  of Species

   Mrs  O’Connor would then take each item in turn and spend one entire
Saturday morning of two and a half hours talking to us about it. Thus, at the
end of three years, with appro[imately thirty-si[ Saturdays in each school
year, she would haYe coYered the one hundred items.
   And  what marYellous e[citing fun it was! She had the great teacher’s
knack of making eYerything she spoke about come aliYe to us in that room.
In two and a half hours, we grew to loYe Langland and his Piers Plowman.
The ne[t Saturday, it was Chaucer, and we loYed him, too. EYen rather
difficult  fellows like Milton  and Dryden and Pope all became thrilling when
Mrs O’Connor told us about their liYes and read parts of their work to us
aloud. And the result of all this, for me at any rate, was that by the age of
thirteen I had become intensely aware of the Yast heritage of literature that
had been built up in England oYer the centuries. I also became an aYid and
insatiable reader of good writing.
   Dear loYely Mrs O’Connor! Perhaps it was worth going to that awful
school simply to e[perience the joy of her Saturday mornings.
   At  thirteen I left prep school and was sent, again as a boarder, to one of
our famous British public schools. They are not, of course, public at all.
They are e[tremely priYate and e[pensiYe. Mine was called Repton, in
Derbyshire, and our headmaster at the time was the ReYerend Geoffrey

153
Fisher, who later became Bishop of Chester, then Bishop of London, and
finally Archbishop of Canterbury. In his last job, he crowned 4ueen
Eli]abeth II  in Westminster Abbey.
   The clothes we had to wear at this school made us look like assistants in
a funeral parlour. The jacket was black, with a cutaway front and long tails
hanging down behind that came below the backs of the knees. The trousers
were black with thin grey stripes. The shoes were black. There was a black
waistcoat with eleYen buttons to do up eYery morning. The tie was black.
Then there was a stiff starched white butterfly collar and a white shirt.
   To top it all  off, the final ludicrous touch was a straw hat that had to be
worn at all times out of doors e[cept when playing games. And because the
hats got soggy in the rain, we carried umbrellas for bad weather.
   You can imagine what I felt like in this fancy dress when my mother took
me, at the age of thirteen, to the train in London at the beginning of my first
term. She kissed me good-bye and off I went.
   I  naturally hoped that my long-suffering backside would be giYen a rest
at my new and more adult school, but it was not to be. The beatings at
Repton were more fierce and more freTuent than anything I had yet
e[perienced. And do not think for one moment that the future Archbishop
of Canterbury objected to these sTualid e[ercises. He rolled up his sleeYes
and joined in with gusto. His were the bad ones, the really terrifying
occasions. Some of the beatings administered by this Man of God, this
future Head of the Church of England, were Yery brutal. To my certain
knowledge he once had to produce a basin of water, a sponge and a towel so
that the Yictim could wash the blood away afterwards.
   No joke, that.
   Shades of the Spanish InTuisition.
   But nastiest of all, I think, was the fact that prefects were allowed to beat
their fellow pupils. This was a daily occurrence. The big boys (aged 1 or
1) would flog the smaller boys (aged 1, 14, 1) in a sadistic ceremony
that took place at night after you had gone up to the dormitory and got into
your pyjamas.
   ‘You’re  wanted down in the changing-room.’

154
   With  heaYy hands, you would put on your dressing-gown and slippers.
Then you would stumble downstairs and enter the large wooden-floored
room where the games clothes were hanging up around the walls. A single
bare electric bulb hung from the ceiling. A prefect, pompous but Yery
dangerous, was waiting for you in the centre of the room. In his hands, he
held a long cane, and he was usually fle[ing it back and forth as you came
in.
   ‘I  suppose you know why you’re here,’ he would say.
   ‘Well,  I …’
   ‘For  the second day running you haYe burnt my toast!’
   Let me e[plain  this ludicrous remark. You were this particular prefect’s
fag. That meant you were his serYant, and one of your many duties was to
make toast for him eYery day at teatime. For this, you used a long three-
pronged toasting fork, and you stuck the bread on the end of it and held it
up before an open fire, first one side, then the other. But the only fire where
toasting was allowed was in the library, and as teatime approached, there
were neYer less than a do]en wretched fags all jostling for position in front
of the tiny grate. I was no good at this. I usually held the bread too close
and the toast got burnt. But as we were neYer allowed to ask for a second
slice and start again, the only thing to do was to scrape the burnt bits off
with a knife. You seldom got away with this. The prefects were e[pert at
detecting scraped toast. You would see your own tormentor sitting up there
at the top table, picking up his toast, turning it oYer, e[amining it closely as
though it were a small and Yery Yaluable painting. Then he would frown
and you knew you were for it.
   So now it was night-time and you were down in the changing-room in
your dressing-gown and pyjamas, and the one whose toast you had burnt
was telling you about your crime.
   ‘I  don’t like  burnt toast.’
   ‘I  held it too close. I’m sorry.’
   ‘Which  do you want? Four with the dressing-gown on, or three with it
off?’
   ‘Four  with it on,’  I said.

155
    It was traditional   to ask this Tuestion.  The Yictim  was always  giYen a
choice. But  my own  dressing-gown  was made of thick  brown  camel-hair,
and there was neYer any Tuestion in my  mind  that this was the  better choice.
To be beaten in pyjamas only  was a Yery painful  e[perience,   and your skin
nearly always  got broken.  But my  dressing-gown  stopped that from
happening. The prefect  knew, of  course, all about  this, and therefore
wheneYer you chose to take an e[tra  stroke  and kept the dressing-gown  on,
he beat you with  eYery ounce of his  strength. Sometimes  he would  take a
little  run, three or  four neat steps on his toes, to  gain momentum  and thrust,
but either way,  it was a saYage business.
    In the old  days, when a man was about  to be hanged, a silence would  fall
upon the whole  prison and the other  prisoners would  sit  Yery Tuietly  in their
cells until  the deed had been done. Much  the same thing  happened at school
when a beating was taking  place. Upstairs  in the  dormitories,  the boys
would  sit in silence  on their  beds in sympathy  for the Yictim,  and through
the silence, from  down  below in  the changing-room,  would  come  the crack
of each stroke as it was  deliYered.
    My  end-of-term  reports from  this  school are of some interest.  Here are
just four  of them,  copied out word  for  word  from  the original  documents:

       Summer Term, 1930 (aged 14). English Composition. ‘I haYe neYer met a boy who so
       persistently writes the e[act opposite of what he means. He seems incapable of
       marshalling his thoughts on paper.’

       Easter Term, 1931 (aged 1). English Composition. ‘A persistent muddler. Vocabulary
       negligible, sentences malconstructed. He reminds me of a camel.’

       Summer Term, 1932 (aged 1). English Composition. ‘This boy is an indolent and
       illiterate member of the class.’

       Autumn Term, 1932 (aged 1). English Composition. ‘Consistently idle. Ideas limited.’
       (And underneath this one, the future Archbishop of Canterbury had written in red ink,
       ‘He must correct the blemishes on this sheet.’)

    Little  wonder  that it  neYer entered my head to become a writer  in  those
days.
    When I  left school  at the age of eighteen,  in 194, I turned  down my
mother’s offer  (my  father died  when I  was three) to go  to uniYersity. Unless
one was going to  become a doctor, a lawyer,  a scientist, an engineer  or

156
some other kind of professional person, I saw little point in wasting three or
four years at O[ford or Cambridge, and I still hold this Yiew. Instead, I had
a passionate wish to go abroad, to traYel, to see distant lands. There were
almost no commercial aeroplanes in those days, and a journey to Africa or
the Far East took seYeral weeks.
   So I got a job with what was called the Eastern Staff of the Shell Oil
Company, where they promised me that after two or three years’ training in
England, I would be sent off to a foreign country.
   ‘Which  one?’ I asked.
   ‘Who  knows?’ the man answered. ‘It depends where there is a Yacancy
when you reach the top of the list. It could be Egypt or China or India or
almost anywhere in the world.’
   That sounded like fun. It was. When my turn came to be posted abroad
three years later, I was told it would be East Africa. Tropical suits were
ordered and my mother helped me pack my trunk. My tour of duty was for
three years in Africa, then I would be allowed home on leaYe for si[
months. I was now twenty-one years old and setting out for faraway places.
I felt great. I boarded the ship at London Docks and off she sailed.
   That journey took two and a half weeks. We went through the Bay of
Biscay and called in at Gibraltar. We headed down the Mediterranean by
way of Malta, Naples and Port Said. We went through the Sue] Canal and
down the Red Sea, stopping at Port Sudan, then Aden. It was tremendously
e[citing. For the first time, I  saw great sandy deserts, and Arab soldiers
mounted on camels, and palm trees with dates growing on them, and flying
fish and thousands of other marYellous things. Finally we reached
Mombasa, in Kenya.
   At  Mombasa, a man from the Shell Company came on board and told me
I must transfer to a small coastal Yessel and go on to Dar-es-Salaam, the
capital of Tanganyika (now Tan]ania). And so to Dar-es-Salaam I went,
stopping at Zan]ibar on the way.
   For the ne[t  two years, I worked for Shell in Tan]ania, with my
headTuarters in Dar-es-Salaam. It was a fantastic life. The heat was intense
but who cared? Our dress was khaki shorts, an open shirt and a topee on the

157
head. I learned to speak Swahili. I droYe up-country Yisiting diamond
mines, sisal plantations, gold mines and all the rest of it.
   There were giraffes, elephants, ]ebras, lions and antelopes all oYer the
place, and snakes as well, including the Black Mamba which is the only
snake in the world that will chase after you if it sees you. And if it catches
you and bites you, you had better start saying your prayers. I learned to
shake my mosTuito boots upside down before putting them on in case there
was a scorpion inside, and like eYeryone else, I got malaria and lay for three
days with a temperature of one hundred and fiYe point fiYe.
   In  September 199, it became obYious that there was going to be a war
with Hitler’s  Germany. Tanganyika, which only twenty years before had
been called German East Africa, was still full of Germans. They were
eYerywhere. They owned shops and mines and plantations all oYer the
country. The moment war broke out, they would haYe to be rounded up. But
we had no army to speak of in Tanganyika, only a few natiYe soldiers,
known as Askaris, and a handful of officers. So all of us ciYilian men were
made Special ReserYists. I was giYen an armband and put in charge of
twenty Askaris. My little  troop and I were ordered to block the road that led
south out of Tanganyika into neutral Portuguese East Africa. This was an
important job, for it was along that road most of the Germans would try to
escape when war was declared.
   I  took my happy gang with their rifles and one machine-gun and set up a
road-block in a place where the road passed through dense jungle, about ten
miles outside the town. We had a field telephone to headTuarters which
would tell us at once when war was declared. We settled down to wait. For
three days we waited. And during the nights, from all around us in the
jungle, came the sound of natiYe drums beating weird hypnotic rhythms.
Once, I wandered into the jungle in the dark and came across about fifty
natiYes sTuatting in a circle around a fire. One man only was beating the
drum. Some were dancing round the fire. The remainder were drinking
something out of coconut shells. They welcomed me into their circle. They
were loYely people. I could talk to them in their language. They gaYe me a

158
shell filled with a thick grey into[icating  fluid  made of fermented mai]e. It
was called, if I remember rightly, Pomba. I drank it. It was horrible.
   The ne[t  afternoon, the field telephone rang and a Yoice said, ‘We are at
war with Germany.’ Within minutes, far away in the distance, I saw a line
of cars throwing up clouds of dust, heading our way, beating it for the
neutral territory of Portuguese East Africa as fast as they could go.
   Ho ho, I thought. We are going to haYe a little battle, and I called out to
my twenty Askaris to prepare themselYes. But there was no battle. The
Germans, who were after all only ciYilian townspeople, saw our machine-
gun and our rifles and Tuickly gaYe themselYes up. Within an hour, we had
a couple of hundred of them on our hands. I felt rather sorry for them. Many
I knew personally, like Willy Hink  the watchmaker and Herman Schneider
who owned the soda-water factory. Their only crime had been that they
were German. But this was war, and in the cool of the eYening, we marched
them all back to Dar-es-Salaam where they were put into a huge camp
surrounded by barbed wire.
   The ne[t  day, I got into my old car and droYe north, heading for Nairobi,
in Kenya, to join the R.A.F. It was a rough trip and it took me four days.
Bumpy jungle roads, wide riYers where the car had to be put on to a raft and
pulled across by a ferryman hauling on a rope, long green snakes sliding
across the road in front of the car. (N.B. NeYer try to run oYer a snake
because it can be thrown up into the air and may land inside your open car.
It’s happened many times.) I slept at night in the car. I passed below the
beautiful Mount Kilimanjaro,  which had a hat of snow on its head. I droYe
through the Masai country where the men drank cows’ blood and eYery one
of them seemed to be seYen feet tall. I nearly collided with a giraffe on the
Serengeti Plain. But I came safely to Nairobi at last and reported to R.A.F.
headTuarters at the airport.
   For si[  months, they trained us in small aeroplanes called Tiger Moths,
and those days were also glorious. We skimmed all oYer Kenya in our little
Tiger Moths. We saw great herds of elephants. We saw the pink flamingoes
on Lake Nakuru. We saw eYerything there was to see in that magnificent
country. And often, before we could take off, we had to chase the ]ebras off

159
the flying-field. There were twenty of us training to be pilots out there in
Nairobi. SeYenteen of those twenty were killed during the war.
   From Nairobi,  they sent us up to IraT, to a desolate airforce base near
Baghdad to finish our training. The place was called Habbaniyih, and in the
afternoons it got so hot (10 degrees in the shade) that we were not allowed
out of our huts. We just lay on the bunks and sweated. The unlucky ones got
heat-stroke and were taken to hospital and packed in ice for seYeral days.
This either killed them or saYed them. It was a fifty-fifty chance.
   At  Habbaniyih, they taught us to fly more powerful aeroplanes with guns
in them, and we practised shooting at drogues (targets in the air pulled
behind other planes) and at objects on the ground.
   Finally,  our training was finished, and we were sent to Egypt to fight
against the Italians in the Western Desert of Libya. I joined 0 STuadron,
which flew fighters, and at first we had only ancient single-seater bi-planes
called Gloster Gladiators. The two machine-guns on a Gladiator were
mounted one on either side of the engine, and they fired their bullets,
belieYe it or not, through the propeller. The guns were somehow
synchroni]ed with the propeller shaft so that in theory the bullets missed the
whirling propeller blades. But as you might guess, this complicated
mechanism often went wrong and the poor pilot, who was trying to shoot
down the enemy, shot off his own propeller instead.
   I  myself was shot down in a Gladiator which crashed far out in the
Libyan desert between the enemy lines. The plane burst into flames, but I
managed to get out and was finally rescued and carried back to safety by
our own soldiers who crawled out across the sand under coYer of darkness.
   That crash sent me to hospital in Ale[andria for si[ months with a
fractured skull and a lot of burns. When I came out, in April 1941, my
sTuadron had been moYed to Greece to fight the Germans who were
inYading from the north. I was giYen a Hurricane and told to fly it from
Egypt to Greece and join the sTuadron. Now, a Hurricane fighter was not at
all like the old Gladiator. It had eight Browning machine-guns, four in each
wing, and all eight of them fired simultaneously when you pressed the small
button on your joy-stick. It was a magnificent plane, but it had a range of

160
only two hours’ flying-time.  The journey to Greece, non-stop, would take
nearly fiYe hours, always oYer the water. They put e[tra fuel tanks on the
wings. They said I would make it. In the end, I did. But only just. When you
are si[ feet si[ inches tall, as I am, it is no joke to be sitting crunched up in
a tiny cockpit for fiYe hours.
   In  Greece, the R.A.F. had a total of about eighteen Hurricanes. The
Germans had at least one thousand aeroplanes to operate with. We had a
hard time. We were driYen from our aerodrome outside Athens (EleYis), and
flew for a while from a small secret landing strip further west (Menidi). The
Germans soon found that one and bashed it to bits, so with the few planes
we had left, we flew off to a tiny field (Argos) right  down in the south of
Greece, where we hid our Hurricanes under the oliYe trees when we weren’t
flying.
   But this couldn’t  last long. Soon, we had only fiYe Hurricanes left, and
not many pilots still aliYe. Those fiYe planes were flown to the island of
Crete. The Germans captured Crete. Some of us escaped. I was one of the
lucky ones. I finished up back in Egypt. The sTuadron was re-formed and
re-eTuipped with Hurricanes. We were sent off to Haifa, which was then in
Palestine (now Israel), where we fought the Germans again and the Vichy
French in Lebanon and Syria.
   At  that point, my old head injuries caught up with me. SeYere headaches
compelled me to stop flying. I was inYalided back to England and sailed on
a troopship from Sue] to Durban to Capetown to Lagos to LiYerpool,
chased by German submarines in the Atlantic and bombed by long-range
Focke-Wulf aircraft eYery day for the last week of the Yoyage.
   I  had been away from home for four years. My mother, bombed out of
her own house in Kent during the Battle of Britain and now liYing in a small
thatched cottage in Buckinghamshire, was happy to see me. So were my
four sisters and my brother. I was giYen a month’s leaYe. Then suddenly I
was told I was being sent to Washington D.C. in the United States of
America as Assistant Air Attaché. This was January 1942, and one month
earlier the Japanese had bombed the American fleet in Pearl Harbor. So the
United States was now in the war as well.

161
   I  was twenty-si[ years old when I arriYed in Washington, and I still had
no thoughts of becoming a writer.
   During  the morning of my third day, I was sitting in my new office at the
British Embassy and wondering what on earth I was meant to be doing,
when there was a knock on my door. ‘Come in.’
   A  Yery small man with thick steel-rimmed spectacles shuffled shyly into
the room. ‘ForgiYe me for bothering you,’ he said.
   ‘You  aren’t bothering me at all,’ I answered. ‘I’m not doing a thing.’
   He stood before me looking Yery uncomfortable and out of place. I
thought perhaps he was going to ask for a job.
   ‘My  name,’ he said, ‘is Forester. C. S. Forester.’
   I  nearly fell out of my chair. ‘Are you joking?’  I said.
   ‘No,’  he said, smiling. ‘That’s me.’
   And  it was. It was the great writer himself, the inYentor of Captain
Hornblower and the best teller of tales about the sea since Joseph Conrad. I
asked him to take a seat.
   ‘Look,’   he said. ‘I’m too old for the war. I liYe oYer here now. The only
thing I can do to help is to write things about Britain for the American
papers and maga]ines. We need all the help America can giYe us. A
maga]ine called the Saturday Evening Post will publish any story I write. I
haYe a contract with them. And I haYe come to you because I think you
might haYe a good story to tell. I mean about flying.’
   ‘No  more than thousands of others,’ I said. ‘There are lots of pilots who
haYe shot down many more planes than me.’
   ‘That’s  not the point,’ Forester said. ‘You are now in America, and
because you haYe, as they say oYer here, “been in combat”, you are a rare
bird on this side of the Atlantic. Don’t forget they haYe only just entered the
war.’
   ‘What  do you want me to do?’ I asked.
   ‘Come and haYe lunch with me,’ he said. ‘And while we’re eating, you
can tell me all about it. Tell me your most e[citing adYenture and I’ll write
it up for the Saturday Evening Post. EYery little bit helps.’

162
   I  was thrilled. I had neYer met a famous writer before. I e[amined him
closely as he sat in my office. What astonished me was that he looked so
ordinary. There was nothing in the least unusual about him. His face, his
conYersation, his eyes behind the spectacles, eYen his clothes were all
e[ceedingly normal. And yet here was a writer of stories who was famous
the world oYer. His books had been read by millions of people. I e[pected
sparks to be shooting out of his head, or at the Yery least, he should haYe
been wearing a long green cloak and a floppy hat with a wide brim.
   But no. And it  was then I began to reali]e for the first time that there are
two distinct sides to a writer of fiction. First, there is the side he displays to
the public, that of an ordinary person like anyone else, a person who does
ordinary things and speaks an ordinary language. Second, there is the secret
side which comes out in him only after he has closed the door of his
workroom and is completely alone. It is then that he slips into another
world altogether, a world where his imagination takes oYer and he finds
himself actually living in the places he is writing about at that moment. I
myself, if you want to know, fall into a kind of trance and eYerything
around me disappears. I see only the point of my pencil moYing oYer the
paper, and Tuite often two hours go by as though they were a couple of
seconds.
   ‘Come along,’  C. S. Forester said to me. ‘Let’s go to lunch. You don’t
seem to haYe anything else to do.’
   As I  walked out of the Embassy side by side with the great man, I was
churning with e[citement. I had read all the Hornblowers and just about
eYerything else he had written. I had, and still haYe, a great loYe for books
about the sea. I had read all of Conrad and all of that other splendid sea-
writer, Captain Marryat (Mr Midshipman Easy, From PoZder Monkey to
Admiral, etc.), and now here I was about to haYe lunch with somebody who,
to my mind, was also pretty terrific.
   He took me to a small e[pensiYe French restaurant somewhere near the
Mayflower Hotel in Washington. He ordered a sumptuous lunch, then he
produced a notebook and a pencil (ballpoint pens had not been inYented in
1942) and laid them on the tablecloth. ‘Now,’ he said, ‘tell me about the

163
most e[citing or frightening or dangerous thing that happened to you when
you were flying fighter planes.’
   I  tried to get going. I started telling him about the time I was shot down
in the Western Desert and the plane had burst into flames.
   The waitress brought two plates of smoked salmon. While we tried to eat
it, I was trying to talk and Forester was trying to take notes.
   The main course was roast duck with Yegetables and potatoes and a thick
rich graYy. This was a dish that reTuired one’s full attention as well as two
hands. My narratiYe began to flounder. Forester kept putting down the
pencil and picking up the fork, and Yice Yersa. Things weren’t going well.
And apart from that, I haYe neYer been much good at telling stories aloud.
   ‘Look,’   I said. ‘If you like,  I’ll  try to write down on paper what happened
and send it to you. Then you can rewrite it properly yourself in your own
time. Wouldn’t that be easier? I could do it tonight.’
   That, though I didn’t  know it at the time, was the moment that changed
my life.
   ‘A  splendid idea,’ Forester said. ‘Then I can put this silly notebook away
and we can enjoy our lunch. Would you really mind doing that for me?’
   ‘I  don’t mind a bit,’  I said. ‘But you mustn’t e[pect it  to be any good. I’ll
just put down the facts.’
   ‘Don’t  worry,’  he said. ‘So long as the facts are there, I can write the
story. But please,’ he added, ‘let me haYe plenty of detail. That’s what
counts in our business, tiny little details, like you had a broken shoelace on
your left shoe, or a fly settled on the rim of your glass at lunch, or the man
you were talking to had a broken front tooth. Try to think back and
remember eYerything.’
   ‘I’ll   do my best,’ I said.
   He gaYe me an address where I could send the story, and then we forgot
all about it and finished our lunch at leisure. But Mr Forester was not a
great talker. He certainly couldn’t talk as well as he wrote, and although he
was kind and gentle, no sparks eYer flew out of his head and I might just as
well haYe been talking to an intelligent stockbroker or lawyer.

164
   That night, in the small house I liYed in alone in a suburb of Washington,
I sat down and wrote my story. I started at about seYen o’clock and finished
at midnight. I remember I had a glass of Portuguese brandy to keep me
going. For the first time in my life, I became totally absorbed in what I was
doing. I floated back in time and once again I was in the si]]ling hot desert
of Libya, with white  sand underfoot, climbing up into the cockpit of the old
Gladiator, strapping myself in, adjusting my helmet, starting the motor and
ta[iing  out for take-off. It was astonishing how eYerything came back to me
with absolute clarity. Writing it down on paper was not difficult. The story
seemed to be telling itself, and the hand that held the pencil moYed rapidly
back and forth across each page. Just for fun, when it was finished, I gaYe it
a title. I called it ‘A  Piece of Cake’.
   The ne[t  day, somebody in the Embassy typed it out for me and I sent it
off to Mr Forester. Then I forgot all about it.
   E[actly  two weeks later, I receiYed a reply from the great man. It said:

       Dear RD, You Zere meant to give me notes, not a finished story. I’m
   EoZled over. Your piece is marvellous. It is the Zork of a gifted Zriter.
   I  didn’t touch a Zord of it. I sent it at once under your name to my
   agent, Harold Matson, asking him to offer it to the Saturday Evening
   Post Zith  my personal recommendation. You Zill Ee happy to hear that
   the Post accepted it immediately and have paid one thousand dollars.
   Mr  Matson’s commission is ten per cent. I enclose his check for nine
   hundred dollars. It’s all  yours. As you Zill see from Mr Matson’s letter,
   Zhich  I also enclose, the Post is asking if you Zill Zrite more stories
   for  them. I do hope you Zill. Did you knoZ you Zere a Zriter? With my
   very Eest Zishes and congratulations, C. S. Forester.

‘A Piece of Cake’ is printed at the end of this book.
   Well!  I thought. My goodness me! Nine hundred dollars! And they’re
going to print it! But surely it can’t be as easy as all that?
   Oddly  enough, it was.
   The ne[t  story I wrote was fiction. I made it up. Don’t ask me why. And
Mr Matson sold that one, too. Out there in Washington in the eYenings oYer

165
the ne[t two years, I wrote eleYen short stories. All were sold to American
maga]ines, and later they were published in a little book called Over to You.
   Early on in this period, I also had a go at a story for children. It was
called ‘The Gremlins’, and this I belieYe was the first time the word had
been used. In my story, Gremlins were tiny men who liYed on R.A.F.
fighter-planes and bombers, and it was the Gremlins, not the enemy, who
were responsible for all the bullet-holes and burning engines and crashes
that took place during combat. The Gremlins had wiYes called Fifinellas,
and children called Widgets, and although the story itself was clearly the
work of an ine[perienced writer, it was bought by Walt Disney who decided
he was going to make it into a full-length animated film. But first it was
published in Cosmopolitan Magazine with Disney’s coloured illustrations
(December 1942), and from then on, news of the Gremlins spread rapidly
through the whole of the R.A.F. and the United States Air Force, and they
became something of a legend.
   Because of the Gremlins, I was giYen three weeks’ leaYe from my duties
at the Embassy in Washington and whisked out to Hollywood. There, I was
put up at Disney’s e[pense in a lu[urious BeYerly Hills hotel and giYen a
huge shiny car to driYe about in. Each day, I worked with the great Disney
at his studios in Burbank, roughing out the story-line for the forthcoming
film. I had a ball. I was still only twenty-si[.  I  attended story-conferences in
Disney’s enormous office where eYery word spoken, eYery suggestion
made, was taken down by a stenographer and typed out afterwards. I
mooched around the rooms where the gifted and obstreperous animators
worked, the men who had already created SnoZ White, DumEo, BamEi and
other marYellous films, and in those days, so long as these cra]y artists did
their work, Disney didn’t care when they turned up at the studio or how
they behaYed.
   When my time was up, I went back to Washington and left them to it.
   My  Gremlin story was published as a children’s book in New York and
London, full of Disney’s colour illustrations, and it was called of course The
*remlins.  Copies are Yery scarce now and hard to come by. I myself haYe
only one. The film, also, was neYer finished. I haYe a feeling that Disney

166
was not really Yery comfortable with this particular fantasy. Out there in
Hollywood, he was a long way away from the great war in the air that was
going on in Europe. Furthermore, it was a story about the Royal Air Force
and not about his own countrymen, and that, I think, added to his sense of
bewilderment. So in the end, he lost interest and dropped the whole idea.
   My  little Gremlin  book caused something else Tuite e[traordinary to
happen to me in those wartime Washington days. Eleanor RooseYelt read it
to her grandchildren in the White House and was apparently much taken
with it. I was inYited to dinner with her and the President. I went, shaking
with e[citement. We had a splendid time and I was inYited again. Then Mrs
RooseYelt began asking me for week-ends to Hyde Park, the President’s
country house. Up there, belieYe it or not, I spent a good deal of time alone
with Franklin RooseYelt during his rela[ing hours. I would sit with him
while he mi[ed the martinis before Sunday lunch, and he would say things
like, ‘I’Ye just had an interesting cable from Mr Churchill.’ Then he would
tell me what it said, something perhaps about new plans for the bombing of
Germany or the sinking of U-Boats, and I would do my best to appear calm
and chatty, though actually I was trembling at the reali]ation that the most
powerful man in the world was telling me these mighty secrets. Sometimes
he droYe me around the estate in his car, an old Ford I think it was, that had
been specially adapted for his paralysed legs. It had no pedals. All the
controls were worked by his hands. His secret-serYice men would lift him
out of his wheel-chair into the driYer’s seat, then he would waYe them away
and off we would go, driYing at terrific speeds along the narrow roads.
   One Sunday during lunch at Hyde Park, Franklin RooseYelt told a story
that shook the assembled guests. There were about fourteen of us sitting on
both sides of the long dining-room table, including Princess Martha of
Norway and seYeral members of the Cabinet. We were eating a rather
insipid white fish coYered with a thick grey sauce. Suddenly the President
pointed a finger at me and said, ‘We haYe an Englishman here. Let me tell
you what happened to another Englishman, a representatiYe of the King,
who was in Washington in the year 12.’ He gaYe the man’s name, but
I’Ye forgotten it. Then he went on, ‘While he was oYer here, this fellow

167
died, and the British for some reason insisted that his body be sent home to
England for burial. Now the only way to do that in those days was to pickle
it in alcohol. So the body was put into a barrel of rum. The barrel was
lashed to the mast of a schooner and the ship sailed for home. After about
four weeks at sea, the captain of the schooner noticed a most frightful
stench coming from the barrel. And in the end, the smell became so
appalling they had to cut the barrel loose and roll it oYerboard. But do you
know Zhy it stank so badly?’ the President asked, beaming at the guests
with that famous wide smile of his. ‘I will  tell you e[actly  why. Some of the
sailors had drilled a hole in the bottom of the barrel and had inserted a
bung. Then eYery night they had been helping themselYes to the rum. And
when they had drunk it all, that’s when the trouble started.’ Franklin
RooseYelt let out a great roar of laughter. SeYeral females at the table turned
Yery pale and I saw them pushing their plates of boiled white fish gently
away.
   All  the stories I wrote in those early days were fiction, e[cept for that
first one I did with C. S. Forester. Non-fiction, which means writing about
things that haYe actually taken place, doesn’t interest me. I enjoy least of all
writing about my own e[periences. And that e[plains why this story is so
lacking in detail. I could Tuite easily haYe described what it was like to be
in a dog-fight with German fighters fifteen thousand feet aboYe the
Parthenon in Athens, or the thrill of chasing a Junkers  in and out the
mountain peaks in Northern Greece, but I don’t want to do it. For me, the
pleasure of writing comes with inYenting stories.
   Apart from  the Forester story, I think I haYe only written one other non-
fiction piece in my life, and I did this only because the subject was so
enthralling I couldn’t resist it. The story is called ‘The Mildenhall
Treasure’, and it’s in this book.
   So there you are. That’s how I became a writer. Had I not been lucky
enough to meet Mr Forester, it would probably neYer haYe happened.
   Now, more than thirty years later, I’m still slogging away. To me, the
most important and difficult thing about writing fiction  is to find the plot.
Good original plots are Yery hard to come by. You neYer know when a

168
loYely idea is going to flit suddenly into your mind, but by golly, when it
does come along, you grab it with both hands and hang on to it tight. The
trick is to write it down at once, otherwise you’ll forget it. A  good plot is
like a dream. If you don’t write down your dream on paper the moment you
wake up, the chances are you’ll forget it and it’ll be gone for eYer.
   So when an idea for a story comes popping into my mind, I rush for a
pencil, a crayon, a lipstick, anything that will write, and scribble a few
words that will later remind me of the idea. Often, one word is enough. I
was once driYing alone on a country road and an idea came for a story about
someone getting stuck in an eleYator between two floors in an empty house.
I had nothing to write with in the car. So I stopped and got out. The back of
the car was coYered with dust. With one finger I wrote in the dust the single
word ELEVATOR. That was enough. As soon as I got home, I went straight to
my work-room and wrote the idea down in an old red-coYered school
e[ercise-book which is simply labelled ‘Short Stories’.
   I  haYe had this book eYer since I started trying to write seriously. There
are ninety-eight pages in the book. I’Ye counted them. And just about eYery
one of those pages is filled up on both sides with these so-called story ideas.
Many are no good. But just about eYery story and eYery children’s book I
haYe eYer written has started out as a three- or four-line note in this little,
much-worn red-coYered Yolume. For e[ample:










This became Charlie and the Chocolate Factory.

169
Fantastic Mr Fox.
















‘The Boy Who Talked with Animals.’










This became ‘Henry Sugar’.
   Sometimes, these little scribbles will stay unused in the notebook for fiYe
or eYen ten years. But the promising ones are always used in the end. And if

170
they show nothing else, they do, I think, demonstrate from what slender
threads a children’s book or a short story must ultimately be woYen. The
story builds and e[pands while you are writing it. All the best stuff comes at
the desk. But you can’t eYen start to write that story unless you haYe the
beginnings of a plot. Without my little notebook, I would be Tuite helpless.

171
                                      A  Piece    of  Cake



                                       My first story – 1942


I do not remember much of it; not beforehand anyway; not until it
happened.
   There was the landing at Fouka, where the Blenheim boys were helpful
and gaYe us tea while we were being refuelled. I remember the Tuietness of
the Blenheim boys, how they came into the mess-tent to get some tea and
sat down to drink it without saying anything; how they got up and went out
when they had finished drinking and still they did not say anything. And I
knew that each one was holding himself together because the going was not
Yery good right then. They were haYing to go out too often, and there were
no replacements coming along.
   We thanked them for the tea and went out to see if they had finished
refuelling our Gladiators. I remember that there was a wind blowing which
made the windsock stand out straight, like a signpost, and the sand was
blowing up around our legs and making a rustling noise as it swished
against the tents, and the tents flapped in the wind so that they were like
canYas men clapping their hands.
   ‘Bomber boys unhappy,’ Peter said.
   ‘Not unhappy,’ I answered.
   ‘Well, they’re browned off.’
   ‘No. They’Ye had it, that’s all. But they’ll keep going. You can see
they’re trying to keep going.’

172
   Our two old  Gladiators were standing beside each other in the sand and
the airmen in their khaki shirts and shorts seemed still to be busy with
refuelling. I was wearing a thin white cotton flying suit and Peter had on a
blue one. It wasn’t necessary to fly with anything warmer.
   Peter said, ‘How far away is it?’
   ‘Twenty-one miles beyond Charing Cross,’ I answered, ‘on the right side
of the road.’ Charing Cross was where the desert road branched north to
Mersah Matruh. The Italian army was outside Mersah, and they were doing
pretty well. It was about the only time, so far as I know, that the Italians
haYe done pretty well. Their morale goes up and down like a sensitiYe
altimeter, and right then it was at forty thousand because the A[is was on
top of the world. We hung around waiting for the refuelling to finish.
   Peter said, ‘It’s a piece of cake.’
   ‘Yes. It ought to be easy.’
   We separated and I climbed into my cockpit. I haYe always remembered
the face of the airman who helped me to strap in. He was oldish, about
forty, and bald e[cept for a neat patch of golden hair at the back of his head.
His face was all wrinkles, his eyes were like my grandmother’s eyes, and he
looked as though he had spent his life helping to strap in pilots who neYer
came back. He stood on the wing pulling my straps and said, ‘Be careful.
There isn’t any sense not being careful.’
   ‘Piece of cake,’ I said.
   ‘Like  hell.’
   ‘Really.  It isn’t anything at all. It’s a piece of cake.’
   I  don’t remember much about the ne[t bit; I only remember about later
on. I suppose we took off from Fouka and flew west towards Mersah, and I
suppose we flew at about eight hundred feet. I suppose we saw the sea to
starboard, and I suppose – no, I am certain – that it was blue and that it was
beautiful, especially where it rolled up on to the sand and made a long thick
white line east and west as far as you could see. I suppose we flew oYer
Charing Cross and flew on for twenty-one miles to where they had said it
would be, but I do not know. I know only that there was trouble, lots and
lots of trouble, and I know that we had turned and were coming back when

173
the trouble got worse. The biggest trouble of all was that I was too low to
bale out, and it is from that point on that my memory comes back to me. I
remember the dipping of the nose of the aircraft and I remember looking
down the nose of the machine at the ground and seeing a little clump of
camel-thorn growing there all by itself. I remember seeing some rocks lying
in the sand beside the camel-thorn, and the camel-thorn and the sand and
the rocks leapt out of the ground and came to me. I remember that Yery
clearly.
   Then there was a small gap of not-remembering. It might haYe been one
second or it might haYe been thirty; I do not know. I haYe an idea that it was
Yery short, a second perhaps, and ne[t I heard a crumph on the right as the
starboard wing tank caught fire, then another crumph on the left as the port
tank did the same. To me that was not significant, and for a while I sat still,
feeling comfortable, but a little drowsy. I couldn’t see with my eyes, but
that was not significant either. There was nothing to worry about. Nothing
at all. Not until I felt  the hotness around my legs. At first it was only a
warmness and that was all right too, but all at once it was a hotness, a Yery
stinging scorching hotness up and down the sides of each leg.
   I  knew that the hotness was unpleasant, but that was all I knew. I disliked
it, so I curled my legs up under the seat and waited. I think there was
something wrong with the telegraph system between the body and the brain.
It did not seem to be working Yery well. Somehow it was a bit slow in
telling the brain all about it and in asking for instructions. But I belieYe a
message eYentually got through, saying, ‘Down here there is a great
hotness. What shall we do? (Signed) Left Leg and Right Leg.’ For a long
time there was no reply. The brain was figuring the matter out.
   Then slowly, word by word, the answer was tapped oYer the wires. ‘The
– plane – is – burning. Get – out – repeat – get – out – get – out.’ The order
was relayed to the whole system, to all the muscles in the legs, arms and
body, and the muscles went to work. They tried their best; they pushed a
little and pulled a little, and they strained greatly, but it wasn’t any good. Up
went another telegram, ‘Can’t get out. Something holding us in.’ The
answer to this one took eYen longer in arriYing, so I just sat there waiting

174
for it to come, and all the time the hotness increased. Something was
holding me down and it was up to the brain to find out what it was. Was it
giants’ hands pressing on my shoulders, or heaYy stones or houses or steam
rollers or filing cabinets or graYity or was it ropes? Wait a minute. Ropes –
ropes. The message was beginning to come through. It came Yery slowly.
‘Your – straps. Undo – your – straps.’ My arms receiYed the message and
went to work. They tugged at the straps, but they wouldn’t undo. They
tugged again and again, a little feebly, but as hard as they could, and it
wasn’t any use. Back went the message, ‘How do we undo the straps?’
   This time I  think that I sat there for three or four minutes waiting for the
answer. It wasn’t any use hurrying or getting impatient. That was the one
thing of which I was sure. But what a long time it was all taking. I said
aloud, ‘Bugger it. I’m going to be burnt. I’m …’  but I was interrupted. The
answer was coming – no, it wasn’t – yes, it was, it was slowly coming
through. ‘Pull – out – the – Tuick – release – pin – you – bloody – fool –
and – hurry.’
   Out came the pin and the straps were loosed. Now, let’s get out. Let’s get
out, let’s get out. But I couldn’t do it. I simply couldn’t  lift myself out of the
cockpit. Arms and legs tried their best but it wasn’t any use. A last
desperate message was flashed upwards and this time it was marked
‘Urgent’.
   ‘Something else is holding us down,’ it said. ‘Something else, something
else, something heaYy.’
   Still  the arms and legs did not fight. They seemed to know instinctiYely
that there was no point in using up their strength. They stayed Tuiet and
waited for the answer, and oh what a time it took. Twenty, thirty, forty hot
seconds. None of them really white hot yet, no si]]ling of flesh or smell of
burning meat, but that would come any moment now, because those old
Gladiators aren’t made of stressed steel like a Hurricane or a Spit. They
haYe taut canYas wings, coYered with magnificently inflammable dope, and
underneath there are hundreds of small thin sticks, the kind you put under
the logs for kindling, only these are drier and thinner. If a cleYer man said,
‘I am going to build a big thing that will  burn better and Tuicker than

175
anything else in the world,’ and if he applied himself diligently to his task,
he would probably finish up by building something Yery like a Gladiator. I
sat still waiting.
   Then suddenly the reply, beautiful in its briefness, but at the same time
e[plaining eYerything. ‘Your – parachute – turn – the – buckle.’
   I  turned the buckle, released the parachute harness and with some effort
hoisted myself up and tumbled oYer the side of the cockpit. Something
seemed to be burning, so I rolled about a bit in the sand, then crawled away
from the fire on all fours and lay down.
   I  heard some of my machine-gun ammunition going off in the heat and I
heard some of the bullets thumping into the sand nearby. I did not worry
about them; I merely heard them.
   Things were beginning to hurt. My face hurt most. There was something
wrong with my face. Something had happened to it. Slowly I put up a hand
to feel it. It was sticky. My nose didn’t seem to be there. I tried to feel my
teeth, but I cannot remember whether I came to any conclusion about them.
I think I do]ed off.
   All  of a sudden there was Peter. I heard his Yoice and I heard him
dancing around and yelling like a madman and shaking my hand and
saying, ‘Jesus, I thought you were still inside. I came down half a mile
away and ran like hell. Are you all right?’
   I  said, ‘Peter, what has happened to my nose?’
   I  heard him striking a match in the dark. The night comes Tuickly in the
desert. There was a pause.
   ‘It  actually doesn’t seem to be there Yery much,’ he said. ‘Does it hurt?’
   ‘Don’t  be a bloody fool, of course it hurts.’
   He said he was going back to his machine to get some morphia out of his
emergency pack, but he came back again soon, saying he couldn’t find his
aircraft in the dark.
   ‘Peter,’ I  said, ‘I can’t see anything.’
   ‘It’s  night,’  he answered. ‘I can’t see either.’
   It  was cold now. It was bitter cold, and Peter lay down close alongside so
that we could both keep a little warmer. EYery now and then he would say,

176
‘I’Ye neYer seen a man without a nose before.’ I kept spewing a lot of blood
and eYery time I did it, Peter lit a match. Once he gaYe me a cigarette, but it
got wet and I didn’t want it anyway.
   I  do not know how long we stayed there and I remember only Yery little
more. I remember that I kept telling Peter that there was a tin of sore throat
tablets in my pocket, and that he should take one, otherwise he would catch
my sore throat. I remember asking him where we were and him saying,
‘We’re between the two armies,’ and then I remember English Yoices from
an English patrol asking if we were Italians. Peter said something to them; I
cannot remember what he said.
   Later I remember hot thick soup and one spoonful making me sick. And
all the time the pleasant feeling that Peter was around, being wonderful,
doing wonderful things and neYer going away. That is all that I can
remember.

The men stood beside the aeroplane painting away and talking about the
heat.
   ‘Painting  pictures on the aircraft,’ I said.
   ‘Yes,’  said Peter. ‘It’s a great idea. It’s subtle.’
   ‘Why?’  I  said. ‘Just you tell me.’
   ‘They’re  funny pictures,’ he said. ‘The German pilots will all laugh when
they see them; they’ll shake so with their laughing that they won’t be able
to shoot straight.’
   ‘Oh  baloney baloney baloney.’
   ‘No,  it’s a great idea. It’s fine. Come and haYe a look.’
   We ran towards the line of aircraft. ‘Hop, skip, jump,’ said Peter. ‘Hop
skip jump, keep in time.’
   ‘Hop  skip jump,’ I  said, ‘Hop skip jump,’ and we danced along.
   The painter on the first aeroplane had a straw hat on his head and a sad
face. He was copying the drawing out of a maga]ine, and when Peter saw it
he said, ‘Boy oh boy look at that picture,’ and he began to laugh. His laugh
began with a rumble and grew Tuickly into a belly-roar and he slapped his
thighs with his hands both at the same time and went on laughing with his

177
body doubled up and his mouth wide open and his eyes shut. His silk top
hat fell off his head on to the sand.
   ‘That’s  not funny,’ I said.
   ‘Not  funny!’  he cried. ‘What d’you mean “not funny”? Look at me. Look
at me laughing. Laughing like this I couldn’t hit anything. I couldn’t hit a
hay wagon or a house or a louse.’ And he capered about on the sand,
gurgling and shaking with laughter. Then he sei]ed me by the arm and we
danced oYer to the ne[t aeroplane. ‘Hop skip jump,’ he said. ‘Hop skip
jump.’
   There was a small man with a crumpled face writing a long story on the
fuselage with a red crayon. His straw hat was perched right on the back of
his head and his face was shiny with sweat.
   ‘Good  morning,’ he said. ‘Good morning, good morning,’ and he swept
his hat off his head in a Yery elegant way.
   Peter said, ‘Shut up,’ and bent down and began to read what the little
man had been writing. All the time Peter was spluttering and rumbling with
laughter, and as he read he began to laugh afresh. He rocked from one side
to the other and danced around on the sand slapping his thighs with his
hands and bending his body. ‘Oh my, what a story, what a story, what a
story. Look at me. Look at me laughing,’ and he hopped about on his toes,
shaking his head and chortling like a madman. Then suddenly I saw the
joke and I began to laugh with him. I laughed so much that my stomach
hurt and I fell down and rolled around on the sand and roared and roared
because it was so funny that there was nothing else I could do.
   ‘Peter, you’re marYellous,’ I shouted. ‘But can all those German pilots
read English?’
   ‘Oh  hell,’ he said. ‘Oh hell. Stop,’ he shouted. ‘Stop your work,’ and the
painters all stopped their painting and turned round slowly and looked at
Peter. They did a little caper on their toes and began to chant in unison.
‘Rubbishy things – on all the wings, on all the wings, on all the wings,’ they
chanted.
   ‘Shut up,’  said Peter. ‘We’re in a jam. We must keep calm. Where’s my
top hat?’

178
   ‘What?’  I said.
   ‘You  can speak German,’ he said. ‘You must translate for us. He will
translate for you,’ he shouted to the painters. ‘He will translate.’
   Then I saw his black top hat lying in the sand. I looked away, then I
looked around and saw it again. It was a silk opera hat and it was lying
there on its side in the sand.
   ‘You’re  mad,’ I shouted. ‘You’re madder than hell. You don’t know what
you’re doing. You’ll get us all killed. You’re  absolutely plumb cra]y, do you
know that? You’re cra]ier than hell. My God, you’re cra]y.’
   ‘Goodness, what a noise you’re making. You mustn’t shout like that; it’s
not good for you.’ This was a woman’s Yoice. ‘You’Ye made youself all
hot,’ she said, and I felt someone wiping my forehead with a handkerchief.
‘You mustn’t work yourself up like that.’
   Then she was gone and I saw only the sky, which was pale blue. There
were no clouds and all around were the German fighters. They were aboYe,
below and on eYery side and there was no way I could go; there was
nothing I could do. They took it in turns to come in to attack and they flew
their aircraft carelessly, banking and looping and dancing in the air. But I
was not frightened, because of the funny pictures on my wings. I was
confident and I thought, ‘I am going to fight a hundred of them alone and
I’ll  shoot them all down. I’ll shoot them while they are laughing; that’s
what I’ll  do.’
   Then they flew closer. The whole sky was full of them. There were so
many that I did not know which ones to watch and which ones to attack.
There were so many that they made a black curtain oYer the sky and only
here and there could I see a little of the blue showing through. But there
was enough to patch a Dutchman’s trousers, which was all that mattered. So
long as there was enough to do that, then eYerything was all right.
   Still  they flew closer. They came nearer and nearer, right up in front of
my face so that I saw only the black crosses which stood out brightly
against the colour of the Messerschmitts and against the blue of the sky; and
as I turned my head Tuickly from one side to the other I saw more aircraft
and more crosses and then I saw nothing but the arms of the crosses and the

179
blue of the sky. The arms had hands and they joined together and made a
circle and danced around my Gladiator, while the engines of the
Messerschmitts sang joyfully in a deep Yoice. They were playing Oranges
and Lemons and eYery now and then two would detach themselYes and
come out into the middle of the floor and make an attack and I knew then
that it was Oranges and Lemons. They banked and swerYed and danced
upon their toes and they leant against the air first to one side, then to the
other. ‘Oranges and Lemons said the bells of St Clement’s,’ sang the
engines.
   But I  was still confident. I could dance better than they and I had a better
partner. She was the most beautiful girl in the world. I looked down and
saw the curYe of her neck and the gentle slope of her pale shoulders and I
saw her slender arms, eager and out-stretched.
   Suddenly I saw some bullet holes in my starboard wing and I got angry
and scared both at the same time; but mostly I got angry. Then I got
confident and I said, ‘The German who did that had no sense of humour.
There’s always one man in a party who has no sense of humour. But there’s
nothing to worry about; there’s nothing at all to worry about.’
   Then I saw more bullet holes and I got scared. I slid back the hood of the
cockpit and stood up and shouted, ‘You fools, look at the funny pictures.
Look at the one on my tail; look at the story on my fuselage. Please look at
the story on my fuselage.’
   But they kept on coming. They tripped into the middle of the floor in
twos, shooting at me as they came. And the engines of the Messerschmitts
sang loudly. ‘When will you pay me? said the bells of Old Bailey,’ sang the
engines, and as they sang the black crosses danced and swayed to the
rhythm of the music. There were more holes in my wings, in the engine
cowling and in the cockpit.
   Then suddenly there were some in my body.
   But there was no pain, eYen when I went into a spin, when the wings of
my plane went flip, flip, flip,  faster and faster, when the blue sky and the
black sea chased each other round and round until there was no longer any
sky or sea but just the flashing of the sun as I turned. But the black crosses

180
were following me down, still dancing and still holding hands and I could
still hear the singing of their engines. ‘Here comes a candle to light you to
bed, here comes a chopper to chop off your head,’ sang the engines.
   Still  the wings went flip, flip,  flip, flip,  and there was neither sky nor sea
around me, but only the sun.
   Then there was only the sea. I could see it below me and I could see the
white horses, and I said to myself, ‘Those are white horses riding a rough
sea.’ I knew then that my brain was going well because of the white horses
and because of the sea. I knew that there was not much time because the sea
and the white horses were nearer, the white horses were bigger and the sea
was like a sea and like water, not like a smooth place. Then there was only
one white horse, rushing forward madly with his bit in his teeth, foaming at
the mouth, scattering the spray with his hooYes and arching his neck as he
ran. He galloped on madly oYer the sea, riderless and uncontrollable, and I
could tell that we were going to crash.
   After  that it was warmer, and there were no black crosses and there was
no sky. But it was only warm because it was not hot and it was not cold. I
was sitting in a great red chair made of YelYet and it was eYening. There
was a wind blowing from behind.
   ‘Where am I?’  I said.
   ‘You  are missing. You are missing, belieYed killed.’
   ‘Then  I must tell my mother.’
   ‘You  can’t. You can’t use that phone.’
   ‘Why  not?’
   ‘It  goes only to God.’
   ‘What  did you say I was?’
   ‘Missing,  belieYed killed.’
   ‘That’s  not true. It’s a lie. It’s a lousy lie because here I am and I’m not
missing. You’re just trying to frighten me and you won’t succeed. You
won’t succeed, I tell you, because I know it’s a lie and I’m going back to
my sTuadron. You can’t stop me because I’ll just go. I’m going, you see,
I’m going.’
   I  got up from the red chair and began to run.

181
   ‘Let  me see those X-rays again, nurse.’
   ‘They’re  here, doctor.’ This was the woman’s Yoice again, and now it
came closer. ‘You haYe been making a noise tonight, haYen’t you? Let me
straighten your pillow for you, you’re pushing it on to the floor.’ The Yoice
was close and it was Yery soft and nice.
   ‘Am  I missing?’
   ‘No,  of course not. You’re fine.’
   ‘They  said I was missing.’
   ‘Don’t  be silly;  you’re fine.’
   Oh eYeryone’s silly, silly, silly, but it was a loYely day, and I did not want
to run but I couldn’t stop. I kept on running across the grass and I couldn’t
stop because my legs were carrying me and I had no control oYer them. It
was as if they did not belong to me, although when I looked down I saw
that they were mine, that the shoes on the feet were mine and that the legs
were joined to my body. But they would not do what I wanted; they just
went on running across the field and I had to go with them. I ran and ran
and ran, and although in some places the field was rough and bumpy, I
neYer stumbled. I ran past trees and hedges and in one field there were some
sheep which stopped their eating and scampered off as I ran past them.
Once I saw my mother in a pale grey dress bending down picking
mushrooms, and as I ran past she looked up and said, ‘My basket’s nearly
full; shall we go home soon?’ but my legs wouldn’t stop and I had to go on.
   Then I saw the cliff ahead and I saw how dark it was beyond the cliff.
There was this great cliff and beyond it there was nothing but darkness,
although the sun was shining in the field where I was running. The light of
the sun stopped dead at the edge of the cliff and there was only darkness
beyond. ‘That must be where the night begins,’ I thought, and once more I
tried to stop but it was not any good. My legs began to go faster towards the
cliff and they began to take longer strides, and I reached down with my
hand and tried to stop them by clutching the cloth of my trousers, but it did
not work; then I tried to fall down. But my legs were nimble, and each time
I threw myself I landed on my toes and went on running.

182
   Now  the cliff and the darkness were much nearer and I could see that
unless I stopped Tuickly I should go oYer the edge. Once more I tried to
throw myself to the ground and once more I landed on my toes and went on
running.
   I  was going fast as I came to the edge and I went straight on oYer it into
the darkness and began to fall.
   At  first it was not Tuite dark. I could see little trees growing out of the
face of the cliff, and I grabbed at them with my hands as I went down.
SeYeral times I managed to catch hold of a branch, but it always broke off at
once because I was so heaYy and because I was falling so fast, and once I
caught a thick branch with both hands and the tree leaned forward and I
heard the snapping of the roots one by one until it came away from the cliff
and I went on falling. Then it became darker because the sun and the day
were in the fields far away at the top of the cliff, and as I fell I kept my eyes
open and watched the darkness turn from grey-black to black, from black to
jet black and from jet black to pure liTuid blackness which I could touch
with my hands but which I could not see. But I went on falling, and it was
so black that there was nothing anywhere and it was not any use doing
anything or caring or thinking because of the blackness and because of the
falling. It was not any use.
   ‘You’re  better this morning. You’re much better.’ It was the woman’s
Yoice again.
   ‘Hallo.’
   ‘Hallo;  we thought you were neYer going to get conscious.’
   ‘Where am I?’
   ‘In  Ale[andria;  in hospital.’
   ‘How  long haYe I been here?’
   ‘Four  days.’
   ‘What  time is it?’
   ‘SeYen o’clock in the morning.’
   ‘Why  can’t I see?’
   I  heard her walking a little closer.
   ‘Oh,  we’Ye just put a bandage around your eyes for a bit.’

183
   ‘How  long for?’
   ‘Just for a while. Don’t  worry. You’re fine. You were Yery lucky, you
know.’
   I  was feeling my face with my fingers but I couldn’t feel it; I could only
feel something else.
   ‘What’s  wrong with my face?’
   I  heard her coming up to the side of my bed and I felt her hand touching
my shoulder.
   ‘You  mustn’t talk any more. You’re not allowed to talk. It’s bad for you.
Just lie still and don’t worry. You’re fine.’
   I  heard the sound of her footsteps as she walked across the floor and I
heard her open the door and shut it again.
   ‘Nurse,’  I said. ‘Nurse.’
   But she was gone.

184
PENGUIN  BOOKS

Published by the Penguin Group
Penguin Books Ltd,  0 Strand, London  WC2R 0RL, England
Penguin Group (USA)  Inc.,  Hudson Street, New York, New Y ork 10014, USA
Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton  AYenue East, Suite 00, Toronto, Ontario, Canada  M4P 2Y (a
diYision of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.)
Penguin Ireland, 2 St Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2, Ireland  (a diYision of Penguin Books  Ltd) 

Penguin Group (Australia),  20 Camberwell Road, Camberwell,  Victoria  124, Australia (a diYision 

of Pearson Australia Group Pty  Ltd)
Penguin Books India PYt Ltd,  11 Community  Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi – 1 10 01, India
Penguin Group (NZ),  6 Apollo DriYe,  Rosedale, Auckland 062, New Zealand (a diYision  of 

Pearson New Zealand Ltd)
Penguin Books (South Africa)  (Pty)  Ltd,  24 Sturdee A Yenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South
Africa

Penguin Books Ltd,  Registered Offices: 0 Strand, London WC2R  0RL,  England

www.penguin.com

First published by  Jonathan Cape 19
Published in Peacock Books 19 

Published in Puffin  Books 192 

First published in  Penguin Books 192 

Reissued in this edition 2011 

Copyright  © Roald Dahl  Nominee Ltd,  19

CoYer credit: CoYer design: gray1

All  rights reserYed

Earlier Yersions of ‘The  Mildenhall  Treasure’ and ‘A  Piece of Cake’  were first  published in the
Saturday Evening Post

Typeset by Palimpsest Book Production  Limited,  Falkirk,  Stirlingshire

E[cept  in the United States of America,  this book  is sold subject to the condition  that it shall  not, by
way of trade or otherwise,  be lent, re-sold, hired out,  or otherwise circulated  without  the publisher’s
prior consent in any form  of binding  or coYer other than that in which  it  is published and without  a
similar condition  including  this  condition being  imposed on the subseTuent purchaser

ISBN: 9–0–241–9620–9

