2
      This	document	was	generated	by	ABC	Amber	LIT	Converter	program

	

Tricks

CHAPTER	        1

The	pair	of	them	came	down	the	street	streaming	blood.

No	one	paid	any	attention	to	them.

This	was	the	city.

The	taller	of	the	two	wore	a	blood-stained	blue	bathrobe.	Blood	appeared
to	be	oozing	from	a	half-dozen	crosshatched	wounds	on	his	face.	His
hands	were	covered	with	blood.	The	striped	pajama	bottoms	that	showed
beneath	the	hem	of	the	robe	were	splattered	with	blood	that	seemed	to
have	dripped	from	an	open	wound	in	his	belly,	where	a	dagger	was
plunged	to	the	hilt.

The	shorter	person,	a	girl	mdash;although	it	was	difficult	 to	tell	from	the
contorted	mask	of	her	face	mdash;wore	only	a	paisley-patterned
nightgown	and	high-heeled,	pink	pom-pommed	bedroom	slippers.	Her
garments	screamed	blood	to	the	unusually	mild	October	night.	An	ice
pick	was	stuck	to	her	chest,	the	handle	smeared	with	blood.	Blood	was
matted	in	her	long	stringy	hair,	bright	 red	blood	stained	her	naked
legs,her	ankles,	and	the	backs	of	her	hands,	and	her	narrow	chest	where
it	showed	above	the	top	of	the	yoke-necked	nightgown.

She	couldn't	have	been	older	than	twelve.

The	boy	with	her	was	perhaps	the	same	age.

They	were	both	carrying	shopping	bags	that	seemed	stained	with	blood
as	fresh	as	that	of	their	wounds.	There	could	have	been	something
recently	severed	from	a	human	body	inside	each	of	those	bags.	A	hand
perhaps.	Or	a	head.	Or	perhaps	the	bags	had	become	blood-soaked	only
from	proximity	 to	their	 own	bodies.

They	came	running	up	the	street	as	though	propelled	by	the	urgency	of

3
their	wounds.

"Let's	 try	here,"	 the	boy	said.

Several	teeth	appeared	to	be	missing	from	his	mouth.	The	black	gaps
were	visible	when	he	spoke.	A	thin	line	of	red	painted	a	trail	from	his
lower	lip	to	his	chin.	The	flesh	around	his	right	eye	was	discolored	red
and	black	and	blue	and	purple.	He	looked	as	if	someone	had	beaten	him
severely	before	plunging	the	dagger	into	his	belly.

"This	one?"	the	girl	 asked.

They	stopped	before	a	street-level	door.

They	knocked	frantically	on	the	door.

It	opened.

"Trick	 or	treat!"	 they	shouted	in	unison.

It	was	4:10	p.m.	on	Halloween	night.

The	four-to-midnight	 shift	at	the	87th	Precinct	was	only	ten	minutes	old.

"Halloween	ain't	 what	it	used	to	be,"	Andy	Parker	 said.

He	was	sitting	behind	his	desk	in	the	squadroom,	his	feet	up	on	the	desk,
his	chair	tilted	dangerously,	as	if	burdened	by	the	weight	of	the	shoulder
holster	slung	over	its	back.	He	was	wearing	rumpled	trousers,	an
unpressed	sports	jacket,	unshined	black	shoes,	dingy	white	socks,	and	a
wash-and-wear	shirt	with	food	stains	on	it.	He	had	got	his	haircut	at	a
barber's	college	on	the	Stem.	There	was	a	three-day-old	beard	stubble	on
his	face.	He	was	talking	to	Hawes	and	Brown,	but	they	were	not	listening
to	him.	That	didn't	 stop	Parker.

"What	 it	is,	Devil's	Night	steals	from	it,"	 he	said,	and	nodded	in
agreement	with	his	observation.

At	their	own	desks,	the	other	detectives	kept	typing.

"Years	ago,"	Parker	said,	"tonightwas	when	the	kids	raised	hell.
Nowadays,	you	got	church	dances,	you	got	socials	at	the	Y,	you	got	all

4
kinds	of	shit	to	keep	the	kids	out	of	trouble.	So	the	kids	figure	Okay,	they
want	us	to	be	good	on	Halloween,	so	we'll	pick	another	night	to	behave
like	little	bastards.	So	they	invented	Devil's	Night,	which	was	last	night,
when	we	got	all	the	windows	busted	and	the	eggs	thrown."

Across	the	room,	the	typewriters	kept	clacking.

"You	guys	writing	 books	or	what?"	Parker	asked.

No	one	answered	him.

"I'm	 gonna	write	a	book	one	of	these	days,"	Parker	said.	"Lots	of	cops
write	books,	they	make	a	fortune.	I	had	plenty	experience,	I	could	prolly
write	a	terrific	 book."

Hawes	looked	up	for	a	moment,	and	then	scratched	at	his	back.	He	was
sunburned	and	peeling.	He	had	returned	only	Monday	morning	from	a
week's	vacation	in	Bermuda,	but	his	skin	was	still	the	color	of	his	hair.
Big	red-headed	man	with	a	white	streak	in	the	hair	over	the	left	temple,
where	he'd	once	been	slashed.	He	had	not	yet	told	Annie	Rawles	that	he'd
spent	some	very	pleasant	hours	with	a	girl	he'd	met	down	there	on	the
pink	sands.

"This	guy	Wamburger	 in	L.A.,	he	used	to	be	a	cop,"	Parker	said,	"I
think	with	 Hollywood	Division.	He	writes	these	big	bestsellers,	don't	he?
This	other	guy,	Kornitch,	he	writes	them,	too,	he	used	to	be	a	cop	in	New
York.	Ain't	 nobody	who	didn't	used	to	be	a	cop	can	write	books	sound
real	about	cops.	One	of	these	days,	I'm	gonna	write	a	big	fuckin'	best-
seller,	I'll	go	live	on	a	yacht	in	the	south	of	France.	Get	these	naked
broads	diving	off	the	boat	while	I	sit	there	doing	nothing."

"Like	 now,"	Brown	 said.

"Yeah,	bullshit,	I	already	finished	my	 work,"	 Parker	said.	"This	 shift's
been	too	fuckin'	quiet.	Whose	idea	was	it	to	put	on	extra	men,	anyway?"

"The	lieutenant's."

"So	what's	the	use	of	seven	guys	when	nothin's	happening?	Who's	on,
anyway?	And	where	the	fuck	are	they?"

"Cruising,"	 Hawes	said.	"Out	 there	looking	for	trouble."

5
He	was	thinking	he	himself	would	be	looking	for	trouble	if	 he	told	Annie
what	had	happened	in	Bermuda,	even	though	his	arrangement	with	her
was	a	loose	one.	Separate	apartments,	occasional	conjugal	visits,	like	they
gave	prisoners	down	in	Mexico.	Anyway,	he'dasked	Annie	to	come	with
him	to	Bermuda,	hadn't	he?	Annie	said	her	vacation	wasn't	till	February.
He	asked	her	to	change	her	vacation.	She	said	she	had	to	be	in	court	all
that	week.	She	also	said	she	hated	Bermuda.	He	went	down	alone.	Met
this	girl	who	practiced	law	in	 Atlanta.	She'd	taught	him	some	legal	tricks.

"It's	 so	quiet,	you	could	hear	a	pin	drop,"	Parker	said.	"I	 coulda	been
home	sleeping."

"Instead	of	sleeping	here,"	Brown	said,	and	went	to	the	water	cooler.	He
was	a	hefty,	muscular	black	man,	standing	some	six-feet	four-inches	tall
and	weighing	two	hundred	and	twenty	pounds.	There	was	a	glowering
look	on	his	face	as	he	pulled	a	paper	cup	from	the	holder	and	then
stabbed	at	the	faucet	button.	He	always	looked	glowering,	even	when	he
was	smiling.	Brown	could	get	an	armed	robber	to	drop	his	piece	just	by
glowering	at	him.

"Who's	sleeping?"	Parker	 said.	"I'm	 resting,	is	all.	I	already	finished	my
work."

"Then	why	don't	 you	start	writing	 your	book?"	 Hawes	said.

"You	could	write	all	 about	how	Halloween	ain't	what	it	used	to	be,"
Brown	said,	crumpling	the	paper	cup	and	going	back	to	his	desk.

"It	 ain't,"	 Parker	 agreed.

"You	could	write	about	it's	 so	quiet	on	Halloween,	your	hero	has	nothing
to	do,"	Hawes	said.

"That's	 the	truth,"	 Parker	said.	"This	 phone	ain't	rung	once	since	I	come
in."

He	looked	at	the	phone.

It	did	not	ring.

"I'll	 bet	that	 bothers	you	a	lot,"	Brown	said.	"The	 phone	not	ringing."

6
"Nothing	to	do,"	Hawes	said.

"No	ax	murders	out	there,"	Brown	said.

"I	had	an	ax	murder	once,"	Parker	said,	"I	could	maybe	write	about
that."

"It's	been	done,"	Hawes	said.

"Be	a	big	fuckin'	best-seller."

"I	don't	think	it	was."

"	'Cause	maybe	a	cop	didn't	write	it.	You	got	to	be	a	cop	to	write	best-
sellers	about	cops."

"You	got	to	be	an	ax	murderer	to	write	best-sellers	about	ax	murders,"
Brown	said.

"Sure,"	Parker	said,	and	looked	at	the	phone	again.

"You	got	nothing	to	do,"	Hawes	said,	"whyn't	you	go	down	the	hall	and
shave?"

"I'm	working	on	my	Miami	Vice	look,"	Parker	said.

"You	look	like	a	bum,"	Brown	said.

"Iam	a	bum,"	Parker	said.

"You	got	to	be	a	bum	to	write	best-sellers	about	bums,"	Brown	said.

"Tell	that	to	Kennedy,"	Hawes	said.

"Teddy?	I	didn't	know	he	wrote	books,"	Parker	said.	"What	does	he
write	about?	Senators?"

"Go	shave,"	Hawes	said.

"Or	go	write	a	book	about	a	barber,"	Brown	suggested.

7
"I	ain't	a	barber,"	Parker	said.

He	looked	at	the	phone	again.

"You	ever	see	it	this	quiet?"	he	asked.

"I	never	evenheard	it	this	quiet,"	Brown	said.

"Me,	neither,"	Parker	said.	"It's	like	a	paid	vacation."

"Like	always,"	Brown	said.

"I	once	had	a	lady	choked	to	death	on	a	dildo,"	Parker	said.	"Maybe	I
could	write	about	that.	I	had	a	lot	of	cases	I	could	write	about."

"Maybe	you	could	write	about	the	case	you're	working	now,"	Brown
said.

"I	ain't	working	nothing	right	now."

"No	kidding?"

"I	finished	all	my	work.	Everything	wrapped	up	till	the	phone	rings."

"Maybe	the	phone's	out	of	order,"	Hawes	said.

"You	think	so?"	Parker	said,	but	he	made	no	move	to	lift	the	receiver
and	listen	for	a	dial	tone.

"Or	maybe	none	of	the	bad	guys	are	doing	anything	out	there,"	Brown
said.

"Maybe	all	the	bad	guys	went	south	for	the	winter,"	Hawes	said,	and
thought	again	about	Bermuda,	and	wondered	if	he	should	come	clean
with	Annie.

"Fat	chance,"	Parker	said.	"This	weather?	I	never	seen	an	October	like
this	in	my	entire	life.	I	once	had	a	case,	this	guy	strangled	his	wife	with
the	telephone	cord.	I'll	bet	I	could	write	about	that."

"I'll	 bet	you	could."

8
"Hit	her	with	the	phone	first,	knocked	her	cold.	Then	strangled	her	with
the	cord."

"You	could	call	itLong	Distance	,"	Brown	said.

"No,	he	was	standing	close	to	her	when	he	done	it."

"Then	how	aboutLocal	Call	?"

"What's	wrong	withSorry,	Wrong	Number	?"	Parker	asked.

"Nothing,"	Hawes	said.	"That's	a	terrific	title."

"Or	I	could	write	about	this	guy	got	drowned	in	the	bathtub.	His	wife
drowned	him	in	the	bathtub.	That	was	a	good	case."

"You	could	call	itGlub	,"	Brown	said.

"Glubain't	a	best-selling	title,"	Parker	said.	"Also,	she	cut	off	his	cock.
The	water	was	all	red	with	his	blood."

"Why'd	she	do	that?"	Brown	asked,	truly	interested	now.

"He	was	fuckin'	around	with	some	other	broad,"	Parker	said.	"You
shoulda	seen	the	guy,	he	was	a	tiny	little	runt.	His	wife	came	in	while	he
was	taking	a	bath,	she	shoved	him	under	the	water,	good-bye,	Charlie.
Then	she	cuts	off	his	cock	with	his	own	straight	razor,	throws	it	out	the
window."

"The	razor?"

"No,	the	cock.	Hit	an	old	lady	walking	by	in	the	street.	Hit	her	right	on
top	of	the	head,	knocked	this	plastic	flower	off	her	hat.	She	bends	down
to	pick	up	the	flower,	she	sees	the	cock	laying	on	the	sidewalk.	Right
away	she	wonders	who	she	can	sue.	She	picks	it	up,	runs	to	her	lawyer
with	it.	Goes	running	down	the	street	with	this	cock	in	her	fist,	in	this	city
nobody	even	blinked."

"Carella	and	I	once	worked	a	case,"	Hawes	said,	"where	this	guy	cut	off
another	guy's	hands."

"Why'd	he	do	that?"

9
"Same	reason.	Love."

"That'slove	?"

"Love	or	money,"	Hawes	said,	and	shrugged.	"The	only	two	reasons
there	are."

"Plus	your	lunatics,"	 Brown	said.

"Well,	that's	 a	whole	'nother	ball	game,"	Parker	said.	"Your	 lunatics.	I
once	had	a	lunatic,	he	killed	four	priests	before	we	caught	up	with	him.
We	ast	him	why	he	was	killing	priests.	He	told	us	his	father	was	a	priest.
How	could	that	be,	his	father	a	priest?"

"Maybe	his	mother	was	a	nun,"	Brown	 said.

"No,	his	mother	was	a	registered	nurse.	Fifty	years	old,	but	gorgeous.
Peaches	Muldoon,	her	name	was.	Her	square	handle,	I	mean	it,	she	was
from	Tennessee.	Told	me	her	son	was	nuts	for	sure,	and	she	was	glad	I
nailed	him.	Peaches	Muldoon.	A	redhead.	A	real	racehorse."

"Who'dshe	say	the	father	was?"

"Her	brother,"	 Parker	 said.

"Nice	case,"	Hawes	said.

"Yeah.	Maybe	I	oughta	write	about	that	 one."

"You're	not	a	priest."

"Sometimes	Ifeel	like	a	priest,"	Parker	 said.	"You	know	the	last	time	I
got	laid?	Don't	ask."

"Maybe	you	oughta	go	look	up	Peaches,"	Brown	suggested.

"She's	prolly	dead	by	now,"	Parker	 said,	giving	the	idea	serious
consideration.	"This	was	maybe	ten	years	ago,	this	case."

"She'd	be	sixty	by	now,"	Hawes	said.

10
"If	she	ain't	dead,	yeah.	But	sixty	ain't	old,	you	know.	I	laid	a	lot	of	sixty-
year-old	broads.	They	have	lots	of	experience,	they	know	what	they're
doing."

He	looked	at	the	phone	again.

"Maybe	Iwill	go	shave,"	he	said.

The	two	women	knew	each	other	well.

Annie	Rawles	was	a	Detective/First	working	out	of	the	Rape	Squad.

Eileen	Burke	was	a	Detective/Second	who	worked	out	of	Special	Forces.

They	were	in	Annie's	office	discussing	murder.

The	clock	on	the	wall	read	4:30	p.m.

"Why'd	they	dragyou	in?"	Eileen	asked.

"My	experience	with	decoys,"	Annie	said.	"I	guess	Homicide's	getting
desperate."

"Who	caught	the	squeals?"

"Guy	named	Alvarez	at	the	Seven-Two."

"In	Calm's	Point?"

"Yes."

"All	three?"

"All	three."

"Same	area	of	the	precinct?"

"The	Canal	Zone,	down	by	the	docks.	You'd	think	you	were	in	Houston."

"I've	never	been	to	Houston."

"Don't	go."

11
Eileen	smiled.

She	was	five-feet	nine-inches	tall,	with	long	legs,	good	breasts,	flaring
hips,	flaming	red	hair,	and	green	eyes.	There	was	no	longer	a	scar	on	her
left	cheek.	Plastic	surgery	had	taken	care	of	that.	But	Annie	wondered	if
there	were	still	internal	scars.

"You	don't	have	to	take	this	one,"	she	said.	"I	know	it's	 short	notice."

"Well,	tell	 me	some	more,"	Eileen	said.

"Or	 it	can	wait	tillnext	 Friday.	Shit,	Homicide	only	called	me	an	hour
ago.	Told	me	Alvarez	wasn't	making	any	headway,	maybe	the	spic	needed
a	helping	hand.	Homicide's	words,	not	mine."

"Good	old	Homicide,"	 Eileen	said,	and	shook	her	head	knowingly.

She	wondered	if	Annie	had	doubts	about	her	handling	this	one.	She
hadn't	handled	a	really	difficult	 one	since	the	accident.	Calling	it	an
"accident"	 made	it	easier	to	think	about.	An	accident	was	something	that
could	happen	to	anyone.	Something	that	needn't	necessarily	happen
again.	An	accident	wasn't	a	rapist	slashing	open	your	left	cheek	and	then
taking	you	by	force.

Annie	was	watching	her.

Eyes	the	color	of	loam	behind	glasses	that	gave	her	a	scholarly	look,
black	hair	cut	in	a	wedge,	firm	cupcake	breasts	on	a	slender	body.	About
the	same	age	as	Eileen,	a	bit	shorter.	As	hard	and	as	brilliant	as	a
diamond.	Annie	used	to	work	out	of	Robbery,	where	she'd	blown	away
two	guys	holding	up	a	midtown	bank.	Blew	them	out	of	the	air.	If	she
hadn't	been	frightened	by	two	seasoned	hoods	facing	a	max	of	twenty,
would	she	have	any	sympathy	for	a	decoy	cop	running	scared?

Well,	I've	been	on	the	job,	Eileen	thought,	I'mnot	running	scared.

But	she	was.

"When	was	the	first	one?"	she	asked.

"The	tenth.	A	Friday	 night,	full	 moon.	Alvarez	thought	maybe	a	loonie.

12
Then	the	second	one	turned	up	a	week	later,	the	seventeenth.	And
another	one	last	Friday	night."

"Always	Friday	 night,	huh?"

"So	far."

"So	tonight's	Friday,	so	Homicide	wants	a	decoy."

"So	does	Alvarez.	I	spoke	to	him	right	after	I	got	the	call.	He	sounds
smart	as	hell,	but	so	far	he	hasn't	got	a	place	to	hang	his	hat."

"What's	 his	thinking	on	it?"

"You	don't	know	 the	Zone,	huh?"

"No."

"Then	you	missed	what	I	was	saying	about	Houston."

"I	 guess	so."

"There's	an	area	bordering	the	Ship	Canal	down	there,	it's	infested	with
hookers	and	dope.	Sleaziest	dives	I've	ever	seen	in	my	life.	The	docks	on
the	Calm's	Point	Canal	run	a	close	second."

"Are	they	hookers	then?	The	victims?"

"Yes.	Hookers."

"All	 three?"

"One	of	them	only	sixteen	years	old."

Eileen	nodded.

"What'd	 he	use?"	she	asked.

Annie	hesitated.

"A	knife,"	 she	said.

13
And	suddenly	it	all	played	back	again	in	Eileen's	head	hellip;

Her	hand	going	for	the	Browning	.380	automatic	tucked	into	her	boot,
Don't	force	me	to	cut	you,the	pistol	coming	free	of	its	holster,	moving	into
firing	position	mdash;and	he	slashed	her	face.	Sudden	fire	blazed	a	trail
across	her	cheek.	She	dropped	the	gun	at	once.	Good	girl,he	said.	And
slashed	her	pantyhose	and	the	panties	underneath	hellip;>

And	hellip;

And	thrust	the	cold	flat	side	of	the	knife	against	her	hellip;	against	her
hellip;

"Want	me	to	cut	you	here,	too?"

She	shook	her	head.

No,	please,	she	thought.

And	mumbled	the	words	incoherently,	No,	please,	and	said	them	aloud	at
last,	"No,	please.	Please.	Don't	hellip;	cut	me	again.	Please>."

"Want	me	to	fuck	you	instead?"

"Don't	 cut	me	again."

Annie	was	watching	her	intently.

"Slit	 their	throats	with	 a	knife,"	she	said.

Eileen	was	covered	with	cold	sweat.

"So	hellip;	I	 hellip;	I	 guess	they	want	me	to	play	hooker,	is	that	it?"	she
said.

"That's	 it."

"New	girl	 in	town,	huh?"

"You've	got	it."

"Cruising?	 Or	have	they	set	up	hellip;	?"

14
"They're	planting	you	in	a	place	called	Larry's	Bar.	On	Fairview	and
East	Fourth."

Eileen	nodded.

"Tonight,	huh?"

"Starting	around	eight."

"That's	early,	isn't	it?"

"They	want	to	give	him	enough	rope."

"Where	do	I	check	in?"

"The	Seven-Two.	You	can	change	there."

"Into	what?	The	hookers	today	look	like	college	girls."

"Not	the	ones	working	the	Canal	Zone."

Eileen	nodded	again.

"Has	Alvarez	picked	my	backups?"

"One.	A	big	beefy	guy	named	hellip;"

"I	want	at	least	two,"	Eileen	said.

"I'm	your	other	one,"	Annie	said.

Eileen	looked	at	her.

"If	you	want	me."

Eileen	said	nothing.

"I'm	not	afraid	of	using	the	piece,"	Annie	said.

"I	know	you're	not."

15
"But	if	you'd	feel	better	with	another	man	hellip;"

"Nothing's	going	to	make	me	feel	better,"	Eileen	said.	"I'm	scared
shitless.	You	could	back	me	with	the	Russian	army,	and	I'd	still	be
scared."

"Then	don't	do	it,"	Annie	said.

"Then	when	do	I	stop	being	scared?"	Eileen	asked.

The	room	went	silent.

"Homicide	asked	me	to	get	the	best	decoy	I	knew,"	Annie	said	softly.	"I
picked	you."

"Thanks	a	lot,"	Eileen	said.

But	she	smiled.

"Youare	,	you	know."

"Iwas	."

"Are,"	Annie	said.

"Sweet	talker,"	Eileen	said.

And	smiled	again.

"So	hellip;	it's	up	to	you,"	Annie	said,	and	looked	up	at	the	clock.	"But
you've	got	to	let	me	know	right	away.	They	want	everything	in	place	by
eight	tonight."

"Who's	this	big	beefy	guy?"

"His	name's	Shanahan.	Irish	as	Paddy's	underwear,	six-feet	tall,	weighs
at	least	two	hundred	pounds.	I	wouldn't	want	to	meet	him	in	a	dark	alley,
believe	me."

"Iwould	,"	Eileen	said.	"I'd	like	an	hour	with	him	before	I	hit	the	street.
Can	he	be	in	the	squadroom	by	seven?"

16
"You'll	 do	it	then?"

"Only	 'cause	you're	the	other	backup,"	Eileen	said,	and	smiled	again.

But	she	was	trembling	inside.

"This	guy	who	killed	 them,"	she	said.	"Do	they	have	any	idea	what	he
looks	like?"

"Alvarez	says	he's	got	some	statements	that	seem	to	jibe.	But	who	knows
what	he'll	look	like	tonight?	 If	he	comes	in	at	all."

"Terrific,"	  Eileen	said.

"One	thing	for	 sure,	though."

"Yeah?"

"He's	passing	himself	off	as	a	trick."

The	saw	ripped	through	wood,	ripped	through	flesh	and	bone	along	the
middle	of	the	wooden	box	and	the	middle	of	the	woman.	Blood	gushed
from	the	track	the	saw	made,	following	the	sharp	teeth.	The	saw	itself
was	bloody	when	at	last	he	withdrew	it	from	box	and	woman.	He	looked
up	at	the	wall	clock.	5:05	p.m.	He	nodded	in	grim	satisfaction.

And	lifted	the	lids	on	both	sides	of	the	box.

And	the	woman	stepped	out	in	one	piece,	grinning,	and	held	her	arms
over	her	head,	and	the	audience	began	to	applaud	and	cheer.

"Thank	 you,	thank	you	very	much,"	 the	man	said,	bowing.

The	audience	was	composed	mostly	of	boys	and	girls	between	the	ages	of
thirteen	and	eighteen	because	the	performance	was	being	held	at	the	high
school	on	North	Eleventh.	The	principal	of	the	school,	Mr.	Ellington,
beamed	contentedly.	Hiring	the	magician	had	been	his	idea.	A	way	to
keep	these	restless	teenagers	happy	and	occupied	for	an	hour	or	so	before
they	hit	the	streets.	He	would	make	a	little	speech	after	the	performance
was	over,	which	should	be	any	minute	now.	He	would	tell	them	all	to	go
home	and	have	a	good	dinner	and	then	put	on	their	costumes	and	go	out
for	a	safe	and	sane	Halloween	in	the	secure	knowledge	that	among	the

17
rights	granted	in	a	democracy	was	freedom	of	assembly	mdash;like	the
assembly	they'd	had	this	evening	mdash;and	also	freedom	of	assembly	in
the	streets,	butnot	the	freedom	to	perform	malicious	mischief,	definitely
not.	That	would	be	his	pitch.	The	kids,	grateful	for	an	hour's
entertainment,	would	mdash;he	hoped	mdash;follow	his	directives.	No
one	from	Herman	Raucher	High	would	become	involved	in	vandalism
tonight.	Nossir.

He	watched	now	as	the	magician's	assistant	rolled	the	wooden	box	off	the
stage.	She	was	a	good-looking	blonde,	in	her	late	twenties	Ellington
guessed,	wearing	a	sequined	costume	that	exposed	to	good	advantage	her
long,	long	legs	and	her	exuberant	breasts.	Ellington	noticed	that	most	of
the	boys	in	the	auditorium	could	not	take	their	eyes	off	the	assistant's
long	legs	and	the	popping	tops	of	her	creamy	white	breasts.	He	himself
was	having	a	little	difficulty	 doing	that.	She	was	back	on	stage	now,
wheeling	a	tall	box.	A	vertical	one	this	time.	The	magician	mdash;whose
name	was	Sebastian	the	Great	mdash;was	wearing	tails	and	a	top	hat.
Ellington	looked	up	at	the	clock.	This	was	probably	the	closing	number
of	the	act.	He	hoped	so	because	he	wanted	to	make	his	little	speech	and
get	the	kids	the	hell	out	of	here.	He	had	promised	Estelle	he	would	stop
by	on	the	way	home	from	school.	Estelle	was	the	lady	he	stopped	by	to
see	every	Wednesday	and	Friday	afternoon,	when	his	wife	thought	he
had	meetings	with	the	staff.	Estelle's	legs	weren't	as	long,	nor	were	her
breasts	as	opulent	as	those	on	the	magician's	assistant,	but	then	again
Estelle	was	forty-seven	years	old.

"Thank	 you,	kids,"	Sebastian	the	Great	said,	"thank	you.	Now	I	know
you're	all	anxious	to	get	out	there	in	the	streets	for	a	safe	and	sane
Halloween,	and	so	I	won't	keep	you	much	longer.	Ah,	thank	you,	Marie,"
he	said	to	his	assistant.

Her	name's	Marie,	Ellington	thought,	 and	wondered	what	her	last	name
was,	and	wondered	if	she	was	listed	in	the	phone	book.

"You	see	here	a	little	box	mdash;well,	not	so	little	because	I'm	a	pretty
tall	fellow	mdash;which	I'm	 going	to	step	into	in	just	a	moment	hellip;
thank	you,	Marie,	you	can	go	now,	you've	been	very	helpful,	let's	have	a
nice	round	of	applause	for	Marie,	kids."

Marie	held	her	hands	up	over	her	head,	legs	widespread,	big	smile	on	her
mouth,	and	the	kids	applauded	and	yelled,	especially	the	boys,	and	then
she	did	a	cute	little	sexy	turn	and	went	strutting	off	the	stage	in	her	high

18
heels.

"That's	 the	last	you'll	see	of	Marie	tonight,"	 Sebastian	said.

Shit,	Ellington	thought.

"And	 in	just	a	few	minutes,	you'll	see	the	last	of	me,	too.	What	I'm	going
to	do,	kids,	I'm	going	to	step	inside	this	box	hellip;"

He	opened	the	door	on	the	face	of	the	box.

"And	 I'm	going	to	ask	you	all	to	count	to	ten	hellip;	out	loud	hellip;	 one,
two,	three,	four,	and	so	on	mdash;you	all	know	how	to	count	to	ten,	don't
you?"

Laughter	from	the	kids.

"And	 I'm	going	to	ask	your	principal,	 Mr.	Ellington,	 to	come	up	here
mdash;Mr.	Ellington,	would	 you	come	up	here	now,	please?	mdash;and
when	you	reach	the	number	ten,	he's	going	to	open	the	door	of	this	box,
and	Sebastian	the	Great	will	be	gone,	kids,	I	will	have	disappeared,
vanished,	poof!	So	hellip;	ah,	good,	Mr.	Ellington,	if	you'll	just	 stand	here
beside	the	box,	thank	you.	That's	very	good."	He	took	off	his	top	hat.
Stepping	partially	into	 the	box,	he	said,	"I'm	going	to	say	good-bye	to	you
now	hellip;"

Applause	and	cheering	from	the	kids.

"Thank	 you,	thank	you,"	he	said,	"and	I	 want	to	remind	you	again	to
please	have	a	safe	and	sane	Halloween	out	there.	Now	the	minute	I	close
this	door,	I	want	you	to	start	counting	out	loud.	And	when	you	reach	ten,
Mr.	Ellington	 will	open	the	door	and	I'll	 be	gone	but	not	forgotten.	Mr.
Ellington?	Are	you	ready?"

"Ready,"	Ellington	 said,	feeling	like	an	asshole.

"Good-bye,	kids,"	 Sebastian	said,	and	closed	the	door	behind	him.

"One!"	 the	kids	began	chanting.	"Two!	Three!	Four!	 Five!	Six!	Seven!
Eight!	Nine!	Ten!"

Ellington	opened	the	door	on	the	box.

19
Sebastian	the	Great	had	indeed	vanished.

The	kids	began	applauding.

Ellington	went	to	the	front	 of	the	stage,	and	held	up	his	hands	for	silence.

He	would	have	to	remind	the	kids	not	to	try	sawing	anybody	in	half,
because	that	had	been	only	a	trick.

The	station	wagon	pulled	up	to	the	curb	in	front	of	the	liquor	 store	on
Culver	and	Ninth.	The	big	woman	behind	the	wheel	was	a	curly-haired
blonde	in	her	late	forties,	wearing	a	blue	dress	with	a	tiny	white	floral
print,	a	cardigan	sweater	over	it.	A	kid	was	sitting	beside	her	on	the	front
seat.	Three	more	kids	were	in	the	back	of	the	car.	The	kids	looked
perhaps	eleven	or	twelve	years	old,	no	older	than	that.

They	threw	open	the	doors	and	got	out	of	the	car.

"Have	fun,	kids,"	 the	blonde	behind	the	wheel	said.

The	kids	were	all	dressed	like	robbers.

Little	black	 leather	jackets,	and	little	blue	jeans,	and	little	white	sneakers,
and	little	billed	caps	on	their	little	 heads,	and	little	black	masks	over	their
eyes.	They	were	all	carrying	shopping	bags	decorated	with	little	orange
pumpkins.	They	were	all	holding	little	 toy	pistols	in	their	little	 hands.
They	went	across	the	sidewalk	in	a	chattering	little	excited	group,	and
one	of	them	opened	the	door	to	the	liquor	store.	The	clock	on	the	wall
behind	the	counter	read	5:15	p.m.	The	owner	of	the	store	looked	up	the
moment	the	bell	over	the	door	sounded.

"Trick	 or	treat!"	 the	little	 kids	squealed	in	unison.

"Come	on,	kids,	get	out	of	here,"	the	owner	said	impatiently.	"This	 is	a
place	of	business."

And	one	of	the	little	kids	shot	him	in	the	head.

Parker	had	shaved	and	was	back	in	the	squadroom,	rummaging	through
the	file	cabinets	containing	folders	for	all	the	cases	the	detectives	had
successfully	closed.	In	police	work,	there	was	no	such	thing	as	a	solution.

20
You	neversolved	a	case,	you	closed	it	out.	Or	it	remainedopen	,	which
meant	the	perpetrator	was	already	in	Buenos	Aires	or	Nome,	Alaska,	and
you'dnever	catch	him.	The	Open	File	was	the	graveyard	of	police
detection.

"I	 feel	like	a	new	man,"	Parker	said.	In	fact,	he	looked	like	the	same	old
Parker,	except	that	he	had	shaved.	"Muldoon,"	he	said,	"Muldoon,
where	are	you,	Muldoon?"

"You	really	gonna	call	a	sixty-year-old	lady?"	 Brown	asked.

"Peaches	Muldoon,	correct,"	Parker	said.	"If	 she	was	well-preserved	at
fifty,	she's	prolly	still	 got	it	all	in	the	right	 places.	Where	the	fuck's	the
file?"

"Look	 under	Aging	Nurses,"	Hawes	said.

"Look	 under	Decrepit	Broads,"	Brown	 said.

"Yeah,	bullshit,	wait'll	 you	see	her	picture,"	Parker	said.

The	clock	on	the	squadroom	wall	read	5:30	p.m.

"Muldoon,	 here	we	go,"	Parker	said,	and	yanked	a	thick	file	from	the
drawer.

The	telephone	rang.

"Who's	catching?"	 Parker	asked.

"I	 thought	you	were,"	Brown	said.

"Me?	No,	no.	You're	up,	Artie."

Brown	sighed	and	picked	up	the	phone.

"Eighty-Seventh	Squad,"	he	said,	"Brown."

"Artie,	 this	is	Dave	downstairs."

Sergeant	Murchison,	at	the	muster	desk.

21
"Yeah,	Dave."

"Adam	Four	 just	responded	to	a	10-20	on	Culver	and	Ninth.	Liquor	store
called	Adams	Wine	Spirits."

"Yeah?"

"They	got	a	homicide	there."

"Okay,"	 Brown	said.

"You	got	some	people	out,	don't	you?"

"Yes."

"Who?	Can	you	take	a	look	for	me?"

Brown	reached	across	the	desk	for	the	duty	chart.

"Kling	 and	Carella	are	riding	 together,"	he	said.	"Meyer	and	Genero	are
out	solo."

"Any	 idea	which	sectors?"

"No."

"Okay,	I'll	 try	 to	raise	them."

"Keep	in	touch."

"Will	 do."

Brown	hung	up.

"What?"	 Hawes	asked.

"Homicide	on	Culver.	There	goes	the	neighborhood."

The	telephone	rang	again.

"Take	a	look	at	this	picture,"	 Parker	said,	coming	over	to	Brown's	desk.
"You	ever	see	a	body	like	this	one?"

22
"Eighty-Seventh	Squad,	Hawes."

"Look	 at	those	tits,"	Parker	said.

"Hello,	who	am	I	talking	 to,	please?"	a	woman's	voice	asked.

"Detective	Hawes."

"Legs	that	won't	 quit,"	 Parker	said.

"My	 husband's	gone,"	the	woman	said.

"Yes,	ma'am,"	Hawes	said,	"let	me	give	you	the	number	for	hellip;"

"My	 name	is	hellip;"

"It'll	  be	best	if	you	call	Missing	Persons,	ma'am,"	Hawes	said.	"They're
specially	equipped	to	deal	with	hellip;"

"He	disappeared	here	inthis	precinct,"	the	woman	said.

"Still	 hellip;"

"Does	that	look	like	a	fifty-year-old	 broad?"	 Parker	asked.

The	telephone	rang	again.	Brown	picked	up.

"Eighty-Seventh	Squad,	Brown,"	 he	said.

"Artie?	 This	is	Genero."

"Yeah?"

"Artie,	 you	won't	believe	this."

"What	 won't	I	believe?"	 Brown	asked.	He	looked	up	at	Parker,	covered
the	mouthpiece,	and	whispered,	"Genero."

Parker	rolled	his	eyes.

"It	 happened	again,"	Genero	said.

23
"My	 name	is	Marie	Sebastiani,"	the	woman	on	Hawes's	phone	said.	"My
husband	is	Sebastian	the	Great."

Hawes	immediately	thought	he	was	talking	to	a	bedbug.

"Ma'am,"	  he	said,	"if	your	husband's	really	gone	hellip;"

"I'm	 at	this	restaurant,	you	know?"	 Genero	said.	"On	Culver	and
Sixth?"

"Yeah?"	Brown	 said.

"Where	they	had	the	holdup	last	night?	I	stopped	by	to	talk	to	the
owners?"

"Yeah?"

"My	 husband	is	a	magician,"	Marie	said.	"He	calls	himself	Sebastian	the
Great.	He's	disappeared."

Good	magician,	Hawes	thought.

"And	 I	go	out	back	to	look	in	the	garbage	cans?"	Genero	said.	"See
maybe	somebody	dropped	a	gun	in	there	or	something?"

"Yeah?"	Brown	 said.

"I	 mean	he'sreally	disappeared,"	Marie	said.	"Vanished.	I	went	out	back
of	the	high	school	where	he	was	loading	the	car,	and	the	car	was	gone,
and	so	was	Frank.	And	all	his	tricks	were	dumped	in	the	driveway	like
hellip;"

"Frank,	 ma'am?"

"My	 husband.	Frank	Sebastiani.	Sebastian	the	Great."

"It	 happened	again,	Artie,"	Genero	said.	"I	 almost	puked."

"What	 happened	again?"

"Maybe	he	just	went	home,	ma'am,"	Hawes	said.

24
"No,	we	live	in	the	next	state,	he	wouldn't	have	left	without	me.	And	his
stuff	was	all	over	the	driveway.	I	mean,	expensivetricks	."

"So	what	are	you	saying,	ma'am?"

"I'm	 saying	somebody	must've	stolen	the	car	and	God	knows	what	he	did
to	Frank."

"Artie?"	  Genero	said.	"Are	you	with	me?"

"I'm	 with	 you,"	Brown	said,	and	sighed.

"It	 was	in	one	of	the	garbage	cans,	Artie."

"What	 was	in	one	of	the	garbage	cans?"

"Which	 high	school	is	that,	ma'am?"	Hawes	asked.

"Herman	 Raucher	High.	On	North	Eleventh."

"Are	you	there	now?"

"Yes.	I'm	calling	from	 a	pay	phone."

"You	stay	right	there,"	 Hawes	said,	"I'll	 get	somebody	to	you."

"I'll	 be	waiting	out	 back,"	Marie	 said,	and	hung	up.

"Artie,	 you	better	come	over	here,"	Genero	said.	"The	Burgundy	on
Culver	and	Sixth."

"What	 is	it	you	found	in	hellip;?"

But	Genero	had	already	hung	up.

Brown	slipped	into	his	shoulder	holster.

Hawes	clipped	his	holster	to	his	belt.

Parker	picked	up	the	telephone	receiver.

25
"Peaches	Muldoon,	here	I	come,"	he	said.

5:40	P.M.	on	Halloween	night,	the	streets	dark	for	almost	an	hour	now,
the	city	off	daylight	savings	time	since	the	twenty-sixth	of	the	month.	All
the	little	monsters	and	goblins	and	devils	and	bats	out	in	force,	carrying
their	shopping	bags	full	of	candy	from	door	to	door,	yelling	"Trick	 or
Treat!"	 and	praying	no	one	would	give	them	a	treat	with	a	double-edged
razor	blade	in	it.

Brown	looked	at	his	watch.

Along	about	now,	his	wife,	Caroline,	would	be	taking	Connie	around.	His
eight-year-old	daughter	had	previewed	her	costume	for	him	last	night.
She'd	looked	like	the	most	angelic	witch	he'd	ever	seen	in	his	life.	All	next
week,	there'd	be	sweets	to	eat.	The	only	people	who	profited	from
Halloween	were	the	candymakers	and	the	dentists.	Brown	was	in	the
wrong	profession.

He	had	chosen	to	walk	to	the	Burgundy	Restaurant	on	Culver	and	Sixth.
It	wasn't	too	far	from	 the	station	house,	and	a	cop	mdash;if	Genero	could
be	considered	one	mdash;was	already	on	the	scene.

The	night	was	balmy.

God,	what	an	October	this	had	been.

Leaves	still	on	the	trees	in	the	park,	dazzling	yellows	and	reds	and
oranges	and	browns,	daytime	skies	a	piercing	blue,	nighttime	skies	pitch-
black	and	sprinkled	with	 stars.	In	a	city	where	itchy	citizens	took	off
their	overcoats	far	too	early	each	spring,	it	now	seemed	proper	and
fitting	that	 there	was	no	need	to	put	them	on	again	quite	yet.	He	walked
swiftly	toward	 Culver,	turning	to	glance	at	E.T.	hurrying	 by	with
Frankenstein's	monster	on	one	side	and	Dracula	on	the	other.	Smiling,	he
turned	the	corner	onto	Culver	and	began	walking	toward	Sixth.

Genero	was	waiting	on	the	sidewalk	outside	the	restaurant.

He	looked	pale.

"What	 is	it?"	Brown	 asked.

"Come	on	back,"	Genero	said.	"I	 didn't	 touch	it."

26
"Touch	what?"	 Brown	asked.	But	Genero	was	already	walking	up	the
alleyway	on	the	right-hand	side	of	the	restaurant.

Garbage	cans	flanked	either	side	of	the	restaurant's	back	door,
illuminated	by	an	overhead	flood	light.

"That	 one,"	Genero	said.

Brown	lifted	the	lid	 on	the	can	Genero	was	pointing	to.

The	bloody	upper	torso	of	a	human	body	was	stuffed	into	the	can,	on	top
of	a	green	plastic	garbage	bag.

The	torso	had	been	severed	at	the	waist	from	the	rest	of	the	body.

The	torso	had	no	arms.

And	no	head.

"Why	 does	this	always	happen	to	me?"	Genero	asked	God.





CHAPTER	        2

"I	 once	found	a	hand	in	an	airlines	bag,"	Genero	said.

"No	shit?"	 Monoghan	asked	without	interest.

Monoghan	was	a	Homicide	cop.	He	usually	worked	in	tandem	with	his
partner	Monroe,	but	there	had	been	two	homicides	in	the	Eight-Seven
tonight,	a	few	blocks	apart	from	each	other,	and	Monoghan	was	here
behind	the	restaurant	on	Culver	and	Sixth,	and	Monroe	was	over	at	the
liquor	store	on	Culver	and	Ninth.	It	 was	a	shame;	Monoghan	without
Monroe	was	like	a	bagel	without	lox.

"Cut	 off	at	the	wrist,"	 Genero	said.	"I	almost	puked."

"Yeah,	a	person	could	puke,	all	right,"	Monoghan	said.

27
He	was	looking	down	into	the	garbage	can	where	the	bloody	torso	still
rested	on	the	green	plastic	bag.

"Nothing	 but	a	piece	of	fresh	meat	here,"	he	said	to	Brown.

Brown	had	a	pained	look	in	his	eyes.	He	merely	nodded.

"M.E.	 on	the	way?"	Monoghan	asked.

"Called	him	 ten	minutes	ago."

"You	won't	need	an	ambulance	for	this	one,"	Monoghan	said.	"All	 you'll
need	is	a	shopping	bag."

He	laughed	at	his	own	little	witticism.

He	sorely	missed	Monroe.

"Looks	like	 a	man,	don't	it?"	 he	said.	"I	mean,	no	knockers,	all	that	hair
on	the	chest."

"This	hand	I	 found,"	 Genero	said,	"it	was	a	man's,	too.	A	great	big	hand.
I	nearly	puked."

There	were	several	uniformed	cops	in	the	alley	now,	and	a	couple	of
technicians	sniffing	around	the	back	door	of	the	restaurant,	and	a
plainclothes	lady	cop	from	Photo	taking	her	Polaroids.	Crime	Scene	signs
already	up,	even	though	thiswasn't	a	crime	scene	in	the	strictest	sense	of
the	word,	in	that	the	crime	had	almost	certainly	taken	place	elsewhere.
All	they	had	here	was	the	detritus	of	a	crime,	a	piece	of	fresh	meat
mdash;as	Monoghan	had	called	it	mdash;lying	in	a	garbage	can,	the
partial	remains	of	what	had	once	been	a	human	being.	That	and
whatever	clues	may	have	been	left	by	the	person	who'd	transported	the
torso	to	this	particular	 spot.

"It's	 amazing	the	number	of	dismembered	stiffs	you	get	in	this	city,"
Monoghan	said.

"Oh,	boy,	you're	tellingme	?"	 Genero	said.

Monoghan	was	wearing	a	black	homburg,	a	black	suit,	a	white	shirt,	and
a	black	tie.	His	hands	were	in	his	jacket	pockets,	only	the	thumbs

28
showing.	He	looked	like	a	sad,	neat	undertaker.	Genero	was	trying	to
look	like	a	hip	big-city	detective	disguised	as	a	college	boy.	He	was
wearing	blue	slacks	and	a	reindeer-patterned	sweater	over	a	sports	shirt
open	at	the	throat.	Brown	penny	loafers.	No	hat.	Curly	black	hair,	brown
eyes.	He	resembled	a	somewhat	stupid	poodle.

Monoghan	looked	at	him.

"You	the	one	found	this	thing	here?"	he	asked.

"Well,	yes,"	Genero	said,	wondering	if	he	should	have	admitted	this.

"Any	 other	parts	in	these	other	garbage	cans?"

"I	 didn't	 look,"	Genero	said,	thinking	one	part	had	been	plenty.

"Want	to	look	 now?"

"Don't	 get	prints	on	any	of	those	garbage-can	lids,"	one	of	the	techs
warned.

Genero	tented	a	handkerchief	over	his	hand	and	began	lifting	lids.

There	were	no	other	parts.

"So	all	we	got	here	is	this	chest	here,"	Monoghan	said.

"Hello,	boys,"	 the	M.E.	said,	coming	up	the	alley.	"What've	we	got
here?"

"Just	this	chest	here,"	Monoghan	said,	indicating	the	torso.

The	M.E.	peeked	into	the	garbage	can.

"Very	nice,"	 he	said,	and	put	down	his	satchel.	"Did	you	want	me	to
pronounce	it	dead,	or	what?"

"You	could	give	us	a	postmortem	interval,	that'd	be	helpful,"	 Monoghan
said.

"Autopsy'll	 give	you	that,"	 the	M.E.	said.

29
"Looks	of	this	one,"	 Monoghan	said,	"somebody	alreadydone	the
autopsy.	What'd	he	use,	can	you	tell?"

"Who?"	 the	M.E.	said.

"Whoever	cut	him	up	in	 pieces."

"He	wasn't	a	brilliant	 brain	 surgeon,	I	can	tell	you	that,"	 the	M.E.	said,
looking	at	the	torn	and	jagged	flesh	where	the	head,	arms,	and	lower
torso	had	been.

"So	what	was	it?	A	cleaver?	A	hacksaw?"

"I'm	 not	a	magician,"	 the	M.E.	said.

"Any	 marks,	scars,	tattoos?"	Brown	asked	quietly.

"None	that	I	can	see.	Let	me	roll	it	over."

Genero	noticed	that	the	M.E.	kept	referring	to	it	 as	"it."

The	M.E.	rolled	it	over.

"None	here,	either,"	he	said.

"Nothing	 but	a	piece	of	fresh	meat,"	Monoghan	said.

Hawes	was	wearing	only	a	lightweight	sports	jacket	over	a	shirt	open	at
the	throat,	no	tie,	no	hat.	A	mild	breeze	riffled	his	red	hair;	 October	this
year	was	like	springtime	in	the	Rockies.	Marie	Sebastiani	seemed
uncomfortable	talking	to	a	cop.	Most	honest	citizens	did;	it	was	the
thieves	of	the	world	who	felt	perfectly	at	home	with	law-enforcement
officers.

Fidgeting	nervously,	she	told	him	how	she'd	changed	out	of	her	costume
and	into	the	clothes	she	was	now	wearing	mdash;a	tweed	jacket	and
skirt,	a	lavender	blouse	and	high-heeled	pumps	mdash;while	her
husband,	Sebastian	the	Great,	a.k.a.	Frank	Sebastiani,	had	gone	out
behind	the	high	school	to	load	the	car	with	all	thelittle	tricks	he	used	in
the	act.	And	thenshe'd	gone	out	back	to	where	she	was	supposed	to	meet
him,	and	the	car	was	gone,	and	he	was	gone,	and	his	tricks	were	scattered
all	over	the	driveway.

30
"Bylittle	 tricks	hellip;"	  Hawes	said.

"Oh,	you	know,	the	rings,	and	the	scarves,	and	the	balls,	and	the	bird
cage	hellip;	well,	all	this	stuff	all	over	the	place	here.	Jimmy	comes	with
the	van	to	pick	up	the	boxes	and	the	bigger	stuff."

"Jimmy?"

"Frank's	 apprentice.	He's	a	jack	of	all	trades,	drives	the	van	to	wherever
we're	performing,	helps	us	load	and	unload,	paints	the	boxes	when	they
need	it,	makes	sure	all	the	spring	catches	are	working	properly	hellip;
like	that."

"He	dropped	you	both	off	today,	did	he?"

"Oh,	yes."

"And	 helped	you	unload	and	all?"

"Same	as	always."

"And	 stayed	for	the	performance?"

"No,	I	don't	 know	where	he	went	during	the	performance.	Probably	out
for	a	bite	to	eat.	He	knew	we'd	be	done	here	around	five,	five-thirty."

"So	where	is	he	now?	Jimmy?"

"Well,	I	 don't	know.	What	time	do	you	have?"

Hawes	looked	at	his	watch.

"Five	after	six,"	 he	said.

"Gee,	I	don't	knowwhere	he	is,"	Marie	 said.	"He's	usually	very
punctual."

"What	 timedid	you	get	done	here?"	Hawes	asked.

"Like	 I	said,	around	five-fifteen	or	so."

31
"And	 you	changed	your	clothes	hellip;"

"Yes.	Well,	so	did	Frank."

"What	 does	he	wear	on	stage?"

"Black	tie	and	tails.	And	 a	top	hat."

"And	 he	changed	into?"

"Is	this	important?"

"Very,"	 Hawes	said.

"Then	let	me	get	it	absolutely	correct,"	 Marie	said.	"He	put	 on	a	pair	of
blue	slacks,	and	a	blue	sports	shirt,	no	pattern	on	it,	just	the	solid	blue,
and	blue	socks,	and	black	shoes,	and	a	hellip;	what	do	you	call	it?
Houndstooth,	is	that	the	weave?	A	sort	of	jagged	little	black	and	blue
weave.	A	houndstooth	sports	jacket.	No	tie."

Hawes	was	writing	now.

"How	old	is	your	 husband?"	he	asked.

"Thirty-four."

"How	tall	 is	he?"

"Five-eleven."

"Weight?"

"One-seventy."

"Color	 of	his	hair?"

"Black."

"Eyes?"

"Blue."

32
"Does	he	wear	glasses?"

"No."

"Is	he	white?"

"Well,	ofcourse	,"	Marie	 said.

"Any	 identifying	marks,	scars	or	tattoos?"

"Yes,	he	has	an	appendectomy	scar.	And	also	a	meniscectomy	scar."

"What's	 that?"	 Hawes	asked.

"He	had	a	skiing	accident.	Tore	the	cartilage	in	his	left	knee.	They
removed	the	cartilage	mdash;what	they	call	the	meniscus.	There's	a	scar
there.	On	his	left	knee."

"How	do	you	spell	that?"	 Hawes	asked.	"Meniscectomy?"

"I	 don't	know,"	 Marie	said.

"On	the	phone,	you	told	me	you	live	in	the	next	state	hellip;"

"Yes,	I	do."

"Where?"

"Collinsworth."

"The	address?"

"604	Eden	Lane."

"Apartment	 number?"

"It's	 a	private	house."

"Telephone	number,	area	code	first?"

"Well,	I'll	 give	you	Frank's	 card,"	she	said,	and	dug	into	her	shoulder
bag	and	came	up	with	a	sheaf	of	cards.	She	took	one	from	the	stack	and

33
handed	it	to	Hawes.	He	scanned	it	quickly,	wrote	both	the	home	and
office	phone	numbers	onto	his	pad,	and	then	tucked	the	card	into	the
pad's	flap.

"Did	 you	try	calling	home?"	he	asked.

"No.	Why	would	 I	do	that?"

"Are	you	sure	he	didn't	 go	home	without	you?	Maybe	he	figured	this
Jimmy	would	pick	you	up."

"No,	we	were	planning	on	eating	dinner	here	in	the	city."

"So	he	wouldn't	have	gone	home	without	you."

"He	never	has."

"This	Jimmy	 hellip;	what's	 his	last	name?"

"Brayne."

"Brain?	 Like	in	somebody's	head?"

"Yes,	but	with	a	Y."

"B-R-A-Y-N?"

"With	 an	E	on	the	end."

"B-R-A-Y-N-E?"

"Yes."

"James	Brayne."

"Yes."

"And	 his	address?"

"He	lives	with	us."

"Same	house?"

34
"A	little	apartment	over	the	garage."

"Andhis	phone	number?"

"Oh,	gee,"	she	said,	"I'm	not	sure	I	remember	it."

"Well,	try	to	remember,"	Hawes	said,	"because	I	think	we	ought	to	call
back	home,	see	if	either	of	them	maybe	went	back	there."

"They	wouldn't	do	that,"	Marie	said.

"Maybe	they	got	their	signals	crossed,"	Hawes	said.	"Maybe	Jimmy
thought	your	husband	was	going	to	take	the	stuff	in	the	car	hellip;"

"No,	the	big	stuff	won't	fit	in	the	car.	That's	why	we	have	the	van."

"Or	maybe	your	husband	thought	you	were	getting	a	ride	back	with
Jimmy	hellip;"

"I'm	sure	he	didn't."

"What	kind	of	a	car	was	your	husband	driving?"

"A	1984	Citation.	A	two-door	coupe."

"Color?"

"Blue."

"License-plate	number?"

"DL	74-3681."

"And	the	van?"

"A	'79	Ford	Econoline."

"Color?"

"Tan,	sort	of."

35
"Would	you	know	 the	license-plate	number	on	that	one?"

"RL	 68-7210."

"In	 whose	name	are	the	vehicles	registered?"

"My	 husband's."

"Both	registered	across	the	river?"

"Yes."

"Let's	 find	a	phone,	okay?"	Hawes	said.

"There's	one	inside,"	she	said,	"but	calling	them	won't	 do	any	good."

"How	do	you	know?"

"Because	Frank	wouldn't	have	dumped	his	tricks	all	over	the	driveway
this	way.	These	tricks	cost	money."

"Let's	 try	calling	them,	anyway."

"It	 won't	do	any	good,"	Marie	 said.	"I'm	 telling	you."

He	dialed	Sebastiani's	home	and	office	numbers,	and	got	no	answer	at
either.	Marie	at	last	remembered	the	number	in	the	room	over	the
garage,	and	he	dialed	that	one,	too.	Nothing.

"Well,"	 he	said,	"let	me	get	to	work	on	this.	I'll	 call	you	as	soon	as
hellip;"

"How	am	I	 going	to	get	home?"	Marie	asked.

They	always	asked	how	they	were	going	to	get	home.

"There	are	trains	running	 out	to	Collinsworth,	 aren't	there?"

"Yes,	but	hellip;"

"I'll	 drop	 you	off	at	the	station."

36
"What	about	all	those	tricks	outside	in	the	driveway?"

"Maybe	we	can	get	the	school	custodian	to	lock	them	up	someplace.	Till
your	husband	shows	up."

"What	makes	you	think	he'll	show	up?"

"Well,	I'm	sure	he's	okay.	Just	some	crossed	signals,	that's	all."

"I'm	not	sure	I	want	to	go	home	tonight,"	Marie	said.

"Well,	ma'am	hellip;"

"I	think	I	 may	want	to	hellip;	could	I	come	to	the	police	station	with	you?
Could	I	wait	there	till	you	hear	anything	about	Frank?"

"That's	entirely	up	to	you,	ma'am.	But	it	may	take	a	while	before	we
hellip;"

"And	can	you	lend	me	some	money?"	she	asked.

He	looked	at	her.

"For	dinner?"

He	kept	looking	at	her.

"I'll	 pay	you	back	as	soon	as	hellip;	as	soon	as	we	find	Frank.	I'm	sorry,
but	I've	only	got	a	few	dollars	on	me.	Frank	was	the	one	they	paid,	he's
the	one	who's	got	all	the	money."

"Howmuch	money,	ma'am?"

"Well,	just	enough	for	a	hamburger	or	something."

"I	meant	how	much	money	does	your	husband	have	on	him?"

"Oh.	Well,	we	got	a	hundred	for	the	job.	And	he	probably	had	a	little
something	in	his	wallet,	I	don't	know	how	much."

Which	lets	out	robbery,	Hawes	thought.	Although	in	this	city,	there	were
people	who'd	slit	your	throat	for	a	nickel.	He	suddenly	wondered	how

37
much	money	he	himself	was	carrying.	This	was	the	first	time	in	his	entire
life	that	a	victim	had	asked	him	for	a	loan.

"I'm	 sort	of	hungry	 myself,"	he	said.	"Let's	find	 the	custodian	and	then
go	get	something	to	eat."

Monroe	looked	bereft	without	Monoghan.

The	clock	on	the	liquor-store	wall	read	6:10	p.m.

He	was	standing	behind	the	cash	register,	where	the	owner	of	the	store
had	been	shot	dead	a	bit	more	than	an	hour	earlier.	The	body	was
already	gone.	There	was	only	blood	and	a	chalked	outline	on	the	floor
behind	the	counter.	The	cash	register	was	empty.

"There	was	four	of	them,"	 the	man	talking	to	Meyer	said.

Meyer	had	been	cruising	the	area	when	Sergeant	Murchison	raised	him
on	the	radio.	He	had	got	here	maybe	ten	minutes	after	it	was	all	over,	and
had	immediately	radioed	back	with	a	confirmed	D.O.A.	Murchison	 had
informed	Homicide,	so	here	was	Monroe,	all	alone,	and	looking	as	if	he'd
lost	his	twin	brother.	He	was	wearing	a	black	homburg,	a	black	suit,	a
white	shirt,	and	a	black	tie.	His	hands	were	in	his	jacket	pockets,	only	the
thumbs	showing.	He	looked	like	a	sad,	neat	undertaker.	Meyer	wondered
where	Monoghan	was.	Wherever	he	was,	Meyer	figured	he'd	be	dressed
exactly	like	Monroe.	Even	if	he	was	home	sick	in	bed,	he'd	be	dressed	like
Monroe.

Meyer	himself	was	wearing	brown	slacks,	a	brown	cotton	turtleneck,	and
a	tan	sports	jacket.	He	thought	he	looked	very	dapper	tonight.	With	his
bald	head	and	his	burly	build,	he	figured	he	looked	like	Kojak,	except
more	handsome.	He	was	sorry	Kojak	was	off	the	air	now.	He'd	always
felt	Kojak	 gave	bald	cops	a	good	name.

"Little	 kids,"	 the	man	said.

This	was	the	third	time	he'd	told	Meyer	that	 four	little	 kids	had	held	up
the	liquor	store	and	shot	the	owner.

"What	 do	you	mean,	little	kids?"	Monroe	asked	from	behind	the	cash
register.

38
"Eleven,	twelve	years	old,"	the	man	said.

His	name	was	Henry	Kirby,	and	he	lived	in	a	building	up	the	street.	He
was	perhaps	sixty,	sixty-five	years	old,	a	thin,	graying	man	wearing	a
short-sleeved	sports	shirt	and	wrinkled	polyester	slacks.	He'd	told	first
Meyer	and	then	Monroe	that	he	was	coming	to	the	store	to	buy	a	bottle	of
wine	when	he	saw	these	little	kids	running	out	with	shopping	bags	and
guns.	Monroe	still	couldn't	believe	it.

"You	meanchildren	?"	he	said.

"Little	 kids,	yeah,"	Kirby	  said.

"Grade-schoolers?"

"Yeah,	little	kids."

"Pre-pubescent	twerps?"	Monroe	said.

He	was	doing	okay	without	Monoghan.	Without	Monoghan,	he	was	being
Monoghan	and	Monroe	all	by	himself.

"Yeah,	little	kids,"	 Kirby	 said.

"What	 were	they	wearing?"	Meyer	said.

"Leather	jackets,	blue	jeans,	sneakers	and	masks."

"What	 kind	of	masks?"	Monroe	asked.	"Like	 these	monster	masks?
These	rubber	things	you	pull	over	your	head?"

"No,	just	these	little	black	masks	over	their	eyes.	Like	robbers	wear.
They	were	robbers,	these	kids."

"And	 you	say	there	were	four	of	them?"

"Four,	right."

"Ran	out	of	the	store	with	shopping	bags	and	guns?"

"Shopping	bags	and	guns,	right."

39
"What	kind	of	guns?"	Monroe	asked.

"Little	guns."

"Like	twenty-twos?"

"I'm	not	so	good	at	guns.	These	were	little	guns."

"Like	Berettas?"

"I'm	not	so	good	at	guns."

"Like	little	Brownings?"

"I'm	not	so	good	at	guns.	They	were	little	guns."

"Did	you	hear	any	shots	as	you	approached	the	store?"	Meyer	asked.

"No,	I	didn't.	I	didn't	know	Ralph	was	dead	till	I	walked	inside."

"Ralph?"	Monroe	said.

"Ralph	Adams.	It's	his	store.	Adams	Wine	Spirits.	He's	been	here	in	this
same	spot	for	twenty	years."

"Not	no	more,"	Monroe	said	tactfully.

"So	where'd	these	kids	go	when	they	came	out	of	the	store?"	Meyer
asked.

He	was	thinking	this	sounded	like	Fagin's	little	gang.	The	Artful	Dodger,
all	that	crowd.	A	cop	he	knew	in	England	had	written	recently	to	say	his
kids	would	be	celebrating	mdash;if	that	was	the	word	for	it
mdash;Halloween	over	there	this	year.	Lots	of	American	executives	living
in	England,	their	kids	had	introduced	the	holiday	to	the	British.	Just
what	they	need,	Meyer	thought.	Maybe	next	year,	twelve-year-old	British
kids'd	start	holding	up	liquor	stores.

"They	ran	to	this	car	parked	at	the	curb,"	Kirby	said.

"A	vehicle?"	Monroe	said.

40
"Yeah,	a	car."

"An	automobile?"

"A	car,	yeah."

"What	kind	of	car?"

"I'm	not	so	good	at	cars."

"Was	it	a	big	car	or	a	little	car?"

"A	regular	car."

"Like	a	Chevy	or	a	Plymouth?"

"I'm	not	so	good	at	cars."

"Like	an	Olds	or	a	Buick?"

"A	regular	car,	is	all."

"They	all	got	in	this	car?"	Meyer	asked.

"One	in	the	front	seat,	three	in	the	back."

"Who	was	driving?"

"A	woman."

"How	old	a	woman?"

"Hard	to	say."

"What'd	she	look	like?"

"She	was	a	blonde."

"What	was	she	wearing?"

"I	really	couldn't	see.	It	was	dark	in	the	car.	I	could	see	she	was	a	blonde,
but	that's	about	all."

41
"How	about	when	the	kids	opened	the	doors?"	Monroe	asked.	"Didn't
the	lights	go	on?"

"Yeah,	but	I	didn't	 notice	what	she	was	wearing.	I	figured	this	was
maybe	a	car	pool,	you	know?"

"What	 do	you	mean?"

"Well,	the	kids	were	all	about	the	same	age,	so	they	couldn't	all	beher
kids,	you	know	what	I	mean?	So	I	figured	she	was	just	driving	maybe	her
own	kid	and	some	of	his	friends	around.	For	Halloween,	you	know?"

"You	mean	the	kid's	mother	was	a	wheelman,	huh?"

"Well	hellip;"

"For	a	stickup,	huh?	A	wheelman	for	four	 eleven-year-olds."

"Or	 twelve,"	Kirby	 said.	"Eleven	or	twelve."

"These	kids,"	Meyer	said,	"Were	all	 of	them	boys?"

"They	weredressed	like	boys,	but	I	really	couldn't	say.	They	all	went	by
so	fast.	Just	came	running	out	of	the	store	and	into	the	car."

"Then	what?"	 Monroe	asked.

"The	car	pulled	away."

"Did	 you	see	the	license	plate?"

"I'm	 not	so	good	at	license	plates,"	Kirby	said.

"Was	it	you	who	called	the	police?"	Meyer	asked.

"Yes,	sir.	I	called	911	the	minute	I	saw	Ralph	laying	dead	there	behind
the	counter."

"Did	 you	use	this	phone	here?"	Monroe	asked,	indicating	the	phone
alongside	the	register.

42
"No,	sir.	I	went	outside	and	used	the	pay	phone	on	the	corner."

"Okay,	we've	got	your	name	and	address,"	Monroe	said,	"we'll	get	in
touch	if	we	need	you."

"Is	there	a	reward?"	 Kirby	 asked.

"For	what?"

"I	 thought	there	might	be	a	reward."

"We're	not	so	good	at	rewards,"	Monroe	said.	"Thanks	 a	lot,	we'll	be	in
touch."

Kirby	 nodded	glumly	and	walked	out	of	the	store.

"Halloween	ain't	 what	it	used	to	be,"	Monroe	said.

"You	just	got	yourself	another	backup,"	 Kling	 said.

"No,"	 Eileen	said.

"What	 do	you	mean	no?	You're	going	into	one	of	the	worst	sections	in	the
city	hellip;"

"Without	 you,"	 she	said.

"	hellip;	 looking	for	a	guy	who's	already	killed	hellip;"

"Withoutyou	 ,	Bert."

"Why?"

They	were	in	an	Italian	restaurant	near	the	Calm's	Point	Bridge.	It	 was
twenty	minutes	past	six;	Eileen	had	to	be	at	the	Seven-Two	in	forty
minutes.	She	figured	five	minutes	over	the	bridge,	another	five	to	the
precinct,	plenty	of	time	to	eat	without	hurrying.	 She	probably	shouldn't
be	eating,	anyway.	In	the	past,	she'd	found	that	going	out	hungry	gave
her	a	fighter's	edge.	Plenty	of	time	to	eatafter	you	caught	the	guy.	Have
two	martinis	after	 you	caught	him,	down	a	sirloin	and	a	platter	of	fries.
After	you	caught	him.	If	 you	caught	him.	Sometimes	you	didn't	catch
him.	Sometimes	he	caught	you.

43
She	was	carrying	her	hooker	threads	and	her	hardware	in	a	tote	bag
sitting	on	the	floor	to	the	left	of	her	chair.	Kling	 was	sitting	opposite	her,
hands	clasped	on	the	tabletop,	leaning	somewhat	forward	now,	blond
hair	falling	 onto	his	forehead,	intent	look	in	his	eyes,	wanting	to	know
why	she	didn't	need	a	tagalong	boyfriend	tonight.

"Why	 do	you	think?"	 she	asked.

The	chef	had	overcooked	the	spaghetti.	They'd	specifiedal	dente	but	this
was	the	kind	of	dive	where	the	help	thought	Al	Dente	was	some	guy	with
Mafia	connections.

"I	 think	you're	 crazy	is	what	I	think."

"Thanks."

"Damn	it,	 if	I	can	throw	some	extra	weight	your	way	hellip;"

"I	 don't	want	you	throwing	 anything	my	way.	I've	got	a	guy	who's	twice
your	size	and	a	woman	who	can	shoot	her	way	out	of	a	revolution.	That's
all	I	need.	Plus	myself."

"Eileen,	I	won't	 get	in	your	way.	I'll	 just	hellip;"

"No."

"I'll	 just	 be	there	if	you	need	me."

"You	really	don't	 understand,	do	you?"

"No,	I	don't."

"You're	not	just	 another	cop,	Bert."

"I	 know	that."

"You're	my	hellip;"

She	debated	saying	"boyfriend"	but	that	sounded	like	a	teenager's
steady.	She	debated	saying	"lover"	but	that	sounded	like	a	dowager's
kept	stud.	She	debated	saying	"roommate"	but	that	sounded	like	you

44
lived	with	either	another	woman	or	a	eunuch.	Anyway,	they	weren't
actually	living	together,	not	in	the	same	apartment.	She	settled	for	what
had	once	been	a	psychologist's	term,	but	which	had	now	entered	the
jargon	as	a	euphemism	for	the	guy	or	girl	with	whom	you	shared	an
unmarried	state.

"You're	my	S.O.,"	 she	said.

"Your	what?"

"Significant	 Other."

"I	 should	hope	so,"	Kling	said.	"Which	 is	why	I	want	to	hellip;"

"Listen,	are	you	dense?"	she	asked.	"I'm	a	cop	going	out	on	a	job.	What
the	hell's	the	matter	with	you?"

"Eileen,	I	hellip;"

"Yes,what?	Don't	you	think	I	can	cut	it?"

She	had	chosen	an	unfortunate	word.

Cut.

She	saw	the	look	on	his	face.

"That's	 just	what	I	mean,"	 she	said.

"What	 are	you	talking	about?"

"I'm	 not	going	to	get	cut	again,"	she	said,	"don't	worry	 about	it."

He	looked	at	her.

"This	time	I	 shoot	to	kill,"	 she	said.

He	took	a	deep	breath.

"This	spaghetti	tastes	like	a	sponge,"	she	said.

"What	 time	are	you	due	there?"

45
"Seven."

He	looked	up	at	the	clock.

"Where	are	they	planting	you?"

"A	bar	called	Larry's.	 On	Fairview	 and	East	Fourth."

"This	guy	Shanahan,	is	he	any	good?"

"I	 hope	so,"	she	said,	and	shoved	her	plate	aside.	"Could	we	get	some
coffee,	do	you	think?	And	how	come	you're	chalking	off	Annie?"

"I'm	 not	hellip;"

"I'd	 trade	a	hundred	Shanahans	for	Annie."

"Calm	down,	Eileen."

"I'm	 calm,"	 she	said	icily.	"I	just	don't	 like	your	fucking	 attitude.	You
want	to	hand	wrestle	me?	Prove	you	can	go	out	there	tonight	and	do	the
job	better	than	I	can?"

"Nobody	said	hellip;"

"I	 can	do	the	job,"	she	said.

He	looked	into	her	eyes.

"I	 can	do	it,"	she	said.

He	didn't	want	to	leave	the	parts	where	they'd	be	found	too	easily,	and
yet	at	the	same	time	he	didn't	want	to	hide	them	so	well	that	they
wouldn't	be	discovered	for	weeks.	This	was	tricky	business	here.	Putting
the	pieces	of	the	jigsaw	in	different	places,	making	sure	he	wasn't	spotted
while	he	was	distributing	the	evidence	of	bloody	murder.

He'd	dropped	the	first	one	behind	a	restaurant	on	Culver,	near	Sixth,
figuring	they'd	 be	putting	out	more	garbage	when	they	closed	tonight,
hoping	they'd	discover	the	upper	torso	then	and	immediately	call	the
police.	He	didn't	want	to	scatter	the	various	parts	in	locations	too	distant

46
from	each	other	because	he	wanted	this	to	remain	a	strictly	local	matter,
one	neighborhood,	one	precinct,this	precinct.	At	the	same	time,	he
couldn't	risk	 someone	finding	any	one	of	the	parts	so	quickly	that	there'd
be	police	crawling	all	over	the	neighborhood	and	making	his	job	more
difficult.

He	wanted	them	to	put	it	all	together	in	the	next	little	while.

Two,	three	days	at	the	most,	depending	on	how	long	it	took	them	to	find
the	parts	and	make	identification.

By	then,	he'd	be	far,	far	away.

He	cruised	the	streets	now,	driving	slowly,	looking	for	prospects.

The	other	parts	of	the	body	mdash;the	head,	the	hands,	the	arms,	the
lower	torso	mdash;were	lying	on	a	tarpaulin	in	the	trunk.

More	damn	kids	in	the	streets	tonight.

Right	now,	only	the	little	ones	were	out.	In	an	hour	or	so,	you'd	get	your
teenyboppers	looking	for	trouble,	and	later	tonight	you'd	 get	your	older
teenagers,	the	onesreally	hoping	to	do	damage.	Kick	over	a	garbage	can,
find	a	guy's	arm	in	it.	How	 does	that	grab	you,	boys?

He	smiled.

Police	cars	up	ahead,	outside	a	liquor	store.

Bald	guy	coming	out	to	the	curb,	studying	the	sidewalk	and	then	the
street.

Trouble.

But	nothis	trouble.

He	cruised	on	by.

Headed	up	to	the	Stem,	made	a	right	turn,	scanning	the	storefronts.	Kids
swarming	all	over	the	avenue,	trick	or	treat,	trick	 or	treat.	Chinese
restaurant	there	on	the	right.	All-night	 supermarket	on	the	corner.
Perfect	if	there	was	a	side	alley.	One-way	side	street,	he'd	have	to	drive

47
past,	make	a	right	at	the	next	corner,	and	then	another	right	onto	Culver,
come	at	it	from	there.	Stopped	for	the	red	light	at	the	next	corner,	didn't
want	some	eager	patrolman	pulling	him	over	for	a	bullshit	violation.
Made	the	right	turn.	 Another	light	 on	Culver.	Waited	for	that	one	to
change.	Turned	onto	Culver,	drove	up	one	block,	made	another	right
onto	the	one-way	street.	Drove	up	it	slowly.	Good!	An	alley	between	the
corner	supermarket	and	the	apartment	house	alongside	it.	He	drove	on
by,	went	through	the	whole	approach	a	second	time.	Guy	in	an	apron
standing	at	the	mouth	of	the	alley,	lighting	a	cigarette.	Drove	by	again.
And	again.	And	again	and	again	until	the	alley	and	the	sidewalk	were
clear.	He	made	a	left	turn	into	the	alley.	Cut	the	ignition,	yanked	out	the
keys.	Came	around	the	car.	Unlocked	the	trunk.	Yanked	out	one	of	the
arms.	Eased	the	trunk	shut.	Walked	swiftly	to	the	nearest	garbage	can.
Lifted	the	lid.	Dropped	 the	arm	in	it.	Left	 the	lid	slightly	askew	on	top	of
the	can.	Got	back	in	the	car	again,	started	it,	and	backed	slowly	out	of
the	alley	and	into	the	street.

Two	down,	he	thought.

48
CHAPTER	        3

The	police	stations	in	this	city	all	looked	alike.	Even	the	newer	ones
began	looking	like	the	older	ones	after	a	while.	A	pair	of	green	globes
flanking	the	entrance	steps,	a	patrolman	standing	on	duty	outside	in	case
anybody	decided	to	go	in	with	a	bomb.	White	numerals	lettered	onto
each	of	the	globes:	72.	Only	the	numbers	changed.	Everything	else	was
the	same.	Eileen	could	have	been	across	the	river	and	uptown	in	the
Eight-Seven.

Scarred	wooden	entrance	doors,	glass-paneled	in	the	upper	halves.	Just
inside	the	doors	was	the	muster	room.	High	desk	on	the	right,	looked	like
a	judge's	bench,	waist-high	brass	railing	some	two	feet	in	front	of	it,
running	the	length	of	it.	Sergeant	sitting	behind	it.	On	the	wall	 behind
him,	photographs	of	the	mayor	and	the	police	commissioner	and	a	poster
printed	with	 the	Miranda-Escobedo	warnings	in	English	and	in	Spanish.
Big	American	flag	on	the	wall	opposite	the	desk.	Wanted	posters	on	the
bulletin	board	under	it.	 She	flashed	her	shield	at	the	sergeant,	who
merely	nodded,	and	then	she	headed	for	the	iron-runged	steps	at	the	far
end	of	the	room.

Rack	with	charging	walkie-talkies	on	the	wall	there,	each	unit	stenciled
PROPERTY	OF	72ND	PRECINCT.	Staircase	leading	down	to	the
holding	cells	in	the	basement,	and	up	to	the	Detective	Division	on	the
second	floor,	hand-lettered	sign	indicating	the	way.	She	climbed	the	steps,
apple	green	walls	on	either	side	of	her,	paint	flaking	and	hand-smudged.
She	was	wearing	sensible,	low-heeled	walking	shoes,	a	cardigan	sweater
over	a	white	cotton	blouse	and	a	brown	woolen	skirt.	The	hooker	gear
was	still	in	the	tote	bag,	together	with	her	hardware.

Down	the	corridor	past	the	Interrogation	 Room,	and	the	Clerical	Office,
and	the	men's	and	women's	toilets,	and	the	locker	rooms,	through	a	wide
doorway,	and	then	to	the	slatted	wooden	rail	divider	with	green	metal
filing	cabinets	backed	up	against	it	on	the	inside.	Stopped	at	the	gate	in
the	railing.	Flashed	the	potsy	again	at	the	guy	sitting	behind	the	closest
desk.

"Eileen	Burke,"	 she	said.	"I'm	 looking	for	Shanahan."

49
"You	found	him,"	 Shanahan	said,	and	got	to	his	feet	and	came	around
the	desk,	hand	extended.	He	was	not	as	big	as	Annie	had	described	him,
five-eleven	or	so,	maybe	a	hundred	and	seventy	pounds,	a	hundred	and
eighty.	Eileen	wished	he	were	bigger.	Black	hair	and	blue	eyes,	toothy
grin,	what	Eileen's	father	used	to	call	a	black	Irishman.	"Mike,"	  he	said,
and	took	her	hand	in	a	firm	grip.	 "Glad	 to	have	you	with	us.	Come	on	in,
you	want	some	coffee?"

"Sounds	good,"	she	said,	and	followed	him	through	the	gate	in	the	railing
and	over	to	his	desk.	"Light	with	 one	sugar."

"Coming	right	 up,"	 he	said,	and	went	to	where	a	Silex	pot	of	water	was
sitting	on	a	hot	plate.	"We	only	got	instant,"	 he	said,	"and	that	powdered
creamer	stuff,	but	the	sugar's	real."

"Good	enough,"	she	said.

He	spooned	instant	coffee	and	creamer	into	a	cup,	poured	hot	water	over
it,	spooned	sugar	into	it	with	the	same	white	plastic	spoon,	stirred	it,	and
then	carried	the	cup	back	to	his	desk.	She	was	still	standing.

"Sit	down,	sit	down,"	 he	said.	"I'll	 buzz	Lou,	tell	him	 you're	here."

He	looked	up	at	the	clock.

Ten	minutes	to	seven.

"I	 thought	you	and	Annie	might	be	coming	over	together,"	he	said,	and
picked	up	the	phone	receiver.	"Good	lady,	Annie,	I	used	to	work	with	her
in	Robbery."	He	stabbed	at	a	button	on	the	base	of	the	phone,	waited,
and	then	said,	"Lou?	Eileen	Burke's	here,	you	want	to	come	on	back?"
He	listened.	"No,	not	yet."	He	looked	at	the	clock	again.	"Uh-huh,"	 he
said.	"Okay,	fine."	 He	put	the	receiver	back	on	the	cradle.	"He'll	be	right
here,"	he	said	to	Eileen.	"He's	down	the	hall	in	Clerical,	thought	you
might	want	to	look	over	the	reports	on	the	case.	We	been	working	it
together,	Lou	and	me,	not	that	we're	getting	such	hot	results.	Which	is
why	Homicide's	on	our	backs,	huh?"

She	registered	this	last	silently.	She	did	not	want	a	backup	harboring	a
grudge	over	Homicide's	interference.	Some	cops	treated	a	tough	case	as	if
it	were	a	sick	child.	Nurse	it	along,	take	its	temperature	every	ten
minutes,	change	the	sheets,	serve	the	hot	chicken	soup.	Anybody	else

50
went	near	it,	watch	out.	She	hoped	that	wasn't	the	situation	here.	She
wished	the	Seven-Two	hadasked	for	assistance,	instead	of	having	it
dumped	on	them.

"How's	the	coffee?"	Shanahan	asked.

She	hadn't	touched	it.	She	lifted	the	cup	now.	Squadroom	coffee	cups	all
looked	alike.	Dirty.	In	some	squadrooms,	the	detectives	had	their	initials
painted	on	the	cups,	so	they	could	tell	one	dirty	cup	from	another.	She
sipped	at	the	coffee.	The	imprint	of	her	lipstick	appeared	on	the	cup's
rim.	It	 would	probably	still	 be	there	a	month	from	now.

"Okay?"	 he	said.

"Yes,	fine,"	she	said.

"Ah,	here's	Lou,"	 he	said,	looking	past	her	shoulder	toward	the	railing.
She	turned	in	the	chair	just	in	time	to	see	a	slight,	olive-complexioned
man	coming	through	the	gate.	Small	mustache	under	his	nose.	Thick
manila	file	folder	in	his	right	 hand.	Five-nine,	she	estimated.	Moved	like
a	bullfighter,	narrow	 shoulders	and	waist,	delicate	hands.	But	you	could
never	tell.	Hal	Willis	at	the	Eight-Seven	was	only	five-eight	and	he	could
throw	any	cheap	thief	on	his	ass	in	three	seconds	flat.

"Burke?"	 he	said.	"Nice	to	see	you."	No	trace	of	an	accent.	Second-	or
third-generation	American,	 she	guessed.	He	extended	his	hand.	Light,
quick	grip,	almost	instant	release.	No	smile	on	his	face.	"Lou	Alvarez,"
he	said.	"Glad	to	have	you	with	us,	we	can	use	the	help."

Party	manners?	Or	a	genuine	welcome?	She	wished	she	knew.	It	would
be	her	ass	on	the	line	out	there	tonight.

"I've	 got	the	file	here,"	he	said,	"you	might	want	to	take	a	look	at	it	 while
we're	waiting	for	Rawles."	He	looked	up	at	the	clock.	Still	only	five
minutes	to	Seven,	but	he	nodded	sourly.	Was	this	an	indication	that	he
thought	all	women	were	habitually	late?	Eileen	took	the	manila	folder
from	him.

"You	can	skip	over	the	pictures,"	he	said.

"Why?"

51
Alvarez	shrugged.

"Suit	yourself,"	 he	said.

She	was	looking	at	the	photographs	when	Annie	walked	in.

"Hi,"	 Annie	 said,	and	glanced	up	at	the	clock.

Seven	sharp.

"Hello,	Mike,"	  she	said,	"how's	The	Chameleon	these	days?"

"Comme-i,	comme-a,"	Shanahan	said,	and	shook	her	hand.

"We	used	to	call	him	The	Chameleon,"	she	explained	to	Eileen,	and	then
said,	"Annie	Rawles,"	and	offered	her	hand	to	Alvarez.

"Lou	 Alvarez."

He	took	her	hand.	He	seemed	uncomfortable	shaking	hands	with	women.
Eileen	was	suddenly	glad	it	would	be	Shanahan	out	there	with	her
tonight.

"Why	 The	Chameleon?"	she	asked.

"Man	 of	a	thousand	faces,"	Annie	said,	and	looked	at	the	photograph	in
Eileen's	hand.	"Nice,"	she	said,	and	grimaced.

"Never	mind	the	pictures,"	 Alvarez	said,	"the	pictures	can't	 talk.	We	got
statements	in	there	from	a	couple	of	girls	working	the	Zone,	they	give	us
a	pretty	good	idea	who	we're	looking	for.	Homicide's	been	pressuring	us
on	this	from	minute	one.	That's	'cause	the	mayor	made	a	big	deal	in	the
papers	about	cleaning	up	the	Zone.	So	Homicide	dumps	it	on	us.	You
help	us	close	this	one	out,"	he	said	to	Eileen,	"I'll	personally	give	you	a
medal.	Cast	it	in	bronze	all	by	myself."

"I	 was	hoping	for	gold,"	Eileen	said.

"You'd	better	take	a	look	at	those	other	pictures,"	Shanahan	said.

"She	don't	have	to	look	at	them,"	Alvarez	said.

52
"Which	 ones?"	Eileen	asked.

"You	trying	 to	spook	her?"

"I'm	 trying	 to	prepare	her."

"She	don't	have	to	look	at	the	pictures,"	Alvarez	said.

But	Eileen	had	already	found	them.

The	earlier	photographs	had	shown	slashed	faces,	slit	throats.

These	showed	rampant	mutilation	below.

"Used	the	knife	top	and	bottom,"	 Shanahan	said.

"Uh-huh,"	 Eileen	said.

"Slashed	the	first	girl	 in	a	doorway	two	blocks	from	the	bar."

"Uh-huh."

"Second	one	in	an	alleyway	on	East	Ninth.	Last	one	on	Canal-side."

"Uh-huh."

"What	 I'm	saying	is	watch	your	step,"	Shanahan	warned.	"This	ain't
your	garden	variety	weirdo	jumpin'	 old	ladies	in	the	park.	This	 is	a
fuckin'	animal,	 and	he	means	business.	You	get	in	the	slightest	bit	of
trouble,	you	holler.	I'll	 be	there	in	zero	flat."

"I'm	 not	afraid	 to	holler,"	Eileen	said.

"Good.	We	ain't	trying	 to	prove	nothing	here,	we	only	want	to	catch	this
guy."

"I'm	 the	one	who	catches	him,"	Alvarez	said,	"I'll	 cut	off	his	balls."

Eileen	looked	at	him.

"What'd	 these	other	girls	tell	you?"	Annie	asked.

53
She	did	not	want	Eileen	to	keep	studying	those	pictures.	Once	around	the
park	was	once	too	often.	She	took	them	from	her	hand,	glanced	at	them
only	cursorily,	and	put	them	back	into	the	folder.	Eileen	looked	up	at	her
questioningly.	But	Alvarez	was	already	talking.

"You	familiar	 with	the	Canal	Zone,	you	know	most	of	the	girls	work	on
the	street,"	he	said.	"A	car	pulls	up,	the	girl	leans	in	the	window,	they
agree	on	a	price,	and	she	does	the	job	while	the	trick	drives	them	around
the	block.	It's	Have	Mouth,	Will	 Travel,	is	what	it	is.	But	there's	a	bar
near	the	docks	where	you	get	a	slightly	better-class	hooker.	We're	talking
comparative	here.	None	of	these	girls	are	racehorses."

"What	 about	this	bar?"	 Annie	said.

"It's	 called	Larry's,	 on	Fairview	and	East	Fourth.	The	girls	working	 the
cars	go	in	there	every	now	and	then,	shoot	up	in	the	toilet,	fix	their	faces,
whatever.	But	there's	also	some	girls	a	little	younger	and	a	little	prettier
who	hang	out	there	looking	for	tricks.	Again,	we're	talking	 comparative.
The	girls	on	the	meat	rack	outside	get	only	five	bucks	for	a	handjob	and
ten	for	a	blow-job.	The	ones	working	the	bar	get	double	that."

"The	point	 is,"	Shanahan	said,	"the	three	girls	he	ripped	were	working
the	bar."

"So	that's	where	you're	planting	me,"	 Eileen	said.

"Be	safer	all	around,"	 Alvarez	said.

"I'm	 not	looking	for	 safe,"	she	said,	bristling.

"No,	and	you're	not	a	real	hooker,	either,"	Alvarez	said,	bristling	 himself.
"You	stand	out	there	on	the	street,	you	keep	turning	down	tricks,	the
other	girls'll	 make	you	for	fuzz	in	a	minute.	You'll	be	standing	out	there
all	alone	before	the	night's	ten	minutes	old."

"Okay,"	 she	said.

"I	 want	this	guy,"	he	said.

"So	do	I."

"Not	the	way	I	want	 him.	I	got	a	daughter	the	age	of	that	little	girl	 in

54
there,"	he	said,	wagging	his	finger	at	the	folder.

"Okay,"	 Eileen	said	again.

"You	work	 the	bar,"	Alvarez	said,	"you	get	a	chance	to	call	your	own
shots.	You	played	hooker	before?"

"Yes."

"Okay,	so	I	don't	have	to	tell	you	how	to	do	your	job."

"That's	 right,	you	don't."

"But	 there	are	some	mean	bastards	down	there	in	the	Zone,	and	not	all	of
them	are	looking	to	carve	you	up.	You	better	step	easy	all	around.	This
ain't	Silk	Stocking	work."

"None	of	it	is,"	 Eileen	said.

They	both	glared	at	each	other.

"What'd	 they	say	about	him?"	Annie	asked,	jumping	in.

"What?"	 Alvarez	said.

Still	angry.	Figuring	 Homicide	had	sent	him	an	amateur.	Figuring	she'd
be	spotted	right	off	as	a	plant.	Fuck	you	and	your	daughter	both,	Eileen
thought.	I	know	my	job.	And	 it's	stillmy	ass	out	there.

"These	girls	you	talked	to,"	 Annie	said.	"What'd	 they	say?"

"What?"

"About	 the	guy,	she	means,"	Shanahan	said.	"This	ain't	gospel,	Annie,
this	is	maybe	just	hookers	running	scared,	which	they	got	every	right	to
be.	But	on	the	nights	of	the	murders,	they	remember	a	guy	sitting	at	the
bar.	Drinking	with	 the	victims.	The	three	he	ripped.	Same	guy	on	three
different	Friday	 nights.	Big	blond	guy,	six-two,	six-three,	maybe	two
hundred	pounds,	dressed	different	each	time,	but	blending	in	with
everybody	else	in	the	joint."

"Meaning?"

55
"Meaning	Friday-night	 sleaze.	No	uptown	dude	looking	for	kicks."

"Do	you	get	any	of	those?"	Eileen	asked.

"Now	and	then,"	 Shanahan	said.	"They	don't	last	long	in	the	Zone.
Hookers	ain't	the	only	predators	there.	But	this	guy	looked	like	one	of	the
seamen	off	the	ships.	Which	don't	necessarily	mean	hewas	,	of	course."

"Anything	 else	we	should	know	about	him?"

"Yeah,	he	had	them	in	stitches."

"What	 do	you	mean?"

"Kept	 telling	them	jokes."

Eileen	looked	at	him.

"Yeah,	I	know	what	you're	thinking,"	  Shanahan	said.	"A	stand-up	comic
with	a	knife."

"Anything	 else?"

"He	wears	eyeglasses,"	Alvarez	said.

"One	of	the	girls	thinks	 he	has	a	tattoo	on	his	right	hand.	Near	the
thumb.	She's	the	only	one	who	mentioned	it."

"What	 kind	of	tattoo?"

"She	couldn't	remember."

"How	many	girls	 did	you	talk	to?"

"Fourdozen	altogether,"	Alvarez	said,	"but	 only	two	of	them	gave	us	a
handle."

"What	 time	was	this?"	Annie	asked.	"When	they	saw	him	at	the	bar	with
the	victims?"

"Varied.	As	early	as	nine,	as	late	as	two	in	the	morning."

56
"Gonna	be	a	long	night,"	Annie	 said,	and	sighed.

Shanahan	looked	up	at	the	clock.

"We	better	work	 out	our	strategy,"	he	said.	"So	we	can	move	when	he
does.	Once	he	gets	Eileen	outside	hellip;"

He	let	the	sentence	trail.

The	clock	ticked	into	the	silence	of	the	squadroom.

"Do	they	know	you	down	there	in	the	Zone?"	Eileen	asked.

Shanahan	looked	at	her.

"Do	they?"

"Yes,	but	hellip;"

"Then	what	the	hell	hellip;	 ?"

"I'll	 be	hellip;"

"What	 good's	a	backup	who	hellip;?"

"You	won't	recognize	me,	don't	worry."

"No?	What	does	the	bartender	say	when	you	walk	in?	Hello,	Detective
Shanahan?"

"Six-to-five	right	 this	minute,	you	won't	 know	me	when	I	walk	in,"
Shanahan	said.

"Don't	 take	the	bet,"	Annie	said.

"Will	 I	know	 you	if	I	have	to	holler?"

"You'll	 know	me	then.	Because	I'll	be	there."

"You're	on,"	 Eileen	said.	"But	if	 I	make	you,	I	go	straight	home.	I	walk
out	of	there	and	go	straight	home.	Understood?"

57
"I'd	 do	the	same.	But	you	won't	know	me."

"I	hope	not.	I	hope	I	lose	the	bet."

"You	will,"	Annie	promised.

"I	didn't	 like	your	shooting	him,"	the	blonde	at	the	wheel	of	the	station
wagon	said.	"That	wasn't	at	all	necessary,	Alice."

Alice	said	nothing.

"You	fire	the	guns	in	the	air	to	scare	them,	to	let	them	know	you	mean
business,	that's	all.	If	that	man	you	shot	is	dead,	the	rest	of	the	night
could	be	ruined	for	us."

Alice	still	said	nothing.

"The	beauty	part	of	this,"	the	blonde	said,	"is	they	never	expect	lightning
to	strike	twice	in	the	same	night.	Are	you	listening,	kiddies?"

None	of	the	kids	said	a	word.

The	digital	dashboard	clock	read	7:04.

They	figure	you	do	a	stickup,	you	go	home	and	lay	low	for	a	while.	That's
the	beauty	part.	We	play	our	cards	right	tonight,	We	go	home	with	forty
grand	easy.	I	mean,	a	Friday	night?	Your	liquor	stores'll	be	open,	some	of
them,	till	midnight,	people	stocking	up	for	the	weekend.	Plenty	of	gold	in
the	registers,	kids,	there	for	the	taking.	No	more	shooting	people,	have
you	got	that?"

The	kids	said	nothing.

The	eyes	behind	the	masks	darted,	covering	both	sides	of	the	avenue.	The
slits	in	the	masks	made	all	the	eyes	look	Oriental,	even	the	blue	ones.

"Especially	you,	Alice.	Do	you	hear	me?"

Alice	nodded	stiffly.

"There	she	is,"	the	blonde	said,	"number	two,"	and	began	easing	the

58
station	wagon	in	toward	the	curb.

The	liquor	store	was	brightly	lighted.

The	lettering	on	the	plate-glass	window	read	FAMOUS	BRANDS	WINE
WHISKEY.

"Have	fun,	kids,"	 the	blonde	said.

The	kids	piled	out	of	the	car.

"Trick	 or	treat,	trick	 or	treat!"	  they	squealed	at	an	old	woman	coming
out	of	the	liquor	store.

The	old	woman	giggled.

"Howcute	!"	 she	said	to	no	one.

Inside	the	store,	the	kids	weren't	so	cute.

The	owner	had	his	back	to	them,	reaching	up	for	a	half-gallon	of	Johnny
Walker	Red.

Alice	shot	him	at	once.

The	thirty-year-old	 account	executive	standing	in	front	of	the	counter
screamed.

She	shot	him,	too.

The	kids	cleaned	out	the	cash	register	in	less	than	twelve	seconds.	One	of
them	took	a	fifth	of	Canadian	Club	from	 the	shelves.	Then	they	ran	out
of	the	store	again,	giggling	and	yelling,	"Trick	or	treat,	 trick	or	 treat!"

"Hello,	Peaches?"	the	man	on	the	telephone	said.

"Yes?"

"I've	 been	trying	to	reach	you	all	day.	My	secretary	left	your	number,	but
she	didn't	say	which	agency	you're	with."

"Agency?"

59
"Yes.	This	is	Phil	Hendricks	at	Camera	Works.	We're	shooting	some	stuff
next	week,	and	my	secretary	thought	you	might	be	right	for	the	job.	How
old	are	you,	Peaches?"

"Forty-nine,"	  she	said	without	hesitation.	Lying	a	little.	Well,	lying	by
eleven	years,	but	who	was	counting?

"That's	 perfect,"	he	said,	"this	is	stuff	for	 the	Sears	catalogue,	a	half-
dozen	mature	women	modeling	housedresses.	If	you'll	give	me	the	name
of	your	agency,	I'll	call	them	in	the	morning."

"I	 don't	have	an	agency,"	Peaches	said.

"You	don't?	Well,	that's	 strange.	I	mean	hellip;	well,	how	long	have	you
been	modeling?"

"I'm	 not	a	model,"	Peaches	said.

"You're	not?	Then	how'd	my	 secretary	hellip;	?"

There	was	a	long,	puzzled	silence	on	the	line.

"This	is	Peaches	Muldoon,	isn't	it?"	he	said.

"Yes,"	she	said,	"but	I've	never	hellip;"

"349-4040?"

"That's	 the	number.	But	your	secretary	must've	hellip;"

"Well,	here's	your	name	and	number	right	 here	in	her	handwriting,"	 he
said.	"But	you	say	you're	not	a	model?"

"No,	I'm	 an	RN."

"A	what?"

"A	registered	nurse."

"Then	how'd	 she	hellip;	?"

60
Another	puzzled	silence.

"Have	you	everthought	of	modeling?"	he	asked.

"Well	hellip;	 not	seriously."

"Because	maybe	you	mentioned	to	someone	that	you	were	looking	for
modeling	work,	and	this	got	to	my	secretary	somehow.	That's	the	only
thing	I	can	figure."

"What's	 your	secretary's	name?"

"Linda.	 Linda	Greeley."

"No,	I	don't	 know	anyone	by	that	name."

"Didyou	mention	to	someone	that	you	might	be	interested	in	modeling?"

"Well	hellip;	 you	know	hellip;	 people	are	always	telling	me	I	should	try
modeling,	but	you	know	how	people	talk.	I	never	take	them	seriously.	I
mean,	I'm	not	a	kid	anymore,	you	know."

"Well,	forty-nine	 isn't	exactlyancient	,"	 he	said,	and	laughed.

"Well,	I	 suppose	not.	But	people	try	to	natter	you,	you	know.	I'm	not
really	beautiful	enough	to	do	modeling.	There's	a	certain	type,	you	know.
For	modeling."

"What	 typeare	you,	Peaches?"	he	asked.

"Well,	I	 don't	know	how	to	answer	that."

"Well,	how	tall	 are	you,	for	example?"

"Five-nine,"	 she	said.

"How	much	do	you	weigh?"

"I	 could	lose	a	little	weight	right	now,"	she	said,	"believe	me."

"Well,	there	isn't	 a	woman	on	earth	who	doesn't	think	she	could	stand	to
lose	a	few	pounds.	How	muchdo	you	weigh,	Peaches?"

61
"A	hundred	and	twenty,"	she	said.	Lying	a	little.	Well,	lying	by	ten
pounds.	Well,	twenty	pounds,	actually.

"That's	not	what	I'd	callobese	,"	he	said.	"Five-nine,	a	hundred-twenty."

"Well,	let's	say	I'm	hellip;	well	hellip;	zoftig,	I	guess."

"Are	you	Jewish,	Peaches?"

"What?"

"That's	a	Jewish	expression,	zoftig,"	he	said.	"But	Muldoon	isn't	Jewish,
is	it?"

"No,	no.	I'm	Irish."

"Red	hair,	I'll	bet."

"How'd	you	guess?"	she	asked,	and	laughed.

"And	isn't	that	a	faint	Southern	accent	I	detect?"

"I'm	from	Tennessee	originally.	I	didn't	think	it	still	showed."

"Oh,	just	a	trace.	Which	is	why	zoftig	sounded	so	strange	on	your	lips,"
he	said.	"Well,	I'm	sorry	you're	not	a	model,	Peaches,	truly.	We're	paying
a	hundred	and	twenty-five	a	hour,	and	we're	shooting	something	like	two
dozen	pages,	so	this	could've	come	to	a	bit	of	change.	Do	you	work	full
time	as	a	nurse?"

"No.	I	do	mostly	residential	work."

"Then	you	might	be	free	to	hellip;"

He	hesitated.

"But	if	you're	not	experienced	hellip;"

He	hesitated	again.

"I	just	don't	know,"	he	said.	"What	we're	looking	for,	you	see,	is	a	group

62
of	women	who	are	mature	and	who	could	be	accepted	as	everyday
housewives.	We're	not	shooting	any	glamor	stuff	here,	no	sexy	lingerie,
nothing	like	that.	In	 fact	hellip;	well,	I	 don't	really	know.	But	 your
inexperience	might	be	a	plus.	When	you	say	you're	a	zoftig	type,	you
don't	mean	hellip;	well,	you	don't	looktoo	glamorous,	do	you?"

"I	 wouldn't	say	I	look	glamorous	no.	I'm	 forty-nine,	you	know."

"Well,	Sophia	Loren's	what?	In	 her	fifties,	isn't	she?	And	she	certainly
looks	glamorous.	What	I'm	saying	is	we're	not	looking	for	any	Sophia
Lorens	here.	Can	you	imagine	Sophia	Loren	in	a	housedress?"	he	said,
and	laughed	again.	"Let	me	just	write	down	your	dimensions,	okay?	I'll
discuss	this	with	the	ad	agency	in	the	morning,	who	knows?	You	said
five-nine	hellip;"

"Yes."

"A	hundred	and	twenty	 pounds."

"Yes."

"What	 are	your	other	dimensions,	Peaches?	Bust	size	first."

"Thirty-six	 C."

"Good,	we	don't	want	anyone	who	lookstoo	,	well	hellip;	you	get	some	of
these	so-calledmature	models,	they're	big-busted,	but	very	flabby.	You're
not	flabby,	are	you?"

"Oh,	no."

And	your	waist	size,	Peaches?"

"Twenty-six."

"And	 your	hips?"

"Thirty-six."

"That	 sounds	very	good,"	he	said.	"Are	your	breasts	firm?"	 he	asked.

"What?"

63
"Your	breasts.	Forgive	me,	but	I	know	the	ad	agency'll	want	to	know.
They've	had	so	many	of	these	so-called	mature	models	who	come	in	with
breasts	hanging	to	their	knees,	they're	getting	a	little	gun-shy.	Are	your
breasts	good	and	firm?"

Peaches	hesitated.

"What	 did	you	say	your	name	was?"	she	asked.

"Phil	 Hendricks.	At	Camera	Works.	We're	a	professional	photography
firm,	down	here	on	Hall	Avenue."

"Could	I	 have	your	number	there,	please?"

"Sure.	It's	847-3300."

"And	 this	is	for	the	Sears	catalogue?"

"Yes,	we	begin	shooting	Monday	morning.	We've	already	signed	two
women,	both	of	them	in	their	late	forties,	good	firm	bodies,	one	of	them
used	to	model	lingerie	in	fact.	Do	me	a	favor,	will	you,	Peaches?"

"What's	 that?"	 she	said.

"Is	there	a	mirror	 in	the	room	there?"

"Yes?"

"Does	the	phone	reach	over	there?	To	where	the	mirror	is?"

"Well,	it's	 right	there	on	the	wall,"

"Stand	up,	Peaches,	and	take	a	look	at	yourself	in	that	mirror."

"Why	 should	I	do	that?"

"Because	I	want	an	objective	opinion.	What	are	you	wearing	right	now,
Peaches?"

"A	blouse	and	a	skirt."

64
"Are	you	wearing	shoes?"

"Yes?"

"High-heeled	shoes?"

"Yes?"

"And	 a	bra?	Are	you	wearing	a	bra,	Peaches?"

"Listen,	this	conversation	is	making	me	a	little	nervous,"	 she	said.

"I	 want	your	objective	opinion,	Peaches."

"About	 what?"

"About	 whether	your	breasts	are	good	and	firm.	Can	you	see	yourself	in
the	mirror,	Peaches?"

"Listen,	this	is	really	 making	mevery	nervous,"	she	said.

"Take	off	your	blouse,	Peaches.	Look	at	yourself	in	your	bra,	and	tell	me
hellip;"

She	hung	up.

Her	heart	was	pounding.

A	trick,	she	thought.	He	tricked	me!	How	could	I	 have	been	so	dumb?
Kepttalking	to	him!	 Keptbelieving	his	pitch!	Gave	him	all	the	answers	he
hellip;

How'd	he	know	my	first	 name?

I'm	listed	as	P.	Muldoon,	how'd	he	hellip;	?

The	answering	machine.	Hi,	this	is	Peaches,	I	can't	come	to	the	phone
just	now.	Of	course.	Said	he'd	been	trying	to	reach	me	all	day.	Hi,	this	is
Peaches,	I	can't	come	to	the	phone	just	now.	Got	the	Muldoon	and	the
number	from	the	phone	book,	got	my	first	name	from	the	answering
hellip;

65
Oh,	God,	myaddress	is	in	the	book,	too!

Suppose	hecomes	here?

Oh	dear	God	hellip;

The	telephone	rang	again.

Don't	answer	it,	she	thought.

It	kept	ringing.

Don't	answer	it.

Ringing,	ringing.

But	Sandra's	supposed	to	call	about	the	party.

Ringing,	ringing,	ringing.

If	it's	him	 again,	I'll	 just	hang	up.

She	reached	out	for	the	phone.	Her	hand	was	trembling.	She	lifted	the
receiver.

"Hello?"	 she	said.

"Peaches?"

Was	it	him	again?	The	voice	didn't	sound	quite	like	his.	"Yes?"	she	said.

"Hi,	 this	is	Detective	Andy	Parker.	I	don't	know	if	 you	remember	me	or
not,	I'm	the	one	who	locked	up	your	crazy	hellip;"

"Boy,	am	I	glad	to	hear	fromyou	!"	 she	said.

"How	about	that?"	 Parker	 said,	putting	up	the	phone.	"Remembered	me
right	off	the	bat,	told	 me	to	hurry	on	over!"

"You're	unforgettable,"	 Brown	 said.	He	was	at	his	desk,	typing	a	report
on	the	torso	they'd	found	behind	the	Burgundy	Restaurant.	Genero	was
looking	over	his	shoulder,	trying	to	learn	how	to	spell	dismembered.

66
The	squadroom	was	alive	with	clattering	typewriters.

Meyer	sat	in	his	dapper	tan	sports	jacket	typing	a	report	on	the	kids
who'd	held	up	the	liquor	store	and	killed	the	owner.

Kling	was	at	his	own	desk,	typing	a	follow-up	report	on	a	burglary	 he'd
caught	three	days	ago.	He	was	thinking	about	Eileen.	He	was	thinking
that	right	 about	now	Eileen	was	in	Calm's	Point,	getting	ready	to	hit	the
Zone.	He	was	thinking	he	might	just	wander	over	there	later	tonight.	He
looked	up	at	the	clock.	Seven-fifteen.	Maybe	when	he	got	off	at	midnight.
See	what	was	happening	over	there.	She	didn't	have	to	know	he	was	there
looking	around.	A	third	 backup	never	hurt	anybody.

"So,"	Parker	 said,	"if	 nobody	needs	me	here,	I	think	I'll	mosey	on	over."

"Nobody	needs	you,	right,"	Meyer	said.	"We	 got	two	homicides	here,
nobody	needs	you."

"Tell	me	the	truth,	 Meyer,"	Parker	said.	"You	 think	those	two	homicides
are	gonna	be	closed	out	tonight?	In	all	your	experience,	have	you	ever
closed	out	a	homicide	the	same	day	you	caught	it?	Have	you?"

"I'm	 trying	 to	think,"	 Meyer	said.

"In	 all	my	experience,	that	never	happened,"	Parker	said.	"Unless	you
walk	in	and	there's	the	perp	with	a	smoking	gun	in	his	hand.	Otherwise,
it	takes	weeks.	Months	sometimes.	Sometimesyears	."

"Sometimescenturies	,"	Brown	said.

"So	what's	your	point?"	 Meyer	said.

"My	 point	is	hellip;here's	my	point,"	 he	said,	opening	his	arms	wide	to
the	railing	as	Carella	came	through	the	gate.	"Steve,"	he	said,	"I'm	very
glad	to	see	you."

"You	are?"	Carella	 said.

He	was	a	tall	slender	man	with	the	build	and	stance	of	an	athlete,	brown
hair,	brown	eyes	slanting	slightly	downward	to	give	his	face	a	somewhat
Oriental	look.	Tonight	he	was	wearing	a	plaid	sports	shirt	under	a	blue

67
windbreaker,	light	cotton	corduroy	 trousers,	brown	loafers.	He	went
directly	to	his	desk	and	looked	in	the	basket	there	for	any	telephone
messages.

"How's	it	 out	there?"	Brown	 asked.

"Quiet,"	 Carella	said.	"You	got	back	okay,	huh?"	 he	asked	Kling.

"I	 caught	a	taxi."

Carella	turned	to	Parker.	"Why	 are	you	so	happy	to	see	me?"	he	asked.

"	'Cause	my	colleague,	Detective	Meyer	Meyer	there,	sitting	at	his	desk
there	in	his	new	jacket	and	his	bald	head,	is	eager	to	crack	a	homicide	he
caught,	and	he	needs	a	good	partner."

"That	 lets	me	out,"	Carella	said.	"What	 kind	of	homicide,	Meyer?"

"Some	kids	held	up	a	liquor	store	and	shot	the	owner."

"Teenagers?"

"Eleven-year-olds."

"No	kidding?"

"You	gotta	get	yourself	some	lollipops,"	Brown	said,	"bait	 a	trap	with
them."

"So	is	everybody	all	paired	up	nice	now?"	Parker	asked.	"You	got
Genero	hellip;"

"Thanks	very	much,"	 Brown	said.

"Meyer's	got	Steve	hellip;"

"I	 only	stopped	by	for	some	coffee,"	Carella	said.

"And	 I	got	Peaches	Muldoon."

"Who's	that?"

68
"A	gorgeous	registered	nurse	who's	dying	to	see	me."

"Sixty	years	old,"	Brown	said.

"That's	an	oldlady	!"	Genero	said,	shocked.

"Tell	him."

"You	ever	date	a	nurse?"	Parker	said.

"Me?"	Genero	said.

"You,	you.	You	ever	date	a	nurse?"

"No.	And	I	never	dated	a	sixty-year-old	lady,	either."

"Tell	him,"	Brown	said.

"There	is	nothing	like	a	nurse,"	Parker	said.	"It's	a	fact	that	in	the	book
business	if	you	put	the	word	nurse	in	a	title,	you	sell	a	million	more
copies."

"Who	told	you	that?"

"It's	a	fact.	A	publisher	told	me	that.	In	this	office	where	they	stole	all	his
typewriters,	this	was	maybe	a	year	ago.	A	nurse	in	the	title	sells	a	million
more	copies."

"I'm	gonna	write	a	book	calledThe	Naked	and	the	Nurse	,"	Brown	said.

"How	aboutGone	with	the	Nurse	?"	Meyer	said.

"OrNurse-22	?"	Carella	said.

"Kid	around,	go	ahead,"	Parker	said.	"You	see	me	tomorrow	morning,
I'll	be	a	wreck."

"I	think	you'd	better	stick	around,"	Brown	said.	"Cotton's	all	alone	out
there."

"Bert	can	go	hold	his	hand,	soon	as	he	finishes	writing	his	book	there."

69
"What	 book?"	Kling	 asked,	looking	up	from	his	typewriter.

"Me,"	 Parker	said,	"I'm	  gonna	go	do	a	follow-up	on	a	homicide
investigation."

"Ten	years	old,"	Brown	said.

"I	 thought	you	said	eleven,"	Carella	said,	puzzled.

"The	homicide.	Ten	years	ago.	He	arrested	a	nut	was	killing	priests.	The
nurse	is	his	mother."

"Thekids	are	eleven	years	old,"	Meyer	said.	"The	ones	who	did	the	liquor
store	guy.	Or	twelve."

"That's	 what	I	thought,"	 Carella	said.	He	still	looked	puzzled.

"Any	 further	 objections?"	Parker	asked.

They	all	looked	at	him	sourly.

"In	 that	case,	gentlemen,	I	bid	you	a	fond	adoo."

"You	gonna	leave	a	number	where	we	can	reach	you?"	Brown	asked.

"No,"	 Parker	said.

The	phone	rang	as	he	went	through	the	gate	and	out	into	the	corridor.

Watching	him	go,	Brown	shook	his	head	and	then	picked	up	the	phone
receiver.

"Eighty-Seventh	Squad,	Brown."

"Artie,	 this	is	Dave	downstairs,"	Murchison	 said.	"You're	handling	that
body	in	the	garbage	can,	ain't	you?"

"Pieceof	a	body,"	Brown	said.

"Well,	we	just	got	another	piece,"	Murchison	 said.

70
CHAPTER	        4

Hawes	had	to	keep	telling	himself	this	was	strictly	business.

Bermuda	had	been	one	thing,	Bermuda	was	a	thousand	miles	away,	and
besides	he'd	asked	Annie	to	go	along	with	him.	This	was	another	thing.
This	was	the	big	bad	city,	and	Annie	lived	here	and	besides	he	had	a	date
with	her	tomorrow	 night,	and	furthermore	 Marie	Sebastiani	was
married.

As	of	the	moment,	anyway.

The	possibility	existed	that	her	husband	had	run	off	on	his	own	to	get
away	from	her,	though	why	anyone	would	want	to	abandon	a	beautiful,
leggy	blonde	was	beyond	Hawes.	If	that's	what	had	happened,	though
mdash;Sebastian	the	Great	tossing	his	junk	all	over	the	driveway	and
then	taking	off	in	the	Citation	 mdash;then	maybe	he	was	gone	forever,	in
which	case	Marie	wasn't	as	married	as	she	thought	she	was.	Hawes	had
handled	cases	where	a	guy	went	out	for	a	loaf	of	bread	and	never	was
heard	from	since.	Probably	living	on	some	South	Sea	island	painting
naked	natives.	One	case	he	had,	the	guy	told	his	wife	he	was	going	down
for	aTV	Guide.	This	was	at	eight	o'clock.	The	wife	sat	through	the	eleven
o'clock	news,	and	then	the	Johnny	Carson	show,	and	then	the	late	movie,
and	still	no	hubby	with	theTV	Guide.	Guy	turned	up	in	 California	six
years	later,	living	with	two	girls	in	 Santa	Monica.	So	maybe	Sebastian	the
Great	had	pulled	the	biggest	trick	of	his	career,	disappearing	on	his	wife.
Who	knew?

On	the	other	hand,	maybe	the	lady's	concern	was	well-founded.	Maybe
somebody	had	come	across	Frank	Sebastiani	while	he	was	loading	his
goodies	in	the	car,	and	maybe	he'd	zonked	the	magician	and	thrown	his
stuff	out	of	the	car	and	took	off	with	the	car	and	the	magician	both.
Dump	the	magician	later	on,	dead	or	alive,	and	sell	the	car	to	a	chop
shop.	Easy	pickings	on	a	relatively	quiet	Halloween	night.	It	was	possible.

Either	way,	this	was	strictly	business.

Hawes	wished,	however,	that	Marie	wouldn't	keep	touching	him	quite	so
often.

71
The	lady	was	very	definitely	a	toucher,	and	although	Hawes	didn't
necessarily	buy	the	psychological	premise	that	insisted	casual	body
contact	was	an	absolute	prerequisite	to	outright	seduction,	he	had	to
admit	that	her	frequent	touching	of	his	arm	 or	his	shoulder	or	his	hand
was	a	bit	unsettling.	True	enough,	the	touching	was	only	to	emphasize	a
conversational	point	mdash;as	when	she	told	him	again	how	grateful	she
was	that	he	was	taking	her	to	dinner	mdash;or	to	indicate	this	or	that
possible	restaurant	along	the	Stem.	He	had	parked	the	car	on	North
Fifth,	and	they	were	walking	westward	now,	heading	downtown,	looking
for	a	place	to	eat.	At	seven	thirty-five	on	a	Friday	night	there	were	still	a
lot	of	restaurants	open,	but	Marie	had	told	him	she	felt	like	pizza	and	so
he	chose	a	little	place	just	south	of	the	avenue,	on	Fourth.	Red-checkered
tablecloths,	candles	in	Chianti	bottles,	people	waiting	in	line	for	tables.
Hawes	rarely	pulled	rank,	but	now	he	casually	mentioned	to	the	hostess
that	he	was	a	detective	working	out	of	the	Eight-Seven	and	he	hadn't	had
anything	to	eat	since	he	came	on	at	four	o'clock.

"This	way,	officer,"	 the	hostess	said	at	once,	and	led	them	to	a	table	near
the	window.

As	soon	as	the	hostess	was	gone,	Marie	said,	"Does	that	happen	all	the
time?"

"Does	what	happen?"

"The	royal	treatment."

"Sometimes,"	Hawes	said.	"You	sure	you	only	want	pizza?	There's
plenty	other	stuff	on	the	menu."

"No,	that's	what	I	 really	feel	like.	Cheese	and	anchovies."

"Would	you	like	 a	drink?"	 he	asked.	"I'm	on	duty,	but	 hellip;"

"Do	you	really	honor	that?"

"Oh,	sure."

"I'll	 just	 have	beer	with	the	pizza."

Hawes	signaled	to	the	waiter,	and	then	ordered	a	large	pizza	with	cheese

72
and	anchovies.

"Anything	 to	drink?"	  the	waiter	asked.

"A	draft	 for	the	lady,	a	Coke	for	me."

"Miller's	 or	 Michelob?"

"Miller's,"	  Marie	 said.

The	waiter	went	off	again.

"This	is	really	very	 nice	of	you,"	Marie	said,	and	reached	across	the	table
to	touch	his	hand	briefly.	A	whisper	touch.	There,	and	then	gone.

"As	soon	as	we	get	back	to	the	squadroom,"	Hawes	said,	"I'll	call	Auto
again,	see	if	they	turned	up	anything	on	either	of	the	vehicles."

He	had	made	a	call	to	Auto	Theft	from	the	custodian's	office	at	the	high
school,	reporting	both	the	Citation	and	the	Econoline,	but	he	knew	what
the	chances	were	of	finding	either	vehicle	tonight.	He	didn't	want	to	tell
her	that.

"That	 would	be	a	start,"	she	said.	"If	they	found	 the	cars."

"Oh,	sure."

A	pained	look	crossed	her	face.

"I'm	 sure	he's	okay,"	Hawes	said.

"I	 hope	so."

"I'm	 sure."

He	wasn't	at	all	sure.

"I	 just	keep	thinking	something	terrible	 has	happened	to	him.	I	keep
thinking	whoever	stole	the	car	hellip;"

"Well,	you	don't	 know	that	for	a	fact,"	 Hawes	said.

73
"What	 do	you	mean?"

"Well,	that	 the	car	was	stolen."

"It's	 gone,	isn't	it?"

"Yes,	but	hellip;"

He	didn't	want	to	tell	 her	that	maybe	her	husband	had	driven	off	on	his
own,	heading	for	the	wild	blue	yonder.	Let	the	lady	enjoy	her	pizza	and
her	beer.	If	her	husband	had	in	fact	abandoned	her,	she'd	learn	it	soon
enough.	If	he	was	lying	dead	in	an	alley	someplace,	she'd	learn	that	even
sooner.

He	didn't	bring	 up	Jimmy	Brayne	again	until	 after	they'd	been	served.

She	was	digging	into	the	pizza	as	if	she	hadn't	eaten	for	a	week.	She	ate
the	way	that	woman	in	theTom	Jones	movie	ate.	Licked	her	lips,	rolled
her	eyes,	thrust	pizza	into	her	mouth	as	if	she	were	making	love	to	it.
Come	on,	he	thought.	Strictly	business	here.

"He's	normally	 reliable,	is	that	right?"	 he	said.

"Who?"

"Jimmy	 Brayne."

"Oh,	yes.	Completely."

"How	long	has	he	been	working	for	you?"

"Three	months."

"Started	this	July?"

"Yes.	We	did	the	act	at	a	big	Republican	picnic	on	the	Fourth.	That	was
the	first	time	Jimmy	 helped	us."

"Carrying	 the	stuff	over	in	the	van	hellip;"

"Yes."

74
"Picking	it	up	later."

"Yes."

"Did	he	know	where	he	was	supposed	to	pick	you	up	tonight?"

"Oh,	sure.	He	dropped	the	stuff	off	at	the	school,	of	course	he	knew."

"Helped	you	unload	it?"

"Yes."

"When	was	that?	What	time?"

"We	got	there	about	three-fifteen."

"Drove	into	the	city	together?"

"Frank	and	I	were	following	the	van."

"And	Jimmy	left	the	school	at	what	time?"

"As	soon	as	everything	was	on	stage."

"Which	was	when?"

"Three-thirty,	a	quarter	to	four?"

"And	he	knew	he	was	supposed	to	come	back	at	five-thirty?"

"Yes."

"Is	it	possible	he	went	someplace	with	your	husband?"

"Like	where?"

"For	a	drink	or	something?	While	you	were	changing?"

"Then	why	was	all	the	stuff	on	the	sidewalk?"

"It's	just	that	hellip;	well,both	of	them	disappearing	hellip;"

75
"Excuse	me,"	the	waiter	said.	"Officer?"

Hawes	looked	up.

"Officer,	I	 hate	to	bother	you,"	the	waiter	said.

"Yes?"

"Officer,	there's	somebody's	arm	in	one	of	the	garbage	cans	out	back."

It	was	ten	minutes	to	eight	on	the	face	of	the	clock	on	the	locker-room
wall.

They	could	have	been	teenagers	swapping	stories	about	their	boyfriends.

Nothing	in	their	conversation	indicated	they	were	going	out	hunting	for	a
killer.

"Maybe	I	 should've	gone	down	later,"	Annie	said.	"The	trial	 ended	on
Wednesday,	I	could've	gone	down	then."	She	stepped	into	her	short	skirt,
pulled	it	over	her	blouse	and	pantyhose,	zipped	up	the	side,	fastened	the
button	at	the	waist.	"Trouble	 is,	I	wasn't	sure	Iwanted	to	go."

"But	 he	asked	you,	didn't	he?"	Eileen	said.

"Sure,	but	hellip;	 I	don't	 know.	I	got	the	feeling	he	was	just	going
through	the	motions.	I'll	 tell	you	the	truth,	 I	think	 he	wanted	to	go	down
there	alone."

"What	 makes	you	think	so?"	Eileen	asked.

She	was	wearing	a	low-cut	blouse,	and	a	wraparound	skirt	as	short	as
Annie's,	fastened	on	the	right-hand	side	with	a	three-inch-long
ornamental	safety	pin.	The	pin	would	be	a	last-ditch	weapon	if	she
needed	it.	If	she	needed	it,	she	would	poke	out	his	eyes	with	it.

She	was	sitting	on	the	bench	in	front	of	the	lockers,	pulling	on	high-
heeled	boots	with	floppy	tops.	A	holster	was	strapped	to	her	ankle	inside
the	right	boot.	The	pistol	in	the	holster	was	a	.25-caliber	Astra	Firecat
automatic,	with	a	two-and-a-half-inch	barrel.	 It	weighed	a	bit	less	than
twelve	ounces.	Six-shot	magazine,	plus	one	in	the	firing	chamber.	She
would	pump	all	seven	slugs	into	his	face	if	she	had	to.	There	was	a	six-

76
shot,	.44-caliber	Smith	Wesson	hammerless	revolver	in	her	handbag.	Plus
a	switchblade	knife.	Rambo,	she	thought.	But	it	won't	happen	to	me
again.	She	was	wearing	two	pairs	of	panties	under	her	pantyhose.	Her
psychological	weapons.

"I	 just	hellip;	 I	don't	know,"	 Annie	said.	"I	 think	 Cotton's	trying	 to	end
it,	I	just	don't	 know."

She	reached	into	the	locker	for	her	handbag,	took	out	her	cosmetics	kit.

Eileen	was	standing	now,	looking	down	into	the	boots.

"Can	you	see	this	gun?"	she	asked.

Annie	came	over	to	her,	lipstick	in	her	hand.	She	looked	down	into	the
floppy	top	of	the	boot	on	Eileen's	right	foot.

"You	might	want	to	lower	 the	holster,"	she	said.	"I'm	getting	a	glimpse	of
metal."

Eileen	sat	again,	rolled	down	the	boot	top,	unstrapped	the	holster,
lowered	it,	strapped	it	tight	again.

"Maybe	you	should've	gone	down	there,	had	it	out	with	him,"	 she	said.

"Well,	that	 would've	ended	it	for	sure.	A	man	doesn't	want	a	showdown
on	his	vacation."

"But	 if	hewants	to	end	it	hellip;"

"I'm	 not	sure	of	that."

"Well,	what	makes	you	think	hemight	want	to?"

"We	haven't	made	love	in	the	past	two	weeks."

"Bert	 and	I	haven't	made	love	since	the	rape,"	Eileen	said	flatly,	and
stood	up	and	looked	down	into	the	boots	again.

"I'm	 hellip;	 sorry,"	Annie	 said.

"Maybe	that'll	 change	tonight,"	 Eileen	said.

77
And	Annie	suddenly	knew	she	was	planning	murder.

The	old	lady's	name	was	Adelaide	Davis,	and	she	had	seen	the	kids	going
into	the	liquor	store	on	Culver	and	Twelfth.	She	was	now	standing
outside	on	the	sidewalk	with	Carella	and	Meyer.	Inside	the	store,	two
ambulance	attendants	were	hoisting	the	body	of	the	owner	onto	a
stretcher.	Monroe	was	watching	the	operation,	his	hands	in	his	jacket
pockets.	A	tech	from	the	Mobile	Lab	unit	was	dusting	the	register	for
fingerprints.	The	M.E.	 was	kneeling	over	the	second	body.	One	of	the
attendants	said,	"Up,"	and	they	both	lifted	 the	stretcher	and	then
stepped	gingerly	around	the	M.E.	and	the	other	body.

A	crowd	had	gathered	on	the	sidewalk.	This	was	still	only	eight	o'clock	on
a	balmy	Friday	night,	a	lot	of	people	were	still	in	the	streets.	The
ambulance	attendants	went	past	Mrs.	Davis	and	the	two	detectives.	Mrs.
Davis	watched	them	as	they	slid	the	stretcher	into	the	ambulance.	She
watched	them	as	they	carried	another	stretcher	back	into	the	store.
Patrolmen	were	shooing	back	the	crowd	now,	making	sure	everyone
stayed	behind	the	barriers.	Mrs.	Davis	felt	privileged.	Mrs.	Davis	felt	like
a	star.	She	could	see	some	of	her	neighbors	in	the	crowd,	and	she	knew
they	envied	her.

"I	 can't	believe	this,"	she	said.	"They	looked	so	cute."

"How	many	were	there,	ma'am?"	 Carella	asked.

Mrs.	Davis	liked	Carella.	She	thought	he	was	very	handsome.	The	other
detective	was	bald,	she	had	never	favored	bald	men.	Wait'll	she	told	her
daughter	in	Florida	that	 she'd	witnessed	a	murder	mdash;twomurders
mdash;and	had	talked	to	detectives	like	on	television.

"Oh,	just	 a	handful	of	them,"	she	said.

"How	many	would	 you	say?"	Meyer	asked.

"Well,	they	went	by	very	fast,"	 she	said.	"But	I'd	 say	there	were	only
four	or	five	of	them.	They	all	jumped	out	of	 the	station	wagon	and	ran
into	the	store."

"It	 was	a	station	wagon,	huh?	The	vehicle?"

78
"Oh,	yes.	For	certain."

"Would	you	know	 the	year	and	make?"

"I'm	 sorry,	no.	A	blue	station	wagon."

"And	 these	kids	ran	out	of	it	with	guns	in	their	hands,	huh?"

"No,	I	didn't	 see	any	guns.	Just	the	shopping	bags."

"No	guns,"	Carella	 said.

"Not	until	 they	got	inside	the	store.	The	guns	were	in	the	shopping	bags."

"So	when	they	got	inside	the	store,	these	little	boys	pulled	the	guns	and
hellip;"

"No,	they	were	little	girls."

Meyer	looked	at	Carella.

"Girls?"	 he	said.

"Yessir.	Four	or	five	little	girls.	 All	of	them	wearing	these	long	dresses
down	to	their	ankles	and	little	blonde	wigs.	They	looked	like	little
princesses."

"Princesses,"	Carella	said.

"Yes,"	Mrs.	Davis	said.	"They	 had	on	these	masks	that	covered	entire
faces,	with	sort	of	Chinese	eyes	on	them	mdash;slanted,	you	know
mdash;well,	maybe	Japanese,	I	guess.	Well,	likeyour	eyes,"	she	said	to
Carella.	"Slanted,	you	know?"

"Yes,	ma'am."

"And	 rosy	cheeks	painted	on	the	masks,	and	bright	red	lips,	and	I	think
little	beauty	spots	near	the	mouth.	They	were	absolutely	beautiful.	Like
little	Chinese	princesses.	Or	Japanese.	Except	that	they	were	blonde."

"So	they	had	on	these	Chinese-looking	masks	hellip;"

79
"Or	Japanese	hellip;"

"Right,"	Meyer	said,	"and	they	were	wearing	blonde	wigs	hellip;"

"Yes,	curly	blonde	wigs.	Like	Little	Orphan	Annie,	except	she's	a
redhead."

"Curly	blonde	wigs,	and	long	dresses."

"Yes,	like	gowns.	They	looked	like	darling	little	princesses."

"What	kind	of	shoes,	ma'am?"	Carella	asked.

"Oh.	I	don't	know.	I	didn't	notice	their	shoes."

"They	weren't	wearingsneakers	,	were	they?"

"Well,	I	really	couldn't	see.	The	gowns	were	very	long."

The	ambulance	attendants	were	coming	out	with	the	second	body	now.
The	M.E.	was	still	inside,	talking	to	Monroe.	Mrs.	Davis	looked	down	at
the	body	as	it	went	past.	Before	tonight,	she	had	never	seen	a	dead	body
except	in	a	funeral	home.	Tonight,	she'd	just	seen	two	of	them	close	up.

"So	they	ran	into	the	store,"	Carella	said.

"Yes,	yelling	'Trick	or	treat.'	"

"Uh-huh,"	Carella	said.	"And	pulled	the	guns	hellip;"

"Yes.	And	shot	Mr.	Agnello	and	the	man	who	was	in	the	store	with	him."

"Shot	them	right	off?"	Meyer	said.

"Yes."

"Didn't	say	it	was	a	stickup	or	anything,	just	started	shooting."

"Yes.	Mr.	Agnello	and	the	man	with	him."

"What	happened	next,	ma'am?	In	the	store.	Did	you	keep	watching?"

80
"Oh,	yes.	I	was	scared	to	death,	but	I	kept	watching."

"Did	you	see	them	clean	out	the	cash	register?"

"Yes.	And	one	of	them	took	a	bottle	of	whiskey	from	the	shelf."

"Then	what?"

"They	came	running	out.	I	was	standing	over	there,	to	the	left,	over
there,	I'm	not	sure	they	saw	me.	I	guess	maybe	they	would've	shot	me,
too,	if	they'd	seen	me."

"You	were	lucky,"	Carella	said.

"Yes,	I	think	I	was."

"What'd	they	do	then?"	Meyer	asked.

"They	got	back	in	the	station	wagon,	and	the	woman	drove	them	off."

"There	was	a	woman	driving	the	car?"

"Yes,	a	blonde	woman."

"How	old,	would	you	know?"

"I	really	couldn't	say.	A	sort	of	heavyset	woman,	she	might've	been	in	her
forties."

"By	heavyset	hellip;"

"Well,	sort	of	stout."

"What	was	she	wearing,	would	you	remember?"

"I'm	sorry."

Monroe	was	coming	out	of	the	liquor	store.

"This	the	witness	here?"	he	asked.

"A	very	good	witness,"	Carella	said.

81
"Well,	thank	 you,	young	man,"	Mrs.	Davis	said,	and	smiled	at	him.	She
was	suddenly	glad	she	hadn't	told	him	she'd	wet	her	pants	when	she	saw
those	little	girls	shooting	Mr.	Agnello.

"So	what've	we	got	here?"	Monroe	said.	"An	epidemic	of	kindergarten
kids	holding	up	liquor	 stores?"

"Looks	that	 way,"	Carella	said.	"Where's	your	 partner?"

"Who	the	hell	knows	where	he	is?"	Monroe	said.	"Excuse	me,	lady."

"Oh,	that's	 perfectly	all	right,"	 she	said.	This	was	just	like	cable
television,	with	the	cursing	and	all.	She	couldn't	wait	to	phone	her
daughter	and	tell	her	about	it.

"Same	kids,	or	what?"	Monroe	 asked.

"What?"	 Mrs.	 Davis	said.

"Excuse	me,	lady,"	Monroe	said,	"I	 was	talking	to	this	officer	here."

"Little	 girls	 this	time,"	Meyer	 said.	"But	it	 sounds	like	the	same	bunch.
Same	blonde	driving	the	car."

"Nice	lady,	that	blonde,"	 Monroe	said.	"Driving	 kids	to	stickups.	What
kind	of	car,	did	you	find	out?"	 He	turned	to	Carella.	"What	 it	 is,	the	fart
at	the	other	store	couldn't	hellip;	excuse	me,	lady."

"Oh,	that's	 perfectly	all	right,"	 she	said.

"A	blue	station	wagon,"	Meyer	 said.

"You	happen	to	know	what	year	and	make,	lady?"

"I'm	 sorry,	I	 don't."

"Yeah,"	Monroe	said.	"So	all	 we	got	is	the	same	big	blonde	driving	four
kids	in	a	blue	station	wagon."

"That's	 about	it,"	 Meyer	said.

82
"There	wasn't	homicides	involved	here,	I'd	turn	 this	over	to	Robbery	in	a
minute.	You	better	give	them	a	buzz,	anyway."

"I	 already	did,"	 Meyer	said.	"After	 the	first	one."

One	of	the	techs	ambled	out	of	the	store.

"Got	some	bullets	here,"	he	said.	"Who	wants	them?"

"What	 do	they	look	like?"	Monroe	 asked.

The	technician	showed	him	the	palm	of	his	hand.	A	white	cloth	was
draped	over	it,	and	four	spent	bullets	rested	on	it.

"Twenty-twos	maybe,"	he	said,	and	shrugged.

Mrs.	Davis	leaned	over	to	look	at	the	technician's	palm.

"So,	okay,	lady,"	Monroe	said,	"you	got	any	further	 business	here?"

"Cool	it,"	 Carella	said.

Monroe	looked	at	him.

"I'll	 have	one	of	our	cars	drop	you	home,	Mrs.	Davis,"	Carella	said.

"A	taxi	 service,	they	run	up	here,"	Monroe	said	to	the	air.

"Cool	it,"	 Carella	said	again,	more	softly	this	time,	but	somehow	the
words	carried	greater	menace.

Monroe	looked	at	him	again	and	then	turned	to	Meyer.

"Bag	them	bullets	and	get	them	over	to	Ballistics,"	he	said.	"Call
Robbery	and	tell	them	we	got	another	one."

"Sounds	like	good	advice,"	Meyer	said.

Monroe	missed	the	sarcasm.	He	glared	again	at	Carella,	and	then	walked
to	where	his	car	was	parked	at	the	curb.

Wait'll	 I	tell	my	daughter!	 Mrs.	Davis	thought.	A	ride	in	a	police	car!

83
The	patrolmen	riding	Charlie	 Four	were	approaching	the	corner	of
Rachel	and	Jakes,	just	cruising	by,	making	another	routine	run	of	the
sector	when	the	man	riding	shotgun	spotted	it.

"Slow	down,	Freddie,"	 he	said.

"What	 do	you	see,	Joe?"

"The	van	there.	Near	the	corner."

"What	 about	it?"

Joe	Guardi	opened	his	notebook.	"Didn't	we	get	a	BOLO	on	a	Ford
Econoline?"	He	snapped	on	the	roof	light,	scanned	the	notebook.	"Yeah,
here	it	is,"	he	said.	In	his	own	handwriting,	he	saw	the	words	"BOLO	 tan
79	Ford	Econoline,	RL	68-7210.	Blue	'84	Citation,	DL	74-3681."	The
word	BOLO	stood	for	Be	On	the	Lookout.

"Yeah,"	he	said	again.	"Let's	check	it	out."

The	two	men	got	out	of	the	car.	They	flashed	their	torches	over	the	van.
License	plate	from	the	next	state,	RL	68-7210.

They	tried	the	door	closest	to	the	curb.

Unlocked.

Freddie	slid	it	all	the	way	open.

Joe	came	around	to	the	passenger	side	of	the	van.	He	slid	the	door	open
there,	leaned	in,	and	thumbed	open	the	glove	compartment.

"Anything?"	  Freddie	asked.

"Looks	like	 a	registration	here."

He	took	the	registration	out	of	a	clear-plastic	packet	containing	an
owner's	manual	and	a	duplicate	insurance	slip.

The	van	was	registered	to	a	Frank	Sebastiani	whose	address	was	604
Eden	Lane	in	Collinsworth,	over	the	river.

84
The	movie	had	let	out	at	seven	o'clock,	and	they	had	stopped	for	a	drink
on	the	Stem	later.	They	had	begun	arguing	in	the	bar,	in	soft,	strained
voices,	almost	whispers,	but	everyone	around	them	knew	they	were
having	a	fight	because	of	the	way	they	leaned	so	tensely	over	the	small
table	between	them.	At	first,	the	fight	was	only	about	the	movie	they'd
seen.	She	insisted	it	had	been	based	on	a	novel	calledStreets	of	Gold	,	by
somebody	or	other,	and	he	insisted	the	movie'd	had	nothing	whatever	to
do	with	that	particular	 novel,	the	movie	was	an	original.	"Then	how
come	they're	allowed	to	use	the	same	title?"	she	asked,	and	he	said,
"They	can	do	that	'cause	you	can't	copyright	a	title.	They	can	make	the
shittiest	movie	in	the	world	if	they	want	to,	and	they	can	call	itFrom	Here
to	Eternity	orThe	Good	Earth	or	evenStreets	of	Gold	,	like	they	did	tonight,
and	nobody	in	the	world	can	do	a	damn	thing	about	it."	She	glared	at
him	for	a	moment,	and	then	said,	"What	the	hell	do	you	know	about
copyright?"	 and	he	said,	"A	hell	of	a	lot	more	than	you	know
aboutanything	,"	and	by	now	they	were	really	screaming	at	each	other	in
whispers,	and	leaning	tensely	over	the	table,	eyes	blazing,	mouths	drawn.

They	were	still	arguing	on	the	way	home.

But	by	now	the	argument	had	graduated	to	something	more	vital	than	an
unimportant	 little	novel	calledStreets	of	Gold	or	a	shitty	little	movie	that
hadn't	been	based	upon	it.

They	were	arguing	about	sex,	which	is	what	they	almost	always	argued
about.	In	fact,	maybe	that's	what	they'd	really	been	arguing	about	back
there	in	the	bar.

It	was	almost	eight-thirty	 but	the	streets	were	already	beginning	to	fill
with	teenagers	on	the	prowl.	Not	all	of	them	were	looking	for	trouble.
Many	of	them	were	merely	seeking	to	let	off	adolescent	energy.	The	ones
out	for	fun	and	games	were	wearing	costumes	that	weren't	quite	as
elaborate	as	those	the	toddlers	and	later	the	teenyboppers	had	worn.
Some	of	the	teenage	girls,	using	the	excuse	of	Halloween	to	dress	as
daringly	as	they	wished,	walked	the	streets	looking	like	hookers	or	Mata
Haris	or	go-go	dancers	or	sexy	witches	in	black	with	slits	up	their	skirts
to	their	thighs.	Some	of	the	teenage	boys	were	dressed	like	combat
marines	or	space	invaders	or	soldiers	of	fortune,	most	of	them	wearing
bandoliers	and	carrying	huge	plastic	machine	guns	or	huge	plastic	death-
ray	guns.	But	these	weren't	the	ones	looking	for	trouble.	The	ones	looking
for	trouble	weren't	 dressed	up	for	Halloween.	They	wore	only	their	usual

85
clothing,	with	perhaps	a	little	blackening	on	their	 faces,	the	better	to	melt
into	the	night.	These	were	the	ones	looking	to	smash	and	to	burn.	These
were	the	ones	who	had	caused	Lieutenant	Byrnes	to	double-team	his
detectives	tonight.	Well,almost	double-team	them.	Seven	men	on	instead
of	the	usual	four.

The	arguing	couple	came	up	the	street	toward	the	building	where	they
lived,	passing	a	group	of	teenage	girls	dressed	like	John	Held	flappers,
sequined	dresses	with	wide	sashes,	long	cigarette	holders,	beaded	bands
around	their	foreheads,	giggling	and	acting	stoned,	which	perhaps	they
were.	The	couple	paid	no	attention	to	them.	They	were	too	busy	arguing.

"What	 it	is,"	 he	said,	"is	there's	never	any	spontaneity	to	it."

"Spontaneity,	sure,"	she	said.	"What	you	mean	by	spontaneity	is
jumping	on	me	when	I	come	out	of	the	shower	hellip;"

"There's	nothing	wrong	 with	hellip;"

"When	I'm	 all	clean."

"When	do	youwant	to	make	love?"	he	asked.	"When	you're	all	dirty?"

"I	 sure	as	hell	don't	want	to	get	allsweaty	again	after	I've	just	taken	a
shower."

"Then	how	aboutbefore	you	take	your	shower?"

"I	 don't	like	to	make	love	when	I	feel	all	sweaty."

"So	you	don't	like	to	do	it	 when	you're	sweaty	and	you	don't	like	to	do	it
when	you'renot	sweaty.	Whendo	you	hellip;?"

"You're	twisting	 what	I'm	 saying."

"No,	I'm	 not.	The	point	I'm	 trying	 to	make	hellip;"

"The	point	 is	you're	a	sex	maniac.	I'm	trying	to	cook,	you	come	up
behind	me	and	shove	that	humongous	thing	at	me	hellip;"

"I	 don't	see	anything	wrong	with	spontaneous	hellip;"

86
"Not	while	I'm	cooking!"

"Then	how	about	when	you'renot	cooking?	How	about	when	I	get	home,
and	we're	having	a	martini,	how	about	hellip;?"

"You	know	I	like	to	relax	before	dinner."

"Well,	what	the	hell	is	making	love?I	find	making	love	relaxing,	I	have	to
tell	you.	Ifyou	think	making	love	is	some	kind	of	goddamn
strenuousobstacle	course	hellip;"

"I	can't	enjoy	my	cocktail	if	you're	pawing	me	while	I'm	trying	to	re
hellip;"

"I	don't	considerfondling	youpawing	you."

"You	don't	know	how	to	be	gentle.	All	you	want	to	do	is	jump	on	me	like
a	goddamnrapist	!"

"I	do	not	consider	passion	rape!"

"That's	because	you	don't	know	the	difference	between	making	love	and
hellip;"

"Okay,	what's	this	all	about?	Tell	me	what	it's	all	about,	okay?	Do	you
want	to	quit	making	loveentirely?	You	don't	want	to	do	itbefore	your
shower,	you	don't	want	to	do	itafter	your	shower,	you	don't	want	to	do	it
while	we'redrinking	or	while	you'recooking	or	while	we're	watching
television,	or	when	we	wake	up	in	the	morning,	when	the	helldo	you	want
to	do	it,	Elise?"

"When	I	feel	like	doing	it.	And	stop	shouting!"

"I'm	notshouting	,	Elise!	When	do	you	want	to	do	it?	Do	youever	want	to
do	it,	Elise?"

"Yes!"	she	shouted.

"When?"

"Right	now,	Roger,	okay?	Right	here,	okay?	Let's	do	it	right	here	on	the
sidewalk,	okay?"

87
"Fine	by	me!"

"You'd	do	it,	too,	wouldn't	you?"

"Yes!	Right	here!Anywhere	!"

"Well,	I	wouldn't!	You'd	have	done	it	at	the	goddamnmovies	if	I'd	let
you."

"I'd	 have	done	it	in	the	bar,	too,	if	you	hadn't	startedarguing	about	that
dumb	movie!"

"You'd	do	it	in	church!"	she	said.	"You're	a	maniac,	is	what	you	are.

"That's	right,	I'm	a	maniac!	You're	driving	me	crazy	is	why	I'm	a
maniac!"

They	were	entering	their	building	now.	He	lowered	his	voice.

"Let's	do	it	in	the	elevator,	okay?"	he	said.	"You	want	to	do	it	in	the
elevator?"

"No,	Roger,	I	don't	want	to	do	it	in	the	goddamn	elevator."

"Then	let's	take	the	elevator	up	to	the	roof,	we'll	do	it	on	the	roof."

"I	don't	want	to	do	it	on	the	goddamn	roof,	either."

He	stabbed	angrily	at	the	elevator	button.

"Wheredo	you	want	to	do	it,	Elise?When	do	you	want	to	do	it,	Elise?"

"Later."

"When	later?"

"When	Johnny	Carson	goes	off."

"Ifwe	were	on	television,"	he	said,	"and	Johnny	Carson	was	watchingus
,"	he	said,	"and	he	had	a	big	hard-on	hellip;"

88
"We	happen	tolive	here,	Roger."

"	hellip;	 do	you	think	Johnny	Carson	would	wait	 tillwe	were	off	to	do	it?
Or	would	Johnny	Carson	hellip;	 ?"

"I	 don't	care	what	Johnny	Carson	would	do	or	wouldn't	 do.	I	don't
evenlike	Johnny	Carson."

"Then	why	do	you	want	to	wait	till	 he's	off?"

The	elevator	doors	opened.

At	first	 they	thought	it	was	a	stuffed	dummy.	The	lower	half	of	a
scarecrow	or	something.	Blue	pants,	blue	socks,	black	shoes,	black	belt
through	the	trouser	loops.	A	Halloween	prank.	Some	kids	had	tossed	half
a	stuffed	dummy	into	the	elevator.

And	then	they	realized	that	a	jagged,	bloody	edge	of	torn	flesh	showed
just	above	the	dummy's	waist,	and	they	realized	that	they	were	looking	at
the	lower	torso	of	a	human	being	and	Elise	screamed	and	they	both	ran
out	of	the	lobby	and	out	of	the	building	and	up	to	the	pay	phone	on	the
corner,	where	Roger	breathlessly	dialed	911.

The	cruising	cops	in	Boy	Two	responded	within	three	minutes.

One	of	the	cops	got	on	the	walkie-talkie	to	the	Eight-Seven.

The	other	cop,	although	he	should	have	known	better,	went	through	the
stiff's	trousers	and	found	a	wallet	in	the	right	 hip	pocket.

Inside	the	wallet,	which	he	also	shouldn't	have	touched,	he	found	a
driver's	license	with	a	name	and	an	address	on	it.

"Well,	here's	who	he	is,	anyway,"	he	said	to	his	partner.





CHAPTER	        5

"What	 this	is,"	Parker	 said,	"you	had	an	obscene	phone	call,	is	what	this
is."

89
"That's	 what	I	figured	it	 was,"	Peaches	said.

She	still	looked	pretty	good.	Maybe	like	a	woman	in	her	early	fifties.
Good	legs	mdash;well,	the	legs	never	changed	mdash;breasts	still	firm,
hair	as	red	as	he	remembered	it,	maybe	with	a	little	help	from	Clairol.
Wearing	a	simple	skirt	and	blouse,	high-heeled	shoes.	Legs	tucked	up
under	her	on	the	couch.	He	was	glad	he'd	shaved.

"They're	 not	all	of	them	what	you	think	 they're	gonna	be,"	Parker	said.
"I	 mean,	they	don't	get	on	the	phone	and	start	talking	dirty	right	 away
mdash;well,	some	of	them	do	mdash;but	a	lot	of	them	have	a	whole
bagful	of	tricks,	you	don't	 realize	what's	happening	till	they	already	got
you	doing	things."

"That'sjust	 what	happened,"	Peaches	said.	"I	didn't	realize	what	was
going	on.	I	mean,	he	gave	me	hisname	and	hellip;"

"Phil	 Hendricks,	right?"	 Parker	 said.	"Camera	Works."

"Right.	 And	his	address	and	his	phone	number	hellip;"

"Did	 you	try	calling	that	 number	he	gave	you?"

"Ofcourse	not!"

"Well,	I'll	 give	it	 a	try	if	you	like,	but	 I'm	sure	all	that	 was	phony.	I	had	a
case	once,	this	guy	would	call	numbers	at	random,	hoping	to	get	a	baby-
sitter.	He'd	finally	get	a	sitter	on	the	phone,	tell	her	he	was	doing	research
on	child	abuse,	smooth-talked	these	fifteen-,	sixteen-year-old	girls	into
slapping	around	the	babies	they	were	sitting."

"What	 do	you	mean?"

"He'd	 tell	them	how	important	 it	was	in	their	line	of	work	 to	guard
against	their	own	tendencies,	everybody	has	such	tendencies	mdash;this
is	him	talking	mdash;and	child	abuse	is	an	insidious	thing.	And	he'd	have
them	interested	and	listening,	and	he'd	say,	'I	know	you	yourself	must
have	been	tempted	on	many	an	occasion	to	slap	the	little	kid	you're
sitting,	especially	when	he's	acting	up,'	and	the	fifteen-year-old	sitter
goes,	'Oh,	boy,	you	said	it,'	and	he	goes,	'For	example,	haven't	you	been
tempted	at	least	once	tonight	to	smack	him	around?'	and	she	goes,	'Well

90
hellip;'	and	he	goes,	'Come	on,	tell	me	the	truth,	I'm	a	trained	child
psychologist,'	and	before	you	know	it,	he's	got	her	convinced	that	the	best
way	tocurb	these	tendencies	is	torelease	them,	you	know,	in	a	therapeutic
manner,	slap	the	kid	gently,	why	don't	you	go	get	the	kid	now?	And	she
runs	to	get	the	kid	and	he	tells	her	to	give	the	kid	a	gentle	slap,	and
before	you	know	it	he's	got	her	beating	the	daylights	out	of	the	kid	while
he's	listening	and	getting	his	kicks.	That	was	this	one	case	I	had,	I	may
write	a	book	about	it	one	day."

"That's	 fascinating,"	Peaches	said.

"Another	 case	I	had,	this	guy	would	look	in	the	paper	for	ads	where
people	were	selling	furniture.	He	was	looking	for	somebody	selling	a	kid's
bedroom	set,	you	know?	Getting	rid	of	the	kiddy	furniture,	 replacing	it
with	more	mature	stuff.	He	knew	he'd	get	either	a	youngish	mother	or	a
teenage	girl	on	the	phone	mdash;usually	the	girls	who	want	their
furniture	 changed	when	they	get	into	their	teens.	And	he'd	start	talking
to	them	about	the	furniture,	either	 the	mother	if	she	was	home,	or	the
teenage	girl	if	the	mother	was	out,	and	while	he	was	talking	to	them,
because	it	would	be	a	long	conversation,	you	know,	what	kind	of	bed	is	it,
and	how's	the	mattress,	and	how	many	drawers	in	the	dresser,	like	that,
while	he	was	on	the	phone	he'd	be	hellip;	well	hellip;"

"He'd	 be	masturbating,"	Peaches	said.

"Well,	yes."

"Do	you	think	 the	man	who	called	me	tonight	was	masturbating	while	he
talked	to	me?"

"That's	 difficult	 to	say.	From	what	you	told	me,	he	eitherwas	already,	or
was	leading	up	to	it.	He	was	trying	to	get	you	to	talk	about	your	body,
you	see.	Which	is	still	very	nice,	by	the	way."

"Well,	thank	 you,"	Peaches	said,	and	smiled.

"Sounds	to	me	like	that's	what	would've	set	him	off.	Getting	you	to	strip
in	front	of	the	mirror	  there.	You'd	be	surprised	how	many	women	go
along	with	something	like	that.	He	hooks	them	into	thinking	they've	got	a
shot	at	modeling	mdash;there	isn't	a	woman	alive	who	wouldn't	like	to	be
a	model	mdash;and	then	he	gets	them	looking	at	themselves	while	he
does	his	number."

91
"That's	 when	I	began	to	realize,"	Peaches	said.

"Sure."

"When	he	told	me	to	take	off	my	blouse."

"Sure.	But	lots	of	women	don't	realize	even	then.	You'd	be	surprised.
They	just	go	along	with	it,	thinking	 it's	legit,	never	guessing	what's
happening	on	the	other	end."

"I'm	 afraid	 he	might	come	here,"	Peaches	said.

"Well,	these	guys	don't	usually	do	that,"	Parker	 said.	"They're	not	your
rapists	or	your	stranglers,	usually.	Don't	quote	me	on	that,	you	got
allkinds	of	nuts	out	there.	But	usually	your	telephone	callers	aren't	your
violent	ones."

"Usually,"	 Peaches	said.

"Yes,"	Parker	said.

"Because	he	has	my	address,	you	see."

"Um,"	 Parker	said.

"And	 my	name	is	on	the	mailbox	downstairs.	With	the	apartment
number."

"I	 know.	I	saw	it	when	I	rang	the	bell.	But	that	says	P.	Muldoon."

"Sure,	but	that's	what's	in	 the	phone	book,	too.	P.	Muldoon."

"Well,	I	 doubt	he'll	be	coming	around	here.	He	may	not	even	call	again.
What	I'd	 do,	though,	if	I	was	you,	I'd	change	that	message	on	your
answering	machine.	Lots	of	single	girls,	they	do	these	fancy	messages,
music	going	in	the	background,	they	try	to	sound	sexy,	it	makes	the	caller
think	he's	got	some	kind	of	swinger	here.	Better	to	just	put	a	businesslike
message	on	the	machine.	Something	like,	'You've	reached	123-4567,'	and
then,	'Please	leave	a	message	when	you	hear	the	beep.'	Strictly	business.
You	don't	have	to	explain	that	you	can't	come	to	the	phone	because
everybodyknows	they	caught	the	machine.	And	of	course	you	shouldn't

92
say,	'I'm	out	just	now,'	or	anything	 like	that,	because	that's	an	invitation
to	burglars."

"Yes,	I	know."

"The	point	 is	most	people	today	are	familiar	with	answering	machines,
theyknow	they're	supposed	to	leave	a	message	when	they	hear	the	beep,
so	you	don't	have	to	give	them	a	whole	list	of	instructions,	and	you	don't
have	to	sound	cute,	either.	Your	friends	hear	that	cute	little	message	a
coupla	hundred	times,	they	want	to	shoot	you.	An	obscene	caller	hears
that	cute	little	message,	he	figures	he's	got	a	live	one,	and	he'll	keep
calling	back	till	he	can	get	you	talking."

"I	 see,"	Peaches	said.

"Yeah,"	Parker.	"Do	 you	have	any	male	friends	who	can	record	a
message	for	you?"

"Well	hellip;"

"Because	that's	usually	the	best	thing.	That	way	any	nut	who's	running
his	finger	down	the	book	for	listings	with	only	a	first	 initial,	 he	comes
across	P.	Muldoon,	he	gets	a	man's	voice	on	the	answering	machine,	he
figures	he	got	a	Peter	Muldoon	or	a	Paul	Muldoon,	but	not	a	Peaches
Muldoon.	He	won't	call	back.	So	that's	a	good	way	to	go	unless	you're
afraid	it'll	 scare	off	any	men	who	may	be	calling	you	legitimately.	That's
up	to	you."

"I	 see,"	Peaches	said.

"Yeah,"	Parker	 said.	"Now	with	this	 guy	who	called	you	tonight,	he
already	knows	there's	a	Peaches	Muldoon	living	here,	and	he	already	got
you	going	pretty	far	with	 his	little	routine,	so	he	may	call	you	back.	What
we'll	do	if	he	keeps	calling	you,	we'll	put	a	trap	on	the	line	hellip;"

"A	trap?"

"Yeah,	so	we	can	trace	the	call	even	if	he	hangs	up.	You've	got	to	let	me
know	if	he	calls	again."

"Oh,	Iwill	 ,"	 Peaches	said.

93
"So	that's	about	it,"	 Parker	said.	"Though	 maybe	he	won't	call	again."

"Or	 come	here."

"Well,	like	 I	said,	I	don't	think	 he'll	 do	that.	But	you	know	how	to	reach
me	if	he	does."

"I	 really	appreciate	this,"	Peaches	said.

"Well,	come	on,	I'm	just	doing	my	job."

"Are	you	on	duty	 right	now?"	 she	asked.

"Not	exactly,"	 he	said.

"Wanna	come	to	party?"	 she	said.

Marie	Sebastiani	was	showing	them	another	card	trick.

"What	 we	have	is	three	cards	here,"	she	said.	"The	ace	of	spades,	the	ace
of	clubs,	and	the	ace	of	diamonds."	She	fanned	the	cards	out,	the	ace	of
diamonds	under	the	ace	of	spades	on	the	left	and	the	ace	of	clubs	on	the
right.	"Now	 I'm	 going	to	put	these	three	aces	face	down	in	different	parts
of	the	deck,"	she	said,	and	started	slipping	them	into	the	deck.

Five	detectives	were	watching	her.

Carella	was	on	the	phone	to	Ballistics,	telling	them	he	wanted	a	fast
comeback	on	the	bullets	the	techs	had	recovered	at	Famous	Brands	Wine
Liquors.	The	guy	at	Ballistics	was	giving	him	a	hard	time.	He	told
Carella	this	was	almost	a	quarter	to	nine	already,	and	he	went	off	at
midnight.	The	lab	would	be	closed	till	eight	tomorrow	morning.	 He	was
telling	Carella	the	report	could	wait	 till	 then.	Carella	was	telling	him	he
wanted	it	right	away.	Meanwhile,	he	was	watching	Marie's	card	trick	 at
the	same	time.

The	other	four	detectives	were	either	standing	around	Carella's	desk,	or
else	sitting	on	parts	of	it.	His	desk	resembled	a	convention	center.	Brown
was	standing	just	to	the	left	of	Carella,	his	arms	folded	across	his	chest.
He	knew	this	was	going	to	be	another	good	trick.	She	had	done	four	card
tricks	since	Hawes	came	back	to	the	squadroom	with	her.	This	was	after
Hawes	had	called	Brown	from	a	little	pizza	joint	on	North	 Fourth	to	say

94
one	of	the	people	there	had	found	an	arm	in	a	garbage	can	out	back.
Brown	had	rushed	on	over	with	Genero.	Now	they	had	three	pieces.	Or
rather	the	Medical	Examiner	had	them.	The	upper	torso	and	a	pair	of
arms.	Brown	was	hoping	the	M.E.	would	be	able	to	tell	him	whether	or
not	the	parts	belonged	to	each	other.	If	the	parts	didn't	match,	then	they
were	dealing	with	maybe	three	separate	corpses.	Like	the	three	cards
Marie	Sebastiani	now	slipped	face	down	into	various	places	in	the	deck.

"The	ace	of	spades,"	she	said.	"The	ace	of	diamonds."	Sliding	it	into	the
deck.	"And	the	ace	of	clubs."

Genero	was	watching	the	cards	carefully.	He	felt	certain	he'd	be	able	to
catch	the	secret	here,	though	he	hadn't	been	able	to	on	the	last	four
tricks.	He	wondered	if	they	were	breaking	some	kind	of	regulation,
having	a	deck	of	cards	here	in	the	squadroom.	He	was	hoping	the	M.E.
would	call	to	say	they	were	dealing	with	a	single	corpse	here.	Somehow,
the	idea	of	a	single	chopped-up	corpse	was	more	appealing	than	three
separate	chopped-up	corpses.

Meyer	was	standing	beside	him,	watching	Marie's	hands.	She	had	long
slender	fingers.	The	fingers	slipped	the	cards	into	the	deck	as	smoothly	as
a	drug	dealer	running	a	knife	into	a	competitor.	Meyer	was	wondering
why	those	little	kids	had	changed	their	clothes	before	pulling	the	second
stickup.	He	was	also	wondering	whether	there'd	be	a	third	stickup.	Were
they	finished	for	the	night?	Nitey-nite,	kiddies,	beddy-bye	time.	Or	were
they	just	starting?

Hawes	was	standing	closest	to	Marie.	He	could	smell	her	perfume.	He
was	hoping	her	husband	had	abandoned	her	and	run	off	to	Hawaii.	He
was	hoping	her	husband	would	call	her	from	Honolulu	to	say	he	had	left
her.	This	would	leave	a	cold,	empty	space	in	Marie's	bed.	Her	proximity
now	was	stupefyingly	intoxicating.	Hawes	guessed	it	was	her	perfume.	He
had	not	yet	told	her	that	the	blues	had	located	the	van.	No	word	on	the
Citation	yet.	Maybe	hubby	and	his	apprentice	had	flown	off	to	Hawaii
together.	Maybe	hubby	was	gay.	Hawes	glanced	at	Marie's	pert	little
behind	as	she	leaned	over	the	desk	to	pick	up	the	deck	of	cards.	He	was
sorely	tempted	to	put	his	hand	on	her	behind.

"Who'd	 like	to	shuffle?"	 she	asked.

"Me,"	 Genero	said.	He	was	sure	the	secret	of	all	her	tricks	had	something
to	do	with	shuffling.

95
Marie	handed	the	deck	to	him.

Meyer	watched	her	hands.

Genero	shuffled	the	cards	and	then	handed	the	deck	back	to	her.

"Okay,	Detective	Brown,"	 she	said.	"Pick	one	of	those	three	cards.	Either
the	ace	of	clubs,	the	ace	of	diamonds,	or	the	ace	of	spades."

"Clubs,"	 Brown	said.

She	riffled	through	the	deck,	the	cards	face	up,	searching	for	it.	When
she	found	the	ace	of	clubs,	she	pulled	it	out,	and	tossed	it	onto	the	desk.
"Detective	Meyer?"	 she	said.	"How	about	you?"

"The	ace	of	spades,"	he	said.

"I	 don't	get	it,"	 Genero	said.

Marie	was	looking	through	the	deck	again.

"Where's	the	trick?"	  Genero	said.	"If	you're	looking	 at	the	cards,
ofcourse	you're	going	to	find	them."

"Right	 you	are,"	she	said.	"Here's	the	ace	of	spades."

She	tossed	it	onto	the	desk.

"Which	 card	doyou	want?"	she	asked	Genero.

"There's	only	one	card	left."

"And	 which	one	is	that?"

"The	ace	of	diamonds."

"Okay,"	 she	said,	and	handed	him	the	deck.	"Find	it	for	me."

Genero	started	looking	through	the	deck.

"Have	you	found	it	yet?"	 she	asked.

96
"Just	hold	on	a	minute,	okay?"	 he	said.

He	went	through	the	entire	deck.	No	ace	of	diamonds.	He	went	through	it
a	second	time.	Still	no	ace	of	diamonds.

"Have	you	got	it?"	 she	asked.

"It	 isn't	here,"	 he	said.

"Are	you	sure?	Take	another	look."

He	went	through	the	deck	a	third	time.	Still	no	ace	of	diamonds.

"But	 I	saw	you	put	it	back	in	the	deck,"	he	said,	baffled.

"Yes,	you	did,"	she	said.	"So	where	is	it?"

"I	 give	up,	where	is	it?"

"Right	 here,"	she	said,	grinning,	and	reached	into	her	blouse,	and	pulled
the	ace	of	diamonds	out	of	her	bra.

"How'd	 you	do	that?"	Hawes	asked.

"Maybe	I'll	 tell	 you	sometime,"	Marie	said,	and	winked	at	him.

The	telephone	rang.	Carella	was	sitting	closest	to	it.	He	picked	up.

"Eighty-Seventh	Squad,	Carella,"	he	said.

"Steve,	this	is	Dave	downstairs.	Let	me	talk	to	either	Brown	or	Genero,
okay?	Preferably	Brown."

"Hold	 on	a	sec,"	Carella	said,	and	extended	the	receiver	to	Brown.
"Murchison,"	 he	said.

Brown	took	the	receiver.

"Yeah,	Dave?"

"I	 just	got	a	call	from	Boy	Two,"	 Murchison	said.	"It	 looks	like	we

97
maybe	got	an	ID	on	that	body	been	turning	up	in	bits	and	pieces.	A
couple	found	the	lower	half	in	their	building,	 in	the	elevator.If	it's	the
same	body.	Wallet	in	the	guy's	hip	pocket,	driver's	license	in	it.	You
better	run	on	over	there,	I'll	 notify	Homicide."

"What's	 the	address?"	Brown	asked,	and	listened.	"Got	it,"	he	said,
writing.	"And	  the	couple's	name?"	He	listened	again.	"Okay.	And	the
name	on	the	license?	Okay,"	he	said,	"we're	rolling."	He	put	the	receiver
back	on	the	cradle.	"Let's	go,	Genero,"	he	said,	"the	pieces	are	coming
together.	We	just	got	ourselves	the	lower	half.	Name	tag	on	it,	this	time."

"This	trick	 is	called	The	Mystic	Prediction,"	 Marie	 said,	and	began
shuffling	the	cards.

"What	 do	you	mean,	name	tag?"	Genero	asked.

"The	dead	man's	carrying	a	wallet,"	 Brown	said.

"How?"

"What	 do	you	meanhow?	In	hispocket	is	how."

"I'm	 going	to	ask	any	one	of	you	to	write	down	a	three-figure	number	for
me,"	Marie	said.

"You	mean	he's	wearing	pants?"	Genero	said.

"Unless	there's	a	pocket	sewn	on	his	ass,"	Brown	said.

"You	mean	there'spants	on	the	lower	half	of	the	body?"

"Whyn't	 we	run	on	over	and	see	for	ourselves,	okay?"

"Who	wants	to	write	 down	three	numbers	for	me?"	Marie	 asked.	"Any
three	numbers?"

"And	 his	name's	in	the	wallet?"	Genero	said.

"On	his	driver's	 license,"	Brown	said.	"Let's	 go."

Both	men	started	for	the	railing.	Kling	 was	coming	back	from	the	men's
room	down	the	hall.	He	opened	the	gate	and	made	a	low	bow,	sweeping

98
his	arm	across	his	body,	ushering	them	through.

"So	what's	his	name?"	Genero	asked.

"Frank	 Sebastiani,"	Brown	said.

And	Marie	fainted	 into	Kling's	 arms.

Annie	Rawles	was	already	in	place	when	Eileen	pulled	up	outside
Larry's.	 The	clock	behind	the	bar,	a	big	ornate	thing	rimmed	with	orange
neon,	read	five	minutes	to	nine.	Through	the	plate-glass	window,	Annie
could	see	the	white	Cadillac	edging	into	the	curb.	The	bartender	could
see	it,	too.	They	both	watched	with	casual	interest	as	the	driver	cut	the
engine,	Annie	nursing	a	beer,	the	bartender	polishing	glasses.	The	man
behind	the	wheel	of	the	car	was	big	and	black	and	wearing	pimp	threads.

They	both	watched	as	Eileen	got	out	of	the	car	on	the	curb	side,	long	legs
flashing	and	signaling,	little	hidden	pistol	tucked	into	one	of	those	soft
sexy	boots,	high-stepping	her	way	toward	the	entrance	door	now.

Mr.	Pimp	leaned	across	the	seat,	rolled	down	the	window	on	the	curb
side.

Yelled	something	to	Eileen.

Eileen	sashayed	back,	bent	over	to	look	in	the	window.

Short	skirt	tight	 across	her	ass,	flashing,	advertising.

Started	shaking	her	head,	waving	her	arms	around.

"She's	givin'	him	sass,"	the	bartender	said.

Southern	accent	you	could	cut	with	a	butter	knife.	Maybe	this	wasn't	so
far	from	Houston	after	all.

"An'	 he	don't	like	it	 none,"	the	bartender	said.

Mr.	Pimp	came	storming	out	of	the	car	on	the	driver's	side,	walked
around	the	car,	stood	yelling	at	her	on	the	sidewalk.

Eileen	kept	shaking	her	head,	hands	on	her	hips.

99
"Won't	 stop	sassin'	him,	will	she?"	the	bartender	said.

And	suddenly	Mr.	Pimp	slapped	her.

"Whomp	 her	good,"	the	bartender	said,	nodding	encouragement.

Eileen	staggered	back	from	the	blow,	her	green	eyes	blazing.	She
bunched	her	fists	and	went	at	him	as	if	she'd	kill	him,	but	he	shoved	her
away,	turned	her	toward	the	bar,	shoved	her	again,	toward	the	door	of
the	bar	this	time,	and	then	strutted	back	to	the	Caddy,	lord	of	all	he
surveyed.	Eileen	was	nursing	her	cheek.	She	glared	at	the	Caddy	as	it
pulled	away	from	the	curb.

Act	One	had	begun.

Four	pieces	had	become	one	piece.

Maybe.

They	showed	her	the	bundle	of	clothing	first.

Black	shoes,	blue	socks.	Blue	trousers.	Black	belt.	White	Jockey
undershorts.	Blood	stains	on	the	waistband	of	the	trousers	and	the	shorts.

"I	 hellip;	I	 think	those	are	Frank's	clothes,"	Marie	 said.

Some	coins	in	one	of	the	pants	pockets.	A	quarter,	two	dimes,	and	a
penny.

No	keys.	Neither	house	keys	nor	car	keys.

A	handkerchief	in	another	pocket.

And	a	wallet.

Black	leather.

"Is	this	your	 husband's	wallet?"	Brown	asked.

"Yes."

100
Her	voice	very	soft.	As	if	what	they	were	showing	her	demanded
reverence.

In	the	wallet,	a	driver's	license	issued	to	Frank	Sebastiani	of	604	Eden
Lane,	Collinsworth.	No	credit	cards.	Voters	Registration	card,	same
name,	same	address.	A	hundred	and	twenty	dollars	in	twenties,	fives,	and
singles.	Tucked	into	one	of	the	little	pockets	was	a	green	slip	of	paper
with	the	words	MARIE'S	 SIZES	hand-lettered	onto	it,	and	beneath	that:

101
         Hat:> 22>

       Dress:> 8>

         Bra:> 36B>

         Belt:> 26>

    Panties:> 5>

        Ring:> 5>

     Gloves:> 6	frac12;>

Stockings:> 9	frac12;(Medium)>

      Shoes:> 6	frac12;>

                "Is	this	 your	husband's	handwriting?"	 Brown	asked.

"Yes,"	Marie	 said.	Same	soft	reverential	voice.

They	led	her	inside.

The	morgue	stank.

She	reeled	back	from	the	stench	of	human	gasses	and	flesh.

They	walked	her	past	a	stainless-steel	table	upon	which	the	charred
remains	of	a	burn-victim's	body	lay	trapped	 in	a	pugilistic	pose,	as
though	still	trying	 to	fight	off	 the	flames	that	had	consumed	it.

The	four	pieces	of	the	dismembered	corpse	were	on	another	stainless-
steel	table.	They	were	casually	assembled,	not	quite	joining.	Lying	there
on	the	table	like	an	incomplete	jigsaw	puzzle.

She	looked	down	at	the	pieces.

"There's	no	question	they're	the	same	body,"	Carl	Blaney	said.

102
Lavender-eyed,	white-smocked.	Standing	under	the	fluorescent	lights,
seeming	neither	to	notice	nor	to	be	bothered	by	the	intolerable	stink	in
the	place.

"As	for	identification	 hellip;"

He	shrugged.

"As	you	see,	we	don't	have	the	hands	or	the	head	yet."

He	addressed	this	to	the	policemen	in	the	room.	Ignoring	the	woman	for
the	time	being.	Afraid	she	might	puke	on	his	polished	tile	floor.	Or	in	one
of	the	stainless-steel	basins	containing	internal	organs.	Three	cops	now.
Hawes,	Brown,	and	Genero.	Two	cases	about	to	become	one.	Maybe.

The	lower	half	of	the	torso	was	naked	now.

She	kept	looking	down	at	it.

"Would	you	know	 his	blood	type?"	Blaney	asked.

"Yes,"	Marie	 said.	"B."

"Well,	that's	 what	we've	got	here."

Hawes	knew	about	the	appendectomy	and	meniscectomy	scars	because
she'd	mentioned	them	while	describing	her	husband.	He	said	nothing
now.	First	rule	of	identification,	 you	didn't	prompt	 the	witness.	Let	them
come	to	it	on	their	own.	He	waited.

"Recognize	anything?"	Brown	asked.

She	nodded.

"What	 do	you	recognize,	ma'am?"

"The	scars,"	she	said.

"Would	you	know	 what	kind	of	scars	those	are?"	Blaney	asked.

"The	one	on	the	belly	is	an	appendectomy	scar."

103
Blaney	nodded.

"The	one	on	the	left	knee	is	from	when	he	had	the	cartilage	removed."

"That's	 what	those	scars	are,"	Blaney	said	to	the	detectives.

"Anything	 else,	ma'am?"	Brown	asked.

"His	penis,"	 she	said.

Neither	Blaney	nor	any	of	the	detectives	blinked.	This	wasn't	the	Meese
Commission	standing	around	the	pieces	of	a	corpse,	this	was	a	group	of
professionals	trying	to	make	positive	identification.

"What	 about	it?"	 Blaney	asked.

"There	should	be	a	small	hellip;	well,	a	beauty	spot,	I	guess	you'd	call	it,"
Marie	said.	"On	 the	underside.	On	the	foreskin."

Blaney	lifted	the	corpse's	limp	penis	in	one	rubber-gloved	hand.	He
turned	it	slightly.

"This?"	 he	asked,	and	indicated	a	birthmark	the	size	of	a	pin-head	on
the	foreskin,	an	inch	or	so	below	the	glans.

"Yes,"	Marie	 said	softly.

Blaney	let	the	penis	drop.

The	detectives	were	trying	to	figure	out	whether	or	not	all	of	this	added
up	to	a	positive	ID.	No	face	to	look	at.	No	hands	to	examine	for
fingerprints.	Just	the	blood	type,	the	scars	on	belly	and	leg,	and	the
identifying	birthmark	  mdash;what	Marie	had	called	a	beauty	spot
mdash;on	the	penis.

"I'll	 work	 up	a	dental	chart	sometime	tomorrow,"	 Blaney	said.

"Would	you	know	 who	his	dentist	was?"	Hawes	asked	Marie.

"Dentist?"	 she	said.

104
"For	comparison	later,"	 Hawes	said.	"When	we	get	the	chart."

She	looked	at	him	blankly.

"Comparison?"	 she	said.

"Our	 chart	against	the	dentist's.	If	it's	your	 husband,	the	charts'll
match.'"

"Oh,"	 she	said.	"Oh.	Well	hellip;	the	last	time	he	went	to	a	dentist	was	in
Florida.	Miami	 Beach.	He	had	this	terrible	toothache.	He	hasn't	been	to	a
dentist	since	we	moved	north."

"When	was	that?"	 Brown	asked.

"Five	years	ago."

"Then	the	most	recent	dental	chart	hellip;"

"I	 don't	even	know	if	there	is	a	chart,"	Marie	 said.	"He	just	 went	to
somebody	the	hotel	recommended.	We	had	a	steady	gig	at	the	Regal
Palms.	I	mean,	we	never	had	afamily	dentist,	if	that's	what	you	mean."

"Yeah,	well,"	Brown	 said.

He	was	thinking	Dead	End	on	the	teeth.

He	turned	to	Blaney.

"So	what	do	you	think?"	 he	said.

"How	tall	 was	your	husband?"	Blaney	asked	Marie.

"I've	 got	all	that	here,"	Hawes	said,	and	took	out	his	notebook.	He
opened	it	to	the	page	he'd	written	on	earlier,	and	began	reading	aloud.
"Five-eleven,	one-seventy,	hair	black,	eyes	blue,	appendectomy	scar,
meniscectomy	scar."

"If	 we	put	a	head	in	place	there,"	Blaney	said,	"we'd	have	a	body	some
hundred	and	eighty	centimeters	long.	That's	just	about	five-eleven.	And
I'd	estimate	the	weight,	given	the	separate	sections	here,	at	about	what
you've	got	there,	a	hundred-seventy,	a	hundred-seventy-five,	in	there.

105
The	hair	on	the	arms,	chest,	legs,	and	pubic	area	is	black	mdash;which
doesn't	necessarily	mean	thehead	hair	would	match	it	exactly,	but	at	least
it	rules	out	a	blonde	or	a	redhead,	or	anyone	in	the	brown	groupings.
This	hair	is	very	definitelyblack.	The	eyes	mdash;well,	we	haven't	got	a
head,	have	we?"

"So	have	we	got	a	positive	ID	or	what?"	Brown	asked.

"I'd	 say	we're	looking	at	the	remains	of	a	healthy	white	male	in	his	late
twenties	or	early	thirties,"	 Blaney	said.	"How	old	was	your	husband,
madam?"

"Thirty-four,"	  she	said.

"Yes,"	Blaney	said,	and	nodded.	"And,	of	course,	identification	of	the
birthmark	 on	the	penis	would	seem	to	me	a	conclusive	factor."

"Is	this	your	 husband,	ma'am?"	Brown	asked.

"That	 is	my	husband,"	Marie	said,	and	turned	her	head	into	Hawes'
shoulder	and	began	weeping	gently	against	his	chest.

The	hotel	was	far	from	the	precinct,	downtown	on	a	side	street	off
Detavoner	Avenue.	He'd	deliberately	chosen	a	fleabag	distant	from	the
scene	of	the'	crime.Scenes	of	the	crime,	to	be	more	accurate.	Five
separate	scenes	if	you	counted	the	head	and	the	hands.	Five	scenes	in	a
little	playlet	entitled	 "The	Magical	 and	Somewhat	Sudden	Disappearance
of	Sebastian	the	Great."

Good	riddance,	he	thought.

"Yes,	sir?"	the	desk	clerk	said.	"May	 I	help	you?"

"I	 have	a	reservation,"	he	said.

"The	name,	please?"

"Hardeen,"	 he	said.	"Theo	Hardeen."

Wonderful	magician,	long	dead.	Houdini's	brother.	Appropriate	 name	to
be	using.	Hardeen	had	been	famous	for	his	escape	from	a	galvanized	iron
can	filled	with	water	and	secured	by	massive	locks.	Failure	Means	a

106
Drowning	Death!	his	posters	had	proclaimed.	The	risks	of	failure	here
were	even	greater.

"How	do	you	spell	that,	sir?"	 the	clerk	asked.

"H-A-R-D-E-E-N."

"Yes,	sir,	I	have	it	right	here,"	the	clerk	 said,	yanking	a	card.	Hardeen,
Theo.	That's	just	for	the	one	night,	is	that	correct,	Mr.	Hardeen?"

"Just	the	one	night,	yes."

"How	will	 you	be	paying,	Mr.	Hardeen?"

"Cash,"	 he	said.	"In	advance."

The	clerk	figured	this	was	a	shack-up.	One-night	stand,	guy	checking	in
alone,	his	bimbo	mdash;or	else	a	hooker	from	the	Yellow	Pages
mdash;would	be	along	later.	Never	explain,	never	complain,	he	thought.
Thank	you,	Henry	Ford.	But	 charge	him	for	a	double.

"That'll	 be	eighty-five	dollars,	plus	tax,"	 he	said,	and	watched	as	the
wallet	came	out,	and	then	a	hundred-dollar	bill,	and	the	wallet
disappeared	again	in	a	wink.	Like	he	figured,	a	shack-up.	Guy	didn't
want	to	show	even	a	glimpse	of	his	driver's	license	or	credit	cards,	the
Hardeen	was	undoubtedly	a	phony	name.	Theo	Hardeen?	The	names
some	of	them	picked.	Who	cared?	Take	the	money	and	run,	he	thought.
Thank	you,	Woody	Alien.

He	calculated	the	tax,	made	change	for	the	C-note,	and	slid	the	money
across	the	desk	top.	Wallet	out	again	in	a	flash,	money	disappearing,
wallet	disappearing,	too.

"Did	 you	have	any	luggage,	sir?"	he	asked.

"Just	the	one	valise."

"I'll	 have	someone	show	you	to	your	room,	sir,"	he	said,	and	banged	a
bell	on	the	desk.	"Front!"	 he	shouted.	"Checkout	time	is	twelve	noon,	sir.
Have	a	nice	night."

"Thank	 you."

107
A	bellhop	in	a	faded	red	uniform	showed	him	to	the	third-floor	 room.
Flicked	on	the	lights	in	the	bathroom.	Taught	him	how	to	operate	the
window	air-conditioning	 unit.	Turned	on	the	television	set	for	him.
Waited	for	the	tip.	Got	his	fifty	 cents,	looked	at	it	on	the	palm	of	his
hand,	shrugged,	and	left	the	room.	What	the	hell	had	he	expected	for
carrying	that	one	bag?	Rundown	joint	like	 this	mdash;well,	that's	why
he'd	picked	it.	No	questions	asked.	In,	out,	thank	you	very	much.

He	looked	at	the	television	screen,	and	then	at	his	watch.

A	quarter	past	nine.

Forty-five	minutes	before	the	ten	o'clock	news	came	on.

He	wondered	if	they'd	found	the	four	pieces	yet.	Or	either	of	the	cars.
He'd	left	the	Citation	 in	the	parking	lot	of	an	A	P	four	blocks	north	 of	the
river,	shortly	after	he'd	 deep-sixed	the	head	and	the	hands.

Something	dumb	was	on	television.	Well,everything	on	television	was
dumb	these	days.	He'd	have	to	wait	till	ten	o'clock	to	see	what	was
happening,	if	anything.

He	took	off	his	shoes,	lay	full	length	on	the	bed,	his	eyes	closed,	and
relaxed	for	the	first	time	today.

By	tomorrow	night	 at	this	time,	he'd	be	in	San	Francisco.





CHAPTER	        6

Eileen	came	out	of	the	ladies'	room	and	walked	toward	the	farthest	end
of	the	bar,	where	a	television	set	was	mounted	on	the	wall.	Quick	heel-
clicking	hooker	glide,	lots	of	ass	and	ankle	in	it.	She	didn't	even	glance	at
Annie,	sitting	with	her	legs	crossed	at	the	cash-register	end	of	the	bar.
Two	or	three	men	sitting	at	tables	around	the	place	turned	to	look	at	her.
She	gave	them	a	quick	once-over,	no	smile,	no	come-on,	and	took	a	stool
next	to	a	guy	watching	the	television	screen.	She	was	still	fuming.	In	the
mirror	 behind	the	bar,	she	could	still	see	the	flaming	imprint	of	his	hand
on	her	left	cheek.	The	bartender	ambled	over.

108
"Name	it,"	 he	said.

"Rum-Coke,"	 she	said.	"Easy	on	the	rum."

"Comin',"	  he	said,	and	reached	for	a	bottle	of	cheap	rum	on	the	shelf
behind	him.	He	put	ice	in	a	glass,	short-jiggered	some	rum	over	it,	filled
the	glass	with	Coke	from	a	hose.	"Three	bucks	even,"	he	said,	"a
bargain.	You	be	runnin'	a	tab?"

"I'll	 pay	as	I	go,"	she	said,	and	reached	into	her	shoulder	bag.	The	.44
was	sitting	under	a	silk	scarf,	butt	up.	She	took	out	her	wallet,	paid	for
the	drink.	The	bartender	lingered.

"I'm	 Larry,"	  he	said.	"This's	my	place."

Eileen	nodded,	and	then	took	a	sip	of	the	drink.

"You're	new,"	 Larry	 said.

"So?"	she	said.

"So	I	get	a	piece,"	he	said.

"You	get	shit,"	Eileen	said.

"I	 can't	have	hookers	hangin'	around	in	here	'cept	I	get	a	piece."

"Talk	to	Torpedo,"	 she	said.

"I	 don't	know	nobody	named	Torpedo."

"You	don't,	huh?	Well,	ask	around.	I	got	a	feeling	you	won't	like	talking
to	him."

"Who's	Torpedo?	The	black	dude	was	slapping	you	around?"

"Torpedo	Holmes.	Ask	around.	Meanwhile,	fuck	off."

"You	see	the	lady	sittin'	there	at	the	end	of	the	bar?"	Larry	 said.

Eileen	looked	over	at	Annie.

109
"I	 see	her."

"She's	new,	too.	We	had	a	nice	little	talk	minute	she	come	in.	I'm	gettin'
twenty	percent	of	her	action,	just	for	lettin'	 her	plant	her	ass	on	that
stool."

"She	ain't	got	Torpedo,"	Eileen	said.	"You	want	to	get	off	my	fuckin'
back,	or	you	want	me	to	make	a	phone	call?"

"Go	make	your	phone	call,"	Larry	  said.

"Mister,"	 Eileen	said,	"you're	 askin'	for	more	shit	than	you're	 worth."

She	swung	off	the	stool,	long	legs	reaching	for	the	floor,	picked	up	her
bag,	shouldered	it,	and	swiveled	toward	the	phone	booth.	Watching	her,
Annie	thought	God,	she's	good.

In	the	phone	booth,	Eileen	dialed	the	hot-line	number	at	the	Seven-Two.

Alvarez	picked	up.

"Tell	Robinson	to	get	back	here,"	she	said.	"The	bartender's	hassling
me."

"You	got	him,"	 Alvarez	said,	and	hung	up.

Detective/Second	Grade	Alvin	Robinson	worked	out	of	the	Seven-Three,
near	the	park	and	the	County	Court	House.	The	team	at	the	Seven-Two
was	certain	he	wouldn't	be	made	for	a	cop	here	in	the	Canal	Zone,	and
were	using	him	tonight	only	to	establish	Eileen's	credentials	as	a	bona
fide	hooker.	He	wouldn't	be	part	of	the	backup	team,	though	Eileen
might	have	wished	otherwise.	She	was	still	annoyed	that	he'd	hit	her	that
hard	mdash;even	though	she	knew	he'd	been	going	for	realism
mdash;but	in	the	Caddy	on	the	way	over	he'd	sounded	like	a	tough,
dependable	cop	who	knew	his	business.

He	walked	into	the	bar	not	ten	minutes	after	she	placed	her	call.	Eyes
challenging,	sweeping	the	room	under	the	wide	brim	of	his	hat,	everyone
in	the	joint	looking	 away.	He	did	a	cool	pimp	shuffle	over	to	where	Eileen
was	sitting,	and	put	his	hand	on	her	shoulder.

110
"That	 him?"	 he	asked,	and	cocked	his	head	to	where	Larry	was	filling	a
jar	with	 tomato	juice.	Eileen	merely	nodded.	"You,"	Robinson	said,	and
pointed	his	finger.	"Come	here."

Larry	 took	his	time	ambling	over.

"You	givin'	 my	fox	trouble?"	 Robinson	said.

"You	got	a	phone	in	that	pussy	wagon	of	yours?"	Larry	said,	toughing	it
out	though	he'd	never	seen	a	meaner-looking	black	man	in	his	life.
Everybody	in	the	bar	was	looking	at	them	now.	The	guys	at	the	tables,
the	one	who'd	been	watching	television	a	minute	earlier.

"I	 ast	you	a	question,"	Robinson	said.

"I	 read	her	the	rules,	pal,"	Larry	 said.	"The	same	rules	hellip;"

"Don't	 palme	,	pal,"	Robinson	said.	"I	ain't	 your	fuckin'	 pal,	and	I	don't
live	by	no	rules.	If	you	never	heard	of	Torpedo	Holmes,	then	you	got
some	quick	learnin'	to	do.	Nobody	cuts	my	action,	man.	Nobody.	Less
he's	lookin'	for	someother	kinda	cut	I'd	be	mighty	obliged	to	supply.	You
got	that?"

"I'm	 tellin'	 you	hellip;"

"No,	you	ain'ttellin'	 me	nothin',	 mister.	Youlist'nin'	is	what	you	doin'."
He	reached	into	his	wallet,	took	a	frayed	piece	of	glossy	paper	from	it,
unfolded	it,	and	smoothed	it	flat	on	the	bar.	"This's	fromL.A.	 Magazine	,"
he	said.	"You	recognize	that	picture	there?"

Larry	 looked	down	at	a	color	photograph	of	a	big	black	man	wearing	a
red	silk	lounge	robe	and	grinning	cockily	at	the	camera.	The	room	in	the
background	was	opulent.	The	caption	under	the	picture	read:	Thomas
"Torpedo"	Holmes	at	Home.
>

Robinson	thought	the	resemblance	was	a	good	one.	But	even	if	it	hadn't
been,	he	firmly	believed	that	most	white	men	mdash;especially	a	redneck
like	this	one	mdash;thought	all	niggers	looked	alike.	Thomas	"Torpedo"
Holmes	was	now	doing	ten	years	at	Soledad.	The	article	didn't	mention	the
bust	and	conviction,	because	it	had	been	written	three	years	earlier,	when
Holmes	was	riding	too	high	for	his	own	good.	You	don't	shit	on	cops	in

111
print,	not	even	in	L.A.

"I'm	 assumin'	you	don't	know	how	to	read,"	Robinson	said,	"so	I'll	fill	you
in	fast."	He	snatched	the	article	off	the	bartop	before	it	got	too	much
scrutiny,	folded	it,	put	it	back	into	his	wallet	again.	Eileen	sat	looking
bored.	"Now	what	that	article	says,	man,	is	that	not	even	L.A.'s	finest	could
lay	a	finger	on	me,	is	what	that	article	says.	An'	the	same	applies	right	here
inthis	city,	ain't	no	kinda	law	 can	touch	me,	ain't	no	kinda	shitty
bartender	hellip;"

"Iown	this	place!"	 Larry	 said.

"You	list'nin'	 to	me,	man,	or	you	runnin'	 off	at	the	mouth?	I'm	 tellin	you
I	don't	cut	my	action	with	 nobody,	not	the	law,	not	nobody	else	runnin'
girls,	and	most	of	all	notyou	."

"This	ain't	 L.A.,"	 Larry	 said.

"Well,	no	shee-it?"	Robinson	said.

"I	 mean,	I	got	rules	here,	man."

"You	want	me	to	shove	your	rules	up	your	ass,	man?	Together	with	that
jar	of	tomato	juice?	Man,	don't	 tempt	me.	This	little	girl	 here,	she's
gonna	sit	here	long	as	she	likes,	you	dig,	man?	An'	if	I'm	happy	with	the
service	she	gets,	then	maybe	I'll	drop	some	other	little	girls	off	every	now
an'	then,	give	this	fuckin'	dump	some	class."	His	wallet	came	out	again.
He	threw	a	fifty-dollar	 bill	 on	the	counter.	"This	is	for	whatever	she
wants	to	drink.	When	that's	used	up,	I'll	 be	back	with	more.	You	better
pray	I	don't	 come	back	with	somethin'	has	a	sharp	end.	You	take	my
meanin',	man?"

Larry	 picked	up	the	bill	and	tucked	it	into	 his	shirt	pocket.	He	figured
he'd	won	a	moral	victory.	"What's	 all	this	strong-arm	 shit?"	he	asked,
smiling,	playing	to	the	crowd	now,	showing	them	he	hadn't	backed	down.
"We're	two	gentlemen	here,	can't	we	talk	without	threatening	each
other?"

"Was	you	threatenin'	me?"	 Robinson	said.	"I	didn't	 hear	nobody
threatenin'	me."

"What	 I	meant	hellip;"

112
"We	finished	here,	man?	You	gonna	treat	Linda	nice	from	now	on?"

"All	 I	said	to	the	lady	hellip;"

"What	 you	said	don't	mean	shit	to	me.	I	don't	want	no	more	phone	calls
from	her."

"I	 don't	mind	a	nice-looking	girl	 in	the	place,"	Larry	 said.

"Good.	An'	 I	don't	mind	 her	bein'	here,"	Robinson	said,	and	grinned	a
big	watermelon-eating	grin.	He	put	his	hand	on	Eileen's	shoulder	again.
"Now,	honey,"	he	said,	"go	easy	on	the	sauce.	'Cause	Daddy	got	some
nice	candy	for	you	when	the	night's	done."

"See	you,	Torp,"	she	said,	and	offered	her	cheek	for	his	kiss.

Robinson	gave	Larry	a	brief,	meaningful	nod,	and	then	did	his	cool	pimp
shuffle	over	to	the	door	and	out	to	the	white	Cadillac	at	the	curb.

From	the	other	end	of	the	bar,	Annie	said,	"I	wishI	had	a	man	like	that."

The	third	liquor-store	 holdup	took	place	while	Alvin	Robinson	was	doing
his	little	dog-and-pony	act	for	the	owner	of	Larry's	 Bar,	but	the	blues
didn't	respond	till	 nine-thirty,	 and	Carella	and	Meyer	didn't	 arrive	at	the
scene	till	nine	thirty-five,	by	which	time	 Robinson	was	already	driving
back	toward	the	Seventy-Third	Precinct.

This	time,	nobody	had	been	killed	mdash;but	not	for	lack	of	trying.
Martha	Frey,	the	forty-year-old	 woman	who	owned	and	operated	the
store	on	Culver	and	Twentieth,	told	them	that	four	of	them
mdash;wearing	clown	suits,	and	pointed	pom-pommed	clown	hats,	and
white	clown	masks	with	bulbous	red	noses	and	wide	grinning	red	mouths
mdash;had	started	shooting	the	minute	they	walked	in.	She'd	grabbed
for	her	heart	and	fallen	down	behind	the	counter	in	what	she	hoped	was
a	very	good	imitation	of	someone	who'd	been	mortally	wounded.	It	had
occurred	to	her,	while	they	were	cleaning	out	the	cash	register,	that	one	of
them	might	decide	to	put	a	"coop	dee	gracie,"	as	she	called	it,	in	her	head
while	she	was	lying	there	playing	possum.	None	of	them	had.	She
considered	it	a	miracle	that	she	was	still	alive,	four	little	guns	opening	up
that	way,	all	of	them	at	the	same	time.	She	wondered	if	maybe	they'd	hit
her	after	all.	Was	it	possible	she	was	now	in	shock	and	didn't	know	she'd

113
been	hit?	Did	the	detectives	see	any	blood	on	her?

Meyer	assured	her	that	she	was	still	in	one	piece.

"I	 can't	believe	they	missed	me,"	she	said,	and	made	the	sign	or	the	cross.
"God	must	have	been	watching	over	me."

Either	that,	or	they	were	nervous	this	time	around,	Carella	thought.
Three	times	in	the	space	of	four	hours,	even	your	seasoned	pro	could
spook.	No	less	a	handful	of	grade-schoolers.

"Did	 you	see	who	was	driving	the	car?"	Carella	asked.

"No,"	 Martha	 said.	"I	was	tallying	 the	register	for	the	night.	I	usually
close	at	nine	on	Fridays,	but	this	is	Halloween,	there's	lots	of	parties
going	on,	people	run	short	of	booze,	they	make	a	last-minute	run	to	the
store.	This	was	maybe	twenty	after	when	they	came	in."

The	Mobile	Lab	van	was	pulling	up	outside	the	store.

"Techs'll	be	here	a	while,"	Carella	said.	"They'll	 want	to	see	if	there's
anything	on	that	register."

"There	ain't	 anythingin	it,	 that's	for	sure,"	 Martha	 said	mournfully.

"Did	 they	say	anything	to	you?"	Meyer	asked.	"When	they	came	in?"

"Just	'Trick	 or	Treat!'	 Then	they	started	shooting."

"Didn't	 say,	'This	is	a	stickup,'	anything	like	that?"

"Nothing."

"Hello,	boys,"	 one	of	the	techs	said.	"Kiddy	time	again?"

"School	let	out	again?"	the	other	tech	said.

"How	about	when	they	were	cleaning	out	the	register?"	Meyer	asked,
ignoring	them.

"One	of	them	said,	'Hold	it	 open,	Alice.'	I	guess	he	meant	the	shopping
bag."

114
"Alice?"	Carella	said.	"A	girl?"

"A	woman,	yes,"	Martha	said.

Carella	thought	this	was	carrying	feminism	a	bit	too	far.

"Well,	this	little	girl	hellip;"	he	started	to	say,	but	Martha	broke	in	at
once.

"Awoman	,"	she	said.	"Not	a	little	girl.	These	weren'tchildren	,	Detective
Carella,	they	weremidgets	."

He	looked	at	her.

"I	used	to	work	the	high-wire	with	Ringling,"	she	said.	"Broke	my	hip	in
a	fall,	quit	for	good.	But	I	still	know	midgets	when	I	see	them.	These
weremidgets	."

"What'd	I	tell	you,	Baz?"	one	of	the	techs	said.	"I	shoulda	taken	your
bet."

"Midgets,"	the	other	tech	said.	"I'll	be	a	son	of	a	bitch."

Me,	too,	Carella	thought.

But	now	they	knew	what	they	were	looking	for.

And	now	they	had	a	pattern.

Peaches	and	Parker	were	the	only	ones	not	in	costume.

"What	are	you	supposed	to	be?"	a	man	dressed	like	a	cowboy	asked.

"I'm	a	cop,"	Parker	said.

"I'm	a	victim,"	Peaches	said.

"I'll	 be	damned,"	the	cowboy	said.

Parker	showed	his	shield	to	everyone	he	met.

115
"Looks	like	 the	real	McCoy,"	a	pirate	said.

Peaches	lifted	her	skirt	and	showed	a	silent-movie	director	a	black-and-
blue	mark	on	her	thigh.

"I'm	 a	victim,"	 she	said.

She	had	got	the	black-and-blue	mark	banging	against	a	table	on	her	way
to	the	bathroom	one	night.

The	silent-movie	director,	who	was	wearing	jodhpurs	and	carrying	a
megaphone,	said,	"That's	some	leg,	honey.	You	wanna	be	in	pictures?"

The	girl	with	 him	was	dressed	as	Theda	Bara.	"That's	an	anagram	for
Arab	Death,"	 she	said.

Parker	looked	into	the	front	of	her	clingy,	satin,	low-cut	dress,	and	said,
"You're	under	arrest,"	 and	showed	her	his	shield.

In	the	kitchen,	Dracula	and	Superman	and	Scarlett	O'Hara	 and
Cleopatra	were	snorting	cocaine.

Parker	didn't	 show	them	his	shield.	Instead,	he	snorted	a	few	lines	with
them.

Peaches	said,	"You're	kinda	fun	for	a	cop."

This	was	the	first	time	in	a	good	many	years	that	anyone	had	told	Parker
he	was	kind	of	fun,	for	a	cop	or	anything	else.	He	hugged	her	close.

She	went,	"Oooooo."

A	white	man	in	blackface,	dressed	as	Eddie	Murphy	dressed	as	the
Detroit	detective	inBeverly	Hills	Cop	said,	"I'm	a	cop,"	 and	showed
Parker	a	fake	shield.

"I'll	 go	along	quietly,"	 Parker	said,	and	hugged	Peaches	again.

"Way	I	 figure	it,"	 Kling	 said,	"we	go	over	there	soon	as	we're	relieved.
Maybe	get	to	the	Zone	around	midnight,	a	little	after."

"Uh-huh,"	 Hawes	said,	and	looked	up	at	the	wall	clock.

116
Ten	minutes	to	ten.	Less	than	two	hours	before	the	relieving	shift	began
filtering	 in.

"They	don't	 even	need	to	know	we're	there,"	Kling	said.	"We	take	one	of
the	sedans,	just	cruise	the	streets."

They	were	sitting	at	his	desk,	talking	in	whispers.	Across	the	room,
Brown	was	getting	a	description	of	Jimmy	Brayne.	He	was	right	now
ready	to	bet	the	farm	that	Sebastian	the	Great's	apprentice	was	the	one
who'd	done	him	in	and	chopped	him	up	in	pieces.

"This	guy's	extremely	dangerous,"	Kling	 said.	"Juked	three	people
already."

"And	 you	think	they	may	need	help,	huh?"	Hawes	said.	"Annie	and
Eileen?"

"More	 the	merrier,"	 Kling	said.

"White	 or	black?"	 Brown	asked.

"White,"	 Marie	 said.

"His	age?"

"Thirty-two."

"Height?"

"About	 six	feet."

"Annie	never	even	mentioned	she	was	going	out	on	this,"	Hawes	said.	"I
talked	to	her	must've	been	hellip;"

"She	didn't	get	the	call	from	Homicide	 till	late	this	afternoon.	That's	 the
thing	of	it,	Cotton.	They	pulled	this	whole	damn	thing	 out	of	a	Cracker
Jack	box."

"Weight?"	 Brown	said.

"About	 a	hundred	and	eighty?	Something	like	that."

117
"Color	of	hair?"

"Black."

"Eyes?"

"Brown."

"I	mean,	wouldyou	go	out	there	with	only	two	backups?"	Kling	said.
"Where	the	guy's	armed	with	a	knife,	and	already	boxed	three	people?"

"Those	don't	sound	like	bad	odds,"	Hawes	said.	"Three	to	one?	All	three
of	them	loaded.	Against	only	a	knife."

"Only,	huh?	My	point	is,	if	Annie	and	this	Shanahan	guy	stay	too	close	to
her,"	Kling	said,	"he	won't	make	his	move.	So	they	have	to	keep	their
distance.	But	if	he	breaks	out,	who's	covering	the	backfield?"

"Any	identifying	scars,	marks,	or	tattoos?"	Brown	asked.

"Not	that	I	know	of."

"Any	regional	accent	or	dialect?"

"He's	from	Massachusetts.	He	sounds	a	little	like	the	Kennedys."

"What	was	he	wearing	when	you	left	the	house	today?"

"Let	me	think."

She	was	sitting	on	a	bench	under	the	squadroom	bulletin	board,	her
hands	folded	on	her	lap.	Her	face	was	still	tear-stained.	Brown	had	one
foot	up	on	the	bench,	a	clipboard	resting	on	his	knee.	He	waited.

"Blue	jeans,"	she	said.	"And	a	woolen	sweater,	no	shirt.	A	V-necked
sweater.	Sort	of	rust-colored.	And	sneakers.	And	hellip;	white	socks,	I
think.	Oh,	yes.	He	wears	a	sort	of	medallion	around	his	neck.	A	silver
medallion,	I	think	he	won	it	in	a	swim	meet.	A	high	school	swim	meet."

"Wears	it	all	the	time?"

118
"I've	never	seen	him	without	it."

"Have	you	discussed	this	with	Eileen?"	Hawes	asked.

"Yeah,	I	mentioned	it	at	dinner,"	Kling	said.

"Told	her	you	want	to	go	over	there?"

"Yeah."

"To	the	Zone?"

"Yeah."

"What'd	she	say?"

"She	told	me	she	could	handle	it."

"But	you	don't	think	she	can,	huh?"

"I	think	she	can	handle	it	better	with	a	few	more	people	on	the	job.	They
shoulda	known	that	themselves,	Homicide.	And	also	the	Seven-Two.
Putting	two	women	on	the	street	against	hellip;"

"Plus	Shanahan."

"Well,	I	don't	know	this	Shanahan,	do	you?"

"No,	but	hellip;"

"For	all	I	know	hellip;"

"But	you	can't	automatically	figure	he's	a	hairbag."

"I	don't	know	what	he	is.	Ido	know	he's	not	gonna	care	as	much	about
Eileen	asI	care	about	her."

"Maybe	that's	the	problem,"	Hawes	said.

"Does	he	wear	a	wristwatch?"	Brown	asked.

"Yes,"	Marie	said.

119
"Would	you	know	what	kind?"

"One	of	those	digital	things.	Black	with	a	black	band.	A	Seiko,	I	think.
I'm	not	sure."

"Any	other	jewelry?"

"A	ring.	He	wears	it	on	his	right	pinky.	A	little	gold	ring	with	a	red	stone.
I	don't	think	it's	a	ruby,	but	it	looks	like	one."

"Is	he	right-handed	or	left-handed?"

"I	don't	know."

"What	do	you	mean?"	Kling	said.

"I	mean,	why	don't	you	leave	it	to	them?"	Hawes	said.

Kling	looked	at	him.

"They're	experienced	cops,	all	of	them.	If	Homicide	or	the	Seven-Two
hasn't	put	an	army	out	there,	it's	maybe	'cause	they	think	they'll	spook
him."

"I	don't	see	how	two	more	guys	is	gonna	make	anarmy	,"	Kling	said.

"These	guys	can	smell	traps,"	Hawes	said,	"they're	like	animals	in	the
jungle.	Anyway,	they'll	be	carrying	walkie-talkies,	won't	they?	Annie,
Shanahan?	Maybe	even	Eileen.	There'll	be	rmp's	cruising	the	Zone,
they're	not	gonna	be	alone	out	there.	Any	one	of	'em	calls	in	a	10-13
hellip;"

"I	don't	want	her	getting	cut	again,"	Kling	said.

"You	thinkshe	wants	to	get	cut	again?"	Hawes	said.

"Tell	me	what	happened	before	you	left	the	house	today,"	Brown	said.
"Was	he	behaving	differently	in	any	way?"

"Same	as	always,"	Marie	said.

120
"Did	 he	get	along	okay	with	your	husband?"

"Yes.	Well,	he	wants	to	be	a	magician,	you	see.	He	studies	all	the	tricks
the	famous	magicians	did	mdash;Dai	Vernon,	Blackstone,	Audley	Walsh,
Tommy	Windsor,	Houdini,	Ballantine	mdash;all	 of	them.	He	keeps	up
with	all	the	new	people,	too,	tries	to	dope	out	their	tricks.	And	my
husband	is	hellip;"

Her	face	almost	broke.

"My	 husband	hellip;	was	hellip;	very	patient	with	 him.	Always	willing	 to
explain	a	sleight,	or	a	pocket	trick,	or	a	stage	illusion	hellip;	helping	him
with	his	patter	hellip;	 taking	the	time	to	hellip;	 to	hellip;	show	him	and
hellip;	and	guide	him.	I	don't	 know	how	he	could've	done	something	like
this.	I'll	 tell	you	the	truth,	 Detective	Brown,	I'm	willing	 to	give	you
anything	you	need	to	find	Jimmy,	but	I	can't	believe	he	did	this."

"Well,we	don't	know	that	 for	sure,	either,"	Brown	 said.

"That's	 just	what	I	mean,"	 Marie	said.	"I	 just	pray	 to	God	something
hasn't	happened	tohim	,	too.	I	just	hope	somebody	hasn't	hellip;	hasn't
killed	themboth	."

"How	doyou	get	along	with	him?"	 Brown	asked.

"Jimmy?	 I	think	 of	him	as	a	brother."

"No	friction,	 huh?	I	mean,	the	three	of	you	living	in	the	same	house?"

"None	whatever."

"So	what	does	that	mean?"	Kling	asked.	"You	won't	go	with	 me?"

"I	 don't	thinkyou	 should	go,	either,"	Hawes	said.

"Well,	I'm	 going."

"She	knows	her	job,"	Hawes	said	flatly.	"And	 so	does	Annie."

"Shedidn't	know	her	job	when	that	son	of	a	bitch	hellip;"

Kling	caught	himself.	He	took	a	deep	breath.

121
"Take	it	easy,"	Hawes	said.

"I'm	 going	out	there	tonight,"	 Kling	 said.	"With	 you	or	without	you."

"Take	it	easy,"	Hawes	said	again.

Brown	walked	over.

"Here's	the	way	I	figure	 it,"	 he	said	to	Hawes.	"You	caught	the	Missing
P,	I	caught	the	pieces.	Turns	out	it's	the	same	case.	I	figure	maybe	Genero
ought	to	go	back	to	cruising,	find	all	that	trouble	 in	the	streets	the	loot's
worried	about.	You	and	me	can	team	up	on	this	one,	how	does	that	sound
to	you?"

"Sounds	good,"	Hawes	said.

"I'll	 go	tell	Genero,"	 Brown	said,	and	walked	off.

"You	okay?"	 Hawes	asked	Kling.

"I'm	 fine,"	 Kling	 said.

But	he	walked	off,	too.

The	precinct	map	was	spread	out	on	the	long	table	in	the	Interrogation
Room.	Meyer	and	Carella	were	hunched	over	the	map.	They	had	already
asked	Sergeant	Murchison	to	run	a	check	on	any	circuses	or	carnivals
that	happened	to	be	in	town.	They	did	not	think	there'd	be	any	at	this
time	of	year.	In	the	meantime,	they	were	trying	to	figure	out	where	the
midgets	would	hit	next.

"Midgets,"	 Meyer	said,	shaking	his	head.	"You	ever	bust	a	midget?"

"Never,"	Carella	 said.	"I	busted	a	dwarf	once.	He	was	a	very	good
burglar.	Used	to	crawl	into	vents."

"What's	 the	difference?"	Meyer	asked.

"A	midget	is	a	person	of	unusually	small	size,	but	he's	physically	well-
proportioned."

122
"So?	Dopey	and	Doc	were	well-proportioned,	too."

"That's	 the	movies,"	Carella	said.	"In	 real	life,	a	dwarf	has	abnormal
body	proportions."

"Can	you	name	all	the	Seven	Dwarfs?"	Meyer	asked.

"I	 can't	even	name	Snow	White,"	Carella	said.

"Go	on,	give	it	a	try."

"Anyone	can	name	the	Seven	Dwarfs,"	Carella	said.

"Go	ahead,	name	them."

"Dopey,	Doc	hellip;"

"I	 gave	you	those	two	free."

"Grumpy,	 Sleepy,	Sneezy	hellip;	how	many	is	that?"

"Five."

"Bashful."

"Yeah?"

"And	 hellip;"

"Yeah?"

"Who's	the	seventh	one?"	Carella	said.

"Nobody	can	name	all	seven	of	them,"	Meyer	said.

"So	tell	me	who	he	is."

"Think	 about	it,"	 Meyer	said,	smiling.

Carella	hunched	over	the	precinct	map.	Now	the	goddamn	seventh	dwarf
would	bother	him	all	night	 long.

123
"First	 hit	was	here,"	he	said,	indicating	the	location	on	the	map.	"Culver
and	Ninth.	Second	one	here.	Still	on	Culver,	three	blocks	east.	Next	one
was	Culver	and	Twentieth."

"They're	 working	their	 way	uptown	on	Culver."

"First	 one	at	hellip;	have	you	got	that	timetable?"

Meyer	opened	his	notebook.	"Five-fifteen,"	he	said.	"Second	one	at	a
little	after	seven.	Third	one	about	forty	minutes	ago."

"So	what's	the	interval?"

"Five-fifteen,	seven-oh-five,	nine-twenty.	Figure	two	hours,	more	or	less."

"Time	to	change	their	costumes	hellip;"

"Or	 maybe	we're	dealing	withthree	gangs	here,	did	that	occur	to	you?"

"There	aren't	 that	many	midgets	in	the	world,"	 Carella	said.

"You	figured	out	the	seventh	dwarf	yet?"

"No."	 He	looked	at	the	map	again.	"So	the	next	one	should	be	further
uptown	on	Culver,	and	they	should	hit	around	eleven,	eleven-thirty."

"Ifthere's	 a	next	one."

"And	 unless	they	speed	up	the	timetable."

"Yeah,"	Meyer	said,	and	shook	his	head	again.	"Midgets.	I	always
thought	midgets	were	law-abiding	citizens."

"Just	be	happy	they	aren't	giants,"	 Carella	said.

"You	got	it,"	 Meyer	said.

"Huh?"	 Carella	said.

"Happy.	That's	 the	seventh	dwarf."

"Oh.	Yeah."

124
"So	what	do	you	want	to	do?"

"First	 let's	check	Dave,	see	if	he	came	up	with	any	circuses	or	carnivals."

"That's	 a	long	shot,"	Meyer	said.

"Then	let's	call	Ballistics	again,	see	if	they	got	anything	on	the	bullets."

"We'll	 maybe	get	a	caliber	and	make,"	Meyer	said,	"but	I	don't	 see	how
that's	gonna	help	us."

"And	 then	I	guess	we	better	head	uptown,"	Carella	said,	"case	Culver,
see	which	stores	are	possibles	for	the	next	hit."

"You	figuring	 on	a	plant?"

"Unless	there's	a	dozen	of	them."

"Well,	it's	 getting	late,	there	won't	be	many	open."

Carella	folded	the	map.

"So,"	he	said.	"Murchison	 first."

She	was	still	sitting	on	the	bench,	weeping	softly,	when	Hawes
approached	her.

"Mrs.	 Sebastiani?"	he	said.

Marie	looked	up.	Face	tear-streaked,	blue	eyes	rimmed	with	red	now.

"I'm	 sorry	to	bother	 you,"	he	said.

"No,	that's	all	 right,"	 she	said.

"I	 wanted	to	tell	you	hellip;	we	found	the	van,	but	we	still	haven't	located
the	Citation.	You	said	Brayne	drove	the	van	into	the	city	today	hellip;"

"Yes."

"So	maybe	the	techs'll	be	able	to	lift	his	prints	from	the	wheel.	He	hasn't

125
got	a	criminal	record,	has	he?"

"Not	that	 I	know	of."

"Well,	we'll	 run	him	 through	the	computer,	see	what	we	come	up	with.
Meanwhile,	if	the	techs	lift	anything,	and	if	 we	find	the	Citation,	then
maybe	we'll	know	if	he's	the	one	who	drove	it	away	from	the	school.	By
comparing	prints	from	 the	two	wheels,	do	you	see?"

"Yes.	But	hellip;	well,	weall	drove	both	cars	a	lot.	I	mean,	you'll	probably
find	my	prints	 and	Frank's	together	with	Jimmy's.	 If	you	find	 any
prints."

"Uh-huh,	yes,	that's	a	possibility.	But	we'll	see,	okay?	Meanwhile,
Detective	Brown	has	already	put	out	a	bulletin	on	Brayne,	and	we'll	be
watching	all	railroad	 stations,	bus	terminals,	airports,	in	case	he	hellip;"

"You'llbe	watching?"

"Well,	not	Brown	 and	me	personally.	I	mean	the	police.	The	bulletin's
gone	out	already,	as	I	said,	so	maybe	we'll	get	some	results	there.	If	he's
trying	to	get	out	of	the	city."

"Yes,"	Marie	 said,	and	nodded.

"Brown	 and	I	are	gonna	run	back	to	the	high	school,	see	if	anybody	there
saw	what	happened	in	that	driveway."

"Well	hellip;	 will	 anyonebe	there?	I	mean,	won't	the	teachers	hellip;?"

"And	 the	kids,	yes,	they'll	be	gone,	that'll	have	to	wait	till	morning.	But
the	Custodian'll	be	there,	and	maybehe	saw	something."

"Will	 it	 be	the	same	custodian	who	was	there	this	afternoon?"

"I	 don't	know,	but	we're	going	to	check	it	out,	anyway."

"Yes,	I	see."

"Meanwhile,	I	 wanted	to	know	whatyou	plan	to	do.	Do	you	have	any
relatives	or	friends	here	in	the	city?"

126
"No."

"Then	will	you	be	going	back	home?	I	know	you're	short	of	cash	hellip;"

"Yes,	but	there	was	money	in	Frank's	wallet."

"Well,	the	lab'll	be	running	tests	on	the	wallet	and	everything	in	it,	so	I
can't	let	you	have	that.	But	if	you	want	me	to	lend	you	train	fare,	or	bus
fare	hellip;	what	I'm	asking	is	whether	or	not	you	plan	on	going	home,
Mrs.	Sebastiani.	Because,	honestly,	there's	nothing	more	you	can	do
here."

"I	hellip;	I	don't	know	what	I	want	to	do,"	she	said,	and	began	crying
again,	burying	her	face	in	an	already	sodden	handkerchief.

Hawes	watched	her,	awkward	in	the	presence	of	her	tears.

"I'm	not	sure	I	want	to	go	home,"	she	said,	her	voice	muffled	by	the
handkerchief.	"With	Frank	gone	hellip;"

The	sentence	trailed.

She	kept	sobbing	into	the	handkerchief.

"You	have	to	go	home	sometime,"	Hawes	said	gently.

"I	know,	I	know,"	she	said,	and	blew	her	nose,	and	sniffed,	and	wiped	at
her	eyes	with	the	back	of	her	hand.	"There	are	calls	I'll	have	to	make
hellip;	Frank's	mother	in	Atlanta,	and	his	sister	hellip;	and	I	guess	hellip;
I	suppose	I'll	have	to	make	funeral	arrangements	hellip;	oh	God,	how	are
they	going	to	hellip;	what	will	they	hellip;?"

Hawes	was	thinking	the	same	thing.	The	body	was	in	four	separate
pieces.	The	body	didn't	have	hands	or	a	head.

"That'll	have	to	wait	till	autopsy,	anyway,"	he	said.	"I'll	let	you	know
when	hellip;"

"I	thought	they'd	already	done	that."

"Well,	that	was	a	prelim.	We	asked	for	a	preliminary	report,	you	see.	But
the	M.E.'ll	want	to	do	a	more	thorough	examination."

127
"Why?"	 she	asked.	"I've	already	identified	him."

"Yes,	but	we're	dealing	with	a	murder	here,	Mrs.	Sebastiani,	and	we	need
to	know	hellip;	well,	for	 example,	your	husband	may	have	beenpoisoned
before	the	body	was	hellip;	well	hellip;"

He	cut	himself	short.

He	was	talking	too	much.

This	was	a	goddamn	grieving	widow	here.

"There	are	lots	of	things	the	M.E.	can	tell	us,"	he	concluded	lamely.

Marie	nodded.

"So	hellip;will	 you	be	going	home?"	he	asked.

"I	 suppose."

Hawes	opened	his	wallet,	pulled	out	two	twenties	and	a	ten.	"This	should
get	you	there,"	he	said,	handing	the	money	to	her.

"That's	 too	much,"	she	said.

"Well,	tide	you	over.	I'll	 give	you	a	ring	later	tonight,	make	sure	you	got
home	okay.	And	I'll	be	in	touch	as	we	go	along.	Sometimes	these	things
take	a	little	while,	but	we'll	 be	work	hellip;"

"Yes,"	she	said.	"Let	me	know."

"I'll	 have	one	of	the	cars	drop	you	off,"	he	said.	"Will	 you	be	going	home
by	train	or	hellip;	 ?"

"Train,	 yes."

She	seemed	numb.

"So	hellip;	uh	hellip;	 whenever	you're	ready,	I'll	buzz	the	sergeant	and
he'll	pull	one	of	the	cars	off	the	street.	I'd	drive	you	myself,	but	Brown
and	I	want	to	get	over	to	the	school."

128
Marie	nodded.

And	then	she	looked	up	and	said	mdash;perhaps	only	to	herself
mdash;"How	am	I	 going	to	live	without	him?"





CHAPTER	        7

Genero	was	annoyed.

He	was	the	one	who'd	found	the	first	piece	of	the	body,	and	now	allfour
pieces	were	out	of	his	hands.	So	to	speak.	He	blamed	it	on	seniority.	Both
Brown	and	Hawes	had	been	detectives	longer	than	he	had,	and	so	they'd
immediately	taken	charge	of	a	juicy	homicide.	So	here	he	was,	back	on
the	street	again,	cruising	like	a	goddamn	patrolman.	He	was	more	than
annoyed.	He	was	enormously	pissed.

The	streets	at	a	quarter	past	ten	were	still	teeming	with	people	hellip;
well,	sure,	who	expected	this	kind	of	weather	at	the	end	of	October?	Guys
in	shirt	sleeves,	girls	in	summer	dresses,	everybody	strolling	up	the
avenue	like	it	was	summertime	in	Paris,	not	that	he'd	ever	been	there.
Lady	there	on	the	corner	with	a	French	poodle,	letting	the	dog	poop	right
on	the	sidewalk,	even	though	it	was	against	the	law.	He	wondered	if	he
should	arrest	her.	He	considered	it	beneath	his	dignity,	a	Detective/Third
having	to	arrest	a	lady	whose	dog	was	illegally	pooping.	He	let	the	dog
poop,	drove	on	by.

Made	a	cursory	tour	of	the	sector.

Who	else	was	out	here?

Kling?

Came	onto	Culver,	began	heading	east.

Past	the	first	liquor	store	got	robbed	tonight,	then	the	second	one	hellip;

What	had	they	been	talking	about	back	there	in	the	squad-room?	Meyer
and	Carella.	Midgets?	Was	it	possible?	Midgets	holding	up	liquor	stores?

129
Those	little	Munchkins	fromThe	Wizard	of	Oz	holding	upliquor	stores,	for
Christ's	sake?	He	didn't	know	what	kind	 of	a	world	this	was	getting	to
be.	He	thanked	God	every	night	before	he	went	to	sleep	that	he	had	been
chosen	to	enforce	law	and	order	in	the	kind	of	world	this	was	getting	to
be.	Even	if	sometimes	he	had	a	good	ripe	murder	yanked	out	of	his
hands.	The	only	way	to	get	ahead	in	the	Department	was	to	crack	a	good
homicide	every	now	and	then.	Not	that	it	had	done	Carella	much	good,
all	the	homicides	he'd	cracked.	Been	a	detective	for	how	many	years
now?	Still	only	Second	Grade.	Well,	sometimes	people	got	passed	over.
The	meek	shall	inherit	the	earth,	he	thought.	Still,	he	wished	he'd	had	an
honest	crack	at	that	homicide	tonight.	He	was	the	one	found	the	first
piece,	wasn't	he?

Onto	Mason	Avenue,	the	hookers	out	in	force,	well,	Halloween,	lots	of
guys	coming	uptown	to	look	for	the	Great	Pumpkin.	Went	home	with	the
Great	Herpes	and	maybe	the	Great	AIDS.	He	wouldn't	screw	a	Mason
Avenue	hooker	if	you	gave	him	a	million	dollars.	Well,	maybe	he	would.
For	a	million,	maybe.	That	one	on	the	corner	looked	very	clean,	in	fact.
But	you	could	never	tell.	Anyway,	she	was	Puerto	Rican,	and	his	mother
had	warned	him	against	fooling	around	with	any	girls	who	weren't
Italian.	He	wondered	if	Italian	 girls	ever	got	herpes.	He	was	positive	they
never	got	AIDS.

Swinging	north	again,	up	one	of	the	side	streets,	then	onto	the	Stem,	all
gaudy	and	bright,	he	really	loved	this	part	of	the	hellip;

"Boy	One,	Boy	One	hellip;"

The	walkie-talkie	lying	on	the	seat	beside	him.	Dispatcher	trying	to	raise
hellip;

"Boy	One."

Answering.

"10-21	at	one-one-four-one	Oliver,	near	Sixth.	Apartment	four-two.	10-21
at	one-one-four-one	Oliver,	near	Sixth.	See	the	lady."

"What	 was	that	apartment	again?"

"Four-two."

130
"Rolling."

A	burglary	past,	couple	of	blocks	down	and	to	the	south.	No	need	for	a
detective	on	the	scene.	If	it	had	been	a	10-30,	an	armed	robbery	in
progress,	or	even	a	10-34,	an	assault	in	progress,	he'd	have	responded
along	with	the	blues.	He	guessed.	Sometimes	it	was	better	not	to	stick
your	nose	into	too	many	things.	A	10-13	mdash;an	assist	officer
mdash;sure.	Man	called	in	for	help,	you	got	to	the	scene	fast,wherever
you	were.

Ran	uptown	on	the	Stem	for	a	couple	of	blocks,	made	a	right	turn	at
random,	heading	south	toward	the	park.	He'd	swing	onto	Grover	there,
parallel	the	park	for	 a	while,	then	run	north	to	the	river,	 come	back	down
Silvermine,	take	a	run	around	the	Oval,	then	back	south	on	hellip;

Up	ahead.

Four	teenagers.

Running	into	the	building	 on	the	corner.

Just	a	glimpse	of	them.

Blue	jeans	and	denim	jackets.

Something	in	their	hands.

Trouble?

Shit,	he	thought.

He	eased	the	car	over.	No	parking	spaces	on	the	street,	he	double-parked
in	front	of	the	building	 and	picked	up	the	walkie-talkie.

"Eight-Seven,"	he	said,	"D.D.	Four."

Calling	home,	identifying	himself.	One	of	the	six	unmarked	sedans	used
by	the	Detective	Division.

"Go	ahead,	Four."

"Genero,"	 he	said.	"10-51,	four	in	number,	at	twelve-seven-teen	North

131
Eleventh."

"Stay	in	touch,	Genero."

He'd	identified	the	four	 teenagers	as	a	roving	band,	a	non-crime	incident,
and	he	hoped	that	was	what	it	turned	out	to	be.	Getting	out	of	the	car,	he
pulled	back	the	flap	of	his	jacket	and	was	clipping	the	walkie-talkie	to	his
belt	when	a	loud	whooshing	sound	erupted	from	inside	the	building.	He
almost	dropped	the	walkie-talkie.	He	looked	up	sharply.	Flames!	In	the
lobby	there!	And	running	 out	of	the	building,	the	four	 teenagers,	one	of
them	still	carrying	 in	his	right	hand	what	looked	like	 a	Molotov	cocktail.
Instinctively,	Genero	yelled,	"Stop!	Police!"	 and	yanked	his	service
revolver	from	its	holster.

The	kids	hesitated	for	only	a	moment.

"Police!"	 he	shouted	again.

The	one	with	the	firebomb	held	a	Zippo	lighter	to	the	wick	and	hurled
the	bottle	at	Genero.

The	bottle	crashed	at	his	feet.	Flames	sprang	up	from	the	sidewalk.	He
threw	both	hands	up	to	protect	his	face,	and	then	immediately	stepped
back	and	brought	his	right	hand	down	again,	pistol	level,	firing	 into	the
wall	of	fire,	through	 the	wall	of	fire,	two	quick	shots	in	succession.

Somebody	screamed.

And	suddenly	they	were	on	him.	They	jumped	through	the	names	like
circus	performers,	three	of	them	hitting	him	 almost	simultaneously,
knocking	him	to	the	pavement.	He	rolled	away	from	the	fire,	tried	to	roll
away	from	their	kicks.	He	brought	the	gun	hand	up	again,	fired	again,
three	shots	gone	now,	heard	someone	grunt.	Don't	waste	any,	he	thought,
and	one	of	them	kicked	him	in	the	head.	He	went	blank	for	an	instant.
His	finger	tightened	reflexively	on	the	trigger.	The	gun	exploded	wild,
close	to	his	own	ear.	He	blinked	his	eyes.	He	was	going.	He	fought
unconsciousness.	Someone	kicked	him	in	the	shoulder,	and	the	sharp	pain
rocketed	into	his	brain	and	brought	him	 back.	Four	shots	gone,	he
thought.	Make	the	next	ones	count.	He	rolled	away	again.	He	blinked
them	into	focus.	Only	two	of	them	on	their	feet	now.	The	third	one	flat	on
his	back	near	the	entrance	to	the	building.	Fourth	one	lying	on	the
sidewalk	dangerously	close	to	the	fire.	He'd	hammered	two	of	them,	but

132
there	were	still	two	to	go,	and	only	two	shots	left	in	the	gun.

His	heart	was	pounding.

But	he	took	his	time.

Waited	till	the	lead	kicker	was	almost	on	him,	and	then	shot	for	his	chest.

Second	one	right	behind	him,	almost	knocked	off	his	feet	when	his	buddy
blew	back	into	him.	Genero	fired	again.	Took	the	second	one	in	the	left
shoulder,	sent	him	spinning	around	and	staggering	back	toward	the	wall
of	the	building.

Genero	could	hardly	breathe.

He	got	to	his	feet,	fanned	the	empty	gun	at	them.

Nobody	seemed	to	be	going	anywhere.

He	backed	off	a	pace,	pulled	cartridges	from	his	belt,	loaded	them	into
the	cylinder,	counting	hellip;	four,	five,	six	and	ready	again.

"Move	and	you're	dead,"	 he	whispered,	and	yanked	the	walkie-talkie
from	his	belt.

Detective/Third	Grade	Richard	 Genero	had	come	of	age	on	the	eve	of	All
Hallows'	Day.

The	school	custodian	who	answered	the	night	bell	was	the	same	one
who'd	locked	Sebastian	the	Great's	tricks	in	a	storeroom	earlier	this
afternoon.	Peering	through	the	grilled	upper	glass	panel	of	the	door	at
the	back	of	the	building,	he	recognized	Hawes	at	once,	unlocked	the	door,
and	let	him	in.

"	'Evening,	Mr.	 Buono,"	Hawes	said.

"Hey,	how	you	doing?"	Buono	said.

He	was	a	man	in	his	late	sixties,	thinning	gray	hair,	thin	gray	mustache
over	his	upper	lip.	Pale	blue	eyes,	somewhat	bulbous	nose.	He	was
wearing	coveralls.	A	flashlight	was	in	one	of	the	pockets.	He	clipped	his
ring	of	keys	to	a	loop	on	the	pocket.

133
"This	is	my	partner,	Detective	Brown,"	 Hawes	said.

"Nice	to	meetcha,"	Buono	said.	"You	come	back	for	the	stuff?"

"Well,	no,"	 Hawes	said.	"Few	questions	we'd	like	to	ask	you."

Buono	immediately	figured	they	knew	he	was	stealing	supplies	from	the
classroom	closets.

"Hey,	sure,"	he	said,	and	tried	to	look	innocent.	He	locked	the	door
behind	them,	and	said,	"Come	on	over	the	office,	we	can	talk	there.	My
friend	and	me	were	playing	checkers."

They	walked	down	a	yellow-tiled,	locker-lined	corridor.	They	passed	a
wall	clock	that	read	twenty	minutes	past	ten.	They	made	a	left	turn.
More	students'	lockers	on	either	wall.	A	bulletin	board.	A	poster	reading:

                                COME	 CHEER	THE	 TIGERS!
                                    Saturday,	Nov.	1,	2:00	p.m.
                                          RAUCHER	 FIELD

To	the	right	of	that,	another	poster	announcing:

                                   SEBASTIAN	 THE	GREAT!
                                      HALLOWEEN	  MAGIC!
                                        Auditorium.	 4:00	p.m.

Beneath	the	lettering	was	a	black-and-white	photograph	of	a	good-
looking	young	man	wearing	a	top	hat	and	bow	tie,	grinning	into	the
camera.

"Okay	to	take	that	 poster?"	Brown	asked.

"Which	 one?"	Buono	said.

"The	magician."

"Sure,"	 Buono	said,	and	shrugged.

Brown	began	pulling	out	the	tacks.

134
"Come	in	handy,	we	find	the	head,"	he	said	to	Hawes,	and	then	folded
the	poster	and	put	it	in	his	inside	jacket	pocket.

Buono	led	them	further	down	the	hall,	opened	a	door	at	the	end	of	it.	A
sparsely	furnished	room.	An	upright	locker,	green	in	contrast	to	the	reds,
yellows,	and	oranges	of	the	lockers	in	the	halls.	Long	oak	table,	probably
requisitioned	from	one	of	the	administration	offices.	Four	straight-
backed	chairs	around	it,	checker	board	on	one	end	of	it.	Coffee	pot	on	a
hot	plate	on	one	wall	of	the	room,	clock	over	it.	Framed	picture	of	Ronald
Reagan	on	the	wall	opposite.

"This	here's	my	friend,	 Sal	Pasquali,"	Buono	said.

Pasquali	was	in	his	late	sixties,	early	seventies,	wearing	brown	trousers,
brown	shoes	and	socks,	a	pale	yellow	sports	shirt,	and	a	brown	sweater
buttoned	up	the	front.	He	looked	like	a	candy-store	owner.

"These	people	here	are	detectives,"	Buono	said,	and	looked	at	Pasquali,
hoping	he	would	understand	what	the	look	meant:	Watch	your	onions
about	the	chalk,	and	the	paste,	and	the	pencils,	and	the	erasers,	and	the
reams	of	paper.

Pasquali	nodded	sagely,	like	a	Mafia	don.

"Pleased	to	meetcha,"	he	said.

"So,"	Buono	said,	"sit	 down.	You	want	some	coffee?"

"Thanks,	no,"	 Hawes	said.

The	detectives	pulled	out	chairs	and	sat.

Buono	could	see	Brown's	gun	in	a	shoulder	holster	under	his	jacket.

"We	were	just	playing	checkers	here,"	Pasquali	said.

"Who's	winning?"	 Brown	 asked.

"Well,	we	don't	play	 for	money	or	nothing,"	 Pasquali	said.

Which	meant	that	they	did.

135
Brown	suddenly	wondered	what	these	two	old	farts	were	hiding-"I
wanted	to	ask	whether	you	saw	anything	that	happened	outside	there	this
afternoon,"	Hawes	said.

"Why?"	 Buono	said	at	once.	"Is	something	missing?"

"No,	no.	Missing?	What	do	you	mean?"

"Well,	what	doyou	mean?"	Buono	said,	and	glanced	at	Pasquali.

"I	 meant	when	the	cars	were	being	loaded."

"Oh."

"When	Mr.	 Sebastiani	was	out	there	loading	his	tricks	in	the	Citation."

"I	 didn't	 see	him	doing	that,"	Buono	said.

"You	weren't	out	there	after	he	finished	the	act,	huh?"

"No.	I	didn't	 come	on	till	four	 o'clock."

"Well,	he'd	have	been	out	there	around	five-thirty."

"No,	I	didn't	 see	him."

"Then	you	have	no	idea	who	might've	dumped	that	stuff	out	of	his	car
hellip;"

"No	idea	at	all."

"And	 driven	off	with	 it."

"No.	Five-thirty,	 I	was	prolly	 down	the	north	end	of	the	building,	starting
with	the	classrooms	there.	I	usually	start	cleaning	the	classrooms	down
the	north	end,	it's	like	a	routine,	you	know.	Tradition."

"That's	 near	the	driveway,	isn't	it?	The	north	end?"

"Yeah,	the	back	of	the	building.	But	I	didn't	 see	anything	out	there.	I
mean,	Imighta	seen	something	if	I	was	looking	mdash;there's	windows	in
the	classrooms,	you	know.	But	I	wasn't	looking	for	nothing.	I	was	busy

136
cleaning	up	the	classrooms."	You	say	you	came	on	at	four	hellip;"

"That's	 right.	Four	 to	midnight."

"Like	 us,"	Brown	said,	and	smiled.

Yeah?"	Buono	said.	"Is	that	your	shift?	Whattya	 know?	You	hear	this,
Sal?	They	got	shifts	like	us."

"What	 a	coincidence,"	Pasquali	said.

Brown	still	wondered	what	they	were	hiding.

"So	you	came	on	at	four	hellip;"	 Hawes	said.

"Yeah.	Four	to	midnight.	There's	a	man	relieves	me	at	midnight."	He
looked	at	the	clock	on	the	wall.	"Be	here	in	a	few	hours,	well,	less.	But
he's	like	just	a	watchman,	you	know."

"If	 you	came	on	at	four	hellip;"

"Yeah."	A	nod.

"Then	you	weren't	here	when	the	Sebastianis	arrived,	were	you?	They
would've	got	here	about	a	quarter	after	three.	You	weren't	here	then,	is
that	right?"

"No.	Sal	was	here."

Pasquali	nodded.

"Sal	works	from	 eight	to	four,"	Buono	said.	"He's	theday	custodian."

"Shifts,"	 Pasquali	said.	"Like	 you."

"He	can't	stay	away	from	the	place,"	Buono	said.	"Comes	back	to	play
checkers	with	me	every	night."

"I'm	 a	widower,"	Pasquali	explained,	and	shrugged.

"Did	 you	see	the	cars	when	they	arrived?"	Brown	asked	him.	"Tan	Ford
Econoline,	blue	Citation?"

137
"I	seen	one	of	them	out	there,"	Pasquali	said.	"But	not	when	it	came	in."

"Which	one	did	you	see?"

"Little	blue	car."

"When	was	this?	When	you	saw	it?"

"Around	hellip;	three-thirty,	was	it?"

"You	asking	me?"	Buono	said.	"I	wasn't	here	three-thirty."

"Three-thirty,	it	musta	been,"	Pasquali	said.	"I	remember	I	was	heading
out	front,	where	the	school	buses	come	in.	I	usually	go	out	there,	talk	to
the	drivers."

"They'd	have	been	setting	up	the	stage	by	then,"	Hawes	said.

Brown	nodded.

"And	the	van	was	already	gone."

Brown	nodded	again.

"Did	you	see	any	people	out	there?"	Hawes	asked	Pasquali.	"Carrying
things	in?	Unloading	the	cars?"

"All	I	 saw	was	the	one	car	mdash;"

"Blonde	woman	in	her	late	twenties?	Two	men	in	their	early	thirties?"

"No,"	Pasquali	said,	and	shook	his	head.

"Were	the	doors	open?"

"What	doors?"

"On	the	car."

"They	looked	closed	to	me."

138
"Anything	 lying	in	 the	driveway	there?"

"Nothing	 I	could	see.	What	do	you	mean?	Like	what?"

"Tricks,"	 Hawes	said.

"Tricks?"	 Pasquali	said,	and	looked	at	Buono.

"They	done	a	magic	show	this	afternoon,"	Buono	said.	"For	the	kids."

"Oh.	No,	I	didn't	 see	no	tricks	out	there."

"You	didn't	 happen	to	wander	by	that	driveway	later	on,	did	you?
Around	five-thirty?	 When	they	were	loading	the	hellip;"

"Five-thirty	 I	 was	home	eating	my	dinner.	I	made	a	nice	TV	dinner	for
myself."

Hawes	looked	at	Brown.

"Anything?"	  he	asked.

Brown	shook	his	head.

"Well,	thanks	a	lot,"	 Hawes	said,	and	shoved	back	his	chair.

"I'll	 let	you	out	the	building,"	  Buono	said.

The	detectives	followed	him	out	of	the	office.

As	soon	as	they	were	gone,	Pasquali	took	out	his	handkerchief	and
mopped	his	brow.

At	twenty	minutes	past	ten,	Larry's	 Bar	was	buzzing	with	activity.

Not	a	table	empty.	Not	a	stool	unoccupied	at	the	bar.

Eileen	was	sitting	at	one	of	the	tables	now,	talking	to	a	blonde	hooker
named	Sheryl	who	was	wearing	a	red	skirt	slit	up	one	side,	and	a	white
silk	blouse	unbuttoned	three	buttons	down.	There	was	nothing	under	the
blouse.	Sheryl	sat	with	her	legs	spread,	her	high	heels	hooked	on	the
chair's	top	rung.	Eileen	could	see	track	marks	on	her	naked	white	thighs.

139
She	was	telling	Eileen	how	she'd	come	to	this	city	from	Baltimore,
Maryland.	Eileen	was	scanning	the	room,	trying	to	figure	out	which	one
of	these	guys	in	here	was	her	backup.	Two	waitresses,	who	could	have
passed	for	hookers	themselves	mdash;short	black	skirts,	high	heels,
overflowing	white	peasant	blouses	mdash;were	busily	scooting	back	and
forth	between	the	tables	and	the	bar,	avoiding	grabs	at	their	asses.

"Got	off	 the	bus,"	the	girl	said,	"first	 thing	 happens	to	me	is	this	kindly
old	man	asks	can	he	help	me	with	my	valise.	Had	to	be	forty	years	old,
am	I	right,	a	nice	old	man	being	friendly.	Asks	me	have	I	got	a	place	to
stay,	offers	to	get	me	a	taxi	to	the	Y,	says	'I'll	bet	you're	starving,'	which	I
was,	takes	me	to	a	hamburger	joint,	stuffs	me	with	burgers	and	fries,	tells
me	a	nice	young	girl	like	me	mdash;I	was	only	seventeen	mdash;had	to
be	careful	in	the	big,	bad	city,	lots	of	people	out	there	waiting	to	victimize
me."

"Same	old	bullshit,"	 Eileen	said.

She	figured	there	were	only	two	men	who	could	be	Shanahan.	Guy	sitting
there	at	one	of	the	tables,	talking	up	a	hooker	with	frizzied	brown	hair,	he
had	a	hook	nose	that	could've	been	a	phony,	black	hair	and	blue	eyes	like
Shanahan's,	about	his	height	and	weight,	wearing	horn-rimmed
eyeglasses.	He	could've	been	Shanahan.

"Well,	sure,	you	know	the	story	already,"	the	girl	 said.	"Mr.	 Nice	turns
out	to	be	Big	Daddy,	takes	me	to	his	apartment,	introduces	me	to	two
other	girls	living	there,	nice	girls	like	 me,	he	says,	has	me	smoking	pot
that	same	night	and	shooting	horse	before	the	week	is	out.	Turned	me	out
two	days	later	with	a	businessman	from	Ohio.	Guy	ast	me	to	blow	him,	I
didn't	know	 what	the	fuck	he	meant.	Man,	that	seems	like	ages	ago."

"How	old	are	you	now?"	 Eileen	asked.

"Twenty-two,"	 Sheryl	said.	"I'm	 not	with	 Lou	no	more	hellip;	that	 was
his	name,	Lou	hellip;	I	got	me	a	new	man,	takes	good	care	of	me.	Who
you	with?"

"Torpedo	Holmes,"	Eileen	said.

"Is	he	black,	or	what?"

"Black."

140
"Yeah,	mine,	too.	Lou	was	white.	I	think	the	white	ones	are	meaner,	I
really	do.	Lou	used	to	beat	the	shit	out	of	me.	That	first	time,	after	the
guy	from	Ohio,	you	know,	where	I	didn't	 know	what	to	do,	Lou	beat	me
so	I	couldn't	walk.	Had	a	dozen	of	his	buddies	come	up	the	next	morning,
one	after	the	other,	twelve	of	them,	teach	the	little	hayseed	from
Baltimore	how	to	suck	a	cock.	Broke	in	my	ass,	too.	That	was	when
Ireally	got	turned	out,	believe	me.	The	guy	from	Ohio	was	child's	play.	In
fact,	everything	after	that	night	 with	Lou's	buddies	was	child's	play."

"Yeah,	they	can	be	rotten	when	they	want	to,"	Eileen	said.

Guy	sitting	there	talking	to	Annie	 was	the	other	possibility,	though	she
doubted	Shanahan	would've	made	such	obvious	contact.	Brown	eyes,	but
those	could	be	contacts	if	he	was	playing	this	real	fancy.	Wearing	a	plaid
jacket	that	made	him	look	wider	than	Shanahan.	Sitting	on	a	stool,	so
Eileen	couldn't	tell	how	tall	he	was.	But	he	was	a	possibility.

"This	guy	I	 got	now	hellip;	you	know	Ham	Coleman?"

"I	 don't	think	 so."

"Hamilton?	 Hamilton	 Coleman?"

"Yeah,	maybe."

"Black	as	his	name.	Coal,	you	know.	Coleman.	Hung	like	a	stallion,	likes
to	parade	around	the	pad	with	only	a	towel	around	him,	dares	the	girls	to
snatch	it	off.	Quick	as	a	bullfighter.	You	snatch	off	the	towel,	he	gives	you
a	little	treat.	My	 poison	is	still	hoss	mdash;well,	you	know,	that's	what
Lou	hooked	me	on.	But	some	of	the	girls	mdash;there's	six	of	us	with	him
mdash;they	dig	the	nose	candy,	and	he	gets	them	whatever	they	need,
good	stuff	too,	I	think	he	has	Colombian	connections.	It's	like	a	game	he
plays	with	the	towel,	snatch	it	off,	suck	his	big	dick,	he	lays	the	dope	on
you.	I	mean,	it's	just	a	game,	'cause	he	keeps	us	supplied	very	nice,
anyway.	It's	kind	of	cute,	though,	the	way	he	struts	around	in	that	towel.
He's	really	okay.	Ham	Coleman.	You	ever	think	of	moving,	you	might
want	to	come	over.	We	don't	have	any	redheads.	That	your	real	hair?"

"Yeah,"	Eileen	said.

"	'Cause	mine	is	straight	from	a	bottle,"	 Sheryl	said,	and	laughed.

141
She	still	had	a	little-girl's	laugh.	Twenty-two	years	old,	hooked	on	heroin,
in	the	life	since	she	was	seventeen.	Thought	Ham	Coleman	with	his	towel
was	"kind	of	cute."

"What	 I'm	really	 hoping	for	hellip;	 well,	this	is	just	adream	,	I	know,"	she
said,	and	rolled	her	eyes,	"but	I	keep	asking	Ham	about	it	all	the	time,
who	knows,	it	might	really	come	true	one	day.	I	keep	asking	him	to	set	us
up	like	real	call	girls,	you	know,	hundred-buck	tricks,	 maybe	two
hundred,	never	mind	dropping	us	here	in	the	Zone	where	we're	like
commonwhores	,	you	know	what	I	mean?	I	mean,	you	and	me,	we're	just
common	whores,	ain't	we?	When	you	get	right	down	to	it?"

"Uh-huh.	And	 what	does	he	say?"

"Oh,	he	says	we	ain't	got	the	class	yet	to	be	racehorses.	I	tell	him	class,
shit.	A	blowjob's	a	blowjob.	He	says	we	still	got	a	lot	to	learn,	all	six	of	us.
He	says	maybe	in	time	he'll	set	up	a	class	operation	like	what	I	got	in
mind.	So	I	tell	himwhen?	When	we're	all	scaley-legged	hookers,	thirty,
forty	years	old?	Excuse	me,	I	guess	maybe	you're	in	your	thirties,	I	didn't
mean	no	offense,	Linda."

"Don't	 worry	 about	it,"	 Eileen	said.

"Well,	we	all	have	our	dreams,	don't	we?"	Sheryl	said,	and	sighed.	"My
dream	when	I	first	came	to	this	city	was	I'd	become	an	actress,	you
know?	I	was	in	a	lot	of	plays	in	high	school,	in	Baltimore,	I	figured	I
could	make	it	big	as	an	actress	here.	Well,	that	was	just	a	dream.	Like
being	a	hundred-dollar	call	girl	 is	probably	just	a	dream,	too.	Still,	you
got	to	have	dreams,	am	I	right?	Otherwise	hellip;"

"You	girls	gonna	sit	here	talking	to	each	other	all	night?"

The	man	standing	by	the	table	had	padded	up	so	quietly	that	he	startled
both	of	them.	Blond	guy,	Eileen	figured	him	at	five-eleven,	around	a
hundred	and	seventy	pounds,	just	like	Shanahan	Wearing	dark	glasses,
she	couldn't	see	the	color	of	his	eyes.	The	blond	hair	could	be	a	wig.
Moved	a	bit	like	Shanahan,	too,	maybe	hewas	Shanahan.	If	so,	he'd	just
won	the	bet.	One	thing	he	wasn't	was	the	killer.	Not	unless	he'd	lost	three,
four	inches,	thirty	pounds,	a	pair	of	eyeglasses,	and	a	tattoo	near	his	right
thumb.

142
He	pulled	out	a	chair.

"Martin	 Reilly,"	 he	said,	and	sat.	"What's	a	nice	Irish	lad	doing	in	 a	joint
like	this,	right?"

Voice	heavier	than	Shanahan's.	Calm's	Point	accent.	Turtle	Bay	section,
most	likely.	Lots	of	Irish	families	still	 there.

"Hi,	 Morton,"	 Sheryl	said.

"Martin,"	  he	corrected	at	once.

"Ooops,	sorry,"	Sheryl	said.	"I'm	  Sheryl,	I	know	just	how	you	feel.	When
people	call	me	Shirley,	it	really	burns	my	ass."

"You	know	what	really	 burns	my	ass?"	Reilly	said.

"Sure.	People	calling	you	Morton."

"No,"	 Reilly	said.	"A	 little	fire	 about	this	high."

He	held	out	his	hand,	palm	down,	to	indicate	a	fire	only	high	enough	to
burn	a	man's	ass.

"That	 one	has	hair	on	it,"	Eileen	said,	looking	bored.

"Like	 the	palm	of	my	hand,"	Reilly	 said,	and	grinned.	"All	 those	months
at	sea,	ladies,	a	man	marries	his	hand."

Still	grinning.	 Rows	of	even	white	glistening	teeth,	the	better	to	eat	you
with,	my	dear.	If	Shanahan	had	capped	teeth	like	that,	he'd	be	starring
on	Hill	Street	Blues.
>

"You	just	get	in?"	Sheryl	asked.

"Docked	tonight."

"From	where?"

Lebanon."

143
"Ain't	 there	no	girls	there	in	Lebanon?"	Sheryl	said,	and	rolled	her	eyes.

"Not	like	you	two,"	he	said.

"Oooo,	my,"	she	said,	and	leaned	over	the	table	so	he	could	look	into	the
front	of	her	blouse.	"So	what	are	you	looking	for?"	she	asked,	getting
straight	to	the	point.	"A	handjob's	fifteen,"	she	said,	quoting	high,	"a
blowjob's	twenty-five,	and	Miss	Puss	is	forty."

"How	about	your	friend	here?	What's	your	name,	honey?"	he	asked,	and
put	his	hand	on	Eileen's	thigh.

"Linda,"	 she	said.

She	let	his	hand	stay	on	her	thigh.

"That	means	beautiful	in	Spanish."

"So	they	tell	me."

"How	much	for	both	of	you?	Do	I	get	a	better	price	for	both	of?

"You're	getting	a	bargain	as	it	is,"	Sheryl	said.

"Tell	you	what,"	Reilly	said,	and	slipped	his	hand	up	under	Eileen's	skirt.
"I'll	 give	you	hellip;"

"Mister,"	 Eileen	said,	and	caught	his	hand	at	the	wrist.	"You	ain't	given
usnothing	yet,	so	don't	grope	the	goods,	okay?"

"I'm	 sampling	it."

"You	get	what	you	see,	you	don't	need	samples.	This	ain't	a	grocery	store
honors	coupons."

Reilly	laughed.	He	folded	his	hands	on	the	table	top.

"Okay,	let's	talk	 numbers,"	he	said.

"We're	listening,"	 Sheryl	said,	and	glanced	at	Eileen.

"Fifty	 for	the	both	of	you,"	 Reilly	said.	"Around	 the	world."

144
"You	talking	fifty	foreach	of	us?"	Sheryl	said.

"I	saidboth	of	you.	Twenty-five	each."

"No	way,"	Sheryl	said	at	once.

"Okay,	make	itthirty	each.	And	you	throw	in	a	little	entertainment."

"What	kinda	entertainment?"	Sheryl	asked.

"I	wanna	see	you	go	down	on	the	redhead	here."

Sheryl	looked	at	Eileen	appraisingly.

"I	hardly	know	her,"	she	said.

"So?	You'll	get	to	know	her."

Sheryl	thought	it	over.

"Make	it	fifty	apiece,	we'll	give	you	a	good	show,"	she	said.

"That's	too	much,"	he	said.

"Then	fuck	off,"	Sheryl	said.	"You're	wasting	our	time	here."

"I'll	 tell	you	what,"	Reilly	said.	"I'll	make	it	forty	apiece,	how's	that?"

"What	are	you?"	Sheryl	said.	"A	Lebanese	rug	merchant?"

Reilly	laughed	again.

"Forty-five,"	he	said.	"For	each	of	you.	And	a	ten-dollar	bonus	for
whoever	brings	me	off	first."

"Count	me	out,"	Eileen	said.

"What's	the	matter?"	Reilly	asked,	looking	offended.	"That's	a	fair	and
honest	deal."

"It	really	is,	you	know,"	Sheryl	said.

145
"Sheryl	can	show	you	a	good	time	all	by	herself,"	Eileen	said,	doing	a
fast	tap	dance.	"I	don't	work	 doubles."

"Then	what	the	fuck	 were	we	talking	about	here?"	Reilly	asked.

"You	were	doing	all	the	talking,"	 Eileen	said.	"I	 was	only	listening."

Reilly	dismissed	her	at	once.

"You	got	any	other	girlfriends	 in	here?"	he	asked	Sheryl.

"How	about	the	frizzied	 brunette	over	there?"	she	said.

Reilly	looked	over	to	where	the	brunette	was	still	in	conversation	with
one	of	the	other	Shanahan	possibilities.

"That's	 Gloria,"	 Sheryl	said.	"I	 worked	with	her	before."

"Is	she	a	muff-diver?"	 Reilly	said.	"Or	 is	she	like	your	friend	here?"

"Sheloves	pussy,"	Sheryl	said,	lying.	"You	want	me	to	talk	to	her?"

"Yeah,	go	talk	to	her."

"That's	 forty-five	apiece,"	Sheryl	said,	cementing	the	deal,	and	a	ten-
buck	bonus."	She	was	figuring	they'd	do	a	little	show,	and	take	turns
blowing	him,	and	share	the	extra	ten	for	fifty	each.	Which	wouldn't	 be
bad	for	an	hour's	work.	Maybe	less	than	an	hour	if	he'd	been	at	sea	as
long	as	he'd	said.	"A	hundred	in	all,	right?"

"A	hundred	is	what	I	 said,	ain't	it?"

"It's	 just	I	have	to	tell	Gloria,"	  Sheryl	said,	and	got	up,	long	leg	and
thigh	flashing	in	the	slit	skirt.	 "Don't	 go	away,	honey,"	she	said,	and
walked	over	to	the	other	table.

"You're	in	 the	wrong	business,"	Reilly	said	to	Eileen.

Maybe	I	am,	Eileen	thought.

There	were	four	liquor	stores	on	Culver	Avenue	between	the	last	one	hit

146
on	Twentieth,	and	the	eastern	edge	of	the	precinct	territory	on	Thirty-
Fifth.	After	 that,	it	was	the	neighboring	precinct's	problem,	and	welcome
to	it.	They	drove	up	Culver	to	the	last	store,	and	then	doubled	back	to	the
one	on	Twenty-Third.	The	digital	dashboard	clock	read	10:32	p.m.

The	store	was	empty	except	for	a	man	behind	the	counter	who	was
slitting	open	a	carton	of	Jack	Daniels	sour	mash.	He	looked	up	when	the
bell	over	the	door	sounded,	saw	a	burly	bald-headed	guy	and	another	big
guy	with	him,	and	immediately	placed	his	hand	on	the	stock	of	the
shotgun	under	the	counter.

"What'll	 it	 be,	gents?"	he	asked.

Hand	still	on	the	shotgun	stock,	finger	inside	the	trigger	guard	now.

Meyer	flashed	the	potsy.

"Police,"	 he	said.

The	hand	under	the	counter	relaxed.

"Detective	Meyer,"	he	said.	"Detective	Carella.	Eighty-Seventh	Squad."

"What's	 the	problem?"	the	man	said.

He	was	in	his	early	fifties,	not	quite	as	bald	as	Meyer,	but	getting	there.
Brown	eyes,	slight	build,	wearing	a	gray	cotton	work	jacket	with	the
words	ALAN'S	WHISKIES	  stitched	in	red	on	the	breast	pocket.

"Who	are	we	talking	to,	sir?"	 Meyer	asked.

"I'm	 Alan	Zuckerman."

"Is	this	your	 store,	sir?"

"It	 is."

"Mr.	 Zuckerman,"	 Carella	said,	"there've	been	three	liquor-store
holdups	on	Culver	Avenue	tonight.	Starting	on	Ninth	and	working
uptown.	If	there's	a	pattern	mdash;and	there	may	not	be	mdash;your
store's	next	in	line."

147
"I'm	closing	in	half	an	hour,"	Zuckerman	said,	and	turned	to	look	at	the
clock	on	the	wall	behind	the	counter.

"They	may	come	in	before	then,"	Meyer	said.

"You	don't	know	me,	huh?"	Zuckerman	said.

"Should	I	know	you?"	Meyer	said.

"Alan	Zuckerman.	I	was	in	all	the	papers	last	year	this	time."	He	looked
at	Carella.	"Youdon't	know	me,	either,	do	you?"

"I'm	sorry,	sir,	I	don't."

"Some	cops,"	Zuckerman	said.

Meyer	glanced	at	Carella.

"This	very	precinct,	they	don't	know	me."

"Why	should	we	know	you,	sir?"	Carella	asked.

"Because	last	October	I	shot	two	people	came	in	the	store	to	rob	me,"
Zuckerman	said.

"Oh,"	Carella	said.

"Withthis	!"	Zuckerman	said,	and	yanked	the	shotgun	from	under	the
counter.

Both	detectives	backed	away.

"Bang!"	Zuckerman	said,	and	Meyer	flinched.	"One	of	them	falls	on	the
floor	screaming!Bang	,	the	other	barrel!	And	the	second	one	goes	down!"

"I	seem	to	recall	that	now,"	Meyer	said.	"Mr.	Zuckerman,	you	can	put
up	the	shotgun	now,	okay?"

"Made	all	the	papers,"	Zuckerman	said,	the	gun	still	in	his	hands,	his
finger	inside	the	trigger	guard.	"Shotgun	Zuckerman,	they	called	me,	the
papers.	They	had	the	story	on	television,	too.	Nobody	tried	no	tricks	here
since,	I	can	tell	you	that.	It's	been	a	year	already,	a	little	more	than	a

148
year."

"Well,	these	people	tonight,"	Meyer	said,	"Mr.	 Zuckerman,	could	you
please	put	up	the	gun?"

Zuckerman	slid	the	gun	under	the	counter	again.

"Thank	 you,"	Meyer	said.	"These	people	tonight,	there	are	four	of	them.
All	of	them	armed.	So	your	shotgun	there,	if	all	four	of	them	start
shooting	hellip;"

"Shotgun	Zuckerman	can	take	care	of	them,	don't	worry."

"What	 we	were	thinking,"	 Carella	said,	"is	maybe	we	could	lend	you	a
hand."

"Sort	of	ride	 shotgun	to	your	shotgun,"	Meyer	said,	nodding.

"Backups,	sort	of,"	 Carella	said.

"Only	 in	case	you	need	us."

"Otherwise	we'll	 butt	out."

Zuckerman	looked	at	them.

"Listen,"	 he	said	at	last,	"you	want	to	waste	your	time,	that's	fine	by
me."

He	yanked	the	phone	from	the	receiver	the	moment	it	rang.

"Hello?"	 he	said.

"Hi,"	 Marie	 said.

"Where	are	you?"

"Metro	 West.	I'm	catching	the	ten	forty-five	 home."

"How'd	 it	go?"

"Tough	night,"	 she	said.	"Any	trouble	on	your	end?"

149
"Nope.	They	made	identification,	huh?	I	saw	it	on	television."

"I	was	the	one	who	made	it.	Where'd	you	leave	the	Citation?"

"Behind	an	A	P	near	the	river."

"	'Cause	I	don't	think	they	found	it	yet."

"Who's	on	the	case?"

"A	salt-and-pepper	team.	Brown	and	Hawes.	Big	redhead,	big	black	guy.
In	case	they	come	snooping."

"Why	would	they?"

"I'm	saying	in	case.	They're	both	dummies,	but	you	oughta	be	warned.
They	got	a	bulletin	out	hellip;	they	asked	me	for	descriptions	They're
gonna	be	watching	all	the	airports.	What	flight	are	you	on?"

"TWA's	one	twenty-nine.	Leaves	at	twelve-oh-five	tomorrow	afternoon."

"What	time	do	you	get	to	Frisco?"

"Four	forty-seven."

"I'll	 try	you	at	the	hotel	around	six-thirty.	You'll	be	registered	as	Jack
Gwynne,	am	I	right?"

"All	the	dead	ones,"	he	said,	and	laughed.	"Like	Sebastian	the	Great."

"Give	me	the	number	of	the	Hong	Kong	flight	again?"

"United	eight-oh-five.	Leaves	Frisco	at	one-fifteen	Sunday,	gets	there
around	eight	the	next	morning."

"When	will	you	call	me?"

"Soon	as	I'm	settled."

"You	think	that	passport'll	work?"

150
"It	cost	us	four	hundred	bucks,	itbetter	work.	Why?	You	running
scared?"

"Nerves	of	steel,"	she	said.	"You	shoulda	seen	me	with	the	cops."

"No	problem	with	the	ID,	was	there?"

"None."

"You	did	mention	the	cock?"

"Oh,	sure."

"Little	birthmark	 and	all?"

"Come	on,	we	went	over	this	a	hundred	times."

"You	went	over	it	a	hundred	times."

"And	hated	every	minute	of	it."

"Sure."

"Youknow	that,	damn	it."

"Sure."

"You	going	to	start	on	me	again?"

"I'm	sorry."

"You	oughta	be.	All	we've	been	through."

"I	said	I	was	sorry."

"Okay."

There	was	a	long	silence	on	the	line.	"So	whattya	gonna	do	till	noon
tomorrow?"

"Thought	I'd	go	down	for	a	drink,	then	come	back	and	get	some	sleep."

151
"Be	careful."

"Oh	yeah."

"They	know	what	you	look	like."

"Don't	worry."	Another	silence.

"Maybe	you	oughta	call	me	later	tonight,	okay?"

"Sure."

"Be	careful,"	she	said	again,	and	hung	up.

152
CHAPTER	      8

"Torpedoman	ain't	gonna	like	this,"	Larry	said.

"Who	asked	you?"	Eileen	said.

"For	a	working	girl,	all	you	done	so	far	is	sit	and	drink."

"Guess	it	just	ain't	my	lucky	night,"	Eileen	said.

"Whattya	talkin'	about?	I	already	seen	you	turn	down	a	dozen	guys."

"I'm	particular."

"Then	you	shouldn't	be	in	this	dump,"	Larry	said.	"Particular	ain't	for
the	Canal	Zone."

Eileen	knew	he	was	only	pointing	out	the	obvious:	the	name	of	the	game
was	money,	and	a	hooker	working	a	bar	wasn't	a	girl	at	the	Spring
Cotillion.	You	didn't	tell	a	prospective	John	your	card	was	filled,	even	if
he	looked	like	Godzilla.	Larry	was	already	suspicious,	and	that	was
dangerous.	Get	a	few	more	guys	giving	her	the	fish	eye,	and	she	could
easily	blow	thereal	reason	she	was	here.

Sheryl	and	the	frizzled	brunette	were	still	out	with	the	blond	sailor,	but
Eileen	was	ready	to	bet	her	shield	they'd	be	back	in	business	the	moment
they	returned.	There	was	no	way	any	enterprising	girl	could	avoid
making	a	buck	in	here.	The	bar	was	in	incessant	motion,	a	whorehouse
with	a	liquor	license	and	a	transient	crowd.	Any	man	who	came	in	alone
walked	out	not	five	minutes	later	with	a	girl	on	his	arm.	According	to
Shanahan,	the	girls	mdash;even	some	of	them	on	the	Canalside	meat
rack	mdash;used	either	a	hot-bed	hotel	up	the	street	or	any	one	of	fifty,
sixty	rooms	for	rent	in	the	Zone.	They	usually	paid	five	bucks	for	the
room,	got	a	kickback	from	the	owner	and	also	a	share	of	the	three	bucks
the	John	paid	for	soap	and	towels.	That	way,	a	twenty-dollar	trick	could
net	a	girl	the	same	twenty	when	all	was	said	and	done.	Plus	whatever	tip
a	generous	John	might	decide	to	lay	on	her	for	superior	performance.

She	glanced	down	the	length	of	the	bar	to	where	Annie	was	sitting	in

153
earnest	conversation	with	a	little	Hispanic	guy	wearing	jeans,	boots,	and
a	black	leather	jacket	studded	with	chrome.	Looked	like	Annie	was
having	the	same	problem.	The	only	difference	was	that	she	could	step
outside	every	now	and	then,	make	it	look	like	she	was	drumming	up
trade	on	the	street.	Eileen	was	glued	to	the	bar.	The	bar	was	where	the
killer	had	picked	up	his	three	previous	victims.	She	tried	to	catch	Annie's
eye.	They	had	figured	out	beforehand	that	if	they	wanted	to	talk	they'd
do	it	in	the	ladies'	room,	not	here	in	public.	Eileen	wanted	to	dope	out	a
scam	that	would	cool	Larry's	heat.

"Torpedoman's	gonna	whip	your	ass,"	he	said.

"You	wanna	make	a	little	side	bet?"	Eileen	said.	"You	wanna	bet	I	go
home	with	six	bills	before	the	night's	over?"

Annie	finally	looked	over	at	her.

Eye	contact.

Brief	nod	of	her	head.

Eileen	got	off	the	stool	and	started	for	the	ladies'	room.	The	Hispanic	guy
sitting	next	to	Annie	got	off	his	stool	at	the	same	time.	Good,	Eileen
thought,	she's	ditching	him.	But	the	Hispanic	walked	straight	toward	 her,
meeting	her	halfway	down	the	bar.

"Hey,	where	you	goin',	Mama?"	he	said.	Loud	voice	for	a	little	twerp,
Spanish	accent	you	could	cut	with	a	machete.	Little	brown	eyes,
mustache	under	his	nose,	looked	like	an	undernourished	biker	in	his
leather	jacket.

"Got	to	visit	 my	grandma,"	 Eileen	said.

"You	gran'ma	can	wait,"	 he	said.

Behind	him,	down	the	bar,	Annie	was	watching	them.

Another	brief	nod.

All	right	 already,	Eileen	thought.	As	soon	as	Ishake	this	guy.

The	guy	wasn't	about	to	be	shaken.	He	gripped	Eileen's	elbow	in	his	right

154
hand,	began	steering	her	toward	the	stool	she'd	abandoned
mdash;"Come	on,	Mama,	we	ha'	biss'niss	to	talk	abou'	"	mdash;same
loud	voice,	you	could	hear	him	clear	across	the	river,	fingers	tight	on	her
elbow,	plunked	her	down	on	the	stool	mdash;"My	name	iss	Arturo,	I
been	watchin'	you,	Mama"	mdash;and	signaled	to	Larry.

"You	want	me	to	wet	my	pants?"	Eileen	asked.

"No,	no,	I	sornly	don'	 wann	you	to	do	that,"	he	said.

Larry	 ambled	over.

"See	wha'	my	frien'	here	iss	drinkin',"	  Arturo	 said.

She	couldn't	make	a	fuss	about	the	ladies'	room	now,	not	with	Larry
standing	right	here	and	already	believing	she	was	turning	down	tricks
left	and	right.	Spot	Annie	trailing	 her	in	there,	they'dboth	be	out	of
business.

"Larry	 knows	what	I'm	 drinking,"	  she	said.

"Rum-Coke	for	 the	lady,"	Larry	 said,	"it's	 still	 prom	night.	How	about
you,	amigo?"

"Scotch	on	dee	rahss,"	Arturo	said.	"Twiss."

Larry	 started	pouring.

"So	how	much	you	get,	Mama?"	Arturo	 asked.

"What	 are	you	looking	for?"

"This	swee'	li'l	 ting	here,"	he	said,	and	put	his	forefinger	on	her	lips.

"That'll	 cost	you	twenty,"	she	said.

Going	price,	in	case	Larry	was	listening.	Which	of	course	he	was.

"You	got	someplace	we	can	go,	Mama?"

"Plenty	of	rooms	for	rent	 around	here."	Everything	 kosher	so	far.	But
Larry	 was	still	here.

155
"How	much	do	I	 pay	for	dee	room?"	Arturo	 asked.

"Five."

Larry	 raised	his	eyebrows.	He	knew	the	girls	usually	paid	for	the	room
themselves	but	he	figured	Linda	here	was	hustling	the	little	spic.	Maybe
shewould	go	home	with	six	bills	tonight,	who	the	hell	knew?

"Muy	bien,	muchacha,"	Arturo	 said.

"Rum-Coke,	scotch-rocks	with	a	twist,"	 Larry	 said,	sliding	the	drinks
closer	to	them.	"Six	bucks,	a	bargain."

Arturo	 put	a	ten-dollar	bill	 on	the	counter.	Larry	started	for	 the	cash
register	at	the	far	end.	As	soon	as	he	was	out	of	earshot,	Arturo
whispered,	in	perfect	English,	"I'm	 on	the	job,	play	along."

Eileen's	eyes	opened	wide.

At	the	far	end	of	the	bar,	Annie	gave	another	brief	nod.	Larry	 rang	open
the	register,	put	the	ten	in	the	drawer,	took	four	bills	out	of	it,	slammed
the	drawer	shut	again,	and	then	started	back	toward	where	they	were
sitting,	sipping	at	their	drinks	 now.	Arturo	 had	his	hand	on	Eileen's	knee,
and	he	was	peering	down	the	front	of	her	blouse.	She	was	saying,	"
'Cause	like,	you	know,	I'm	a	working	girl,	 Artie,	so	I'd	 like	to	get	started,
if	that's	okay	with	 you."

"Hey,	no	sweat,	Mama,"	he	said.	"We	can	tay	dee	booze	wid	us."

"Not	inmy	good	glasses,"	Larry	said,	and	immediately	began	transferring
the	drinks	to	plastic	cups.

Eileen	was	already	off	the	stool.	She	turned	to	Larry	and	said,	"Glad	you
didn't	take	that	 bet?"

Larry	 shrugged.

He	watched	them	as	they	picked	up	the	cups	and	walked	away	from	the
bar.	He	was	thinking	he	wouldn't	mind	a	piece	of	that	himself.	As	they
started	out	the	door,	they	almost	collided	with	a	man	coming	in	at	the
same	time.

156
"Oh,	I	 beg	your	pardon,"	he	said,	and	stepped	aside	to	let	them	through.

Larry	 was	sure	he'd	seen	the	guy	before.	He	was	at	least	six-feet	two-
inches	tall,	with	wide	shoulders	and	a	broad	chest,	thick	wrists,	big
hands.	He	was	wearing	jeans,	sneakers,	a	little	tan	cap,	and	a	yellow
turtleneck	sweater	that	matched	the	color	of	his	hair.	He	looked	like	a
heavyweight	fighter	in	training.

"You're	notleaving	,	are	you?"	he	asked	Eileen.

She	breezed	right	past	him,	ignoring	him.

But	her	heart	was	suddenly	pounding.

Annie	sat	at	the	bar	wearing	a	short	tight	black	skirt,	 purple	tube	top
cradling	her	cupcake	breasts,	high-heeled	black	patent	leather	shoes,	face
heavily	pancaked,	blood-red	lipstick	on	her	mouth,	eyes	lined	in	black,
lids	tinted	to	match	the	blouse,	looking	more	like	a	hooker	than	any	of
the	real	ones	in	the	place.

She	thought	Terrific.	Here	he	is.

All	we	need	is	this	little	trick	 of	fate.

Eileen	walking	out	while	he	walks	in.

Eileen	loaded	to	the	gunnels,	me	wearing	only	a	.38	in	my	handbag,
terrific.

Eileen	the	decoy,	me	the	backup,	and	in	he	walks.

Terrific.

Ifit's	 him.>

He	sure	as	hell	looked	like	the	blond	guy	Alvarez	and	Shanahan	had
described.	No	eyeglasses,	but	the	same	height	and	weight,	the	same	bulk.

Standing	just	inside	the	doorway	now,	looking	over	the	place,	cool,
confident	in	his	size,	ready	to	take	on	any	guy	in	the	place,	mop	up	the
floor	with	him,	 this	cat	had	nothing	to	worry	 about,	oh	no,	handsome	as

157
the	devil,	oh	so	cool,	scanning	the	room,	checking	out	the	girls,	then
walking	up	toward	the	bar,	passing	the	cash	register	where	she	sat	hellip;

"Hi,"	 she	said.	"Wanna	join	me?"

"Danny	Ortiz,"	  Arturo	 said	on	the	street	outside.	"Detective/Second,
Undercover	Narcotics.	I	got	a	call	from	Lou	hellip;"

Lou,	Eileen	thought.	Not	Lou	the	friendly	 white	man	who'd	turned	 out
Sheryl,	if	that	was	her	real	name.	In	novels,	everybody	had	different
names	so	you	could	tell	them	apart.	In	real	life,	Lou	could	be	a	pimp	and
a	detective	at	the	same	time.	Lou	Alvarez	of	the	Seven-Two.

"	hellip;	 said	I	ought	to	check	out	Larry's	 Bar,	see	his	decoy	needed	some
help.	Described	you	and	Rawles,	sat	with	her,	talked	her	up,	she	told	me
the	Johns	were	hitting	on	you	like	locusts.	Am	I	screwing	anything	up?"

Lou	Alvarez,	calling	his	buddy	Danny	Ortiz	 in	Narcotics,	asking	him	to
run	on	over	here,	hit	on	the	decoy,	take	her	out	of	the	joint	to	preserve
her	credibility.

"You	saved	my	life,"	Eileen	said.

Bit	of	an	exaggeration,	but	at	least	he'd	saved	her	cover.

"So	you	wanna	neck	or	anything?"	Ortiz	 said.	"Pass	the	time?"

"That's	 the	best	offer	I've	had	all	night,"	 she	said.	"But	I	gotta	get	back
in	there."

Ortiz	looked	at	her.

"Our	 man	just	walked	in,"	 she	said.

His	size	was	intimidating.	He	filled	the	stool,	filled	the	bar,	seemed	to	fill
the	entire	room.	Sitting	next	to	him,	Annie	was	scared.	If	this	was	the	guy
hellip;

"So	what's	your	name?"	she	asked.

"What's	 yours?"

158
"Jenny,"	 she	said.

"I'll	 bet."

Deep	voice	rumbling	up	out	of	his	barrel	chest.

"Well,"	 she	said,	"my	straight	handle	is	Antoinette	Le	Fevrier,	but	 who'll
believe	that	on	a	hooker?"

"Oh,	is	that	what	you	are?"	 he	asked.

Voice	almost	toneless.	Bored	attitude.	Looking	in	the	mirror,	checking	out
the	other	girls	in	the	place	even	as	he	talked	to	her.

"No,	I'm	 a	famous	brain	surgeon,"	Annie	said,	and	smiled.

He	did	not	smile	back.	Turned	to	look	at	her.	Eyes	the	color	of	steel.	A
chill	ran	up	her	spine.	Where	the	hell	was	Shanahan?

"You	still	didn't	 tell	 me	your	name,"	she	said.

"Howie,"	 he	said.

Sounded	square	enough	to	be	true.

"Howie	what?"

"Howie's	enough,"	he	said,	and	folded	his	hands	on	the	table-top.	No
tattoo	on	either	one	of	them.	Was	he,	or	wasn't	he?	"So	what	you	do	is
make	love	to	strangers,	huh?"	he	said.	"For	money."

She	didn't	want	this	guy	to	ask	her	outside.	Not	with	only	the	.38	in	her
bag	and	Shanahan	nowhere	in	sight.

"That's	 my	job.	You	interested?"

"You're	not	my	type,"	 he	said.

"Oh?	And	what's	 your	type?"	she	asked.	Keep	him	talking.	Keep	him
interested	till	Eileen	walked	back	in.	And	if	 Eileendidn't	walk	in	soon,
then	talk	him	into	takingher	 outside	to	make	his	move.	If	Shanahan	was
anywhere	around,	he'd	be	tracking	both	of	them.

159
"I	like	them	younger,"	he	said.	"And	fresher."

"Well,	what	you	see	is	what	you	get,"	she	said.

"You	seem	too	far	gone."

"Uh-huh,"	she	said,	"practically	ancient."	One	of	the	dead	girls	had	been
sixteen.	The	others	were	in	their	twenties.	Keep	him	here,	she	thought.
Don't	let	him	wander	off	to	any	of	the	younger	girls	in	here,	or	they'll
drift	away	together	and	he'll	score	another	one	tonight.

"I	mean,	what	can	I	tell	you?"	she	said.	"I'm	not	a	teenager,	but	I'm
pretty	good	for	an	old	lady."

He	turned	to	look	at	her	again.

No	smile.

Christ,	he	was	chilling.

"Really?"	he	said.

"Really."

Come-on	look	in	her	eyes.	She	licked	her	lips.	But	she	had	only	the	.38	in
her	bag.	No	backup	artillery.	And	Shanahan	God	knew	where.	Ortiz
heading	back	home	soon	as	he	cleared	Eileen,	wham,	bam,	thank	you,
ma'am,	or	so	it	would	appear	to	Larry.

"Ten	for	a	handjob,"	she	said,	"how	about	it?	Twenty	for	a	blowjob,
thirty	if	you	want	the	pearly	gates."

"My,	my,"	he	said.	"You	really	are	a	seasoned	pro,	aren't	you?"

"Exactly	what	I	am,"	she	said.	"How	about	it?"

"No,	you're	too	far	gone,"	he	said.

Eyes	on	the	mirror	again.	The	blonde	who'd	been	talking	with	Eileen
earlier	was	back	now,	together	with	her	frizzied	brunette	friend.	Both	of
them	young	and	looking	for	more	action.	His	eyes	checked	them	out.

160
Stick	with	me,	pal,	she	thought.	Here's	where	the	action	is.

"Are	you	a	cop?"	he	asked	without	even	looking	at	her.

Mind-reader,	she	thought.

"Sure,"	 she	said.	"Are	you	a	cop,	too?"

"I	 used	to	be,"	he	said.

Oh,	shit,	she	thought.	A	renegade.	Or	a	malcontent.

"I	 can	always	tell	a	cop,"	he	said.

"You	wanna	see	my	badge?"	she	said.

Deliberately	using	the	word	badge.	A	cop	called	it	a	shield.

"Are	you	with	 Vice?"	he	asked.

"Oh,	man,am	I,"	 she	said.	"Clear	down	to	my	tonsils."

"I	 used	to	be	with	Vice,"	he	said.

"SoI'm	the	one	who	caught	myself	a	cop,	huh?"	she	said,	and	smiled.
"Well,	Howie,	that	 makes	no	difference	to	me	at	all,	the	past	is	the	past,
all	water	under	the	bridge.	What	do	you	say	we	take	a	little	stroll	up	the
street,	I'll	show	you	a	real	good	hellip;"

"Get	lost,"	 he	said.

"Let's	 get	lost	together,	Howie,"	she	said,	and	put	her	hand	on	his	thigh.

"You	understand	English?"	 he	said.

"French,	too,"	 she	said.	"Come	on,	Howie,	give	a	working	girl	a	hellip;"

"Getlost	!"	 he	said.

A	command	this	time.

Eyes	blazing,	big	hands	clenched	on	the	bartop.

161
"Sure,"	 she	said.	"Relax."

She	got	off	the	stool.

"Relax,	okay?"	 she	said,	and	walked	down	to	the	other	end	of	the	bar.

Inexplicably,	her	palms	were	wet.

Guy	sitting	next	to	him	at	the	bar	was	running	a	tab,	twenty-dollar	 bill
tucked	under	the	little	bowl	of	salted	peanuts.	Big	flashy	Texan	sporting	a
diamond	pinky	ring,	 a	shirt	as	loud	as	he	himself	was,	and	a	black	string
tie	held	with	one	of	those	turquoise-and-silver	Indian	clasps.	He	was
drinking	 martinis,	and	talking	 about	soybeans.	Said	soybeans	were	the
nation's	future.	No	cholesterol	in	soybeans.

"So	what	doyou	do?"	he	asked.

"I'm	 in	insurance."

Which	wasn't	too	far	from	 the	truth.	Soon	as	Marie	made	the	insurance
claim	hellip;

"Lots	of	money	in	insurance,"	 the	Texan	said.

"For	sure."

At	double	indemnity,	the	policy	came	to	two	hundred	grand.	More	money
than	he	could	make	in	eight	years'	time.

"By	the	way,	my	name's	Abner	Phipps,"	the	Texan	said,	and	extended	a
meaty	hand.

He	took	the	hand.	"Theo	Hardeen,"	he	said.

"Nice	to	meet	you,	Theo.	You	gonna	be	in	town	long?"

"Leaving	tomorrow."

"I'm	 stuck	here	all	through	next	week,"	Phipps	said.	"I	 hate	this	city,	I
truly	do.	There're	people	who	say	it's	a	nice	place	to	visit,	but	I	can't	even
see	it	for	that.	Worth	your	life	just	 walkin'	 the	streets	here.	You	see	that

162
thing	on	television	tonight?"

"What	 thing	is	that?"

The	black	bartender	was	listening	silently,	standing	some	six	feet	away
from	them,	polishing	glasses.	The	clock	on	the	wall	read	ten	to	eleven.
Shows'd	be	breaking	soon,	he	wanted	to	be	ready	for	the	crowd.

"Somebody	chopping	up	a	body,	leaving	pieces	of	it	all	over	town,"
Phipps	said,	and	shook	his	head.	"Bad	enough	youkill	somebody,	you	got
to	chop	him	up	in	pieces	afterward?	Why	you	suppose	he	did	that,
Theo?"

"Well,	I'll	 tell	 you,	Abner,	there're	all	kinds	of	nuts	in	this	world."

"I	 mean,	there're	two	rivers	in	this	city,	Theo.	Why	didn't	 he	just	throw
the	whole	damnbody	in	one	of	them?"

That's	where	the	head	is,	he	thought.	And	the	hands.

"Still,"	 Phipps	said,	"if	 you	got	a	body	to	get	rid	of,	I	guess	it's	easier	to
dump	in	sections.	I	mean,	somebody	sees	you	hauling	a	corpse	around,
that	might	raise	suspicion,	even	inthis	city.	An	arm,	a	head,	whatever,	you
can	just	drop	in	a	garbage	can	or	down	the	sewer,	nobody'll	pay	any
attention	to	you,	am	I	right,	Theo?"

"I	 guess	maybe	that's	why	he	did	it."

"Well,	who	can	figure	the	criminal	 mind?"	 Phipps	said.

"Not	me,	that's	for	 sure.	I	have	a	hard	enough	time	selling	insurance."

"Oh,	I'll	 bet,"	 Phipps	said.	"You	know	why?	Nobody	likes	to	think	he's
gonna	kick	off	one	day.	You	sit	there	tellin'	him	how	his	wife's	gonna	be
sittin'	pretty	 once	he's	dead,	he	don't	want	to	hear	that.	He	wants	to	think
he's	gonna	live	forever.	I	don't	carehow	responsible	a	man	he	is,	it	makes
him	uncomfortable	talkin'	 about	death	benefits."

"You	hit	it	 right	 on	the	head,	Abner.	I	talk	myself	blue	in	the	face,	and
half	the	time	they're	not	even	listening.	Explain,	explain,	explain,	they
don't	know	what	the	hell	I'm	 talking	 about."

163
"People	just	don't	listen	anymore,"	 Phipps	said.

"Or	 they	don't	listen	carefully	enough.	They	hear	only	what	they	want	to
hear."

"That's	 for	sure,	Theo."

"I'll	 give	you	an	example,"	he	said,	and	then	immediately	thought	Come
on,	he's	too	easy.	On	the	other	hand,	it	might	teach	him	a	valuable	lesson.
Chatting	up	a	stranger	in	a	bar,	no	real	sense	of	how	many	con	artists
were	loose	and	on	the	prowl	in	this	city.	Teach	him	something	he	could
take	back	home	to	Horse's	Neck,	Texas.

He	reached	into	his	pocket,	took	out	a	dime	and	a	nickel.

"What	 have	I	got	here?"	he	asked.

"Fifteen	cents,"	Phipps	said.

"Okay,	open	your	hand."

Phipps	opened	his	hand.

"Now	I'm	 putting	 this	dime	and	this	nickel	on	the	palm	of	your	hand."

"Yep,	I	see	that,	Theo."

"And	 I'm	not	touching	 them	anymore,	they're	in	your	hand	now,	am	I
right?"

"Right	 there	on	the	palm	of	my	hand,	Theo."

"Now	close	your	hand	on	them."

Phipps	closed	his	hand.	The	bartender	was	watching	now.

"You've	got	that	fifteen	cents	in	your	fist	now,	am	I	right?"

"Still	 there,"	Phipps	said.

"A	dime	and	a	nickel."

164
"A	dime	and	a	nickel,	right."

"And	I	haven't	touched	them	since	you	closed	your	hand	on	them,
right?"

"You	haven't	touched	them,	right."

"Okay,	I'll	bet	you	when	you	open	your	hand,	one	of	them	won't	be	a
dime."

"Come	on,	Theo,	you're	lookin'	to	lose	money."

"Man's	lookin'	to	lose	money	for	sure,"	the	bartender	said.

"I'll	 bet	you	the	twenty	dollars	under	that	peanut	bowl,	okay?"

"You	got	a	bet,"	Phipps	said.

"Okay,	open	your	hand."

Phipps	opened	his	hand.	Fifteen	cents	still	on	his	palm.	Same	dime,	same
nickel.	The	bartender	shook	his	head.

"You	lose,"	Phipps	said.

"No,	I	win.	What	I	said	hellip;"

"The	bet	was	that	one	of	these	coins	wouldn't	be	a	dime	no	more."

"No,	you	weren't	listening.	The	bet	was	that	one	of	them	wouldn't	be	a
dime."

"That's	just	what	hellip;"

"And	one	of	them	isn't.	One	of	them's	a	nickel."

He	slid	the	twenty-dollar	bill	from	under	the	peanut	bowl,	and	tucked	it
into	his	jacket	pocket.	"You	can	keep	the	fifteen	cents,"	he	said,	and
smiled	and	walked	out	of	the	bar.

The	bartender	said,	"That's	a	good	trick	to	know,	man."

165
Phipps	was	still	looking	at	the	fifteen	cents	on	the	palm	of	his	hand.

Genero	was	a	celebrity.

And	he	was	learning	that	a	celebrity	is	expected	to	answer	a	lot	of
questions.	Especially	if	he	shot	four	teenagers.	There	were	two	people
waiting	to	ask	questions	now.	One	was	a	roving	investigative	reporter
from	Channel	6.	The	other	was	a	Duty	Captain	named	Vince	Annunziato,
who	was	filling	in	for	the	Eight-Seven's	Captain	Frick.	 The	reporter	was
interested	only	in	a	sensational	news	story.	Annunziato	was	interested
only	in	protecting	the	Department.	He	stood	by	silently	and	gravely	while
the	reporter	set	up	the	interview;	one	sure	way	to	get	the	media	dumping
on	cops	was	to	act	like	you	had	something	to	hide.

"This	is	Mick	 Stapleton,"	the	reporter	 said,	"at	the	scene	of	a	shooting	on
North	Eleventh	Street,	here	in	Isola.	I'm	talking	 to	Detective/Third
Grade	Richard	Genero,	who	not	forty-five	minutes	ago	shot	four
teenagers	who	allegedly	started	a	fire	in	the	apartment	building	behind
me."

Annunziato	caught	the	"allegedly."	 Protecting	his	ass	in	case	this	thing
blew	up	to	something	like	the	Goetz	shootings	in	New	York.	Guy	with	a
hand-held	camera	aimed	at	Stapleton,	another	guy	working	some	kind	of
sound	equipment,	third	guy	handling	lights,	you'd	think	 they	were
shooting	a	Spielberg	movie	instead	of	a	two-minute	television	spot.
Crowds	behind	the	police	barriers.	Ambulances	already	here	and	gone,
carting	away	the	four	teenagers.	Annunziato	was	happy	they	weren't
black.

"Detective	Genero,	can	you	tell	us	what	happened	here?"	Stapleton
asked.

Genero	blinked	into	the	lights,	looked	at	the	red	light	on	the	front	of	the
camera.

"I	 was	making	a	routine	tour	of	the	sector,"	he	said.	"This	is	Halloween
night	and	the	lieutenant	put	on	extra	men	to	handle	any	problems	that
might	arise	in	the	precinct."

So	far,	so	good,	Annunziato	thought.	Care	and	caution	on	the	part	of	the
commanding	officer,	concern	for	the	citizenry.

166
"So	you	were	driving	past	the	building	here	hellip;"

"Yes,	and	I	saw	the	perpetrators	running	into	the	premises	with	objects
in	their	hands."

"What	kind	of	objects?"	Stapleton	asked.

Careful,	Annunziato	thought.

"What	turned	out	to	be	firebombs,"	Genero	said.

"But	you	didn't	know	that	at	the	time,	did	you?"

"All	I	 knew	was	a	roving	band	running	into	a	building."

"And	this	seemed	suspicious	to	you?"

"Yes,	sir."

"Suspicious	enough	for	you	to	draw	your	gun	and	hellip;	?"

"I	did	not	unholster	my	revolver	until	fire	broke	out	in	the	premises."

Good,	Annunziato	thought.	Felony	in	progress,	reason	to	yank	the	piece.

"But	when	you	first	saw	these	youngsters,	you	didn't	know	they	were
carrying	firebombs,	did	you?"

"I	found	out	when	the	fires	went	off	inside	there,	and	they	came	running
out."

"What	did	you	do	then?"

"I	drew	my	service	revolver,	announced	that	I	was	a	policeman	and
warned	them	to	stop."

"And	did	they	stop?"

"No,	sir,	they	threw	one	of	the	firebombs	at	me."

"Is	that	when	you	shot	at	them?"

167
"Yes,	sir.	When	they	ignored	my	warnings	and	came	at	me."

Good,	Annunziato	thought.	Proper	procedure	all	the	way	down	the	line.
Firearm	used	as	a	defensive	weapon,	not	a	tool	of	apprehension.

"When	you	say	they	came	at	you	hellip;"

"They	attacked	me.	Knocked	me	over	and	kicked	me."

"Were	they	armed?"

Careful,	Annunziato	thought.

"I	 did	not	see	any	weapons	except	the	firebombs.	But	they	had	just
committed	a	felony,	and	they	were	attacking	me."

"So	you	shot	them."

"As	a	last	resort."

Perfect,	Annunziato	thought.

"Thank	 you,	Detective	Genero.	For	Channel	Six	News,	this	is	Mick
Stapleton	on	Eleventh	Street."

With	the	edge	of	his	hand,	Stapleton	made	a	throat-slitting	gesture	to	his
cameraman,	and	a	brief	"Thanks,	that	was	swell"	to	Genero,	and	then
walked	quickly	to	where	the	mobile	van	was	waiting	at	the	curb.

Annunziato	came	over	to	where	Genero	was	standing,	looking	surprised
that	it	was	over	so	fast.

"Captain	 Annunziato,"	 he	said.	"I've	got	the	duty."

"Yes,	sir,"	Genero	said.

"You	handled	that	okay,"	 Annunziato	said.

"Thank	 you,	sir."

"Handledyourself	okay	with	 them	four	punks,	too."

168
"Thank	 you,	sir."

"But	 you	better	call	home	now,	tell	'em	we're	taking	you	off	the	street."

"Sir?"

"Few	questions	we'll	have	to	ask	you	downtown.	Make	sure	we	get	all	the
facts	before	the	bleeding	hearts	come	out	of	the	woodwork."

"Yes,	sir,"	Genero	said.

He	was	thinking	the	goddamn	shift	would	be	relieved	at	a	quarter	to
twelve,	but	he'd	be	downtown	answering	questions	all	night.

Train	speeding	through	the	night	now,	leaving	behind	the	mills	and
factories	just	over	the	river,	coming	into	rolling	 green	land	where	you
could	see	the	lights	of	houses	twinkling	like	it	was	Christmas	instead	of
Halloween.

By	Christmas	they'd	be	sitting	fat	and	pretty	 in	India	someplace.

Person	could	live	on	ten	cents	a	day	in	India	mdash;well,	that	was	an
exaggeration.	But	you	could	rent	yourself	a	luxurious	villa,	staff	it	with
all	the	servants	you	needed,	live	like	royalty	on	just	the	interest	the	two
hundred	thousand	would	bring.	New	names,	new	lives	for	both	of	them.
Never	mind	trying	to	live	on	the	peanuts	Frank	had	earned	each	year.

She	sighed	heavily.

She'd	have	to	call	his	mother	as	soon	as	she	got	home,	and	then	is	sister,
and	then	she	guessed	some	of	his	friends	in	the	business.	Had	to	get	in
touch	with	that	detective	again,	find	out	when	she	could	claim	the	body,
arrange	for	some	kind	of	funeral,	have	to	keep	the	casket	closed,	of
course,	she	wondered	how	soon	that	would	be.	Today	was	Friday,	she
didn't	know	 whether	they	did	autopsies	on	the	weekend,	probably
wouldn't	get	around	to	it	 till	Monday	 morning.	Maybe	she	could	have	the
body	by	Tuesday,	but	she'd	better	call	an	undertaker	first	thing	in	the
morning,	make	sure	they	could	handle	it.	Figure	a	day	in	the	funeral
home	mdash;well,	two	days,	she	guessed	mdash;bury	him	on	Thursday
morning.	She'd	have	to	find	a	cemetery	that	had	available	plots,
whatever	you	called	them,	maybe	the	undertaker	would	know	about	that.
Had	to	have	a	stone	cut,	too,	HERE	LIES	FRANK	SEBASTIANI,	 REST

169
IN	PEACE	mdash;but	that	 could	wait,	there	was	no	hurry	about	a	stone.

She'd	call	the	insurance	company	on	Friday	morning.

Tell	them	her	husband	had	been	murdered.

Make	her	claim.

She	didn't	expect	any	problems.	Sensational	case	like	this	one?	Already
on	television	and	in	one	of	the	early	morning	papers	she'd	bought	at	the
terminal.	MAGICIAN	  MURDERED,	 the	headline	read.	Bigger	headline
than	he'd	ever	had	in	his	life.	Had	to	get	himself	killed	to	get	it.

Two	hundred	thousand	dollars,	she	thought.

Invest	it	at	ten	percent,	that'd	bring	 them	twenty	thousand	a	year,	more
than	enough	to	live	on	like	a	king	and	queen.	A	maharajah	and
maharanee	was	more	like	it.	Go	to	the	beach	every	day,	have	someone
doing	the	cleaning	and	the	cooking,	have	a	man	polishing	the	car	and
doing	the	marketing,	buy	herself	a	dozen	saris,	learn	how	to	wrap	them,
maybe	get	herself	a	little	diamond	for	her	nose.	Even	at	eight	percent,	the
money	would	bring	in	sixteen	thousand	a	year.	More	than	enough.

And	all	they'd	had	to	do	for	it	 was	kill	him.

The	train	rumbled	 through	the	night,	lulling	 her	to	sleep.

He	approached	Eileen	almost	the	moment	she	sat	down	at	one	of	the
tables.

"Hi,"	 he	said.	"Remember	me?"

No	eyeglasses,	no	tattoo,	but	otherwise	their	man	down	to	his	socks.	The
eyeglasses	he'd	worn	on	his	earlier	outings	could	have	been	windowpane.
The	tattoo	could	have	been	a	decal.	Her	heart	was	beating	wildly.	She
didn't	realize	until	 this	moment	just	how	frightened	she	really	was.
You're	acop	,	she	told	herself.Am	I?	she	wondered.

"I'm	 sorry,"	 she	said,	"have	we	met?"

"Mind	 if	I	 sit	down?"

170
"Please	do."

The	prim	and	proper	hooker.

But	crossed	her	legs	anyway,	to	show	him	thigh	clear	to	Cincinnati.

"I'm	 Linda,"	 she	said.	"Are	you	looking	for	 a	good	time?"

"That	 depends,"	he	said.

"On	what?"

"On	what	you	consider	a	good	time."

"That's	 entirely	up	to	you."

"I	 noticed	you	when	I	was	coming	in,"	he	said.	"You	were	leaving	with	a
little	Puerto	Rican."

"You're	very	observant,"	 she	said.

"You're	a	beautiful	 woman,	how	could	I	miss	you?"

"What's	 your	name?"	she	asked.

"Howie."

"Howie	what?"

"Howie	gonna	keep	'em	down	on	the	farm."

He	had	them	in	stitches.	Shanahan's	words.	Kept	telling	them	jokes.	A
stand-up	comic	with	a	knife.

"So	what're	you	interested	in,	Howie?"

"Let's	 talk,"	 he	said.

"Candy	store's	open,"	she	said.	"You	want	to	know	how	much	the
goodies	cost?"

"Not	right	 now."

171
"Just	say	when,	Howie."

He	folded	his	hands	on	the	tabletop.	Looked	into	her	eyes.

"How	long	have	you	been	hooking,	Linda?"

"First	 time	tonight,"	 she	said.	"In	fact,	I'm	 a	virgin."

Not	a	smile.	Not	even	thehint	of	a	smile.	Some	stand-up	comic.	Just	sat
there	looking	into	her	eyes,	big	hands	folded	on	the	table.

"How	old	are	you?"

"You	should	never	ask	a	woman	her	age,	Howie."

"Early	 thirties,	in	 there?"

"Who	knows?"	 she	said,	and	rolled	her	eyes.

"What's	 your	real	name?"

"What's	 yours?"

"I	 told	you.	Howie."

"But	 you	didn't	tell	 me	Howie	what."

"Howie	Cantrell,"	  he	said.

"Eileen	Burke,"	 she	said.

The	name	would	mean	nothing	to	him.	If	he	was	their	man,	he'd	learn
soon	enough	who	Eileen	Burke	was.	If	he	was	looking	for	action,	her
name	wouldn't	mean	beans	to	him.

"Why	 are	you	using	Linda?"	he	asked.

"I	 hate	the	name	Eileen,"	she	said.	Which	wasn't	true.	She'd	always
thought	the	name	Eileen	was	perfect	for	the	person	she	was.	"Linda
sounds	more	glamorous."

172
"You're	glamorous	enough,"	he	said,	"you	don't	need	a	phony	name.
May	I	call	you	Eileen?"

"You	can	call	me	Lassie	if	you	like."

Still	no	smile.	Totally	devoid	of	a	sense	of	humor.	So	where	was	the
comedian?	Flat,	steel-gray	eyes	reflecting	nothing.	But	were	they	the	eyes
of	a	triple	murderer?

"So	where're	you	from,	Howie?"

"I'll	 ask	the	questions,"	he	said.

"Now	you	sound	like	a	cop."

"I	 used	to	be	one."

Bullshit,	she	thought.

"Oh?"	 she	said.	"Where?"

"Philadelphia,"	 he	said.	"Do	you	see	that	girl	sitting	at	the	bar?"

"Which	 one?"	Eileen	asked.

"In	 the	black	skirt.	With	 the	short	dark	 hair."

He	was	indicating	Annie.

"What	 about	her?"

"I	 think	she's	a	cop,"	he	said.

Eileen	burst	out	laughing.

"Jenny?"	 she	said.	"You've	got	to	be	kidding."

"You	know	her?"

"She's	been	hooking	since	she	was	thirteen.	Jenny	a	cop?	Wait'll	I	tell
her!"

173
"I	already	told	her."

"Mister,	let	me	tellyou	something	about	hookers	and	cops,	okay?"

"I	know	all	about	hookers	and	cops."

"Right,	you're	a	cop	yourself."

"Usedto	be	one,"	he	said.	"I	can	always	tell	a	cop."

"Have	it	your	way,"	she	said.	"Jenny's	a	cop,	you're	a	cop,	I'm	a	cop,
when	you're	in	love	the	whole	world's	a	cop."

"You	don't	believe	I	used	to	be	a	cop,	do	you?"

"Howie,	I'll	believe	anything	you	tell	me.	You	tell	me	you	used	to	be	a
Presbyterian	minister,	I'll	believe	you.	An	astronaut,	a	spy,	a	hellip;"

"I	was	with	the	Vice	Squad	in	Philly."

"So	what	happened?	Didn't	you	like	the	work?"

"It	was	good	work."

"So	how	come	you	ain't	doing	it	no	more?"

"They	fired	me."

"Why?"

"Who	knows?"	he	said,	and	shrugged.

"Can't	stay	away	from	the	job,	though,	huh?"

"What	does	that	mean?"

"Well,	here	you	are,	Howie."

"Just	thought	I'd	drop	by."

"You	been	here	before?"

174
First	leading	question	she'd	asked	him.

"Couple	of	times."

"Guess	you	like	it,	huh?"

"It's	 okay."

"Come	on,	Howie,	tell	me	the	truth."	 Teasing	him	now.	"You	really	dig
the	girls	here,	don't	you?"

"They're	 okay.	Some	of	them."

"Which	 ones?"

"Some	of	them.	Lots	of	these	girls,	you	know,	they're	in	this	against	their
will,	you	know."

"Oh,	sure."

"I	 mean,	they	were	forced	into	it,	you	know."

"You	sure	you	were	a	Vice	cop,	Howie?"

"Yes."

"I	 mean,	you	sound	almosthuman	."

"Well,	it's	 true,	you	know.	A	lot	of	these	girls	would	get	out	of	it	if	they
knew	how."

"Tell	me	the	secret.	How	do	I	get	out	of	it,	Howie?"

"There	are	ways."

A	big,	wiry,	gray-haired	guy	walked	over	from	the	bar.	Had	to	be	in	his
mid-fifties,	grizzled	look,	sailor's	swagger.	Wearing	jeans	and	white
sneakers,	blue	T-shirt,	gold	crucifix	hanging	on	a	chain	outside	the	shirt,
metal-buttoned	denim	jacket	open	over	it.	Right	arm	in	a	plaster	cast	and
a	sling.	Shaggy	gray	eyebrows,	knife	scar	angling	downward	through	the
right	brow	 and	partially	closing	the	right	 eye.	Brown	eyes.	Thick	nose
broken	more	than	once.	Blue	watch	cap	tilted	onto	the	back	of	his	head.

175
Shock	of	gray	hair	hanging	on	his	forehead.	He	pulled	out	a	chair,	sat,
and	said,	"Buzz	off,	Preacher."

Howie	looked	at	him.

"Buzz	off,	I	 wanna	talk	to	the	lady."

"Hey	mister,"	 Eileen	said,	"we're	hellip;"

"You	hear	me,	Preacher?	Move!"

Howie	shoved	back	his	chair.	He	glared	angrily	at	the	guy	with	the
broken	arm,	and	then	walked	across	the	bar	and	out	into	the	street.
Annie	was	already	up	and	after	him.

"Thanks	a	lot,"	 Eileen	said.	"You	just	cost	me	hellip;"

"Shanahan,"	he	said.

She	looked	at	him.

"Put	your	 hand	on	my	knee,	talk	nice."

The	midgets	came	in	at	a	minute	before	eleven.

Shotgun	Zuckerman	was	ready	to	close	the	store.

They	came	in	yelling	"Trick	 or	treat!"

Alice	opened	fire	at	once.

("It	 was	us	taking	all	the	risk,"	 she	said	at	the	Q	A	later.	"Never	mind
what	Quentin	told	us.	If	anybody	pegged	us	for	little	people,	we	were
finished.	It	was	better	to	kill	 them.	Easier,	too.")

Zuckerman	didn't	 even	have	a	chance	to	reach	for	the	shotgun.	He	went
down	dead	in	the	first	volley.

Meyer	and	Carella	broke	out	of	the	stockroom	the	moment	they	heard
the	bell	over	the	door	sound.	By	the	time	they	came	through	the	curtain
shielding	the	front	of	the	store	from	the	back,	Zuckerman	was	already
dead.

176
In	the	station	wagon	outside,	the	blonde	began	honking	the	horn.

"Police!"	 Meyer	shouted,	and	Alice	opened	up	with	a	second	volley.

This	wasn't	a	cops-and-robbers	movie,	this	was	real	life.	Neither	of	the
detectives	got	off	a	shot.

Meyer	went	down	with	a	bullet	through	 his	arm	and	another	through	his
shoulder.

Carella	went	down	with	a	bullet	in	his	chest.	No	tricks.	Real	blood.	Real
pain.

Three	of	the	midgets	ran	out	of	the	store	without	even	glancing	at	the
cash	register.	The	only	reason	Alice	ran	out	after	them,	without	first
killing	the	two	cops	on	the	floor,	was	that	she	thought	there	might	be
more	cops	in	the	place.

This	came	out	during	the	Q	A	at	ten	minutes	past	two	on	the	morning	of
All	Hallows'	 Day.





CHAPTER	        9

The	more	Parker	presented	himself	as	afake	cop,	the	more	he	began
feeling	like	areal	cop.	Everybody	at	the	party	kept	telling	him	he	could
pass	for	a	detective	anywhere	in	the	city.	Everybody	told	him	his	shield
and	his	gun,	a	.38	Smith	Wesson	Detective	Special,	looked	very	authentic.
One	of	the	women	mdash;a	sassy	brunette	dressed	as	a	Las	Vegas
cigarette	girl,	in	a	flared	black	skirt	 and	a	flimsy	top,	high-heeled	black
shoes,	and	seamed	silk	stockings	mdash;wanted	to	hold	the	gun	but	he
told	her	cops	didn't	allow	straights	to	handle	dangerous	weapons.	He	had
deliberately	used	police	jargon	for	"honest	citizens."	In	this	 city,	a
straight	was	anyone	victimized	by	a	thief.	In	some	cities,	victims	were
called	"civilians."	 In	any	city,	a	thief	was	anyone	who	wasn't	a	cop,	a
straight,	or	a	civilian.	To	the	cops	in	this	city,	most	thieves	were	"cheap"
thieves.

A	homosexual	wearing	a	blonde	wig,	a	long	purple	gown,	and	amethyst

177
earrings	to	match,	objected	to	the	use	of	the	word	"straight"	to	describe
an	honest	citizen.	The	homosexual,	who	said	he	was	dressed	as	Marilyn
Monroe,	told	Parker	that	 all	thegays	he	knew	were	also	honest	citizens.
Parker	apologized	for	his	use	of	police	terminology.	"But,	you	see,"	he
said,	"I	ain't	 areal	cop."	And	yet	he	felt	like	one.	For	the	first	time	 in	as
long	as	he	could	remember,	he	felt	like	a	bona	fide	detective	on	the
world's	finest	police	force.

It	was	peculiar.

Even	more	peculiar	was	the	fact	that	he	was	having	such	a	good	time.

Peaches	Muldoon	had	a	lot	to	do	with	that.

She	was	the	life	of	the	party,	and	some	of	her	exuberance	and	vitality
rubbed	off	on	Parker.	She	told	everyone	stories	about	what	it	was	like
growing	up	as	a	victim	on	a	sharecropper's	farm	in	Tennessee.	She	told
them	incest	was	a	way	of	life	on	the	farm.	Told	them	her	first	sexual
experience	was	with	her	father.	Told	them	herbrother's	first	sexual
experience	mdash;other	than	with	the	sheep	who	was	his	steady
girlfriend	 mdash;had	been	with	his	sister	Peaches	Muldoon	one	rainy
afternoon	when	they	were	alone	together	in	the	house.	She	told	everyone
that	she'd	enjoyed	her	brother	more	than	she	had	her	father.	Everyone
laughed.	They	all	thought	she	was	making	up	victim	stories.	Only	Parker
knew	that	the	stories	were	true;	she'd	told	him	ten	years	earlier	that	her
priest-killing	 son	was	the	bastard	child	of	her	relationship	with	her
brother.

The	stories	Peaches	told	encouraged	Parker	to	tell	some	stories	of	his
own.	Everyone	thought	he	was	making	them	up,	the	way	Peaches	had
made	up	her	stories	about	theTobacco	Road	dirt	farm.	He	told	them	the
story	about	the	woman	who'd	cut	off	her	husband's	penis	with	a	straight
razor.	He	said,	"I	substituted	the	word	penis	for	cock,	because	I	didn't
want	to	offend	anybody	here	who	might	be	a	vigilante	for	the	Meese
Commission."	Everyone	laughed	at	the	story	and	also	at	his	comment
about	the	Meese	Commission.	Somebody	wondered	out	loud	if	the
Attorney	General	considered	it	pornographic	that	 the	unauthorized	sale
of	arms	to	Iran	had	provided	unauthorized	 funds	for	Nicaraguan	rebels.

This	was	straying	into	intellectual	territory	  beyond	Parker's	scope.

He	laughed,	anyway.

178
Pornography	was	something	he	dealt	with	on	a	daily	basis,	and	he
believed	straights	ought	to	keep	their	noses	out	of	it,	period.	Complicated
and	illegal	arms	deals	were	something	else,	and	he	never	wondered	about
them	except	as	they	might	effect	his	line	of	work.	When	you	dealt	with
cheap	thieves	day	and	night,	you	already	knew	that	they	weren't	only	in
the	streets	but	also	in	the	highest	reaches	of	government.	He	didn't	say
this	to	anyone	here	at	the	party	because	he	was	having	too	good	a	time,
and	he	didn't	want	to	get	too	serious	about	cause	and	effect.	He	didn't
even	think	of	it	consciously	as	cause	and	effect.	But	he	knew,	for	example,
that	when	a	star	athlete	was	exposed	as	a	coke	addict,	the	kids	playing
pickup	ball	in	the	school	yard	thought,	"Hey,	 I	gotta	try	me	some	of	that
shit."	He	also	knew	that	when	somebody	high	up	in	government	broke
the	law,	then	your	punk	dealing	grams	of	crack	in	the	street	could	justify
his	actions	by	saying,	"See?Everybody	breaks	the	law."	Cause	and	effect.
It	only	made	Parker's	job	harder.	Which	 was	maybe	why	he	didn't	work
too	hard	at	the	job	anymore.	Although	tonight,playing	at	the	job,	he	felt
as	if	he	was	working	harder	at	it	than	he	had	in	years.

It	was	really	very	peculiar.

He	told	everybody	that	one	day	he	was	going	to	write	a	book	about	his
experiences.

"Ah-ha!"	 somebody	said,	"you're	awriter	!"

"No,	no,	I'm	 a	cop,"	he	protested.

"So	how	come	you	want	to	be	a	writer?"	someone	else	said.

"	'Cause	I	ain't	 got	the	guts	to	be	a	burglar,"	Parker	said,	and	everyone
laughed	again.

He'd	never	realized	he	was	so	witty.

At	a	little	after	 eleven,	Peaches	suggested	that	they	move	on	to	another
party.

Which	is	how	Parker	got	to	meet	the	wheelman	and	one	of	the	midgets	on
the	liquor-store	holdups.

There	were	a	lot	of	things	bothering	Brown	about	the	Sebastiani	case.

179
The	three	most	important	things	were	the	head	and	the	hands.	He	kept
wondering	why	they	hadn't	turned	 up	yet.	He	kept	wondering	where
Jimmy	Brayne	had	dropped	them.

He	also	wondered	where	Brayne	was	right	now.

The	blues	from	the	Two-Three,	armed	with	the	BOLO	that	had	gone	out
all	over	the	city,	had	located	the	blue	Citation	in	the	parking	lot	of	an	A	P
not	far	from	the	River	 Dix.	The	techs	had	crawled	over	the	car	like	ants,
lifting	latent	 prints,	collecting	stain	samples,	vacuuming	for	hairs	and
fibers.	Anything	they'd	 got	had	already	been	bagged	and	sent	to	the	lab
for	comparison	with	whatever	had	been	recovered	from	the	Econoline
van.	Brown	had	no	illusions	about	the	lab	getting	back	to	them	before
sometime	Monday.	Meanwhile,	both	cars	had	been	dumped	mdash;which
left	Brayne	without	wheels.	His	last	location	had	been	in	the	Twenty-
Third,	where	he'd	dropped	the	Citation,	 way	over	on	the	south	side	of	the
city.	Was	he	now	holed	up	somewhere	in	that	precinct?	Had	he	crabbed
east,	west,	or	north	to	a	hotel	someplace	else?	Or	was	he	already	on	an
airplane,	bus,	or	train	heading	for	parts	unknown?

All	of	this	bothered	Brown.

He	also	wondered	why	Brayne	had	killed	his	mentor	and	employer.

"You	think	 they're	making	it?"	 he	asked	Hawes.

"Who?"

"Brayne	and	the	woman."

"Marie?"

The	possibility	had	never	occurred	to	Hawes.	She	had	seemed	so	honestly
grieved	by	her	husband's	disappearance	and	death.	But	now	that	Brown
had	mentioned	it	mdash;

"I	 mean,	what	I'm	looking	for	 is	some	motive	here,"	Brown	said.

"The	guy	could've	just	gone	beserk,	you	know.	Threw	those	tricks	all
over	the	driveway,	ran	off	in	the	Citation	hellip;"

180
"Yeah,	I'm	curious	about	that,	 too,"	Brown	said.	"Let's	 try	 to	dope	out	a
timetable,	okay?	They	come	into	the	city	together,	Brayne	in	the	van,
Marie	and	her	husband	in	the	Citation	hellip;"

"Got	to	the	school	around	a	quarter	past	three."

"Unloaded	the	car	and	the	van	hellip;"

"Right."

"And	 then	Brayne	went	off	God	knows	where,	said	he'd	be	back	at	five,
five-thirty	 to	pick	up	the	big	stuff."

"Uh-huh."

"Okay,	they	finish	the	act	around	five-fifteen.	 Sebastiani	changes	into	his
street	clothes,	goes	out	back	to	load	the	car	while	Marie's	getting	out	of
her	costume.	She	comes	out	later,	finds	the	stuff	all	over	the	driveway	and
the	Citation	gone."

"Right."

"So	we	got	to	figure	Brayne	dumped	the	van	on	Rachel	Street	sometime
between	three-thirty	and	five-fifteen,	grabbed	a	taxi	back	to	the	school,
and	cold-cocked	Sebastiani	while	he	was	loading	the	car."

"That's	 what	it	looks	like,"	 Hawes	said.

"Then	he	chops	up	the	body	mdash;where'd	he	do	that,	Cotton?	Blood
stains	in	the	Citation's	trunk,	 you	know,	but	nowhere	else	in	the	car."

"Coulda	done	it	anywhere	in	the	city.	Found	himself	a	deserted	street,	an
abandoned	building	hellip;"

"Yeah,	you	could	do	that	in	this	city.	So	he	chops	up	the	corpse,	loads	the
pieces	in	the	trunk,	and	starts	dropping	them	all	around	town.	When	he
gets	rid	of	the	last	one,	he	leaves	the	car	behind	that	A	P	and	takes	off."

"Yeah."

"So	where's	the	motive?"

181
"I	don't	know."

"She's	an	attractive	woman,"	Brown	said.

Hawes	had	noticed	that.

"If	she	was	playing	house	with	Brayne	in	that	apartment	over	the	garage
hellip;"

"Well,	you've	got	no	reason	to	believe	that,	Artie."

"I'm	snowballing	it,	Cotton.	Let's	say	they	had	a	thing	going.	Brayne	and
the	woman."

"Okay."

"And	let's	say	hubby	tipped	to	it."

"You're	thinking	movies	or	television."

"I'm	thinking	real-life,	too.	Hubby	tells	Brayne	to	lay	off,	Brayne's	still
hungry	for	her.	He	chops	up	hubby,	and	him	and	the	woman	ride	off	into
the	sunset."

"Except	Brayne's	the	only	one	who	rode	off,"	Hawes	said.	"The	woman's
hellip;"

"You	think	she's	home	yet?"	Brown	asked,	and	looked	up	at	the	clock.

Ten	minutes	past	eleven.

"Half	hour	or	so	to	Collinsworth,"	Hawes	said.	"She	was	catching	the	ten
forty-five."

"Whyn't	we	take	a	ride	out	there?"	Brown	said.

"What	for?"

"Toss	that	apartment	over	the	garage,	see	we	can't	find	something."

"Like	what?"

182
"Like	 maybe	where	Brayne's	heading.	Or	better	yet,	something	that	links
him	to	the	woman."

"We'll	 need	a	warrant	to	toss	that	garage."

"We	haven't	even	got	jurisdiction	across	the	river,"	 Brown	said.	"Let's
play	it	by	ear,	okay?	If	the	lady's	clean,	she	won't	ask	for	a	warrant."

"You	want	to	call	her	first?"

"What	 for?"	 Brown	said.	"I	 love	surprises."

Kling	waved	so	long	to	them	as	they	headed	out	of	the	squad.	He	looked
up	at	the	clock.	The	graveyard	shift	should	be	here	in	half	an	hour	or	so
mdash;O'Brien,	Delgado,	Fujiwara	and	Willis	 Fill	 them	in	on	what	had
gone	down	on	the	four-to-midnight	grab	one	of	the	sedans,	and	head	for
Calm's	Point.	Make	himself	invisible	in	the	Zone,	just	another	John
looking	for	a	little	 Friday-night	 sport.	But	keep	an	eye	out	for	Eileen.

He	thought	she	was	dead	wrong	about	this	one.

His	being	there	in	the	Zone	could	only	help	an	undercover	situation	that
had	been	hastily	planned	and	recklessly	undermanned.

This	time,he	was	the	one	who	was	dead	wrong.

They	sat	at	the	table	talking	in	whispers,	just	another	hooker	and	a
potential	trick.	 Negotiating	the	deal,	Larry	figured.	 Never	seen	the	guy
with	the	broken	arm	in	 here	before,	wondered	who'd	be	on	top	in	the
sack,	might	get	a	little	clumsy	with	that	arm	in	 a	sling.	Wondered	about
that	and	nothing	else.	The	place	was	still	busy,	there	was	booze	to	be
poured.

"Howie	Cantrell	 is	his	real	name,"	Shanahan	whispered.	"Used	to	be
with	Vice	in	Philly,	that's	 all	straight	goods.	Went	off	his	rocker	six	years
ago,	first	started	beating	up	hookers	in	the	street,	then	began	preaching
salvation	to	them.	The	Philly	P.D.	didn't	so	much	mind	the	beatings.
Worse	things	than	beatings	go	down	in	Vice.	But	they	didn't	like	the	idea
of	a	plainclothes	minister	on	the	force.	They	sent	him	up	for	psychiatric,
and	the	shrinks	decided	he	was	under	considerable	stress	as	a	result	of
his	proximity	to	the	ladies	of	the	night.	Retired	him	with	 full	 pension,	he
drifted	first	 to	Boston,	then	here,	started	his	missionary	work	all	over

183
again	in	the	Zone.	Everybody	calls	him	the	Preacher.	He	looks	for	the
young	ones,	spouts	Jesus	to	them,	tries	to	talk	them	out	of	the	life.	Takes
one	of	them	to	bed	every	now	and	then,	for	old	times'	sake.	But	he's
harmless.	Hasn't	raised	a	hand	to	anybody	since	Philly	let	him	go."

"I	 thought	he	was	our	man,"	Eileen	said.

"We	did,	too,	at	first.	 Dragged	him	in	right	after	 the	first	murder,
questioned	him	up	and	down,	but	he	was	clean	as	a	whistle.	Talked	to
him	again	after	the	second	one,	and	again	after	the	third.	Alibis	a	mile
long.	We	shoulda	warned	you	about	him.	Be	easy	to	make	the	mistake
you	made.	How's	it	going	otherwise?"

"I	 almost	lost	my	virginity,	but	 Alvarez	bailed	me	out."

"Who'd	 he	send?"

"Guy	named	Ortiz.	 Narcotics."

"Good	man.	Looks	eighteen,	don't	he?	He's	almost	thirty."

"You	coulda	told	me	I'd	have	help."

"We're	just	 full	of	tricks,"	  Shanahan	said,	and	smiled.

"You	gonna	plant	yourself	in	here?"	Eileen	asked.

"Nope.	I'll	 be	outside.	Watching,	waiting."

"Who	grizzled	up	your	 hair?"	 she	asked.

"The	Chameleon,"	he	said,	and	grinned.

"I	 hope	you	cansee	through	that	eye."

"I	 can	see	just	fine."

"And	 I	hope	our	man	doesn't	want	to	arm	wrestle,"	she	said,	glancing	at
the	cast.

Across	the	room,	Annie	was	coming	back	into	the	bar.	She	walked	to
where	Larry	was	standing,	put	four	dollars	 on	the	bar-top	and	said,

184
"Your	end,	pal."

"Why,	thank	 you,	honey,"	he	said,	"much	obliged,"	and	tucked	the	bills
into	his	shirt	pocket,	figuring	 the	four	represented	twenty	percent	of
whatever	she'd	got	for	her	last	trick.	Ido	love	an	honest	hooker,	he
thought,	and	immediately	wondered	if	she'd	short-changed	him.

Annie	wandered	over	to	where	Eileen	and	Shanahan	were	sitting.

"Your	blond	 friend	went	home,"	she	said.	"Caught	a	bus	on	the	corner."

"That's	 okay,"	Eileen	said,	"I'm	 still	waiting	 for	Mr.	 Right."

Annie	nodded,	and	then	walked	over	to	a	table	on	the	other	side	of	the
room.	She	wasn't	alone	for	more	than	a	minute	when	a	big	black	guy	sat
down	next	to	her.

"She	needs	help,"	Eileen	whispered.

"Bring	 her	outside,"	Shanahan	said,	and	then	rose	immediately	and	said
in	a	voice	loud	enough	for	everyone	in	the	bar	to	hear,	"I'll	see	you
around	the	corner,	honey."

Eileen	went	over	to	Annie	and	the	black	man.

"I	 got	a	one-armed	bandit	waiting	in	a	car	around	the	corner,"	she	said.
"He's	looking	for	 a	hands-on	trio,	me	driving,	him	in	 the	middle,	both	of
us	dancing	his	meat	around	the	block.	You	interested	in	a	dime	for	ten
minutes'	work?"

"Dimes	add	up,"	Annie	 said,	and	immediately	got	to	her	feet.

"Hurry	 on	back,	hear?"	 the	black	man	said.

"I	 did	not	appreciate	all	the	shooting,"	Quentin	Forbes	said,	looking
petulant.	He	was	still	wearing	the	dress,	pantyhose,	and	low-heeled
walking	shoes	he'd	worn	while	driving	the	station	wagon,	but	the	long
blonde	wig	was	hooked	over	the	arm	of	a	ladder-backed	wooden	chair.
"There	was	no	need	for	such	violence,	Alice.	I	warned	you	repeatedly
hellip;"

"It	 was	only	insurance,"	she	said,	and	shrugged.

185
"The	costumes	were	all	the	insurance	we	hellip;"

"The	costumes	were	bullshit,"	Alice	said.

She	was	a	beautiful	little	blonde	woman	in	her	late	thirties,	blue	eyes	and
a	Cupid's-bow	mouth,	perfect	legs	and	breasts,	four-feet	two-inches	tall
and	weighing	a	curvaceous	seventy-one	pounds.	In	the	circus,	she	was
billed	as	Tiny	Alice.	This	went	over	big	with	homosexual	men.	She	had
changed	out	of	the	clown	costume	they'd	worn	on	the	last	two	holdups,
and	was	now	wearing	a	dark	green	dress	and	high-heeled	pumps.	To
Forbes,	she	looked	wildly	sexual.

"Did	 you	want	the	cops	to	think	threeseparate	gangs	of	kids	were	holding
up	those	stores?"	she	asked.

"I	 wanted	to	confuse	the	cops,	was	all,"	Forbes	said.	"If	you	want	to
know	whatI	think,	 Alice,	I	think	 your	shooting	spree	was	what	brought
them	down	on	us,	is	what	I	think."

"We	should	have	finished	them	off,"	she	said.	"If	you	hadn't	 started
honking	the	horn	hellip;"

"I	 honked	the	horn	to	warn	you.	The	moment	I	saw	them	coming	from
the	back	room	hellip;"

"We	should	have	finished	them	off,"	she	said	again,	and	took	a	tube	of
lipstick	from	 her	handbag	and	went	to	the	mirror	on	the	wall.

"The	point	 of	the	costumes,"	Forbes	insisted,	"was	to	hellip;"

"The	point	 was	you	wanted	to	put	on	a	dress,"	Alice	said.	"I	think	you
enjoy	being	in	drag."

"I	 do	indeed,"	Forbes	said.	"First	time	I've	 been	in	a	woman's	pants	in
more	than	a	month."

"Braggart,"	 Corky	 said.

She	was	slightly	taller	than	Alice,	a	bad	failing	for	a	midget,	but	she	was
prettier	in	a	delicate,	small-boned,	almost	Oriental	way.	She,	too,	had
changed	into	street	clothes,	a	black	skirt	and	a	white	silk	blouse,	a	pink

186
cardigan	sweater,	high-heeled	patent	leather	pumps.	She	looked	like	a
tiny,	young	Debbie	Reynolds.

The	two	men	who'd	been	in	on	the	holdups	were	sitting	at	the	table,	still
wearing	their	clown	suits,	counting	the	money.

"That's	 five	thousand	here,"	one	of	them	said.

High	Munchkin	 voice,	wearing	glasses,	brown	eyes	intent	behind	them.
His	name	was	Willie.	In	the	circus,	he	was	billed	as	Wee	Willie	Winkie.
Next	month,	he'd	be	down	in	Venice,	Florida,	rehearsing	for	the	season.
Tonight	he	was	helping	to	stack	and	count	the	money	from	four	stickups
mdash;well,three	actually,	since	they	hadn't	got	anything	but	cops	on	the
last	one.	The	stickups	had	been	Forbes'	idea,	but	Corky	was	the	one	who
talked	Willie	into	 going	along,	said	it'd	be	a	good	way	to	pick	up	some
quick	off-season	change.	Corky	was	his	wife,	and	Alice	was	her	best
friend.	This	made	Willie	nervous.	Alice	was	the	only	one	who'd	shot
anyone	tonight.	The	others	had	all	fired	their	pistols	all	over	the	heads	of
the	store	owners,	the	way	Forbes	had	told	them	to.

"What	 we	should	do,"	Willie	said	to	the	other	man	at	the	table,	"we
should	both	of	us	count	each	stack."

His	hands	were	sweating.	He	was	still	very	nervous	about	this	whole
thing.	He	was	sure	the	police	would	come	breaking	in	here	any	minute.
All	because	of	Alice.	He	had	never	heard	of	a	midget	doing	time	in
prison.	Or	getting	the	electric	chair.	He	did	not	want	to	be	the	first	one	in
history.

"Can	I	 trust	you	little	 crooks	to	give	me	a	true	count?"	Forbes	asked.

"You	can	help	count	it,	you	want	to,"	 the	other	man	at	the	table	said.

He	was	older	than	the	other	midgets,	shorter	and	more	delicate	than	even
the	women.	His	name	was	Oliver.	In	the	circus,	he	was	billed	as	Oliver
Twist.	He	never	understood	why.	He	had	red	hair	and	blue	eyes,	and	he
was	single,	which	was	just	the	way	he	wanted	it.	Oliver	was	a	great	ladies'
man.	Full-sized	women	loved	to	pick	him	up	and	carry	him	to	bed.	Full-
sized	women	considered	him	too	darling	for	words,	and	they	were	never
threatened	by	his	tiny	erect	pecker.	Full-sized	women	were	always
amazed	that	they	could	swallow	him	to	the	hilt	without	gagging.	In	some
ways,	being	a	midget	had	its	benefits.

187
"Here's	another	five,"	 Willie	 said,	and	slid	the	stack	to	Oliver,	who	began
riffling	 the	bills	like	a	casino	dealer.

"My	 rough	estimate,"	Forbes	said,	"is	we	took	in	something	like	forty
thousand."

"I	 think	that's	 high,"	Alice	 said.

Standing	at	the	mirror,	putting	 on	her	lipstick.	Lips	 puckered	to	accept
the	bright	red	paint,	pretty	 as	a	little	doll.	Forbes	had	tried	making	her
last	year	when	they	were	playing	the	Garden	in	New	York.	She'd	turned
him	down	cold,	said	he	would	break	her	in	half,	although	he	knew	she
was	sleeping	with	half	the	Flying	Dutchmen.	Corky	watched	her	intently,
as	if	hoping	to	pick	up	some	makeup	tricks.

"Twelve,	thirteen	thousand	each	store,"	Forbes	said,	"that's	what	I
figure.	Thirty-five,	 forty	 thousand	dollars."

"There	wasn't	any	thirteen	 in	that	store	with	the	lady	owner,"	 Oliver
said.

He	was	the	one	who'd	cleaned	out	the	register	after	Alice	shot	that	lady	in
the	third	store.	They	weren't	supposed	to	talk	in	the	stores,	but	he'd
yelled,	"Hold	itopen	,	Alice!,"	 because	Alice's	hands	were	trembling,	and
the	bag	was	shaking	as	if	there	was	a	snake	in	it	trying	to	get	out.

"Mark	 my	words,	forty,"	 Forbes	said.

"Here's	another	five,"	 Willie	 said.

"Fifteen	already,"	 Forbes	said.	"Mark	 my	words."

Turned	out,	when	all	was	said	and	done,	that	there	was	only	thirty-two
thousand.

"What'd	 I	tell	 you?"	Alice	said.

"Somebody	must	be	skimming,"	Forbes	said,	and	winked	at	her.

"What	 does	that	come	to?"	Corky	asked.	"Five	into	thirty-two?"

188
"Something	like	sixty	grand	apiece,"	Oliver	 said.

"Youwish	,"	Alice	 said.

"Six,	I	mean."

Willie	was	already	doing	the	long	division	on	a	scrap	of	paper.

"Six-four,"	 he	said.

"Which	 ain't	bad	for	 a	night's	work,"	 Forbes	said.

"We	should've	finished	those	cops,"	Alice	said	idly,	blotting	her	lipstick
with	a	piece	of	Kleenex.	Willie	shivered.	He	looked	at	his	wife.	Corky	was
staring	at	Alice's	mouth,	a	look	of	idolatrous	adoration	on	her	face.	Willie
shivered	again.

"What	 I'm	gonna	do	right	 now,"	Forbes	said,	"is	get	out	of	this	dress,
and	put	on	my	own	clothes,	and	then	I'm	gonna	go	partying.	Alice?	You
wanna	come	along?"

She	looked	him	up	and	down	as	if	seeing	him	for	the	first	time.

Then	she	shrugged	and	said,	"Sure.	Why	not?"

She	called	her	mother-in-law	the	moment	she	was	in	the	house.

The	place	felt	empty	without	him.

"Mom,"	 she	said.	"This	is	Marie."

Crackling	on	the	line	to	Atlanta.

"Honey,"	 her	mother-in-law	said,	"this	 is	aterrible	connection,	can	you
get	the	operator	to	ring	it	again?"

Terrific,	she	thought.	I'm	 calling	to	tell	her	Frank	 is	dead,	and	she	can't
hear	me.

"I'll	 try	 again,"	 she	said,	and	hung	up,	and	then	dialed	the	operator	and
asked	her	to	place	the	call.	Her	mother-in-law	picked	up	on	the	second
ring.

189
"How's	that?"	 Marie	 asked	her.

"Oh,	much	better.	I	was	just	about	to	callyou	,	this	must	be	psychic."
Susan	Sebastiani	believed	in	psychic	phenomena.	Whenever	she	held	a
seance	in	her	house,	she	claimed	to	converse	with	Frank's	father,	who'd
been	dead	and	gone	for	twenty	years.	Frank's	father	had	been	a
magician,	like	his	son.	"What	it	is,"	 she	said,	"I	had	this	terrible
premonition	that	something	was	wrong.	I	said	to	myself,	'Susan,	you'd
better	call	the	kids.'	Are	you	okay?	Is	everything	all	right?"

"Well	hellip;	 no,"	 Marie	said.

"What's	 the	matter?"	Susan	said.

"Mom	 hellip;"

How	to	tell	her?

"Mom	 hellip;	this	is	very	bad	news."

"What	 is	it?"

"Mom	 hellip;	Frank	 hellip;"

"Oh,	my	God,	something's	happened	to	him,"	Susan	said	at	once.	"I
knew	it."

Silence	on	the	line.

"Marie?"

"Yes,	Mom."

"What	 happened?	Tell	me."

"Mom	 hellip;	he's	hellip;	Mom,	 he's	dead."

"What?	Oh,	my	 God,	my	God,	oh,	dear	God,"	she	said,	and	began
weeping.

Marie	waited.

190
"Mom?"

"Yes,	I'm	here."

"I'm	sorry,	Mom.	I	wish	I	wasn't	the	one	who	had	to	tell	you."

"Where	are	you?"

"Home."

"I'll	 come	up	as	soon	as	I	can.	I'll	call	the	airlines,	find	out	when	there's
hellip;	what	happened?	Was	it	an	automobile	accident?"

"No,	Mom.	He	was	murdered."

"What?"

"Someone	hellip;"

"What?Who?	What	are	you	talking	about?	Murdered?"

"We	don't	know	yet,	Mom.	Someone	hellip;"

She	couldn't	bring	herself	to	tell	his	mother	that	someone	had	chopped
up	his	body.	That	could	wait.

"Someone	killed	him,"	she	said.	"After	a	show	we	did	this	afternoon.	At
a	high	school	up	here."

"Who?"

"We	don't	know	yet.	The	police	think	it	might	have	been	Jimmy."

"Jimmy?	Jimmy	Brayne?	Who	Frank	was	teaching?"

"Yes,	Mom."

"I	can't	believe	it.	Jimmy?"

"That's	what	they	think."

191
"Well,	where	is	he?	Have	they	questioned	him?"

"They're	still	looking	for	him,	Mom."

"Oh,	God,	this	is	terrible,"	Susan	said,	and	began	weeping	again.	"Why
would	he	do	such	a	thing?	Frank	treated	him	like	a	brother."

"We	both	did,"	Marie	said.

"Have	you	called	Dolores	yet?"

"No,	you're	the	first	one	I	hellip;"

"She'll	have	a	heart	attack,"	Susan	said.	"You'd	better	let	me	tell	her."

"I	can't	ask	you	to	do	that,	Mom."

"She's	my	daughter,	I'll	do	it,"	Susan	said.

Still	weeping.

"I'll	 tell	her	to	come	there	right	away,	you'll	need	help."

"Thank	you,	Mom."

"What	is	it	from	her	house?	An	hour?"

"Tops."

"I'll	 tell	her	to	get	right	there.	Are	you	okay?"

"No,	Mom,"	she	said,	and	her	voice	broke.	"I	feel	terrible."

"I	know,	I	know,	sweetie,	but	be	brave.	I'll	come	up	as	soon	as	I	can.
Meanwhile,	Dolores	will	be	there.	Oh,	my	God,	so	many	people	I'll	have
to	call,	relatives,	friends	hellip;	when	is	the	funeral	going	to	be?	They'll
want	to	know."

"Well	hellip;	they'll	be	doing	an	autopsy	first."

"What	do	you	mean?	Chopping	him	up?"

192
Silence	on	the	line.

"You	didn't	 give	them	permission	to	do	that,	did	you?"

Opportunity	 right	there	to	tell	 her	he	wasalready	chopped	up.	She	let	the
opportunity	 pass.

"They	have	to	do	an	autopsy	in	a	murder	case,"	she	said.

"Why?"

"I	 don't	know	why,	it's	the	law."

"Some	law,"	Susan	said.

Both	women	fell	silent.

Susan	sighed	heavily.

"All	 right,"	 she	said,	"let	me	call	Dolores,	let	me	get	to	work.	She'll	be
there	in	a	little	while,	will	 you	be	okay	till	then?"

"I'll	 be	fine."

Another	silence.	"I	know	how	much	you	loved	him,"	 Susan	said.

"I	 did,	Mom."

"I	 know,	I	know."

Another	sigh.

"All	 right,	 honey,	I'll	talk	 to	you	later.	I'll	try	 to	get	a	plane	tonight	if	I
can.	You're	not	alone,	Marie.	Dolores	will	be	right	there,	and	I'll	 be	up	as
soon	as	I	can."

"Thank	 you,	Mom."

"All	 right	 now,"	Susan	said,	"I	have	to	go	now.	Call	me	if	you	need	me."

"Yes,	Mom."

193
"Good	night	now,	honey."

"Good	night,	Mom."

There	was	a	small	click	on	the	line.	Marie	put	the	receiver	back	on	the
cradle.	She	looked	up	at	the	clock	on	the	kitchen	wall.	Only	forty	minutes
left	to	what	had	been	the	longest	day	of	her	life.

The	clock	ticked	noisily	into	the	stillness	of	the	empty	house.

The	clock	on	the	hospital	wall	read	twenty-five	minutes	past	eleven.

Lieutenant	Peter	Byrnes	had	not	yet	called	the	wives.	He	would	have	to
call	the	wives.	Speak	to	Teddy	and	Sarah,	tell	them	what	had	happened.
He	was	standing	in	the	corridor	with	Deputy	Police	Commissioner
Howard	Brill,	 who'd	come	uptown	when	he'd	heard	that	two	detectives
had	been	shot	in	a	liquor-store	stakeout.	Brill	was	a	black	man	in	his
early	fifties;	Byrnes	had	known	him	when	they	were	both	walking	beats
in	River-head.	About	the	same	size	as	Byrnes,	same	compact	head	and
intelligent	eyes;	the	men	could	have	been	cast	from	the	identical	bullet
mold,	except	that	one	was	black	and	the	other	was	white.	Brill	was	upset;
Byrnes	could	understand	why.

"The	media's	gonna	have	a	ball,"	Brill	 said.	"Did	 you	see	this?"

He	showed	Byrnes	the	front	page	of	one	of	the	morning	tabloids.	The
headline	looked	as	if	it	had	been	written	for	a	sensational	rag	that	sold	at
the	local	supermarket.	But	instead	of

MARTIAN	 IMPREGNATES	 CAMEL	 or	HITLER	  REINCARNATED
AS	IOWA	HOUSEWIFE,	 this	one	read:

MIDGETS	2	mdash;COPS	0
POLICE	CAUGHT	 SHORT

"Very	funny,"	 Byrnes	said.	"I	 got	one	cop	in	intensive	care,	and	another
one	in	surgery,	and	they're	making	jokes."

"How	are	they?"	 Brill	 asked.

"Meyer's	okay.	Carella	hellip;"	  He	shook	his	head.	"The	bullet's	still
inside	him.	They're	digging	for	it	 now."

194
"What	 caliber?"

"Twenty-two.	That's	 according	to	the	slugs	we	recovered	in	the	store.
Meyer	took	two	hits,	but	the	bullets	passed	through."

"He	was	lucky,"	Brill	  said.	"They're	worse	than	a	goddamn	forty-five,
those	low-caliber	guns.	Hit	a	man	where	there's	real	meat,	the	bullet
hasn't	got	the	force	to	exit.	Ricochets	around	inside	there	like	it's
bouncing	off	furniture."

"Yeah,"	Byrnes	said,	and	nodded	bleakly.

"Lot	 of	shooting	tonight,"	 Brill	 said.	"You'd	think	 it	was	the	Fourth	of
July,	'stead	of	Halloween.	Your	man	clean	on	that	other	one?"

"I	 hope	so,"	Byrnes	said.

"Four	 teenagers,	Pete,	the	medialoves	kids	getting	shot.	What's	the
report	on	their	condition?"

I	haven't	checked	it.	I	ran	over	here	the	minute	hellip;"

"Sure,	I	understand."

Byrnes	guessed	he	should	have	checked	on	those	kids	before	he'd	come
over	here	mdash;not	that	he	really	caredhow	they	were,	except	as	their
condition	reflected	on	his	squad.	On	his	block,	if	you	were	looking	for
trouble	with	a	cop,	you	should	be	happy	you	found	it.	But	if	Genero	had
pulled	his	gun	without	prudent	 care	and	reasonable	cause,	and	if	one	of
those	punks	died,	or	worse	yet	ended	up	a	vegetable	hellip;

"How	smart	 is	he?"	Brill	 asked.

"Not	very."

"	'Cause	they'll	be	coming	at	him,	you	know."

"I	 realize	that."

"Where	is	he	now?"

195
"Still	downtown.	I	think.	I	really	don't	know,	Howie.	I'm	sorry,	but	when
I	heard	about	Meyer	and	Carella	hellip;"

"Sure,	I	understand,"	Brill	said	again.

He	was	wondering	which	of	the	incidents	would	cause	the	Department
the	biggest	headache.	A	dumb	cop	shooting	four	kids,	or	two	dumb	cops
getting	shot	by	midgets.

"Midgets,"	he	said	aloud.

"Yeah,"	Byrnes	said.

Tricky,	he	thought.

I	know	that.

Coming	back	to	the	same	bar	a	fourth	time.

But	that's	part	of	the	fun.

Look	the	same,	act	the	same,	makes	it	more	exciting	that	way.	Big	blond
guy	is	who	they're	looking	for,	so	Heeeeeere'sJohnny	,	folks!	No
description	in	the	newspapers	yet,	but	that's	the	cops	playing	it	tricky,
too.

Tricks	all	around,	he	thought.

Suits	me	fine.

By	now	they're	thinking	psycho.

Some	guy	who	once	had	a	traumatic	experience	with	a	hooker.	Hates	all
hookers,	is	systematically	eliminating	them.	They	ought	to	boot	up	their
computer,	check	with	Kansas	City.	In	Kansas	City,	it	was	only	two	of
them.	Well,	when	you're	just	starting,	you	start	small,	right?	In	Chicago,
it	was	three.	Good	night,	folks!	Do	my	little	song	and	dance	in	each	city,
listen	to	the	newspaper	and	television	applause,	take	my	bow,	and	shuffle
off	to	Buffalo.	Slit	their	throats,	carve	up	their	pussies,	the	copshave	to	be
thinking	psycho.	I'll	do	four	of	them	here,	he	thought,	and	then	move	on.
Two,	three,	four,	a	nice	gradual	escalation.

196
Let	the	cops	think	psycho.

A	psycho	acts	compulsively,	hears	voices	inside	his	head,	thinks
someone's	commanding	him	to	do	what	he's	doing.	Me,	I	never	hear
voices	except	when	I'm	listening	to	my	Sony	Walkman.	Comedians.	Walk
along	with	the	earphones	on,	listen	to	their	jokes.	Woody	Alien,	Bob
Newhart,	Bill	Cosby,	Henny	Youngman	hellip;

Take	my	wife.	Please.

For	our	anniversary,	my	wife	said	she	wanted	to	go	someplace	she'd
never	been.	I	said,	How	about	the	kitchen?

My	wife	wanted	a	mink	coat,	and	I	wanted	a	new	car.	We	compromised.	I
bought	her	a	mink	coat	and	we	keep	it	in	the	garage.

Walk	along,	listen	to	the	comics,	laugh	out	loud,	people	probably	think
I'm	nuts.	Who	cares?	There	isn't	anyonecommanding	me	to	kill	these
girls	mdash;

Ooops,	excuse	me,	I	beg	your	parmigiana.	Mustn't	get	the	feminists	on
my	back,	they'd	be	worse	to	deal	with	than	cops.	Next	city,	maybe	I'll	do
five.	Get	five	of	them	and	then	move	on.	Two,	three,	four,	five,	nice
arithmetical	progression.	Keep	moving,	keep	having	fun,	just	the	way
Mother	wanted	it.	What's	 the	sense	of	life	if	you	can't	enjoy	it?	Live	a
little,	laugh	a	little,	that's	 the	thing.	These	women	mdash;got	it	right	that
time,	Ms.	Steinem	mdash;arefun	to	do.

Try	to	dopethat	one	out,	officers.

Keep	on	looking	for	a	psycho,	go	ahead.

When	all	you're	dealing	with	is	somebody	as	sane	as	Sunday.

Larry's	 Bar,

Welcome	home,	he	thought,	and	opened	the	door.

"What'll	 it	 be?"	Larry	 asked	him.

"This	guy	comes	into	a	bar,	has	a	little	monkey	on	his	shoulder."

197
"Huh?"	Larry	 said.

"This	is	a	joke,"	he	said.	"The	bartender	asks	him	'What'll	it	be?'	The
guys	says,	'Scotch	on	the	rocks,'	and	the	monkey	says,	'Same	for	me.'	The
bartender	looks	at	both	of	them	and	says,	'What	are	you,	a
ventriloquist?'	The	monkey	says,	'Were	my	lips	moving?'	"

"That's	a	joke,	huh?"	Larry	said.

"Gin	and	tonic,"	he	said,	and	shrugged.

"How	about	your	monkey?"

"My	monkey's	driving,"	he	said.

Larry	blinked.

"That's	another	joke."

"Oh,"	Larry	 said,	and	looked	at	him.	"You	been	in	here	before?"

"Nope.	First	time."

"	'Cause	you	look	familiar."

"People	tell	me	I	look	like	Robert	Redford."

"Nowthat's	a	joke,"	Larry	said,	and	put	the	drink	in	front	of	him.	"Gin
and	tonic,	three	bucks,	a	bargain."

He	paid	for	the	drink,	sat	sipping	it,	eyes	on	the	mirror.

"Nice	crop	tonight,	huh?"	Larry	said.

"Maybe."

"What	are	you	looking	for?	We	had	a	Chinese	girl	in	here	ten	minutes
ago.	You	dig	Orientals?"

"This	samurai	comes	home	from	the	wars,"	he	said.

"Is	this	another	joke?"

198
"His	servant	meets	him	at	the	gate,	tells	him	his	wife's	been	making	it
with	a	black	man.	The	samurai	runs	upstairs,	breaks	down	the	bedroom
door,	yanks	out	his	sword,	yells,	'Whassa	this	I	hear,	you	make	it	with	a
brack	man?'	His	wife	says,	'Where	you	hear	such	honkie	jive?'	"

"I	don't	get	it,"	Larry	 said.

"I	guess	you	had	to	be	there."

"Where?"

"Forget	it."

"We	got	some	nice	black	girls	in	here	tonight,	if	that's	what	you're
lookin'	for."

Larry	was	thinking	about	his	twenty-percent	commission.	Drum	up	a
little	trade	here.

"This	old	man	goes	into	a	whorehouse	hellip;"

"This	ain't	a	whorehouse,"	Larry	said	defensively.

"This	is	another	joke.	Old	guy,	ninety-five	years	old.	He	tells	the	madam
he's	looking	for	a	blowjob.	The	guy's	so	frail	he	can	hardly	stand	up.	The
madam	says,	'Come	on,	mister,	you've	had	it.'	He	says,	'I	have?	How
much	do	I	owe	you?'"

"Nowthat's	funny,"	Larry	said.

"I	know	a	hundred	jokes	about	old	people."

"Thatfunny,	it	wasn't."

"This	old	guy	is	sitting	on	a	park	bench,	crying	his	heart	out.	Another
guy	sits	next	to	him,	says	hellip;"

"Hi."

He	turned.

199
A	good-looking	blonde	girl	was	sitting	on	the	stool	next	to	his.

"My	 name's	Sheryl,"	she	said.	"Wanna	party?"

200
CHAPTER	      10

The	minute	he	saw	her,	he	knew	she	was	going	to	be	more	fun	than	any	of
the	others.	Something	in	her	eyes.	Something	in	her	smile.	Something	in
the	way	she	plumped	her	cute	little	bottom	down	on	the	bar	stool,	and
crossed	her	legs,	and	propped	one	elbow	on	the	bar,	and	her	chin	on	her
hand,	and	looked	him	mischievously	in	the	eye	mdash;a	fun	girl,	he	could
tell	that	at	once.

"Well,	well,	well,	hello,	Sheryl,"	he	said.

"Well,	well,	well,	hello	to	you,"	she	said.

"Barkeep,"	he	said,	"see	what	the	lady'll	have."

"Barkeep,	I	love	that,"	Sheryl	said.

A	fun	girl.	He	knew	it.

"So	what'll	it	be?"	he	asked.

"What	areyou	drinking?"

"Gin	and	tonic."

"I'll	 have	the	same,"	she	said.

"A	gin	and	tonic	for	the	lady,"	he	said	to	Larry,	and	then	immediately,
"This	guy	walks	into	a	bar	hellip;"

"You	already	told	this	one,"	Larry	said.

"This	is	another	one.	Guy	walks	into	a	bar,	says,	'See	that	cat	over
there?'	Everybody	looks	at	the	cat.	Big	tomcat	with	an	enormous	tail.
The	guys	says,	'I'll	bet	any	man	in	the	house	my	penis	is	longer	than	that
cat's	tail.'	Everybody	wants	to	bet	him.	Hundred-dollar	bills	come	out	all
over	the	place.	The	guy	says	to	the	bartender	hellip;"

"Gin	and	tonic,"	Larry	said,	"three	bucks,	a	bargain."

201
"You	should	learn	not	to	interrupt	 a	story,"	 he	said.

"Tell	'im,"	 Sheryl	said.

"The	guy	says	to	the	bartender,	'Okay,	measure	us.'	So	the	bartender
takes	out	a	tape	measure,	goes	over	to	the	cat,	measures	the	cat's	tail,	and
says,	'Fourteen	inches.'	They	guy	nods	and	says,	'Okay,	now	measure	my
penis.'	The	bartender	measures	the	penis.	'Eight	inches,'	he	says.	'You
lose.'	The	guy	looks	at	him.	'Excuse	me,'	he	says,	'but	exactlyhow	did	you
measure	that	cat's	tail?'	The	bartender	says,	'I	put	one	end	of	the	tape
against	his	asshole	and	the	other	end	hellip;'	and	the	guy	says,	'Would
you	mind	showing	me	the	same	consideration?'	"

Sheryl	burst	out	laughing.

Larry	 said,	"I	don't	 get	it.	You	owe	me	three	bucks."

He	paid	for	the	drink.	 Sheryl	was	still	laughing.

A	fun	girl.

"What's	 your	name?"	she	asked.

"Robert	Redford,"	 he	said,	which	wasn't	too	far	from	 the	truth	in	 that
his	first	name	really	was	Robert.

"I	 believe	you,"	she	said,	and	winked	at	Larry.	"What	 do	people	call
you?	Rob?	Bob?	Bobby?"

"Bobby,"	 he	said,	which	was	absolutely	the	truth.

"And	 how	doesyour	tail	measure	up	against	that	cat's,	Bobby?"

"Want	to	find	 out?"	 he	said.

"Oooo,	yes,"	Sheryl	said,	and	rolled	her	eyes.

"Think	 that	might	 be	fun,	huh?"	he	said.

"I	 think	it'd	 beloads	of	fun,"	she	said.	"I'll	 tell	you	what	I	 get,	Bobby.	A
handjob's	hellip;"

202
"Not	yet,"	 he	said.

"Well,	you	see,	Bobby,	I'm	a	working	girl.	 So	whereas	there's	nothing	I'd
enjoy	more	than	sitting	here	all	night	with	 you	hellip;"

He	put	a	twenty-dollar	bill	 on	the	bartop.

"Let's	 say	we're	running	a	tab,"	he	said.

"You	mean	you	and	me?	Or	you	and	Larry?"

"You	and	me.	The	twenty's	yours.	It	buys	twenty	minutes,	a	dollar	a
minute.	We'll	talk	 about	renewing	the	option	when	the	meter	runs	out.
How's	that	sound,	Sheryl?"

"No	problem,"	 she	said,	and	scooped	up	the	bill.

"Four	 bucks	of	that	is	mine,"	Larry	 said,	and	held	out	his	hand.	Sheryl
made	a	face,	but	she	gave	him	the	twenty,	and	watched	him	as	he	walked
down	to	the	cash	register	to	make	change.

"So	where	you	from,	Bobby?"	she	asked.

"Most	recently?	Chicago.	Before	that,	Kansas	City."

Playing	it	recklessly.	Those	were	the	two	cities	exactly.	But	that's	what
made	this	so	exciting.	Playing	the	game	for	the	ultimate	risk.

Larry	 was	back	with	her	change.	"Here's	your	sixteen,"	he	said,	handing
her	three	fives	and	a	single.

"You	take	out	a	fourteen-inch	whanger	in	here,"	she	said,	"Larry'll	  want
twenty	percent	of	it."

"I	 never	yet	seen	nobody	with	a	fourteen-incher,"	Larry	said.

"You	been	looking?"	she	asked,	and	winked	at	Bobby	and	put	the	bills
into	her	handbag.	"What	 Larry	 does,	he	checks	out	the	men's	room	for
fourteen-inchers."

"This	soldier	is	in	the	men's	room	taking	a	shower,"	Bobby	said.	"All	 the

203
other	guys	in	his	company	hellip;"

"Is	this	another	one?"	Larry	  said.

"I	 thought	I	told	 you	not	to	interrupt	 my	stories,"	Bobby	said.

"Stories	like	yours	hellip;"

"Be	quiet,"	 he	said.

He	spoke	the	words	very	softly.

Larry	 looked	at	him.

"Do	you	understand?"	 he	said.	"When	I'm	telling	 a	story,	be	quiet."

Larry	 looked	into	his	eyes.

Then	he	shrugged	and	walked	to	the	other	end	of	the	bar.

"Serves	him	right,"	 Sheryl	said.	"Let	 me	hear	the	story,	Bobby."

"This	soldier	is	taking	 a	shower.	All	the	other	guys	in	his	company	are
crowded	around	the	stall,	looking	in	at	him,	craning	for	 a	look	at	him.
That's	because	the	guy	has	a	penis	that's	only	an	inch	long.	Finally,	the
guy	can't	take	it	anymore.	He	turns	to	them	and	yells,	'What's	the
matter?	You	never	seen	anybody	with	a	hard-on	before?'	"

Sheryl	burst	out	laughing	again.

From	the	other	end	of	the	bar,	Larry	grimaced	sourly,	and	said,	"Very
funny."

"So	which	one	are	you,	Bobby?"	Sheryl	asked.	"The	fourteen-incher	or
the	inch-long	wonder?"

"I	 thought	we	weren't	going	to	hurry,"	 he	said.

"Listen,	it's	 your	money,"	Sheryl	said.	"Take	all	the	time	you	need."

"I	 mean,	I	thought	we	were	having	fun	here,"	he	said.

204
"We	are,"	she	said.

"I	mean,	isn't	this	fun?"

"I	love	your	stories,	Bobby,"	she	said.

"You're	a	fun	girl,"	he	said.	"I	can	tell	that."

"That's	what	I've	been	told,	Bobby."

"I	mean,	I'll	bet	you	like	to	do	new	and	exciting	things,	don't	you?"

"Oh,	sure,"	she	said.	"I	even	did	it	with	a	police	dog	once."

"That's	not	what	I	meant.	I	meantnew	things.	Exciting	things.'

"Well,	to	me	that	was	new.	Six	guys	watching	while	I	did	it	with	a	police
dog?	That	was	new."

"It	may	have	been	new,	but	I'll	bet	it	wasn't	exciting,"	Bobby	said.

"Well,	I	have	to	admit,	when	the	dog	went	down	on	me	that	was	sort	of
exciting.	He	had	like	this	very	raspy	tongue,	you	know?	Like	sandpaper.	I
guess	you	could	say	that	was	sort	of	exciting.	I	mean,	once	you	got	past
the	idea	of	him	being	adog	,	which	was	disgusting,	of	course."

"Sheryl,"	he	said,	"I	think	you're	terrific,	I	really	do.	We're	going	to	have
a	lot	of	fun	together,	you'll	see."

"Oh,	I'm	sure."

"We're	going	to	do	some	new	and	very	exciting	things."

"I	can	hardly	wait,"	she	said.

"Lots	of	laughs,"	he	said.

"I	already	find	you	very	funny,"	she	said.

"This	midget	goes	into	a	men's	room,"	he	said.	"And	there's	a	guy
standing	there	at	one	of	the	hellip;"

205
This	second	party	was	even	better	than	the	first	one	had	been.

Parker	was	having	the	time	of	his	life.

At	the	first	party,	 he'd	got	drunk	enough	to	believe	he	was	really	a	writer
passing	himself	off	as	a	cop	who	only	wanted	to	be	a	writer.	At	this	party,
he	didn't	tell	anyone	he	was	a	cop	because	no	one	was	in	costume	here,	it
wasn't	that	kind	of	a	party.	But	 even	without	the	masquerade,	he	was
having	a	marvelous	time.	Maybe	because	there	were	all	sorts	of
interesting	people	here,	most	of	them	women.	Or	maybe	because	these
interesting	women	all	foundhim	interesting.

This	was	very	amazing	to	him.

He	thought	he	was	just	being	his	usual	shitty	self.

It	turned	out	 that	the	woman	whose	apartment	they	were	in	was
celebrating	her	sixty-third	 birthday	 tonight,	which	was	why	there	was	a
party	in	the	first	 place,	never	mind	Halloween.	Her	name	was	Sandra,
and	she	was	the	one	Peaches	had	been	expecting	a	call	from	earlier
tonight,	which	was	the	only	reason	she'd	answered	the	phone	after	that
heavy-breathing	creep	got	off	the	line.	Sandra	was	her	next-to-best
friend;	her	best	friend	was	the	woman	who'd	thrown	the	costume	party.
Still,	Peaches	liked	Sandra	a	lot,	especially	because	she	never	expected	a
present	on	her	birthday.	She	was	a	bit	surprised,	therefore,	and
somewhat	annoyed,	when	Parker	flatly	and	rudely	expressed	the	opinion
that	no	one	over	the	age	of	sixty	should	be	asked	to	blow	out	all	the
candles	on	a	birthday	cake	in	a	single	breath.	And	she	was	even	more
surprised	when	Sandra	burst	out	laughing	and	said,	"Oh,	baby,	how
true!	Who	the	hell	needs	such	a	humiliating	stress	test?"

Everyone	laughed.	Even	Peaches.

Sandra	then	blew	out	all	the	candles	in	a	single	breath,	and	pinched
Parker	on	the	behind	and	asked	him	if	he'd	like	the	candles	onhis	cake
blown.	"Out,"	 she	added.

Everyone	laughed.	Except	Peaches.

A	little	later	on,	encouraged	by	the	attention	a	lot	of	these	very	interesting
women	were	paying	to	ideas	he'd	never	even	known	he'd	had,	Parker
ventured	a	bit	closer	to	home	and	suggested	to	a	lady	trial	lawyer

206
thatanyone	committing	a	murder	was	at	least	a	little	bit	crazy	and	that
therefore	the	"legal	insanity"	 defense	was	meaningless.	The	lady	lawyer
said,	"That's	very	interesting,	Andy.	I	 had	a	case	last	week	where	hellip;"

It	was	astonishing.

Parker	said	to	a	woman	wearing	horn-rimmed	eyeglasses	and	no	bra	that
he	found	pornographic	movies	more	honest	than	any	of	the	nighttime
soaps	on	television,	and	the	woman	turned	out	to	be	a	film	critic	who
encouraged	him	to	expand	upon	the	idea.

Parker	told	a	woman	writer	 mdash;areal	writer	mdash;that	he	never
spent	more	than	five	pages	with	any	book	if	he	wasn't	hooked	by	then,
and	the	woman	expounded	upon	the	importance	of	a	book's	opening	and
closing	paragraphs,	to	which	Parker	said,	"Sure,	it's	like	foreplay	and
afterplay,"	and	the	woman	writer	 put	her	hand	on	his	arm	and	laughed
robustly,	which	Peaches	did	not	find	at	all	amusing.

Peaches,	in	fact,	was	becoming	more	and	more	irritated	by	the	fact	that
Sandra	had	invited	her	to	a	party	where	the	women	outnumbered	the
men	by	an	approximate	two-to-one	and	where	Parker	was	suddenly	the
center	of	all	this	female	attention.	She	had	liked	it	better	when	they	were
a	couple	pretending	to	be	a	cop	and	a	victim.	They	weresharing
something	then.	Now	Parker	seemed	to	be	stepping	out	on	his	own,	the
small-time	flamenco	dancer	who'd	been	offered	a	movie	contract
provided	he	ditched	his	fat	lady	partner.	This	miffed	Peaches	because	for
Christ's	sake	she	was	the	one	who'd	introduced	him	to	show	biz	in	the
first	place!

When	the	female	midget	walked	in	at	twenty-five	minutes	to	twelve,
Peaches	immediately	checked	out	the	man	with	her.	Burly	guy	going	a	bit
bald,	but	with	a	pleasant	craggy	face,	and	a	seemingly	gentle	manner.
Five-ten	or	-eleven,	she	guessed,	merry	blue	eyes,	nice	speaking	voice	now
that	she	heard	him	wishing	Sandra	a	happy	birthday.	Sandra	took	their
coats	and	wandered	off,	muttering	something	about	mingling.	Peaches
moved	in	fast	before	the	other	sharks	smelled	blood	on	the	water.	She
introduced	herself	to	the	man	and	the	midget	mdash;

"Hi,	 I'm	Peaches	Muldoon."

"Quentin	 Forbes.	Alice	hellip;"

207
mdash;and	then	took	the	man's	arm	before	he	could	finish	the	midget's
name,	and	said,	"Come	on,	I'll	get	you	a	drink,"	 and	sailed	off	with	him,
leaving	the	midget	standing	there	by	the	door	looking	forlornly	and	shyly
into	the	room.

Parker	had	never	seen	a	more	beautiful	woman	in	his	life.

He	went	over	to	her	at	once.

"Small	world,"	  he	said.

And	to	his	enormous	surprise	mdash;the	night	was	full	of	surprises
mdash;she	burst	out	laughing,	and	said,	"I	feel	like	a	fire	hydrant
waiting	for	an	engine	company.	Where's	the	bar?"

Hal	Willis	came	into	the	squadroom	at	twenty	minutes	to	midnight.	The
teams	usually	relieved	at	a	quarter	to	the	hour,	and	so	he	was	early
mdash;which	was	a	surprise.	Nowadays,	ever	since	he'd	taken	up	with
Marilyn	 Hollis,	he	was	invariably	late.	And	rumpled-looking.	 He	was
rumpled-looking	tonight,	 too,	giving	the	impression	of	a	man	who'd
leaped	out	of	bed	and	into	his	trousers	not	five	minutes	earlier.

"Getting	 a	bit	brisk	out	there,"	 he	said.

He	was	wearing	a	short	car	coat	over	slacks	and	a	sports	jacket,	no	tie,
the	top	button	of	his	shirt	unbuttoned.	At	 five-feet	eight-inches	tall,	he
was	the	shortest	man	on	the	squad	mdash;even	shorter	than	Fujiwara,
who	was	of	Japanese	descent	mdash;but	Willis	knew	judo	and	karate,
and	he'd	fooled	many	a	cheap	thief	who'd	figured	him	for	a	pushover.	He
took	off	the	coat	and	hung	it	on	the	coatrack,	glanced	idly	at	the	bulletin
board,	and	then	looked	at	the	duty	chart	to	see	who'd	be	sharing	the	shift
with	him.	He	moved	like	a	man	underwater	nowadays.	Kling	attributed
his	eternal	weariness	to	Marilyn	Hollis.	Eileen	said	Marilyn	 Hollis	was
poison.	Maybe	she	was	right.	Kling	looked	up	at	the	clock.

"Let	 me	fill	you	in,"	 he	said.

He	told	Willis	about	the	four	 teenagers	Genero	had	shot.

"Genero?"	Willis	 said,	amazed.

He	told	Willis	about	the	four	 midgets	who'd	held	up	a	series	of	liquor

208
stores.

"Midgets?"	 Willis	 said,	amazed.

He	told	Willis	that	 Carella	and	Meyer	had	taken	three	bullets	between
them	and	were	both	at	Buenavista	Hospital.

"You	going	over	there?"	Willis	 asked.

"Maybe	later.	I	 have	to	run	out	to	Calm's	Point."

He	looked	up	at	the	clock	again.

"Brown	 and	Hawes	caught	a	homicide,"	he	said,	"all	the	paperwork	is	on
Brown's	desk.	There's	a	picture	of	the	victim,	too,	a	magician.	They
found	him	in	four	 separate	pieces."

"Four	 pieces?"	Willis	said,	amazed.

"Here's	a	number	you	can	reach	them	at	in	Collinsworth,	case	anything
breaks.	They	got	an	all-points	out	on	a	guy	named	Jimmy	Brayne."

"Good	evening,	gentlemen,"	O'Brien	said	from	the	slatted	rail	 divider,
and	then	pushed	his	way	through	the	gate	into	the	squadroom.	"Winter's
on	the	way."	He	was	indeed	dressed	for	winter,	wearing	a	heavy	overcoat
and	a	muffler,	which	he	took	off	now	and	carried	to	the	coatrack.	Willis
wasn't	happy	to	be	partnered	with	O'Brien.	 O'Brien	was	a	hard-luck
cop.	You	went	on	a	call	with	O'Brien,	somebody	was	bound	to	get	shot.
This	wasn't	O'Brien's	fault.	 Some	cops	simply	attracted	the	lunatics	with
guns.	On	Christmas	Day,	not	too	long	ago	mdash;well,	not	too	long	ago
byprecinct	time,	where	sometimes	an	hour	seemed	an	eternity
mdash;O'Brien	and	Meyer	had	stopped	to	check	out	a	man	changing	a
flat	tire	on	a	moving	van.	A	moving	van?	Working	on	Christmas	Day?
The	man	turned	out	to	be	a	burglar	named	Michael	Addison,	who'd	just
cleaned	out	half	a	dozen	houses	in	Smoke	Rise.	Addison	shot	Meyer	twice
in	the	leg.	Brown	later	dubbed	the	burglar	Addison	and	Steal.	This	was
pretty	funny,	but	the	bullets	in	Meyer's	 leg	weren't.	Willis	mdash;and
everyone	else	on	the	squad	mdash;was	convinced	Meyer	had	got	himself
shot	only	because	he'd	been	partnered	with	O'Brien.	Still,	he'd	been	shot
again	tonight,	hadn't	he?	And	he'd	been	working	with	Carella.	Maybe	in
this	line	of	work,	there	were	bullets	waiting	out	there	with	 your	name	on
them.	In	any	event,	Willis	wished	O'Brien	was	home	in	bed,	instead	of

209
here	in	the	squadroom	with	him.

"Steve	and	Meyer	took	a	couple,	did	you	hear?"	he	said.

"What	 are	you	talking	about?"

"Some	midgets	shot	them,"	Kling	said.

"Come	on,	midgets,"	O'Brien	 said.

Kling	looked	up	at	the	clock	again.

"I'll	 be	checking	out	a	car,"	he	said	to	no	one.

"You	want	a	cup	of	coffee?"	O'Brien	 asked	Willis.

It	was	only	fifteen	minutes	before	the	beginning	of	All	Hallows'	Day.

In	the	Roman	Catholic	and	Anglican	churches,	the	first	day	of	November
is	a	feast	day	upon	which	the	church	glorifies	God	for	all	his	saints,
known	or	unknown.	The	word	"hallow"	  derives	from	the	Middle
Englishhalowen	,	further	derived	from	the	Old	 Englishhalgian	,	and	it
means	"to	make	or	set	apart	as	holy;	to	sanctify;	to	consecrate."	All
Hallows'	Day	and	Hallowmass	are	now	archaic	names	for	this	feast;
today	mdash;except	in	novels	mdash;it	is	called	All	Saints'	Day.	But	it
has	always	been	celebrated	on	the	first	day	of	November,	which	in	Celtic
times	was	coincidentally	the	first	day	of	winter,	a	time	of	pagan	witches
and	ghosts,	mummery	and	masquerade.	Wholly	Christian	in	origin,
however,	are	the	vigil	and	fasting	that	occur	on	the	day	before.

On	the	eve	of	All	Hallows'	Day,	a	Christian	and	a	Jew	kept	vigil	in	a
corridor	 of	the	Ernest	Atlas	Pavilion	on	the	fourth	floor	 of	Buenavista
Hospital.

The	Christian	was	Teddy	Carella.

The	Jew	was	Sarah	Meyer.

The	clock	on	the	corridor	wall	read	11:47	p.m.

Sarah	Meyer	had	brown	hair	and	blue	eyes	and	lips	her	husband	had
always	considered	sensual.

210
Teddy	Carella	had	black	hair	and	brown	eyes,	and	lips	that	could	not
speak,	for	she	had	been	born	deaf	and	mute.

Sarah	had	not	seen	the	inside	of	a	synagogue	for	more	years	than	she
cared	to	count.

Teddy	scarcely	knew	the	whereabouts	of	her	neighborhood	church.

But	both	women	were	silently	praying,	and	they	were	both	praying	for
the	same	man.

Sarah	knew	that	her	husband	was	out	of	danger.

It	was	Steve	Carella	who	was	still	in	surgery.

On	impulse,	she	took	Teddy's	hand	and	squeezed	it.

Neither	of	the	women	said	a	word	to	the	other.

Neither	of	the	women	said	a	word	to	the	other.

They	spotted	him	the	moment	they	came	back	into	the	bar.	Annie	knew
he	was	their	man.	So	did	Eileen.	They	headed	immediately	for	the	ladies'
room.

A	black	hooker	wearing	a	blonde	wig	was	standing	at	the	sink,	looking
into	the	mirror	 over	it,	touching	up	her	lipstick.	 She	was	a	woman	in	her
early	forties,	Eileen	guessed,	wearing	a	black	dress	and	a	short,	fake	fur
jacket,	going	a	bit	thick	in	the	middle	and	around	the	ankles.	Eileen	was
certain	she	had	just	come	in	off	the	meat	rack	on	the	street	outside.

"Getting	 chilly	out	there,	ain't	 it?"	 the	woman	said.

"Yeah,"	Annie	said.

"I'd	 park	 in	here	a	while,	but	Larry	 gets	twenty	percent."

"I	 know."

"My	 man	take	a	fit	I	give	away	twenty	percent	of	the	store."

211
There	was	a	knife	scar	across	the	bridge	of	her	nose.

She	must	have	been	pretty	once,	Eileen	thought.

"One	last	pee,"	she	said,	and	went	into	one	of	the	stalls.

Annie	lighted	a	cigarette.	They	chatted	idly	about	how	cold	it	was.	The
black	hooker	chimed	in	from	behind	the	closed	door	of	the	stall,
reporting	on	the	really	cold	weather	in	Buffalo,	New	York,	where	she
used	to	work	years	ago.	They	waited	for	her	to	flush	the	toilet.	They
waited	while	she	washed	her	hands	at	the	sink.

"Have	a	nice	night,"	 she	said,	and	was	gone.

"He's	our	man,	isn't	 he?"	Eileen	said	at	once.

"Looks	like	 him."

"Hitting	 on	the	wrong	hooker."

"You'd	better	move	in,"	 Annie	said.

"Sheryl	won't	 like	it."

"She'll	like	 a	slab	even	less."

"Will	 Shanahan	know	he's	here?"	Eileen	asked.

"He'll	 know,	don't	worry."

Eileen	nodded.

"You	ready	for	this?"	 Annie	asked.

"I'm	 ready."

"You	sure?"

"I'm	 sure."

Annie	searched	her	face.

212
"Because	if	you	hellip;"

"I'm	 ready,"	Eileen	said.

Annie	kept	searching	her	face.	Then	she	said,	"Let's	go	then,"	and	tossed
her	cigarette	into	one	of	the	toilet	bowls.

The	cigarette	expired	with	a	short	tired	hiss.

He	was	telling	another	joke	when	Eileen	took	the	stool	on	his	right.

Blond.	Six-two,	six-three.	Two	hundred	and	ten	easy.	Eyeglasses.	A	tattoo
near	his	right	thumb,	a	blue	heart	lined	in	red,	nothing	 in	it.

"	hellip;	 so	he	says	to	the	old	man,	'What's	the	matter?	Why	are	you
crying?'	The	old	man	just	keeps	sitting	there	on	the	park	bench,	crying
his	eyes	out.	Finally	he	says,	'A	year	ago,	I	married	this	beautiful	twenty-
six-year-old	girl.	I've	never	been	happier	in	my	life.	Before	breakfast	each
morning,	she	wakes	me	up	and	blows	me,	and	then	she	serves	me	bacon
and	eggs	and	toasted	English	muffins	and	piping	hot	coffee,	and	I	go
back	to	bed	and	rest	till	lunchtime.	Then	she	blows	me	again	before
lunch,	and	she	serves	me	a	hot,	delicious	lunch,	and	I	go	back	to	bed
again	and	rest	till	dinnertime.	And	 she	blows	me	again	before	dinner	and
serves	me	another	terrific	meal,	and	I	fall	asleep	until	morning	when	she
wakes	me	up	again	with	another	blowjob.	She's	the	most	wonderful
woman	I've	ever	met	in	my	life.'	The	guy	looks	at	him.	'Then	why	are	you
crying?'	he	asks.	And	the	old	man	says,	'I	forgot	where	Ilive	!'	"

Sheryl	burst	out	laughing.

Eileen	was	thinking	about	the	dead	hookers	he'd	had	in	stitches.

"This	guy's	marvelous,"	 Sheryl	said,	still	laughing,	leaning	over	to	talk
across	him.	"Linda,	say	hello	to	Bobby,	he's	marvelous."

"Hello,	Bobby,"	 Eileen	said.

Terrific	name	for	a	slasher,	she	thought.

"Well,	well,	well,	hello,	Linda,"	 he	said,	turning	 to	her.

"Me	and	Bobby's	running	 a	tab,"	Sheryl	said.	"Which	 by	the	way,	time's

213
almost	up."

"That	right?"	Eileen	said.

"Just	having	a	little	fun	here,"	Bobby	said.

"The	real	fun	comes	later,	honey,"	Sheryl	said.	"This	is	just	the	warm-
up."

"I	hear	redheads	are	a	lot	of	fun,"	Bobby	said.	"Is	that	true?"

"I	haven't	had	any	complaints,"	Eileen	said.

She	was	wondering	how	she	could	get	rid	of	Sheryl.	If	they	were	running
a	bar	tab	hellip;

"But	they	burn	in	the	sun,"	Bobby	said.

"Yeah,	I	have	to	watch	that."

"Just	don't	go	out	except	at	night,	that's	all,"	Sheryl	said.	"Listen,
Bobby,	I	hate	to	be	pushy,	but	your	time's	running	out.	You	said	twenty
bucks	for	twenty	minutes,	remember?"

"Uh-huh."

"So	take	a	look	at	the	clock.	You	got	about	a	minute	left."

"I	see	that."

"So	what	do	you	say?	We're	having	fun	here,	am	I	right?"

"Lots	of	fun."

"So	how	about	another	twenty,	take	us	into	Saturday?"

"Sounds	like	a	good	idea,"	he	said,	but	he	made	no	move	for	his	wallet.
Sheryl	figured	she	was	losing	him.

"Matter	of	fact,"	she	said,	"whyn't	you	put	Linda	on	the	tab,	too?"

"Thanks,	no,	I've	been	drinking	too	much	tonight,"	Eileen	said.

214
"This	ain't	 a	booze	tab,"	Sheryl	said.	"This	is	accounts	receivable.	What
do	you	say,	Bobby?	Lay	a	couple	of	twenties	on	the	bar	there,	you	buy
both	of	us	till	a	quarter	past.	Double	your	pleasure,	double	your	fun.	And
later	on,	you	still	interested,	we	do	a	triad."

"What's	 a	triad?"	 he	asked.

"I	 read	it	in	a	book.	It's	like	 a	two-on-one.	A	triad."

"I'm	 not	sure	I	could	handle	two	of	you,"	 he	said.

But	Eileen	could	see	the	sudden	spark	of	ambition	in	his	eyes.	Blue	to
match	the	blue	in	the	tattooed	heart	near	his	thumb.	Seriously
considering	the	possibility	now.	Take	themboth	outside,	slash	them	both,
maybe	go	for	a	third	one	later	on,	do	the	hat	trick	tonight.

She	didn't	want	a	civilian	getting	in	the	way.

She	had	to	get	rid	of	Sheryl.

"I	 don't	work	 doubles,"	she	said.

A	risk.

"How	come?"	Bobby	asked.

"Why	 should	I	share	this?"	she	said,	and	put	her	left	hand	on	his	thigh.
He	thought	she	was	going	for	the	meat.	She	was	frisking	him	for	the
knife.	Found	it,	too.	Outlined	in	 his	right-hand	pants	pocket,	felt	like	a
six-incher	at	least.	Maybe	eight.

A	shiver	ran	up	her	spine.

Sheryl	was	getting	nervous.	Her	eyes	flicked	up	to	the	clock	again.	The
twenty	minutes	were	gone,	and	she	didn't	see	another	twenty	bucks
coming	out	of	his	wallet.	She	was	afraid	she'd	already	lost	him.	So	she
tried	again,	appealing	not	tohim	now,	but	to	the	redheaded	hooker	sitting
on	his	right,	a	sorority	sister,	so	to	speak,	someone	who	knew	how	tough
it	was	to	earn	a	buck	in	a	dog-eat-dog	world.

"Change	your	mind,	Linda,"	  she	said.

215
There	was	something	almost	plaintive	in	her	voice.

"Come	on,	okay?	It'll	 be	fun."

"I	 think	Linda	 might	be	more	fun	alone,"	Bobby	said.

Eileen's	hand	was	still	on	his	thigh.	Off	the	knife	now,	like	finding	the
knife	was	an	accident.	Fingers	spread	toward	his	crotch.

Sheryl	looked	up	at	the	clock	again.

"Tell	you	what,"	 she	said.	"I'll	 make	it	only	ten	bucks	for	the	next	twenty
minutes,	how's	that?	We'll	sit	here,	I'll	 let	you	tell	me	some	more	of	your
jokes,	be	a	lot	of	fun,	what	do	you	say?"

A	last	desperate	try.

"I	 say	it's	up	to	Linda	here.	What	do	you	say,	Linda?"

"I	 told	you.	I	don't	 do	doubles."

Flat	out.	Get	rid	of	her.

"You	heard	her,"	he	said.

"Hey,	come	on,	what	kinda	hellip;	?"

"So	long,	Sheryl,"	he	said.

She	got	off	the	stool	at	once.

"You're	some	cunt,	you	know	that?"	she	said	to	Eileen,	and	turned	away
angrily	and	walked	toward	a	table	where	three	men	were	sitting	drinking
beer.	"Who	wants	me?"	she	said	angrily,	and	pulled	out	a	chair	and	sat.

"I	 hate	it	when	the	fun	goes	out	of	it,"	Bobby	said.

"We'll	 have	lots	of	fun,	don't	worry,"	 Eileen	whispered,	and	tightened
her	hand	on	his	thigh.	"You	want	to	get	out	of	here	this	minute?	I	get	ten
bucks	for	a	handjob	hellip;"

216
"No,	no,	let's	talk	a	while,	okay?"	 He	reached	into	his	right	hip	pocket,
pulled	out	his	wallet.	Big	killer,	she	thought,	keeps	his	wallet	in	the	sucker
pocket.	"Same	deal	as	with	Sheryl,	okay?	A	buck	a	minute,	here's	a
twenty"	mdash;reaching	into	the	wallet,	pulling	 out	a	bill,	looking	 up	at
the	clock	mdash;"we'll	see	how	it	goes,	okay?"

"What	 is	this?"	Eileen	asked.	"An	audition?"

"Well,	I'd	 like	to	get	to	know	you	a	little	 before	I	hellip;"

He	cut	himself	short.

"Before	you	what?"	 she	said.

"You	know,"	 he	said,	and	smiled,	and	lowered	his	voice.	"Do	it	to	you."

"What	 would	you	like	to	do	to	me,	Bobby?"

"New	and	exciting	things,"	 he	said.

She	looked	into	his	eyes.

Another	shiver	ran	up	her	back.

"You	cold?"	he	asked.

"A	little.	 The	weather's	changing	all	of	a	sudden."

"Here,"	 he	said.	"Take	my	jacket."

He	shrugged	out	of	the	jacket.	Tweed.	He	was	wearing	a	blue	flannel
shirt	under	it,	open	at	the	throat.	Blue	to	match	his	eyes	and	the	tattooed
heart	near	his	thumb.	He	draped	the	jacket	over	her	shoulders.	There
was	the	smell	of	death	on	the	jacket,	as	palpable	as	the	odor	of	smoke
hanging	on	the	air.	She	shivered	again.

"So	what	do	you	say?"	he	asked	her.	"A	buck	a	minute,	does	that	sound
all	right?"

"Sure,"	 she	said.

"Well,	good,"	 he	said,	and	handed	her	the	twenty-dollar	bill.

217
"Thanks,"	 she	said,	and	looked	up	at	the	clock.	"This	buys	you	till
twenty	past,"	she	said,	and	tucked	the	bill	into	her	bra.	She	didn't	want
to	open	her	bag.	She	didn't	want	to	risk	him	spotting	the	.44	in	her	bag,
under	the	silk	scarf.	She	was	going	to	blow	his	brains	out	with	that	gun.

"Nothing	 for	our	friendly	 barkeep?"	he	asked.

"Huh?"

"I	 thought	he	got	twenty	percent."

"Oh.	No,	we	have	an	arrangement."

"Well,	good.	I'd	 hate	to	think	you	were	cheating	him.	You	don't	cheat
people,	do	you,	Linda?"

"I	 try	to	give	good	value,"	she	said.

"Good.	'Cause	you	promised	me	a	lot	of	fun,	didn't	you?"

"Show	you	a	real	good	time,"	she	said,	and	nodded.

Across	the	room,	Annie	was	in	conversation	with	the	frizzied	brunette
who'd	earlier	partnered	with	 Sheryl.	The	place	was	beginning	to	thin	out
a	bit.	There'd	be	a	new	shift	coming	in,	Eileen	guessed,	the	morning
people,	the	denizens	of	the	empty	hours.	He'd	paid	for	twenty	minutes	of
her	time,	but	he'd	dumped	Sheryl	without	a	backward	glance,	and	she
couldn't	risk	 losing	him	to	any	of	the	other	girls	here.	Twenty	minutes
unless	he	laid	another	bill	on	the	bar.	Twenty	minutes	to	get	him	outside
on	the	street,	where	he'd	moved	on	the	other	three	women.	Show	him	a
real	good	time,	all	right.	Punish	him	for	what	 he'd	done.	Make	him	pay
for	the	three	women	he'd	killed.	Make	him	pay,	too,	for	what	a	man
named	Arthur	Haines	had	done	to	her	face	hellip;	and	her	body	hellip;
and	her	spirit.

"So	where	are	all	the	jokes?"	she	asked.

"Jokes?"

"Sheryl	said	you're	full	 of	jokes."

218
"No,	Sheryl	didn't	say	that."

"I	thought	she	said	hellip;"

"I'm	sure	she	didn't."

A	mistake?	No.	Back	off	a	bit,	anyway.

"She	said	she'd	settle	for	ten	bucks,	sit	here	with	you,	let	you	tell	her
some	more	jokes	hellip;"

"Oh.	Yeah."

"So	let	me	hear	one."

"I'd	 rather	talk	about	you	right	now."

"Sure,"	Eileen	said.

"	'Cause	I	find	that	fun,	you	know.	Learning	about	other	people,	finding
out	what	makes	them	tick."

"You	sound	like	a	shrink,"	she	said.

"Well,	my	father's	a	shrink."

"Really?"

"Yeah.	Practices	in	L.A.	Lots	of	customers	out	there.	You	know	what
L.A.	stands	for?"

"What?"

"Lunatic	Asylum."

"I've	never	been	there,	so	I	wouldn't	hellip;"

"Take	my	word	for	it.	Every	variety	of	nut	in	the	mdash;do	you	know	the
one	about	the	guy	who	goes	into	a	nut	shop?"

"No."

219
"He	stutters	badly,	he	says	to	the	clerk,	'I'd	I-I-like	 to	b-b-buy	a	p-p-
pound	of	n-n-nuts.'	The	clerk	says,	'Yes,	sir,	we	have	some	very	nice
Brazil	nuts	at	three	dollars	a	pound.'	The	guy	says,	'N-n-no,	that's	t-t-too
high.'	So	the	clerk	says,	'I've	also	got	some	nice	almonds	at	two	dollars	a
pound.'	The	guy	says,	'N-n-no,	that's	t-t-too	high,	t-t-too.'	So	the	clerk
says,	'I've	got	some	peanuts	at	a	dollar	a	pound,'	and	the	guys	says,	'F-f-
fine.'	The	clerk	weighs	out	the	peanuts,	puts	them	in	a	bag,	and	the	guy
pays	for	them.	The	guy	says,	'Th-thank	you,	and	I	also	w-w-want	to	th-
thank	you	for	n-n-not	m-m-mentioning	 m-m-my	im-p-p-pedi-ment.'	 The
clerk	says,	'That's	quite	all	right,	 sir,	and	I	want	to	thank	you	for	not
mentioning	my	deformity.'	 The	guy	says,	'Wh-what	d-d-deformity?'	The
clerk	says,	'Well,	I	have	a	very	large	nose.'	The	guy	says,	'Oh,	is	that	your
n-n-nose?	Your	n-n-nuts	are	so	high,	I	th-thought	it	was	your	p-p-
pecker.'"

Eileen	burst	out	laughing.

The	laughter	was	genuine.

For	the	briefest	tick	of	time	she	forgot	that	she	was	sitting	here	at	the	bar
with	a	man	she	felt	reasonably	certain	had	killed	three	women	and	would
do	his	best	to	kill	her	as	well	if	she	gave	him	the	slightest	opportunity.

The	laughter	surprised	her.

She	had	not	laughed	this	heartily	in	a	long	time.	She	had	not	laughed
since	the	night	Arthur	Haines	slashed	her	cheek	and	forced	himself	upon
her.

She	could	not	stop	laughing.

She	wondered	all	at	once	if	the	laughter	was	merely	a	release	of	nervous
tension.

But	she	kept	laughing.

Tears	were	rolling	down	her	cheeks.

She	reached	into	her	bag	for	a	tissue,	felt	under	the	silk	scarf,	touched	the
butt	of	the	.44,	and	suddenly	the	laughter	stopped.

Dabbing	at	her	eyes,	she	said,	"That	was	very	funny."

220
"I'm	 going	to	enjoy	you,"	he	said,	smiling,	looking	into	her	eyes.	"You're
going	to	be	a	good	one."





CHAPTER	        11

Alice	was	telling	him	that	a	lot	of	men	got	turned	on	by	midgets,	did	he
realize	that?

Parker	realized	it.	She	was	a	perfect	little	doll,	blonde	hair	and	blue	eyes,
beautifully	formed	breasts	and	well-shaped	legs.	She	was	wearing	a	green
dress	that	hugged	the	womanly	curves	of	her	body,	legs	crossed,	one	foot
jiggling	in	a	high-heeled	green	slipper.

He	said,	"I	read	a	lot	of	these	men's	magazines,	you	know	hellip;"

"Uh-huh,"	 she	said,	nodding	encouragement.	Drink	in	her	right	hand,
cigarette	in	her	left.

"And	 there's	all	sorts'	of	letters	from	men	who	get	turned	on	by	all	sorts
of	women."

"Uh-huh."

"Like,	 for	example,	there	are	many	men	who	are	sexually	attracted	to
women	with	back	problems."

"Back	problems?"	 Alice	said.

"Yes.	Women	who	wear	braces."

"I	 see,"	she	said.

"And	 there	are	men	who	enjoy	one-armed	women."

"Uh-huh."

"Or	 even	double	amputees."

221
"Uh-huh."

"Or	women	who	are	color	blind."

"Color	blind,	right."

"But	I've	never	seen	any	letters	from	men	who	findmidgets	sexually
attractive.	I	wonder	why.	I	mean,	I	findyou	very	attractive,	Alice."

"Well,	thank	you,"	she	said.	"But	that's	what	I	was	saying.	Alot	of	men
get	turned	on	by	midgets."

"I	can	understand	that."

"It's	what's	called	the	Snow	White	Syndrome."

"Is	that	what	it's	called?"

"Yes,	because	she	was	living	with	those	seven	dwarfs,	you	know."

"That's	right,	I	never	thought	of	that.	I	mean,	if	you	look	at	it	that	way,	it
could	be	a	dirty	story,	couldn't	it?"

"Well,	sure.	Not	that	dwarfs	are	midgets."

"No,	no.	Theyaren't	?"

"No.	Midgets	are	perfectly	proportioned	little	people."

"You	certainly	are	perfectly	proportioned,	Alice."

"Well,	thank	you.	But	my	point	is,	with	so	many	men	being	attracted	to
female	midgets	hellip;"

"Uh-huh."

"You	think	you'd	see	midgets	in	ads	and	all."

"I	never	thought	of	it	that	way."

"I	mean,	wouldn't	you	like	to	see	me	modeling	lingerie,	for	example?"

222
"Oh,	I	would."

"But	instead,	if	you're	a	midget,	you	have	to	join	a	circus."

"I	never	thought	of	it	that	way,"	he	said	again.

"Have	you	ever	seen	a	midget	working	as	a	clerk	in	a	department	store?"

"Never,"	he	said.

"Do	you	know	why?"

"Because	you	can't	see	over	the	counter?"

"Well,	that's	one	reason,	of	course.	But	the	main	reason	is	there's	a
lingering	prejudice	against	little	people."

"I'll	 bet	there	is."

"Short	has	become	a	dirty	word,"	Alice	said.	"Have	you	ever	seen	a	short
movie	star?"

"Well,	Al	Pacino	is	short."

"On	my	block,	Al	Pacino	is	agiant	,"	she	said,	and	giggled.

Parker	loved	the	way	she	giggled.

"Have	you	ever	seen	a	movie	where	there	are	midgets	makinglove	?"	she
asked.

"Never."

"Wedo	make	love,	you	know."

"Oh,	I'll	bet."

"Have	you	ever	seen	a	midget	fireman?	Or	a	midget	cop?"

He	had	not	yet	told	her	he	was	a	cop.	He	wondered	if	he	should	tell	her	he
was	a	cop.

223
"Well,	they	changed	the	requirements,	you	know,"	he	said.

"What	requirements?"

"The	height	requirements.	It	used	to	be	five-eight."

"So	what	is	it	now?"

"You	can	be	any	height.	I	know	cops	you	can	fit	them	in	your	vest
pocket."

"You	mean	a	midget	can	become	a	cop?"

"Well,	I	don't	know	aboutmidgets.	But	I	guess	hellip;"

"Because	I	can	shoot	a	gun	as	good	as	anybody	else,	you	know.	I	used	to
do	an	Annie	Oakley	act	in	the	circus.	Little	Annie	Oakley,	they	called	me.
That	was	before	I	got	to	be	Tiny	Alice."

"Youare	tiny,"	he	said.	"That's	one	of	the	things	I	find	very	sexually
attractive	about	you."

"Well,	thank	you.	But	what	I'm	asking,	if	I	applied	to	the	police
department	hellip;	to	become	a	woman	cop,	you	know	hellip;	would	they
accept	me?	Or	would	they	thinkshort?	Do	you	see	what	I	mean?"

"I	don't	think	of	you	as	short,"	Parker	said.

"Oh,	I'm	short,	all	right."

"I	think	of	you	as	delicate."

"Well,	thank	you.	There's	this	man	Hans,	he's	one	of	the	Flying
Dutchmen,	an	aerial	act,	you	know?"

"Uh-huh."

"He	wrote	me	this	very	hot	love	letter,	I	memorized	it.	What	made	me
think	of	it	was	your	use	of	the	word	delicate."

"Well,	you	are	delicate."

224
"Thank	 you.	Would	you	like	to	hear	the	letter?"

"Well	hellip;	 sure,"	Parker	 said,	and	glanced	over	his	shoulder	to	see
where	Peaches	was.	She	was	nowhere	in	sight.	"Go	ahead,"	he	said.

"He	said	he	wanted	to	disrobe	me."

"Take	off	your	clothes,	you	mean."

"Yes.	He	said	he	wanted	to	discard	my	dainty	delicate	under	things
hellip;	that's	what	made	me	think	of	it,	 delicate."

"Yes,	I	see."

"And	 pat	my	pubescent	peaks	hellip;	this	is	him	talking	now,	in	the
letter."

"Yes."

"And	 probe	my	pithy	pussy,	and	manipulate	my	miniature	mons	veneris
and	Lilliputian	 labiae	hellip;"

"Uh-huh."

"And	 caress	my	compact	clitoris	and	crisp	pauciloquent	pubic	patch.
That	was	the	letter."

"From	 one	of	the	Flying	Dutchmen,	huh?"

"Yes."

"He	speaks	good	English."

"Oh,	yes."

"That	 isn't	the	guy	you're	with	tonight,	 is	it?	The	guy	you	came	in	with?"

"No,	no.	That's	Quentin."

"He's	not	one	of	the	Flying	Dutchmen,	huh?"

"No,	he's	a	clown."

225
"Oh."

"A	very	good	one,	too."

"So	how	long	have	you	been	in	town?	I	didn't	even	know	the	circus	was
here,	I'll	tell	you	the	truth."

"Well,	we're	not	here.	We	won't	be	here	till	the	spring	sometime.	We	go
down	to	Florida	next	month	to	start	rehearsing	the	new	season."

"Oh,	so	you're	just	visiting	then,	is	that	it?"

"Yeah,	sort	of."

"You're	not	married	or	anything,	are	you?"

"No,	no.	No,	no,	no,	no,	no."

Shaking	her	head	like	a	little	doll.

"How	long	will	you	be	in	town?"

"Oh,	I	don't	know.	Why?"

"I	thought	we	might	get	together,"	Parker	said,	and	shrugged.

"How	about	the	big	redhead	you're	with?"

"Peaches?	She's	just	a	friend."

"Uh-huh."

"Really.	I	hardly	know	her.	Alice,	I've	got	to	tell	you,	I've	never	met	a
woman	as	delicate	and	as	attractive	as	you	are,	I	mean	it.	I'd	really	like	to
get	together	with	you."

"Well,	why	don't	you	give	me	a	call?"

"I'd	 like	that,"	he	said,	and	took	his	pad	from	his	pocket.

"That'ssome	notebook,"	she	said.	"It's	bigger	than	I	am."

226
"Well,	you	know,"	 he	said,	and	wondered	again	if	he	should	tell	her	he
was	a	cop.	Lots	of	women,	you	told	them	you	were	a	cop,	it	turned	them
off.	They	figured	all	cops	were	on	the	take,	all	cops	were	crooks.	Just
because	every	now	and	then	you	accepted	a	little	gift	from	somebody.	"So
where	can	I	reach	you?'	he	said.

"We're	staying	at	Quentin's	apartment.	 The	four	of	us."

"Who's	the	four	 of	us?	Not	the	Flying	Dutchmen,	I	hope."

"No,	no,	they	went	back	to	Germany,	they'll	be	joining	us	in	Florida."

"So	who's	the	four	of	you?"

"Willie	 and	Corky	hellip;	 they're	married	 hellip;	 and	Oliver	and	me	And
of	course	Quentin,	whose	apartment	it	is.	Quentin	Forbes."

"What's	 the	address?"	Parker	asked.

"Four-oh-three	Thompson	Street."

"Downtown	in	 the	Quarter,"	 he	said,	nodding.	"The	Twelfth."

"Huh?"

He	wondered	if	he	should	explain	to	her	that	in	this	city	you	didn't	call
the	Twelfth	the	"One-Two."	 Any	precinct	from	 the	First	to	the	Twentieth
was	called	by	its	full	and	proper	designation.	After	that,	it	became	the
Two-One,	the	Three-Four,	the	Eight-Seven,	and	so	on.	But	that	would
have	meant	telling	her	he	was	a	cop,	and	he	didn't	want	to	chance	losing
her.

"What's	 the	phone	number	there?"	he	asked.

"Three-four-eight	 hellip;"

"Excuseme."

Voice	as	cold	as	the	second	day	of	February,	hands	on	her	hips,	green
eyes	blazing.

227
"I'd	 like	to	go	home	now,"	Peaches	said.	"Did	you	plan	on	accompanying
me?	Or	are	you	going	to	play	house	all	night?"

"Uh	hellip;	 sure,"	Parker	 said,	and	got	to	his	feet.	"Nice	meeting	you,"
he	said	to	Alice.

"It's	 in	the	book,"	 Alice	said,	and	smiled	up	sweetly	at	Peaches.

Peaches	tried	to	think	of	a	scathing	midget	remark,	but	nothing	came	to
mind.

She	turned	and	started	for	the	door.

"I'll	 call	 you,"	Parker	whispered,	and	ran	out	after	 her.

The	house	was	a	white	clapboard	building	with	a	white	picket	fence
around	it.	A	matching	white	clapboard	garage	stood	some	twenty	feet
from	the	main	structure.	Both	buildings	 were	on	a	street	with	only	three
other	houses	on	it,	not	too	far	from	the	turnpike.	It	 was	two	minutes	past
midnight	when	they	reached	the	house.	The	first	day	of	November.	The
beginning	of	the	Celtic	winter.	As	if	in	accordance,	the	weather	had
turned	very	cold.	As	they	pulled	into	the	driveway,	Brown	remarked	 that
all	they	needed	was	snow,	the	turnpike	would	be	backed	up	all	the	way	to
Siberia.

There	were	no	lights	burning	on	the	ground	floor	of	the	house.	Two
lighted	windows	showed	on	the	second	story.	The	men	were
inappropriately	 dressed	for	the	sudden	cold.	Their	breaths	plumed	from
their	mouths	as	they	walked	to	the	front	door.	Hawes	rang	the	doorbell.

"Probably	 getting	ready	for	bed,"	he	said.

"You	wish,"	 Brown	said.

They	waited.

"Give	it	 another	shot,"	Brown	said.

Hawes	hit	the	bell	button	again.

Lights	snapped	on	downstairs.

228
"Who	is	it?"

Marie's	voice,	just	inside	the	door.	A	trifle	alarmed.	Well,	sure,	midnight
already.

"It's	 Detective	Hawes,"	he	said.

"Oh."

"Sorry	 to	bother	you	so	late."

"No,	that's	all	 hellip;	just	a	minute,	please."

She	fumbled	with	the	lock,	and	then	opened	the	door.	Shehad	been
getting	ready	for	bed.	She	was	wearing	a	long	blue	robe.	Laced	ruff	of	a
nightgown	showing	in	the	V-necked	opening.	No	slippers.

"Have	you	found	him?"	 she	asked	at	once.

Referring	to	Jimmy	Brayne,	of	course.

"No,	ma'am,	not	yet,"	 Brown	said.	"Okay	 for	us	to	come	in?"

"Yes,	please,"	she	said,	"excuse	me,"	and	stepped	back	to	let	them	in.

Small	entryway,	a	sense	of	near-shabbiness.	Worn	carpeting,	scarred	and
rickety	piece	of	furniture	 under	a	flaking	mirror.

"I	 thought	hellip;	when	you	told	me	who	you	were	hellip;	I	thought	 you'd
found	Jimmy,"	 she	said.

"Not	yet,	Mrs.	 Sebastiani,"	Hawes	said.	"In	fact,	the	reason	we	came	out
here	hellip;"

"Come	in,"	 she	said,	"we	don't	have	to	stand	here	in	the	hall."

She	backed	off	several	paces,	reached	beyond	the	door	jamb	for	a	light
switch.	A	floor	lamp	came	on	in	the	living	room.	Musty	drapes,	a	faded
rug,	a	thrift-shop	sofa	and	two	upholstered	armchairs,	an	old	upright
piano	on	the	far	wall.	Same	sense	of	down-at-the-heels	existence.

"Would	you	like	 some	coffee	or	anything?"	she	asked.

229
"I	 could	use	a	cup,"	Brown	said.

"I'll	 put	 some	up,"	she	said,	and	walked	back	through	the	hall	and
through	a	doorway	into	the	kitchen.

The	detectives	looked	around	the	living	room.

Framed	photographs	on	the	piano,	Sebastian	the	Great	doing	his	act
hither	and	yon.	Soiled	antimacassars	on	the	upholstered	pieces.	Brown
ran	his	finger	over	the	surface	of	an	end	table.	Dust.	Hawes	poked	his
forefinger	into	the	soil	of	a	potted	plant.	Dry.	The	continuing	sense	of	a
house	too	run	down	to	care	about	mdash;or	a	house	in	neglect	because	it
would	soon	be	abandoned.

She	was	back.

"Take	a	few	minutes	to	boil,"	she	said.

"Who	plays	piano?"	 Hawes	asked.

"Frank	 did.	A	little."

She'd	grown	used	to	the	past	tense.

Mrs.	Sebastiani,"	Brown	said,	"we	were	wondering	if	 we	could	take	a
look	at	Brayne's	room."

"Jimmy's	 room?"	she	said.	She	seemed	a	bit	flustered	by	their	presence,
but	that	could	have	been	normal,	two	cops	showing	on	her	doorstep	at
midnight.

"See	if	there's	anything	up	there	might	give	us	a	lead,"	Brown	said,
watching	her.

"I'll	 have	to	find	a	spare	key	someplace,"	she	said.	"Jimmy	had	his	own
key,	he	came	and	went	as	he	pleased."

She	stood	stock	still	in	the	entrance	door	to	the	living	room,	a	thoughtful
look	on	her	face.	Hawes	wondered	what	she	was	thinking,	face	all
screwed	up	like	that.	Was	she	wondering	whether	it	was	safe	to	show
them	that	room?	Or	was	she	merely	trying	to	remember	where	the	spare

230
key	was?

"I'm	 trying	 to	think	 where	Frank	might	have	put	it,"	 she	said.

A	grandfather	clock	on	the	far	side	of	the	room	began	tolling	the	hour,
eight	minutes	late.

One	hellip;	two	hellip;

They	listened	to	the	heavy	bonging.

Nine	hellip;	ten	hellip;	eleven	hellip;	twelve.

"Midnight	 already,"	 she	said,	and	sighed.

"Your	clock's	slow,"	Brown	 said.

"Let	 me	check	the	drawer	in	the	kitchen,"	she	said.	"Frank	used	to	put	a
lot	of	junk	in	 that	drawer."

Past	tense	again.

They	followed	her	into	the	kitchen.	Dirty	 dishes,	pots,	and	pans	stacked
in	the	sink.	The	door	of	the	refrigerator	smudged	with	handprints.
Telephone	on	the	wall	near	it.	Small	enamel-topped	table,	two	chairs.
Worn	linoleum.	Only	a	shade	on	the	single	window	over	the	sink.	On	the
stove,	the	kettle	began	whistling.

"Help	yourselves,"	she	said.	"There's	cups	there,	and	a	jar	of	instant."

She	went	to	a	drawer	in	the	counter,	opened	it.	Hawes	spooned	instant
coffee	into	each	of	the	cups,	poured	hot	water	into	them.	She	was	busy	at
the	drawer	now,	searching	for	the	spare	key.	"There	should	be	some	milk
in	the	fridge,"	 she	said.	"And	there's	sugar	on	the	counter	there."	Hawes
opened	the	refrigerator.	Not	much	in	it.	Carton	of	low-fat	 milk,	slab	of
margarine	or	butter,	several	containers	of	yogurt.	He	closed	the	door.

"You	want	some	of	this?"	he	asked	Brown,	extending	the	carton	to	him.

Brown	shook	his	head.	He	was	watching	Marie	going	through	the	drawer
full	of	junk.

231
"Sugar?"	 Hawes	asked,	pouring	milk	into	his	own	cup.

Brown	shook	his	head	again.

"This	may	be	it,	I	 really	don't	know,"	 Marie	 said.

She	turned	from	the	drawer,	handed	Brown	a	brass	key	that	looked	like	a
house	key.

The	telephone	rang.

She	was	visibly	startled	by	its	sound.

Brown	picked	up	his	coffee	cup,	began	sipping	at	it.

The	telephone	kept	ringing.

She	went	to	the	wall	near	the	refrigerator,	lifted	the	receiver	from	its
hook.

"Hello?"	 she	said.

The	two	detectives	watched	her.

"Oh,	hello,	Dolores,"	she	said	at	once.	"No,	not	yet,	I'm	down	in	the
kitchen,"	she	said,	and	listened.	"There	are	two	detectives	with	me,"	she
said.	"No,	that's	all	right,	 Dolores."	She	listened	again.	"They	want	to
look	at	the	garage	room."	Listening	again.	"I	 don't	know	yet,"	 she	said.
"Well,	they	hellip;	 they	have	to	do	an	autopsy	first."	More	listening.
"Yes,	I'll	let	you	know.	Thanks	for	 calling,	Dolores."

She	put	the	receiver	back	on	its	hook.

"My	 sister-in-law,"	she	said.

"Taking	it	 hard,	I'll	 bet,"	 Hawes	said.

"They	were	very	close."

"Let's	 check	out	that	room,"	Brown	 said	to	Hawes.

"I'll	 come	over	with	you,"	 Marie	said.

232
"No	need,"	Brown	said,	"it's	 getting	cold	outside."

She	looked	at	him.	She	seemed	about	to	say	something	more.	Then	she
merely	nodded.

"Better	get	a	light	from	 the	car,"	Hawes	said.

Marie	watched	them	as	they	went	out	the	door	and	made	their	way	in	the
dark	to	where	they'd	parked	their	 car.	Car	door	opening,	interior	light
snapping	on.	Door	closing	again.	A	moment	later,	a	flashlight	came	on.
She	watched	them	as	they	walked	up	the	driveway	to	the	garage,	pool	of
light	ahead	of	them.	They	began	climbing	the	steps	at	the	side	of	the
building.	Flashlight	beam	on	the	door	now.	Unlocking	the	door.	Should
she	have	given	them	the	key?	Opening	the	door.	The	black	cop	reached
into	the	room.	A	moment	of	fumbling	for	 the	wall	switch,	and	then	the
light	snapped	on,	and	they	both	went	inside	and	closed	the	door	behind
them.

The	bullet	had	entered	Carella's	chest	on	the	right	side	of	the	body,
piercing	the	pectoralis	major	muscle,	deflecting	off	the	rib	cage	and
missing	the	lung,	passing	through	the	soft	tissue	at	the	back	of	the	chest,
and	then	twisting	again	to	lodge	in	one	of	the	articulated	bones	in	the
spinal	column.

The	X	rays	showed	the	bullet	dangerously	close	to	the	spinal	cord	itself.

In	fact,	if	it	 had	come	to	rest	a	micrometer	further	to	the	left,	it	would
have	traumatized	the	cord	and	caused	paralysis.

The	surgical	procedure	was	a	tricky	one	in	that	the	danger	of	necrosis	of
the	cord	was	still	present,	either	through	mechanical	trauma	or	a
compromise	of	the	arterial	supply	of	blood	to	the	cord.	Carella	had	bled	a
lot,	and	there	was	the	further	attendant	danger	of	his	going	into	heart
failure	or	shock.

The	team	of	surgeons	mdash;a	thoracic	surgeon,	a	neurosurgeon,	his
assistant,	and	two	residents	mdash;had	decided	on	a	posterolateral
approach,	going	in	through	the	back	rather	than	entering	the	chest
cavity,	where	there	might	be	a	greater	chance	of	infection	and	the
possibility	of	injury	 to	one	of	the	lungs.	The	neurosurgeon	was	the	man
who	made	the	incisions.	The	thoracic	surgeon	was	standing	by	in	the

233
event	they	had	to	open	the	chest	after	all.	There	were	also	two	scrub
nurses,	a	circulating	nurse,	and	an	anesthesiologist	in	the	room.	With	the
exception	of	the	circulating	nurse	and	the	anesthesiologist,	everyone	was
fully	gowned	and	gloved.	Alongside	the	operating	table,	machines
monitored	Carella's	pulse	and	blood	pressure.	A	Swan-Ganz	catheter	was
in	place,	monitoring	the	pressure	in	the	pulmonary	artery.	Oscilloscopes
flashed	green.	Beeps	punctuated	the	sterile	silence	of	the	room.

The	bullet	was	firmly	seated	in	the	spinal	column.

Very	close	to	the	spinal	cord	and	the	radicular	arteries.

It	was	like	operating	inside	a	matchbox.

The	River	Dix	had	begun	silting	over	during	the	heavy	September	rains,
and	the	city	had	awarded	the	dredging	contract	to	a	private	company
that	started	work	on	the	fifteenth	of	 October.	Because	there	was	heavy
traffic	on	the	river	 during	the	daylight	 hours,	the	men	working	the
barges	started	as	soon	as	it	was	dark	and	continued	on	through	until	just
before	dawn.	Generator-powered	lights	set	up	on	the	barges	illuminated
the	bucketsful	of	river	slime	scooped	up	from	the	bottom.	Before	tonight,
the	men	doing	the	dredging	had	been	grateful	for	the	unusually	mild
weather.	Tonight,	it	was	no	fun	standing	out	here	in	the	cold,	watching
the	bucket	drop	into	the	black	water	and	come	up	again	dripping	all
kinds	of	shit.

People	threw	everything	in	this	river.

Good	thing	Billy	Joe	McAllister	 didn't	 live	in	this	city;	 he'd	have	maybe
thrown	a	dead	baby	in	the	river.

The	bucket	came	up	again.

Barney	Hanks	watched	it	swinging	in	wide	over	the	water,	and	signaled
with	his	hand,	directing	it	 in	over	the	center	of	the	disposal	barge.	Pete
Masters,	sitting	in	the	cab	of	the	diesel-powered	dredge	on	the	other
barge,	worked	his	clutches	and	levers,	tilting	the	bucket	to	drop	another
yard	and	a	half,	two	yards	of	silt	and	shit.	Hanks	jerked	his	thumb	 up,
signaling	to	Masters	that	the	bucket	was	empty	and	it	was	okay	to	cast
the	dragline	out	over	the	river	again.	In	the	cab,	Masters	yanked	some
more	levers	and	the	bucket	swung	out	over	the	side	of	the	barge.

234
Something	metallic	was	glistening	on	the	surface	of	the	muck	in	the
disposal	barge.

Hanks	signaled	to	Masters	to	cut	the	engine.

"What	 is	it?"	Masters	shouted.

"We	got	ourselves	a	treasure	chest,"	Hanks	yelled.

Masters	cut	his	engine,	climbed	down	from	the	cab,	and	walked	across
the	deck	toward	the	other	barge.

"Time	for	 a	coffee	break,	anyway,"	he	said.	"What	do	you	mean	a
treasure	chest?"

"Throw	 me	that	grappling	hook,"	 Hanks	said.

Masters	threw	the	hook	and	line	to	him.

Hanks	tossed	the	hook	at	what	appeared	to	be	one	of	those	aluminum
cases	you	carried	roller	skates	in,	except	that	it	was	bigger	all	around.
The	case	was	half-submerged	in	slime,	it	took	Hanks	five	tosses	to	snag
the	handle.	He	pulled	in	the	line,	freed	the	hook,	and	put	the	case	down
on	the	deck.

Masters	watched	him	from	the	other	barge.

Hanks	tried	the	catches	on	the	case.

"No	lock	on	it,"	 he	said,	and	opened	the	lid.

He	was	looking	at	a	head	and	a	pair	of	hands.

Kling	arrived	 in	the	Canal	Zone	at	thirteen	minutes	past	midnight.

He	parked	the	car	on	Canalside	and	Solomon,	locked	it,	and	began
walking	up	toward	Fairview.	 Eileen	had	told	him	they'd	be	planting	her
in	a	joint	called	Larry's	 Bar,	on	Fairview	and	East	Fourth.	This	 side	of
the	river,	the	city	got	all	turned	around.	What	 could	have	been	North
Fourth	in	home	territory	 was	East	Fourth	here,	go	figure	it.	Like	two
different	countries,	the	opposite	sides	of	the	river.	They	even	spoke
English	funny	over	here.

235
Larry's	 Bar.

Where	the	killer	had	picked	up	his	three	previous	victims.

Kling	planned	on	casing	it	from	the	outside,	just	to	make	sure	he	was	still
in	there.	Then	he'd	fade	out,	cover	the	place	from	a	safe	vantage	point	on
the	street.	Didn't	want	Eileen	to	know	he	was	on	the	scene.	First	off,	she'd
throw	a	fit,	and	next	she	might	spook,	blow	her	own	cover.	All	he	wanted
was	to	be	around	in	case	she	needed	him.

He	had	put	on	an	old	pea	jacket	he	kept	in	his	locker	for	unexpected
changes	of	weather	like	the	one	tonight.	He	was	hatless	and	he	wasn't
wearing	gloves.	If	he	needed	to	pull	the	piece,	he	didn't	want	gloves
getting	in	the	way.	Navy-blue	pea	jacket,	blue	jeans	mdash;too
lightweight,	really,	for	the	sudden	chill	mdash;blue	socks	and	black
loafers.	And	a	.38	Detective	Special	in	a	holster	at	his	waist.	Left	hand
side.	Two	middle	buttons	of	the	jacket	unbuttoned	for	an	easy	reach-in
and	cross-body	draw.

He	came	up	Canalside.

The	Beef	Trust	was	out	in	force,	despite	the	cold.

Girls	huddled	under	the	lamp	posts	as	though	the	overhead	lights
afforded	some	warmth,	most	of	them	wearing	only	short	skirts	and
sweaters	or	blouses,	scant	protection	against	the	cold.	A	lucky	few	were
wearing	coats	provided	by	mobile	pimps	with	an	eye	on	the	weather.

"Hey,	sailor,	lookin'	for	 a	party?"

Black	girl	breaking	 away	from	the	knot	under	the	corner	lamp	post,
swiveling	over	to	him.	Couldn't	be	older	than	eighteen,	nineteen,	hands	in
the	pockets	of	a	short	jacket,	high-heeled	ankle-strapped	shoes,	short
skirt	blowing	in	 the	fresh	wind	that	came	off	the	canal.

"Almos'	 do	it	for	free,	you	so	good-lookin',"	she	said,	grinning	widely.
"Thass	a	joke,	honey,	but	the	price	is	right,	trust	me."

"Not	right	 now,"	Kling	 said.

"Well,when	,	baby?	I	stann	out	here	much	longer,	my	pussy	turn	to	ice.

236
Be	no	good	to	neither	one	of	us."

"Maybe	later,"	 Kling	 said.

"You	promise?	Slide	your	hand	up	under	here,	take	a	feel	of	heaven."

"I'm	 busy	right	 now,"	Kling	 said.

"Too	busy	forthis	?"	she	said,	and	took	his	hand	and	guided	it	onto	her
thigh.	"Mmmmm-mmmmm,"	 she	said,	"sweet	chocolate	pussy,	yours	for
the	takin'."

"Later,"	 he	said,	and	freed	his	hand	and	began	walking	off.

"You	come	on	back	later,	man,	hear?"	she	shouted	after	him.	"Ask	for
Crystal."

He	walked	into	the	darkness.	On	the	dock,	he	could	hear	rats	rustling
along	the	pilings.	Another	lamp	post,	another	huddle	of	hookers.

"Hey,	Blondie,	lookin'	 for	some	fun?"

White	girl	 in	her	twenties.	Wearing	a	long	khaki	coat	and	high	heels.
Opened	the	coat	to	him	as	he	went	past.

"Interested?"	 she	said.

Nothing	under	the	coat	but	garter	belt	and	long	black	stockings.	Quick
glimpse	of	rounded	belly	and	pink-tipped	breasts.

"Faggot!"	 she	yelled	after	him,	and	twirled	the	coat	closed	as	gracefully
as	a	dancer.	The	girls	with	her	laughed.	Fun	on	the	docks.

Made	a	right	turn	 onto	Fairview,	began	walking	up	toward	Fourth.	 Pools
of	light	on	the	sidewalk	ahead.	Larry's	Bar.	Two	plate-glass	windows,
beer	displays	in	them,	entrance	door	set	between	them.	He	went	to	the
closest	window,	cupped	his	hands	on	either	side	of	his	face,	peered
through	the	glass.	Not	too	crowded	just	now.	Annie.	Sitting	at	a	table
with	a	black	man	and	a	frizzied	brunette.	Good,	at	least	one	backup	was
close	by.	There	at	the	bar.	Eileen.	With	a	big	blond	guy	wearing	glasses.

Okay,	Kling	thought.

237
I'm	here.

Don't	worry.

From	where	Shanahan	sat	slumped	behind	the	wheel	of	the	two-door
Chevy	across	the	street,	he	saw	only	a	big	blond	guy	looking	through	the
plate-glass	window	of	the	bar.	Six	feet	tall,	he	guessed,	give	or	take	an
inch,	broad	shoulders	and	narrow	waist,	wearing	a	seaman's	pea	jacket
and	blue	jeans.

Shanahan	was	suddenly	alert.

Guy	was	still	looking	through	the	window,	hands	cupped	to	his	face,
motionless	except	for	the	dancing	of	his	blond	hair	on	the	wind.

Shanahan	kept	watching.

The	guy	turned	from	the	window.

No	eyeglasses.

Might	not	be	him.

On	the	other	hand	hellip;

Shanahan	got	out	of	the	car.	It	was	clumsy	moving	with	the	right	arm	in
a	cast,	but	he'd	rather	be	made	for	a	cripple	than	a	cop.	Guy	walking	up
the	street	now.	How	come	he	wasn't	going	in	the	bar?	Change	of	M.O.?
Shanahan	fussed	with	the	lock	of	the	car	door,	watching	him	sidelong.

Minute	the	guy	was	four	car	lengths	away,	Shanahan	took	off	after	him.

The	bar	was	baited	with	Eileen,	but	there	were	plenty	of	other	girls	out
here	on	the	street.	And	if	this	guy	was	suddenly	changing	his	pattern,
Shanahan	didn't	wantany	of	them	dying.

Eileen	didn't	like	the	tricks	 her	mind	was	beginning	to	play.

She	was	beginning	to	like	him.

She	was	beginning	to	think	he	couldn't	possibly	be	a	murderer.

238
Like	the	stories	you	read	in	the	newspapers	after	the	kid	next	door	shot
and	killed	his	mother,	his	father,	and	his	two	sisters.	Nice	kid	like	that?
all	the	neighbors	said.	Can't	believe	it.	Always	had	a	kind	word	for
everyone.	Saw	him	mowing	the	lawn	and	helping	old	ladies	across	the
street.	This	kid	a	killer?	Impossible.

Or	maybe	she	didn'twant	him	to	be	a	murderer	because	that	would	mean
eventual	confrontation.	She	knew	that	if	this	was	the	guy,	she'd	have	to
end	up	face	to	face	with	him	on	the	street	outside.	And	the	knife	would
come	out	of	his	pocket.	And	hellip;

It	was	easier	to	believe	he	couldn't	possibly	be	the	killer.

You're	tricking	 yourself,	she	thought.

And	yet	hellip;

There	really	were	a	lot	of	likable	things	about	him.

Not	just	his	sense	of	humor.	Some	of	his	jokes	were	terrible,	in	fact.	He
told	them	almost	compulsively,	whenever	anything	in	the	conversation
triggered	what	appeared	to	be	a	vast	computer-bank	memory	of	stories.
You	mentioned	the	tattoo	near	his	thumb,	for	example	mdash;the	killer
had	a	tattoo	near	his	thumb,	she	reminded	herself	mdash;and	he
immediately	told	the	one	about	the	two	girls	discussing	the	guy	with	the
tattooed	penis,	and	one	of	them	insisted	only	the	word	Swan	was	tattooed
on	it,	whereas	the	other	girl	insisted	the	word	was	Saskatchewan,	and	it
turned	out	they	were	both	right,	which	took	 Eileen	a	moment	to	get.	Or
you	mentioned	the	sudden	change	in	the	weather,	and	he	immediately
reeled	off	Henry	Morgan's	famous	weather	forecast,	"Muggy	today,
Toogy	tomorrow,"	and	then	segued	neatly	into	the	joke	about	the
panhandler	shivering	outside	in	the	cold	and	another	panhandler	comes
over	to	him	and	says,	"Can	you	lend	me	a	dime	for	a	cup	of	coffee?"	and
the	first	guy	says,	"Are	you	kidding?	I'm	 standing	here	bare-assed,	I'm
shivering	and	starving	to	death,	how	come	you're	askingme	for	a	dime?"
and	the	second	guy	says,	"Okay,	make	it	a	nickel,"	which	wasn't	very
funny,	but	which	he	told	with	such	dramatic	flair	 that	 Eileen	could
actually	visualize	the	two	panhandlers	standing	on	a	windy	corner	of	the
city.

Outside,	the	city	beckoned.

239
The	night	beckoned.

The	knife	beckoned.

But	inside,	sitting	here	at	the	bar	with	the	television	set	going,	and	the
sound	of	voices	everywhere	around	them,	the	world	seemed	safe	and	cozy
and	warm,	and	she	found	herself	listening	intently	to	everything	he	said.
Not	only	the	jokes.	The	jokes	were	a	given.	If	you	wanted	to	learn	about
him,	you	had	to	listen	to	his	jokes.	The	jokes	were	some	sort	of	defense
system,	she	realized,	his	way	of	keeping	himself	at	arm's	distance	from
anyone.	But	scattered	in	among	the	incessant	jokes,	there	were	glimpses
of	a	shy	and	somewhat	vulnerable	person	longing	to	make	contact
mdash;until	another	joke	was	triggered.

He	had	used	up	his	first	twenty	dollars	five	minutes	ago,	and	was	now
working	on	the	second	twenty,	which	he	said	should	take	them	through	to
twelve-forty.

"After	 that,	we'll	 see,"	he	said.	"Maybe	we'll	talk	some	more,	or	maybe
we'll	go	outside,	depends	how	we	feel,	right?	We'll	play	this	by	ear,
Linda,	I'm	 really	enjoying	this,	aren't	 you?"

"Yes,"	she	said,	and	guessed	she	meant	it.

But	he's	the	killer,	she	reminded	herself.

Or	maybe	not.

She	hoped	he	wasn't.

"If	 you	add	up	these	twenties,"	he	said,	"a	dollar	a	minute,	you'll	be
getting	a	third	of	what	my	dad	gets	in	L.A.,	he	gets	a	hundred	and	fifty
bucks	for	a	fifty-minute	 hour,	which	ain't	bad,	huh?	For	listening	to
people	tell	you	they	have	bedbugs	crawling	all	over	them?	Don't	brush
them	on	me,	right?	Well,	I	guess	you	know	that	one,	I	guess	I've	already
told	that	one."

He	hadn't	told	that	one.	But	suddenly,	as	he	apologized	for	what	he'd
mistakenly	thought	was	repetition,	she	felt	oddly	close	to	him.	Like	a
married	woman	listening	to	the	same	jokes	her	husband	had	told	time
and	again,	and	yet	enjoying	them	each	time	as	if	he	were	telling	them	for

240
the	first	time.	She	knew	the	"Don't-brush-them-on-me"	 joke.	Yet	she
wished	he	would	tell	it,	anyway.

And	wondered	if	she	was	stalling	for	time.

Wondered	if	she	was	putting	off	that	eventual	moment	when	the	knife
came	out	of	the	pocket.

"My	 father	was	very	strict,"	 he	said.	"If	 you	have	any	choice,	don't	get
raised	by	a	psychiatrist.	How's	your	father?	Is	he	tough	on	you?"

"I	 never	really	knew	him,"	 she	said.

Her	father.	A	cop.	On	the	beat,	they	used	to	call	him	Pops	Burke.	Shot	to
death	when	she	was	still	a	little	girl.

In	the	next	instant,	she	almost	told	him	that	heruncle	and	not	her	father
was	the	one	who'd	had	the	most	telling	influence	on	her	life.	Uncle	Matt.
Also	a	cop.	Whose	favorite	toast	was,	"Here's	to	golden	days	and	purple
nights."	An	expression	he'd	heard	repeated	again	and	again	on	a	radio
show.	Recently,	Eileen	had	heard	Hal	Willis's	new	girlfriend	using	the
same	expression.	Small	world.	Even	smaller	world	when	your	favorite
uncle	is	sitting	off-duty	in	his	favorite	 bar	making	his	favorite	toast	and	a
guy	walks	in	with	a	sawed-off	shotgun.	Uncle	Matt	drew	his	service
revolver	and	the	guy	shot	him	dead.	She	almost	told	Bobby	she'd	become
a	cop	because	of	her	Uncle	Matt.	She	almost	forgot	in	that	instant	that
she	herself	was	a	cop	working	undercover	to	trap	a	killer.	The	word
"entrapment"	 flashed	into	her	mind.	Suppose	he	isn't	the	killer?	she
wondered.	Suppose	I	blow	him	away	and	it	turns	out	mdash;

And	realized	again	that	her	mind	was	playing	tricks.

"I	 grew	up	in	a	world	of	don't	 do	this,	don't	do	that,"	 Bobby	said.	"You'd
think	a	shrink	 would've	known	better,	well,	I	guess	it	was	a	case	of	the
shoemaker's	children.	Talk	about	repression.	It	was	my	mother	who
finally	helped	me	to	break	out.	I	make	it	sound	like	a	prison,	don't	I?
Well,	it	was.	Do	you	know	the	one	about	the	lady	walking	along	the	beach
in	Miami?"

She	shook	her	head.

She	realized	she	was	already	smiling.

241
"Well,	she	sees	this	guy	lying	on	the	sand,	and	she	goes	up	to	him	and	she
says,	'Excuse	me,	I	don't	mean	to	intrude,	but	you're	very	white.'	The
guy	looks	up	at	her	and	says,	'So?'	The	lady	says,	'I	mean,	most	people
they	come	down	to	Miami,	they	lie	in	the	sun,	they	get	a	nice	tan.	But
you're	very	white.'	The	guy	says,	'So?'	The	lady	says,	'So	how	come
you're	so	white?'	The	guy	says,	'This	is	prison	pallor,	I	just	got	out	of
prison	yesterday.'	The	lady	shakes	her	head	and	says,	'How	long	were
you	in	prison?'	The	guys	says,	'Thirty	years.'	The	lady	says,	'My,	my,
what	did	you	do,	they	put	you	in	prison	for	thirty	  years?'	The	guy	says,	'I
killed	my	wife	with	 a	hatchet	and	chopped	her	up	in	little	pieces.'	The
woman	looks	at	him	and	says,	'Mmmm,	so	you're	single?'	"

Eileen	burst	out	laughing.

And	then	realized	that	the	joke	was	about	murder.

And	then	wondered	if	a	murderer	would	tell	 a	joke	about	murder.

"Anyway,	it	 was	my	mother	who	broke	me	out	of	prison,"	Bobby	said,
"and	she	had	to	die	to	do	it."

"What	 do	you	mean?"

"Left	 me	a	lot	of	money.	Do	you	know	what	she	said	in	her	will?	She	said,
'This	is	for	Robert's	freedom	to	risk	 enjoying	life.'	Her	exact	words.	She
always	called	me	Robert.	'Robert's	freedom	to	risk	enjoying	life.'	Which
is	just	what	I've	been	doing	for	the	past	year.	Kissed	my	father	off,	told
him	to	shove	it,	told	him	I'd	 be	happy	if	I	never	saw	him	again,	and	then
left	L.A.	forever."

She	wondered	if	there	were	any	warrants	out	on	him	in	L.A.

But	why	would	there	be	any	warrants?

"Went	to	Kansas	City,	had	a	good	time	there	hellip;	got	the	tattoo	there,
in	fact,	what	the	hell,	I'd	always	wanted	a	tattoo.	Then	on	to	Chicago,
lived	it	up	there,	too,	plenty	of	money	to	take	risks,	Linda.	I	owe	that	to
my	mother."	He	nodded	thoughtfully,	and	then	said,	"He's	the	one	who
killed	her,	you	know."

She	looked	at	him.

242
"Oh,	not	literally.	 I	mean	he	didn't	 stick	a	knife	in	her	or	anything.	But
he	was	having	an	affair	with	our	housekeeper,	and	she	found	out	about	it,
and	it	broke	her	heart,	she	was	never	the	same	again.	They	said	it	was
cancer,	but	stress	can	induce	serious	illness,	you	know,	and	I'm	sure
that's	what	caused	it,	his	fooling	around	with	Elga.	The	money	my
mother	eventually	left	me	was	the	money	she'd	got	in	the	divorce
settlement,	which	I	think	was	poetic	justice,	don't	you?	I	mean,	him
raising	me	so	strictly	mdash;while	he's	fooling	around	with	that	Nazi
hooker,	mind	you	mdash;and	my	mother	giving	mehis	money	so	I	could
lead	a	richer	life,	so	I	could	risk	enjoying	life.	I	think	 that	 was	the	key
word,	don't	you?	In	the	will?	 Risk.	I	think	 she	wanted	me	to	take	risks
with	the	money,	which	is	what	I've	been	doing."

"How?"	 Eileen	asked.

"Oh,	not	by	investing	in	hog	bellies	or	anything,"	 he	said,	and	smiled.
"By	living	 well.	Living	 well	is	the	best	revenge,	isn't	it?	Who	said	that?	I
knowsomebody	said	that."

"Notme	!"	 Eileen	said,	and	backed	away	in	mock	denial.

"Don't	 brush	them	on	me,	right?"	 he	said,	and	they	both	laughed.

He	looked	at	the	clock.

"Five	minutes	left,"	 he	said.	"Maybe	we'll	go	outside	then.	Would	you
like	to	go	outside	then?	When	the	five	minutes	are	up?"

"Whatever	you	want,"	 she	said.

"Maybe	that's	 what	we'll	do,"	 he	said.	"Have	a	little	fun.	Do	something
new	and	exciting,	huh?	Risks,"	he	said,	and	smiled	again.

He	had	a	very	pleasant	smile.

Transformed	his	entire	face.	Made	him	look	like	a	shy	little	boy.	Blue
eyes	soft,	almost	misty,	behind	the	eyeglasses.	Shy	little	kid	sitting	in	the
back	row,	afraid	to	raise	his	hand	and	ask	questions.

"In	 a	way,	you	know,"	he	said,	"ithas	been	a	sort	of	revenge.	What	I've
been	doing	with	the	money.	Traveling,	having	a	good	time,	taking	my

243
risks.	And	getting	even	with	him,	in	a	way,	for	Elga.	Our	housekeeper,
you	know?	The	woman	he	tricked	my	mother	with.	Deceiving	her	all
those	years.	A	shrink,	can	you	imagine?	Holier	than	thou,	and	he's	laying
the	goddamn	housekeeper.	I	mean,	my	mother	was	the	one	who	put	him
through	medical	school.	She	was	a	schoolteacher,	you	know,	worked	all
those	years	to	put	him	through	school,	do	you	know	how	long	a
psychiatrist	has	to	go	to	school?	It's	very	difficult	to	believe	that	women
can	be	so	callous	toward	other	women.	I	find	that	very	difficult	to	believe,
Linda.	I	mean,	Elga	behaving	like	a	common	hooker	hellip;	excuse	me,	I
don't	mean	any	offense.	Excuse	me,	really,"	he	said,	and	patted	her	hand.
"But,	you	know,	you	hear	all	this	talk	 about	sisterhood,	you'd	think	she
might	have	had	some	sense	of	concern	for	my	mother,	I	mean	the	woman
was	married	to	him	for	fortyyears	!"	 He	grinned	suddenly.	"Do	you	know
the	one	about	this	man	who	comes	to	his	wife,	they've	been	married	forty
years,	he	says	to	her,	'Ida,	I	want	to	do	it	like	dogs.'	She	says,	'That's
disgusting,	Sam,	doing	it	like	dogs.'	He	says,	'Ida,	if	you	won't	do	it	like
dogs,	I	want	a	divorce.'	She	says,	'Okay,	Sam,	we'll	do	it	like	dogs.	But
not	on	our	block.'	"

Eileen	nodded.

"Didn't	 like	that	 one,	huh?"

"Mezz'	a	mezza,"	she	said,	and	see-sawed	her	hand	on	the	air.

"I	 promise	we	won't	do	it	like	dogs,	okay?"	he	said,	smiling.	"How	would
you	like	to	do	it,	Linda?"

"You're	the	boss,"	she	said.

"Have	you	ever	seen	a	snuff	movie?"	he	asked.

"Never,"	she	said.

Here	it	comes,	she	thought.

"Does	that	scare	you?"	he	said.	"My	asking	about	a	snuff	movie?"

"Yes,"	she	said.

"Me,	too,"	 he	said,	and	smiled.	"I've	never	seen	one,	either."

244
Explore	it,	she	thought.

But	she	was	afraid	to.

"Think	 you	might	like	 that?"	she	asked.

Her	heart	was	suddenly	pounding	again.

"Killing	 someone	while	you	were	laying	her?"

He	looked	deep	into	her	eyes	as	though	searching	for	something	there.

"Not	if	 she	knew	it	was	going	to	happen,"	he	said.

And	suddenly	she	knew	for	certain	that	he	was	their	man,	and	there	was
no	postponing	what	would	happen	tonight.

He	looked	up	at	the	clock.

"Time's	up,"	 he	said.	"Let's	go	outside."

245
CHAPTER	      12

The	call	to	the	squadroom	came	at	twenty	minutes	to	one.	The	call	came
from	Monoghan,	who	was	in	a	phone	booth	on	the	edge	of	the	River	Dix.
He	asked	to	talk	to	either	Brown	or	Genero.	Willis	told	him	Brown	and
Genero	were	both	out.

"So	who's	this?"	Monoghan	asked.

"Willis."

"What	I	got	here,"	Monoghan	said,	"is	a	head	and	a	pair	of	hands.	These
guys	dragging	the	river	turned	up	this	aluminum	case,	like	it's	big
enough	to	hold	a	man's	head.	And	his	hands.	So	that's	what	I	got	here.	A
head	cut	off	at	the	neck,	and	a	pair	of	hands	cut	off	at	the	wrists."

"Uh-huh,"	Willis	said.

"So	earlier	tonight	I	was	with	Brown	and	Genero	back	out	behind	this
restaurant	the	Burgundy,	and	what	we	had	there	was	the	upper	part	of	a
torso	in	a	garbage	can,	is	what	we	had.	And	I	got	a	head	and	a	pair	of
hands,	and	it	occurred	to	me	this	might	be	the	same	body	here,	this	head
and	hands."

"Uh-huh,"	Willis	said.

"So	what	I	want	to	know,	does	Brown	or	Genero	have	a	positive	make	on
the	stiff?	'Cause	otherwise	we	now	got	a	head	to	look	at,	and	also	some
hands	to	print."

"Let	me	take	a	look	at	Brown's	desk,"	Willis	said.	"I	think	he	left	some
stuff	here."

"Yeah,	go	take	a	look,"	Monoghan	said.

"Hold	on,"	Willis	said.

"Yeah."

246
"Hold	 on,	I'm	putting	 you	on	hold."

"Yeah,	fine,"	Monoghan	said.

Willis	pressed	the	hold	button,	and	then	went	over	to	Brown's	desk.	He
riffled	through	 the	papers	there,	and	then	stabbed	at	the	lighted
extension	button,	and	picked	up	the	receiver.

"Monoghan?"

"Yeah."

"From	 what	I	can	gather,	the	body	was	identified	as	someone	named
Frank	Sebastiani,	male,	white,	thirty-four	 years	old."

"That's	 what	I	got	here,	a	white	male	around	that	age."

"I've	 got	a	picture	here,	too,"	Willis	said.

"Whyn't	 you	run	 on	over	with	it?"	 Monoghan	said.	"We	see	we	got	the
same	stiff	or	not."

"Where	are	you?"

"Freezing	my	ass	off	on	the	drive	here.	Near	the	river."

"Which	 river?"

"The	Dix."

"And	 where?"

"Hampton."

"Give	me	ten	minutes,"	Willis	 said.

"Don't	 forget	the	picture,"	 Monoghan	said.

The	apartment	over	the	garage	was	perhaps	twelve-feet	wide	by	twenty-
feet	long.	There	was	a	neatly	made	double	bed	in	the	room,	and	a	dresser
with	a	mirror	 over	it,	and	an	upholstered	chair	with	a	lamp	behind	it.
The	wall	surrounding	the	mirror	 was	covered	with	pictures	of	naked

247
women	snipped	from	men's	magazines	banned	in	7-Eleven	stores.	All	of
the	women	were	blondes.	Like	Marie	Sebastiani.	In	the	bottom	drawer	of
the	dresser,	under	a	stack	of	Brayne's	shirts,	the	detectives	found	a	pair
of	crotchless	black	panties.	The	panties	were	a	size	five.

"Think	 they're	Brayne's?"	 Hawes	asked	drily.

"What	 size	you	think	the	lady	wears?"	Brown	asked.

"Could	be	a	five,"	 Hawes	said,	and	shrugged.

"I	 thought	you	were	an	expert."

"Onbras	I'm	 an	expert."

Men's	socks,	undershorts,	sweaters,	handkerchiefs	in	the	other	dresser
drawers.	Two	sports	jackets,	several	pairs	of	slacks,	a	suit,	an	overcoat,
and	three	pairs	of	shoes	in	the	single	small	closet.	There	was	also	a
suitcase	in	the	closet.	Nothing	in	it.	No	indication	anywhere	in	the
apartment	that	Brayne	had	packed	and	taken	off	in	a	hurry.	Even	his
razor	and	shaving	cream	were	still	on	the	sink	in	the	tiny	bathroom.

A	tube	of	lipstick	was	in	the	cabinet	over	the	sink.

Brown	took	off	the	top.

"Look	 like	the	lady's	shade?"	he	asked	Hawes.	"Pretty	careless	if	it's	her,
leavin'	her	o.c.p.'s	in	the	dresser	and	her	hellip;"

"Herwhat	?"

"Her	open-crotch	panties."

"Oh."

"You	think	 she	was	dumb	enough	to	be	makin'	it	with	him	right	here	in
this	room?"

"Let's	 see	what	else	we	find,"	Hawes	said.

What	else	they	found	was	a	sheaf	of	letters	rubber-banded	together.	They
found	the	letters	in	a	cardboard	shoe	box	on	the	top	shelf	of	the	closet.

248
The	letters	were	inside	lavender-colored	envelopes,	but	none	of	the
envelopes	had	been	stamped	or	mailed.	The	name	"Jimmy"	was	scrawled
on	the	front	of	each	envelope.

"Hand-delivered,"	 Hawes	said.

"Mmm,"	  Brown	said,	and	they	began	reading	the	letters.	The	letters
were	written	in	purple	 ink.	The	first	 letter	read:

Jimmy,
Just	say	when.
Marie
>

It	was	dated	July	18.

"When	did	he	start	working	for	them?"	Brown	asked.

"Fourth	 of	July."

"Fast	worker,	this	lady,"	Brown	said.

The	second	letter	was	dated	July	21.	It	described	in	excruciatingly
passionate	detail	all	the	things	Marie	and	Jimmy	had	done	together	the	day
before.

"This	is	dirty,"	 Brown	said,	looking	up.

"Yes,"	Hawes	said.	He	was	reading	over	Brown's	shoulder.

There	were	twenty-seven	letters	in	all.	The	letters	chronicled	a	rather	active
sex	life	between	the	lady	and	the	sorcerer's	apprentice,	Marie	apparently
having	been	compulsive	about	jotting	down	everything	she	had	done	to
Jimmy	in	the	recent	past,	and	then	outlining	everything	she	hadn't	yet	done
to	him	but	which	she	planned	to	do	to	him	in	the	foreseeable	future,	which
mdash;if	the	chronology	was	faithful	mdash;she	did	indeed	get	around	to
doing	to	him.

She	did	a	lot	of	things	to	him.

The	last	letter	was	dated	October	27,	four	days	before	the	murder	and
dismemberment	of	the	lady's	husband.	She	suggested	in	this	last	letter	that

249
one	of	the	things	she	wanted	to	do	to	Jimmy	on	Halloween	night	was	tie
him	to	the	bed	in	his	black	silk	undershorts	and	spread	herself	open	over
him	in	her	black	crotchless	panties	and	then	mdash;

"You	see	any	black	silk	undershorts	in	the	dresser	there?"	Brown	asked.

"No,"	 Hawes	said.	"I'm	reading."

"A	celebration,	do	you	think?"	Brown	asked.	"All	this	stuff	she	planned	to
do	to	him	on	Halloween?"

"Maybe."

"Do	hubby	in,	chop	him	up	in	little	pieces,	then	come	back	here	and	have	a
witch's	sabbath."

"Where	does	she	call	it	that?"

"Call	it	 what?"

"Witch's	sabbath."

"I'mcalling	 it	 that,"	 Brown	said.	"Black	silk	 undershorts,	black	o.c.p's
hellip;"

"So	where's	Brayne?"	Hawes	asked.	"If	they	were	planning	a	celebration
hellip;"

"Did	 you	look	under	the	bed?"	Brown	asked,	and	then	turned	suddenly
toward	the	window.

Hawes	turned	at	exactly	the	same	moment.

An	automobile	had	just	pulled	into	the	driveway.

At	ten	minutes	to	one	mdash;ten	minutes	after	Bobby	had	suggested	that
they	go	outside	mdash;Eileen	excused	herself	and	went	to	the	ladies'
room.	Annie,	sitting	at	a	table	with	an	Italian	 sailor	who	was	having
difficulty	 making	his	needs	understood,	watched	her	as	she	crossed	the
room	and	made	a	left	turn	at	the	phone	booths.

"Excuse	me,"	Annie	said.

250
By	the	time	she	got	to	the	ladies'	room,	Eileen	was	already	in	one	of	the
stalls.	Annie	did	a	quick	check	for	feet.	The	other	stalls	were	empty.

"Yes	or	no?"	she	asked.

"Yes,"	Eileen	said.

Her	voice	from	behind	the	closed	door	sounded	odd.

"Are	you	sure?"

"I	 think	so."

"You	okay?"

"Fine.	Checking	out	the	hardware."

The	door	opened.	Eileen	looked	pale.	She	went	to	the	sink,	touched	up
her	lipstick,	blotted	it.

"You	going	out	now?"	Annie	asked.

"Yes."

The	same	odd	voice.

"Give	me	three	minutes	to	get	on	the	street,"	Annie	said.

"Okay."

Annie	went	to	the	door.

"I'll	 be	there,"	 she	said	simply.

"Good,"	 Eileen	said.

Annie	took	one	last	look	at	her,	and	then	went	out.

"What	 I'm	talking	 about	is	decency	and	honor,"	Peaches	said.

It	was	very	cold	and	they	were	walking	along	the	street	rapidly.

251
"I'm	talking	about	a	person's	responsibility	to	another	person,"	Peaches
said,	clinging	to	Parker's	arm	for	warmth	and	nothing	else.

Parker	was	beginning	to	feel	married.

"You	went	to	that	party	withme	,"	Peaches	said,	"and	not	with	Little
Miss	Muffet."

"If	a	person	can't	have	a	simple	conversation	with	another	person
hellip;"

"That	wasn't	a	conversation,"	Peaches	said.	"That	was	a	person-and-a-
half	exchanging	deep	sighs	and	meaningful	glances."

"I	don't	think	it's	nice	of	you	to	make	midget	jokes,"	Parker	said.

"Oh,	was	she	a	midget?"	Peaches	said.	"I	thought	maybe	she'd	shrunk	in
the	wash."

"That's	just	what	I	mean,"	Parker	said.

"I	thought	maybe	she	was	E.T.	in	drag."

"I'm	sorry	if	you're	upset,"	he	said.

"I	am	upset."

"And	I'm	sorry."

Hewas	sorry.	He	was	thinking	it	was	getting	to	be	a	very	cold	night	after
a	lovely	day	in	the	tropics,	and	he	would	much	prefer	spending	the	winter
in	Peaches'	probably	warm	and	generous	bed	here	in	town	instead	of	in
his	own	narrow,	mean	bed	in	his	grubby	little	apartment	away	the	hell
out	in	Majesta.	He	was	also	thinking	tomorrow	was	time	enough	to	give
Alice	a	call.

"What	bothers	me	is	I	thought	we	were	having	such	a	good	time
together,"	Peaches	said.

"We	were.	We	still	are.	The	night	is	young,"	he	said.

252
"I	thought	you	sort	of	liked	me."

"I	do	like	you.	I	like	you	a	lot."

"I	like	you,	too,"	Peaches	said.

"So	where's	the	problem?	There's	no	problem.	I	don't	see	any	problem.
What	we'll	do,"	Parker	said,	"is	we'll	go	back	to	your	place,	and	we'll
have	a	drink,	and	maybe	watch	some	television	hellip;"

"That	sounds	nice,"	she	said,	and	hugged	his	arm.

"It	does,	doesn't	it?"	he	said.	"It	does	sound	nice."

"And	we'll	forget	all	about	Eeansie-Beansie	Spider."

"Who?"	Parker	said.

"Your	little	friend,"	Peaches	said.

"I	already	forgot	about	her,"	Parker	said.

They	were	just	passing	one	of	those	subway-kiosk	newsstands	on	the
corner.	The	blind	owner	was	kneeling	over	a	stack	of	newspapers	on	the
pavement,	cutting	the	cord	around	them.	Parker	came	up	beside	him.
The	blind	man	knew	he	was	there,	but	he	took	his	good	sweet	time
cutting	the	cord.	Parker	waited;	he	prided	himself	on	never	having
hassled	a	blind	man	in	his	life.	The	blind	man	finally	hefted	the	papers	up
onto	the	newsstand	and	then	walked	around	to	the	little	door	on	the	side
of	the	stand	and	went	in	behind	the	counter.

"So?"	he	said.

Parker	was	looking	down	at	the	headline.

"You	want	a	paper?"	the	blind	man	said.

The	headline	read:

                                           2	COPS	SHOT
                                    4	MIDGETS	SOUGHT

253
The	car	in	the	driveway	of	the	Sebastian!	house	was	a	1979	Cadillac
Seville,	silver-sided	with	a	black	hardtop,	still	in	seemingly	excellent
condition.	The	woman	who	got	out	of	the	Caddy	was	in	excellent
condition	herself,	tall	and	leggy	and	wearing	a	black	cloth	coat	the	color
of	her	hair.	Hawes	and	Brown	watched	her	from	the	upstairs	window	of
the	garage	as	she	went	directly	to	the	front	door	of	the	house	and	rang
the	bell.

Hawes	looked	at	his	watch.

A	few	minutes	before	one	in	the	morning.

"Who	the	hell	is	that?"	 he	said.

They	came	out	of	Larry's	Bar	at	exactly	1:00	a.m.,	twenty	minutes	after
Bobby	had	first	suggested	they	leave.	A	strong	wind	was	blowing	off	the
canal.	He	had	insisted	that	she	continue	wearing	his	jacket,	and	she	still
had	it	draped	over	her	shoulders.	She	hoped	it	wouldn't	get	in	the	way
when	she	yanked	the	gun.	Her	hand	hovered	over	the	open	top	of	her
bag,	seemingly	resting	there	close	to	the	shoulder	strap.	But	close	to	the
butt	of	the	gun,	too.

Bobby	had	his	right	hand	in	his	pants	pocket.

On	the	knife,	she	thought.

He	had	slashed	his	first	victim	in	a	doorway	two	blocks	from	the	bar.

The	second	one	in	an	alleyway	on	East	Ninth.

The	third	on	Canalside	itself,	heavily	trafficked	 with	hookers.

"Pretty	 cold	out	here,"	he	said.	"Not	exactly	what	I	had	in	mind."

Annie	was	the	first	of	the	three	detectives	to	spot	them	coming	out	of	the
bar.

She	had	hit	the	street	the	moment	she'd	left	Eileen	in	the	ladies	room,
and	had	taken	up	position	in	the	darkened	doorway	or	a	closed	Chinese
noodle	factory.	It	was	very	cold	out	here	on	the	street,	and	she	wasn't
dressed	for	it.	Skirt	too	damn	short,	blouse	too	flimsy.	Eileen	came	out	of
the	bar	like	a	flare,	red	hair	blowing	on	the	wind,	the	guy's	jacket	draped

254
over	her	shoulders,	made	an	immediate	left	turn,	walking	on	the	guy's
right,	her	own	right	 hand	on	the	curb	side	and	resting	on	her	bag.	The
guy's	right	hand	was	in	his	pants	pocket.

Two	of	the	lamp	posts	on	Fairview	had	been	vandalized,	and	there	were
wide	stretches	of	darkness	between	the	light	on	the	corner	and	the	third
one	up.	On	the	distant	corner,	a	traffic	light	turned	 to	red	as	flaming	as
Eileen's	hair.	The	red	hair	was	a	plus.	Easy	to	keep	her	in	view.	Annie
gave	them	a	twenty-yard	lead,	and	then	fell	into	step	behind	them,
keeping	close	to	the	buildings	on	her	left,	the	guy's	blind	side	because	he
was	turned	to	the	right	as	he	walked	and	talked.	She	cursed	the	hooker
heels	she	was	wearing	because	they	made	such	a	clatter	on	the	sidewalk,
but	the	guy	seemed	unaware	of	her	presence	behind	them,	just	kept
chatting	up	Eileen	as	they	dissolved	into	the	darkness	between	the	lighted
lamp	posts.

Eileen's	red	hair	was	the	beacon.

Kling,	scanning	the	street	from	a	vantage	point	diagonally	across	from
the	bar,	was	the	second	detective	to	spot	them.

The	street	was	dark	where	he	waited	in	the	shadow	of	an	abandoned	tool
works,	the	lamp	post	globe	shattered,	but	the	woman	was	unmistakably
Eileen.	Never	mind	the	red	hair,	he'd	have	known	her	if	she	was	wearing
a	blonde	wig.	Knew	every	nuance	of	her	walk,	the	long	stride,	the	swing
of	her	shoulders,	the	rhythmic	jiggle	of	her	buttocks.	He	was	about	to
move	out,	cross	the	street	and	fall	in	behind	them,	when	he	saw	Annie.

Good,	he	thought,	she's	in	place.

He	stayed	on	the	opposite	side	of	the	street,	ten	feet	behind	Annie	who
was	working	hard	to	keep	up	without	showing	herself.	Eileen	and	the	guy
were	walking	very	fast,	up	toward	the	traffic	 light	on	the	corner,	which
changed	now,	throwing	a	green	wash	onto	the	roadway.	The	formation
could	have	been	a	classic	tailing	triangle	mdash;one	cop	behind	the
quarry,	another	cop	ahead	of	them	on	the	same	side	of	the	street,	a	third
cop	on	the	opposite	side	of	the	street	mdash;except	that	it	was	lacking	the
third	cop.

Or	so	Kling	thought.

Shanahan	was	the	third	cop.

255
He	had	been	tailing	Kling	from	the	moment	he'd	spotted	him	peering
through	the	plate-glass	window	of	the	bar.	Pacing	the	street	impatiently,
always	circling	back	to	the	bar,	checking	out	the	front	door	from	across
the	street,	then	drifting	off	again,	and	back	again,	behaving	very	much
like	a	person	waiting	for	somebody	to	come	out	of	there.	When	Eileen
finally	came	out	of	the	bar	with	asecond	blond	guy,	Shanahan's	blond
took	off	after	them.	Annie	was	up	ahead,	she	had	Eileen	andher	blond
covered	and	in	sight.	But	this	other	blond	guy	was	still	showing	too	much
interest.	Shanahan	gave	him	a	lead,	and	then	fell	in	behind	him	again.

Up	ahead,	Eileen	and	her	blond	turned	left	at	the	traffic	light,	 and
disappeared	around	the	corner.

Shanahan's	blond	hesitated	only	a	moment.

Seemed	undecided	whether	to	make	his	move	or	not.

Then	he	pulled	a	gun	and	started	across	the	street.

Annie	recognized	Kling	at	once.

He	had	a	gun	in	his	hand.

She	didn't	know	whether	she	was	more	surprised	by	his	presence	here	or
by	the	gun	in	his	hand.	Too	many	thoughts	clicked	through	her	mind	in
the	next	three	seconds.	She	thought	He's	going	to	blow	it,	the	guy	hasn't
made	his	move	yet.	She	thought	Does	Eileen	know	he's	here?	She	thought
mdash;

But	Eileen	and	her	man	were	already	around	the	corner	and	out	of	sight.

"Bert!"	  she	shouted.

And	in	that	instant	 Shanahan	came	thundering	up	yelling,	"Stop!
Police!"

Kling	turned	 to	see	a	man	pointing	an	arm	in	a	plaster	cast	at	him.

He	turned	the	other	way	and	saw	Annie	running	across	the	street.

"Mike!"	  Annie	shouted.

256
Shanahan	stopped	dead	in	his	tracks.	Annie	was	waving	her	arms	at	him
like	a	traffic	 cop.

"He's	on	the	job!"	 she	shouted.

Shanahan	had	earlier	told	Eileen	that	he	and	Lou	Alvarez	were	just	full
of	tricks.	He	hadn't	realized,	however,	that	Alvarez	had	sent	another	man
to	the	Zone	without	telling	him	about	it.	 That	tricky,	 he	didn't	think
Alvarez	was.	Shanahan's	own	little	trick	was	a	.32	revolver	in	his	right
hand,	his	finger	inside	the	trigger	guard,	the	gun	and	the	hand	encased	in
the	plaster	cast.	He	felt	like	an	asshole	now,	the	plaster	cast	still	pointed
at	a	guy	Annie	had	just	identified	as	a	cop.

The	realization	came	to	all	three	of	them	in	the	same	instant.

The	traffic	light	 on	the	corner	turned	red	again	as	though	signaling	the
coming	of	their	mutual	dawn.

Without	a	word,	they	looked	up	the	street.

It	was	empty.

Eileen	and	her	man	were	gone.

A	minute	ago,	she'd	had	three	backups.

Now	she	didn't	have	any.

Dolores	Eisenberg	was	Frank	Sebastiani's	older	sister.

Five-feet	ten-inches	tall,	black	hair	and	blue	eyes,	thirty-eight,	thirty-nine
years	old.	Hugging	Marie	to	her	when	Brown	and	Hawes	came	over	from
the	garage.	Tears	in	the	eyes	of	both	women.

Marie	introduced	her	to	the	cops.

Dolores	seemed	surprised	to	see	them	there.

"How	do	you	do?"	 she	said,	and	glanced	at	Marie.

"We're	sorry	 for	your	trouble,"	 Brown	 said.

257
An	old	Irish	 expression.	Hawes	wondered	where	he'd	picked	it	up.

Dolores	said,	"Thank	you,"	and	then	turned	 to	Marie	again.

"I'm	 sorry	it	 took	me	so	long	to	get	here,"	she	said.	"Max	is	in
Cincinnati,	and	I	had	to	find	 a	sitter.	God,	wait'll	he	hears	this.	He's
crazy	about	Frank."

"I	 know,"	Marie	 said.

"I'll	 have	to	call	him	again,"	 Dolores	said.	"When	Mom	told	me	what
happened,	I	tried	to	reach	him	at	the	hotel,	but	he	was	out.	What	time
was	that,	when	you	called	Mom?"

"It	 must've	been	around	eleven-thirty,"	Marie	 said.

"Yeah,	she	called	me	right	afterward.	I	felt	like	I'd	 been	hit	by	a
locomotive.	I	tried	to	get	Max,	I	left	 a	message	for	him	to	call	me,	but
then	I	left	the	house	around	midnight,	as	soon	as	the	sitter	got	there.	I'll
have	to	call	him	again."

She	was	still	wearing	her	overcoat.	She	took	it	off	now,	revealing	a	trim
black	skirt	and	a	crisp	white	blouse,	and	carried	it	familiarly	  to	the
coatrack.	They	were	still	standing	in	the	entrance	hall.	The	house	seemed
exceptionally	still	at	this	hour	of	the	morning.	The	heater	came	on	with	a
sudden	whooosh.

"Would	anyone	like	some	coffee?"	Dolores	asked.

A	take-charge	lady,	Hawes	thought.	Tragedy	in	the	family,	here	she	is	at
one	in	the	morning,	ready	to	make	coffee.

"There's	some	on	the	stove,"	Marie	said.

"Officers?"	 Dolores	said.

"Thank	 you,	no,"	Brown	said.

"No,	thanks,"	 Hawes	said.

"Marie?	 Honey,	can	I	get	a	cup	for	you?"

258
"I'm	 all	right,	 Dolores,	thank	you."

"Poor	baby,"	 Dolores	said,	and	hugged	her	sister-in-law	close	again.	Her
arm	still	around	her,	she	looked	at	Brown	and	said,	"My	mother	told	 me
you	think	Jimmy	 did	it,	is	that	right?"

"That's	 a	strong	possibility,"	Brown	said,	and	looked	at	Marie.

"You	haven't	found	him,	though?"

"No,	not	yet."

"It's	 hard	to	believe,"	Dolores	said,	and	shook	her	head.	"My	mother
said	you	have	to	do	an	autopsy.	I	wish	you	wouldn't,	really.	That's	really
upsetting	to	her."

It	occurred	to	Brown	that	 she	did	not	yet	know	her	brother's	body	had
been	dismembered.	Hadn't	Marie	told	the	family?	He	debated	breaking
the	news,	opted	against	it.

"Well,	ma'am,"	 he	said,	"an	autopsy's	mandatory	in	any	trauma	 death."

"Still,"	 Dolores	said.

Brown	was	still	looking	at	Marie.	 It	had	further	 occurred	to	him	that	 on
the	phone	with	Dolores	not	an	hour	ago,	she	herself	advised	her	sister-in-
law	about	the	autopsy.	Yet	now	Dolores	sounded	as	if	the	information	had
come	from	her	mother.	He	tried	to	remember	the	exact	content	of	the
phone	conversation.	Marie's	end	of	it,	anyway.

Hello	Dolores,	no,	not	yet,	I'm	down	in	the	kitchen.

Which	meant	her	sister-in-law	had	asked	her	if	she	was	in	bed,	or	getting
ready	for	bed,	or	whatever,	and	she'd	told	her	No,	I'm	down	here	with
two	detectives.	Which	meant	that	Doloresknew	there	were	two	detectives
here,	so	why	had	she	looked	so	surprised	tofind	them	here?

They	want	to	look	at	the	garage	room.

So	you	had	to	figure	Dolores	had	asked	her	what	two	detectives	were
doing	there.	And	she'd	told	her.	And	then	the	business	about	the	autopsy.

259
Which	Dolores	had	just	now	talked	about	as	if	it	had	come	from	her
mother.	But	if	Dolores	had	called	here	just	before	leaving	the	house
hellip;	well,	wait	a	minute.

On	the	phone,	Marie	hadn't	said	anything	about	expecting	her,	nothing
like	"See	you	soon	then,"	or	"Hurry	 on	over,"	or	 "Drive	 safely,"	just	"I'll
let	you	know,"	meaning	about	the	autopsy,	"Thanks	for	calling."

Brown	decided	to	play	it	flat	out.

He	looked	Dolores	dead	in	the	eye	and	said,	"Did	you	call	here	about	an
hour	ago?"

And	the	telephone	rang.

Brown	figured	there	had	to	be	a	god.

Because	if	the	earlier	ringing	of	the	phone	had	visibly	startled	Marie,	this
time	the	ringing	caused	an	immediate	look	of	panic	to	flash	in	her	eyes.
She	turned	toward	the	kitchen	as	if	it	had	suddenly	burst	into	flames,
made	an	abortive	start	out	of	the	entrance	hall,	stopped,	said,	"I	wonder
hellip;"	 and	then	looked	blankly	at	the	detectives.

"Can't	 be	Dolores	again,	can	it?"	Brown	said.

"What?"	 Dolores	said,	puzzled.

"Better	go	answer	it,"	 Brown	said.

"Yes,"	Marie	 said.

"I'll	 go	with	 you,"	he	said.

In	the	kitchen,	the	phone	kept	ringing.

Marie	hesitated.

"Want	me	to	get	it?"	 Brown	asked.

"No,	I'll	 hellip;	 it	may	be	my	mother-in-law,"	 she	said,	and	headed
immediately	for	the	kitchen,	Brown	right	 behind	her.

260
The	phone	kept	ringing.

She	was	thinking	You	goddamn	fool,	Itold	you	the	cops	were	here!

She	reached	out	for	the	receiver,	her	mind	racing.

Brown	was	standing	in	the	doorway	to	the	kitchen	now,	his	arms	folded
across	his	chest.

Marie	lifted	 the	receiver	from	the	hook.

"Hello?"	 she	said.

And	listened.

Brown	kept	watching	her.

"It's	 for	you,"	 she	said,	sounding	relieved,	and	handed	the	receiver	to
him.





CHAPTER	        13

Parker	felt	like	a	real	cop	again.

A	working	detective.

The	feeling	was	somewhat	exhilarating.

The	newspaper	story	accompanying	the	headline	told	him	everything	he
needed	to	know	about	the	liquor-store	holdups	tonight.	The	story
extensively	quoted	Detective	Meyer	Meyer	who	had	been	interviewed	in
his	room	at	Buenavista	Hospital.	Meyer	had	told	the	reporter	that	the
heists	and	subsequent	felony	murders	had	been	executed	by	four	midgets
being	driven	by	a	big	blonde	woman	in	a	blue	station	wagon.	One	of	the
holdup	victims	had	described	the	thieves	as	midgets.	She	had	further	told
the	police	that	one	of	the	midgets	was	named	Alice.

Parker	did	not	have	to	be	a	detective	to	know	that	there	couldn't	be	too
many	midgets	named	Alice	in	this	city.	But	making	the	connection	so

261
quickly	made	him	feel	like	a	real	cop	again.

He	put	Peaches	in	a	taxi	mdash;even	though	they	were	only	four	blocks
from	her	apartment	mdash;told	 her	he'd	try	to	call	her	later,	and	then
hailed	a	cruising	patrol	car.	The	two	uniformed	cops	in	the	car	advised
Parker	they	were	from	the	Three-One	mdash;which	Parker	knew
anyway	since	the	number	of	the	precinct	was	on	the	side	of	the	car
mdash;and	they	didn't	know	if	 they	had	authority	to	provide
transportation	for	 a	detective	from	the	Eight-Seven.

Parker	said,	"This	is	a	homicide	here,	open	the	fucking	door!"

The	two	uniformed	cops	looked	at	each	other	by	way	of	consultation,	and
then	the	cop	riding	shotgun	unlocked	the	back	door	for	him.	Parker	sat
in	the	back	of	the	car	like	a	common	criminal,	a	metal	grille	separating
him	from	the	two	cops	up	front.

"Four-oh-three	Thompson	Street,"	 he	told	the	driver.

"That's	 all	the	way	down	the	Quarter,"	the	driver	 complained.

"That's	 right,	it	 should	take	you	fifteen,	twenty	minutes."

"Half	 hour's	more	like	it,"	 the	shotgun	cop	said,	and	then	got	on	the
walkie-talkie	to	tell	his	sergeant	they	were	driving	a	bull	from	 the	Eight-
Seven	downtown.

The	sergeant	said,	"Let	me	talk	to	him."

"He's	in	back,"	 the	shotgun	cop	said.

"Stop	the	car	and	let	me	talk	to	him,"	 the	sergeant	said.	He	sounded	very
no-nonsense.	Parker	had	met	sergeants	like	him	before.	He	loved
trampling	on	sergeants	like	him.

They	stopped	the	car	and	opened	the	back	door.	The	shotgun	cop	handed
the	walkie-talkie	in	to	Parker.

"What's	 the	problem?"	Parker	 said	into	it.

"Who's	this?"	 the	sergeant	said.

262
"Detective	Andrew	Lloyd	 Parker,"	 he	said,	"Eighty-Seventh	Squad.
Who's	this?"

"Never	mind	who	this	is,	what's	the	idea	commandeering	one	of	my
cars?"

"The	idea	is	homicide,"	Parker	 said.	"The	idea	is	two	cops	in	the
hospital.	The	idea	is	I	gotta	get	downtown	in	a	hurry,	and	I'd	hate	like
hell	for	the	media	to	find	out	a	sergeant	from	the	Three-One	maybe	stood
in	the	way	of	a	timely	arrest.	That's	the	idea.	You	think	you	got	it?"

There	was	a	long	silence.

"Who's	your	 commanding	officer?"	 the	sergeant	asked,	trying	to	save
face.

"Lieutenant	 Peter	Byrnes,"	Parker	said.	"We	finished	here?"

"You	can	take	the	car	downtown,	but	I'll	 be	talking	to	your	lieutenant,"
the	sergeant	said.

"Good,	you	talk	to	him,"	 Parker	 said,	and	handed	the	walkie-talkie	to
the	shotgun	cop.	"Let's	get	rolling,"	 he	said.

They	closed	the	back	door	again.	The	driver	set	the	car	in	motion.

"Hit	 the	hammer,"	Parker	 said.

The	blues	looked	sidelong	at	each	other.	This	kind	of	thing	didn't	seem	to
warrant	use	of	the	siren.

"Hit	 the	fucking	hammer,"	 Parker	said.

The	driver	hit	 the	siren	switch.

They	were	sitting	in	the	living	room	when	Brown	got	off	the	phone.
Marie	and	her	sister-in-law	side	by	side	on	the	sofa,	Hawes	in	an	easy
chair	opposite	them.

Brown	walked	in	looking	very	solemn.

"Hal	 Willis,"	 he	said	to	Hawes.

263
"What's	 up?"	Hawes	said.

Brown	tugged	casually	at	his	earlobe	before	he	started	talking	again.
Hawes	picked	up	the	signal	at	once.	Little	dog-and-pony	act	on	the	way.

"They	found	the	rest	of	the	body,"	Brown	 said.

Marie	looked	at	him.

"Head	and	the	hands,"	Brown	said.	"In	 the	river.	I'm	 sorry,	ma'am,"	 he
said	to	Dolores,	"but	your	brother's	 body	was	dismembered.	I	hate	to
break	it	to	you	this	way."

"Oh	myGod	!"	 Dolores	said.

Marie	was	still	looking	at	Brown.

"Guys	dredging	the	river	 pulled	up	this	aluminum	case,	head	and	the
hands	in	it,"	he	said.

Hawes	was	trying	to	catch	the	drift.	He	kept	listening	intently.

"Did	 you	know	this?"	Dolores	asked	Marie.

Marie	nodded.

"You	knew	he'd	been	hellip;	?"

"Yes,"	she	said.	"I	didn't	 tell	Mom	 because	I	knew	what	it	would	do	to
her."

"Monoghan	responded,"	Brown	 said	to	Hawes,	"phoned	the	squad.
Willis	went	on	over	with	the	stuff	on	my	desk."

The	stuff	on	his	desk,	Hawes	thought.	The	reports,	the	positive	ID,	the
poster	he'd	taken	from	the	high	school	bulletin	board.

"I	 hate	to	have	to	go	over	this	another	time,	Mrs.	Sebastiani,"	Brown
said,	"but	I	 wonder	if	you	can	give	me	a	description	of	your	husband
again.	So	we	can	close	this	out."

264
"I	have	it	right	here,"	Hawes	said.	He	was	beginning	to	catch	on.	Nobody
closed	out	a	case	while	the	murderer	was	still	running	around	loose.	He
took	his	notebook	from	the	inside	pocket	of	his	jacket,	flipped	through
the	pages.	"Male,	white,	thirty-four	years	old	hellip;"	he	said.

"That	right?"	Brown	asked	Marie.

"Yes,"	she	said.

"Five-eleven,"	Hawes	said,	"one-seventy	hellip;"

"Mrs.	Sebastiani?"

"Yes."

Eyes	flashing	with	intelligence	now.	Hawes	figured	she	was	beginning	to
catch	on,	too.	Didn't	know	exactly	what	was	coming,	but	was	bracing
herself	for	it.	Hawes	didn't	know	exactly	what	was	coming,	either.	But	he
had	a	hunch.

"Hair	black,"	he	said,	"Eyes	hellip;"

"Why	do	we	have	to	go	over	this	again?"	she	said.	"I	identified	the	body,
you	have	everything	you	hellip;"

My	brother's	hair	was	black,	yes,"	Dolores	said	softly,	and	patted	Marie's
hand.

"Eyes	blue,"	Hawes	said.

"Blue	eyes,	yes,"	Dolores	said.	"Like	mine."

"Will	I	 have	to	come	into	the	city	again?"	Marie	asked.	"To	look	at
hellip;	at	what	they	hellip;	they	found	in	the	hellip;	?"

"Mrs.	Sebastiani,"	Brown	said,	"the	head	we	found	in	the	river	doesn't
match	your	husband's	photograph."

Marie	blinked	at	him.

Silence.

265
Then:

"Well	hellip;	 does	hellip;	does	that	mean	hellip;	what	does	that	mean?"

"It	 means	the	dead	man	isn't	your	husband,"	Brown	said.

"Has	someone	made	a	mistake	then?"	Dolores	asked	at	once.	"Are	you
saying	my	brother	isn't	dead?"

"Mrs.	 Sebastiani,"	Brown	said,	"would	 you	mind	very	much	if	I	 read	you
this	description	you	gave	me	of	Jimmy	Brayne?"

"I	 really	don't	see	why	we	have	to	go	over	this	a	hundred	times,"	she
said.	"If	you	were	doing	your	job	right,	 you'd	havefound	Jimmy	by	how."

Brown	had	already	taken	out	his	notebook.

"White	 male,"	he	read,	"thirty-two	  years	old.	Height,	six	feet.	Weight,	a
hundred	and	eighty	hellip;"

"Yes,"	she	said	impatiently.

Eyes	alert	now.	Hawes	had	seen	those	eyes	before.	Desperate	eyes,
trapped	eyes.	Brown	was	closing	in,	and	she	knew	it.

"Hair	 black,	eyes	brown."

"Yes,"	she	said	again.

"Mrs.	 Sebastiani,	the	eyes	were	brown."

"Yes,	I	just	told	you	hellip;"

"On	the	head	in	the	river.	The	eyes	were	brown."	He	turned	to	Dolores.
"Does	your	brother	have	an	appendectomy	scar?"	he	asked.

"A	what?"

"Did	 he	ever	have	his	appendix	removed?"

"No.	I	don't	 understand	what	you	hellip;"

266
"Was	he	ever	in	a	skiing	accident?	Did	he	ever	tear	the	cartilage	on	his
hellip;"

"He	never	skied	in	his	life,"	 Dolores	said.

She	looked	extremely	puzzled	now.	She	glanced	at	Marie.

"The	techs	printed	the	fingers	and	thumbs	on	both	hands,"	Brown	said.
"We're	running	 a	comparison	check	right	this	minute.	Was	your	brother
ever	in	the	service?"

"Yes.	The	Army."

"Would	you	know	 if	Jimmy	Brayne	was	ever	in	the	service?"

"I	 don't	know."

"Or	 in	any	security-sensitive	job?	How	about	you,	Mrs.	Sebastiani?	You
seem	to	know	a	lot	about	Jimmy	Brayne,	maybe	you	know	whether	he's
ever	been	fingerprinted."

"All	 I	know	about	him	 hellip;"

"Right	 down	to	his	beauty	spot,"	Brown	said,	and	snapped	the	notebook
shut.

"Marie,	 what	is	he	talking	about?"	 Dolores	asked.

"I	 think	she	knows	what	I'm	talking	 about,"	 Brown	said.

Marie	said	nothing.

"If	 the	prints	come	up	blank,"	 Brown	said,	"we've	still	 got	the	head.
Someone'll	identify	him.	Sooner	or	later,	we'll	get	a	positive	ID."

She	still	said	nothing.

"He's	Jimmy	 Brayne,	isn't	he?"	Brown	asked.

Silence.

"You	and	your	husband	killed	Jimmy	 Brayne,	didn't	 you?"	he	said.

267
She	sat	quite	still,	her	hands	folded	on	the	lap	of	her	robe.

"Mrs.	 Sebastiani,"	Brown	said,	"would	 you	like	to	tell	us	where	your
husband	is?"

Parker	opened	the	door	with	a	skeleton	key.

On	the	sofa	bed	in	the	living	room,	a	male	midget	and	a	female	midget
were	asleep.	They	jumped	up	the	minute	the	door	opened.

"Hello,"	 Parker	said	softly,	and	showed	them	the	gun.

Wee	Willie	Winkie	was	one	of	the	midgets.	He	was	wearing	striped
pajamas.	He	looked	cute	as	a	button,	but	his	face	went	pale	the	moment
he	saw	the	gun.	His	wife,	Corky,	was	wearing	panties	and	a	baby-doll
nightgown.	Pink.	She	grabbed	a	pillow	and	hugged	it	to	her	breasts	as
Parker	approached	the	bed.	Light	from	the	hallway	spilled	illumination
into	the	room.	It	glinted	on	the	gun	in	Parker's	 hand.	Gorky's	brown	eyes
were	opened	wide.	She	kept	holding	the	pillow	to	her	breasts.	Parker
thought	she	looked	a	little	bit	like	Debbie	Reynolds.

"Are	the	others	asleep?"	he	whispered.

Willie	nodded.

"Where?"

Willie	pointed	to	a	pair	of	closed	doors.

"Up,"	 Parker	whispered.

They	got	out	of	bed.	Corky	looked	embarrassed	in	only	her	nightgown
and	panties.	She	kept	holding	the	pillow	to	her	in	front,	but	her	back	was
exposed.	Parker	gestured	with	the	gun.

"We're	going	to	wake	them	up,"	he	whispered.	"Don't	 yell	or	I'll	 shoot
you	both."

In	one	of	the	bedrooms,	Oliver	Twist	was	asleep	with	a	full-sized	woman.
The	woman	was	very	fat	and	very	blonde.	Parker	remembered	the	old
joke	about	the	midget	marrying	the	circus	fat	lady	and	running	 around

268
the	bed	all	night	yelling,	"Mine,	 all	mine!"

He	nudged	the	midget.

The	midget	popped	up	in	bed.

Red	hair	all	mussed,	blue	eyes	wide.

"Shhhh,"	 Parker	said.	"It's	 the	police."

Oliver	blinked.	So	did	Willie.	 This	was	the	first	he	was	hearing	of	this.	Up
to	now,	he'd	thought	they	were	dealing	with	a	burglar,	which	was	bad
enough.	Now	he	knew	it	was	a	cop	in	here,	his	worst	nightmare	realized.
He	glanced	at	Corky,	his	eyes	blaming	his	wife	for	her	goddamn
friendship	with	 Little	 Annie	Oakley	and	her	trigger-happy	finger.

"Wake	up	your	lady,"	 Parker	said	to	Oliver.

Oliver	nudged	the	fat	blonde.

She	rolled	over.

He	nudged	her	again.

"Go	away,"	she	said.

Parker	pulled	the	blanket	off	her.	She	was	wearing	a	long	granny
nightgown.	She	tried	to	pull	the	blanket	back	over	her	again,	grasped
futilely	at	only	thin	 air,	and	then	sat	up,	annoyed	and	still	half-asleep.

"Police,"	 Parker	said,	smiling.

"What?"	 she	said,	blinking.

"You	the	one	did	the	driving?"	 he	said.

"What	 driving?"	 she	said.

"She	don't	know	what	driving,"	  Parker	said	to	Oliver,	still	 smiling.

"Quentin	 did	the	driving,"	 Oliver	 said.	"This	lady	had	nothing	to	do	with
any	of	it."

269
"Any	 of	what?"	the	blonde	said.

Quentin,	Parker	thought.	The	guy	at	the	party.

"Where	is	he?"	he	asked.

"In	 the	other	room,"	Oliver	 said.

"Let's	 go	tell	him	the	party's	over,"	Parker	 said.	"Get	out	of	bed.	Both	of
you."

They	got	out	of	bed.

"Is	this	a	joke?"	 the	blonde	whispered	to	Oliver.

"I	 don't	think	 it's	a	joke,"	 Oliver	whispered	back.

Parker	herded	the	four	of	them	into	the	other	bedroom.	The	radiator	 was
hissing,	and	the	room	was	suffocatingly	hot.	Parker	snapped	on	the
lights.	Quentin	Forbes	was	in	bed	with	Alice.	Neither	of	them	stirred.
They	had	thrown	back	the	covers	in	their	sleep,	and	they	were	both
naked.	Alice	looked	as	pretty	as	a	little	doll,	her	blonde	hair	fanned	out
over	the	pillow.

"Police!"	 Parker	shouted,	and	they	both	jumped	up	at	the	same	time.
"Hello,	Alice,"	 he	said,	and	smiled.

"Hello,	Andy,"	 she	said,	and	smiled	back.

"We	have	to	get	dressed	now,"	he	said,	as	if	to	a	child.

"Okay,"	 she	said,	and	reached	under	the	pillow.

Parker	said	it	even	before	he	saw	the	gun	in	her	hand.

"Don't."

She	hesitated.

"Please,	Alice,"	he	said.	"Don't."

270
She	must	have	discerned	something	in	his	eyes.	She	must	have	known	she
was	looking	into	the	eyes	of	a	cop	who	had	seen	it	all	and	heard	it	all.

"Okay,"	 she	said,	and	put	down	the	gun.

Forbes	said,	"This	is	an	outrage."

"It	 is,	I	know,"	 Parker	said.

"Let	 me	see	your	badge,"	the	blonde	said.

Parker	showed	her	his	shield.

"What	 is	this?"	she	asked.

"Let's	 get	dressed	now,"	he	said,	and	went	to	the	window	and	yelled
down	for	the	two	uniformed	cops	from	the	Three-One.

There	were	only	three	pairs	of	handcuffs	among	them,	and	six	people	to
cuff.	This	was	a	problem	in	the	law	of	supply	and	demand.	One	of	the
blues	went	downstairs	again	and	radioed	for	assistance,	making	it	clear
this	wasn't	a	10-13,	they	just	needed	some	more	handcuffs.	The	sergeant
at	the	Twelfth	wanted	to	know	what	two	blues	from	the	Three-One	and	a
detective	from	the	Eight-Seven	were	doing	on	his	turf,	but	he	sent	a	car
around	with	the	extra	cuffs.	By	the	time	the	cuffs	arrived,	Parker	 had
personally	searched	the	apartment.	He'd	found	a	valise	full	of	money.
He'd	found	a	trunk	 with	costumes	and	masks	and	wigs	in	it.	He'd	found
four	.22-caliber	Zephyr	revolvers	and	a	Colt	.45-caliber	automatic.

He	figured	he	had	a	case.

When	they	put	the	cuffs	on	her,	Alice	was	wearing	a	pair	of	tailored	gray
slacks,	a	long-sleeved	pink	blouse,	a	double	breasted	navy-blue	jacket
with	brass	buttons,	blue	patent	leather	shoes	with	French	heels,	and	a
little	navy-blue	overcoat.	She	looked	adorable.

As	they	went	out	of	the	apartment	together,	she	said,	"It	didn't	have	to
happen	this	way,	you	know."

"I	 know,"	Parker	 said.

Willis	hoped	there	wasn't	a	gun	in	the	room	here.	He	hoped	there

271
wouldn't	be	shooting.	With	O'Brien	 along	hellip;

"Police,"	 O'Brien	said,	and	knocked	on	the	door	again.

Silence	inside	the	room	there.

Then	the	sound	of	a	window	scraping	open.

"He's	moving!"	 Willis	 said.

He	was	already	backing	away	from	the	door	and	raising	his	right	leg	for
a	piston-kick.	Arms	wide	for	leverage,	he	looked	like	a	football	player
going	for	the	extra	point.	His	leg	lashed	out,	the	sole	and	heel	of	his	shoe
hitting	the	door	flat,	 just	above	the	knob.	The	latch	sprang,	the	door
swung	inward,	O'Brien	following	 it	into	 the	room,	gun	extended.	Don't
let	there	be	another	gun	in	here,	Willis	thought.

A	man	in	his	undershorts	was	halfway	out	the	window.

"That's	 a	long	drop,	mister,"	O'Brien	 said.

The	man	hesitated.

"Mr.	 Sebastiani?"	Willis	said.

The	man	still	had	one	leg	over	the	windowsill.	There	was	no	fire	escape
out	there,	Willis	wondered	where	the	hell	he	thought	he	was	going.

"My	 name	is	Theo	Hardeen,"	he	said.

"So	your	wife	mentioned,"	 Willis	said.

"My	 wife?	I	don't	 know	what	you're	talking	 about."

They	never	knew	what	anyone	was	talking	about.

"Mr.	 Sebastiani,"	Willis	said,	"at	 this	very	moment,	your	wife	is	driving
in	from	Collinsworth	 with	 two	detectives	from	the	Eighty-Seventh	Squad,
upon	whose	instructions	and	advice	we're	hellip;"

"I	 don't	have	any	wife	in	hellip;"

272
"They	also	have	a	chain	saw	in	the	car,"	O'Brien	said.

"They	found	a	chain	saw	in	your	garage,"	Willis	 said.

"There's	a	lot	of	blood	on	the	saw,"	O'Brien	 said.

"Sir,	we're	arresting	you	for	 the	crime	of	murder,"	 Willis	said,	and	then
began	reeling	off	Miranda-Escobedo	by	rote.	Sebastiani	listened	to	the
recitation	as	though	he	were	being	lectured.	He	still	had	one	leg	over	the
windowsill.

"Mr.	 Sebastiani?"	Willis	said.	"You	want	 to	come	in	off	that	window
now?"

Sebastiani	came	in	off	the	window.

"She	blew	it,	huh?"	he	said.

"You	both	did,"	 Willis	 said.

This	time	is	for	real,	Carella	thought.

No	tricks	this	time.

This	time	I	go	west.

Swirling	darkness,	blinking	lights,	 aurora	borealis,	murmuring	 voices,
beeping	sounds,	everything	so	fake	and	far	away,	but	everything	so	real
and	immediate,	it	was	funny.	Floating	somewhere	above	himself,
hovering	above	himself	like	the	angel	of	death,	"Wear	this	garlic	around
your	neck,"	Grandma	 used	to	say,	"it'll	keep	away	the	angel	of	death,"
but	where's	the	garlic	now,	Grandma?	Crisp	white	sheets	and	soft	feather
pillows,	tomato	sauce	cooking	on	the	old	wood	stove	in	the	kitchen,	your
eyeglasses	steaming	up,	the	time	Uncle	Jerry	ate	the	rat	shit,	thinking	it
was	olives,	everyone	gone	now,	is	Meyer	dead,	too?

Jesus,	Meyer,	don't	be	dead.

Please	don't	be	dead.

Floating	on	the	air	above	himself,	looking	down	at	himself,	the	big	hero,
some	hero,	open	to	the	world,	open	to	the	hands	and	eyes	of	strangers,	an

273
open	book,	don't	let	Meyer	be	dead,	let	me	hold	you,	Meyer,	let	me	hold
you,	friend.	Let's	go	in	now,	did	someone	say	that	years	and	years	ago?
Open	him	up	now,	open	up	the	hero,	big	editorial	conference	out	there,
but	no	last-minute	editorial	decisions	this	time,	no	one	here	to	say	you
can't	kill	 the	hero,	big	hero,	some	hero,	cold-cocked	by	midgets,	bang-
bang,	gotcha,	close	the	book.

Exit.

But	hellip;

Please	save	that	for	later,	okay?	Save	the	final	curtain	for	somewhere
down	the	line,	I'm	a	married	 man,	give	me	a	break.	He	almost	laughed
though	nothing	was	funny,	tried	to	laugh,	wondered	if	he	was	smiling
instead,	heard	someone	say	something	through	the	fog	rolling	in	off	the
water,	heavy	storm	brewing	out	there,	I	never	even	learned	to	sail,	he
thought,	I	never	had	a	yacht.

All	the	things	I	never	did.

All	the	things	I	never	had.

Well,	listen,	who's	hellip;	?

All	the	treasures.

Thirty-seven	five	a	year	doesn't	buy	treasures.

Ah,	Jesus,	Teddy,	I	never	bought	you	treasures.

All	the	things	I	wanted	to	buy	you.

Forgive	me	for	the	treasures,	bless	me	father	for	I	have	sinned,	A	is	for
amethyst	and	B	is	for	beryl,	C	is	for	coral	and	D	is	for	diamonds,	F	is	for
furs	and	G	is	for	gold	and	H	is	for	heaven	and	I	is	for	hellip;

E	is	missing.

E	is	for	exit.

But	hellip;

274
Please	don't	get	ahead	of	me,	please	don't	rush	me,	just	give	me	a	little
time	to	finish	the	rest	of	the	alphabet,	I	beg	of	you,	please.

I	is	for	me.

"Careful,"	 someone	said.

There's	one	hot-bed	hotel	the	girls	use,	plus	fifty	or	sixty	rented	rooms	all
over	the	Zone.

Shanahan	talking.

Too	many	hours	ago.

She	had	lost	her	backups,	she	knew	that.

She	didn't	know	what	had	happened	on	the	street	outside,	but	they	were
gone,	that	was	for	sure.

So	here	we	are,	she	thought.

Alone	at	last.

You	and	me.

Face	to	face.

Not	in	that	single	hot-bed	hotel,	where	there	was	a	chance	they	might	find
her	before	the	crack	of	dawn,	but	in	one	of	those	fifty	or	sixty	rented
rooms.	Lady	downstairs	taking	the	money	from	him,	looking	at	it	 on	the
palm	of	her	hand	as	if	she	expected	a	tip	besides,	up	the	stairs	to	the	third
floor,	the	smells	of	cooking	permeating	the	hallways,	terrific	spot	for	a
honeymoon,	key	in	the	door,	the	door	opening	on	a	room	with	a	bed	and	a
dresser	and	a	wooden	chair	and	a	lamp	and	a	tattered	window	shade,	and
a	small	door	at	the	far	end	leading	into	a	bathroom	with	only	a	toilet
bowl	and	a	soiled	sink.

"It's	 small,	but	it's	cheerful,"	 he'd	said,	grinning,	and	then	he'd	locked
the	door	behind	them	and	put	the	key	into	the	same	pocket	with	the
knife.

That	was	almost	an	hour	ago.

275
He'd	been	talking	ever	since.

She	kept	reminding	him	that	time	was	money,	wanting	him	to	make	his
move,	get	it	over	with,	but	he	kept	laying	twenty-dollar	bills	 on	her,	"A
dollar	a	minute,	right?"	 he	said,	and	the	empty	minutes	of	the	night	kept
ticking	away,	and	he	made	no	move	to	approach	her.

She	wondered	if	she	should	bust	him,	anyway.	Here	we	go,	mister,	it's	the
Law,	run	a	lineup	for	the	pair	 of	hookers	who'd	described	him,	run	the
risk	of	them	either	chickening	out	or	not	remembering,	run	 the	further
risk	mdash;evenwith	a	positive	ID	mdash;that	he'd	talk	his	way	out	of	it,
walk	away	from	it.	Two	hookers	claiming	they	saw	him	chatting	up	the
victims	didn't	 add	up	to	a	conviction.	No.	If	he	was	their	man,	he	had	to
move	on	her	before	she	could	bust	him.	Come	at	her	with	the	knife.	No
easy	way	out	of	this	one,	she	thought.	It's	still	him	and	me,	alone	together
in	this	room.	And	all	I	 can	do	is	wait.	And	listen.

She	was	learning	a	lot	about	him.

He	was	lying	on	the	bed	with	his	hands	behind	his	head,	looking	up	at	the
ceiling,	and	she	was	sitting	in	the	wooden	chair	across	the	room	near	the
dresser,	her	bag	on	the	floor	near	her	dangling	hand,	and	she	felt	like	a
psychiatrist	listening	to	a	patient.	The	room	was	warm	enough,	she	had
to	say	that	for	it.	Sizzling	hot	radiator	 throwing	heat,	she	was	almost
getting	drowsy,	that's	all	she	needed.	His	jacket	draped	over	the	back	of
the	wooden	chair	now,	his	voice	droning	into	the	room.	She	sat	with	both
feet	planted	firmly	on	the	floor,	legs	slightly	apart,	gun	strapped	to	her
ankle	inside	the	right	boot.	She	was	ready	for	anything.	But	nothing
came.	Except	talk.

"	hellip;	 that	maybeshe	was	partly	to	blame	for	what	happened,	you
know?"	he	said.	"My	 mother.	Listen,	I	love	her	to	death,	don't	get	me
wrong,	she's	the	one	who	made	my	freedom	possible,	may	she	rest	in
peace.	But	when	you	think	of	it	another	way,	was	it	all	myfather's	fault?
Can	I	just	hold	him	responsible?	For	laying	Elga?	I	mean,	isn't	mymother
partly	to	blame	for	what	 happened?"

Elga	again.

Hardly	a	sentence	out	of	his	mouth	without	some	mention	of	the
housekeeper.

276
"She	was	a	schoolteacher,	you	know,	my	mother,	did	I	tell	you	that?"

Only	a	hundred	times,	Eileen	thought.

"Put	him	 through	medical	school,	left	me	with	Elga	all	the	while	I	was
growing	up,	well,	listen,	I	don't	blame	her	for	 that.	She	was	teaching	to
support	the	family,	you	know,	that	was	a	lot	of	responsibility.	Do	you
know	the	one	about	the	kindergarten	teacher	who	gets	the	obscene	phone
call?	She	picks	up	the	phone,	she	says,	'Hello?'	and	the	voice	on	the	other
end	says,	'Doo-doo,	pee-pee,	ca-ca,'	well,	that's	an	old	one,	you	probably
heard	it.	My	mother	didn't	 teach	kindergarten,	she	was	a	high	school
teacher,	worked	in	a	tough	school,	long,	hard	hours,	sometimes	didn't	get
home	till	six	or	seven,	had	to	correct	papers	all	night	long,	Ihated	Elga.
But	what	I'm	 saying,	responsibility	is	a	two-way	street.	If	my	father	was
laying	Elga,	maybe	part	of	the	fault	was	my	mother's,	do	you	see	what	I
mean?	She	always	said	she	hated	teaching,	but	then	why	did	she	take	it	so
seriously?	Her	sense	of	responsibility,	sure.	But	shouldn't	she	have	been
responsible	to	her	husband,	too?	To	her	son?	Shouldn't	she	have	taken
care	ofour	needs,	too?	I	mean,	shit,	teaching	didn't	have	to	become
anobsession	with	her,	did	it?"

I	don't	want	to	be	your	shrink,	 Eileen	thought.	I	don't	 want	to	hear
anything	else	about	you,	make	your	goddamn	move!

But	he	wouldn't	stop	talking.

"Children	 sense	things,	don't	you	think?"	he	said.	"I	must	haveknown
something	was	wrong	in	that	house.	My	father	yelling	at	me	all	the	time,
my	mother	never	there,	there	was	tension	in	that	house,	you	could	cut	it
with	a	knife."

Silence.

She	watched	him	on	the	bed.

Hands	behind	his	head,	staring	up	at	the	ceiling.

"I'll	 tell	 you	the	truth,	I	 sometimes	felt	like	killing	her."

More	silence.

277
Here	it	comes,	Eileen	thought.

"When	I	 was	a	kid,"	he	said.

And	the	silence	lengthened.

"Fucking	 dedicated	schoolteacher,"	he	said.

She	watched	him.

"Ignoring	 the	people	who	loved	her."

Kept	watching	him.	Ready.	Waiting.

"I	 tried	to	make	sense	of	it	later,	after	she	died.	Left	me	all	that	money.
This	is	for	Robert's	freedom	to	risk	enjoying	life.	 That	was	guilt	talking,
wasn't	it?	That	was	her	guilt	for	 having	ignored	us	both."

Silence	again.

"Do	you	know	what	she	did	once?	Elga?"

"What	 did	she	do?"

"I	 was	eight	years	old."

"What	 did	she	do?"

"She	took	off	her	bloomers."

Bloomers.	A	child's	expression.

"Showed	herself	to	me."

Silence.

"I	 ran	away	from	her	and	locked	myself	in	the	bathroom."

Silence.

"My	 mother	found	me	in	there	when	she	got	home	from	school.	Elga	said
I'd	been	a	bad	boy.	Told	my	mother	I'd	locked	myself	in	the	bathroom

278
and	wouldn't	come	out.	My	mother	asked	me	why	I'd	done	that.	Elga	was
standing	right	there.	I	said	I	was	afraid	of	the	lightning.	 It	was	raining
that	day.	Elga	smiled.	The	next	time	we	were	alone	together,	she	hellip;
she	hellip;	forced	me	to	hellip;"

He	sat	up	suddenly.

"Do	you	know	the	one	about	the	guy	who	goes	into	a	sex	shop	to	buy	a
merkin?	The	clerk	says,	'Did	you	want	this	sent,	sir,	or	will	you	take	it
with	you?'	The	guy	says,	'No,	I'll	just	eat	it	here.'	"	 He	laughed	harshly
and	abruptly	and	then	said,	"How	 would	you	like	me	to	eatyour	pussy?"

"Sure,"	 she	said.

"Then	take	off	your	 bloomers."

He	swung	his	legs	over	the	side	of	the	bed.

"Come	over	here	and	take	off	your	bloomers."

"You	come	here,"	Eileen	said.

He	stood	up.

He	put	his	right	hand	in	his	pocket.

She	thought	Yes,	take	out	the	knife,	you	son	of	a	bitch.

And	then	she	thought	No,	don't,	Bobby.

And	was	suddenly	confused	again.

"Bobby,"	 she	said	wearily,	"I'm	a	cop."

"Sure,"	 he	said,	"a	cop."

"I	 don't	want	to	hurt	 you,"	 she	said.

"Then	don't	 bullshit	me!"	 he	said	angrily.	"I've	 had	enough	bullshit	in
my	life!"

"I'm	 a	cop,"	she	said,	and	took	the	gun	out	of	her	bag,	and	leveled	it	at

279
him.	"Let's	 go	find	some	help	for	you,	okay?"

He	looked	at	her.	A	smile	cracked	over	his	face.

"Is	this	a	trick?"	  he	said.

"No	trick.	 I'm	 a	cop.	Let's	go,	okay?"

"Go	where?	Where	do	you	want	to	go,	baby?"	He	was	still	smiling.

But	his	hand	was	still	in	his	pocket.

"Find	 some	people	you	can	talk	to,"	she	said.

"About	 what?	There's	nothing	I	have	to	say	to	hellip;"

"Put	the	knife	 on	the	floor,	Bobby,"

She	was	standing	now,	almost	in	a	policeman's	crouch,	the	gun	still
leveled	at	him.

"What	 knife?"	 he	said.

"The	knife	in	 your	pocket,	Bobby.	Put	it	on	the	floor."

*'I	 don't	have	a	knife,"	he	said.

"You	have	a	knife,	Bobby.	Put	it	on	the	floor."

He	took	the	knife	out	of	his	pocket.

"Good,	now	put	it	 on	the	floor,"	she	said.

"Suppose	I	don't?"	 he	said.

"I	 know	you	will,	Bobby."

"Suppose	I	lock	myself	in	the	bathroom	instead?"

"No,	you	won't	do	that,	Bobby.	You're	going	to	put	the	knife	on	the	floor
hellip;"

280
"Like	 a	good	little	boy,	huh?"

"Bobby	hellip;	 I'm	 not	your	mother,	I'm	 not	Elga,	I'm	not	going	to	hurt
you.	Just	drop	the	knife	on	the	floor	hellip;"

"Listen	to	the	shrink,"	  he	said.	"You're	a	fuckinghooker	is	what	you	are,
who	the	fuck	do	you	think	you're	kidding?"

"Bobby,	please	drop	the	knife."

"Say	pretty	please,"	he	said,	and	the	blade	snicked	open.

The	gun	was	in	her	hand,	she	had	him	cold.

"Don't	 move,"	she	said.

The	policeman's	crouch	more	defined	now,	more	deliberate.

He	took	a	step	toward	her.

"I'm	 warning	 you,	don't	move!"

"Do	you	know	the	one	about	the	guy	who	goes	into	a	bank	to	hold	it	up?
He	sticks	the	gun	in	the	teller's	face	and	says,	'Don't	muss	a	moovle,	this
is	a	fuck-up!'	"

Another	step	toward	her.

"This	isn't	 fun	anymore,"	 he	said,	and	sliced	the	knife	across	the	air
between	them.

"Whoosh,"	 he	said.

And	came	at	her.

Her	first	bullet	 took	him	in	the	chest,	knocking	him	backward	toward	 the
bed.	She	fired	again	almost	at	once,	hitting	him	in	the	shoulder	this	time,
spinning	him	around,	and	then	she	fired	a	third	time,	shooting	him	in	the
back,	knocking	him	over	onto	the	bed,	and	then	mdash;she	would	never
understand	why	mdash;she	kept	shooting	into	his	lifeless	body,	watching
the	eruptions	of	blood	along	his	spine,	saying	over	and	over	again,	"I
gave	you	a	chance,	I	gave	you	a	chance,"	until	the	gun	was	empty.

281
Then	she	threw	the	gun	across	the	room	and	began	screaming.

Some	people	never	change.

Genero	didn't	even	seem	to	know	she	couldn't	hear	him.

He	was	there	at	the	hospital	to	tell	Carella	what	a	hero	he'd	been,
shooting	four	teenagers	who'd	firebombed	a	building.

He	sat	in	the	hallway	talking	to	Teddy,	who	was	praying	her	husband
wouldn't	die,	praying	 her	husband	wasn't	already	dead.

"	hellip;	 and	all	at	once	they	came	running	out,"	he	said,	"Steve	would've
been	proud	of	me.	They	threw	the	firebomb	at	me,	but	that	didn't	scare
me,	I	hellip;"

A	doctor	in	a	green	surgical	gown	was	coming	down	the	hallway.

There	was	blood	on	the	gown.

She	caught	her	breath.

"Mrs.	 Carella?"	he	said.

She	read	his	lips.

At	first	 she	thought	he	said,	"We	shot	him."

A	puzzled	look	crossed	her	face.

He	repeated	it.

"We	got	it,"	 he	said.

She	let	out	her	breath.

"He'll	 be	okay,"	the	doctor	said.

"He'll	 be	okay,"	Genero	repeated.

She	nodded.

282
And	then	she	cupped	her	hands	to	her	face	and	began	weeping.

Genero	just	sat	there.

Annie	talked	to	him	in	the	hallway	of	the	Seven-Two.

"The	landlady	called	911	because	somebody	was	screaming	upstairs,"
she	said.	"She	caters	to	hookers,	she	wouldn't	have	called	unless	she
thought	it	was	very	serious."

Kling	nodded.

"She	quieted	down	just	a	little	while	ago.	She's	down	the	hall	in
Interrogation.	I'm	 not	sure	you	ought	to	talk	to	her."

"Why	 not?"	Kling	 said.

"I'm	 just	not	sure,"	 Annie	said.

He	went	down	the	hall.

He	opened	the	door.

She	was	sitting	at	the	long	table	in	the	Interrogation	Room,	the	two-way
mirror	 behind	her.	Just	sitting	there.	Looking	at	her	hands.

"I'm	 sorry	if	 I	screwed	it	up,"	he	said.

"You	didn't."

He	sat	opposite	her.

"Are	you	okay?"	 he	asked.

"No,"	 she	said.

He	looked	at	her.

"I'm	 quitting,"	  she	said.

"What	 do	you	mean?"

283
"The	force."

"No,	you're	not."

"I'm	quitting,	Bert.	I	don't	like	what	it	did	to	me,	what	it	keeps	doing	to
me."

"Eileen,	you	hellip;"

"I'm	quitting	this	city,	too."

"Eileen	hellip;"

"This	fucking	city,"	she	said,	and	shook	her	head.

He	reached	for	her	hand.	She	pulled	it	away.

"No,"	she	said.

"What	about	me?"	he	said.

"What	about	me?"	she	said.

The	phone	rang	at	a	little	past	two	in	the	morning.

She	picked	up	the	receiver.

"Peaches?"	the	voice	said.	"This	is	Phil	Hendricks	at	Camera	Works,	we
talked	earlier	tonight."

Him	again!

"What	I	want	you	to	do,"	he	said,	"I	want	you	to	take	off	your	blouse
and	go	look	at	yourself	in	the	mirror.	Then	I	want	you	to	hellip;"

"Listen,	you	creep,"	she	said,	"if	you	call	me	one	more	time	hellip;"

"This	is	Andy	Parker,"	he	said.	"I'm	in	a	phone	booth	on	the	corner.	Is	it
too	late	to	come	up?"

"You	dope,"	she	said.

284
It	was	the	last	trick	of	the	night.
>

