1
    

 

    

   UNRELIABLE    MEMOIRS 

 

    

   ALSO  BY CLIVE   JAMES

   AUTOBIOGRAPHY

   Falling  Towards England

   May Week Was in June

   North Face of Soho

   FICTION

   Brilliant  Creatures

   The Remake

   Brrm!  Brrm!

   The Silver Castle

   VERSE

   The Book of My Enemy: Collected Verse, 1958?2003

   Opal Sunset: Select Poems, 1958?2008

   TRAVEL

2
   Flying Visits

   CRITICISM

   Reliable Essays: The Best of Clive James

   The Metropolitan Critic  (new edition, 1994)

   Visions Before Midnight

   The Crystal Bucket

   First Reactions

   At the Pillars of Hercules

   From the Land of Shadows

   Glued to the Box

   Snakecharmers in Texas

   The Dreaming Swimmer

   On Television

   Even as We Speak

   As of This Writing

   The Meaning of Recognition

   Cultural  Amnesia 

 
 

    

3
 
 

     



























                                                                                                              
                                                                           

                                                                           

                                                                             

                                                                             

                                                                             

                                                UNRELIABLE           MEMOIRS

                                                                Clive    James

     

4
 

 

 

 

 




                                   W. W. NORTON   &  COMPANY

                                              new  york ? london 

                                                             

                                                              

                            Copyright   © 2009,  1980 by Clive  James

                                              All   rights reserved

 For information   about permission  to reproduce  selections from  this  book,
               write  to Permissions,  W. W. Norton  &  Company,  Inc., 
                          500 Fifth   Avenue, New  York,  NY  10110

                   Library  of  Congress Cataloging-in-Publication    Data

                                             James, Clive,  1939? 
                               Unreliable  memoirs  / Clive  James. 
                                                       p. cm. 
                        Originally   published:  London:  Cape, 1980. 
                                      ISBN:  978-0-393-07286-0 
1. James, Clive, 1939?2.  Authors,  Australian?20th  century?Biography.   I.
                                                        Title. 
                                        PR9619.3.J27Z47  2009 

5
                                                   828?dc22 
                                                        [B]

                                                  2009004319

                                    W. W. Norton & Company, Inc. 
                          500 Fifth  Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10110 
                                          www.wwnorton.com

                                    W. W. Norton & Company Ltd. 
                  Castle House, 75/76 Wells Street, London W1T 3QT 

 

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

   to 
Rhoisin and Bruce Beresford 
and the getting of wisdom  

6
 
 

    

 
 

    

   Andromache   led  the  lamentation   of  the  women,  while   she  held  in  her
hands the head of Hector,  her great warrior:

   -Husband,  you  are gone so young from   life,  and leave me in  your  home a
widow.  Our child  is still  but  a little  fellow,  child  of ill-fated   parents, you  and
me.  How   can  he  grow  up   to  manhood?  Before   that,  this   city   shall  be
overthrown.  For you  are gone, you  who kept  watch over  it, and  kept safe its
wives and their  little  ones?

   “And    you   have  left   woe   unutterable   and  mourning   to   your   parents,
Hector;  but  in  my  heart  above  all  others  bitter  anguish  shall  abide.  Your
hands were not  stretched  out to  me  as you lay  dying.   You spoke  to me  no
living  word  that I might  have pondered  as my tears fell  night  and day.”

   Iliad,   xxiv,   translated   by  S.  E.  Winbolt,   from   The  Iliad   Pocket  Book,
Constable 1911  
 

 

    

   CONTENTS 

   Like  America,  Only Different: 
Preface to the American  Edition  
 

   Preface 

7
 

    

   1. The Kid from Kogarah 
 

   2. Valley of the Killer  Snakes 
 

   3. Billycart  Hill 
 

   4. The Force of Destruction 
 

   5. Enter the Flash of Lightning 
 

   6. Dib, Dib, Dib,  Dib 
 

   7. Eros and the Angel 
 

   8. The Imitation of Christ 
 

   9. Milo  the Magnificent 
 

   10. The Sound of Mucus 
 

   11. A Prong in Peril 
 

   12. All  Dressed Up 
 

8
   13. Let Us Rejoice, Therefore 
 

   14. Basic Training 
 

   15. Very Well: Alone 
 

   16. Fidgety Feet 
 

   17. That He Should Leave His House 
 

 
 

    

   LIKE     AMERICA,      ONLY    DIFFERENT:     PREFACE    TO    THE
AMERICAN   EDITION 
 

   MODESTY, NOT  CONCEIT, demands that I proclaim the success of this
book in Britain and Australia when it was first  published in 1979. Modesty,
not conceit, demands that I also proclaim the book’s continued popularity in
both countries ever since. The modesty comes in with the consideration that
the book got almost nowhere in  America: not  at first publication,  and not
afterwards, in the thirty  years separating then from now. There are small,
cultish groups who know  about Unreliable  Memoirs?apparently there is a
coven at Slate magazine who use lines from it as call signs, like members of
the  French  Resistance?and the   occasional  individual,   such   as  Liesl
Schillinger  at the  New York Times Book  Review, has gone  into  print  to
confess fandom. But public advocates remain few, and earlier on there was
almost nobody.

9
   When the book first came out in the United States, my friend Dick Cavett
liked it, and invited me on his show to discuss it, but he rather depressed me
by saying, before we went  on the air, that  the book had no chance in  the
United States. “Nobody   here knows  where Australia  is.”  My   American
publishers are convinced that things might be different now, but I wonder if
they are right. I couldn’t  help noticing that Donald  Rumsfeld, when giving
his Dadaist press briefings  during the  early stages of the  Iraq campaign,
rarely seemed to remember that the Australians had sent troops to the battle.
He remembered the Poles, but there were people of Polish descent in the
United States, and they had a vote. Even President George W. Bush could
remember the Poles. The Australians, however, were still nowhere.

    

   ANOTHER  INITIAL   PROBLEM,  from the American angle, might have
been that the book harked back to a lost paradise. Growing up in a Sydney
suburb after World  War  II,  my  generation of  children could  play  in  the
street with reasonable safety and were even allowed out at night unescorted.
By the  time I  wrote  the book,  both the British  and  the Australians were
nostalgic for such a vanished idyll.  But  for  most Americans the idyll  had
not  yet  vanished:  the   small-town  paradise  of   Booth  Tarkington  was
cherished as a reality, and there were still  parts of  New  York  where you
could play stickball until  dusk. So why the fuss about the lost innocence of
youth? There  was also  the  consideration that  some of  the  innocence I
depicted was  pretty  foul.  In   Portnoy’s  Complaint,  masturbation in   the
adolescent male had been a provocative topic, but in my book it was taken
for  granted as  a harmless competitive  event.  I  thus  conveyed a  moral
insouciance which Americans might  have found  shocking, had they  read
that far. Some of  the reviewers did read that far,  and found me incurably
frivolous.

   But now, in the new millennium, a new dispensation has arrived, even for
America. A  childhood  without electronic  toys is  long enough gone to  be
longed  for,  and  not  even  the  stalwarts  of  the  Christian  Right   would
nowadays believe that a child’s imagination could be squeaky clean?in fact,
especially not them. In those terms, I should hasten to add, it still seems to
me that the young hero of the book is not a sociopath, a natural delinquent

10
or an incipient libertine.  He is  just young. When I  first set pen to  paper, I
could remember him. Even today, I still can. In my own  case, the extent to
which  the child  was  father to  the man  continues to  astonish me, and  I
suspect the same is true for  any  other man, and  for women  too. In  that
regard, I believe I wrote a true book. It is full of exaggerations; there is a lot
of editing for effect; but the emotions are exact.

   Only recently equipped with my first pair of long trousers, at the movies I
died of love for  Audrey  Dalton in the 1953 version of  Titanic. Ever since,
that primal  vision  of  beauty has governed all  my  affections, and  I have
harboured a murderous envy of Robert Wagner. And even Audrey  Dalton
was only  a pale  echo of  a young  creature I  had previously  seen at our
vacation hotel when my  trousers were still  very  short indeed: ambushing
her in the corridor was the first brave moment of my life, and typically I got
it all  wrong. It’s the same with every other revelation of  inadequacy in the
book. Trial  and  error was  the only  way  I  ever found  out  anything, and
almost always there was an error. I  should never have called in  the other
boys to take turns diving  off  the cupboard onto my bed while  my  mother
was out. When the bed broke, I should never have tried to  rig it  so that it
looked as if  it  were still  intact: it  was a Watergate moment, in which  the
cover-up compounded the crime. I should never have built the giant go-kart
that destroyed the garden of the area’s most powerful woman.

   On the other  hand, if  I had not  dared to do these things I  might  never,
later on, have dared to do anything. And always  there were the reassuring
surroundings of suburban life, an atmosphere that breathed solace even for
tragedy. My father had never come home, but home was a solid  reality: a
loving mother, a benevolent climate, and a brick  bungalow in a quarter of
an acre  of   land.  Along   with  hundreds  of  British   magazines like   the
Illustrated London News, our hall cupboard was stacked with the Saturday
Evening Post, Life, Collier’s, Look and Reader’s Digest. In Reader’s Digest
there was a regular  feature called ‘towards  More  Picturesque Speech.? I
suppose I was influenced, just as I was influenced by the penny loafers that
Gene Kelly wore  in An American  in Paris.  Though there was nowhere in
Sydney where you could buy  a pair of  shoes like that,  I knew  that I  was
born to wear them.

11
    

   BUT UNRELIABLE  MEMOIRS isn’t  an American  book, because it was
written   by  someone  born  and   raised  in   another  country,  a  country
superficially  like  America  and yet  profoundly  different.  If  that  is still   a
problem, maybe the book  itself can  now hope to  be part of  the solution.
Here is the story of how it is possible to be a citizen of a country which, like
America,  is   free,  prosperous  and  speaks English,   but  which,   unlike
America, has a small population and is not a world power. Since the arrival
of the white colonists in  1788, Australia has always had a British heritage,
but during  the  American  occupation in  World  War  II?when  the  United
States came to help us fight a battle that it would have cost us everything to
lose?it was confirmed that we  had an American heritage as well,  and my
generation grew   up   under  the  influence   of   both   cultures,  with   the
similarities to the United States becoming more and more pervasive.

   The young protagonist of  this narrative grows up reading British  school
stories, but he dresses up in the masks and capes of the heroes of American
movie serials, and finally the movies are always the decisive influence. At
the time when Rock Around the Clock was first released, the bunch I hung
out with looked, or  anyway hoped they looked, pretty similar to  American
teens, and, with due allowance for our nasal accent, even sounded similar.
Australia  had  begun its   recent and  painfully   self-conscious history   of
worrying  whether it  might not  be turning  into  a parodic American  client
state. But that concern has always been misplaced, because it can’t happen.

   On the plane of fact, rather than in the airy realm of cultural theory, it was
the difference  between the  two  countries,  and not  their  similarity,   that
became more and more startling, and the difference resided precisely in that
discrepancy of scale, which finally dictates that Australia, short of physical
power, must rely on influence instead. In times of trouble, the United States
can send the Screaming Eagles. Australia must  send Cate Blanchett. My
money is on the Aussies, but I wouldn’t  expect the majority  of Americans
to agree. Sometimes Australians feel that if they came from Kazakhstan, the
Americans would understand them better. As things are, the Americans, to
the limited extent that they think about Australia at all, have to grapple with
the concept of a country which feels just as blessed as America but largely

12
refrains from  instructing God  to renew the  blessing at every opportunity.
America still  thinks it  is the world.  Australia knows that it  isn’t.  Knowing
that, it can get on with  the job  of proving  that the American dream is  not
necessarily the only dream there is. One of my original hopes for this book
was that it might  set some of that proof  on paper. My parents, doomed to
have their lives ruined by a quirk of history, hoped that their little son might
grow up in a free world. He did, and a lifetime later it is still  his duty to say
that America, though an essential part of that free world, is not the whole of
it. There is a  world elsewhere: or anyway there was, back there when my
memories began.

    

   -London, 2009 
 

 
 

    

   PREFACE 
 

   MOST     FIRST    NOVELS     are    disguised    autobiographies.   This
autobiography is a disguised novel. On the periphery, names and attributes
of real people have been changed and shuffled so as to render identification
impossible. Nearer the centre, important characters have been run through
the scrambler or else left  out  completely. So  really the  whole affair  is  a
figment got  up to  sound like  truth.  All  you  can be sure of  is one  thing:
careful as I  have been to spare other people’s feelings, I  have been even
more careful not to spare my own. Up, that is, of course, to a point.

   Sick of  being a prisoner of my childhood, I want  to put it behind me. To
do that, I have to remember what it  was like. I  hope I can dredge it all  up
again without sounding too pompous. Solemnity, I am well aware, is not my
best vein. Yet it can’t be denied that books like this are written to  satisfy a
confessional urge; that the mainspring of a confessional urge is guilt;  and

13
that somewhere underneath the guilt there must be a crime.  In my  case I
suspect there are a thousand crimes, which until now  I have mainly  been
successful in not recollecting. Rilke  used to say that  no poet would  mind
going to  gaol, since he  would  at least have time  to  explore the  treasure
house of his memory. In many respects Rilke was a prick.

   Premature memoirs can only be conceited. I have no excuses against this
charge, except to say that self-regard is itself a subject, and that to wait until
reminiscence is justified by achievement might mean to wait for ever. I am
also well aware that all attempts to put oneself in a bad light are doomed to
be frustrated. The ego arranges the bad light to its own satisfaction. But on
that  point  it   is   only   necessary to  remember  Santayana’s devastating
comment on Rousseau’s Confessions, which he said demonstrated, in equal
measure, candour and ignorance of self. However adroitly I have calculated
my intentional revelations, I can be sure that there are enough unintentional
ones to give the reader an accurate impression. I had an absurdly carefree
upbringing. If  my account of it  inspires disapproval, that can only serve to
help redress the balance. One doesn’t expect to get away with it for ever.

   C.J. 
 

 

    

   UNRELIABLE    MEMOIRS 

 
 

    

   THE KID  FROM KOGARAH 
 

   I WAS BORN  IN 1939. The other big event of that year was the outbreak
of  the Second World  War,  but  for  the moment  that  did  not  affect me.

14
Sydney in  those days  had all  of   its  present attractions and few   of  the
drawbacks. You   can  see it   glittering   in   the  background  of   the  few
photographs in which my father and I are together. Stocky was the word for
me. Handsome was the word for him.  Without  firing  a shot, the Japanese
succeeded in extricating him from my clutches. Although a man of humble
birth and restricted education, he was smart enough to see that there would
be war in the Pacific. Believing that Australia should be ready, he joined up.
That was how he came to be in Malaya  at the crucial moment. He  was at
Parit Sulong bridge on the day when a lot of senior officers at last found out
what their  troops had guessed long before -  that  the Japanese army was
better led and better equipped than anything we had to pit against it. After
the battle my father walked all the way south to Singapore and arrived just
in time for the surrender. If he had waited to be conscripted, he might have
been sent to the Western Desert and spent a relatively happy few  months
fighting  the  kind  of  Germans whose  essential decency was later  to  be
portrayed on the screen by James Mason and Marlon Brando. As it was, he
drew the short straw.

   This  isn’t  the place  to tell  the  story of  my  mother  and father?a story
which was  by  no means over, even though  they never  saw one another
again. I could get a lot of  mileage out of describing how  the good-looking
young mechanic wooed and won the pretty girl who left  school at fourteen
and  worked  as  an  upholsterer  at   General  Motors  Holden.   How   the
Depression kept them so poor that they had to wait years to get married and
have me. How fate was cruel to both of them beyond measure. But it would
be untrue to  them.  It  was thirty   years or  more before  I  even began to
consider what my  parents must have  meant to each other.  Before that  I
hardly gave them a thought, except as vague occurrences on the outskirts of
a solipsistic universe. I can’t remember my father at all. I can remember my
mother only through a child’s eyes. I don’t know which fact is the sadder.

   Anyway, my  mother let our little  house in Kogarah and we went to stay
with  my Aunt  Dot  in  Jannali, another half hour  down the  Illawarra  line.
This move  was made on the advice  of  my father, who  assumed that the
centre of Sydney would  be flattened by Japanese bombs about two hours
after the whistle blew. The assumption proved to be ill-founded, but the side
effects were beneficial,  since Jannali  was a  perfect spot to  grow  up  in.

15
There were only a dozen or so streets in the whole area. Only one of them
was paved. The railway line ran through a cutting somewhere in the middle.
Everything else was bush.

   The  houses were  made  of   either  weatherboard or   fibro.  Ours   was
weatherboard. Like all  the  others, it  was surrounded by  an area of  land
which could be distinguished from the bush only  because of its even more
lavish concentrations of colour. Nasturtiums and honeysuckle proliferated,
their strident perfumes locked in perpetual contention. Hydrangeas grew in
reefs, like coral in a sea of warm air. At the bottom of the back yard lay an
air-raid trench  full  of  rainwater. I  fell  into  it  within  minutes  of arriving.
Hearing a distant splash, Aunt  Dot, who  was no sylph, came through the
back door like a train out of  a tunnel and hit the lawn running. The door, a
fly-screen frame with a return spring, made exactly the same sound as one
of those punching-bags you try your strength on. Aunt Dot was attired in a
pink  corset but  it   didn’t  slow  her  down.  She covered  the ground  like
Marjorie Jackson, the girl who  later became famous as the Lithgow Flash.
The earth shook. I was going  down for  the third  time but I  can distinctly
remember the  moment  she launched  herself into   the  air,  describing  a
parabolic trajectory which involved, at one point, a total eclipse of the sun.
She landed in the trench beside me. Suddenly we were sitting  together in
the mud. All the water was outside on the lawn.

   Usually my mother was first to the rescue. This time she was second. She
had to resuscitate both of us. She must have been in the front of the house
looking after my grandfather. He needed a lot of looking after. Later on my
mother told me that he had always been a selfish man. She and Aunt Dot
had given a good  part of  their lives  to waiting  on  him. Mentally,  he had
never left  England. I  remember him as a  tall, barely  articulate source of
smells. The principal   smells were of  mouldy  cloth,  mothballs,  seaweed,
powerful tobacco and the tars that  collect in  the stem of  a very old  pipe.
When he was smoking he was invisible. When he wasn’t  smoking he was
merely hard  to  pick  out  in  the  gloom.  You  could  track  him  down  by
listening for his constant, low-pitched, incoherent mumble. From his carpet
slippers  to  his  moustache  was  twice  as  high  as  I   could  reach.  The
moustache was saffron with nicotine. Everywhere else he was either grey or
tortoise-shell mottle. His teeth were both.

16
   I remember he bared them at me one Christmas dinner. It was because he
was choking on  a coin  in a  mouthful  of plum  pudding.  It was  the usual
Australian Christmas dinner, taking place in the middle of the day. Despite
the temperature being 100?F. in the shade, there had been the full panoply
of ragingly hot food, topped off with  a volcanic plum pudding smothered in
scalding  custard.  My   mother  had  naturally   spiced  the  pudding   with
sixpences and threepenny bits, called zacs and trays respectively. Grandpa
had collected one of these in the esophagus. He gave a protracted, strangled
gurgle which  for  a  long  time we  all  took  to  be the  beginning of  some
anecdote. Then Aunt Dot bounded out of her chair and hit him in the back.
By some miracle  she did not  snap his calcified  spine. Coated with  black
crumbs and custard, the zac streaked out of his mouth like a dum-dum and
ricocheted off a tureen.

   Grandpa used to take me  on his  knee and read me stories, of  which  I
could understand scarcely a word,  not because the stories were over  my
head  but   because  his   speech  by   that   stage  consisted  entirely    of
impediments. “Once  upon  a mpf,”   he would  intone,  “there  wah  ngung
mawg blf?” My  mother got angry with  me if  I was not suitably grateful  to
Grandpa for telling me stories. I was supposed to dance up and down at the
very  prospect.  To  dodge  this   obligation,  I   would   build   cubby-holes.
Collecting chairs,  cushions, bread-boards and blankets from  all  over the
house, I would  assemble them into a pill-box   and crawl in,  plugging  the
hole behind me. Safe inside, I  could  fart discreetly  while  staring through
various eye-slits to keep track of what was going on. From the outside I was
just a pair  of marsupial eyeballs in  a heap of  household junk, topped off
with a rising pall of  sulphuretted hydrogen. It was widely conjectured that I
was hiding from  ghosts. I was, too,  but not as hard as I  was hiding  from
Grandpa. When  he shuffled  off   to  bed, I  would   unplug my   igloo  and
emerge. Since my own bed-time was not long after dark, I suppose he must
have been going  to  bed  in  the  late afternoon.  Finally   he went  to  bed
altogether.

   With  Grandpa laid up, I  was the man of  the house, except when Uncle
Vic or  Ray came home on leave. Uncle Vic  was Aunt  Dot’s husband and
Ray was her son, therefore my cousin. Uncle Vic was an infantry corporal
stationed in New Guinea. Sometimes when he got leave he would bring his

17
Owen gun home, minus the bolt. I was allowed to play with the gun. It was
huge. I  stumbled  around  pointing  it  at  bull-ants?  nests. The  bull-ants,
however, didn’t bluff  so easily. The only  argument they understood was a
few gallons  of boiling  water  poured down their  central stair-well.  I  once
saw Uncle Vic administer this treatment, in revenge after half a dozen bull-
ants stung me on the right foot. They were the big red kind  with the black
bag at the back. When that size bull-ant stings you, you stay stung. My foot
came up like a loaf of bread. I just lay in  the road and screamed. The same
foot got into even worse trouble later on, as I shall relate.

   While  I staggered around blasting the nasturtiums, Uncle Vic did a lot of
enigmatic smiling.  One day  I struggled  all the  way down  to  the railway
cutting so  that I  could  show the  gun to  some local  children  I  hoped to
impress. They hadn’t waited. I could see them climbing the hill on the other
side of the railway line.  I shouted to them, holding the gun up as high as I
could, which I suppose was no height at all. They couldn’t hear me. I think
it was the first big  disappointment of my life.  When I  came back dragging
the gun through the dirt, Uncle Vic did a bit more of his enigmatic smiling.
Talking to him years later, I realised why he was so quiet at the time. It was
because he wasn’t too  thrilled  about what  he had  seen in New  Guinea.
Japanese scouts used to sneak up on our sentries through the thick white
morning jungle mist and punch meat-skewers through their heads from ear
to ear.

   Ray was more  forthcoming, until  he  got sick.  He was a fitter  with  the
RAAF somewhere up there but after his first leave he never went back. He
just stayed around the house in his dressing-gown, getting thinner. He used
to let me stand on his feet while he walked me around. The game was called
Giant Steps. I loved it.  Then the day came when he didn’t  want to play  it
any more. My mother told me he wasn’t strong enough. I got into trouble at
the dinner table when I asked him why  he was holding his  fork with  both
hands.

   So really my mother was the only pillar  of strength available. One parent
is enough to spoil  you but discipline  takes two. I  got too  much of what  I
wanted and not enough of what I needed. I was a child who was picked up.
The effects have stayed with me to this day, although in the last few years I

18
have gradually  learned  to  blame  myself  instead of   circumstances. My
mother had a strong will but she would have had to be Fabius Cunctator to
cope with  my  tantrums  when I  didn’t   feel  like  going  to  school. Every
second day I played sick and stayed home. Her only alternative was to see
how far she could drag me. She would have had a better chance dragging a
dead horse through soft sand. The school was a single-room  wooden hut
with twelve  desks. Painted cream, it sat in half an acre of dirt  playground
about a mile  from  our house. Bushfires  burned it  down every  couple of
years but unfortunately  it  was  easy to  replace. The first  year  of  school
wasn’t so bad. I liked  Miss Dear. Usually I  got more more questions right
than anybody else and was awarded first choice of blocks. I  chose the set
with the arches and the columns. I would go off on my own into a corner of
the playground and build  structures akin to the Alhambra  or the Escorial,
throwing a fit if  any other child tried to interfere.

   Even the  best set of  school blocks  wasn’t as good  as the set I  had at
home. Passed on to  me  by  Grandpa, they  were  satin-smooth Victorian
creations of inch-by-inch oak, every length from one to twelve inches, plus
arches, Doric columns, metopes, triglyphs and sundry other bits and pieces.
With them I could build a tower much taller than myself. The usual site was
the middle of the lounge room.  A length  of cotton could be tied  to one of
the lower columns, so that I could retire into hiding  and collapse the tower
by remote control  at  the precise moment  when Aunt  Dot  lumbered into
range. It  made a noise like  Valhalla  falling.  She would  have one of  her
turns’these needed plenty of space - and demand that I  be sent to school
next day.

   Toys were scarce. A few  crude lead soldiers were still produced so that
children could go on poisoning themselves but otherwise there was almost
nothing. It was a big event when my mother bought me a little  painted red
cow. Presumably it was English. I took it to school and lost it. Next day she
came with me to school, wanting to  find out  what had happened to it. My
carelessness with everything she bought me went on hurting her for years.
She construed it, accurately, as ingratitude. From the sensitivity angle I was
about as obtuse as a child can be. I was sensitive enough about myself, but
that’s a different thing.

19
   School, passable for  the  first  year, became unbearable in  the second,
when the  kind  Miss  Dear  was  supplanted by  a  hard case called  Miss
Turnbull. Dark, cold and impatient, Miss Turnbull might have been the firm
hand I needed, but already I was unable to cope with authority. I still can’t
today, tending to oscillate between nervous flippancy and overly solicitous
respect. In those days, when I was about a third of my present height and a
quarter of the weight, there was nothing to do except duck. I did everything
to get out of facing up to Miss Turnbull.  I had Mondayitis every day of  the
week. As my mother  dragged me down the front path, I  would clutch  my
stomach, cross my eyes, stick out  my  tongue, cough, choke, scream and
vomit simultaneously.

   But there were some occasions when I ended up at school no matter what
I did.  It was then  revealed that I had Dropped Behind  the Class. Words I
could not  recognise would come  up on  the spelling  wheel. The  spelling
wheel was a thick card with a window in it and a cardboard disc behind. As
you  turned the  disc,  words  appeared one  at  a time   in  the  window.  I
remember not being able to pronounce the word “the.” I pronounced it “ter-
her.” The class had collective  hysterics. They were rolling   around on the
floor  with  their  knees up. I  suppose one of  the reasons why  I  grew  up
feeling the need to cause laughter was perpetual fear of being its unwitting
object.

   From the start of Miss Turnbull’s reign until the day we left Jannali, every
morning I  would shout the  house down. For my  mother, the path leading
from  the front  porch  to  the front  gate  became a Via  Dolorosa. My   act
reached ever new heights of extravagance. Either it worked or it didn’t. If it
didn’t  I  would sit  in  school praying  for  the bushfires to  come early  and
incinerate the place. If it did I would either hang around the house or go and
play with Ron, a truant of my  own age who lived next to Hally  the butcher
down near the station. Ron was a grub. I was always being warned off him
because he was so filthy. He and I used to squat under his house tweaking
each other’s ding, watching each other pee, and so on. I can’t remember it
all now. I suppose I have repressed it. If there was any sexual excitement, it
took the form  of intense curiosity,  just as I was curious  about my mother
when we were in  the bath together. I  remember the shock of  seeing Ray
undressed. He looked as if he had a squirrel hanging there. I had an acorn.

20
   Ron’s wreck  of a  mother used to give us  buttered bread with hundreds
and thousands on it. It was like being handed a slice of powdered rainbow.
They must have been a poor family  but I  remember my visits  to them  as
luxuries. As  well  as the  Technicolor bread and  butter, there were  vivid,
viscid green drinks  made from  some kind  of cordial.  Ron’s  place would
have been Beulah Land except for  one drawback. They  had a cattle  dog
called Bluey. A known  psychopath, Bluey would attack himself  if  nothing
else was available. He used to chase himself in circles trying to bite his own
balls off. To  avert instant death, I was supposed to call out from  the front
gate when I arrived  and not open it  until  I  was told  that Bluey  had been
chained up. One day I opened it too  early and Bluey met me on  the front
path. I don’t know  where he had come from - probably around the side of
the house - but it was as if he had come up out of the ground on a lift.  He
was nasty enough when chained up but on the loose he was a bad dream.
Barking from  the  stomach, he opened a mouth like  a great, wet  tropical
flower. When he snapped it shut, my right foot was inside it.

   If  Bluey hadn’t  been as old as the hills, my foot would  have come right
off. Luckily   his teeth were in ruins, but  even so I was only a few  tendons
short of  becoming an amputee. Since Bluey's spittle  obviously  contained
every bacterium known  to science, my  fran tic mother concluded that the
local doctor would not be enough. I think I went to some kind of hospital in
Sutherland. Needles were stuck into me while she had yet another case of
heart failure. Bluey was taken away to be destroyed. Looking back on it, I
can see that this was tough on Bluey, who had grown old in the belief that
biting ankles was the thing to do. At  the time I  was traumatised. 1 loathed
dogs from that day forward. They  could sense my terror from miles away.
Any dog could back me against a wall for hours. Eventually I learned not to
show fear. The breakthrough came when I managed to walk away  from a
dog who had me bailed up against the door of a garage. Admittedly he was
only a Pekinese about eight inches long, but it was still a triumph. That was
more than a year ago.

    

    

    

21
   VALLEY  OF THE KILLER   SNAKES

    

    

    

   SUCH  INCIDENTS   MUST  have been hell  on  my  mother's nerves. I
would have been enough of a handful even in normal circum stances but the
sweat of looking  after me was made worse by her uncertainty about what
was happening to my father.  She got some news of him  when he was  in
Changi but after he was moved to Japan there was not much to go on. The
mail  from  Kobe,  when  there was  any, was  so  censored it  looked  like
shredded lettuce. Dur ing the last part of the war she wasn't even certain that
he was alive. In those circumstances it couldn't have been much help to her,
hav ing the kind of son who goes off and gets half-eaten by a dog.

   Lesser catastrophes were no doubt just as wearing, since they happened
all the time. My  collection of  marbles consisted mainly of priceless connie
agates hapded down by Grandpa. Ocean crystals, iced roses and butterflies
in  amber,  they  tumbled   from   their  draw string  bag  like   a  Byzantine
avalanche. I took  them out  and lost  the lot  to  a  local thug  called  Mick
Roach. Years older than I, Mick dated up clay-dabs against my connies. A
clay-dab, as its name suggests, could be dissolved in water or squeezed flat
with a  thumb. Mick  used steelies for taws. Steelies were ball bearings an
inch in diam eter. They blasted my defenceless cannon-fodder from the ring.
On top of his superior artillery, Mick could actually play marbles, whereas I
had no idea of what I was doing, otherwise I would not have allowed him to
readjust the size of the ring for each go. When it was his turn, the ring was
about four inches in diameter. When it was my turn, the Arunta tribe could
have held a corroboree around its circumference.

   I lurched home in  tears, trailing an empty bag. My mother went berserk.
She tried to shame Mick's parents into giving my marbles back, but Mick's
father talked some confident nonsense about a fair fight. 'If your father was
here,' said my mother with a strangely shak ing voice, 'there'd be a fair fight.'
I wish I could say that I shared her anger, but I think I was just embarrassed

22
about the  fuss. I   wanted my   mistakes forgotten,  not  faced up  to—the
foundations of a bad habit.

   Quite apart from  moral disasters, there was the question of my physical
safety. Even after Bluey's demise, there was still good rea son to believe that
I would  do myself an injury  if  left unsupervised. I had a terrifying  gift  for
carving myself up. Running around bare foot, I would go out of my way  to
jump on  a  broken botde.  Gashes caused by rusty  corrugated iron  were
treated with  Acriflavine,   an  antiseptic that  turned  the surrounding  skin
variously blue and yel low, so that I  looked half  ancient Briton,  half  Inca.
The only asphalt road in the area led down to the railway line  at about the
same angle as a door-wedge. It might not sound a very perilous incline, but
I was able to  prove empirically  that it  was more  than steep enough for a
small boy  on a tricycle  to  attain terminal  velocity.  The pedals became a
vicious blur.  There was no hope of  getting my  feet back on them. It  was
apparent that I would arrive at the bottom of the hill just in time to be flung
on to the line  in  the path of a train  even then looming  out of  the cutting.
Hearing my screams, my mother came after me like the back half of Zeno's
paradox about Achilles and the tortoise, if you can imagine Achilles in drag
and the tortoise scream ing its head off while balanced on a shaking bicycle
seat with its legs stuck out.  She caught up with me at  the last moment. It
was part of  the  pattern. I  always survived,  but only  after  scaring her to
death.

   And  then there were Australia's natural  wonders. Jannali was not quite
the bush proper, but it was certainly an outer suburb. You could walk over
the next hill and be back in the sort of country that the convicts used to die
in  when they  ran  away. Not  that  they  would  necessarily have  died  of
hunger. There is plenty for you to eat. Unfortunately there is also plenty that
wants to eat you.

   By now I  have grown used to the benevolence of the English coun tryside,
where there are no natural hazards beyond the odd clump of poison ivy, a
few varieties of  inimical  mushroom, and half a dozen adders all of which
wear number  plates and  have exclusive  contracts with  BBC   television.
Walking at ease in such an  Augustan context, it  is sometimes difficult  to
remember what it was like  to inhabit  a land crawling  with  danger. I have

23
already mentioned the bull-ants. There were also snakes. Walking to school
bare-footed along dirt paths lined with banksias and waratahs, I was always
expecting to meet one of the snakes portrayed in the gaudily detailed charts
which were hung up in the railway  station and the post-office. Luckily  the
only snakes I ever encountered were harmless civilians: the filing clerks and
secretaries of  the serpentine  world.  But  Uncle  Vic   caught a  full-sized
fighting snake right outside our front  gate. It was a black snake—one step
worse than a  brown snake. A   black snake can  kill  an  adult  if  it  is  big
enough. This one was big enough. Uncle Vic pinned it to the ground in the
middle but both ends of it went on trying to get at him.

   The  next  step  up  from   the  black  snake is   the  tiger  snake. It   was
statistically  likely  that  at  least a  few  tiger  snakes were  in  our  district,
probably holed up in  some shack and sending their girlfriends  out to buy
liquor. Over and above the tiger  snake, so to speak, is the taipan. Luckily
ours was not  taipan country.  Indeed at that  time  the taipan was  not yet
famous anywhere. Up in Queensland, in the sugar cane belt, the taipan was
soon to begin  making headlines and getting  its photograph in  Pix.  Tiger
snakes and black  snakes can't  compete with  taipans,  but  they are  bad
enough. Brown snakes are pretty bad. Allegedly harmless snakes don't look
very benevolent either. I used to think about all this  a lot on the way to  or
from school. Whether to run fast or tip-toe silently was a constant dilemma,
which I tried to solve by doing both at once.

   I also thought about spiders. Two of the worst Australian  spiders are the
funnel-web and the trap-door. One is even more lethal than the other but I
can't remember which. It  doesn't matter, because either can put a child in
peril of its life.  The funnel-web is a ping-pong ball in a fox-fur. It inhabits a
miniature missile silo in the ground, from which it  emerges in a savage arc,
ready to sink its mandibles into anything that breathes. The trap-door spider
is really a funnel-web  plus cunning, since it conceals the mouth of its  silo
with  a tiny  coal-hole  door. Both  kinds  of  spider can  leap an  incredible
distance. A wood-pile  might  contain hundreds of  each kind. If  you  even
suspected the presence of either species in your garden you were supposed
to  report  immediately  to  the  responsi ble authorities. After   the war   an
English immigrant  lady  became famous when  she was discovered gaily
swatting funnel-webs with a broom as they came flying at her in squadrons.

24
Any one of them, if  it had got close enough even to spit at her, would have
put her in bed for a year.

   I  somehow managed to avoid meeting trap-door spiders or funnel-webs.
Quite often I  came face to face with  a harmless rela tive, which Aunt Dot
called a tarantula and I called a triantelope. Actually it  was just a common
garden spider called the huntsman, whose idea of a big thrill was to suck a
wasp. The huntsman wove big vertical webs which I used regularly to walk
into when heading tentatively down the back path to the lavatory after dark.
Getting mixed up  in the web,  to which  I  knew the triantelope must be at
some point  attached, was a  frightening  sensation which  I   attempted to
forestall by inching  forward very  slowly, with  one hand held out. It  didn't
help.

   But the real  horror among spiders was more likely to  be encountered in
the lavatory itself.  This  was the red-back. The  red-back is  mainly black,
with a scarlet stripe down where its spine would be if  it  were a vertebrate.
Looking like  a neatly rigged and painted single-seater that might once have
been flown  by von  Richthofen,  the red-back had enough poison  in  it  to
immobilise a horse. It had the awkward habit, in unsewered areas like ours,
of lurking  under the lavatory seat. If a red-back bit you  on the behind you
were left with  the problem of  where to put  the tourniquet and not long to
think about it. Nor could you ask anyone to suck out the poison, unless you
knew them very  well  indeed. I  saw plenty  of  red-backs and actually got
bitten by one, luckily not on the behind. I think it  was a red-back. Certainly
I told  my  mother it  was. Once again the site of  the wound was my  right
foot,  which  by  this  time  must  have been looking   as if   it  belonged to
Philoctetes. My mother knelt, sucked and spat. We were both frightened but
she was  not  too  frightened  to  act.  She must  have  been getting  tired,
however, of being both father and mother.

   After  the first  atomic  bomb there was a general feeling  that Japan had
surrendered. The street was decorated with bunting. Strings of all the Allied
flags were hung up between the flame trees. The Japanese missed their cue
and all the bunting  had to be taken in. Finally  the Japanese saw the point
and all the bunting was taken out again. Everybody was in ecstasies except
my mother, who still  had no news. Then an official   telegram came to say

25
that he was all  right. Letters  from my  father arrived. They  were in  touch
with  each other  and must  have been very  happy. The  Americans, with
typical gen erosity, arranged that all the Australian POWs in Japan should be
flown home instead of having to wait for ships. My mother started counting
the days. Then a telegram arrived saying that  my father's plane had been
caught in  a  typhoon  and had  crashed in  Manila  Bay   with  the  loss of
everyone aboard.

   Up until  that day, all the grief and worry  that I had ever seen my mother
give way to  had been tempered for my  ears. But now she could not  help
herself. At  the age of  five  I  was seeing the full  force  of  human despair.
There were no sedatives to be had.  It was  several days before she could
control herself. I understood nothing beyond the fact that I could not help. I
think that I  was marked for life.  I  know now that until  very  recent years I
was never quite all there—that I was play-acting instead of living  and that
nothing except  my  own  unre lenting fever of  self-consciousness seemed
quite real. Eventually,  in my  middle  thirties, I  got  a grip  on myself.  But
there can  be no  doubt  that  I  had  a  tiresomely  protracted adolescence,
wasting a lot of  other people's time, patience and love. I suppose it is just
another sign of weakness to blame everything on that  one moment, but it
would be equally dishonest if I failed to record its piercing vividness.

   As  for my  mother, I  don't presume even to guess at what she felt. The
best I can say is that at least they got the chance of writing a few words to
one another  before  the  end.  In  one  respect they  were  like   Osip  and
Nadezhda Mandelstam in the  last chapters of  Hope  against Hope—torn
apart in mid-word without  even the chance to say goodbye. But in another
way they were not. My father had taken up arms out of his own free will. In
Europe, millions   of  women and  children  had been  killed  for  no  better
reason than some ideologi cal fantasy. My father was a free human being. So
was my mother. What happened to them, terrible though it was, belongs in
the cat egory of what Nadezhda Mandelstam, elsewhere in that same great
book, calls the privilege of ordinary heartbreaks. Slowly, in those years, the
world was becoming aware that things had been happen ing which threw the
whole value of human existence into doubt. But my  father's death was not
one of  them. It   was just  bad luck.  I  have  disliked  luck  ever since—an

26
aversion only increased by  the fact  that I  have always been inordinately
lucky.

   Grandpa's death was easier for me to deal with. Everybody was ready for
it. Grief was kept in  bounds. There was no way of pin pointing the moment
when he passed to the beyond. In his dark bedroom he merely turned into a
slightly  more immobile  version of what  he had already been for years. It
was time to open the windows and let in the light. I was encouraged to take
a look at the corpse—a wise decision, since it immediately became clear to
me that there are more terrible things than dying  a natural death. The old
man merely looked as if he had been bored out of existence. Perhaps I got it
all wrong  then and have still  got  it  all  wrong now. Perhaps he died in  a
redemptive ecstasy after being vouchsafed a revelation of the ineffable. But
I doubt it. I think he just croaked.

   Ray was harder to be blase about. We hadn't played Giant Steps for a long
time. Eventually  he  was too  weak to  stand. He  was  taken away to  the
military  hospital  at Yaralla, where  over the  next few  years he gradually
wasted to nothing. He used to smile at me through the mirror mounted over
his face as he lay  in  the iron  lung.  The smile  took an  age to arrive  and
another age to go away. It  was  like  watching sand dry  in the  sun. I  can
remember being scolded for not caring enough. I think it was Aunt Dot who
did the scolding. The unremit ting gradualness of it all must have been hard
for her to take. People's emotions are no less real just because they carry on
a lot.  Aunt   Dot  could  do  the mad  scene from  Lucia  when  her  lemon
meringue pie collapsed. But there is no reason to believe that  she felt her
bereave ment any the less for feeling little things too much. She was, and is,
a good woman who would have mothered me if she had been called upon.
Mothering, however, wasn't what I was short of.

   My   mother decided  it  was  time  to  go  back to  our  house  at No.  6,
Margaret Street, Kogarah, a place I couldn't remember having seen. There
was  nothing   to   keep  us   in   Jannali,  where   losses  appeared to   be
accumulating steadily. Changing  schools was certainly  no  great wrench.
There were no  playmates I  would  particularly  miss,  except perhaps the
unspeakable Ron. I was taken to a party that year where there was a present
for every child  except me. It turned out that my present, a box of soldiers,

27
had been  mislaid.  The  mistake  was  quickly   rectified.  But   it  took  all
afternoon and half the night to coax me down from my tree. Definitely time
for a change of scene.

   Besides, Kogarah was more of a built-up area, and therefore, my mother
reasoned, safer. It would   even have the  sewer on  soon—an unheard-of
luxury. The only problem was to get the tenants out. They had promised to
move when asked, but by now there was a housing shortage and they didn't
want to go. My mother, however, had lost too much. She wouldn't stand for
losing her house as well. It had cost her and my father everything they had
ever  earned. She  was  firm   about  not  letting   the  tenants  break  their
agreement. Out they went and in we moved.

   Even in my memory the house is small. Early on there were a lounge, two
bedrooms, a kitchen-dining  room, a  bathroom and a  back veranda, with
laundry and lavatory built into the back wall. Later we had the back veranda
enclosed with fibro and Cooper lou vres so that it could count as a room too.
Between the front fence and the paved street there was a concrete footpath
and a piece of lawn,  known as the front  strip, which  included a box  gum
tree big enough for a child to swing upside down from and drop on its head.
Every household mowed its own front strip.  It was to be a constant source
of shame to  my mother  that our  piece of front  strip  was never as finely
mown or sharply edged as the front strips of the next-door neighbours.

   From the front  fence to the house was the front lawn. There was a car's-
width of lawn down the right side of the house, leading in almost every case
but ours to a garage. This was called the drive way whether you had a car or
not. On the other side of the house was a much narrower passage between
house and fence, just wide enough to walk through. Behind the house was a
back yard. Most of this,  in our case, was lawn: a mixture of  buffalo grass,
couch, and tenacious crops of  paspalum. There  were passion-fruit  vines
grow ing on the fence where the garage should have been. In the oppo site
back corner  was a peach  tree, in  which  over  the years I   made various
attempts, all  unsuccessful, to build  a tree  house. There were  patches of
vegetable garden along all three edges of the back yard. These were devoted
to the growing  of the kind  of vegetables I always refused to eat—chocos,
beetroot, rhubarb and so on.  Or is  rhubarb a  fruit?  Despite my  mother's

28
imprecations, I could  never see the point of  the choco. Whatever you  do
with  it,  it's still   nothing. It   looks like  an  albino avocado and  tastes like
cellophane. Its only advantage lies in its cheapness. You can't stop chocos
growing. It takes a flame thrower to keep them down.

   The  widest of  these vegetable patches lay  parallel  to  the back  fence,
beyond which  was a  poultry  farm inhabited  by  thousands of chooks all
synchronised to wake you up at dawn. Later on the farm became a housing
estate. Whatever lay   beyond the  back  fence,  I  was  always  tunnelling
towards it. The back patch was the site of my unflagging efforts to get back
to the womb by  digging into  the earth. I started this at quite an early  age,
attaining more proficiency as time went on. My early  burrows were simple
dugouts roofed over with box tops, after which  the earth was heaped back
on. There was just room for me. I  would  persuade my mother to cover up
the entrance and leave me down there all afternoon. It didn't  matter if  the
thing collapsed—it was only  a few inches of dirt.  Older children had been
known to try  the same trick in sand dunes, with fatal results. She probably
reasoned that it was better to let me indulge these fanta sies where she could
keep an eye on me.

   Over the  next few  years, the back patch started looking  like  the Ypres
Salient. I would dig complicated networks of trenches, roof them over, and
continue tunnelling from  inside, honeycombing the clay all  the way down
to the  water  table. Other  boys in  the  street were  fascinated. It  became
known that I  was taking my Donald Duck  comics down there and reading
them by torchlight. They, too, turned up with armfuls of comics. Suddenly I
had friends.  I  had  stumbled on  one  of  the  secrets of  leadership—start
something, then let people know you are doing them a favour  by bringing
them  in  on  it.   Candidates for   my   tunnel  club  had  to   go  through  a
probationary period of hovering  on the outskirts. It  was like  being put  up
for the Garrick. Finally half  the small boys in the district were spending the
whole weekend somewhere under our back yard. Similar scenes must have
occurred on the night of the Great Escape from Stalag Luft III. I  overdid it
when I started letting  the little  kids down there. Little  kids,  I should  have
known, ruin  things.  Geoffrey Teichmann was  only about  four  years old.
Crawling somewhere down around Level 7 leading off Shaft 4, he brushed
against one of the fruit-case slats I used for pit-props. The whole system fell

29
on him. Parents arrived from  everywhere to dig  the little  twerp  out. That
was the end of that.

   But my new-found  acceptability was stricdy a local phenomenon. School
was still   a  nightmare. I   went  to  Kogarah  Infants'  School  and then  to
Kogarah Primary. They were both in the same place, near Kogarah station,
more than a mile away on the trolley bus. The fare was a penny. The trolley
bus went down  Rocky Point  Road, through a  shopping centre called the
Bundy, then turned left to cut  across Prince's Highway and climb over the
hill  to the station, where it either turned around at the Loop  or went on to
Rockdale. There were shops at the Loop,  including Parry's Milk   Bar, the
centre of local night life  for  years to come. Being bought a fruit sundae in
Parry's late at  night was  pretty well  the  most luxurious  thing  that could
happen to you.

   Two  minutes' walk  up the  hill  from  the Loop  was the  school. I  could
make that two minutes last an hour—sometimes a whole day. If it  had not
been for  another boy  called  McGowan,  I  would  have been cast  as the
school's problem child. Luckily  McGowan  was so disturbed that I seemed
unobtrusive by  comparison. A  ginger sham bles, McGowan wore glasses
with one lens covered up  by brown  sticky paper, presumably to correct a
fault of vision.  He screamed without provocation, frothed at the mouth, bit
pieces out of  other  children  and kicked  teachers in the  stomach. In  the
playground he would  run  at the  supervising teacher while  her back  was
turned, so that he would  be going  at full  speed when she wheeled at the
sound of his  running  footsteps. He was  thus able to  get plenty  of  force
behind the kick. The teacher would be taken away on a stretcher. Eventually
there were no longer any members of the staff willing to take on the job of
supervising any classroom or playground with  McGowan in  it,  so he was
removed. That left me looking more con spicuous.

   The only  thing I  liked about school was skipping around in  circles until
the music stopped, then lying down on the floor for Quiet Time. I was very
good at Quiet Time.  Otherwise it  was all a bit  hopeless. I piddled  on the
floor when  it  was my turn  to sing. Con versely, I got caught drinking  my
daily bottle of milk  in  the lavatory. For some reason this was regarded as a
fearful crime.  My  mother  used to pick  me up  after  school. One day  we

30
missed each other and I went home alone on the bus. Meanwhile my mother
was going frantic  at the school. There were  mutual tears that night.  Next
day when  I  answered my  name  at the  morning  assembly roll-call,   the
headmistress said, 'Ah yes,  that's the  little  boy  who  ran away  from  his
mother.' Thanks a lot, witch. I kacked my pants on the spot.

   The  whole secret of  kacking  your  pants, incidentally,  is  to pro duce a
rock-solid blob  which  will  slide  down your  leg  in one  piece and can be
rolled away into  hiding at the point  of the toe. That way,  your moment of
shame can be kept to the proportions of a strictly local disaster. But if  you
let go  with  anything soft,  it  takes two  teach ers to clean you up and  the
whole affair attracts nationwide public ity. You get people interviewing you.

    

    

   BILLYCART   HILL

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

   THE  NAME  I  ANSWERED  TO  in  my early  years was Vivian  James.
Later on my  mother gave me my choice  of new first  names and I  picked
Clive out of  a Tyrone Power movie. She sympathised with the fix  she and
my father had got me into by naming me after Viv ian McGrath, star of the
1938 Davis Cup squad. After Vivien Leigh played Scarlett O'Hara the name
became irrevocably a girl's name no matter how you spelled it, so those few

31
little boys who had been saddled with it went through hell. I just got sick of
ending up on the wrong lists, being sent to sewing classes, etc. Children in
Aus tralia are still  named after movies  and sporting  events. You can  tell
roughly the year the swimming star Shane Gould was born. It was about the
time Shane was released. There was a famous case of a returned serviceman
who named his  son after  all  the campaigns he had  been through in  the
Western Desert. The kid  was called  Wil liam  Bardia Escarpment Qattara
Depression Mersa Matruh Tobruk El Alamein Benghazi Tripoli Harris.

   Things marginally improved when I was promoted, a year early, from the
Infants'  School   to  the   Primary  School.   The  embarrass ments of  co-
education were at last left  behind. No longer  were we obliged  to pair off
and hold hands tweely when marching into the classroom—a huge advance
on previous conditions.  I  achieved early promotion  solely  through being
good at reading. The reason I was good at reading had nothing to do with
school. In  our last year  at Jannali I  had started to  pick my  way  through
Grandpa's musty old bound sets of Wide World magazine. Also there were
bright  yellow  heaps of   the  National  Geographic.  In  our  first   years at
Kogarah, while searching my mother's room, I found the wardrobe half full
of  mag azines. These were mainly   Picture  Post,  Lilliput,   Collier's,  the
Saturday Evening Post, Life and Reader's Digest. I started off by looking at
the pictures but gradually progressed to being able to read the text.

   I can't remember what it was like  not to be able to read English fluently.
Nowadays, if  I  am learning  to read a  new language, I  try  to savour  the
moment that separates not knowing how to from not knowing  how not  to.
At the time, I  simply  found myself able to read. Over the next few years I
absorbed everything in  those few  hundred magazines. I  read them until
there was nothing left  to  read and then read them  again until  the covers
pulled away from the staples. The Saturday Evening Posts with the Norman
Rockwell  covers   satisfied  every  demand  of   my   aesthetic sense,  the
gustatory requirements included. I used to read them instead of eating. I felt
about them the way Turgenev felt  about the emblem book he wrote  of to
Bakunin, and made a part of Laretsky's childhood in A Nest of Gentlefolk.

   I suppose if I had been John Stuart Mill I  would have sought out a better
class of reading matter. Indeed my father and mother had done a lot of fairly

32
solid reading together stacked away at the top of  the cupboard in the hall
were cheap sets of Dickens, Thackeray and the Brontes. For some reason I
was never to seek them out, even in my  teens. I always had an automatic
aversion to the set books.  Read ing off the course was in  my nature. My
style was to read everything except what mattered, just as I ate everything
except what was good for me.

   In  Primary  School I  ceased being the class half-wit   and became class
smart-alec instead. This presented a whole new set of dif ficulties. Coming
out first in the term tests attracted accusations of being teacher's pet. It was
true, alas: Mr  Slavin,  although a  fair-minded  man, couldn't help  smiling
upon anyone who knew how to answer the questions. Too many boys in the
class had trouble  remembering their  own  names. Most  of  the heat was
focused on an unfortunate called Thommo, who  was caned regularly. For
ordinary offences Thommo was caned by Mr  Slavin and for  more serious
transgressions he was caned by the  Deputy Headmaster. Mr  Slavin  was
authorised to impart up to four strokes. Thommo usually required six even
to slow  him  down.  We  used to  sit  silent  while  the  Deputy Head  gave
Thommo the treatment outside in the  corridor. The six  strokes took some
time to  deliver, because Thommo had to be  recaptured after each stroke,
and to be recaptured he had first to be found. His screams and sobs usually
gave away his location,  but  not always. One  day the police  came to the
classroom and made Thommo open his Globite school case. It was full of
stolen trea sures from Coles and Woolworths: balloons, bulldog paper clips,
funny hats, a cut-glass vase. Thommo was led howling away and never seen
again.

   Despite Thommo's fate, on the whole 1 would rather have been him than
me. His manly  activities merited respect. As teacher's pet, I was regarded
with envy, suspicion and hatred. I had not yet learned to joke my way out of
trouble and  into  favour.  Instead  I  tried  to  prove  that  I,  too,  could  be
rebellious,   untrammelled,   dangerous   and   tough.    To   register,   any
demonstration of these qualities  would  have to  be made in  view  of  the
whole class. This would not be easy, since my desk was at the back of the
room. There were five columns of desks with seven desks in each column.
The five most academi cally able boys sat in the back five desks and so on
down  the  line,   with   the  desks  at  the   front  containing   the  dullards,

33
psychopaths, Thommo, etc. The problem was to become the cynosure of all
eyes in some way more acceptable than my usual method of throwing my
hand in the air, crying 'Sir! Sir! Sir!,' and supplying the correct answer.

   The solution lay  in the network of  railways tracks carved into the top of
each desk  by  successive generations of  occupants. Along   these tracks
fragments of  pencil, pen  holders or  bits  of  chalk could  be  pushed with
chuffing noises. I also found out that the exposed wood was susceptible to
friction. At  home I was already an estab lished fire-bug, running around with
a magnifying  glass  frying  sugar-ants. I  had  learned something of  what
pieces of wood  could  do to  each other. This  knowledge  I  now  applied,
rubbing the end of my box-wood ruler against the edge of one of the tracks.
A wisp of smoke came up. Eyes turned towards me. The wisp became a bil‐ 
low. More  eyes turned towards me. The  billow  was fretted with  fire.  Mr
Slavin's eyes turned towards me.

   He gave me his full four strokes. The pain was considerable, but the glory
was greater. 'What's sauce for the goose,' he said as I tucked my smarting
hands under my armpits,  'is  sauce for the  gan der.' Mr Slavin's epigrams
were distinctly  sub-Wildean but  he had a  knack for  trotting  them out  at
precisely the appropriate moment. He might  even have had an inkling  of
how much I wanted to be a goose.

   This small triumph spurred me fatally towards bigger things. There was a
craze on for dongers. Crazes came one after the other. There was a craze for
a game of marbles called followings. There was a craze for cigarette cards:
not the cards that used to come in packets of English cigarettes, but cards
made elaborately out of  the  cigarette packets themselves. The cards had
different  values accord ing to  brands, with   English  Gold  Flake  scoring
highest and Austra lian Craven 'A' scoring lowest. You flicked your cards at
a wall. The  one who finished nearest the wall got  a chance to toss all the
cards in the  air  at once. The  ones that fell  face  up were  his. Bottletops
worked roughly  the same way, except that the one who got closest to the
wall  stacked all  the  botdetops on  his upturned  elbow  and then  swiped
downwards with his hand, getting  to keep as many of the botdetops as he
could catch between hand and wrist. It is difficult to describe and even more
difficult  to do. I  always lost. I wasn't bad at cock-a-lorum, but falling  over

34
on the asphalt playground added painfully to  my usual array of  sores and
scabs. The craze I hoped to be good at was dongers.

   A  donger was an ordinary handkerchief folded into  a triangle. You held
each end of the hypotenuse and twirled  until  the handkerchief had rolled
itself tight.  Then  you held  the two  ends together in  one hand while  you
rolled the fat  centre part even tighter  with  the other. The result  was then
soaked in  water  to  give  it  weight.  The  more reckless  boys sometimes
inserted a lead washer or a small rock. The completed donger was, in effect,
a black-jack. Every play-time, with  me hovering cravenly on the outskirts,
donger gangs would do battle against each other. The brawls looked like the
battle of   Thermopylae.  Finally  the  teacher on  playground  duty   would
plunge into the melee and send everyone in possession of a donger up to the
Deputy  Headmaster  to   get  six.   With    me  hovering   elsewhere,  solo
desperadoes would then creep up on their victims behind the teacher's back.
The idea was to clobber the target and be walking in the opposite direction
with the donger in your pocket before the teacher turned around. He always
turned around because the sound of the donger hitting someone's head was
unmistakable. It sounded like an apple hitting concrete.

   I  was very  keen not  to  be among those victimised.  It  followed  that  I
should become one of  those doing the  victimising.  To  this end I  built  a
donger and chose the target likely to win me the most fame. At one point in
the circumference of the playground there was a low picket fence separating
the Boys' Primary School from the Girls'  Primary School. It was forbidden
to linger at this fence. I noticed a girl using the fence as a whippy. She was
leaning against it with her face buried in  her folded arms while  other girls
hid. If  some other girl  got  to the  whippy  while  she was away searching,
there would be a cry of'All   in, the whippy's taken.' But  at the moment she
was still busy counting  to a hundred. I came at her in  a long curving  run,
swinging  the donger  like  a sling.  Contact  was perfect.  She dropped as
though pole-axed—which, to all  intents and purposes, she had been. I ran
right into the teacher's arms.

   And  so I  kept my  feared but  wished-for appointment  with  the Deputy
Headmaster. He was a tall, slim man in a grey dust-coat. I can't remember
his name, but I can well remember his quietly sar donic manner. He pointed

35
out to me that in hitting the little girl  I had caused her pain, and that he was
now about to show me what pain was like. The instrument I had employed
on the little girl  had been strictly banned. The same embargo, he explained,
did  not  apply  to  the  instrument he  would  now  employ  on  me.  I  was
inspecting this while  he  spoke. It  was a long,  thick  cane with  a leather-
bound tip.  Unlike  other canes I had seen, it  did  not seem to be  flexible.
Instead of swishing when it came down, it hummed. The impact was like a
door slamming on my hand. I  was too stunned even to pee my pants. The
same thing  happened  to  the  other  hand.  Then  the  same  thing  again
happened to each hand twice more in succession. That would teach me, he
informed me, to hit little girls with  dongers.

   If  he meant that it would teach me not to hit  litfle  girls with  dongers, he
was right. For  one thing, I  couldn't have lifted  a  donger, let alone swung
one. When I tried to feed myself my play-lunch sandwiches, I kept missing
my mouth.  But  at least the  fame accru ing to the  maximum penalty  had
raised my  status somewhat. I  was never admitted  to  the inner  circle  of
Kenny Mears, the school's most impressive bully. But for a while I was not
so often  among those bullied.  Probably  I  was lucky  not  to  be included
among the oppres sors. I admired Mears, but for his  self-possession more
than for his  capacity to inflict   suffering. He  was completely without  fear.
Like Napoleon or Hitler,  he seemed imaginative through having no idea of
natural limits  to  his actions. He  was a sawn-off  Siegfried, a Nietz schean
superman in short pants. He embodied Gibbon's definition of the barbarian,
since his liberty was to  indulge the whim  of the moment, and his courage
was to ignore the consequences. He was a frightful little shit.

   But he had the kind  of poise that I have always envied. He swore at the
teachers man-to-man and could absorb an infinite  amount of  punishment
without batting an eye. Indeed he never even blinked. Playing marbles, he
made Mick  Roach look  like  the  Marquis of  Queensberry. Mears fudged
unblushingly. Wittgenstein  defined a  game as consisting of  the  rules by
which it  is played. If  he had seen Mears in action, he would have realised
that a game is fur ther defined by what  the dominant player can get away
with. The basic rule  of marbles is that the taw  must be fired from  outside
the ring.  If  the firing   hand creeps inside the  ring  before the moment  of
release, it's  a   fudge.  Mears  fudged  more  blatandy   than  his  help less

36
opponents would have believed possible. Standing up instead of crouching
down, he fell  forward until  his firing  hand was almost touching the  dates.
Then he  released his taw.  The dates sang  out of   the ring  and  into  his
keeping. If   anybody protested, violence  would  ensue. Nor   was anyone
allowed not to play. Years later I saw the film of Guys and Dolls. There is a
famous scene where  Nathan Detroit's  floating   crap-game moves to  the
sewers, and Big Julie from  Chi cago proposes to roll his own  dice, which
have no spots. When challenged, he produces a .45  automatic. I  thought
immediately: 'Mears.'

   Mears's favourite means of persuasion was the Chinese Burn. Grasping
your hand in  one of  his, he  would twist  your  wrist  with  the other. After
having this done to me by boys older and bigger, I sought revenge by doing
it to boys younger and smaller. But I quickly found  out that I was naturally
averse to being  cruel.  Reading the  Wide  World magazines, I  had  been
excited by a chapter dealing with torture chambers. I still find  it disturbing
that sex and cruelty should be  connected somewhere in my instincts. But
the human personal ity is a drama, not a monologue; sad tricks of the mind
can be offset by sound feelings in  the heart; and the facts say that I  have
always  been revolted   by  the  very   idea  of   deliberately  causing  pain.
Consider ing the amount of pain I have been able to cause without meaning
to, I suppose this is not much of a defence, but to me it has always seemed
an important point. I  burned a lot of sugar-ants with my mag nifying glass,
but if  the sugar-ants had spoken to  me as they might  have spoken to  St
Francis, I   would  have  desisted soon  enough. Hav ing  a  character that
consists mainly of defects, I  try to  correct them one by one, but there are
limits  to the  altitude that  can be attained by  hauling on  one's own boot-
straps. One is what one is, and if one isn't very nice or good, then it brings
some solace to remember that other men have been worse. At various times
in my  life  I  have  tried to  pose as a thug,  but  the imposture has always
collapsed of its own accord. I could be coerced into hurting other people. I
have done it by chance often enough. But 1 could never enjoy it.

   At   home things  were  a  bit   easier than  at  school.  Once or   twice  I
announced my intention of running away, but my mother defused the threat
by packing me a bag containing peanut butter sand wiches and pyjamas. The
first time  I  got  no further  than the top  of our  street and was back home

37
within  the hour. The second time I  got all  the way  to Rocky Point  Road,
more than two hundred yards from home. I was not allowed to cross Rocky
Point Road.  But  I  sat  there until  sunset. Otherwise  I  did  my  escaping
symbolically,  tun nelling into  the poultry   farm  and surfacing  among the
chooks with a crumbling cap of birdshit on my head.

   The teacher's pet image would have followed me home if my mother had
had her way. She had a deadly habit of inviting the neigh bours in for tea so
that she could  casually refer  to  my  school reports  a couple  of  hundred
times.  The  most  favoured  recipient  of   these proud  tirades  was  Nola
Huthnance, who lived  four  doors  down. Nola  Huth-nance was  no mean
talker herself, being joint holder, with her next-door neighbour Gail Thorpe,
of the local record for yapping across the back fence—an unbeatable lunch-
to-sunset epic during which there was no  point at  which one or  the other
was not   talking  and  very  few   moments  when  both  were  not  talking
simultaneously. But not even Nola Huthnance could hold her own when my
mother got going on the subject of  her wonderful  son and his outstanding
intelligence. Long  after I  had been sent to  bed, I  would  lurk  in  the hall
listening to my mother extolling my  virtues in the lounge room. Apparendy
Gogol's mother was  under the impression  that her  son had invented  the
printing press and the steam engine. My own mother thought along roughly
the same lines. I lapped it all  up, but could  see even at the time that such
talk would  do me  no good with  the locals,  unless I cultivated  a contrary
reputation on my own account.

   Luckily,  whether by being just the right  age or by having more than my
fair share of productive neuroses, I continued to think up the kind of games
that most of the other  children in  Margaret Street were keen to get in on.
Wet weather put an end to the  tunnelling sea son, but it produced flooded
gutters. In those days proper concrete kerbing had not yet been laid down.
Water flowed down erratic gut ters through the width of bare earth and clay
between the front  strip and the  ragged-edged asphalt road. Swollen with
rain, these gutters were ripe for having sticks and plastic boats raced down
them. At the top of Margaret Street, beyond the T-junction with Irene Street,
was a block of  waste ground known  as the quarry. Probably the con victs
had once hacked stone there—Botany Bay was  only about  a mile  to the
east. The fall of  ground from  the back to the  front of  the block  was only

38
fifteen feet  or so but  to us  it looked  like  Annapurna. In  wet weather the
water poured  down  the  exposed  rock  face  of  the  quarry  and  formed
streamlets begging to be dammed. I used to build whole networks of  mud
dams, fanatically smoothing them off and facing them with pieces of fibro,
so that they resembled the photographs of the Boulder and Grand Coulee
dams in  my Modern  Marvels  Encyclopedia. In  the  lakes formed  by the
dams I built  har bours for plastic boats. Liberated from the confines of the
bath, they could be pushed around in a more interesting seascape than that
bounded by  my   soapy knees. There  were  secret bases under  tufts  of
overhanging grass. Holding my face close to a boat as I pushed it, I could
study the bow waves and the wake. The boats were only a few inches long
but they  looked like  the  Bismarck if  you  got near  enough. I  built  roads
along the docks and up through the foothills.  Plastic, lead and tin toy cars
could be pushed along them. Dinky Toys were rare at that time.  A  Triang
Mink jeep—later lost, to my mother's anguished disgust—was the star turn.
Wound up, it could make progress even through mud. Other vehicles had to
be pushed. With them it was all pretend.

   But  it  was pretend in  ideal  surroundings. Other children  brought their
boats and cars, blundering  into  my  ashlared revetments, goug ing crude
paths, botching together laughable garages and ludicrous U-boat pens. At
first I  told them to go and build their own  dams. Then I resigned myself to
having my work  ruined.  At the  small price of  an offence to  my aesthetic
instincts, I was able to rule the roost. Besides, with cheap labour available
my  schemes could be  allowed to  wax  ever  grander. Like  Themistocles
linking  Athens  with   Piraeus, I   walled  in  the  whole  area.  My  designs
assumed the proportions of Karriak or Speer's Berlin. I was the overseer, the
construction boss, the superintendent of works.  But  even when my  loyal
slaves were toiling away in every direction, I would sometimes relapse into
a detailed concern for  a certain stretch of  road or dockside, smooth ing it
endlessly with the edge of my  hand into an ever sweeter curve or sharper
edge.

   None of this meant that I was a good practical hand. For exam ple, I could
not build billycarts very well. Other children, most of them admittedly older
than  I,  but   some of   them  infuriatingly    not,  constructed  billycarts  of
advanced design, with skeletal hard-wood frames and steel-jacketed ball-

39
race wheels that screamed on the concrete footpaths like  a diving  Stuka.
The best I  could manage was a  sawn-off fruit   box mounted on  a fence-
paling spine frame, with drearily silent rubber wheels taken off an old pram.
In such a cre ation I could go at a reasonable clip down our street and twice
as fast down  Sunbeam Avenue, which was much  steeper at the top. But
even going down Sunbeam my billycart was no great thrill  com pared with
the ball-race models, which having a ground-clearance of about half an inch
and being almost frictionless  were able to attain  tremendous velocities at
low  profile,  so that  to  the onlooker  their  riders seemed to be  travelling
downhill  sitting   magically  just   above the  ground,  while   to  the  riders
themselves the sense of speed was breathtaking.

   After  school and at weekends boys came from all over the dis trict to race
on the Sunbeam Avenue footpaths. There would be twenty or thirty  carts,
two-thirds of them with  ball-races. The noise was indescribable. It sounded
like the Battle of Britain going on in  somebody's bathroom. There would be
about half an hour's rac ing before the police came. Residents often took the
law  into  their   own  hands, hosing  the  grim-faced  riders  as  they  went
shrieking by. Sunbeam Avenue ran parallel to Margaret Street but it started
higher and lasted longer. Carts racing down the footpath on the far side had
a straight run of about a quarter of a mile all the way  to the park. Emitting
shock-waves of sound, the ball-race carts would attain such speeds that it
was impossible  for  the  rider  to  get off.   All  he  could  do  was to  crash
reasonably gendy when he got to the end. Carts racing down the footpath on
the near side could go only half as far, although very nearly as fast, before
being faced with a right-angle turn into  Irene Street. Here a pram-wheeled
cart like  mine  could demonstrate its  sole advantage. The traction  of  the
rubber tyres made it possible to negotiate the corner in some style. I devel‐ 
oped a histrionic lean-over of the body and slide of the back wheels which
got me around the corner unscathed, leaving black smoking trails of burnt
rubber. Mastery of this trick saved me from being rel egated to the ranks of
the littie kids, than which there was no worse fate. I had come to depend on
being thought of as a big kid. Luckily only the outstanding ball-race drivers
could match my fancy turn into  Irene Street. Others slid straight on with a
yelp of  metal and a  shower of  sparks, braining themselves on the aphalt
road. One driver scalped himself under a bread van.

40
   The Irene Street corner was made doubly perilous by Mrs  Branthwaite's
poppies. Mrs  Branthwaite inhabited  the house on the  cor ner. She was a
known witch  whom we often  persecuted after dark by throwing gravel on
her roof. It was widely believed she poisoned cats. Certainly she was a great
ringer-up of  the police.  In  retrospect I  can see that she  could hardly  be
blamed for this, but her behav iour seemed at the time like irrational hatred
of children. She was a renowned gardener. Her front yard was like the cover
of a seed catalogue. Extending her empire, she had flower beds even on her
two front strips, one on the Sunbeam Avenue side and the other on the Irene
Street side—i.e., on both outside edges of the  famous cor ner. The flower
beds held the  area's best collection of  poppies. She had  been known  to
phone the police if even one of these was illicitly picked.

   At  the time  I  am talking  about, Mrs  Branthwaite's poppies were all  in
bloom. It was essential to make the turn without  hurting a single hair  of a
poppy's head, otherwise the old lady would probably drop the telephone and
come out shooting. Usually, when the pop pies were in bloom, nobody dared
make the turn. I did—not out of courage, but because in my ponderous cart
there was no real danger of going wrong. The daredevil leanings-over and
the dramatic skids were just icing on the cake.

   I  should have left  it at  that, but got  ambitious. One Saturday afternoon
when there was a particularly large turn-out, I got sick of watching the ball-
race carts howling to glory  down the far side. I  organised the slower carts
like my  own into a train.  Every cart except mine was deprived of its  front
axle and loosely bolted to the cart in front. The whole assembly was about a
dozen carts long, with a big  box cart at the back. This  back cart I dubbed
the chuck-wagon, using terminology  I  had picked up  from  the Hopalong
Cassidy serial at the pictures. I was the only one alone on his cart. Behind
me there were two or even three to every  cart until  you got to  the chuck-
wagon, which was crammed full  of little  kids, some of  them so small that
they were holding toy koalas and sucking dummies.

   From its  very first  run down  the far side, my  super-cart was a triumph.
Even the adults who had been hosing us called their fami lies out to marvel
as we went steaming by. On the supercart's next run there was still more to
admire, since even the  top-flight  ball-race  riders had  demanded to have

41
their  vehicles  built   into   it,  thereby  heightening  its   tone,  swelling  its
passenger list, and multiplying  its  already impressive output  of  decibels.
Once again I should have left well alone. The thing was already famous. It
had everything but  a dining  car. Why  did  I  ever suggest that we should
transfer it to the near side and try the Irene Street turn?

   With so much inertia the super-cart started slowly, but it acceler ated like a
piano falling  out of a window.  Long before we  reached the turn I realised
that there had been a  serious miscalculation. The  miscalculation was  all
mine, of course. Sir Isaac Newton would have got it right. It was too late to
do anything  except pray. Leaning  into  the  turn, I  skidded  my  own  cart
safely around in the  usual way. The next few  segments followed me, but
with each segment describing an arc of slightly larger radius than the one in
front.  First gradually,  then with  stunning  finality,  the  monster lashed its
enormous tail.

   The air was full  of flying  ball-bearings, bits of wood, big kids, little  kids,
koalas and dummies. Most  disastrously of  all,  it  was also full   of  poppy
petals. Not a bloom  escaped the scythe. Those of us who  could  still  run
scattered to the winds,  dragging our  wounded with  us. The  police spent
hours visiting all  the parents in the dis trict, warning them that the billycart
era was definitely over. It was a police car that took Mrs Branthwaite away.
There was no point wait ing for the ambulance. She could walk all right. It
was just that she couldn't talk. She stared straight ahead, her mouth slightly
open.

    

    

    

   THE FORCE OF DESTRUCTION

    

    

42
    

    

    

    

    

   SUCH CATASTROPHES distressed my mother but she wrote them off as
growing  pains. Other exploits  broke  her heart.  Once when  she was out
shopping I was riding my second-hand Malvern Star 26-inch frame bicycle
around the house on a complicated circuit  which  led  from the  back yard
along the driveway, once around a small fir tree that stood in the front yard,
and back along the nar row side passage. Passing boys noticed what I was
up to  and  came riding  in.  In   a while   there were  a dozen  or  so of  us
circulating end lessly against the clock. Once again I could  not leave well
alone. I organised a spectacular finish in which the riders had to plunge into
my mother's prize privet hedge. The idea was for the bike's front  wheel to
lodge in the thick privet and the rider to fall  dramatically into  the bush and
disappear. It became harder and harder to disap pear as the privet became
more and more reduced to ruins.

   Giddy  with  success, I started doing  the same thing to  the hydran geas.
Finally I  did it  to the fir  tree, ramming it with  the bike and fall ing through
it,  thereby splitting  its  trunk.  When my  mother  came wearily  down  the
street with the shopping she must have thought the house had been strafed. I
was hiding under it—a  sure sign of  advanced guilt and fear, since it  was
dark under there and red-backs were plentiful. She chased me up the peach
tree and hit me around the ankles with a willow  wand. It didn't  hurt me as
much as her tears did. Not for the only time, I  heard her tell me that I was
more than she could  cope with.  I  suppose there was a  possibility  that I
somehow felt compelled to go on reminding her of that fact.

   Bombing  my bed  didn't make  me very  popular either. It  was a  trick  I
learned whde  recovering from   mumps. Climbing   on  to  the  top  of  the
wardrobe in my room, I would jump off  and land on my bed, which seemed

43
an immense distance below. Actually  it  was only a  few feet,  but the bed
groaned satisfactorily. Eventually there were half a dozen of us climbing up
and jumping  off   in  rapid  succession. It  was  a  mistake  to  let  Graham
Truscott play. He had a  double chin even at that  age and a behind like  a
large bag of  soil.  But  it  took him  so long  to  climb  the wardrobe that  it
seemed unreasonable not to let  him  jump  off  it.   The frame  of  the bed
snapped off its supports with the noise of a firing squad and crashed to the
floor with  the roar of cannon. I sent everyone home and tried to restore the
bed to its right height by putting suitcases under it, but all that did was cave
in the suitcases. Once again it was very dark under the house.

   And  once again there was an element of  panic in  my  mother's fury. It
sprang, of course, from the fact  that what we owned  was all we  had. My
mother had a War Widow's pension to bring me up on. It wasn't much. The
Returned  Servicemen's  League,  always  known   as   the  RSL,   was   a
formidable pressure group in the postwar years but those servicemen who
had not  returned exerted  no pressure at  all.  The  Legacy Club  threw  a
Christmas party every year. Oth erwise the bereaved wives were  paid off
mainly in  rhetoric, most of  it  emanating from the sdver tongue of  Robert
Gordon Menzies, alias Ming, who  went on being Prime Minister  for  what
seemed like eternity. My mother never failed to vote for him. She had quite
a lot of political nous, but Ming's patrician style numbed her judgment.

   Thus she went on remaining loyal to the Liberal  Party, while the Liberal
Party went on  ensuring that her  pension would  never be so  lavish as to
encourage idleness.

   She eked out her pittance by smocking babies' dresses. The smocking was
done on a brick wrapped in cloth. The panel to be smocked was threaded on
a long pin and the pin  was in turn  pushed through the cloth along the top
edge of the brick.  Then with  a needle and thread she produced row after
row of  tiny stitches, the stitches forming  exquisite patterns on the pink or
blue cloth. She was paid piece rates. They were not high. She worked pretty
well all  day and often far  into the evening while  we listened to  the radio.
She would stop only for Jack Davey, who we were agreed was a great wit.
Bob Dyer she found  ridiculous, but  listened to him  just so that she could
loathe him. After I went to bed she often went on working. Once a week she

44
took the  finished pieces up  to  the woman in  Oatley  who  assembled the
dresses. The round  trip  took  the  whole  day. It  was  often  during  these
absences that I perpetrated my  worst  crimes,  such as the  bed-wrecking
incident. Right  back at  the very  start, almost  the first  week  we were  in
Kogarah, I distinguished myself by helping to restore the colour in a faded
patch of the lounge-room carpet. I did this by rubbing a whole tin of Nugget
dark tan boot-polish into the deprived area. By the time she got back from
Oadey I was already in pre-emptive tears, having divined that the results did
not  look   quite   right.   On  such  occasions  she  looked   beyond  anger,
manifesting a sort of resigned desperation.

   Gradually I  learned that damaging anything around the house produced
more emotional wear and tear than I could deal with. So I started damaging
things away from  the house. I became adept at knocking out street-lights.
There was plenty of gravel lying around at the edge of the road. After dusk
I could bend down, pick up a stone, flick it  up at the light, and be half way
home before the pieces of shattered bulb hit the ground. These were small-
time depreda tions but they led on to bigger things.

   Every Saturday afternoon at the pictures there was a feature film, sixteen
cartoons and an episode each from four different  serials. The programme
just went on and on like Bayreuth. The Margaret Street children would join
up  with  the  Irene  Street  children  and  the  com bined mass would  add
themselves unto the Sunbeam Avenue chil dren and the aggregate would
join the swarm of  children from all  the other areas all moving north along
Rocky Point Road towards Rock dale, where the Odeon stood. In summer
the concrete footpaths were hot.  The asphalt footpaths were even hotter:
bubbles of  tar  formed,  to   be squashed flat  by   our  leathery bare  feet.
Running around on  macadamised playgrounds throughout the spring,  by
summer we had feet that could tread on a drawing pin and hardly feel it.

   When you  got to  the Odeon the first  thing  you  did was stock  up with
lollies.  Lollies  was  the word   for  what  the English  call  sweets and  the
Americans call candy. Some of the more privileged children had upwards of
five shillings each to dispose of, but in fact two bob was enough to buy you
as much as you could eat. Everyone, without exception, bought at least one
Hoadley's Violet  Crumble  Bar.  It  was a  slab  of  dense, dry honeycomb

45
coated with  chocolate.  So  frangible  was the  honeycomb  that  it  would
shatter when bitten, scattering bright yellow shrapnel. It  was like trying  to
eat a Ming vase. The honeycomb would go soft only after a day's exposure
to direct  sun light. The chocolate surrounding it,  however,  would  liquefy
after only ten minutes in a dark cinema.

   Fantails  came  in  a  weird,   blue,  rhomboidal  packet  shaped like   an
isosceles triangle with  one  corner missing.  Each  individual  Fantail  was
wrapped in a piece of  paper detailing a film  star's biography—  hence the
pun, fan tales. The Fantail itself was a chocolate-coated toffee so glutinous
that it  could induce  lockjaw  in a  mule. People had to  have their mouths
chipped open with   a cold  chisel.  One packet of  Fantails  would  last  an
average human being for ever. A group of six small boys could go through a
packet during the course of  a single afternoon at the  pictures, but it  took
hard work and involved  a lot of  strangled crying in  the dark. Any  fillings
you had in  your second teeth would be removed instantly,  while children
who still had any first teeth left didn't keep them long.

   The star lolly, outstripping even the Violet Crumble Bar and the Fantail in
popularity, was undoubtedly the Jaffa. A packet of Jaffas was loaded like a
cluster bomb with about fifty  globular  lollies the size of  ordinary marbles.
The Jaffa had a dark chocolate core and a brittle orange candy coat: in cross
section it looked  rather like  the planet Earth. It  presented two alternative
ways of being eaten, each with its allure. You could fondle the Jaffa on the
tongue until your saliva ate its way through the casing, whereupon the taste
of   chocolate  would    invade  your    mouth   with   a   sublime,   majestic
inevitability.  Or you could  bite straight through and submit  the interior  of
your head to a stun ning explosion of flavour. Sucking and biting your way
through forty  or so  Jaffas while Jungle Jim  wrestied with  the crocodiles,
you nearly always had a few left over after the stomach could take no more.
The spare Jaffas made ideal  ammunition.  Flying  through  the dark,  they
would bounce off an infantile  skull  with the noise of  bullets hitting  a bell.
They showered on the stage when the manager came out to announce the
lucky ticket. The Jaffa is a part of Australia's theatrical heritage. There was
a famous occasion, during the Borovansky Bal let production of Giselle  at
the  Tivoli    in   Sydney,   when  Albrecht    was  forced   to   abandon  the
performance. It was a special afternoon pre sentation of the ballet before an

46
audience  of   schoolchddren.  Lying   in   a   swoon   while   awaiting   the
reappearance of Giselle, Albrecht aroused much comment because of his
protuberant codpiece. After   being  hit  square on  the  power-bulge  by  a
speeding Jaffa, he woke up with a rush and hopped off the stage in the stork
position.

   Everyone either ate steadily or raced up and down the aisles to and from
the toilet, or all three. The uproar was continuous, like Niagara. Meanwhile
the programme was unreeling in front of us. The feature film was usually a
Tarzan, a  Western, or   the  kind  of   Eastern Western  in  which   George
Macready played the grand vizier. At an even earlier stage I had been to the
pictures  with   my   mother   and  been  continuously   frightened  without
understanding what was  going  on—the mere  use of  music  to  reinforce
tension, for example, was enough to drive me under the seat for the rest of
the evening. At a later stage I accompanied my mother to every change of
evening double bill both at Ramsgate and Rockdale—a total of four films a
week, every week for at least a decade. But nothing before or since had the
impact of those feature films at the Rockdale Saturday matinees.

   In  those days Johnny  Weissmuller was  making his  difficult   tran sition
from Tarzan to Jungle Jim. As Tarzan he got fatter and fatter until finally he
was too fat to be plausible, whereupon he was obliged to put on a safari suit
and become Jungle Jim. I was glad to learn subsequently that as Jungle Jim
he had a piece of the action and was at last able to bank some money. At the
time, his transmogrification looked  to me like  an unmitigated tragedy. His
old Tarzan movies were screened again and again. Many times I dived with
Tarz off Brooklyn  Bridge during  the climactic scene of Tarzan's New York
Adventure. In  my  mind  I  duplicated  the  back somersaults executed by
Johnny's double as he swung from vine  to vine  on his  way to  res cue the
endangered Jane and Boy from the invading  ivory  hunters. In one of  the
Tarzan movies there is a terrible  sequence where one lot of natives gives
another lot an extremely thin time by  arranging pairs of tree trunks so that
they will  fly  apart and pull the victim to pieces. This scene stayed with me
as a paradigm of evil. No doubt if  I  saw the same film today I  would find
the sequence as crudely done as everything  else ever filmed  on  Poverty
Row. But at the time it seemed a vision of cruelty too horrible even to think
about.

47
   I can remember having strong ideas about which cartoons were funny and
which were not. Mr Magoo and Gerald McBoing-Boing,  with their  stylised
backgrounds and elliptical  animation,  had not  yet  arrived  on the  scene.
Cartoons were still in that hyper-realist phase which turns out in retrospect
to have  been their  golden age. The  standards of animation  set by  Walt
Disney and MGM   cost a  lot  of time,  effort  and money,  but as so  often
happens the art reached its height at the moment  of maximum  resistance
from the medium.  Knowing  nothing of  these theoretical matters, I simply
consumed the  product.  I  knew  straight  away  that  the  Tom  and  Jerry
cartoons were the best. In fact I  even knew straight  away that some Tom
and Jerry cartoons were better than others. There was an early period when
Tom's features were puffy and he ran with a lope, motion being indicated by
the streaks that animators call speed lines. In the later period Tom's features
had an acute precision and his every move was made fully actual, with no
stylisation  at  all.  Meanwhile   Jerry  slimmed  down  and  acquired  more
expressiveness. The two periods were clearly separated in my mind, where
they were dubbed 'old drawings' and 'new drawings.' I remember being able
to tell which  category a given Tom and Jerry cartoon fell into  from see ing
the first few frames. Eventually I  could tell just  from the logo. I  remember
clearly the feeling of disappointment if it  was going to be old drawings and
the feeling of elation if it was going to be new drawings.

   But  the serials were  what caught my  imagination  most, especially  the
ones in which the hero was masked. It didn't occur to  me until  much later
that the producers, among whom  Sam Katzman was the  doyen, kept the
heroes masked so that the leading actors could not ask for more money. At
the time it  just  seemed logical to  me that a hero  should wear a mask. It
didn't have to be as elaborate as Batman's mask. I admired Batman, despite
the worrying wrinkles in the arms and legs of his costume, which attained a
satisfactory tautness only in the region  of his  stomach. But Robin's mask
was easier to copy. So was  the Black  Commando's. My favourite  serials
were those in which masked men went out at night and melted mysteriously
into the urban landscape. Science fiction serials were less appealing at that
stage, while white  hunter  epics like  The Lost  City  of the  Jungle merely
seemed endless. I saw all fourteen episodes of The Lost City of the fungle
except the last. It would have made no difference if I had seen only the last
episode and missed the thirteen leading up to it. The same things happened

48
every week. Either two parties of white hunters in solar topees searched for
each other in one part of the jungle,  or else the same two parties of white
hunt ers in solar topees sought to avoid each other in  another part  of the
jungle.   Meanwhile   tribesmen   from    the   Lost   City    either   captured
representatives of both  parties and took  them  to  the High   Priest ess for
sacrifice, or  else  ran  after  them  when they  escaped. Some times white
hunters escaping ran into  other  white  hunters being captured, and  were
either recaptured or helped the others escape. It was obvious even to  my
unschooled eye that there was only about half  an acre of  jungle, all  of  it
composed of papier mache. By the end of each episode it was beaten flat.
The screen would do a spi ral wipe around an image of the enthroned High
Priestess, clad in a  variety  of  tea-towels and gesturing  oburately with  a
collection of prop sceptres while one of the good white hunters—you could
tell a good one from a bad one by the fact that a bad one always sported a
very  narrow  moustache—was lowered upside  down  into  a  pit  of  limp
scorpions.

   Exotic  locations left  me cold.  What I  liked  was the idea of  pos sessing
unlimited   powers  and  yet   blending   undetectably  into  every day  life,
although not so undetectably that ordinary people would not be able to tell
at a glance who I was. The trouble with Superman, Captain Marvel, Captain
Marvel Jr, Batman and the rest of the dual-identity  squad was that no one
thought much of them when they were in mufti. Lois Lane practically wore
her lip  out sneering at Clark  Kent while  the poor drongo  stood there and
took it.  Billy  Bat-son was always getting  his crutch kicked.  Bruce Wayne
was derided  as  a  playboy.  None  of   that  happened to  me.  Discreedy
informing  people one by one, I  made sure everybody in the district  knew
that when dusk descended it was I, and nobody else, who became the Flash
of Lightning.

    

    

    

   ENTER THE FLASH  OF LIGHTNING

49
    

    

    

    

    

    

   THUS   THERE  WAS  NO  fruitless  speculation  about my  real iden tity  as I
streaked past in my  green felt  mask and black  cape. Like  Dracula,  the Flash
of Lightning   made his  appearance only after  nightfall.   In the  hours between
sunset and bed-time  an  imposing  figure  could  be  seen oudined  against the
stars. In less time than  it took  to pronounce  his name in an awed  whisper, he
was gone,  running   down  one  side  of  the  street and  up  the  other,  darting
along driveways,   clambering   over  back  fences and  making  his  inexorable
progress from  back  yard  to  back  yard.  You would   not  have known,   when
this sinister  avatar caught  and slipped  your  starded gaze, that  his mask  and
cape had been made by his mother.

   Actually    the Flash  of  Lightning's    cape was  almost  his  undoing.   It  was
fastened at  his  neck  by  two  short  lengths   of  rope  tied  in  a  bow.  Flitting
awkwardly   homeward  over  our  back  yard  fence one  night,  I  got  the  rope
tangled around  the  top  of  a paling.   The  result should   have been  death by
strangulation.  There  was a frantic,   word less struggle  in which   the Flash  of
Lightning's    proverbial   dignity    was   overwhelmed    by  a   mortal   urge   to
breathe. Just  when  it  looked  like   curtains  for  the  Flash  of  Lightning,    the
cape popped a seam and I dropped vertically   into the  choco patch.

   But   such  failures   were  few.   Generally   the  Flash   of  Lightning    was  a
success. Other  boys started  appearing  in  masks and  capes. Moments  after
the sun  dropped  they   would   come  swooping  towards   me  like  fruit   bats.
Obviously  everything   was  up to  me. Standing  around  in  mysterious  attire,
surrogates of  the Flash  of  Lightning   awaited  their  instructions.   Meanwhile
they announced their  names. There  was a Green  Flash, a Black  Flash  and a

50
Red Flash. Graham Truscott wanted to call himself the Flash of Thun der. I
took pity on them all and gave them their assignments. These started off as
harmless games  of  doorbell-ringing   but  became  less  cute  with   time.
Throwing gravel on Mrs  Branthwaite's roof must have been agony for her,
even though it was endlessly amusing to us. Films  of  Kristallnacht  never
fail  to  make me  think  of  those brilliantly   staged raids  by  the Flash  of
Lightning,  in  which  a dozen  handfuls of  gravel  would  all  land  on Mrs
Branthwaite's tiles only seconds before the perpetrators, magically divested
of capes and masks, were back at home sitting around the Kosi stove and
help ing their parents listen to Pick a Box. The difference between mis chief
and murder is no greater than what the law will allow. All we were allowed,
thank God, was mischief—and in retrospect that looks bad enough.

   What I had going, of  course, was a gang. Only lack of opportu nity saved
us from outright deliquency. There was a limit to what destruction we could
cause, but   everything   within    that   limit    sooner  or   later   got   done.
Overwhelming temptation was provided by a sud den increase in the number
of  building  sites. The  bottom  half  of  the  street, towards  the park,  had
previously been vacant blocks. These were suddenly all built on at once by
the Housing Commission. The plan was to provide a lot of new houses in a
tearing hurry. People at the top of the street started sneering at the people at
the bottom of  the street before the people at the bottom  of  the street had
even moved in. Adults were agreed that this sudden influx would lower the
tone. By night, and even by day if conditions were favourable, the Flash of
Lightning and his gang made sure that work on the budding sites proceeded
as slowly as possible.

   It  is remarkable how  much damage a group of  small boys can  do to a
building site if  it is  left unguarded. In loose moments I might pride myself
on  possessing a  creative  impulse  but   I  don't   have  to  do   too  much
introspection before being forced to admit  that a destruc tive impulse is in
there somewhere as well. Under my supervision, dumps of mixed lime were
well seeded with bricks. A brick dropped from high up into soft lime makes
a very satisfactory glurp. Stud ded with bricks like ice-cream full of chipped
chocolate, the lime   quickly  became unusable. We smashed tiles  by  the
hundred.  Por celain lavatory  bowls   were  reduced  to   their  constituent
molecules. Timber  frames stood  upright,  waiting  for   brick  walls  to  be

51
formed around them. Using an umbrella as a parachute, the Flash of Light‐ 
ning could jump from the top of one of these frames and land in a sand-pit.
Or the Flash of  Lightning  thought  he could. The  Flash of Lightning  was
lucky  to  land  perfectly  flat,  so  that  he  was merely  winded  instead  of
crippled for life.

   That put a temporary end to my share in the marauding. But if we had all
gone out every night  and worked until  dawn  taking apart everything  that
had been put together, transformation would still have been inevitable. The
district was changing. The  poultry  farm was sold  up and subdivided into
blocks of  building  land. Irene Street was  extended through it,  to join  up
with a new road called Madrers Avenue, so that there were now two ways
up to Rocky Point Road. This must have happened in fits and starts over the
course of  years, but  I  remember it   as a  surge of  innovation.  Concrete
kerbing was laid down, so that everybody's front strip had two edges to be
kept sharply defined  instead of  one. Most  sensational change of all,  the
sewer came. Vast trenches were dug in which pipes were laid. My mother
boldly proposed that one of the miraculous new devices should be installed
not only in the outside lavatory but in  the bath room itself. The very notion
spelled doom for the dunny man.

   Ever since I could remember, the dunny man had come run ning down the
driveway once a week. From inside  the house, we could hear his running
footsteps. Then we could hear the rattie and thump as he lifted the lavatory,
took out the full pan, clipped on a special lid, and set down an empty pan in
its place. After  more rattling  and banging, there was an audible intake of
breath as he hefted the full pan on to his shoulder. Then the footsteps went
back along the driveway, slower this time but still running. From outside in
the street there  was rattling,  banging  and shouting  as the  full   pan was
loaded on  to the  dunny  cart along  with  all  the  other full   pans. I  often
watched the  dunny cart  from  the  front  window.  As  it  slowly   made its
noisome way  down  the street, the  dunny  men ran  to  and from   it  with
awesome expertise. They wore shorts, sandshoes, and nothing else except a
sun-tan suspiciously deep on the forearms. Such occasional glimpses were
all one was allowed by  one's parents and all that was encouraged even by
the dunny men themselves. They preferred to work  in  nobody's company
except their own. They were a band apart. ,

52
   Years went by  without  those running footsteps being acknowl edged by
any other means except a bottle of beer left standing in the lavatory on the
closest visiting day to Christmas Day. Otherwise it seemed generally agreed
that the lavatory pan was changed by magic. From day to day it  got fuller
and fuller, generating maggots by about the third day. To combat the smell,
honeysuckle was grown on a trellis outside the lavatory  door, in the same
way that the Euro pean nobility had recourse to perfume when they travelled
by galley. The maggots came from blowflies and more blowflies came from
the  maggots. Blowflies    were  called  blowies.   The  Australian  climate,
especially  on  the   Eastern  seaboard in   the   latitude  of   Sydney,  was
specifically designed to  accommodate them. The blowies' idea of  a good
time was to hang around the dunny waiting  for the  seat to be lifted. They
were then faced with the challenge of getting through the hole before it was
blocked by the descending behind of the pro spective occupant. There was
no time  for  any  fancy  flying.   Whether parked  on  the wall   or  stacking
around in a holding pattern near the ceiling, every blowie was geared up to
make either a vertical dive from  high altitude or a death-defying low-level
run through  the  rap idly decreasing airspace between the  seat and  your
descending arse. The moment  the seat came  up, suddenly  it  was Pearl
Harbor.

   Once inside, enclosed under a dark sky, the blowies  set about dumping
their eggs. The memory of the results has always, in my mind, given extra
vividness to Shakespeare's line about life in excre ments. God knows what
would have happened if ever the dunny  men had gone on strike. Even as
things were, by the end of the week the contents of the pan would be getting
too close  for  comfort.  Luckily  the  dunny  man was  a model  of  probity.
Never putting  a  foot  wrong,  he carried  out his  Sisyphean task in  loyal
silence. Only   when he  was  about  to  leave our  lives   for  ever  did  his
concentration slip. Perhaps he foresaw that one day the sewer would come
to  everywhere in  the  world.  Perhaps, in  order  to  ward  off  these  grim
thoughts, he partook of his Christmas beer while still  engaged in the task.
Because it was on that day—the day before Christmas Eve—that the dunny
man made his solitary mistake.

   My   mother  and  I  were  having  breakfast.  I  heard  the  dunny  man's
footsteps thumping along the driveway, with  a  silent pause as he hurdled

53
my bicycle, which in my habitual carelessness I had left lying there. I heard
the usual thumps,  bangs and heaves. I  could picture  the brimming   pan,
secured with the special clipped lid, hoisted high on  his shoulder while he
held my mother's gift bottle of beer in his other, appreciative hand. Then the
footsteps started running back the other way. Whether he forgot about my
bicycle, or simply mistimed his jump, there was no way of telling. Suddenly
there was the noise of.  . .  well,  it was  mainly the  noise of a  dunny man
running full  tilt  into  bicycle. The uproar was made especially ominous by
the additional  noise—tiny  but  significant   in  context—  of  a  clipped  lid
springing off.

   While  my  mother  sat there with  her  hands over her  eyes I  raced out
through the fly-screen door and took a look down the driveway. The dunny
man, overwhelmed by the magnitude of his tragedy, had not yet risen to his
feet. Needless to say, the contents of the pan had been fully divulged. All
the stuff had come out. But what was really  remarkable was the way none
of it   had missed him.  Already  you  could hear  a gravid  hum in  the  air.
Millions  of flies were on their  way towards us. They were coming from all
over Australia. For them, it was a Durbar, a moot, a gathering of the clans.
For us, it was the end of an era.

   Once the new lavatories were installed, the bathroom became the centre
of all  ablutions.  I  no longer took  a  book to  the outside lavatory  and sat
absorbed, the door thrown open to admit light. Just as well, because towards
the end of  the unsewered epoch I  was caught in  that position  by  Valma
Chappelow, the girl  from  across the road. She was older than I  was too,
which made it worse. She came pounding around the corner of the house on
her way to bor row something that her scatter-brained mother had forgotten
to buy when out shopping—bread, butter, milk, meat or some other frip pery
like that. Valma got a  good look at me sitting  there with my  pants around
my ankles. She made sure everybody in the district got to hear about it. She
told her  pen-pals. Years later at a  party in  Caringbah, more than  twenty
mUes away by train, I met a stranger who knew all about it. If I went to live
in the  Outer Hebrides I  would  probably  find  the inhabitants all  giggling
behind their hands.

54
   But  the district didn't  change as much as it stayed the same. As I  grew
older, my picture of  where I lived  grew wider  and more com plicated. The
expanding of one's vision is  usually enough in itself  to  generate a feeling
that everything is falling  apart. Nevertheless one had a sense of constancy
even at the time, and looking back on it I can see that my whole chddhood
was remarkable for the amount of entertainment permanently on flow. All
you had to do was turn the tap and bend your pursed lips to the bubbler.

   Admittedly   some  of  the  local   adults  were  terrifying.   Gail  Thorpe's
husband Wally was a pastry cook whose business had failed. His principal
means of revenge was to brow-beat his wife,  who  went away for  electric
convulsion therapy every year or so. The only result of the treatment was to
alter the position of her nervous smile, so that instead of being on the front
of her face it  ended up under one ear. By the time it drifted  around to the
front  again she  was ready  for  another course  of  treatment. Wally   also
tormented his  children  in   various ways.  He  would   go  on  tickling   his
younger daughter, Car-mel, long  after the  desperately sobbing child  had
begged him to stop. Watching these performances, I woke up early to  the
reality of human evil.  News of mass political atrocity has always saddened
me but never come as a surprise. The only time I tried to interfere with one
of Wally Thorpe's divertissements, he swore at me for ten min utes on end at
the top of his  voice. I  went home stunned. My mother did  her best to tell
him off but it  was clear that at such moments she sorely felt her loneliness.
That night was one of the few times I ever heard her say, 'I wish your father
had come home.'

   The Goodhews were likewise  a bit  of  a pain.  They were so  pro tective
about their sons, Darryl and Des, that they would trail them about, checking
up on what was going on. This could be awkward when what was going on
was a full-scale battle  involving  the throw ing of  stones and bits of fibro.
These battles usually  took   place up  in   the quarry,  with   the  defenders
occupying fox-holes in the heights and the attackers moving up through the
lowlands from  one clump of  lantana to  another. Very properly concerned
about their children losing  an eye, the Goodhew parents would invariably
show up just in time  to see one of their little  darlings sconed by a rock or
sliced open by a whizzing piece of fibro. The fuss would take weeks to die
down. According  to Mr  and Mrs  Goodhew, their children  were being led

55
astray by the local toughs. In fact their own  progeny were the worst of the
lot.  Darryl  Goodhew could  look  wonderfully  inno cent when his  parents
were around, but he was a dead shot when they weren't looking. He  once
knocked Beverley Hindmarsh  off  her dinkey  at an  incredible range. The
missile was a lump of sand stone. He was sharing a fox-hole with me at the
top of  the quarry.  It  was the  best fox-hole:  you had  to crawl  through  a
lantana tunnel to get to it. Halfway  down  Margaret Street, Beverley was a
dot on the horizon when Darryl launched the rock. It was a long time on its
way. I had lost  sight of  it  long before she abrupdy stopped pedalling and
crashed sideways with awful finality.   Darryl immediately  ran towards the
scene of the crime  with  a look  of  concern. His  air  of innocence was  so
persuasive that Beverley's  parents never thought  of  blaming  him.  They
would have blamed  me if  I  had been stupid  enough to emerge from  the
lantanas. I was already established as Beverley's persecutor, having pinched
her bottom one day with a metal reinforcing clip stolen from a building site.
It was meant to be a joke, but it took a piece out of her pointed behind. I got
belted for  that, and if  I  surfaced now  I  would get  belted again. Besides,
Darryl would  undoubtedly have pointed  the finger  at me. So I  stayed up
there until the stars came out. Beverley suffered nothing more severe than
shock and a badly bruised infantile bud. When you con sider that the stone
might just  as easily have removed an eyeball,  you can see that we  must
have had a guardian angel.

   Otherwise the adults left us pretty much alone. On the week ends we made
our  big  expeditions  to  the  pictures,  the  swamp  or  the  dump.   In  the
afternoons and evenings after school we  played in  the street. We  played
cock-a-lorum from  one side of  the street to the other. We  played a game
with  half  a dozen sticks  spaced out along  the front  strip  and  you were
allowed to take only  one step between every two sticks. You kept moving
the sticks further  and further  apart until  nobody was left  in  except some
visiting Itid  built  like a praying mantis. You had to do as many chin-ups as
you could on  the box tree. There were complicated bike  races around the
block. The older boys did a lot of  elaborate riding up and down in front  of
the girls, who  used to sit  in  line on  the Chappelows' front fence. War ren
Hartigan could sit on his bicycle backwards and ride past very slowly. They
stopped giggling when he did that. Graham Truscott should never have tried
it. A spoke from one of the wheels went right through his calf.

56
   We played hidings and countries. In countries you threw a tennis ball  in
the air and ran, calling out the name of a country. Each player had the name
of a country. If your country was called, you tried to catch the ball before it
bounced, whereupon you could throw  it  up again and call  out  somebody
else's country. If you only caught it on the bounce, you had to . .. Forget it.
The rules went  on and on.  All  that mattered was to  throw  the ball  high.
Greg Brennan could put it into  orbit.  He lived next  door but one. Nobody
lived very far away. We played on and on through the hot afternoon into the
brief dusk and the sudden nightfall. Towards sunset the adults would appear
on the  front  porches and start  watering the  lawn.  They would   tune the
nozzles to a fine spray, which would drift in the air at the first breath of the
summer wind that came every night. Usually it was a nor'easter. Sometimes
it was the Southerly Buster. The Christmas beedes and cowboy beetles held
jamborees around the street-lights, battering themselves against the white
enamel reflectors and falling  into the street. They lay  on their  backs with
their  legs struggling.  When  you  picked  them  up  they  pulsed with   the
frustrated strength of their clenched wing muscles.

   Before there was the refrigerator there was the ice-chest. A block  of ice
was loaded into it every couple of days. If you left  a bottle of lemonade on
top of the block of ice the bottle would sink in  and get deliciously cold. We
weren't rich but we had meat three times a day, even if it had to be rabbit.
Before myxomatosis was  introduced, the  Australian rabbit  was a  lightly
budt racing model that made excel lent food. Only in a protein-rich country
like Australia could  such a marvellous beast be looked down on. Left-over
rabbit legs could be put in the ice-chest after dinner and eaten for breakfast
next  day. Surrounded  with   cold  white   fat,  they  looked  like   maps  of
Greenland and tasted like a dryad's inner thigh.

   When  the watermelon  man came there  was more  melon than  anyone
could eat. You scooped the lines of blackseeds out with your crooked finger
and bit a face-sized piece out of the cool, crisp, red, sweet slice. Chomping
away until  your ears were full  of  sugar. Slurp ing and snarling until  there
was hardly a trace of pink left  on the white lining  of the rind.  There was a
kind  of  drink-on-a-stick  called  the Skybomber^—a  tetrahedron of  deep
green, lime-flavoured water  frozen so hard  that its  surface had no grain.
You had to suck it  for  half  an hour before it  gave in and became friable.

57
Then whole layers of it would come away sweefly and easily in your numb
mouth, as if the molecules had been arranged in strata, like graphite. Every
time I see that shade of green I think immediately of Skybombers.

   I'm  sure it  was aesthetically justifiable for  Proust to  concentrate on his
piece of cake, but  in  fact almost anything  can take you  back. There is a
rhapsodic stretch about ice-cream in La Prisonniere  that proves the point
exactly. He imagines  his tongue shaping the  ice creams of long ago, and
suddenly all the  past comes rushing back with  authentically  uncontrolled
force. Elsewhere in the novel he keeps his memory on a tight rein. Herzen
was closer to the truth  when he said that every memory  calls up a  dozen
others. The real miracle of Proust is the discipline with  which he stemmed
the flow. Everything is a Madeleine.

    

    

    

   DIB,  DIB, DIB,  DIB

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

   SOMEWHERE  ABOUT  THIS TIME   I was in the Cubs. When the time
came for graduation to the Scouts, I was not accepted, and thus became for
the brief time before I tossed the whole thing in, the old est Cub in the First

58
Kogarah Wolf Cub Pack and probably the world. Lacking the precious gift
of taciturnity,  I  could never achieve the  grim face  essential to success in
paramditary organisations. Consid ering this fatal flaw, it is remarkable how
many of them I  tried to get into.  The Cubs were merely the first in  a long
line. My  mother  made my scarf. It  had to  be in  First Kogarah colours—
maroon with yellow  piping.  She made me a woggle out  of leather. Every
Cub had to have a woggle.  It  held your scarf on.  As well  as the woggle,
there were special sock-tops—called something like higgles—which always
fell  down.  After  you  passed your Tenderfoot  you  got a  wolfs  head, or
diggle, to wear on your cap. Also on the cap went a scraggle for each year
of service. In addition to woggles, fuggles, diggles and scraggles, successful
Cubs had the right, indeed obligation, to wear a whole collection of insignia
and badges. The second in command of a sub-pack of six Cubs was called a
Seconder and wore a yellow stripe on his sleeve. The commander of a sub-
pack was called  a Sixer  and wore  two stripes.  A  sixer in  his  final  year
would be so cov ered in decorations that promotion to the Scouts became a
physical necessity, lest he expire under the weight.

   Ruling  over the whole  pack was Akela.  Her name was taken from  The
Jungle Book. She wore a brown uniform  with a Scout hat. Other wise she,
too, was burdened down with woggles and fuggles. At the beginning of our
weekly meetings, we Cubs would squat in a circle and worship her. While
squatting, we made wolf-head signs with  our fingers  and pointed them at
the floor. Then we chanted, 'Akela, we'll do our best. We'll dib dib  dib dib.
We'll dob dob dob dob ..."  This routine was climaxed  by a mass throwing
back of  heads and emitting  of  supposedly vulpine  howls.  I  used to  get
through the'dib-bing and dobbing all right but during  the howling I  usually
rolled over backwards.

   My   lack  of  poise could  possibly  have  stemmed from  a  never-to-be-
satisfied wonderment  about  what  dibbing   and  dobbing  might  actually
consist of, but more probably it was just the result of an overwhelming love
for Akela.  I  adored her. A  school  teacher in real  life,  she was a mother
figure with  none of the drawbacks. For her own part, she must have found
me a  problem,  since  I   trailed  her  around  everywhere. The  theory  of
Scouting,  or   in   this   case  Cub bing,  was  that   boys  should   become
independent through the acqui sition of woodcraft and related skills.  All   I

59
ever learned was how to attach myself to Akela's skirt. This made it hard for
Akela and  Baloo to  be alone. Baloo  the Bear was  a young adult  King’s
Scout who visited the pack once a month. Decorated like a combination of
Boris Godunov and General MacArthur, a King"s Scout in full regalia could
be looked at only through smoked glass.

   Baloo also accompanied us on camps. We went on a camp to Heathcote,
in the National Park. My  mother came along to help. I  had talked her into
coming by telling  her that every other mother would  be there and that the
camp site was yards from the station.

   It  was seven thousand yards from the station. Mine was the only mother
large-hearted enough to contribute her services. The trek to the camp site
was along bush tracks and down cliffs. Swinging white-lipped  from  vines,
my mother vowed to pick  a bone with me later. By  the time we got to  the
camp site she was  too far  gone to  expend any of  her  remaining energy
remonstrating with me. She cooked the sausages while Akela and Baloo put
up the tents. It took  Akela and Baloo  about an hour's walk in  the bush to
find each tent pole. Meanwhile my mother doled out the exploding sausages
and bandaged the hands of those Cubs—all of them heavdy decorated with
badges denoting proficiency  in  woodcraft—who  had  burned themselves
picking up aluminium mugs of hot tea.

   That night it  rained like the Great Flood. The river rose. Tents col lapsed.
All  the Cubs ended up in one big tent with my mother. Akela ended up in a
pup tent  with  Baloo.  Shortly  afterwards they  were married.  Presumably
Akela gave birth to either a bear or a wolf. By that time I had left the Cubs.
You couldn't get into  the Scouts with out a certain number of  badges. My
own score was zero. Besides, I couldn't face a change of Akelas.

   The big change I couldn't get out of was being sent to a special school. In
fourth class at Kogarah, when we were all about ten years old, we took an
IQ test. It was the Stanford Binet, on which I score about 140. On the more
searching Wechsler-Bellevue I get about 135. Such results are enough to put
me  into  the  98th  percentile,  meaning  that  97  per  cent  of  any   given
population is likely  to  be less good at doing these tests than I am. This is
nothing to  boast about. Intelligence starts being original  only  in  the next
percentile up from mine, where the scores go zooming off  the scale. Time

60
has taught me, too slowly alas, that there is nothing extraordinary about my
mental capacities. In my romantic phase, which lasted for  too long, I  was
fond of  blaming  my sense of  loneliness on superior intellect.  In  fact the
causes were, and are, psychological.

   At  the time, of course, none of these questions came up. My mother was
simply  informed  that  her  son  had revealed  himself  as belonging  to   a
category which demanded two years of special edu cation in the Opportunity
'C school at Hurstville.  Opportunity  'A'  schools were for  the handicapped
and Opportunity 'C schools were for  the gifted.  At either  end of the scale
special schooling  was  a  dubi ous privilege,  since it   involved  travel  by
electric train. Hurstville   was only three stops down  the Illawarra  line but
even such a short voy age offered plenty of opportunities for sudden death.
Mothers very  understandably worried   themselves sick about  what  their
precious little  sons might be getting  up to  on trains that conveyed whole
generations of school children at dizzy speeds without benefit of automatic
doors. For  boys of  any  age it  was  considered mandatory to  stand near
doorways. For older boys it was compulsory to stand at the very edge of the
doorway, holding  the door open  with  their shoulders, draping  their arms
negligendy behind their backs with  their  hands loosely grasping the door
handle, and keeping balance with their  feet and legs as the swaying train
hurtled through cut tings and over viaducts. Stanchions had been provided
every hun dred yards. They were meant to hold up the power lines, but had
the additional function of  braining anybody who  stuck his head out of the
window. Everybody  stuck  his head out  of  the  window,  drawing it  back
again as a stanchion loomed.

   Every second train was a through, meaning it did not stop at Carl ton and
Allawah  but   attempted to   break  the  world   land  speed record  on  an
uninterrupted run from Kogarah to Hurstville or vice  versa. At either end it
was considered de rigueur to alight as early as possi ble. Anyone waiting for
the train  to  stop was  considered a cissy.  The more  athletic  boys could
languidly step off and hit  the platform run ning flat out. If  they mistimed it
they ended up with a gravel rash starting at the forehead and extending all
the way to the toes. The sport  came to an end when the champion, a boy
named Newell, got his stations mixed up and stepped off at Allawah  from
the through train to Hurstville.  When we got the news about his injuries—

61
his left   femur, apparently, was  the only   bone that  remained intact—we
became somewhat meeker about leaving the train early. Neverthe less the
deaths continued to run at the rate of one a year. It  was another ten years
before  automatic  doors  were   tried  out   even  experi mentally. Perhaps
someone was  afraid   that  the  Australian   national  character  would  be
weakened.

   At Hurstville  there was an Opportunity 'C fifth and sixth class with about
thirty  of  us freaks in  each class. Otherwise the  school was normal.  The
freaks strove to be even more normal than every body else—an instructive
example of the  Australian reluctance to  stand out from  the pack  for any
reason other than athletic skill.  Some of  our number, however, ranked as
exotica no matter how hard they tried to blend into the scenery. There was a
boy  called   Nel son, for   example,   who   made  Graham  Truscott  look
emaciated. Nel son needed two desks. But he could play chess at an exalted
level. So could almost everybody else in the class except me. I didn't even
know the moves. A lot  of the boys in the class wore glasses and had notes
from their parents excusing them from soccer, swimming, running, jumping
or even crossing the playground unattended. They were all drafted into the
school's fife   band.  On  sports  day  they  spent  the  afternoon  marching
awkwardly backwards and forwards while playing 'Colonel Bogey' on their
black wooden fifes. The total effect was pathetic in the extreme.

   The fife  players also tended to wear those cissy sandals that looked like
ordinary shoes with bits cut out of them. Whenever I could get away with it
I  defiandy stuck  to  bare feet. This  was  not, I  think,  any  kind  of  class-
conscious social gesture. I had no inkling of class differences. In Australia
there is a widespread illusion  that there are no class barriers. In fact  they
exist, but it  is possible to remain unaware of them. There are social strata
whose occupants feel superior but there is almost nobody who feels inferior,
probably because the  poor  are as  well  nourished  as the  rich.  It  never
occurred to me that most of the boys in the class came from more privileged
homes than mine. If I  had been smarter it might have done. The evidence
was abundant. Graham Slender brought expensive toys to school. His father
had bought them for him  in America. One of  the toys was a machine gun
that fired  ping-pong  balls. For  a few  delirious  seconds he showered the
astonished class with   bounc ing celluloid   spheres before  the  gun  was

62
impounded. Robert  Lunn,   David   Carnaby, John  Elstub  and  I   usually
occupied the back four desks in  the class. Lunn seemed inordinately well
supplied with funds. Sometimes after school he would shout half a dozen of
us to a cream-cake blow-out in one of the Hurstville teashops. He and I both
knew what a blow-out was, since we had both been read ing English comics
and boys'  weeklies.  Most  Australian  boys  at  that  time  read  American
comics but a few  read English ones as well.  With  Lunn  it was  all in  the
family: his parents brought him up in the English manner and eventually he
went to Sydney Grammar  and after that to  Duntroon. With  me it  was an
accident. When I had a suspected case of diphtheria just after the war I was
taken by screaming ambulance to  South Coast Hospital  near Bunnerong
power-house for  three unforgettable  weeks of  ice-cream  and lemon ade.
There were papers like Tip-Top and Radio Fun  lying  around in  the play-
room. I  made my mother buy more of  them. On visiting  days my  mother
would arrive looking like  a news-vendor. It took the edge off having to pee
in a jar.

   From  then on  I   read Tip-Top every  week  and later  graduated to  the
Wizard, Rover, Hotspur  and Champion. By  the  time  I  got  to  Hurst ville
school I  was an expert  on these papers and could  discuss their contents
endlessly. I certainly identified with characters like Brad-dock V.C. and Alf
Tupper, the Tough of the Track.  Braddock was a non-commissioned pilot
who defeated the Luftwaffe  single-handed but contemptuously refused all
promotions and decorations except  the V.C,  whose ribbon  he wore  half
hanging off.   Stuffed  shirts  were  always  objecting  to  his  behaviour  in
railway carriages and then hav ing to apologise when they found out he was
the RAF's greatest hero.

   Alf  Tupper trained on  fish and chips and ran the first  four-minute mile.
While  admiring  the  prowess of  these demigods, I   completely  failed  to
realise that they were fantasy figures specifically  aimed at Britain's  lower
orders. Perhaps Lunn had a better understanding but I suspect that he, too,
was largely in the dark.  There was a serial in the Wizard about a poor lad
who with  the aid  of his  tremendously self-sacrificing mother  was able to
attend a Public School. He wore patched trousers and had to endure much
scorn from the toffs but ended up Captain of Swimming, Cricket, Football,
Debates and finally of  the School itself.  1  don't think  I really  understood

63
what this story  was all  about. After  all,  in Australia  all  the schools were
public—or so it seemed. It never occurred to me that in an English context
'public' meant  'private.' Possibly because I  was clueless, but more  likely
because the provocation simply wasn't there, I didn't  develop any kind  of
chip  on my  shoulder  until  much  later,  so the  social  content of  almost
everything I was reading failed to register, even when social content was the
only kind of content it had.

   By  this time  I  was starting to  devour books  as well  as magazines and
comics.  I   went   Biggies-crazy   and   generally  became  an   expert   on
aeroplanes. Whde the chess players were getting on with their chess I would
be busy reading Worrals Wipes It Off or memorising air-recognition charts.
At the age of eleven I could recognise a pho tograph of any aircraft that had
been built at any time in any country in the world. The Opportunity  system
gave its   pupds plenty   of  time  to   develop such  interests.  The  normal
curriculum was dealt with in the morning and the afternoon was left free for
the  development of   potentialities.  Unfortunately  like   most  educational
concepts this idea yielded pretty thin results. No reflection  on our teacher,
Mr  Davis—who had been a  navigator in  a Lancaster during the war  and
could turn  a  back  somersault off  the  one-metre board—but learn ing to
recognise aeroplanes  is   not  the   same  as  acquiring  knowledge.   The
inevitable result  was that those boys who  were receiving  some guidance
from home flourished while  those whose sole stimulus was the school did
little more than fool  around with 'projects.' Since the choice of project was
left to  us, the results were hopelessly vari able as to quality. One boy with
bifocals  would    be  turning   an   old   washing-machine  into   a  particle
accelerator while the boy at the next desk would be cutting out pictures of
giraffes. I've  just remembered the name of  the boy at  the next desk. His
name was Tommy Pillans. He was unhappy at home and committed suicide
in his  first year  with us—the  first premature death in  my generation. His
desk was empty for only  a few days. Then there was a reshuffle.  Perhaps
part of  Nelson  moved into  it.   Anyway,  that was  Tommy  Pillans. Gone
without a ripple. Not for  the last time, I accommodated myself with ease to
the idea of someone vanishing.

   As well  as glasses, John Elstub had all the other attributes of dampness—
shoe-like sandals, knee-length khaki shorts, fife, and a purse full  of  notes

64
from his mother saying that he was not to be exposed to direct sunlight. The
only day he ever appeared on the soc cer field he ran away from the ball. He
was the son  of  an academic of  some  kind  and spent his  time  at home
absorbing the contents of the Encyclopedia Britannica. He always knew the
answers but had a way of calling out 'Sir! Sir!' that not even Sir could stand.
Elstub was a standing joke. Yet he was reading Ulysses while I was learn ing
to tell a Messerschmitt Bf. 109E from a Bf.  109F. (The Bf. 109E had struts
supporting the tail-plane and the Bf. 109F didn't.) I  was invited to  Elstub's
house once. There were a lot of pre-war American aviation magazines lying
around. I asked if I could borrow them and when I got home I  cut them up
and pasted the  best pictures  in  my  scrap-books. Next  day  at  school  I
presented Elstub with the fait accompli and he said it was all right. It never
occurred to me at the  time that  he had behaved well and I  badly, or  that
what I had done would  have been considered thoughdess in someone half
my age. I was simply convinced that aircraft  were my department and that
those magazines had no business being in Elstub's possession.

   During the afternoons at school I spent a lot of time constructing sand-pit
battlefields full  of lead soldiers. Later on, copying the school newspaper in
The Fifth   Form  at  St  Dominic's,  I   started a  wall   maga zine to which
everyone was invited to contribute. I usually decided that hardly anybody's
contributions were up  to  standard except mine. At  the annual  exhibition
day, held in the school library, my sand-pit battlefield made a huge impact.
While  all  the  parents stood  devoudy  around,  I  explained  the strategic
picture and announced that token detonations had been arranged in order to
represent the effect of artillery fire and tactical bombing. Actually  Slender,
a dab hand at such matters, had sown the sand with hungers which could be
set off in  sequence by touching a wire to a battery. Slender was under the
sand-tray with  the battery.  At  the rehearsal we  used Kwong  Man  Lung
penny hungers and  everything  went  all  right.  But  for   the performance
proper Slender had planted something more ambitious—fourpenny hungers
the size of a stick of  dynamite. On top of  this he got nervous and touched
the whole lot off  at once. The Korean War was in progress at the time and
the parents must have thought that the Chinese communists had arrived in
Hurst ville. One man jumped into  his  wife's arms—an extraordinary  role-
reversal which I  would  have laughed at if  I  had not had  a mouth full  of
sand. It was cowardly of Slender not to come out.

65
   The wall  magazine was rather better received. Verbally it was derivative
in every respect, with stories about heroic war-time fliers, athletes training
on fish  and chips, and stoic young  schoolboys ris ing above their patched
trousers to become Captain of the School. Nearly all  of  it was written  by
me. But I  shared responsibdity for graphic design with David  Carnaby. In
the wad magazine as in  his notebooks, Carnaby had a  subtie touch with
lettering and a ravish ing sense of colour. We usually shared the awards for
the best set-out and decorated exercise books. I stfll like  to think  that my
own let tering had a firmness of outiine that his  lacked. The grand designs
were all mine. But he was unbeatable on tone and detad. Everything he did
breathed a pastel elegance. It often happens that we are most touched by
what we are least capable of. Evanescent delicacy is not the quality in the
arts that I admire most, but it is often the characteristic by which I am most
reduced to envy.  Nowadays I  know  exactiy  what  enchantment is  being
worked on me by Alain-Fournier's hedgerows or Monet's water-lilies. I can
put 'Miroirs'  on the turntable and will ingly succumb. I know that I  can't do
it myself but nowadays I can live with the knowledge. In those days I would
look over Carnaby's shoulder and wonder if it was worth going on at all.

   But go on I  did, finding  success easy. I was made class captain— a clear
endorsement of my personality and attainments. There was thus no pressure
on me to change my ways, which remained selfish, noisy and maladroit. At
that time I was as big as, or bigger than, the boys around me, so it was not
entirely  absurd when  I   presumed to   dominate them.  As   the  teacher's
representative I could  usually  make them  toe  the line,  confident  in  the
knowledge that  it  was less trou ble for  them  to obey  than to  resist. My
biggest coup was to maintain discipline through the long rehearsals for the
Queen's visit. This involved months of driU  for every school in Sydney, so
that finady when everything was put together in the Showground the Queen
and Prince  Philip  would   be stunned by   a co-ordinated  display  of  cal‐ 
isthenics and flag-waving. For two  days before the actual event we shone
our shoes, polished our belts, had our teeth filled, etc. On the day itself the
school transferred en masse to the Showground, where our display  team,
with me as front right marker, lined up with hun dreds of other such teams to
await inspection by the Royal Party.

66
   We stood for hours in the boding sun. The Royal Party was run ning late.
Children were fainting left and right, as if their serried ranks were subject to
sniper fire.  Suddenly  there was a  screech of  tyres in   the distance. The
Queen and her consort screamed past us in a Land Rover. I remember that
they were standing up. Each held on to the top of the windshield with  one
hand whde giving the  famous mechanical wave with the other. How  their
hats stayed on  was a  mystery,  since they  were  travelling  only  slightiy
slower than a Formula One Grand Prix racing car. There were not too many
details to remember, but it was evident that the Queen's complex ion really
was as advertised—peaches and cream. We then got on with our display. It
was a measure of my almost psychopathic self-consciousness that I felt the
Queen's eyes on me as I waved my flag. But I performed creditably, as did
my team. Not counting Nelson, who had fainted long ago and been carried
away on a couple of stretchers.

   Generally it  is our  failures that  civilise  us. Triumph confirms  us in  our
habits. I  would  probably  have abused my power  had I   been given any.
Fortunately  my  role   as  class captain  was  all   responsibili ties and  no
privileges. The most onerous duty was to keep order when Mr  Davis  was
out of the room.  I tried  to do  this by shouting 'Shut up!'  at the top  of my
voice. Eventually   I  could  stun  the whole   school by  sheer  lung-power.
Otherwise, until the end of my stay there, Hurstville  Opportunity 'C hardly
changed me at all, probably  because what was going on at home  was so
intense.

   I  had enrolled myself in a family.  The family  were called the Meldrums
and lived in  Sunbeam Avenue. Mr Meldrum  was a plumber.  He and Mrs
Meldrum had produced three children, all boys: in descending order of age
they were Gary,  Neil  and Craig.  There was  also an Alsatian  dog called
Ruth, whom I will   get to in a minute.  All  six of  them lived in  a house not
much bigger than  ours. Mr  Meldrum  wore  a blue  working  singlet at  all
times. He was regarded in the district  as something of a gypsy. In fact  he
was sim ply the most original man for miles. He made hardly any money but
there was more going on in his house than in anybody else's. He had turned
all the boys into good swimmers. Gary was exception ally good and got his
picture in the papers for swimming a mile at the age of ten. Neil was a bit of
a black sheep and Craig was sim ply dense, but even they were encouraged

67
in their  interests. Neil  was mad about stamps and Craig was held  by Mr
Meldrum  to  be a  promising  biologist.  In  fact  Craig's biological   studies
consisted mainly of picking up privet grubs and eating them. He would also
tuck into the occasional centipede. Mrs Meldrum's understandable hysteria
at such moments would be overwhelmed by Mr  Meldrum's gusto. He was
the first man I ever met who had that. In short, he was a ready-made father
figure.

   The Meldrums taught me to swim. Mr  Meldrum, Gary  and Neil took me
down to the creek in the park. Reeds lined the banks and widows kissed the
surface. The water was as brown as oxtail soup but Mr Meldrum  said that
any water was clean if you could catch healthy fish in it. All  the Meldrums
could  swim  across the  creek underwater. To  me  it  seemed a  fabulous
distance. Gary showed me how to hold my breath and keep my eyes open
underwater. I could see his hair floating. Inside an hour I was dog-paddling.
Mr  Meldrum threw  his own  boys up  in the  air to  turn back  somersaults.
Then I  rode on  Gary's shoulders, Neil  rode  on his  father's, and we  had
battles in the shallow water.

   That was just the start. I think I was eight years old, or perhaps nine. Over
the next few years I  spent more and more time at the Meldrums'. I  would
bolt my  dinner and scoot around to their  place in time  to join  them for  a
second dessert. Thus I laid the foundation of my uncanny ability to inhale a
meal instead of eating it. Another  bad aspect was the inevitable encounter
with Ruth. Like all  dog-owning families, the Meldrums regarded their four-
footed friend as some kind of  genius. Ruth was Mr  Meldrum's blind  spot.
He seemed to think that his house would not be safe without Ruth to guard
it. Apart  from  an abundance of life there was nothing  in the house worth
stealing. Nor, had there been, would Ruth have ranked as an early choice to
stand sentinel. She was undoubtedly ferocious enough, but was no brighter
than any other dog. She vented most of her fury on the family and its close
acquaintances. If any  burglars had  turned  up she  would  probably  have
ignored them, or  else let them in  and minded their  tools. For  me, on the
other hand, she never failed to go through her entire repertoire of savagery.
While I  waited, yelling weakly, on the outside of the trellis  gate in the side
passage, Ruth would hurl herself against the inside of  it like  a pile-driver
and try to bite  a piece out of  it big  enough to get at me through.  I would

68
stand petrified until a few of the Meldrums turned up, clubbed their pet into
submission and dragged it  back out  of  sight. Upon  receipt of  a  written,
signed guarantee that Ruth had been stapled to  the ground  with  croquet
hoops, I would advance trembling and join  the family  for  dessert, tea and
games.

   There were scraps of dog-meat on the floor of  the back veranda but Mr
Meldrum's Rabelaisian spirit turned the chaos and squalor into luxury.  He
was a great one for word games after dinner. As a natural diplomat he was
able to cope with the fact that I often turned out to be better at these than his
own sons. Seeking his favour, I was too keen ever to try less hard. When the
word games were over Mr and Mrs Meldrum would listen to the wireless in
the lounge while the rest of us would try to cross the spare room in the dark
without getting caught by the guard. You took turns being guard. The spare
room lay at the end of the corridor and I remember it as being the size of the
Grand Salon in the Louvre, although I suppose it could have been no bigger
than a box room. Old cupboards and other articles of furniture were stored
in it. It  could be blacked out perfectly, so crossing it undetected was a test
of the ability  to move silently  while  consumed with fear. Neil  had a scary
trick, when he was guard, of dressing up in some frightening  costume and
sud denly switching the light on. The mere possibility of his doing this was
enough to make the hair rise on my neck the way it did at the pictures when
the music indicated tension or impending doom.

   On Saturday afternoons Mr Meldrum led expeditions to the Domain. The
Domain, or Dom, was an old swimming baths oppo site Woolloomooloo on
the south side of  Sydney Harbour. We  got off  the  train at  St James and
walked to  the baths through long  lanes of Moreton  Bay fig  trees. At  the
Dom we changed into blue  vees and swam. The benches on the bleached
wooden catwalks of  the  Dom  were  weighed down  with  ancient wrecks
soaking up the sun. Men older than John D. Rockefeller or Pope Pius XIII
shuffled  dazedly  around, their   vees draped  approximately  across their
shrivelled loins, their skins burned so brown that their sprinklings  of black
skin cancers looked like currants in a fruitcake. But the main point was that
they had lived  a  long time.  Mr  Meldrum  was  obviously  right  about the
preservative effects of sea water.

69
   Mr  Meldrum,  Gary,  Neil  and Craig  always did  wed  in the  swim ming
races. To me it seemed too much like hard work. I  had some of the knack
for swimming  but I lacked the will.  My  main reason for going to the Dom
with the Meldrums was to be able to go home with them afterwards. On the
way back through the trees to St  James sta tion Mr Meldrum bought huge
paper bags full of fruit.  We gorged ourselves on grapes and plums and had
battles with the Moreton  Bay figs lying  around in  thousands on the grass.
On the train there were more word games. Laved and cured by salt water,
fed to reple tion with unadulterated fruit, we were in a state of grace.

   For the rest of the weekend Gary was the ringleader. While Mr Meldrum
was off doing the extra jobs which  were obviously ad that kept the badiffs
from the door, Gary was the one who led the great treks to Botany Bay or
the dump at Tempe. Down at the bay in the early winter mornings we used
to watch  the  fishermen pull   in  the nets  and were  usually  given  a few
yellowtail  or bream to take home. Before they built the refinery  at Kurnell
the bay used to be as fidl of fish as when Banks and Solander first stepped
ashore. At Tempe dump I uncovered choice items for what was to become
one of the world's leading collections of old piston rings, rusty egg-beaters,
quondam bed-springs and discarded transmission components for Sherman
tanks. I shall  not attempt to describe my  mother's joy when  I lugged this
stuff home, staggering out of the sunset long after she had called the police.
A  dump in  those days,  before plastics had  conquered the world,  was  a
treasury of precious metals.

   It  was Gary  who  led the  first,  historic  expedition  to Kingsford   Smith
aerodrome, always known to us by  the name of  the sub urb near where it
was situated, Mascot. The aerodrome was only a few miles distant—in fact
our house was quite near the first set of approach lights to the main runway
—but walking   all  the way  there and back  seemed a feat comparable in
daring to anything con templated by Burke and Wills. As for Mascot itself, it
was simply  fairyland.  Until  well  along  in  my  teens I went  there almost
every weekend, just to watch the aircraft land and take off. ANA  and TAA
were flying mainly  DC-3S and DC-4S. The arrival of  the first DC-6  was a
big event. The first Stratocruiser flight  to arrive from America  was greeted
with national  rejoicing. The  TAA  ground staff  let us take a look  inside a
Convair 240. Gary found the Southern Cross standing in a hangar with its

70
tyres down. I suppose after Smithy's last flight they just wheeled it in there
and left it. Standing with  her nose tilted snootily upward in  the gloom, the
old blue Fokker tri-motor looked  romantic past belief. There was no one in
there with her except us. Gary couldn't  get the cabin door open. But  on a
nearby stretch of waste ground there was the wingless hull of an amphibian
Catalina. The guns had been taken out but the turrets and blisters were still
in her. We used to climb  inside and play wars for  hours. Gary and I were
pilot and navigator. Neil had the nose turret and Craig, was the waist gunner
—a good position  for him,  since among the ribs  and stringers there were
plenty of spiders to be caught and eaten. Defending Mascot from Japanese
and German attack, we shot down hundreds of Zeros and FW 190s.

   The Meldrums' back veranda was a combination of dormitory, playroom
and workshop. All three of  the boys had their beds there. Each bed had its
own set of  shelves for a headboard. Neil's shelves held his stamp albums
and catalogues. Craig's  were  a  teeming, puls ing nightmare  of   chicken
embryos and legless frogs. Gary's shelves were full of balsa model aircraft
made from kits. Solid balsa kits are unheard-of nowadays, when all the skill
required to make a model aircraft is a light touch with the plastic parts and a
steady hand with  the glue.  In  those days you  matched a block  of  balsa
against a rudi mentary diagram and got  going  with  a razor  blade, which
sliced your thumb  as readily as it  carved the balsa. If  the result was rec‐ 
ognisable as  an  aeroplane,  you  were  an  expert.  If   your   thumb  was
recognisable as  a  thumb,  you  were  a  genius.  Gary   worked  fast  and
accurately. He  built  a  Ju.88,  a Hawker   Sea Fury,  a  Heinkel  He.III,   a
Kittyhawk, a Chance-Vought Corsair ... I can remember them all. He would
have had an air force if he had looked after them. But when he got tired of
having them around he soaked them with  dope and set fire  to them.  The
glue came in a tube and was called Tarzan's Grip. If I close my eyes I can
remember how it  felt  to  squeeze the last tiny  transparent blob  from  the
madeable lead tube.

   EROS AND THE  ANGEL

    

    

71
    

    

    

    

    

   IT  WAS  LOVE.   OF  COURSE.  Gary  was older  than  I  was,  sure of
himself, capable at everything  he tackled.  I suppose my  sexuality would
have awoken by  itself   but  he was  certainly  in  on  the beginning  of  it,
although by  the time  I  was getting passionate about him  he was getting
passionate about  girls.    Having   already  started  masturbat ing without
knowing  even vaguely  what  I  was at,  I  was  delighted to  discover  that
someone else did it and even got visible results. While  I  was still  coming
nothing but air Gary was able to conjure a whole vichyssoise into being. It
probably never occurred to him that our mutual masturbation sessions were
looked forward to by  me, and looked back on afterwards, with a romantic,
jealous fervour that  could keep me awake for  hours. Neil  did  his best to
keep us apart out of what seemed to me sheer spite. I grew to hate Neil.

   I don't think  Gary was in any way homosexual or even bisexual. He was
just bung full of juice,  and attracted by the idea of initiat ing me in the ways
of sex, which he was able to find out about at a precocious rate, since girls
found him very attractive. After a day of battles with willow  bows and reed
arrows in the bush and swamp on the far side of  the park, Gary would  be
the one who spotted the pairs of lovers parking  their cars and heading for
the ferns, wherein they would  disappear by the simple expedient of  lying
down. Gary was the one who  had a name for what  they were up to.  Neil
was the one who made the mistake of  firing  an arrow. Reed arrows were
dry, britde and weightless until we tipped them with a piece of copper wire
driven into the capillary left  by the missing pith. Having no tail,  the arrows
lacked accuracy, but they could go a surprisingly long way if  the bow was
any good. Neil had spent a long time selecting his bow. It was strung so taut
that it played a note when he plucked it. We were observing a distant area of
ferns into which a courting couple had vanished some time before. In a low

72
voice, Gary  was  imparting  the unbelievable  information  that  they were
playing with each other in order to have babies. It was a fascinating speech
until interrupted by a soft twang.

   It  would have been bad enough if the man  had stood up with one hand
holding the arrow and the other holding his behind. Unfortunately it was the
woman. The man was running towards us, buckling his belt. We lost him by
ducking to the swamp. Even then Ned's insane giggle might well have given
us away.  Apart  from  Kenny  Mears,  Neil  was  the first   example I  ever
encountered of someone who  lacked any  idea of  a  given action  having
necessary consequences. If he felt like hitting you with  an axe, he hit you
with an axe. Once Gary and I built a tepee in the back yard. Craig sat inside
it  pretending to  be an Indian,  an  impression he reinforced  by  preparing
himself a light snack of worms and wood-lice. The rest of us danced around
the tent pretending to be other Indians attacking. Neil had a garden stake for
a spear. He hurled it full force at the tent. Craig came screaming out of the
tent with  the  garden stake sticking  straight  out  of  his  kidneys. It  often
happened that way. Neil  would have  a brainwave and shortly  afterwards
you would hear the sirens.

   My  erection-consciousness was exacerbated by Gary, who harped on the
words 'big' and 'fat' until they became automatically funny.

   Whenever anybody  used either  of  these words  in  conversation, Gary
would   smile   at  me   and   I   would   snicker   uncontrollably.   Similarly
uncontrollable was  my  virile  organ, which  chose the  most inconve nient
moments to expand. For some reason riding on the top deck of the trolley
bus led to  a  spontaneous show of strength. On  the  lower  deck it  didn't
happen. I rode on the lower deck whenever pos sible, but sometimes I was
forced upstairs, where my  short trousers had a lot  to cope with  from  the
moment I sat down. Placed casually across my lap and held down with one
negligent arm, my Globite school case kept things covered until we  got to
Kogarah  station,  but  getting  off   the  bus  was  a  problem.   If   the  bus
terminated at Kogarah I could wait until everybody else had alighted, but if
it was  going on  to Rockdale  then I  had to disembark  come what might.
There was a choice of carrying my school case unnaturally in front of me or
else hopping along  doubled over.  At  school there  was the desk  to hide

73
under. As  far  as  I  could  tell,  nobody  else  at Hurstville   had  the same
problem. It wasn't until I  got to high school that cock-consciousness spread
to fill  the whole day.

   At school there were friendships and crushes, but nothing phys ical except
the usual  business of  walking  around arm  in  arm.  At  home  there was
rampant sexuality, most of it centred on Gary. But if I was queer for him, it
was the outward expression of  an inward  yearning for  the feminine.  My
dreams were all  of  girls,  even if   I  didn't,  at that  stage, connect what  I
dreamed of doing to them—I  remember fantasies of being pressed against
them very tightly—  with  what I  actually did  in Gary's company. Not long
after the war, when I was just starting at Kogarah Primary, my mother took
me for a week's holiday at Katoomba. The hotel was called the Sans Souci
—the  same name, confusingly,  as a  suburb  just  near Kogarah,  on  the
George's river. But Katoomba was a long way away, in the Blue Mountains,
surrounded by famous tourist attractions like the Scenic Railway, the Three
Sisters, the Everglades gardens at Leura, and the Jenolan caves. Another
husbandless mother staying at the hotel had a daughter my age who wore
lace dresses. I christened her Lacy Skirts, after Gary's best guinea-pig.

   Lacy Skirts  was my first case of the visione amorosa. I lurked  for hours
near her staircase just to get a glimpse of her. Somehow I managed to get to
know her and we played chasings around the hotel. Rarely touching her, 1
had such an awareness of her physical existence that my chest hurt every
time I looked  at her. I never spoke of my  feelings and so never found out
what she felt  for  me, but  I  can remember clearly  (probably because the
vision was to  keep recur ring, each time with a different  object, for  many
years to  come) that  my  obsession was as transforming  and  exalting as
whatever passed through the heart of Augustine Meaulnes in the brief time
he spent with Yvonne de Galais. A picture of Lacy Skirts is no longer in my
head, but my adoration for her is stdl the central memory of that holiday—a
fair measure of intensity, since a lot else happened. I got ear-ache on the bus
to Jenolan as it wound around the mountains. Touring the limestone caves, I
was in frightful pain, and was already crying when I ran off into the bush to
pee. Running  back  to  the  bus  again,  1  tripped   over  in  full   sight  of
everybody and fell into a patch of giant stinging nettles. Pelion was piled on
Ossa. Happening one on  top  of  the  other, the  ear-ache and the  netties

74
constituted an almost  biblical  attack  on  one's equilibrium.  Job  wouldn't
have stood for it. But concentrate as I might, I can't recall the pain, whereas
when I think  of Lacy Skirts,  even though I can't bring back her face, I can
recall exactly the sensation of beatitude. We forget the shape of the light but
remain dazzled for ever.

   My   next amorous  vision  was  the Pocket  Venus. Again   we were  on
holiday, this  time at  a resort on the  Hawkesbury River  caded Una Voce,
which was pronounced Ewna Vose even by its proprietors. Being  by then
almost eleven years old, I was better able to stay out of my mother's hair. If
there were any patches of giant  netties, I man aged to walk around them,
instead of falling  in. It  was my mother  who gave my vision  its name. We
were having lunch in the dining room  on our first day in  residence when a
small adolescent girl walked in. She had on a soft  pale pink blouse, white
shorts and gold sandals laced up the calf, in the manner of a miniaturised,
tennis-playing Greek goddess. Sitting there in  my  short trousers with my
feet nowhere near touching the floor,  I  instantly  realised that my  lack of
years was an irreversible  tragedy. There seemed no hope of  making  her
aware that I was alive. I lurked in the corridors waiting for an opportunity to
walk  suddenly past  her. There  was, of  course,  no question  of  actually
addressing her in  words. As  I  remember it,  my  plan  was to  attract  her
attention by  the intensity  of  my  walk.  The  idea was  to  look  so lost  in
thought that she would  be unable to  resist asking what  the thought  was.
Alas, she resisted successfully for days on end, despite the fact that she was
unable to  travel  far  in  any  direction  without   having  her  path abrupdy
crossed by a short, swifdy moving philosopher.

   When  I  wasn't  hanging around  the corridors  I   was immersed  in  the
swimming pool, waiting for  her to appear so that she could be impressed by
my ability   to  swim across and  back underwater. Since the  pool was  no
bigger than a sheep-dip this was scarcely a great feat, but with the exception
of the Pocket Venus everyone sitting around the pool  was ready to agree,
when prompted, that  I  had the  amphibian properties of  a  platypus. The
Pocket Venus was never there  to agree about  anything. On  the day  she
finally  showed up, she was wearing  a light  blue satin one-piece costume
and  looked  more  beautiful   than  the  mind   could  bear.  Desperate for
recognition, I  took a deep breath and went into  my  act. The stress of the

75
moment, however, caused me to  take this deep breath under  the surface
instead of above it. Having travelled about a yard, I emerged with my  hair
in my eyes and my lungs full of  water. Exercising heroic self-control, I did
not cough or splutter, but managed a terrible half smile which was meant to
indi cate that I had just thought of something important  enough to war rant
interrupting  an   otherwise  inevitably   successful  assault  on  the  world
swimming record. When my vision cleared, the pocket Venus was no longer
there. She had changed her mind and gone back up to the guest house. Such
moments should have been educational but unfortunately there is nothing to
indicate that  self-consciousness can be lessened by proof of  the  world's
indifference.

   Every  night  there  was  a  social in   the  ballroom.  Wadflower  was  an
insufficient word  to describe me. I was a wallshadow, a wallstain. In order
to conceal my short trousers I stood behind things. Boys only  a few years
older than I  were dancing with  her—actually touching her. But  those few
years were an unbridgeable chasm. On the far side of  the abyss lay  long
trousers, an Adam's apple, depth of  voice and tallness of  stature. On the
near side lay bare knees, a piping tre ble, sweaty hands and a head that stuck
out at the back. For months that grew into years I was to spend a good part
of every day checking my profile with  two mirrors, hoping to  find my chin
sticking out more and the back of my head sticking out less. I envied boys
with no backs to their heads. Even today I envy James Gamer. At all costs I
had to minimise the number of occasions on which the Pocket Venus could
see my head from the side. I modified my approach in the corridors so that
my head was always pointing  straight at her  even when my body  was in
profile. I  was lucky not  to walk  out of a window,  instead of merely into  a
waiter carrying a tray  of custards and junkets. Even then she didn't notice
me.

   She finally noticed me on the second last day of the holiday. It was in the
ping-pong room—a context in which noticing me was hard to avoid, since I
had developed a  style of   play so  elaborately baroque that  I  must  have
looked like  one of those Russian girl  gymnasts who dance with a ribbon.
Every stroke of the bat was counterbalanced with an upflung pose from the
other hand. The general effect, I later realised, must have been more comic
than impressive:  mere  virtu osity,  however  precocious, could  not   have

76
attracted such crowds. On the other hand it was impossible to imagine the
Pocket Venus being cruel. It must have been kindness that led her to pick up
a bat and ask if she could play. She was bad enough at it to make us an even
match. We played half that day and all the next morning. I talked endlessly,
trying to fascinate her. At  least twenty years were to go by before I began
realising that there is no point in such efforts—what women like about us is
seldom something we are conscious of and anyway people don't want to be
charmed, they want  to  charm. I  probably  couldn't have  managed things
worse, but for a wonder she seemed to like my company, despite my never
falling silent  except when we touched (it was permissible to brush against
her slighdy when changing ends) or when she bent over to pick up the ball.
When she did that I caught such glimpses of the lace edges of her panties
under her shorts that I  was drained of all  motion. Suddenly I  was a dead
mackerel. She would straighten up with the ball in her hand and find herself
confronted with someone who looked as if he had been zapped with a death
ray or injected with cement.

   Reality  dispelled the dream only  to the extent of  revealing my  light  of
love to  be a nice,  ordinary  girl.  I  fell  more in  love  than ever and could
hardly breathe for grief  when the boat took  me and my mother away  and
left the Pocket Venus behind. The Hawkesbury had flooded during our stay
and was by then almost up to the front porch of the guest house, so she was
only a few feet away from me as we waved goodbye. Dropping away on the
fast-flowing  muddy current—the whole flux   dotted thickly  for miles  with
countiess oranges from the ruined orchards—I looked back  on her as she
grew smaller, already embarked on the rearward voyage that would take the
details of her inexpressibly sweet face beyond the reach of my memory.

   No, there was never any real question about which sex I would love when
the  time  came.  But  not  for   years would   the  time  come,  and  in   the
meanwhile I  was as queer as a coot. For most  of my  two  year stretch at
Hurstville   J  led  a  double  life.   At   home  there  were  viv idly  physical
encounters with Gary, involving a good deal of mutual masturbation, which
must have been a lot  more interesting for  me than for  him,  since he had
something you could get a grip on, and which produced tangible results. At
school 1 formed crushes on the other boys. In an English public school such
passionate attachments would presumably have led to buggery, rape, torture

77
and perhaps death, but in  a Sydney day school  there was not  much that
could happen. Nevertheless the emotions were real, although it was often
embarrassing to discover that they were not reciprocated in equal strength,
or indeed at ad. I was far keener on walking with my  arm around Carnaby,
for example, than he was on walking with  his arm around me. But at least
he took me home to show me his Dinky Toys, of which he had an amazing
collection. There  were avowals  of  inseparable companionship. I  did  the
avowing and he nodded, or at any rate didn't shake his head.

   Other boys  in  the class might  have been more forthcoming  but  I  was
interested only in the optimates. In my fancy, we were a band of brothers—
the Boys in the Back Desks. On the last day of school our class, 6A1, had to
provide two teams for a softbad tournament against the regular sixth class,
called 6A. There was a first team and a second team. Despite my position as
class captain, I some how ended up in the second team along with all  the
duds in  weird sandals, while  the optimates  headed off together over  the
horizon, never to be seen again as a group. I was so disappointed I couldn't
even cry. For  days afterwards I  turned the disaster over  and over in  my
mind, trying  to  think  of  how I  might  have managed things dif ferently. I
even told my  mother about it.  Her  advice was to  forget it,  since the day
would come when I  would  look  back on it  and laugh. She was only  half
right.  The day  eventuady came  when I   could  look  back  on it   without
howling in  anguish, but closer  to equanimity  than that I  never came. Far
bigger things have gone wrong for me since, but nothing  has ever seemed
so unfair. I can see why it  hurt then. What  is hard to see is why  it should
still hurt now.

   Behind this  apparent disaster lay a real disaster, unappreciated by me at
the time. My marks had won me a bursary to Sydney Boys' High School. If
I had  gone there I  might  have been educated in some of  the  ways of  a
gentleman. I suppose that was not much of a loss. More to be regretted was
that I  might  have  been educated in some  of  the ways  of  Latin,  Greek,
English literature, or indeed anything. That Sydney High School counted as
one of the so-called Great Public Schools was a side issue. The central point
to notice was that  its academic standards were unquestionable. The same
could not be said of Sydney Technical High  School. Unlike  Sydney High,
which was well situated near Moore Park, Sydney Tech was a tumbledown

78
collection of  old buildings  in Paddington, a district which  was still  fifteen
years from being  rediscovered by the conser vationists, and which was at
that time  still  largely  inhabited  by pros titutes too jaded  for  the brighter
lights around the docks. Nor was it GPS. Instead it was CHS, or Combined
High Schools—a differ ence its representatives spent a lot of  time  saying
didn't matter. Nor  would it  have mattered, if  Sydney Tech had truly been
able to claim any special distinction. As it was, however, those parents who
sent their  boys there under  the impression that  they  would  receive out‐ 
standing  instruction    in   mathematics   and  the   sciences   were   being
hoodwinked. Sydney Tech might have been a good school before my time
there. For all I know it has been a good school again since I left. But while I
was in attendance it was mediocre at best.

   But my  wanting to go  there wasn't the place's fault—apart, that is, from
the fact  that Carnaby  was on  the way  there  too. Elstub  was bound  for
Sydney High,  naturally enough: he  knew what  he wanted and his  father
knew that that  was the best place to  get it.  Lunn  was bound for  Sydney
Grammar—another  suitable  choice.  Carnaby   had  a   marked  gift    for
mathematics, so Sydney Tech made some kind  of  sense for  him. But  it
made no sense for me to  choose Sydney Tech just because Carnaby was
going there. As so often happens, however, the irrational motives were the
decisive ones.  The rational   motive—that  I  thought  I  wanted  to  be  an
aeronautical engineer—I  could  have been talked  out  of  if   it  had  been
properly explained to  me that Sydney High  produced more of  those than
Sydney Tech did.

   But  the  urge to  follow   Carnaby was proof  even  against my  mother's
distress, which was understandably torrential. The news that Syd ney Tech
had a squadron of air cadets put the matter beyond ques tion, as far as I was
concerned. I imagined myself at the controls of a Mustang taking off  from
the school playground.

   My  mother wanted me to have ad the prestige that Sydney High  would
undoubtedly bring. She didn't want to have to go around hoarsely insisting
that Sydney  Tech was really  something  rather marvelous.  With  Sydney
High there was nothing  to insist about. Everyone knew  that Sydney High
was as good as you could get. And  Sydney High, which  people fought to

79
get their sons into, had asked me to enrol! How could I not? She didn't get
it. For months she kept on and for months I fought back. She was right, of
course, but it didn't help.  1 owed it  to her as a reward for  all her work.  It
would have been better if I  had given in. It  would have been better still  if
the means had  existed to  make  me  do  the right   thing  no  matter how
determined I was on doing the wrong. But on her own she was no match for
me. I just wore her down.

    

    

    

   THE IMITATION   OF CHRIST

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

   THUS,  By A  LONG  BATTLE  of  attrition,  the matter was decided. But
the beginning of my first year at Sydney Tech was still a long way away, at
the far  end of  the school  holidays. By  this  time  the Meldrum  boys  had
become regular attendants at  Kogarah  Presby terian Church, which  was
situated about half-way   between Prince's Highway   and the  station.  Mr
Meldrum,  a  rationalist;   would  have  disapproved  of  this  development.
Unfortunately Mr  Meldrum was no longer around. A load of pipes had slid
off his flat-bed truck and pinned him to a wall. He was brought home to die.
The process took  several weeks. By  now  a seasoned campaigner, I had

80
prudently withheld from  him  the vital  last tenth of my  affection, so I  was
well able  to survive  the shock: indeed I  hardly noticed  it, since by  some
inexplicable  coincidence I   took  to  calling  at  the  Meldrum  house  with
steadily decreasing frequency. Others, notably Mrs Meldrum, were less well
armoured against fortune. She was prostrated. Not just to  get some relief
from their  presence, but also to prepare them against an uncertain world,
she started sending her boys to church. After a decent interval I followed.

   Kogarah Presbyterian Church was a solid purple brick and red tile affair
with plaster interiors. Standing opposite the St George District Hospital,  it
was handdy placed to entertain the polio  patients with  massed singing of
'Onward Christian Soldiers.' Many  a sur geon must have paused gratefully
during a tricky  operation to relish the top  notes of our resident coloratura,
Mrs Pike, as she howled above the choir like a dingo with its paw caught in
a trap. Scalpels must have frozen in mid-slice  as the Boys' Brigade bugle
band came marching  by, emitting  a  rich  collection  of  wrong  notes and
raspber ries. One way and another the whole of Sunday and half the rest of
the week saw the wee kirk teeming with activity. It was a whole way of life.
I plunged  into  it  gladly, egged on  by  my mother.  I  was sup posed to be
Church of England, but she wouldn't have minded if I  had been going to a
mosque, as long as I went.

   My   previous  Christian   experience  had  been  confined  to   an  inter‐ 
denominational Sunday School run by the Purvis family at their house half-
way down Sunbeam Avenue. Mrs Purvis  played the piano and Mr  Purvis
showed 16mm. films of aborigines being converted. In the early part of the
film the aborigines were shown standing around naked with a crotch full of
shadows and looking glum while  flies  camped on their faces. In  the later
part of the film  they were wearing trousers and smiling like Loretta Young.
It was Christ who  had made the difference. They had taken Him into their
hearts, whereupon the flies  had  upped stakes and moved on.  When  the
lights  went  up   Mr  Purvis   would  launch  into   an  attack  on  beer  and
Catholicism. He pronounced 'beer' 'bee-ar.' The legionaries who pee-arsed
Christ's side with a spee-ar had undoubtedly been enslaved to bee-ar. A sure
sign of Catholicism's fundamental evil  was that it required the drinking  of
wine  even in  church,  wine  being mee-arly  another form  of   bee-ar. Mr

81
Purvis would then get us to sign the pledge all over again and send us home
with a warning not to be kidnapped by nuns.

   But the Purvises' Sunday School was strictly short pants, striped

   tee-shirt and bare feet. We would  have grown out of  it  anyway, even if
Mrs Purvis hadn't died of cancer. The piano having fallen silent, there was
nothing for Mr  Purvis  to do except remarry, move to Mel bourne and start
again. He  became famous  years  later  as an  anti-Catholic   campaigner,
warning of attempts by the Vatican to invade Canberra. Once again he had
films  to prove  it.  Nuns  were shown scurrying  darkly  down  side streets,
while a familiar  voice on the sound track talked of how the Roman menace
loomed ever more nee-ar, and of the growing fee-ar that it  would soon be
hee-ar.

   Kogarah Presbyterian Church was the big time. On Sunday morning there
was Sunday School, followed by church, at which the Boys' Brigade would
frequentiy put in  an appearance with snare-drums rattling in  approximate
unison and dented bugles giving out random fragments of late Schonberg.
In the early  eve ning there would be church. Then there was a Fellowship
meet ing for older adolescents and young adults. This would be followed by
church  again,  featuring   a   full-scale   sermon  from   the   Reverend  C.
Cummings Campbell, whose name was the  inspiration of  many a  leaden
joke. ("The  Campbells  are Cummingses, yes they  are,' etc.)  and whose
oratory bored the pigeons out of the roof. If you threw in  and averaged out
all the Harvest Festivals, preparations for  Harvest Festivals, special study
sessions for Sunday School teachers, special missionary group studies for
Fellowship Study Circle leaders, and so on, it would be possible to say that
the devout young communi cant could count on spending most of each week
in constant atten dance, with the odd break for  meals. On  Saturday night
there was usually a Fellowship social. On Thursday night the Boys' Brigade
drilled in the church hall. At one time or another, as I grew older, I took part
in all these activities, starting with Sunday School and the Boys' Brigade.

   Sunday School was  a waste of  time  from  the religious  angle, but had
conspicuous social value. A hundred children broken up into ten groups of
ten, we learned the fundamental disciplines of sitting still for an hour while
an older person told boring stories. Apart  from the chance to take home a

82
deckle-edged sticker, stick  it  in  a  book and  bring  the book  back  to be
marked, there was  no action.  The  stickers had  luridly  coloured  biblical
illustrations on them. There was also a catechism to be learned. Prizes were
to be won for learning it.  Thus the memory was tested, if not the religious
sense. Over the next five or six years I won every possible prize, up to and
including   the   rarely    awarded  Cummings   Campbell   Bible,    without
experiencing, or even needing to pretend I had experienced, a moment of
religious  belief.  Among   the  teachers, the  few  genuine  believers  were
manifesdy as crazy as Mr   Purvis. Any  sign  of  true devotion  among the
pupils was regarded as bad  taste. Eventually I  was to  become a teacher
myself and make a practice of getting the holy stuff over as soon as possible
so that  I  could  get  on  with  telling   stories about  Pearl Harbour  or  the
campaign in the Western Desert. No pupd ever complained.

   But that's to jump the gun. As a new Sunday School pupil I  learned how
to sit still with  girls present. As a probationary recruit in the Boys' Brigade I
learned how to march up and down. The Boys' Brigade was a paramilitary
organisation emanating,  like   the  Scouts,  from   England,  but  with   the
emphasis on parade-ground drill rather than on woodsy lore. The uniform
had to be imported from England. It consisted of forage cap, white cartridge
pouch and brass-buckled belt, the whole thing worn over khaki  shorts and
navy blue shirts, although in  winter we  were expected to wear dark suits.
One of the main attractions of belonging was that the merit badges, worn on
the right  sleeve, were made of  what  looked like  solid  sil ver. In practice
these tended not to arrive  from England  even after repeated notifications
that they had been won, but you could always live  in  hope. Another main
attraction was that you got the chance to blow  a bugle or bang a drum. It
was with high expectations, there fore, that I set off for my first evening on
parade.

   My  manner of  dress perhaps showed questionable judgment. As a new
recruit I was not entitled to wear Boys' Brigade uniform even if it  had been
available. To compensate I eked out my shorts, shirt and sandshoes with a
few extras. On my head I put one of  Ray's old RAAF  forage caps with its
flaps down. The cap was cov ered with about a hundred badges of various
kinds, many of them celebrating our recent alliance with the Soviet Union.
There were several portraits of Stalin. On my chest I wore my father's cam‐ 

83
paign medals—not just the  ribbons, but the  medals entire. Usu ally I was
allowed to wear these only on Anzac Day when we went into town to watch
the march, but my mother had given me a spe cial dispensation. On my belt
was a holster  containing  a Ned  Kelly  cap  pistol  fully  loaded.  A  multi-
purpose jack-knife completed the ensemble. Since I was still quite small the
jack-knife weighed me down on one side. I thought better of  it and took it
off. My  mother persuaded me that the medals were perhaps gilding the lily,
so I took those off too. The rest I kept.

   Kindly  Captain  Andrews, the senior  officer,  forbore from  com ment on
my appearance. There wasn't much he noticed by that stage. Having grown
old in  the task, he tended to day-dream. I fell  in at  the low end of  a long
line, which then divided itself  into four  sections of half a dozen boys each.
Everyone started off as a private. The mere ability to turn  up once a week
ensured one's eventual promotion to lance-corporal. If your voice  broke it
was enough to make you a full corporal. To become a sergeant you had to
pass a few exams. Beyond  that lay  the  dizzy privilege  of  officer  status,
featuring long trousers and a cap with  ribbons hanging down at  the back.
Down at my end of  the scale it all looked very  impressive, but even while
occupying a rank more lowly than private I could see that Captain Andrews
wasn't too hot at drill.  When he said 'About  turn!' we  about-turned. When
he said 'About turn!' again we about-turned again. He then showed us how
we should have done it.  Fac ing towards us, he ordered himself to  about-
turn. By  rights, upon completion  of this  manoeuvre, he should have been
facing away from us, so that we  could see his back. Instead he would end
up facing sideways, so that we could see him in profile. Quickly  he would
add a few  shuffles to  take him  round the  rest of  the way. Gary  was the
corporal at the head of my section. I could see his shoul ders quaking every
time Captain Andrews got  it wrong.  That got me started. Thus a sense of
the ridiculous was inculcated, at  an early age. For years to  come I found
almost everyone ludicrous except myself.

   In fact  the Kogarah Presbyterian Church Company of the Boys' Brigade
was a shambles. Annuady we came last  in the  District  drill  competition,
even when it was held in  our own had. Our bugle  band terrorised not just
the hospital  but   the whole   area, with   bitches whelping   at  its  strident
dissonance. Not long  after  I  joined  there was  a Display  Night,  held  in

84
conjunction with  Girls' Brigade. My  mother was horrified  to discover that
her tiny  son  was last in  a  line  of  crouching small  boys  over which,  or
whom, large girls awkwardly  dived before turning a forward rod on a mat.
Her fears were justi fied. Graham Truscott's older sister Maureen was budt
like  Fatty   Arbuckle   and  looked  no  lovelier   for   being  clad  in   black
sandshoes, blue shorts and a singlet like a two-car garage. As proud parents
sat open-mouthed on the surrounding benches, she came hurtling out of the
back annexe, along the corridor, through the connecting door, into the had,
up to the spring-board and into  space. She drove me into the floor  like  a
tack. Artificial  respiration got my breathing started while Captain Andrews
and the Rev. C. Cummings Camp bell attempted to calm my mother with a
few ill-chosen words.

   Such  incidents were  too  common  to  be  thought  remarkable. At   the
District Athletics Carnival held at Trumper Park our company got no points.
Count them: none. In the swimming carnivals Gary was our only swimmer
ever to reach the finals of anything. As part compensation there was a great
deal  of    rod-walloping.   Masturba tion,  whether   solo,   mutual,   or    of
competition standard, was rife. So was petty theft. After a hard evening of
copying Captain Andrews's about-turns we would all  race down to Parry's
milk  bar, there to  ingest the  milk-shake of  our  choice and  rob the  lolly
counter when Mr Parry wasn't looking. The only time Mr Parry ever caught
one of us he contented himself with delivering a white-lipped lecture. It was
a wonder  he didn't   call  the police.  Anywhere  in   the world,   immigrant
shopkeepers have a particular horror of being robbed by the locals. It hurts
to  work  so  hard  and  suddenly discover  that  some  of  your  customers
subscribe to Proudhon's idea about prop erty being theft. If  Proudhon had
been running the milk  bar he would probably have reacted far worse than
Mr Parry. Luckily for  us, Proudhon had been dead since 1865.

   The other half of  my double life  had more hesitant beginnings. It wasn't
that I   hated  Sydney Tech.  I  just   didn't  connect with   it.   On  weekday
mornings I put on my school uniform.  It consisted, reading from bottom to
top, of black  shoes, grey socks, grey worsted short-pants suit with school
pocket-badge, blue shirt, de in the school colours of maroon and sky blue,
and grey felt hat with hat band in school colours. Add in the enamel school
lapel badge and you  had an awful  lot  of  maroon and sky  blue. Exercise

85
books, pencil case, pens, technical drawing set and Vegemite sandwiches
went into the inevitable Globite school case. Lugging this, I rode the trolley
bus to Kogarah station and caught the train to Central. Other Sydney Tech
boys were already on the train from  stations further down the line.  As we
got closer to town, more joined. Boys from Sydney High also got on. Their
colours were chocolate and  sky blue.  Age for  age, they  seemed slightly
taller than our  lot, with  clearer skins. They  were quieter and read a great
deal. At Central they caught one tram while we caught another. They went
to Moore Park and we went to Pad-dington. Nobody except a few aesthetes
had any idea at  the time  that Paddington's terrace houses were desirable
residences. Gentrifica-tion lay far in the future. The only paint on show was
kack brown and the cast iron balconies looked like  scrap metal waiting to
be taken  away. It   wasn't  a slum  area  like  Redfern—which  during  the
Queen's visit had been masked off with hessian so that she would be unable
to see it from the Royal train—but  it was pretty grim.  Syd ney Tech was in
the grimmest  part and  looked even  grimmer  than its  surroundings. The
playgrounds were entirely asphalt: not a blade of grass. A solitary Moreton
Bay fig tree in  the lower playground was the only touch of green. Jammed
between the  dilapidated  two-storey   buildings,  even  less  prepossessing
'temporary' single-storey buildings cut the playground space down to nearly
nothing. In  the  open air  there wasn't enough bench-space for the  whole
school to sit down at once. We had to have lunch in two shifts.

   Disaster struck on the first day, when Carnaby was assigned to a different
class. In quiet desperation I sought out his company in the playground, but
often he lunched in the other  shift and always he was surrounded by new
friends. So it had all been for nothing.

   I  didn't even get accepted for the Air Cadets. The fact that I  knew more
about air  recognition than  anyone else in  the  world  counted as nothing
beside the further fact that I  had an unacceptable level of albumen in  my
blood. An  independent pathologist wrote  a note  saying that my  level  of
albumen was all right for  me but the RAAF  doctor wouldn't listen. If  such
an injustice had happened to me ear lier it might have helped arm me against
capricious Fate, but I  was too  spoiled to  profit  from  the disappointment.
Many, many years were to go by before I learned the truth of Noel Coward's
comment about the secret of success being the capacity to survive failure.

86
   Soon enough I made new friends  in my  own class, but not  in the same
way as Carnaby did. His natural authority was reinforced by early maturity.
Either that year or the year after, his voice broke. He had acne for about two
days and  simultaneously grew  a  foot   tader. During  this  period  almost
everyone except me  did   something simi lar. I   obstinately stayed  small.
Nobody looked up  to me any longer. In  that first  year the only  thing that
made me worth knowing was my good marks. The teachers weren't brilliant
but they were  consci entious. Besides, there was a certain flywheel effect
carrying over from Hurstville,  where we had been ahead of the curriculum.
At  the half-yearly  examinations I  averaged in  the high  nineties, coming
third in  the class. Things  might have gone on  like  that for  a good  while
longer if it had not been for Mary Luke.

   I was coping with physics and chemistry well enough while Mr Ryan was
still  teaching them. But Mr  Ryan was due for  retirement, an event which
was hastened by an accident in  the laboratory.  He was showing  us how
careful you had to  be when handling  potas sium in the presence of water.
Certainly  you had  to  be more  careful than  he was.  The  school's entire
supply of potassium ignited at  once. Wreathed by dense smoke and lit by
garish flames, the stunned Mr Ryan looked like a superannuated Greek god
in receipt of bad news. The smoke enveloped us all. Windows being thrown
open, it jetted into what passed for a playground, where it hung around like
some sinister leftover from a battie on the Somme. Shocked, scorched and
gassed, Mr Ryan was carried away, never to return.

   Back from  his third  retirement came Mary Luke.  A  chronic short age of
teachers led to Mary  Luke  being magically  resurrected after each burial.
Why he should have been called Mary  was a datum lost in  antiquity. The
school presented him with  a pocket watch every time  he retired. Perhaps
that was a mistake. It  might  have been the massed ticking that  kept him
alive.  Anyway,  Mary  Luke,  having  already ruined  science for  a  whole
generation of schoolboys, came back from the shadows to ruin science for
me.

   Mary  was keen but incomprehensible. The first thing he said at the start
of every  lesson, whether of  physics  or chemistry,  was, 'Make  a Bunsen
burner.' He was apparendy convinced that given  the right  encouragement

87
we would continue  our science studies in make shift laboratories at home.
So we might have done, if we could have understood anything else he said.
Unfortunately 'Make  a Bunsen burner' was his one  remaining fathomable
sentence. In all other respects his elocution made my late grandfather sound
like   Leslie   Howard.  The   same  comparison  applied   to   his  physical
appearance. How could anyone be that old without being  dead? But there
were definite signs of  life. The  mouth moved constantiy. 'Combustioff off
magnesioff,' Mary   would  announce keenly.  'Magnesioff  off  oxidoff   off
hydrogoff off  givoff  off.'  Worriedly  I  slid the cap off  the inverted  jar and
ignited the gaseous contents to prove that hydrogoff  had been givoff  off.
Carefully  I  drew   the apparatus in   my  book,  already  aware that  these
preliminary experiments would be the last I would ever understand.

   Perhaps I was never cut out for chemistry. But I had a right to  think that
physics might  have  lain  within   my  scope. I  impressed Mary   with  my
precocious knowledge of  the planets, which  I  could  name in their  order
outwards from the sun. Mary looked  momen tarily blank at the mention of
Pluto, but otherwise he seemed well pleased. A novel rearrangement of his
lips took  place which I  guessed to be a smile. The teeth thereby revealed
featured eye catching areas of green amongst the standard amber and ochre.
If only  we could  have stuck to astronomy. Instead, Mary sprang optics on
us. "Thoff  angloff  off  incidoff,'  he  informed us,  'equoff thoff  angloff  off
reflectioff.'  We fiddled  dutifully   with  pins and mirrors.  I  had the sinking
feeling of  being  unable to  understand. The moment of  breakdown came
when Mary started exploring the different prop erties of concave and convex
mirrors.  I  couldn't  see which  was which  when  he held  them  up. More
importantly, I  couldn't tell  the difference when he said their names. 'Thoff
miroff  off  concoff,'  he  explained carefully,  'off  thoff  miroff   off  convoff'
Proud of having made things clear, he smiled fixedly, giving us a long look
at his wrecked teeth. What was going on in that mouth of  his? I could  see
things moving.

   But some of the other boys seemed to understand Mary even if I couldn't,
and anyway in  the  straight mathematical  subjects I  had no  excuse. The
teaching might have been uninspired but it was sound enough. Besides, if I
had had any  mathematical talent I  probably  wouldn't  even have  needed
teaching. As  things  were,  I  remained good  at  mathematics as  long  as

88
mathematics  remained   arithmetic   and   algebra.   I    was  passable   at
trigonometry. But when calculus came in, the lights  went out. My  average
marks gradually started to shelve downwards. Things weren't helped by the
weekly classes in woodwork and metalwork. I could handle technical draw‐ 
ing well  enough, helped by  my  skill  at lettering,  but when  I  entered the
workshop I  was a gone goose. Metalwork was bad:  anything I  put in  the
lathe refused to come out true. It would start off as a cylinder and end up as
a blob. So much for my  dream of building  new jet engines to outclass the
Rolls-Royce Avon   and the  Armstrong  Siddeley  Sapphire, of   designing
aircraft whose power and beauty would enrol them among the masterpieces
of  Sydney Camm, Kurt   Tank and Willy   Messerschmitt. Woodwork  was
even worse. Nobody whose hands are not naturally dry can ever be a good
carpenter, and I suffered  badly from  sweaty  hands. My  hands started to
sweat with fear from the moment I put on my calico apron. By the time the
woodwork teacher had finished  explaining what  we had  to do  my hands
would be dripping like taps. Wet hands leave a film on wood that renders it
hard to plane. Our first job was to make a bread board. The breadboard had
to be made from half a dozen lengths of wood glued together edge to edge.
For this to succeed the edges had to be planed true. I kept on and on from
week to week, planing away at my  half dozen pieces. It took me an entire
term  of  classes before  I  got  them  true.  By   that  time  they  were  like
chopsticks. When I glued my breadboard together it was the right length but
only two inches wide. You couldn't have cut a French loaf on it.

   At  the end of second year my average mark was down into the eighties.
Suddenly I had lost  my role.  Being bright  could have saved me from  the
ignominy of  not growing  tall. Growing  tall could  have saved me from the
ignominy of not being bright. As  things were, I was losing on all counts. In
every subject except English and German I was obviously going nowhere.
German was all right for a while. At  Sydney Tech there were only German
and French to choose from.  Typically  I  chose the less beneficial.  It  was
taught by a huge, shambling teacher we called Lothar, after Mandrake the
Magi cian's assistant. He was a nice man but charmless. I found it easy to
keep level   with  Hans  Kuckhoff,   an  immigrant  from   some unheard-of
country whose family spoke German at home. Kuckhoff and I shared a desk
and compared erecdons while Lothar concentrated on battering declensions

89
into the heads of the slower boys. Der den des dem. Die die der der. It was
back to the Cubs.

   In  English  I  shone—fitfully,  but  sufficiendy  to  keep my  morale  from
collapsing altogether. Our teacher in the early  years was 'Jazz* Aked. He
also doubled  as  our  music  teacher: hence  the  nickname. 'Jazz'  taught
English  according to  the  curriculum.   The  curriculum  was  prescriptive.
There were  grammar,  parsing  and Latin   roots  to  be  learned. Without
resorting to  violence,  'Jazz* had  a  way of   get ting results. Eventually  I
learned to parse any sentence I  was given. I  couldn't  do it  now,  but the
knowledge  is  still   there  somewhere  at  an  unconscious  level.  It   was
invaluable training. On  top of that, he set good essay subjects. My essays
were sometimes read out to  the class. I  was thereby established all  over
again as teacher's pet, but at least it was something, in those dreadful days
when  everyone else  seemed to   be  doubling  in   size  overnight,  while
simultaneously acquiring an  Adam's apple like   a half-swallowed  rock,  a
voice like Wallace Beery, and a case of acne like the boiling surface of the
sun. Such are the pangs of being left behind—that you can die of envy for
cratered faces weeping with yellow pus.

    

    

    

   MILO  THE MAGNIFICENT

    

    

    

    

    

    

90
    

   My  MOTHER  KEPT  ON assuring me that I  would 'shoot up.'  She was
not to know I  was one of the kind that acquires altitude gradu-ady, with no
sudden alteration of the  hormonal levels.  My  testoster one was on a drip
feed. In the long run  this saved me from anything more revolting  than the
odd pimple and left me slighter taller than average, but at the time it seemed
like a disaster, especially consid ering that my self-consciousness about girls
had abrupdy attained new  heights, mainly  due  to  the influence  of  Milo
Stefanos. Half the quarry had been sold off as a building block. A house had
been built:  palatial  by  our  standards, since the  garage was underneath,
which  effectively  gave the  place two  storeys.  The Stefanos family   had
moved in.  Hard-working  New  Australians, they  ran a  milk  bar down  at
Brighton, on Botany Bay. Their eldest son, Philip, was already a young man
and had attained some renown as a tennis player. Even older than Gary, he
was beyond my reach. But their second son, Milo, was my age. He was still
in short  pants like  the rest of  us, except that  in  his case the short  pants
bulged and pulsed as if   he had a  live  rat stuffed  down  them. Milo  was
precocious in every sense.

   By  now Gary was giving  most of his spare time to rebuilding  the rusted
wreck of a War Department 500C.C. side-valve BSA that was eventually to
become his first motorbike. He had left Kogarah Inter mediate High School
after the Intermediate Certificate and become an apprentice fitter and turner.
The balsa aeroplane days were over.  He even  left  Boys' Brigade.  I  still
visited him  a lot and expanded my interest in  aeroplanes to an interest in
cars and motorbikes. I was buying and memorising Flight, the Autocar and
the  Motorcycle  every   week.  At   that  time   they  were  stdl   substantial
publications. I   acquired an  immense theoretical  knowledge. But  it   was
gradually becoming  clear to  me  that theoretical  knowledge was  not the
same as practical capacity. Gary could strip and reassemble a gear box. All I
could do was hand him the spanners. His hands were cov ered with grease.
Cutting  oil,  I   noticed,  looked  rather  like  sperm,  but  opportunities  for
checking this   comparison were  growing  fewer  all   the  time.  Finally   it
became clear that Gary nowadays preferred doing that  sort of  thing with
girls. Sensitive to my jealousy, he was slow to tell me, but finally  the news
was too big to hold  in. In  part recompense for my loss, I was told  details.

91
But the girls were Gary's age or older and it all  happened somewhere else.
There was no hope of joining in.

   With Milo  it  was different. You could get in on all of his adven tures, even
the supreme one.  Milo   not  only  had  access to everything,  he  enjoyed
proving it. He  had a lot in common with  his compatriot Alcibiades.  At the
back of his  garage were stacked hundreds of car tons of cigarettes—stock
for the shop. Milo would appropriate the odd carton of Ardath or Craven 'A'
to his own use. I thus started smoking at an early age, although it was some
years before I dared do it  in  public. Milo   smoked in public  whde he was
still in those chadenging short pants. Towards sunset he would appear at the
front  of  the house, his  crotch  bulging  softly  in  the  twilight,  and  air-dy
smoke a cigarette while combing his hair. Milo combed his hair constantly.
Since he smoked constantly too, he  spent a lot  of  time coughing  quietly
with  his eyes screwed up.  He looked  like  a small  cloud  preening itself.
Gathering  rapidly  like   the   fast-falling   Pacific  night,   Milo's   followers
grouped around him. Some of us sat on the  front fence. Others did  hand-
stands and standing long-jumps on  the front  strip.  Still  others rode their
bicycles  along  a  compli cated route  down  one  of  the  Margaret  Street
footpaths and up the other. The route just happened to pass the front of the
Chappelows' house, where the girls were gathered. It was rare for the girls
actu ally to join  us at that  hour. Instead they pretended not to  notice, the
riders pretending not to notice them. Meanwhile Milo  loaned out examples
from  his  unparalleled  collection  of  Carter  Brown  detective  magazines.
Carter Browns   were  famous  for  containing  sex  scenes. Pale  by  later
standards, this was nevertheless unmistakably some kind of pornography.
Erections were to be had while reading it.

   Most  sensationally of  all,  Milo  had  access to Laurel  Smithers. Laurel
lived in  what used to be the house inhabited by the poul try farmers. Now
that the poultry farm was gone and all the land built over, the old farmhouse
on the hill was the only truly  ram shackle house in the district. In effect that
meant that  it  was the  only  building  for   miles  which  had any  aesthetic
interest at all, but since there was nobody within the same radius who had
any notion of what aesthetic interest might happen to be, the house was uni‐ 
versally regarded as a blot on the landscape. It had weatherboard walls and
a corrugated iron roof, upon which, after dark, the mis siles of the Flash of

92
Lightning and his masked companions would often rain. Quailing under this
bombardment, the poultry farmers, their occupation gone, either died off or
moved out,  or  a  mixture  of  both.  The  Smithers  family  moved  in.  Mr
Smithers spent most of the day husbanding his energy, while Mrs Smithers
pottered about busying herself with light household tasks, such as breaking
stones with a sledgehammer or forging new springs for the Model 'A' Ford
museum piece  they  called  a  car. Laurel   was their   daughter. She  was
Allowed  to  Run  Wild.  Yacking  over the  back  fence, our  mothers were
agreed, and went on agreeing, that Laurel would  surely Get Into  Trouble.
They had the right idea, but were using the wrong tense. Laurel was already
seizing every opportunity  to  be sexually interfered  with  by Milo.   Indeed
interference could  go no  further.  They were  at  it  continually.  The only
reason the adults didn't tumble straight away was that Laurel  was already
well embarked on  her teens, whereas Milo  was only  just turning  twelve.
They comforted  themselves with the  thought that  Milo  would  not  know
how. They couldn't have been more wrong. Not only  did Milo   know how,
he was giving lessons.

   The word  in use was 'root.' Milo  used to root  Laurel standing up in  the
back of the garage. He also used to root her lying down in the back of  the
garage. On special occasions we were all invited to watch. One by one and
two by  two, half  the boys in  the district  would  make their way  to Milo's
garage on a Saturday afternoon. Inside the garage the atmosphere was tense,
mainly  because about  fifty   pairs  of   lungs  were  breathing  it.  Lost   in
admiration, envy and cigarette smoke, we all watched Milo perform. It was
hard to say what Laurel  was getting out of  it.  If  she was standing up she
looked at us over Milo's heaving shoulders as if we were strangers she was
encountering in the street. If she was lying down she looked at the ceiling as
if engaged in a long-term entomological study of the spi ders inhabiting the
rafters. The only evidence that she was not indif ferent to the whole process
was the way she kept coming back for more.

   On very special occasions the rest of us were invited to join in. This only
happened when Laurel was 'in the right mood.' If it turned out, after an hour
or two  of   being pounded by  Milo,   that  Laurel  was in  the  right  mood,
everyone queued up and took  a  turn. The  queue shuffled  forward  quite
rapidly since Laurel would allow  even the most fervent admirer only a few

93
seconds inside the sanctum which she had otherwise dedicated to Milo in
perpetuity. Only once did  I dare join  the queue. It was a complete fiasco.
The erection which

   in  other circumstances I  had  so much  trouble getting  rid  of  failed  to
materialise. It was an early instance of First Night  Failure, made worse by
the fact that it was happening in the early afternoon, when everyone could
see—or would have seen, if I had not been so care ful to unveil the timorous
article only  during  my  last  step forward  and to  rehouse it  as soon as I
stepped back. Nor   was my  recalci trant organ  content with   merely  not
inflating.  It  shrivelled  up the  way it   did after  I  had been in  swimming.
Laurel was too  aphasic to be openly contemptuous. Standing on tiptoe,  I
pretended to push myself  inside  her, copying  the  grunting  noises I  had
heard from Milo and some of the others. It is even possible that Laurel was
fooled. I, however, was not.

   The incident was just one more piece of evidence bolstering the case for
my physical abnormality. When in  a state of excite ment I could just about
convince myself  that I  was sufficiently  well   endowed. But to  detumesce
was the same as to disappear. Other boys seemed to be the same length 'on
the slack' as they were when erect, the only difference being that the thing
hung down  like  a  length of  hose instead  of  climbing  like  an  extension
ladder. Milo,  needless to say, was a case in point.  On the  rare occasions
when his uncircumcised tonk  was hanging limp,  it  was still  as thick as a
third thigh. At full  stretch, it was the size of a Japanese midget submarine.

   As bad luck  would have it,  Laurel from then on confined  her favours to
Milo exclusively, so I never got a second chance. But I still had good reason
to be grateful to Milo,  since it was in his com pany that I first came up with
something more  substantial than  a sharp  pain  and a  puff  of   air. As  a
masturbator Milo  was if  anything  even more impressive than  as a lover.
Smoking  casually with   one  hand, he  employed  the  other  to  stimulate
himself, his only prob lem being how to choose the most satisfactory grip. If
he held the near end there was apparently a certain loss of  sensitivity,  so
that the process might occupy a minute or even more. If he held the far end
he could get results in  a matter  of seconds, but his arm  would  be at full
stretch. There was no mistaking the moment when Milo was on the point of

94
unburdening himself. You could practi cally hear the stuff coming. He could
have put out a fire  with  it. With  due allowance for  scale, 1 was matching
him stroke for stroke one day when suddenly I produced something. It was
the only clear-cut sign of  puberty 1 was ever to  be vouchsafed- My pride
knew no bounds. Even Milo was impressed—a generous reaction, since the
stuff was all  over one of his best Carter Browns. But  the change of status
might as well  have been metaphysical for all the difference it  made to the
size of my  dick when dormant. At  school this  problem aggravated all my
other  problems.  After   our  FT   sessions 1  lingered  elaborately  in   the
changing room  so  that  I  could   duck  into  the  com munal shower after
everybody else had come out. If I could manage a semi-erection everything
was all right. I  didn't mind  joining in  the towel-flicking  if  I had something
to show. Unfortunately a semi-erection is no more easily  achieved by will
than a full-sized version. So I had to do a great deal of loitering.

   It  was an eternal anxiety. In a class full of  cock-watchers, I had to keep
something between my shrinking twig  and a hundred prying  eyes, all the
while contriving the deception so that it never seemed deliberate. Emerging
from the shower with  a towel  draped casually around me, ! had to put on
my underpants before I  took  off  the towel,  but make it  look  as if  I  was
taking off the towel before I put on my underpants. The result was a Gypsy
Rose Lee routine of extraor dinary subtlety. I calculated the sight-lines and
the lighting like Max Reinhardt or the Black Theatre of Prague. Either I was
never spotted, or what I had down there looked less underprivileged than I
thought.  According  to   Hemingway,  when  Scott  Fitzgerald  pro claimed
himself worried about the size of his tool  (and we have only Hemingway's
hopelessly unreliable word that this ever happened) the tall writer  told the
short writer that anybody's prong looks small when the owner  looks down
on it. On behalf of  my younger self I would  like to  agree, but at the time I
spent many an anxious hour in front of  my bedroom mirror  and and there
could be no doubt that  my tossle looked the same from  the side as it  did
from on top—i.e., like a shy silk-worm.

   As self-consciousness approached its dizzy peak, I spent so much of my
spare time checking up on myself in mirrors  that there was hardly any left
over for little   matters like homework. A  dress ing table, strangely enough,
was among the few pieces of furniture  in  my room, which  by  now was a

95
small library  of books about air craft, cars, motorcycles and war. The table
beside my bed, which had previously  housed my laboratory—which  is to
say, the collection of malodorous junk I had brought back from the dump—
was now stacked with carefully filed  and cross-referenced technical maga‐ 
zines. The cupboard off which we had all once dived on to the bed was now
mainly a bookcase, in which such tides as The Dam Busters and Reach for
the Sky took pride of place. On the walls, which  my mother had tolerantly
always allowed me  to decorate as I  pleased, coloured tracings of Disney
characters had been joined by elabo rate cut-away drawings of aircraft, so
that you had a Dornier  D0.17 unloading  its bombs on Donald  Duck. The
room was like the cell of a machine-mad monk. The only human touch was
the half-length portrait on one wall, which turned out on closer examination
to be the dressing-table mirror containing my reflection. Almost always the
reflection was in profile,  as I held up a hand mirror  at an angle in front of
me in order to see what I looked like from the side. Why did the back of my
head stick out so far? Why did  my jaw  stick out  so little? As  all the boys
around me started turning into men, I began to wonder if perhaps I was not
doomed to look boyish for ever.

   Even at its best, Sydney Tech was simply a waste of time. But even at its
worst, it mainly just  got me down, rather than driving me to despair. Had it
been a boarding school  I  would  probably have  been in  real trouble.  As
things were, most of  my agonies were self-inflicted  through  an excess of
inward-turned imagination. Unfortunately  misery is not relative.  For some
reason the school prided itself on its achievements in rugby union. It always
finished high  in  the  CHS  competitions and  occasionady fielded  a team
which could lick  the best of the GPS teams, although Sydney High always
remained the unbeatable enemy. For most of my school career I was obliged
to play  House football,  which was  a joke. The  very idea  of dividing   the
school into houses was another joke. I was a member of  Widiams House.
Nobody seemed to be bothered by the fact that no building  existed which
could  be described  as Williams   House or   even Williams   Hut.  In  fact
Williams  House consisted exclusively of  the yellow  singlets its  members
wore during athletics competi tions. Dyed at home by mothers commanding
various techniques and  materials, the  singlets  covered the  range of   ad
possible yellows from fresh butter to old urine. Wearing mine, I came third

96
in the heats and second last in the finals. Once I had been a fast runner, but
that was before I started to shrink.

   House football  took place in a park  only a few  miles' brisk  march from
the school. As a cold wind whipped across the grass, the two teams would
position themselves in expectation of the opening whistie. The start of each
half was the only time when the eye could detect even an approximation of
positional sense. The moment the  whistie  blew, thirty  small  boys would
gather around the ball, form ing a compact, writhing,  many-legged mound
which during the course of what seemed like hours would transfer itself  at
random to  different  parts of  the  field.  I  was somewhere in  the  middle,
praying it would end.

   But there was worse to come. On days when a Grade football team had a
bye, its members would be brought to our park so that they could  practise
dodging tackles. They ran down the field  while we tried  to tackle them. It
went without saying that they were big ger, faster and more skilful than we
were. The real nightmare was when the First Grade side turned up. The star
of First Grade was Reg Gasnier, already tipped as the brightest schoolboy
rugby pros pect in years. Indeed he toured England the following year with
the Australian Rugby League side. Merely to watch Gasnier run was to die
a little. He was all  knees and elbows. His feet scythed outwards as he ran,
like  Boadicea's hub-caps. There seemed no way of tack ling him  without
sustaining a compound fracture. Up and down the  field he  steamed while
we ran at  him from  different  angles, only  to bounce off,  fall  stunned, or
miss completely  as he  side-stepped. He  was beautiful  to  watch  if   you
weren't among the prospective vic tims. The way he  shifted his weight  in
one direction while swerving in the other was a kind of poetry. Regrettably
it was also very painful if experienced at close quarters.

   I  can well  remember the first time  I was deputed to tackle  Gas nier. He
was three times as heavy as I was, although, density having the relationship
it does to dimensions, he was of course only twice as high. There were only
a couple of hundred people watching. Gasnier appeared out of the distance
like  an  express train  moving  unhampered by  rails.  I  ran  at  him  on  a
despairing collision course. Casually he put his hand in my face. My  head
stopped whde the rest of me kept going, so that I spent a certain amount of

97
time supine in mid-air before falling  deftly on my  back. While I  was being
resus citated on the sidelines, Gasnier kindly  materialised  in  my  blurred
vision and explained that the thing to do was keep my head low so that he
could not palm  me off.  The next time  I tackled  him I  kept my  head low.
Side-stepping with uncanny ease, he put his hand on back of my head and
pushed my face into  the ground. So much  for  the friendly  advice. When
they picked me up, or rather pulled me out, there was an impression of my
face in the turf that you could have made a plaster cast from. It would have
looked disappointed but resigned.

   None  of  this  would  have mattered if   I  could  have kept  up  with  the
swimmers. Swimming had, after all, always been my best thing. The hours
and days spent in the creek and the Dom with the Meldrums had paid off in
a certain fluency of style.  When I was twelve  years old I used to hold ray
own in races across the creek against a local boy who subsequently was to
take the silver medal for 100 metres freestyle at the Melbourne Olympics.
At the time when 1 could keep up with  him we were the same size. By the
time of the Olympics  he was 6 feet 3 inches tall  and could close his hand
around the grips of two tennis rackets. But it wasn't just a matter of height.
There was the question of  attitude. I  simply found  excuses never to start
training. After Mr  Meldrum's death, and with Gary playing a less important
part in  my  life,  I   felt  able to  attend Ramsgate Baths on  the weekends.
Ramsgate Baths was a set of tiled pools fed by sea-water from Botany Bay.
Since the water was corrfined and remained unchanged for days on end, Mr
Meldrum had frowned on Ramsgate Baths as unhealthy. He was, of course,
absolutely right. The  water in each pool  would be  preen on the first  day,
orange on the second day and saffron the third. The whole place was one
vast urinal. But there were diving boards, sands pits and giggling swarms of
girls wearing  Speedo swimming costumes. The Speedo was a  thin,  dark
blue cotton one-piece affair  whose shoulder straps some of the  girls  tied
together behind with  a ribbon  so as to tauten the  fabric over  their pretty
bosoms. On a correctly formed pubescent girl a Speedo looked wonderful,
even when it was dry. When it was wet, it was an incitement to riot.

   At  Ramsgate Baths, weekend after  weekend, year after  year, I  would
show off with the clown diving  troupe, dive-bomb near the edge of the pool
to drench the girls, do mildly difficult  acrobatic tricks, smoke, and comb my

98
hair. There were  a  whole bunch  of  us who  wasted all  our  time  in  this
fashion. We were masters of the flat  racing dive and the  quick, flashy  55
yards. Any  one of  us  would  have sunk like   a rock  had he  attempted a
second lap, but  we  could  all  do  an  impressive tumble  turn.  When  the
whistle blew for  races and the real swimmers appeared in their tracksuits,
we repaired to the sand-pit, there to tell what we imagined were dirty jokes
and share a fanatically casual cigarette with the more daring girls. Erections

   were  either  hidden   or  flaunted,   depending on   one's  reputation  for
effrontery.  I  hid   mine,  cither  by  draping  a  towel   over  my  trunks   as
additional camouflage or just lying prone in the sand until the embarrassing
acquisition went away. Sometimes this took  a whole  afternoon, but there
was certainly nothing  better to do.  Falling  for—  not just  pcrving on,  but
actually and rackingly falling  for—a  pretty girl  in  a Speedo certainly beat
any thrills   that were  being experi enced by the  poor bastards who  were
swimming themselves to jelly in the heats and semi-finals. So, at any rate, I
supposed. Every few minutes  you could  hear the spectators roar as they
goaded  some   half-wit    onward   to    evanescent glory.    Meanwhile   I
concentrated on the eternal  values of  the  way  a girl's  nipples  hardened
against her will behind their veils of  blue cotton, or the way the sweet skin
of her thigh near the groin might be the vellum mounting for a single black
hair like the escaped mainspring of a pygmy time-piece.

   The same sort of  dichotomy  prevailed at school The  school swimming
team trained hard at North Sydney Olympic  Pool. The  rest of us went by
toast-rack tram to Rushcutter's Bay, Redleaf Pool, Bronte or Coogee. The
first two  were small net  enclosures in Syd ney Harbour: they offered little
except weeds around your legs and the constant challenge of dodging jelly-
blubbers. But Bronte and Coogee pools were both beside ocean beaches, so
that after  the regu lation hour  of  splashing around to  no  purpose and/or
practising for the  Bronze Medallion  you could change back into  uniform,
have your name ticked off the roll, rush down to the dressing rooms on the
beach, change back into  trunks, and head for  the  surf.  The first  pair  of
flippers made their  appearance in those years. I  had a big  pair  of  green
adjustables with straps that hurt—a characteristically bad buy—but I could
catch waves with them well  enough. Afraid of  sharks but pleased to be at
one with  the elements, I surfed until  I  was exhausted. There were half  a

99
dozen of us,  wastrels all,  who  thus used to  consume the spare hours of
every Wednesday afternoon after compulsory swimming—the beauty of our
activities  being, needless to  say, that  they were  not  compulsory. Frank
Griffiths was our master spirit. Like  Milo  he was something of a lurk-man,
but he had the additional quality of  humour. In class he used to charm his
way out of trouble. I began to see that there were advantages to playing the
fool. In  the  surf he  was completely at  home. His  skin was as  slick as a
duck's feathers. Broad-shouldered and long-legged, he could have been a
competition swimmer if  he had wanted to. But he didn't want to, any more
than the rest of us.

   For one thing, it was too much like work. For another, even if you did the
work there was no guarantee of success. The best swimmer in our school
was Peter Case. He trained about a hundred miles a day. He had gills. Every
year from first year through to fifth he was champion. But he never finished
higher than fourth in  the CHS carnival.  One year I watched him  at North
Sydney Olympic pool. He  was in the same 440 race as Jon Henricks, who
was then at Fort Street, and already wed on the way to his  Olympic  gold.
Henricks won by almost a length of the pool. Case was impressive to watch
but  you  could   see the   strain.  Henricks  seemed to   expend  no  effort
whatsoever. He glided frictionless, as if  salt water were interstellar  space.
Each arm  was  perfecdy relaxed  as it   reached forward  over  the  water,
stiffening only  when it  became immersed. Each of his  lazily  waving feet
seemed a third long section of the leg to which  it was so loosely attached.
The bow  wave in  front  of  his nose curved downwards  on its  way back,
leaving a trough of  air  in which  he occasionally breathed. He annihilated
distance at a rate of about twenty strokes to the lap and tumble-turned like a
porpoise running between wickets. He swam  as if  dreaming. It was clear
that he  had been born  to  swim.  There  was no  point  in  even trying   to
compete. Contrary  to  the pious  belief,  where  sports are  concerned the
impor tant thing is not to have taken part, but to have won.

   Nevertheless Case and his fellow swimmers, together with  all  the other
star athletes, formed an elite within the school no matter how mediocre their
performances outside it. If  Case was worshipped,  you can imagine  what
happened when John Konrads arrived. Even in his first year he was already
nearly six feet tall.  Still  only  eleven years old, he broke the school senior

100
880 record at his first carnival. He would have won every other senior event
if he  had been allowed to compete, but the 880 was the  only one he was
allowed to enter, and then only because there was no race at that distance in
his age group. Upon being lapped for  the second time, Case—then in his
fifth and final year—retired with a broken heart and headed for the showers,
the only  healthy man I  have ever seen limping  with  both legs.  Not long
afterwards Konrads went on to capture a sheaf of world records and become
recognised as the greatest male swim mer on Earth. I am pleased to report,
however, jumping ahead a bit, that  in my  last year at Sydney Tech I  was
privileged,  in  my  capacity  as prefect,  to  book  him  for   running  in  the
playground.

    

    

   THE SOUND OF MUCUS

    

    

    

    

    

   EVEN  IF I  HAD  POSSESSED the will and the weight to  be an athlete,
an  essential part  of   the  wherewithal   would   still   have  been missing.
Although I looked in the bloom of health, 1 was racked by colds throughout
my adolescence. Indeed it was just one long cold that  never went away. I
produced mucus in thick streams. 1 carried half a dozen handkerchiefs and
they were all full by  the end of the day. Kleenex had already been invented
but had not yet penetrated to Kogarah, where people still put a cold in their
pockets. I was  put ting an epidemic in  mine.  Finally  the floods  of  green
slime and the  interminable sniffle  drove  my  mother to  consult the  local
G.P., Dr Bolton, who prescribed a course of penicillin  injections. Over the

101
next few years I was shot full of  millions  of units of penicillin.  I  built up  a
tremendous resistance to   penicillin   and  an  unquenchable fear   of  the
hypodermic syringe—the  latter  phobia being  destined to  become a  key
factor, later on, in  my  long truancy from  the dentist. I  shook at  the mere
idea of being stuck. The actuality  should have been just a dull thud in  the
upper arm, but I tensed up so much that the needle bounced off. Dr Bolton
had to screw it in like a bradawl.

   This went on for a couple of years with no diminution  in the snot supply.
Quite the contrary. No matter how  hard I blew  there was always more up
there. This unabated deliquescence was grad ually joined by such additional
features as sharp pains above and behind the eyes. At the baths I couldn't
submerge more than a few feet without  feeling the  extra pressure. Rather
fancying myself as a diver,  I was disappointed to find  myself  confined to
the one-metre board. Not that I would ever have accomplished much from
the three-metre board—an innate lack of daring guaranteed that—but one of
my  chief   pleasures in  life   was  to   descend from   a  great  height  and
somersault while making contact with the water at the very lip of  the pool.
This activity was known as dive-bombing. An expert could make an impact
like a  500-pounder, saturating the spectators over a range of many yards.
There came a day when I surfaced in the puddle of  spume produced by a
particularly  effective  dive-bomb, and  found  my  face hurting  so much  I
could hardly get out  of the water. For a while  1 thought  that I had hit  the
tiled edge of the pool with my head.

   Dr Bolton  finally  decided that my sinuses needed a wash. First he probed
them extensively, using a stick wrapped in  cotton wool  soaked with local
anaesthetic. This was the least funny thing that had ever happened to me,
not excluding the  time when 1  had had an abscessed tooth extracted and
been sneered at by the dentist merely because a spout of pus had hit him in
the eye. Dr Bolton's immor tal line, 'You may feel a bit  of discomfort,'  still
strikes me today as ranking among the understatements of the century. In a
way he was right. What I felt wasn't pain so much as pressure. It was as if a
wardrobe were being crammed up my nose. When he yanked out the stick
and started to sluice the violated interior, I began a sob bing fit that lasted for
some time. I  went home traumatised. After  visits  to the  dentist I  usually
tucked into a packet of Minties and a few bars of Cherry Ripe, secure in the

102
knowledge that it  would be a year before  I had to  go again. But with  the
sinuses I was on constant

   call.  I  had to  keep up  the treatment. Dr  Bolton   went on  probing  and
sluicing for what seemed to me like years, until one day, on his way up my
nose, he met a polyp coming down.

   Polyps, or proud flesh, apparently favour the sinuses as a growth areas. If
I stuck  my finger  up my  left  nostril 1  could feel  it  entirely blocked by  a
convex meniscus the texture of Bakclitc. This was the vanwall  of what Dr
Bolton  assured my mother  could  be any thing between a  platoon and  a
battalion of  polyps.  Dr  Bolton  also  assured her that a  simple  operation
under local anaesthetic would be enough to clear the matter up. My mother,
strongly supported by  a silent  tantrum I  was  staging in  the background,
suggested that I might be spared some suffering if the operation was done
under general anaesthetic. 'No need for that,' Dr Bolton assured her. 'He'll
only feel a bit of discomfort.'

   After  only a few  weeks of sleepless waiting I found myself seated in Dr
Bolton's surgery. Dressed in a white coat,  he was on another chair facing
me. First he  did the  familiar  number with  the dope-soaked stick of  fairy
floss. I found this as hilarious as always. Then he got up there with a pair of
long-nosed forceps. They were slim to look at but by the time they were in
my head they felt like heavy wire-cutters. It all lasted for centuries and I did
a lot of crying. When I  glanced into the kidney-shaped enamel basin on the
table, it was heaped high with what would have looked like freshly cooked
tripe if  it had not been streaked with blood. My  mother was waiting in the
reception room when I came out. She had an awful look on her face. I have
learned to recognise that look since. It is  the way we look  when someone
we love is suffering and we can't help.

   The operation was so traumatic that I spent the next year doing my best to
conceal the fact that it had not worked.  But there was too much mucus to
hide and the pain both above and below my eyes formed a pair of invisible,
hot iron spectacles that kept me awake. Dr Bolton  at last referred me to a
specialist. He, too, was fond of  a preliminary  probe or two  with  the fairy
floss, but at  least this time  there was not  a suggestion that the operation
should be a sit-down. He  wanted me down and out. I  have never minded

103
general anaes thetic. I rather relish the dreams. When I woke up, my head
felt clear  for the  first  time in  years—-perhaps the first time  ever, since I
could not remember when I  had ever breathed so easdy. There was some
heavy bleeding,  which   the  specialist  staunched by  stuffing   my   facial
cavities full of gauze. This was only mildly  amusing and the removal of the
blood-caked gauze a few days later was  even less so, but my  new-found
happiness was unimpaired. I went on suffering more than my share of colds,
but  the bad  days  ended with  that  oper ation. I  can  still   remember the
specialist's kindly look.  Dr  Bolton, who  assisted at the operation, told me
later that he had never seen such instruments: some of them had had little
lights on them.

   That has been the sum total of my dl-health to date: one adoles cent brush
with sinusitis. I  didn't even have a severe case. To cure Joan Sutherland of
the same thing,  they  had to  slice  her open  along the  top  gum and  cut
through the bone behind her face. So  I got  off  lightly.  But  the feeling of
being helplessly dependent on medical skills is one I have never forgotten.
Only in  thoughtiess moments do I take my strong constitution for granted.
When I see sick, crip pled or deformed people in the street, I always feel that
the reason why they have too little luck is that someone gave me too much.

   My  hopes of heroism fading, I was obliged to find a new role, especially
when I  started ceasing to  be a  star even at  English. 'Jazz' moved  on, a
martinet came in, and I froze up. I was still near the top of the class, owing
to my unusual powers of parsing, but I  hardly stood out. Lucidly  a certain
gift of  the gab opened the way to a new career as a joker. The small boy is
usually obliged to  be amusing just as the fat  boy is usually  obliged to  be
amiable. I cultivated a knack of exaggeration. Lying outrageously, I inflated
rumour and hearsay into saga and legend. The price of fame was small but
decisive. I had to incur  the accusation of being a bud artist—a charge that
any Aus tralian male of  any  age wants to  avoid.  But  I  wanted notoriety
more.

   Rapidly  I  acquired it.  From  a small  circle  of  listeners in  class, I  pro‐ 
gressed to a large circle of listeners in the playground. Bigger boys came to
mock and stayed to listen. Adapted from a recendy seen film, my  story of
the Okinawa kamikazes lasted an endre lunchtime  and drew an audience

104
which, if  it  had not come equipped with  its own  sandwiches, would have
had to be fed with loaves and fishes.

   My  new line in  yarn-spinning was an expansion of the same trick that I
had been working in Sunday School. All  I  had done was throw caution to
the winds. I had also mastered the art of laughing at myself a fraction of  a
second before anybody else did. Climaxing  a  story of  my close  personal
acquaintance with Rommel, I produced a pair of old sand-goggles from my
pocket. This  convinced  the  smaller boys,  but  the  older  boys were  not
fooled. Before  they could  laugh, 1  beat them to it.  I  ran  with  the hares,
hunted with  the  hounds, and never left   a swing  except to  step on  to  a
roundabout. Gradually even the most scornful among my listeners came to
accept that what Jamesie said wasn't meant to be true—only entertaining. If
it wasn't that, key  figures drifted  away, and soon everyone else was gone
along with them, leaving me alone with my uneaten sandwiches. It was my
first experience of the difference between clicking and flopping.

   Riding the crest, I diversified,  exploiting a highly  marketable capacity to
fart at will.  Thus  I became an all-round entertainer. Somehow, perhaps by
osmosis, I had learned this invaluable knack from Milo, who could  fart the
opening bars of'Blue Moon.' The first time he performed this feat to a select
audience in the back of his garage, the effect was shattering. Suddenly we
were all outside in the  sunlight, staggering around gasping with combined
suffocation and  astonishment. Using  the Zippo   cigarette lighter  he  had
stolen from his father, Milo would  set a light to his farts, producing a jet of
flame rivalling  that emitted by the oil  refinery at Kurnell,  across the bay. I
was never able to match Milo  for  sonority and melodic  content, but I  did
manage to acquire the knack of letting  one off  whenever I wanted to.  By
mastering this skill I set myself on a par with those court jesters of old who
could wow the monarch and all  his rednue by unleashing, as a grandstand
finale, a  simultaneous leap, whisde  and fart.  Unable to  extend my  neo-
Homeric story-telling   activities from   the playground  to the  classroom, I
could nevertheless con tinue to hog the limelight by interpolating a gaseous
running com mentary while the teacher addressed himself to the blackboard.
The essential factor here was volume control. My  contributions  had to be
loud enough to  amuse the class but  not so  strident that  they caught the
teacher's ear. They were bound to catch his nose eventually, but by that time

105
they were untraceable, since I  never made the  mistake of  either looking
proud or  overdoing the angelic  innocence. Whde the teacher stood there
with his  nostrils twitching  and scanned the room for malefactors, I  stared
inscrutably into the middle  distance, as if lost in the middle  of a quadratic
equation.

   Two bacon rolls and a custard pie were my undoing. Tuck  shop lunches
were a dangerous substitute for home-cut sandwiches, since they generated
a less controllable  supply  of  wind.  Fred  Pick ett, the best of  our  maths
teachers, was filling the board with some incomprehensible account of what
happened to a locus on its way up the abscissa. I was waiting for a suitable
cue. The whole secret of raising  a laugh with  a fart in  class is to  make it
sound as if  it   is punctuating,  or  commenting upon,  what the  teacher is
saying. Timing, not ripeness, is all. 'And since x tends to y as c tends to d,'
Fred expounded, 'then the differential of the increment of x squared must be
.. . must be . . . come on, come on! What  must it flaming  be?' Here was a
chance to give  my version  of what  it  must be.  I armed one,  opened the
bomb bay, and let it go. Unfortunately the results far exceeded the discreet
limits I  had intended. It  sounded like a moose coughing. The shock wave
and gamma radiation left   people in  nearby desks leaning sideways with
both hands over  their noses. Picking  up  a blackboard duster, Fred  spun
round, took aim  and hurled it  with one flowing   movement. There was no
question about his choice of  target. Concentric circles of  outward-leaning
vic rims pointed back to  me as surely  as all  those felled  trees in  Siberia
pointed  back  to   the  meteor's  point  of   impact.   The  duster  impinged
tangentially on my cranium and clattered to the floor. Within sec onds I was
on my way to the Deputy Headmaster. I was carrying a note inscribed with
the numeral 6, meaning that I was to be given six of the best.

   The Deputy Head, Mr Dock,  inevitably known as Hickory, lacked inches
but made up for them with agility. A  short, round man, he had a long, thin,
whippy cane and would have looked like Bobby Riggs serving an ace if he
had not prefaced his windup and delivery with a short swerving run starting
in the far corner of the room.  He didn't waste time talking. He  just opened
the note,  glanced  at  it,  and  reached for  the  cane. Suddenly  I   wanted
desperately to urinate. 'C-c-c-c-c-can I go to the t-t-t-t-toi-toi-toilet?' I asked
bravely. To  his great credit  Hickory   let me  go. Perhaps he was  not the

106
psychopath he was cracked up to be. Perhaps he just didn't want a puddle on
his floor. I raced downstairs and made it to the urinal approximately in time.
My  return  up the  same stairs was  glacial, nay  asymptotic,  but Hickory
kindly appeared on the landing to encourage me over the final stages. Since
the rules stipulated that the hands be hit alter nately, for each stroke Hickory
had to change corners of the room before running up to serve. He covered a
lot of  ground. I found the shock of  each impact nothing like  as bad as the
anticipation. Unfortunately   the aftermath  was  worse than  anything  that
could be imagined. I zigzagged back to class with my hands buried between
my thighs. But even in the midst  of my  agony, I was already secure in the
knowledge that fame was assured.

    

    

    

   A PRONG IN  PERIL

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

   THUS  I  SERVED OUT  my  remaining years at school—as a clown.  It
never made me especially popular, but at least I avoided unpopular ity. At
the end of each school year it was a bespectacled owl called Schratah who
got tied to the flagpole and pelted with cream cakes. The most I can say for
myself is  that I  didn't  throw  any of  the cakes. But  I  can't pretend that I

107
wasn't glad somebody else was being picked on instead of me. I would have
found victimisation hard to bear. Why Schratah didn't commit suicide was a
constant mystery to me. It  wasn't, after all,  that they hated him  for  being
Jewish and a foreigner. They hated him for himself.

   Never  shooting up  with  the suddenness I had  been promised, I  never
stopped gradually growing either, until  eventually it  dawned on me that  I
was as tall as everyone else, with  the necessary excep tion of the athletic
heroes. Still checking up in the mirror,  I came to realise that my neck was
now if  anything thicker  than my head, although the back of my  skull  still
protruded instead of sloping for ward like Superman's. There had also been a
mildly   encouraging improvement   in  the  behaviour  of   my  tool.   After
prolonged immersion it  still  shrivelled  up to  the size of  a jelly-bean,  but
otherwise— although 1 was in  no danger of standing on  the end of it—it
was at least visible. Indeed nowadays it seemed always to be in one of two
conditions: erect and semi-erect. The Smithers family had moved hurriedly
away, amid rumours that Milo  had finally  and irrevocably Got Laurel Into
Trouble. It  didn't occur to  me, or probably  even to Milo,  that such things
could be attempted with any other girl  except her. Ordinary girls  could be
kissed and fiddled with  but there was no question of Going  All  The Way.
Australia  was  still  one  of  the  most  strictly   moralistic  societies  in  the
Western world. As a natu ral corollary, rape was endemic. Every day and ten
times on  Sun days, the tabloid newspapers carried stories of  young men
being sentenced to life  imprisonment  for  rape. Most  of  them seemed to
deserve it, but sometimes you wondered. I was especially impressed by the
front  page stories  about  a  young photographer  who  had  taken twelve
models down into  the National  Park near Heathcote and  raped them all.
Apparently he rendered them helpless with a roll  of  Elastoplast, releasing
them one  at a  time  from  bondage in  order  to  slake his  fell  desires. It
occurred to me that either the young man or the Elastoplast must have had
magic properties. But if the same thing ever occurred to the judge and jury,
there was no hint of it. The rapist was taken to Goulbourn gaol and locked
up to begin pay ing the slow price of his depravity. He's probably still there
now.

   Margaret, in the next street, would let me kiss her. Her mouth seemed to
be always full of water and she had a way of bumping your teeth with hers,

108
so that you were spitting chips of enamel after wards, but she felt round and
warm to  hold, if   you didn't  mind  the dribble.  Jan, across the street, was
pointedly eager to be kissed and even mildly interfered  with, but  her eyes
crossed so badly that you kept wondering if she had seen something in the
distance—a police car, for example. Shirley, down the street, was the most
exciting of the local girls. At spin-the-bottle parties she was the number one
target. She had a  fully  developed figure  and  a marvellous  hot,  yield ing
mouth. I spent half  an hour kissing her one night,  pinning her  against the
wall in  the driveway of  her house. I had to  go home in a running  crouch,
like  a black-tracker.  Shirley  was so passionate that  she might  have co-
operated if one of us had seriously tried to seduce her. But nobody our age
had the  nerve. It  was  an  older  boy from   another district  who  had  the
privilege of  taking  Shirley's virginity,   which must  have felt  as clean and
crisp  as  the  first   bite  of   a  sweet apple.  His   name  was  Barry  Tate.
Sensationally in  command of  his  own  car—a  black Hillman   Minx—he
came booming down the street each evening after another easy day's work
doing whatever it  was he did.  He had a concave chest and a rich,  multi-
coloured collection of pimples, but there was no getting past the fact that he
also had his own car. He would take Shirley away in it to park down among
the dunes at Doll's Point  or Ramsgate. Somewhere out there, a long way
beyond our envious reach, she must have yielded him her all.

   Apart from  Boys' Brigade, in  which  I became a less and less prominent
participant, my church activities took up a steadily greater proportion of my
spare time, principally because there were girls involved. I had one case of
the amorous vision after another. Once I had graduated into long trousers, I
even felt it  possible to translate such adoration into real acquaintanceship.
Christine Bal-lantine, alas, was beyond my hopes. She was almost beyond
even my dreams. Short in the leg but  unbelievably lovely  in the face, she
looked like  the top  half  of a  Botticedi  angel. I  burned tunnels in  the air
adoring her from afar. I  even slogged through church twice in an evening,
just to look  at her as she sat in the choir. This was no mean tribute to  her
beauty, since the second sitting of church included a full-scale sermon from
the Rev. C.  Cummings Campbell.  Quoting liberally   from  A Man  Called
Peter  and various   religious  savants with   three  names each,  the  Rev.
Campbell would  unload from  the pul pit a seemingly fathomless cargo of
cliches. Meanwhile I drank in Christine's beauty, its every movement of lip

109
and eyelid more pleas ing to God than anything the Rev. Campbell would
ever say.

   Little  Sandra McDougall  I  actually  managed to touch. She was a tiny,
sweet-looking blonde with  a deep, grating voice  like Mr  Chifley,  the late
lamented leader of the Labor  Party. The standard heavy teas ing informed
her of my love. With  shyness on my side and under standable reluctance on
hers, we got to the hand-holding  stage. Unfortunately my sinuses, not yet
cured at that time, ruined every thing. No sooner had I picked up her white-
gloved hand than I had to  put it  down again in  order to blow  my nose in
whatever section of my  sodden handkerchief had been used least. Behind
the veil  depending from her frangipani-bedecked hat, her  large blue eyes
would shut  in  what I  hoped  was modest sympathy, but  suspected to be
disgust. Eventually she took to tapping her foot while I honked and hooted.
Finally she turned away.

   But later on, with my health improved, the end of school approaching and
some recognisable version of late adolescence approaching along with it, I
began to find some of the older  girls not entirely  averse to being fumbled
with. This was a revelation. That a mad girl like Laurel might do everything
made it  seem more  likely,  not  less, that  ordinary  well-brought-up  girls
would do  nothing. And  yet here they were, letting  you  put your  hand on
their breasts or even—in  advanced cases—between their thighs. It was a
kind of warfare, with no-go areas and free fire zones. Breast fondling could
go on for some time, but when it noticeably led  to a deeper stage of heavy
breathing then it had to  stop. Thigh strok ing could go on for  only  a short
time at  one go,  although the  hand was  allowed back  again at  a decent
interval after removal. A really determined assault might have burst through
all these conven tions but I would probably have been scared to death if they
had suddenly ceased to be operative. Carol Pascoe, for example, didn't seem
to  know  the  rules.  There  was  always  a  race to  take  her  home  after
Fellowship meetings or socials. A  few times I  won it,  usually by  booking
her up a week in advance. She had no inclination to remove the exploratory
hand or even, as I was stunned to discover, the  exploratory finger, which
could work its  will  unchecked until numbness set in, leaving you with  the
disturbing  sensation of  hav ing only  nine fingers  left.   Meanwhile  Carol
would be bumping and grinding with  her mouth open and her eyes closed.

110
It was vaguely frightening,  although one of course pretended otherwise. A
dozen of us, comparing notes, loudly agreed that Carol was the Best to Take
Home. Reg Hook showed us the condom that he planned to use on her. He
had a detailed plan to dispel what was left  of her innocence. As Reg later
recounted it, the  plan—involving  him self, Carol,  a blanket,  and a Doll's
Point sand dune at  midnight—  unfolded  with  ridiculous  ease. In a  trice
Carol was lying there, sobbing with need. Unfortunately Reg was under the
impression that you had to unroll the condom before putting it on. Since the
rest of  us would  have done the  same in his  place, we  were hardly  in  a
position to point out his mistake.

   Eventuady a Scottish immigrant boy  caded Dorber gave Carol what she
wanted. Thick of accent, repedent of epidermis and wise in the ways of the
Glasgow slums, Dorber was an unlikely mem ber of Fellowship or indeed of
any organisation more benign  than the Parachute Regiment. But  then he
was not in search of religious instruction.  He was out to  use what we had
been wasting. Our idea of the successful climax to an exciting evening was
to limp  home with  a throbbing crotch and a finger  smelling like  a fishing
smack. Dorber's ambitions were less oblique. He wanted everything, and in
several cases, to our flabbergasted disapproval, got it.

   Still,  at least I had some tangible evidence that I was normally endowed.
The only problem was to find  the opportunity, courage and purpose which
would adow of  the endowment being put to use. The problem was almost
solved  for  ever  during   a  fortnight   away  at  a  National  Fitness  camp
somewhere up in the bush. I attended this camp as part of a Sydney Tech
contingent which   included  Griffiths   and  others  among the  freaks  and
wastrels. I never bothered to find  out  at the time  precisely what National
Fitness was or what aims it was supposed to pursue, but in retrospect I can
see that it  was a  reasonably benevolent outfit  promoting  the concept of
mens sana in corpore sano on what it imagined to be an international scale.
The camp, constructed along military lines, consisted of weatherboard huts
scattered through the bush and linked up with  winding  paths. There were
several hundred boys present, including a hefty repre sentation from Nauru
Island. So black they looked blue, these were some of the best-looking boys
in creation. The one to whom  all the  others deferred, although never with
servility, was Detudame, son of the Chief of Nauru.

111
   Nowadays, Detudame is chief himself.  I saw him  on television  recendy
and was pleased to note  that he  had acquired a  weight prob lem closely
resembling my own. At  the time I  am talking  about he was already pretty
bulky,  but  it  was all   dark  muscle, subtiy  catch ing tangential tight   like
polished hardwood. His retinue called him Det for short. Within minutes we
all  did.   He  had  Napoleonic  cha risma combined  with   infinite    charm.
Through the  black  and white  crowd  that  surrounded him  at all  times  I
snatched glimpses   from   a   distance,  awed   by   the   amusement  that
spontaneously came into being around him and which he could silence with
a frown. He and the Nauruans played a strip-tease game in which the object
was to keep your clothes while all around you were losing theirs. While he
was doing the same to you, you whipped your hands suddenly from behind
your back and confronted  your opponent with  any one of  three symbols:
scissors, paper, rock. Scissors cut paper but broke on rock. Paper covered
rock but was cut  by scissors. If you  lost, you had to  remove an article of
clothing, even if it was the last thing you had on. When Det lost—which he
seldom did,  being  a  mind  reader—he stripped  just  as willingly    as his
subjects. But on the one occasion when he was forced down as far  as his
underpants, he insisted on going behind a bush. While his entourage rolled
around in hyster ics, all we saw was the royal Y-fronts being waved in  the
air. Thus the future monarch's dignity was preserved. It will be apparent that

   I  am talking about the kind of  brother I would  have liked to have, and I
suppose miss even now.

   This is a generous appreciation on my part, considering that Det and his
friends brought me to the edge of catastrophe. One night we were playing
Hunt the Lantern. I  forget the rules.  Probably I have repressed them. The
relevant facts are simple. I was fleeing at full tilt through the pitch dark on a
zigzag  path  between the   gum  trees.  Det  and  a  couple  of   his  more
carnivorous-looking  pals were  after  me.  Equipped with   excellent  night
vision and the ability  to run  sdentiy even over dead leaves, they were bad
dreams straight out  of  James Fenimore Cooper. Suddenly I   heard Det's
voice shouting at me to look  out. I  thought it was a ruse and crammed on
more speed. With stunning abruptness some kind of sdent land-mine blew
me straight up in  the air. The stars raced past my eyes in paral lel streaks,
like the  tips of  porcupine quills.  I landed sitting  down, having  performed

112
the best part  of  a double  forward  somersault in  the  piked, or  wrecked,
position. Det and  his friends arrived,  vault ing unerringly over  the barbed
wire fence that I had just tried to run through.

   The fence  had had three strands. The  top strand had  caused a certain
amount of damage across my lower chest. The bottom strand had torn a few
holes in my upper shins and knees. The middle strand had apparendy done
nothing more than tear my  khaki shorts across the crotch. When they got
me to the first  aid  centre it  was soon agreed that the shock was a worse
threat than the cuts. The cuts were treated with the mandatory daubing of
Acriflavine,  tufts  of  cotton wool  being  left  on the wounds  so that scabs
would form  neatiy  under the gauze bandages. The shock was treated by
wrapping me in  a blanket and leaving me there to spend the night.  When
every one was gone I reached up, switched the light back on, and snuck a
look under my shorts. I had discouraged ad attempts to remove them, but it
couldn't be denied that a dull  ache was emanating from that area. What I
had felt, however, paled beside what I now saw.

   My  tonk was sliced open on one side to what looked like a mortal depth.
It was as if the captain of the Titanic, a few minutes after the encounter with
the iceberg, had been lowered by the heels and given a sudden underwater
close-up of the trouble he was in.  The wound wasn't bleeding. It  was just
gaping.  Hurriedly   I   covered  it   up   again  and  stared  at   the  ceiling,
simultaneously pretending I  hadn't seen what  I  had seen and wondering
desperately what to do.

   I chose to do nothing. In the event this proved to be the right decision, but
it was prompted by nothing except cowardice. The mere thought of a doctor
putting stitches  in  my  tossle made me  cross and uncross my  legs  very
rapidly—or would  have done, had I dared move them. So for days on end I
kept my secret, snatching a look at the disaster area as often as I could. It
was inspiring to  see how quickly the  antibodies rallied to the  task. It was
like a  speeded-up film. Rapidly  the whole  area turned bright  white, then
pink. The gash itself, after first  filling  up with  dark blood, tightened into a
crisp scab that  clicked  satisfactorily  when I  tapped it   with  a finger nail.
Before the remaining week of camp was over, it was obvious that my much-
abused saveloy was out  of  danger. Even at  this time,  this  was a  relief.

113
Looking  back, I  almost  faint  at the sheer range of  implication.   Another
quarter of an inch on those barbs and my sub sequent love-life would have
consisted entirely of bad scenes from The Sun Also Rises.

    

    

    

   ALL  DRESSED UP

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

   AS  THE FINAL   YEARS  of  school flowed  turgidly  under the bridge  I
became increasingly lost.  Now  that  I  had  at last  grown  up,  my  comic
persona no longer quite fitted. For many years I was to remain a prisoner of
my own, like a ventriloquist taken over by his dummy. Even today, unless I
watch myself carefully,  I  take refuge in  levity.  Only self-discipline  keeps
my face straight. In War and Peace, if  I were not allowed  to identify  with
Andrey or even Nikolai than I sup pose I would settle for Dolokhov. I would
even try to be pleased if it were pointed out that I was in fact Pierre. But the
man I can't help recognising myself  in is the unfortunate Zherkovim,  who

114
makes an untimely joke about the defeated General Mack and receives the
fidl blast of Andrey's wrath.

   Anyway,  there  is  no  point   in  carping  now.  My   clever  lip  won  me
whatever popularity was coming to me at the time, so that I was able to go
on finding  myself  welcome, or  not  unwelcome, among Griffith's  surfing
parties and the school YMCA  team that com peted annually for the Pepsi-
Cola Shield. Indeed among the latter crew I at last found myself a measure
of sporting stardom, since the vaulting I  had so painfully  learned at Boys'
Brigade was some thing of an  advance on anything  the other Centurions
(that was the  name of our  team) could  improvise uninstructed. My   feet-
through and flying angel-roll on the long box were instrumental in bring ing
the  Pepsi-Cola Shield   home  to  Sydney  Technical  High—a   fact  duly
announced at school assembly. It didn't sound much of an achievement (and
in fact was even less of an achievement than it sounded, since the teams we
had defeated looked like pages from a Unesco pamphlet about the ravages
of vitamin deficiency) but it  was something. I also managed, at the eleventh
hour, to  be chosen for  Grade  football.  It  was only   Third  Grade, which
consisted mainly of rejects from Second Grade, but you were given a fifth-
hand jersey to wear  and travelled about, meeting similarly   decrepit sides
from other schools. My position  was five-eighth: what in  Britain would  be
called a stand-off half. I had just enough speed and agility to tempt myself
into trouble, but not  enough of either to get out of  it. My  short career was
effectively  finished   in   a  game  against  Manly,   whose  two  enormous
breakaways, like the  clashing rocks of  mythol ogy, hit  me from  different
directions while I  was wondering what to do with the ball.  Semi-conscious
and feeling like an old car after it has been compressed into a block of scrap
metal, I  scored against my  own  side  on the  subsequent move and thus
acquired the tag 'Wrong Way' James.

   But at least I  was able to have 'Third Grade Football 1956' embroi dered
in blue  silk  under the  school badge on the  breast pocket of  my  maroon
blazer. Senior boys were encouraged thus to emblazon their achievements.
My paltry  single line  of glory  looked insignificant  enough on its own  and
ludicrous beside the listed battle honours of  the true sporting stars, which
extended below their pockets on to  the blazer itself. 'First  Grade Football
1954.  First   Grade  Football   1955.   First  Grade   Football   1956.  CHS

115
Swimming 1952. CHS Swim ming 1953 ...' My lost companion Carnaby had
a block of blue print  on his blazer that looked, from a distance, like a page
of heroic couplets. As for the Captain of the School, Leslie Halyard, it  was
lucky he was seven feet tall, since his credits went on and on like the tides
of an epic movie.

   The blazer was an important item of equipment. I bought mine after I was
elected one of the school's eighteen prefects. I came in at number seventeen
on the poll,  one ahead of the school bell-ringer.  Without the Third  Grade
football  credit I  never  would  have made it,  and  would  thus never have
enjoyed the heady privilege  of supervising  detention or of  booking  other
boys for running  in the playground. Admission  to the rank of  prefect was
my sole latter-day school success. In other respects I might as well not have
come to school  at all.  Indeed most  of my  clothes looked  as if  they  had
already left. By this time young men's fashions were reflecting the influence
of Rock Around  the Clock and  Don't Knock  the Rock. Another  influence
was the   lingering  impact  of   the  bodgie  era  which  had  occupied  the
immediately preceding  years. The  bod-gies had  favoured a  drape-shape
rather like the British Teddy-boys, with shoes the size of Volkswagens and a
heavily budt-up  hairstyle  razored square across the neck. The  American
tennis manager Jack Kramer also played an important part in shaping our
appearance, even though his palpable influence was confined to the apex of
the head. His flat-top haircut  was faithfully  reflected by what  occurred on
top of our  own craniums, where each hair rose vertically  to the level of  a
single, imaginary horizontal  plane and then stopped dead. Even Halyard,
normally conservative in  his attire, turned up  one day with  the top of  his
head looking as if  it  had been put through a  band saw. Griffiths  set up a
barber shop in the prefects' room and gave us his skilled attention, checking
the results with a tee-square. Well greased with Brylcreem, the side panels
of our haircuts were left to grow long and be swept back with an octago nal,
many-spiked plastic rake which looked like the inside of an Iron Maiden for
butterflies. At  the  back, above the straight-as-a-die bottom line,  a muted
duck's arse effect occured, further echoing  the just-vanished bodgie ideal
and direcdy presaging the incoming cultural  onslaught of 77 Sunset Strip,
among the first programmes to be shown on Australian television.

116
   Continuing to  read downwards, we come to the drape-shape jacket. The
emphasis was on heavily padded shoulders and a waist-less taper towards a
hem line on the lower thighs.  Cut to my  per sonal specifications, the drape
of my own  jacket was so tastefully judged that you had to look for  several
seconds before noticing how a supernumerary set of shoulders, sloping at a
steeper angle, started  where  the real  ones  ended. Shirt   and ties  were
something assertive from   a  shop near  Museum  station  called  Scottish
Tailor ing, the pink, cerise or Mitchell Blue shirt flecked with  white and the
multi-banded iridescent slub tie cut square at the bottom like a decapitated
coral snake. Scottish Tailoring also supplied the peg-top bottie green slacks
with the 14-inch cuffs and the personalised fobs. Socks were usually chosen
in some contrasting  colour to  the  shirt. I  favoured  mauve socks myself,
since they interposed an arresting bravura passage between the bottie green
cuffs and the quilt-top ox-blood  shoes with the half-inch-thick  crepe soles.
Moving,  the shoes made a noise like cow  pats at the moment  of impact.
Station ary, they allowed their occupant to lean over at any angle. You will
understand that I am describing a representative outfit for day wear. In the
evening I dressed up.

   Somewhere else, in  the  parallel  universe inhabited  by  the  Austra lian
equivalent of the middle class, boys of my age must have been learning to
feel at ease with their  advantages. Doubtiess I would have found  theirs a
world of  stultifying  conventionality,  had I known  it.  But I  never knew  it.
The essence of a class system is not that  the privileged  are conscious of
their privileges,  but that  the deprived  are conscious of  their deprivation.
Deprived I never felt. I had nei ther the insight nor the power of observation
to realise  that there  might  be another breed who  recognised each other
simply by  the untroubled,  unquestioning way they  shared good manners,
well-cut clothes and shoes that never wore out. I didn't feel disadvantaged. I
just  felt  lost.  Conforming   desperately with  my   nonconformist  out ward
show, inwardly I could find  nobody to identify  with—certainly  not Marlon
Brando in  The Wild One  or James Dean in  Rebel Without a  Cause. The
inarticulacy of those two heroes would have been a blessed retreat. Instead I
was the  captive of  my  fluent   tongue. The  effort  of  being  continuously
diverting left  me limp.  I  never doubted that those were the only terms on
which I would ever be accepted.

117
   Close friends would probably  have been there had I ready wanted them.
But that would have taken time from the dady task of playing to the gallery.
To that, the only  alternative I  could  ever countenance was solitude. Very
occasionally I went out with  Gary on the pdlion  of the B.S.A.  500, but by
now the refurbished one-lunger was dis turbingly fast. Even in top gear the
separate ignition  strokes were  still  audible,  but  the vacuum  behind me
swelled my shirt  out like  a spinnaker, the airstream was hard on the eyes
and when we heeled over in the corners I thought the speeding asphalt was
coming up to  hit me in  the ear. EventuaUy he sold the 500  and bought a
B.S.A. 350 O.H.V. which he started to adapt for racing. No matter what he
did with  it it  would never be as quick as the A.J.S. 7RS that domi nated its
class, but it was still a demanding machine with expensive tastes. There was
no longer much room in his life for me.

   My   mother and  I  still   went  to  every  change of  programme  at both
Ramsgate and Rockdale Odeons so we were seeing at least four movies a
week. She  sat there  dutifully   through  the  war  films,  even  though  she
despised most of them. She got really angry at John Wayne in The Sands of
Iwo Jima.  Musicals she  couldn't take,  but she still   sat there, generously
keeping me  company  whde  I   envied  Gene  Kelly   and  doted  on  Cyd
Charisse. She even sat stdl for Betty Hutton, though she would rather have
had her teeth drilled. In fact the only  film  she ever walked out of was Hot
Blood, an epic of gypsy life in which  Cornel Wdde and Jane Russell stared
significantiy at each other through the flickering light  of the campfire, very
occa sionally raising their arms above their heads as if to check up on  the
current state of their own armpits although it turned out that they were only
getting ready  to  dance. My  mother  and  I  quarrelled  frequendy but  we
reached a comforting unanimity on such matters as what constituted a lousy
picture. She could be  very funny  about poor  Mario  Lanza. She took  her
revenge over   antipathetic  film    stars  by   getting   their  names  wrong.
Muttering  imprecations at  Dolores Day  and  Susan Hollywood,  she was
good company as we walked  home through the night  along Rocky  Point
Road. For years the mere mention of Lizabeth Scott, renamed Elspeth Scott,
was enough to send us both into hysterics. I wish our closeness could have
been at least partly due to a conscious effort from  me. On the contrary, it
was only our  apartness that was fuelled by my will.   She knew that I  was
doing badly in my last years at high school. I knew she was right, but didn't

118
want to admit that I had made a mistake. When we clashed, the talk and the
tears went on for hours, leaving both of us exhausted.

   So at most it was a famdy of two, except for Christmas, when we always
went to visit Aunt  Dot in Jannali. Aunt Dot laid  on a Christ mas tree and an
enormous Christmas dinner, eaten as usual at noon on Christmas day. The
fatted calf scarcely ranked among the hors d'oeuvres. Everything was still
as scalding hot as the  day Grandpa spat the zac. The  same trifles,  plum
puddings and  lemon meringue  pies. Decorated  with  cotton  wool  snow,
brittie globular doodads and strings of tinsel, the tree shed dry green needles
and presents for myself. Another highlight of the trip was a visit around the
corner to some distant relatives called the Sturrocks. The size of troglodytes
and older  than  the  hills,  they  crouched  in  the  stygian  depths of  their
weatherboard house and croaked greetings. All their lives they had gone on
putting  on  clothes  without  ever  taking  them  off.   I  believe  they  were
spontaneously combustible, like  those people in  Dickens.  The  whole of
Christmas was a solemn ritual  but my  mother and my  aunt needed to be
close even when they got on badly. Their broth ers had never been much use
to  them,  so  they  supported and  com forted each  other  as their   losses
mounted. I would have been proud of both of them if  I had had any sense.
Lacking that, I withdrew  into myself and counted the hours until I could be
alone again.

   At school and church I got by as an entertainer, but it was a soli tary's way
of being gregarious. I was never really at ease in company. Nowadays I am
at last blessed with friends so close that I don't even feel the need to try, but
at the time I am talking  about such friend ships belonged to other people. I
observed them enviously from a distance. It was only in my own company
that I could switch  off the act. Until  the Glaciarium closed down I  used to
go skating alone there twice a week all through the winter,  on Wednesday
afternoon after school and for two sessions on Saturday. I bought a second‐ 
hand pair of Puckmaster ice-hockey skates. They were a typically bad buy,
although not as bad as the football boots that were three sizes too big and
finished my Boys' Brigade soccer career before it began, since I had to run
some distance before the boots started to move. The  hockey skates were
merely clapped out in the heels and soles, so that that the screws pulled out
and the blades parted company from the boots at critical moments. But on

119
the days when my skates stayed together I was perfectiy content, circulating
end lessly while ogling that  prettiest of  all  sights, the line  formed  by the
behind and upper thigh of  a girl  skater. I never went to  classes and could
perform no tricks more complicated than a 'three,' but I had a flash turn of
speed. During the fast skating  periods I  could run  quickly  enough in the
turns to lay  my  inside hand on  the ice—  the surest way  of  pleasing the
crowd, especially if  another skater removed your fingers. As  usual, I was
trying hard to look good, but there were also moments of genuine, monastic
solitude. Talking  contentedly  to  myself  I  would  circle  with   the  crowd,
zigzagging to   hold  my  speed down   and tucking   one hand  inside  my
windbreaker, like   Napoleon. Perhaps Napoleon  found  out   that he  had
chicken pox  the same way  I  did.  It  was a hot  day outside,  the ice  was
covered with an inch of slush, there were thousands of people jamming the
rink, the loudspeakers were playing 'Don't Let the Stars Get In Your Eyes,'
and I discovered I  had a little  bubble on my  stomach- Two little  bubbles.
Scores of little bubbles. I left immediately, guilty  with  the realisation that I
had infected the whole Glaciarium. It closed soon after, probably as a direct
result. Since there was no other ice rink nearer than San Francisco, I hung
up my skates.

   But there was also my bicycle. Simultaneously with my first long trousers
had arrived a scarlet 28-inch frame Speedwell to replace the old brown 26-
inch frame  rattletrap on  which  I  used to tilt   quix otically with  the  privet
hedges. The frame of the new bike was not fully tapered but with my  eyes
half closed  I could  almost call  it  a  racing bike,  especially after  I  had it
equipped with white-wall  tyres and three-speed Sturmey-Archer hub gears.
At the beginning the saddle was flush with the cross bar. By the time of my
final year in  school the saddle was extended to its full height. I  had given
the bike's  appointments a  lot  of   thought. The  gear-change trigger  was
placed next  to  one  of  the  brake  levers  at  the  end of   the  ram's horn
handlebars, so that changing down was like firing a gun, while all  I had to
do to change up was flex my knuckle. Impressively clad in striped tee-shirt,
sandshoes and khaki shorts with rolled-up  legs, I  rode many miles  every
weekend. I could be at Mascot aerodrome in a few minutes, at the George's
River bridge in half  an hour. Some times I rode all the way to the National
Park, just so that I could  coast down Artillery  Hill.   Boys got killed  trying
that: it was a long, long hill. The idea was to go down without ever touching

120
the brakes and at the end to go streaking across the dam without any change
in the  stoic expression. No  expression could  have been more stoic  than
mine. The speed of the airstream was enough to  distort my  features until
they looked like what happened to the rocket crew in Destination Moon, but
underneath I was still   heroically stoic.  It  was an important  test, which  I
passed, although typically I was unable to do so without posing.

   So I got  used to travelling alone. It was hard on my  mother, who earlier
on had always been good at setting up interesting trips. She would sort out
the details of  trains, buses and boats, so that without  effort  I  would find
myself beside her watching the aborigines div ing for coins at La Perouse, or
howling along through the latticed girders of the Hawkesbury River bridge
in the Newcastle Flyer. On the boat to Bundeena she got seats for us in the
prow so that  I  could lean daringly  over  and watch the porpoises as they
appeared, disap peared and reappeared in our bow-wave, sinking to  spin
around each other and rising in quick succession to blow a squirt of aer ated
water that sprinkled your  delighted face like  angel spit. Now  there was a
gang worth joining.  My  mother told me that there was nothing in  the sea,
not even  sharks, that could  hurt  them, and  that there  was nothing  they
wanted to hurt. Those were the days when she could still tell me things. The
breeze caught her hair and pulled it back. She looked like  Garbo in  Anna
Christie. When the water  grew shallow enough for  the sand to be clearly
visible the porpoises peeled away and left us together.

   But now  I knew it  all and couldn't bear to be told, not  even by myself. I
shouted down my own  conscience when it  tried to  inform  me that I  was
well  on the way  to  securing a Leaving  Certificate which  would  scarcely
rank as a dishonourable discharge. Even Eng lish had gone completely sour
on me. 1 had my name down to take the English Honours paper. Big joke. I
was fully   qualified  to  answer anything  that  might  be asked about  Erie
Stanley Gardner  or  Les lie  Charteris, but   beyond that  I   was  perfectly
clueless. None of the dozen books a week I had been taking out of the local
Public Library   had anything  to  do  with  literature.  Nor  was the  teacher
assigned to the Honours class likely  to  spot the discrepancy between my
knowl edge and the tests about to be made of it. He was, in the first place, a
librarian. He was, in the second place, geriatric. He might have been Mary
Luke's older brother. Where Mary started every lesson with instructions on

121
how to make a Bunsen burner, Dewey—short for Dewey  Decimal System
—always began by showing you how to  open a new book from the centre
so that reading it would  not distort the spine. The book's spine, not yours.
He was probably sound on that one subject but on anything else he was a
dead loss. While he burbled aimlessly for his allotted hour, I spent the time
memorising all the parts of the Moto  Guzzi V-8 racing  motorcycle engine.
But I was already wed aware that not even so prodigious a feat of memory
would do me any  good. It was the older  boys, the ones who could do the
maths, who would  go on to  design and construct the beautiful  machines.
While I read about cars, they were already buying them, taking them apart,
putting them back together and driving  them around. On the other hand, I
was no longer any good at English either.

   I  entered the examination hall  with  the same feelings the RAAF  pilots
must have had when they flew  Brewster Buffaloes into  action against the
Japanese—underpowered, outgunned, fearful  and  ashamed.  I   left   the
examination had  fondly   recalling   how  well   I  had  felt   going  in.   The
mathematics papers I had expected to  find  incom prehensible, but it was
unmanning to find the English Honours paper equally opaque. It was full of
questions about  people  I   had  never  heard  of.   Shakespeare's name I
recognised almost instantiy,  but  who   was George  Eliot?  What  had  he
written? I could do none of it. Simpler than going home would have been to
catch a tram to the Gap and jump off. I spent weeks reassuring my mother
that everything would  be all  right, whde  simultaneously indicating that if
everything turned out not to be all right it  would be no true mea sure of my
real abdity or future prospects. But when the results appeared in the Herald
the bluff was over. I got an A  and five Bs. The A  was in English: it  meant
that I had faded my Honours paper outright but had been above average in
the ordinary paper. Since the average mark for the ordinary English paper
had been set to coincide with  the linguistic  attainments of  Ginger Meggs
this did not count for much. The five Bs meant that I had wasted my time

   for  a  lustrum each in  five   different  mathematical subjects—a total  of
twenty-five  man  years  straight  down  the  drain.  About   all   that  I  had
managed to achieve  was matriculation.  It   sounded like  mictu rition  and
meant even less. Practically  anybody could  matriculate. But  you  needed
several more As than I had achieved if  you were to  get a Commonwealth

122
Scholarship, and without one of those there was not much hope of acquiring
a university education. I was a total failure.

   There  was  no  longer  any  hope  of  dissuading  my  mother  from  the
conviction that she had been right all along. Even in the dust and flame of
the debacle, it was obvious that English had been my best subject, or at any
rate my least worst. In the mathematical subjects which had been supposed
to further my engineering career I had scored almost nothing. I fought back
with all  the petulant fervour of  one who knows that he is in  the wrong. In
my heart I had long known that the other boys would be the engineers. But
where did that leave me? What was the  thing I  was supposed to do, now
that it was proved I could do nothing else?

   At  this  point,  like  the Fairy  Godmother, the  Repatriation Com mission
stepped in. The  Australian  government never  got around  to  doing very
much for war widows,  but in  a weak moment it had developed a soft spot
for war  orphans, who could  claim  a free uni versity education as long  as
they matriculated.  Far from  having  to  meet Commonwealth Scholarship
standards, they needed only to obtain the number and quality of passes that
might  be appropri ate for an  apprentice bottle-washer. By  this  absorbent
criterion, I was in. All I  had to do was apply. Even then I almost managed to
persuade myself that I wanted to go  to the University  of  Technology. If I
had prevailed in this wish my  mother would undoubtedly have ended it all
under the wheels of  a trolley  bus. Luckily   the Repat. wasn't having  any.
Sydney University  it   had to  be.  They  advised an  Arts  course. Since  I
thought this  meant drawing,  at which  I  had  always been rather  good, I
signed on the dotted line.

   In  retrospect it seems incredible even to me that I  had come so far and
remained so ignorant. It was not just that I was nowhere compared with an
English sixth-former or  an American prep school graduate. I was nowhere
compared even with my fellow Hurstville  alumni who  had gone to Sydney
High. When I  met Elstub  on the train he was reading The Age of  Anxiety
and I   was reading  Diving   to  Adventure. Knowing   nothing,  I   scarcely
suspected what I was  miss ing. Barely realising what  a university  was, I
looked forward to it  as something vague on an indeterminate horizon. The
immediate task  was  to  survive  as  an  office  boy  in   the L.   J.  Hooker

123
organisation, my first proper job. In my senior high school years I had tried
sev eral different jobs during the school holidays. The most disastrous was
as a shop assistant in Coles, where I rapidly discovered that I was incapable
of dealing with impatient customers without becom ing flustered. Merely to
discover that the  anodised aluminium  tray  I  was supposed to wrap  was
wider  than  the  wrapping  paper  was  enough  to  set  me  darting  about
distractedly in  search of  wider paper or  a  narrower anodised aluminium
tray. In just such a frenzy I ran into a display stand on which were carefully
arranged hundreds of cut glass bowls, dishes and plates. The stuff proved to
be amazingly durable, which raised questions about the composition of the
glass. Instead of shattering, it   bounced. But it  bounced everywhere, and
before the last piece had stopped roding I  was on my  way home. I  had a
similar job  in Herb Horsfield's  Hobby House, but rather than sell wind-up
toys to  wind-up customers I  retreated into the  todet and read The Caine
Mutiny. When Herb finady realised that he was making no sales at all when
I was in charge he reluctantiy opened discussions about terms of separation.
He quite liked me, which was foolish of him in the circumstances.

   L. J. Hooker's was a bigger thing ad round. By  this time my mother was
in despair  of my  ever  accomplishing anything.  She had no  idea what  a
university Arts course might be but she had every reason to suppose that I
would make a hash of it. L.  J. Hooker's, on the other hand, was the fastest
growing real-estate firm in  Australia. If  I applied myself  I might  work my
way up.  If  only  to  blunt  the  edge of  the disappointment in  her  eyes, I
resolved to knuckle down. In  the three months before university started, I
would prove myself as an office boy to myself, my mother and the world.

   The main office  of L.  J. Hooker's was situated in Martin Place, just near
the Cenotaph. I got off the train  at Wynyard every morn ing, walked to the
building,  descended to the  basement, hung up  my  coat,  picked  up my
scissors and applied myself to the thrilling  task of cutting  out all  the L. J.
Hooker classified ads in that day's Herald. It took most of the morning. The
rest of  the  day  I  pasted them  into  a big  book.  At   set intervals  I  also
delivered  mail   all    around  the   budding,   thereby  giving    myself   the
opportunity  to  die  of   love  for  the  boss's secretary,  a tall,   ravishingly
voluptuous girl called Miss  Wiper. Every day, delivering  the mail to her, I
would greet her with a suave one-liner gleaming from the polish of twenty-

124
four hours' sleepless rehearsal. 'Hi, patootie,' I  would  pipe casually, 'how
goes it?' Her  answering smde invariably  floored me  completely. I  would
enter her office looking as relaxed as Ronald Colman—if you can imagine
Ronald Colman wearing quilted shoes the size of small cars—and leave it
crawling and sobbing. It seemed to me at such moments that my love was
being answered. Actually, I  now  realise, something more interesting was
happening. A kind woman was enjoying, mischievously but without malice,
the spectacle  of  awk ward young  manhood  searching for   a  voice  and
manner. Where is

   she now? What lucky man did she marry?

   But love for Miss  Wiper is an insufficient explanation for how thoroughly
I became alienated from the task. If I had been blessed with a gift for self-
knowledge, I would have clearly recognised myself to be unemployable. As
it  was, this  and many  other attempts had  to run  their  disastrous course
before I  at last  learned that I  am  good for  what  I  am good  for  and for
nothing else. It was only by an acci dent of timing that I was able to resign
from Hooker's before I got  the boot. Every Friday after work  I had to take
the mail—which   was all   contained in  a  special large  envelope—across
Martin Place to the GPO and drop it in the slot. Then I had to take another
large enve lope full of copy for the weekend's classified advertising around
the corner to the  Herald budding  and leave it  at the desk. On the  Friday
before the week I was due to leave, I paid both  these calls, hopped on the
train at Wynyard, and was off to Kogarah for the usual week end of quarrels,
movies and long, lonely  bike rides. Since we  had no telephone, I did  not
have to answer for my  latest achievement until Monday  morning, when I
got to the office and found a note on my desk from Miss  Wiper asking if  I
could come up and see her as soon as it might be convenient.

   Pausing only to comb my hair for  half an hour, I translated myself to her
office, the first  lines of an off-hand speech already vibrant on my lips. She
forestalled me with the information that it was L.J.H.—meaning Mr Hooker
himself—who was request ing my presence. I had barely time to die the first
nine hundred of a thousand deaths before I was in the great man's office and
face to face with him  across a desk which I at first thought was tapered at
the sides, until I  realised it  was so big  that my stunned vision  was being

125
struck by  the perspective. There was  nothing on  top of  the  desk except
L.J.H.'s folded  hands and two  empty enve lopes. 'The famous Mr  James,
isn't it?'  enquired L.J.H. This  was the time  to tell  him  that I  was not the
famous Mr James at ad, but was in fact Group Captain the Baron Waldemar
Incognito  of   the  Moldavian  Secret  Service  on  a  sensitive  diplomatic
mission which,  alas,  demanded that I  should  leave immediately  by  the
nearest win dow. Unfortunately the words would not come, partly  because
my tongue had  spot-welded itself  to the  roof of  my  mouth.  'Luckily  the
GPO and the Herald both  got on  to us while  there was still  time,'  L.J.H.
reassured me. 'A  pity,  in  one  way.  You realise  our  weekend classified
advertising involves several hundred thousand pounds' worth of business. It
would  have  been the  biggest  mistake  any  office  boy   had  ever made
anywhere in the world. You  would have been in Ripley.' By  Ripley L.J.H.
meant a newspaper feature called Believe It or  Not, in  which  the readers
were asked to marvel at such phenomena as a man who had cut down a gum
tree with  his teeth, or  an office  boy  who had  put half  a million   pounds'
worth of classi fied advertisements through the wrong hole.

   L.J.H. stood up. He looked very large. He also, I was pathetically relieved
to note, looked very kind.  He had his hand stuck out. At first  I  thought he
was inviting   me  to  read  his  palm,  but  then I   rea lised he was  saying
goodbye. 'Something tells me that we'll be hear ing more from you one day.
Perhaps in some  other line   of  work.  You're  going  to  the University,  I
believe.' It was a statement, not a question, but it gave me a chance to say
something.  'Nyengh.'  L.J.H.   generously  chose  to   ignore  this   further
evidence that he was  dealing with  a Venusian, just  as he had  chosen to
ignore the distilled  water dripping  from  my  hand. 'It's a good  life.  You'll
find yourself there.' I  was on my way out, going  backwards. The oak door
was shut. I was alone with Miss Wiper. Silently she offered me a Mintie.

    

    

    

   LET US REJOICE, THEREFORE

126
    

    

    

    

    

    

    

   FRESHERS  AND   FRESHETTES   arrived  at the university  a week  before
full  term in  order to be inducted  into  the academic life  by  means of lectures,
displays,  film    shows   and  theatrical   events.   The  period   was   known   as
Orientation  Week,  a tide  which  confused  me, since  I  failed  to see why  the
Far East should  be involved.   The university   motto  was  Sidere mens eadem
mutato, which  loosely  translated  means 'Sydney University   is  ready Oxford
or Cambridge   laterady  displaced  approxi mately  12,000  miles.'   In  fact  the
differences  were  enormous.   For  one  thing,   there  were  few  colleges:   the
overwhelming   majority   of  students  arrived  in  the  morning  and  left  in  the
evening. In  the  Arts  course you  could  read several  subjects, rather  like  the
American  sys tem. The  way  to  pass exams  was  to reproduce   the lectures.
Personal supervision—the   heart of  the Oxbridge   system—scarcely  existed.
There was  a Union  for  debates and a  certain amount  of  strained  singing  in
which   Gaudeamus   igitur    featured   prominendy,   but   on   the   whole   the
emphasis  was  on  pushing  forward    to  get  one's  degree.  With   careers as
lawyers  or  upper-echelon  school-teachers  in  mind,  the  Arts  students  were
even more  dedicated  to  exam passing  than  anyone  else. There  was  a day
shift  and  a  night  shift,   both  toiling    away  nervelessly   towards  their   nine
passes. It took  some  of them  the  maximum  allowable   nine  years, but  they
all  got   there.   Nobody   who   wanted   to   pass  ever  failed,   not   even   the
beautiful,  elegantly  groomed,  ineffably  dumb  girls  from  Frensham who  had
been sent along  to  acquire  some elementary   culture  before  resuming  their
inexorable  progress towards marriage  with  a grazier.  Any  real originality   of
mind  or   behaviour   was  confined   to  the  astrophys ics  department  or   the

127
medical school, which both ranked high  in world  standing. The huge Arts
faculty  placed  as  little    emphasis on   the  human  imagination  as  was
consistent with the study of its products.

   Even   for   Australia,   the  late   1950s  were   an  unusually   apolitical,
conformist period. Nevertheless a certain amount of eccentric ity took place.
There  were  about  two   dozen  illuminati    who   domi nated the  student
newspaper honi soit, edited and contributed to the magazines Hermes and
Ama, and produced,  directed and  acted in  plays  put  on by  SUDS  (the
Dramatic Society) and Players (the other dramatic society). Making a career
out of failing   first year Arts  on an annual basis, this coherent little  group
were hard to  miss dur ing Orientation Week,  since they were  continually
trotting  up and  down Science Road  in  order to  take  turns manning  the
publicity booths relating to  their various activities. The booth for  honi soit
was called the Flying Saucer, since it was a circular plywood creation with
a pointed roof. It was only  about six feet in diameter but at the moment of
my arrival it  was crammed with these exotic creatures, the like of which  I
had never seen. Nor, I think,  had they seen any thing quite like me. I  had
turned up in my school blazer, but in order to indicate that 1 was a man of
parts I had pinned my Pres byterian Fellowship badge to the lapel, alongside
the Boys' Brigade  badge in my  buttonhole. A  brown  briefcase contained
sandwiches. My haircut looked like an aircraft carrier for flies.

   But at worst  they were seeing an extreme example of a known type, the
clueless fresher. I, on the other hand, was seeing some thing I could not even
compare with  other examples of  itself.  I  hadn't known  that people were
allowed to look  like  this. The  women had long, stringy  black hair,  heavy
eye make-up,  and smoked cigarettes  no  hands. The men  smoked  their
cigarettes in long holders. They  affected flannel shirts,  corduroy trousers,
and the kind of long-nosed desert boots which I was subsequendy informed
were caded brothel creepers. During this first encounter I could see nothing
of these peo ple below waist  level, since only  their  upper works  showed
above the counter of the Flying Saucer. But their tighdy packed heads, arms
and torsos were sufncientiy extraterrestrial to leave me numb with awe. 'My
God,' cried the  shortest of the men, 'it's  a Christian!  Come and work  for
honi soit.  We  need a  broad spectrum  of  opinion.  You  could offset  the
influence of Wanda here. She's a witch.'

128
   The girl  referred to as Wanda coughed her assent, projecting a small puff
of ash. 'My  name is Spencer,' said the same short man again. He had jug
ears, horn-rimmed glasses and a crew cut. 'Sign here and report for duty at
the  office  tomorrow   morning.  It's   around  that  corner.  A   sort  of  hut
arrangement in Early Permanent Tempo rary. Here is a sample copy of the
paper. Those badges are distorting the shape of what would be a perfectly
good jacket, if it were a differ ent colour and cut.'

   Threading my way in  a daze through the other booths, a good quarter of
which were magically staffed by the same raggle-taggle team I had just met
in the Flying  Saucer, I entered the Union build ing, mechanically bought a
tie dotted with  the University  crest, and sat down  in the  reading room to
look at  my sample copy of  honi  soit. Half  of  it  seemed to be written  by
Spencer. There was a short story by him of  which I  could make little  and
some poems of which I could make even less. One of the poems was about
Rimbaud's cigar. Who was Rimbaud? Yet in  another way I  saw the point
instantly. The  vividness  of  the  language was extraordinary. Even  when
crammed  into   meticulously  symmetrical   verse  forms   every  sentence
sounded like speech. I can't  say that my  future course was set there and
then, but neither can I say that  it wasn't. I  was so excited that my  badges
ratded. There were sparks coming off my lapel.

   Later that day  I attended the Sex Lecture and laughed know ingly along
with all  the other nervous virgins.  I joined  both Film  Group and the Film
Society, though I had no idea how they differed. I joined almost everything.
I wondered where I could  buy a pair of  brothel creepers. Every time it all
became too much 1 retreated to my bolt-hole in the Union reading room and
looked at honi  soit again. The cartoons were amazingly good.  They were
signed 'Hug-gins.' Everybody who counted seemed to have only one name.
Every other leather chair in the reading room  was similarly  occupied by a
freshman looking,  I  was  relieved to  note,  not  much more  at  ease than
myself. Indeed few could smoke as confidendy as I, although everyone was
trying. It was like a bush fire in there.

   I  headed  for  home  bamboozled with   smoke and  strange,  unfo cused
dreams. At tea I  blew smoke into  my mother's face and explained that at
University  one was  expected to  join  in  a wide  range  of  extracurricular

129
activities in  order to  broaden one's outlook.  I  sketched reassuring verbal
pictures of how I  would  explore caves with the Speleological Society and
jump  with  the  Parachute Club.  My   mother  doubdess had the  look   of
someone whose troubles are only just beginning, but my mouth was too far
open for my eyes to notice anything.

   Next day I turned up at the honi soit office bright and early, several times
tripping adroirly on the short flight  of steps. I was wearing my new brothel
creepers, bought on the way up the hill  from  Central Station. My  old  ox-
blood  quilt-tops  were in   my  briefcase. I  had  cho sen a pair  of  brothel
creepers with very long  toes. They must have looked,  to the independent
observer, rather like the footwear of a peculiarly unsubtle clown. Certainly
it was hard to climb stairs in them without turning sideway, so my arrival in
the office proper was somewhat crab-like. The Flying Saucer crew were all
in there, plus a few  more 1 was seeing for  the first time.  Wanda was still
smoking no hands. Spencer was sitting at a typewriter. A tall man looking
like an  illustration  of a kindly   young history  master in an English  public
school was standing beside him.

   'Good  morning,'  said Spencer without  ceasing to  type.  'This  is  Keith
Cameron.' The  tali  man said,  'How  do  you  do.  Sandwich?' 'You  aren't
expected to take one/ said Spencer. 'Cameron is merely being polite. Wanda
you already know. The man in the suit is  John Bottomley.' Bottomley was
conservatively tailored for  the year 1908. He  wore spats. The man in  the
other suit is  Jim Howie.'  Howie was  dressed and groomed for the grouse
moors. 'Wanda will show you how to edit copy. Meanwhile Cameron and I
will  get on with  this diverting lampoon for  the next issue. On behalf of us
all Howie and Bottomley are hatching a plot to unseat the editor, who is an
idiot. For a blessing he is not present. A no confidence motion  concern ing
the editorship will  be put at  a special meeting in the Wallace Theatre this
afternoon at three o'clock. Here is Maurice Grogan.'

   Grogan swung into  the office  by  one hand, which  was reverse-gripped
around the upper door-frame. He  wore nothing on  his superbly  muscular
body except a Speedo the size of a G-string, a pair of  the kind  of sandals
known as Hong Kong  thongs, and a beard. He jumped  up on a desk and
crouched, gibbering and snicker ing. Nobody seemed to notice. I sedulously

130
copied everybody else's indifference while Wanda showed me how to sub-
edit the  readers' letters. To  do this  she had  to use  her hands—my  first
evidence that they were not paralysed. When she pointed things out she did
not always point to the right  place because her eyes were screwed up. Ash
fell from  her cigarette, which she allowed to grow remarkably short during
the course of her lesson. 1 was afraid her face would catch fire. Meanwhile
the conspirators conspired and the creators created, both colloquies being
punctuated by low growls and high-pitched  squeals from Grogan. As they
worked, Cameron and Spen cer kept up an exchange of allusive wit that I
found  at   once  daunting   and  exhilarating.   Spencer  called  something
Firbankian. Who, what or where was Firbankian? I was lost, yet not in  the
usual way of feel ing that I ought to  be somewhere else. Somehow I knew
that I was in exactly the right spot.

   'Shall we  lunch at Manning  or the  Forest Lodge?' asked Spen cer. 'Let's
remember,' said Cameron, 'the  importance  of  remaining  sober.' 'Not  as
important as having a drink,' said Bottomley. 'And  besides, we'll never get
the fool out  anyway. A gesture is the most we can hope to  achieve.' With
me attached, the whole caravan moved across Parramatta Road, up a flight
of steps, and along the street to a pub called the Forest Lodge, which during
opening hours  was the  daytime headquarters of  the  artistic  set. We  all
trooped through the back gate whde Grogan swarmed over the wall. Again
nobody took  any notice.  I  was later  to learn  that Grogan was  Spencer's
steady date. Spencer was bisexual but least unhappy with Grogan. The same
applied to Grogan  vis-d-vis Spencer. For a long  time  I  was incapable of
grasping any of these facts, being under the impres sion that homosexuality
was some kind of rare disease. I am glad to say that incomprehension gave
way   to   tolerance  without    any   inter vening  period   of    bigotry.   But
enlightenment lay far in the future, and for the time being I was as innocent
as Queen Victoria when young.

   As in  all  Australian pubs at the time,  the beer came in two kinds,  New
and Old. New  was made yesterday and Old  was made the day  before. I
asked for a schooner of New, manfully not betraying the fact that it was the
second drink of my life. It  differed from  the first drink in  that I was able to
sip it without  gagging. It  still  tasted like camel's pee. I closed my eyes so
that nobody would notice they were crossed. But my ears were functioning

131
perfecdy. They had never had so much to listen to. The brain between them
could process only the odd scrap of the information  that was streaming in
through the aural receptors. I had never heard such conversation. What kind
of car, I wondered, was a Ford Madox Ford? What sort of  conflict  was an
Evelyn War? At the mention of  Decline and Fall,  I  advanced the name of
Gibbon. Cameron gently explained that the book in question was written by
the aforesaid War, spelt Waugh. Had I not read anything by him? Who was
my idea of a good modern novel ist? I said Nicholas Monsarrat. There were
snorts all round at this. All  present snorted audibly. Wanda snorted visibly.
Spencer cast his eyes to the sky. But Cameron saved my face by insisting
that there were good reasons for admiring Monsarrat, especially in his less
famous works such as HMS Marlborough Will Enter Harbour. I would find,
however, Cameron assured me, that Waugh's early nov els were unbeatable
for  comic invention.  'How  can you  talk  about Waugh when  I'm  reading
Firbank?' Spencer asked a cloud. 'Here's Huggins.'

   Through the gate walked the most artistic-looking young man 1 had ever
seen in my two  days' experience of artistic  young men.  I Ic  was all  pale
suede and corduroy. The ends of a loose! y knit scarf dangled almost to the
ground. He had a folio  under his arm. Sur rounding a face so handsome it
was like  a cartoon, his hair  was blond  and abundant. He was smoking a
cigarette about two feet long.  Within  seconds he was seated, sipping at a
beer glass held in one hand while he sketched with the other. He did a group
sketch of everybody present. 1 was staggered—by the speed of his hand, by
the quality of  what it  produced, and by the fact that I  was included in the
result, which I was allowed to keep. That night I  pasted it on to my wall at
home, airily  explaining  to my  mother that  it  was the work  of  my  friend
Huggins, whom 1  knew quite  well,  since he was a close acquaintance of
mine, and had in fact sat beside me during the vitally important meeting in
which  the editor  of  honi  soit had  retained his  position only  by  a  hair's
breadth. Actually, I now rea lise, any condemnation emanating from my new
acquaintances had the effect of vociferous advocacy, just as anything they
favoured was  automatically doomed.  Spencer's speech had clinched the
issue. He   mentioned  Cocteau, Kleist   and  Lord   Alfred   Douglas.  The
chairman imposed a gag and put the motion to  a vote. It  was lost by  560
votes to eight. I was one of the eight.

132
   From that day my university career proceeded on two separate paths, one
of  them curricular  and  the other  not. In  my  new  desert boots, but  still
retaining my  Fellowship  badge, I  attended lectures in my  four  first-year
subjects, English I,  Modern History  I,  Psychology I  and Anthropology  I.
One among hundreds, I sat taking elaborate notes. I see no reason to mock
myself in retrospect for so slavishly writing  everything down:  nearly all of
it was news to  me, and some of it  was to  prove permanentiy useful. The
lectures on phonetics, for example, were a painless way for a writer to pick
up essential knowl edge about what sounds really rhyme  even when they
look as if  they don't, and what sounds really  don't rhyme even when they
look as if they do. Twenty years later I am still  drawing on that knowledge
every day. Nor was  I in  any position  to scorn elementary lectures on the
time-shift in  A Passage to India, since I  was not yet  fully  divested of the
impression  that  E.  M.   Forster's  principal   creation  had   been Horatio
Hornblower. As  for A  Portrait  of  the Artist  as  a Young Man, I   certainly
needed help  there, having  been  only  dimly   aware  that  Ireland  was  a
Catholic country.

   Modern  History  helped to  make me less clueless on  such points. The
English component of the History course was occupied mainly with  Tudor
constitutional documents. To the suitably  unprepared student it could  not
have been duller. But  the  European side of  things introduced  me to  the
Anabaptists, the Medici, the  Habsburgs and a charming group of bankers
called  the  Fuggers.  Even  here,  though,  I   had  trouble  establishing  a
perspective. What had been so wonderful about the Renaissance? Why had
Burckhardt bothered even to the extent of  being wrong  about it?  But my
pen raced on, unhampered by the mind's doubts. I didn't even know enough
to know that what  I now  knew meant nothing without  the knowledge that
was meant to go around it.

   Anthropology lectures were full of references to Evans-Pritchard,

   RadclifTe-Brown  and  Margaret  Mead.  The  set  books had  titles  like
Growing Up  in  New Guinea,  Structure and Function  in  Primitive  Pago-
Pago and Having It Off in  Hawaii Every  time evolution got a men tion, the
girls in  the audience who belonged to Sancta Sophia college would put  a
conscience-saving mark  at   the  top  of   the  page  and  dis creetly cross

133
themselves. Since they  ran  to   angora twin-sets,  this  last  move  would
involve a gentle but tangible-looking  self-inflicted  pres sure on their cosily
enclosed bosoms, which in several cases were of notable size and shape.
Watching one  especially pretty  Catholic  girl   called Noelecn  Syms  thus
delicately caressing her own breasts, I sucked so thoughtfully  on my  biro
that I was favoured with a sud den, solid mouthfull of black ink. For the next
week I had lips like a silent movie star and teeth like the Mikado.

   Psychology was taught by a faculty composed exclusively of mech anists,
behaviourists and logical positivists. They would have made Pavlov sound
like a mystic had he been foolish enough to show up. He must have heard
about how boring  they were, since he  never appeared, but it was not  for
want of having his name invoked. The whole faculty salivated en masse at
the mere mention of him. As  so often happens, dogmatic contempt for the
very idea of  the  human soul was  accompanied by limitless  belief  in the
quantifiability  of  human personality. On the  one hand we were  informed
that there was no ghost in the machine. On the other we were taught how to
administer tests which would measure whether children were well adjusted.
But quite a lot of  solid information  was embedded in the pulp. Since there
was nothing I did  not write  down and memorise, the real information was
still  there years later, when all  the theo retical blubber surrounding it  had
rotted away. A synapse, after all, remains a synapse, even after some clod
has tried to  convince you  that Michelangelo's talent  can be explained  in
terms of the num ber and intensity of electrical impulses travelling across it.
Or do I mean a ganglion?

   Thus I applied myself. At that time a genuinely important man,

   Professor John Anderson, was head of the Philosophy  Faculty and still
delivering his famous lectures on logic to  first year classes, but typically I
had faded  to set  my  name down  for  the  only  subject  that might   have
stimulated a mental  component more intricate  than mere  memory. As  it
was, I did not sustain the full impact of Ander son's realism until some years
later. For   the  time  being  it   was taxing   enough to   absorb elementary
information about palatal fricatives, gametes, Dyak kinship patterns and the
theological significance of Zwingli.  Walled in behind a stack of books with
tides like We of the Wee-Wee and Dropping Your Lunch in the Desert, I sat

134
at the back of  the Wallace theatre with a fairly  steady set of  companions.
Most of them had already graduated out of school blazers into sports coats,
but it  was plain  that  in  their case raffishness would  go  no further.  Less
square than the out-and-out exam passers, they were still not  bohemians.
They  were ex-GPS  and  lived  in  fashionable  harbour-side suburbs like
Bellevue Hill  and Rose Bay. Without exception they were on their  way to
becoming lawyers. For them,  Arts was a  couple of  easy years before the
real work started. Some of them drove  MG TCs.  Their real life  happened
away from  the university, but  they talked about it  while  they were  there.
Admiring their relax ation, I was glad to be in with them and vaguely hoped
that some of their ease would rub off on me.

   On the way to lectures, during lectures and after lectures they all watched
girls, awarding points for prettiness of face, size of chest, etc. Twenty years
later they are probably still talking the same way and doing the same things.
They were lucky  enough to get set in their  ways early. I  warmed to them
because they knew exactly what they were and liked  being it.  Their  self-
assurance, I need hardly add, was no virtue in itself, and to admire it was an
admission of inad equacy on my part. Doubtiess I would have warmed to the
Wajfen SS for the same reason. Luckily the group in question happened to
be harmless. Gtibert Bolt  was the  ringleader, mainly  through being even
less energetic than the rest of them. Leading from behind was a technique I
had not previously encountered. Somehow, without lifting a finger, he made
ordinary things amusing. He looked half asleep most of the time. Raising an
eyebrow about a millimetre was his way of advising me to calm down.

   Perhaps the Bellevue Hill   mob were  my anchor  to windward,  because
simultaneously I was becoming more and more involved with the aesthetes.
Except for the Film  Society, I  soon came to have no other extracurricular
activity. Nor did 1  last long as an active member of the Film Society. Their
screenings took place at lunch-time in the Union Hall, a highly atmospheric
nco-Gothic nightmare of a place which was unforgivably pulled down a few
years later. Everybody was there. Members of the Film  Society sat in  the
min strel gallery while the common herd  sat in the hall  proper. Before the
house lights  dimmed  an  old   78  of  Bunk  Johnson  and  George Lewis
performing 'When the Saints Go Marching  In'  was played over the public
address system. I was proud to be  among those in the gallery  but it  was

135
fated that  1  should join   the majority   below. There  were two   full-sized
35mm. projectors. We manned them with   a crew of  two,  stripped to  the
waist because of the heat. I found it hard to keep the carbon arc burning at
the  right  intensity.  When  the  picture  got   dark,  I  overdid   it  with   the
readjustment, so that the pic ture got too bright. 1 never noticed a stoppage
until the film  melted. On  the screen, Alan Ladd and Virginia Mayo  would
turn to  stone and be suddenly overwhelmed by  bubbling gravy.  A  junior
member was supposed never to be left alone in the box but in practice the
senior  crew  member  was  often   outside  in   the  gallery   palpating  his
girlfriend.

   If  1 had had help, the fourth reel of Simba would probably never have got
away from  me. The  take-up reel  fell  off  its  spindle, leaving  me a  clear
choice of shutting down the projector or else letting the film  pile up on the
floor. I chose the second course, unaware of just how much volume a reel of
film  occupies when unwound. When it was time  for the  next reel change,
my senior colleague, whose name was Pratt and who was sitting outside in
the gallery, retrieved his hand from  his girlfriend's  blouse and opened the
door to the box. He was expecting to see me and the projectors. Instead he
was confronted with a pulsing, writhing wall of  celluloid. I  was some where
inside it. It was at least half his fault. But screening Tales of Ugetsu with its
reels in  the wrong  order  was entirely  my  responsibil ity, since I  was  in
charge of film  preparation that day. I suppose I marked the reels wrongly.
Hardly anybody  noticed the difference, but  I realised that  it was  .time to
dismiss myself from the Film Soci ety and join its public.

   Anyway,  I  had started to begrudge any of  my  spare time that was  not
spent with the bohemians. The Union Revue would have been enough on its
own to win my  allegiance to their cause. By some act of folly Spencer and
Cameron had been placed in charge of the revue for that year. They called it
Flying  Saucers.  Between  them  they  wrote  all   the  scripts.  They   also
appeared in most of the songs and sketches. The decor, by Huggins, was
brilliant   when  you  could  see  it.  Spencer,  however, had  designed  the
lighting. Litde would  have been visible even if those Film Society members
who were operating  the dimmers had contrived  to stay  sober. There was
great emphasis on dry ice, so that slow billows of mist crept from the stage
into the auditorium, which gradually came to resemble a polar landscape in

136
which people had been embedded up to the neck. Ultra-violet  light  made
the actors' teeth glow green through the white fog. Instru mental music came
from  an  electronic  synthesizer  played  by  Pratt.  Vocal   music  was  by
Palestrina. There were at least two sketches about Virginia Woolf. A  third
sketch might have been about her, but was more probably about Gertrude
Stein. Grogan played Alice B. Toklas, or it could have been Vita SackvUle-
West. Wanda was either in the cast or kept crossing the stage for some other
reason. Bottom-ley  and  Howie,  sharing  the one  pair  of  large  trousers,
purported to be  a mutation.  They mouthed abstract dialogue, partly  as a
forecast of how language might deteriorate in the aftermath of an atomic

   war, partly in deference to the fact that nobody had got around to actually
writing  the sketch. A  tall,  beautiful  girl  called  Penelope White came on
wearing a gown composed of shaving mirrors.  She announced, in a voice
like a chain saw hitting granite, that her song had not been written yet, but
that Spencer had asked her to recite a poem. She recited it. 1 subsequently
learned that it was by John Crowe Ransom. During her recitative, Spencer
stood on one leg in the background, softly tapping a gong.

   Interval was longer than the first  half, which  in turn was longer than the
second half, although it was hard to tell when that was over. The audience,
except for myself and my companion, had left long before. My  companion
was a  girl  from  Kogarah  Presbyterian Church  Fellowship  called Robin
Warne. Afterwards I took her home to Carlton,  telling her, during the long
train trip,  that Spencer and Cameron believed in  pitching their  work  at a
level which would  force the audience either to confess itself inadequate or
else translate its prejudices into violence. I quoted Spencer to the effect that
an audi ence should be challenged, not coddled. When  Robin announced
that she hadn't understood or enjoyed a single moment of the eve ning from
start to finish, 1 countered with Spencer's favourite word: 'Precisely.'

   She burst out laughing when I tried to kiss her and didn't speak to me the
following  Sunday, but I  didn't notice. I  was too  busy plan ning that year's
Kogarah Fellowship revue, which I  called Unidenti fied Flying Objects. As
producer and director I appointed myself sole script writer and cast myself
in every sketch. Lacking adequate sup plies of dry ice, I set fire to some rags
in a plastic  bucket. Graham Truscott, decorated with a joke moustache of

137
his own devising, was in charge of sound, which consisted of a jewel from
my  recently   begun  modern  jazz   collection—an   EP  record   featuring
Maynard Ferguson and Clark Terry engaged in a  long attempt to damage
each other's hearing. 1 had tested this particular disc a few hun dred times on
my mother and could vouch for its challenging effect.

   As   the  trumpeters  interminably   wailed  and  shrieked,  I   improvised
monologues in which such names as Ford Madox Ford and Ronald Firbank
figured prominently. The audience stormed the exits.

   That same week, the Fellowship  newspaper, of which  I was editor  and
leading contributor,  was  largely  devoted to  a  long  article  extol ling the
virtues of atheism. I had cribbed this almost word for word from the preface
to Androcles and the Lion,  one of  the set books for  English  I. Shaw had
enchanted me with his  rationalist blarney.  It  was fitting  that  my shallow
faith  should  have  been  uprooted  by  a  toy   shovel.  The  Reverend C.
Cummings Campbed asked me along for afternoon tea at the Manse. Still
coughing from his evening at the one and only performance of Unidentified
Flying Objects (handi capped by a pair of lungs which had been poisoned at
Ypres, he had been among  the last to  fight  his  way  out of  the  hall)  he
nevertheless managed  to   contain  his   anger.  Instead  of   booting   me
immediately into the street, he began by gently suggesting that I might care
to off-load some of my more onerous responsibilities, such as the edi torship
of the Fedowship newspaper, until I had worked out of my system what was
plainly  'the influence  of  that  man Anderson.' As  usual  I  was careful  to
resign a split second before being fired.  I told  him  that I did  indeed need
time to think, and that perhaps it would be better if  for the nonce I were to
absent myself altogether. He heaved what would have been a sigh of relief
if  it   had not  turned  into   a coughing  fit.   My   last  vision  of  ad  things
Presbyterian was of the piece of sponge cake—it had pink icing—which  I
had parked uneaten on the edge of my saucer.

   Showing my  usual capacity to  walk away  without  a qualm, I  left  it  all
behind upon the instant: the bugles and the drums, the vaulting horse and
the oak  pews, Christine Badantine's eyes like   a pleading fawn  and  Mrs
Pike's voice like a strangled fowl. I had no doubts that I was through with it
all for ever. My cocksureness must have been terrible to behold. Night after

138
night I reduced my mother to  tears with my intedectual arrogance. Copied
sedulously from Spencer, but potentiated by an insensidvity that was all my
own, my  foren sic style was as intransigent as Vyshinsky's. Ferociously  I
attacked my mother's lingering, atavistic determination to go on believing in
something. If she didn't believe in anything specific, I insisted, why couldn't
she just believe in  nothing? Triumphantly  I  refuted her arguments, never
recognising that they were true feelings and amounted to a deep intuition of
the world, which in  the long run we must see to be purposeful if we are to
live in it at all.

   I  suppose that first year at university was just about the most ridiculous
phase of my life.  It was love  again, of course, but this time  I  was in love
with all  of  them. I  copied Spencer's walk, talk  and gestures. I copied the
way he wrote. I  copied the way  Keith Cameron read: Spencer, lost in the
toils of  a fully  bisexual love life  and a chronic deficiency of  funds, hardly
ever  read  anything   except  science  fiction.   I   soon   realised  that  his
pronunciamentos on litera ture in general were based on the most evanescent
acquaintance with its individual products. But Cameron, who already had a
B.A. degree and was qualifying to begin an M.A., had an impressive pri vate
library  of modern literature.  I  devoured it  author by  author. Spencer had
told me  Four  Quartets was  the greatest thing  written  in  recent times.  I
practically  memorised it,  but  was  bewildered  to  find  that  Spencer had
switched his allegiance to Edith Sitwell.  Cameron was less capricious. His
level head was the necessary corrective to Spencer's influence. Huggins I
admired  for   grace,  ease, creative   fer tility,  and  plethora   of   beautiful
girlfriends. He was always promis ing to let me have one of them when he
had finished with her, but somehow it never came about. This was lucky in
a way,  because I  would  scarcely have  known  how  to  behave. I  had a
girlfriend of  my own, an Arts I  student called Sally Vaughan: sweet, pretty,
decent and intelligent. There was a lot  of  heavy petting going  on but she
was a Catholic, I was an idiot, and there was nowhere to take her anyway.
She lived with her parents in Mosman, across the harbour. I still went home
every night, although later and later as the year wore on, especially after I
had discovered in   myself  a  liking  for   the  effects produced  by  several
schooners of New consumed one after the other.

139
   In the Forest Lodge I drank with the Bellcvuc Hill  mob and the aesthetes.
With Spencer, Huggins, Grogan and Wanda (Cameron was a teetotaller) 1
visited my first King's Cross cafes and became acquainted with wine. There
was more of the same stuff at Loren-zinfs, a wine bar where the university
writers made contact with the intelligentsia  of the town.  Lex Banning, the
spastic poet, was often to be found there. But the place where all the half-
worlds met  was the  Royal  George Hotel,  down in  Pyrmont.  The  Royal
George was the headquarters of the Downtown Push, usually known as just
the Push. The Push was composed of several different elements. The most
prominent component was,  or were,  the Libertarians—  a university  free
thought society consisting mainly of  people who, like  the aesthetes, failed
Arts 1 on a career basis, but in this case as a form of political protest against
the state. Endorsing Pareto's analy sis of sexual guilt as a repressive social
mechanism, the  Libertarians  freely   helped  themselves to   each other's
girlfriends. They had their own folk singer, Johnny Pitts, a hair)' dwarf who
every few minutes  would flail   his guitar, launch into  a few  bars of  some
barely  com prehensible protest  song  about  working   conditions  on   an
American railroad, and fall sideways.

   The next most prominent component was the aesthetes them selves, minus
Keith Cameron but  plus some specimens who were no longer  to be seen
around university, their nine years having finally run out. Without exception
they were on  the verge  of  writ ing, painting  or composing  something so
marvellous that they did not  want to run  the risk of  injuring  it by  rational
analysis. As well as the Libertarians and the aesthetes there were small-time
gam blers, traditional jazz fans and the homosexual radio repair men who
had science fiction as a religion. A  pick-up jazz band played loudly  in the
bar. The back room had tables and chairs. If you stuck your  head through
the door of the back room you came face to face with the Push. The noise,
the smoke and the heterogeneity of physiognomy were too much to take in.
It looked like  a cartoon on which Hogarth, Daumicr and George Grosz had
all worked together simultaneously, fighting for supremacy.

   Nothing feels more like home than the place where the homeless gather. 1
was enchanted. Here was a paradise beyond the dreams of my mother or the
Kogarah Presbyterian Church Fellowship. Here was Bohemia. I had friends
here. Everyone in the Push borrowed money from everybody else. Happily

140
I joined  the circuit,   forming  a bad habit  I  was not  to conquer for  many
years. Even in the rare eve nings when Spencer or Huggins did not turn up,
there was always Bottomley to talk to and borrow from,  since this was the
place where he made contact with his fellow gamblers. One of them was six
feet six inches high and nicknamed Emu. Apart from his being perma nently
a thousand  pounds in  debt  and  in  fear  of  his  life,   there was  nothing
remarkable about Emu except his  mistress, but she was very  remarkable
indeed.

   Her name was Lilith   Talbot. About thirty  years old,  she was clas sically
beautiful, with a discreetly ogival figure and a river of auburn hair. She was
softly  spoken  and  always  elegantly   dressed—two qual ities  which   by
themselves would   have  been  enough  to   make  her   unique  in   those
surroundings. What she saw in Emu was one of the great mysteries. Some
said, crudely, that  it  was a  matter of  physiol ogy: others,  that it  was  an
attraction between opposites. I adored her, first of all from  afar, then from
progressively closer to. She was openly delighted with my naive worship of
all  these people whose every  secret she had known  for  years. She was
probably also, I now  realise, secretly delighted with  my absurdly affected
mimicry  of  Spencer. She accused me of being in  love with  him.  I  hotly
denied the charge, even though  it  was partly  true,  and counter-attacked,
greatly daring, by telling her that 1 was in love with  her, which was wholly
true. 1 tried to content myself  with the prospect of a Platonic relationship.
Not only  was she entirely  loyal  to Emu,  but Emu  had friends who  were
almost as frightening as his enemies. The world of crime started just where
the Push finished, and often the edges overlapped.

   By this  time my first  poems were coming out in honi soit. They were, of
course, the most abject pastiche, but my first appearance in print led me to
an excess of posturing beside which Nerval walk ing his lobster would have
been as inconspicuous as  the Invisible   Man.  A  symphony  in  corduroy
velvet, smoking cigarettes the length of a blow-gun, I casuady sprinted into
Manning House, spread out a dozen copies of the paper, and read myself
with  ill-concealed approval. Even  the patience of  the Bellevue  Hill  mob
was strained. They voted that I should no longer be heard on the subject of
lit erature. Since the  aesthetes grew equally  tired   of  hearing  dieir  own
opinions coming back at them, I  was left with  only  Sally to  berate during

141
the day, and Lilith   to harangue in the  -evening. They were bemused and
long-suffering   respectively.  Heinrich   Mann,   writ ing  about   Nietzsche,
remarks at one point that self-confidence often precedes achievement and is
generally strained so long as it  is  untried. No  self-confidence could have
been more strained than mine. Underneath it, needless to say, lay gurgling
indecision. The contradictions were piling up to such an altitude that it was
getting hard to  see over the top of  them. On  the one hand I  was a petty
bourgeois student, on the other  a libertarian  bohemian. Sobbing into  my
beer in the Royal George, I predicted doom for  myself in  the forthcoming
examinations. By day I  nursed my hangover and meticulously took notes,
wondering what the Push was up to. What was I missing out on?

   When the exam results came out, I was deeply shocked to find that I had
passed in both Anthropology and History, was listed in  Order of Merit  for
English—i.e., midway  between a pass and a credit—and  had secured an
outright credit in Psychology. Obvi ously the examiners had been moved to
find their  own  lectures being returned to them  in  condensed form. Apart
from Huggins, a star student in Architecture, none of the aesthetes had ever
done as wed in a lustrum as I had done in a year. I was neck and neck with
the boys from Bellevue Hill.  This made me feel guilty and alarmed. Which
was I, a conformist  or a  nonconformist? I could  feel my  own personality
coming apart  like  the original   continental plates. Getting  drunk  was no
solution, even  though my  mother  was charmingly  willing   to  accept the
consequent behaviour as evidence of fatigue brought on by too much study.
As I  codapsed in the porch at midnight,  having faden over every garbage
bin on the way down  the street, I would explain to  her that the Habsburgs
had been too much for me.  In a dressing gown with  the hall  light  behind
her, she looked down at her son, doubtless wondering what he was turning
into. I was wondering the same thing.

   Could there be such a thing as a virgin sophisticate? Had there ever been
a man  of  the  world  who  came home  every  night  to  his  mother? Fate
resolved this latter anomaly with  brutal speed. My number came up and I
found myself conscripted for National Service.

    

    

142
   BASIC TRAINING

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

   NATIONAL   SERVICE WAS  designed to turn boys into  men and make
the Yellow Peril think  twice about moving south. It was uni versally known
as Nasho—a typically  Australian  diminutive.   Once you  were in  it,  four
years went by before you were out of it: there was a three-week camp every
year, plus numerous parades. But the most brutal fact about Nasho was the
initial   77-day  period  of   basic training,   most  of   which  took   place at
Ingleburn. Each new intake of gormless youth was delivered into the hands
of regular army instructors who knew everything about licking unpromising
material into shape. When we stepped off the bus at Ingleburn,  they were
already screaming  at  us.  Screaming  sergeants and cor porals appeared
suddenly out of huts. I  stood clutching my  Globite suitcase and wondered
what  had gone  wrong  with   my  life.   While  I   goggled at  a  screaming
sergeant, I was  abruptiy  blown  sideways by  a  bellow  originating   from
somewhere behind my right  ear. Recover ing, I turned to face Ronnie the
One.

   His real name was Warrant Officer First Class Ronald McDon ald, but he
was known throughout the army as Ronnie the One.

   Responsible for battalion discipline, he had powers of life and death over
all  non-commissioned personnel  and could  even  bring  charges against
officers up to the rank of Captain. His appearance was almost inconceivably

143
unpleasant. A  pig  born looking   like  him  would  have  demanded plastic
surgery. His brass gleamed like gold and his leather like mahogany, but the
effect was  undone by his  khaki  drills,  which  despite being  ironed glass
smooth were perpetu ally soaked with sweat. Ronnie the One dripped sweat
even on a cold day. It  was not just because he was fat, although he had a
behind like an old sofa. It was because he was always screaming so hard. At
that moment he was screaming directiy at me. 'GEDYAHAH-CARD!' Later
on a translator told me that this mean 'Get your hair cut' and could generally
be taken as a friendly  greeting, especially if  you  could still   see his eyes.
When Ronnie was really annoyed his face swelled up and turned purple like
the rear end of an amorous baboon.

   For the next eleven weeks I was running flat out, but no mat ter how fast
my feet moved, my mind  was moving even faster. It was instandy plain to
me that only cunning could ensure survival. Among the university students
in  our  intake, Wokka  Clark   was undoubtedly  the  golden boy.  Already
amateur middleweight cham pion of NSW, he was gorgeous to behold. But
he couldn't take the bullshit. What happened to him was like a chapter out
of From Here to  Eternity. They applauded him in  the boxing ring  at night
and screamed at him  all  day. That summer  the noon temperature was a
hundred plus. Ronnie the One would take Wokka out on the parade ground
and drill him till  he dropped. The reason Wokka dropped before Ronnie did
was simple. All  Ronnie had on his head was a cap. Wokka had on a steel
helmet. The pack on his back was full of bricks. After  a few weeks of that,
plus guard duty every night that he wasn't boxing, even Wokka was obeying
orders.

   You  couldn't  fight   them. Even  the  conscientious objectors  ended up
looking after the regimental mascot—a bulldog called Onslow who looked
like Ronnie's handsome younger brother. It was like one of Kenny Mears's
games of marbles: nobody was adowed not to play. I could  appreciate the
psychology of it.  The  first task  when training  new recruits is  to disabuse
them of the notion that life  is  fair. Otherwise they will  stand roofed to the
spot when they first come up against people who are trying to kid them. But
my abstract understanding of what was going on impinged only tangentially
on the concrete problem of getting through the day without landing myself

144
in the kind of  trouble that would  make the next day even more impossibly
difficult  than it was going to be anyway.

   Something about my general appearance annoyed Ronnie. There were a
thousand trainees in the intake but I was among the select handful of those
whose aspect he couldn't abide. I could be stand ing in a mess queue, Ronnie
would be a  dot in  the distance, and suddenly his voice  would arrive  like
incoming artidery.  'GEDDA-BIGGAHAD!'    He meant that  I  should get a
bigger hat. He didn't like the way  it sat on top of my  head. Perhaps he just
didn't like my head, and wanted the whole thing covered up. The drill that I
had learned in  Boys'  Brigade  saved my  life.   When it   came to  square-
bashing, it   turned out   that  the years  I  had  spent  interpreting  Cap tain
Andrews's commands had given me a useful insight into what Ronnie was
likely  to mean by  his shouts and screams. When Ron nie yeded 'ABARD
HARGH!' I  knew almost straight away that it must mean 'about turn.' Thus I
was able to turn decisively with the many, instead of dithering with the few.

   On  the parade ground  Peebles drew most  of  the  lightning.  So  unco-
ordinated that he was to all intents and purposes a spastic, Peebles should
not have been passed medically fit. But since he had been, the Army  was
stuck with him.  After  a month of train ing, when Ronnie shouted 'ABARD
HARGH!'   999 soldiers  would  smartly  present  their  backs and  Peebles
would be writhing   on the ground,  strangled by the sling  of  his rifle.  For
Peebles the day  of   reckoning  came when  he  obeyed  an  order  to  fix
bayonets. This was one of Ronnie's most frightening orders. It had the verb
at the end, as in German or Latin. In English the order would have sounded
something like:  'Bayonets ...  fix!'   Bellowed  by  Ronnie, it  came  out as:
'BAHAYONED   ... FEE!'  The last  word was  delivered as a high-pitched,
almost supersonic, scream. It was succeeded on this occa sion by another
scream, since Pccblc's bayonet, instead of appearing at the end of his rifle,
was to be seen protruding from the back of the soldier standing in front of
him. After that, they used to mark Pee bles present at company parade every
morning but lose him behind a tree on the way to battalion parade, where he
was marked absent.

   My  kit, not my  drill,  was what got me into trouble. For once in my life  I
had to  make my  own  bed every  morning, without   fail,  and lay  out  for

145
inspection my neatly polished and folded belongings. Since the penalty for
not doing this properly was to have the whole lot thrown on the floor and be
obliged to  start  again, I   gradually got  better  at it,   but  I  never became
brilliant. National  Servicemen had to wax and polish their webbing instead
of just powdering it with bianco. It was a long process which bored me, and
the same fingers which had been so tacky at woodwork were still likely  to
gum up the job. The problem became acute when it was my platoon's turn
to mount guard. Throughout the entire twenty-four hours it was on duty, the
guard was inspected, supervised, harassed and haunted by Ronnie the One.
The initial   inspection  of  kit,  dress and  rifle  lasted  a  full  hour.  Ronnie
snorted at my  brass, retched at  my  webbing, and  turned puce  when he
looked down the barrel  of my  rifle.  THASS-NODDAGHARDRIVAL!'    he
yelled. He meant that it was not a guard rifle.  'ISSFULLAPADAYDAHS!'
He meant that it was full of  potatoes. I looked down the barrel. I had spent
half a day pulling  it through until  it glowed  like El  Dorado's gullet. Now I
saw that a single speck of grit had crept into it.

   In the guard-house we had to scrub the floors and tables, white wash the
walls and polish  the undersides of the  drawing pins on  the notice board.
When we went out  on picket  we could not  afford to  relax for  a moment,
since Ronnie could be somewhere in the vicin ity preparing to do his famous
Banzai charge. At two o'clock in  the morning I  was guarding the transport
park. It was raining.  Sitting down  in the sentry box, I  had the brim of  my
hat unbuttoned and was hanging from the collar of my groundsheet, praying
for death. I had my rifle inside my groundsheet with me, so that I could fold
my hands on its muzzle, lean my chin on the cushion formed by my hands
under the cape, and gendy nod off while still looking reason ably alert. I had
calculated that Ronnie would not come out in the rain. This proved to be a
bad guess. I thought the sentry box had been struck by lightning, but it was
merely Ronnie's face going off like a purple grenade about a foot in front of
mine. I came to atten tion as if electrocuted and tried to shoulder arms. Since
the rifle was still  inside my groundsheet, merely to attempt this manoeuvre
was bound to yield  Peebles-like results. Ronnie informed  me, in  a tirade
which  sounded and felt   like  an  atomic  attack, that  he  had never  seen
anything like it in his life.

146
   The inevitable consequence was extra kitchen duty. I can safely say that I
did more of  this than anybody else in the battalion.  Whde everybody else
was out in the donga learning to disguise themselves as ant-hills and sneak
up on the  enemy, I was  in the  kitchen heading a  crack team of  cleaners
composed of no-hopers like Peebles. The kitchen was as big as an aircraft
hangar. All  the utensils were  on an  enormous scale. The smallest dixies
would be four  feet  long, two  feet across and three feet deep. Lined  with
congealed custard and rhubarb, they took half an hour each to clean. The
biggest dixie was the size of a Bessemer converter and mounted on gimbals.
I was lowered into it on a rope. When I hit  the bottom it rang like a tem ple
gong. After the kitchen sergeant was satisfied that the dixie was shining like
silver he pulled a crank and I was tipped out, smoth ered in mashed potato.

   It  must have been while I  was inside the dixie  that I  missed out on the
chance to volunteer for Infantry. That was how I found myself

   in  the  Assault  Pioneers—the one  specialist course  that  nobody sane
wanted to be on, since it involved land mines, booby traps and deto nators.
In the long  run the lethality  of  the subject proved to  be a boon. National
Service was winding to an end by that stage—ours was to be the last intake
—and the government didn't  want any mother's sons getting killed  at  the
eleventh hour. So instead of  bury ing mines for us  to dig  up, they  buried
rocks. While our  back were turned, they would bury  a hundred rocks in a
careful pattern. We would move through the area, probing the earth with our
bayonets, and dig up two hundred. It wasn't as glamorous as being in, say,
the mortar   platoon,  but  I  came  to  appreciate the  lack   of  excitement,
especially  after  we  were  all   marched  out  to  the  range  and  given   a
demonstration of what the mortar specialists had learned.

   The mortars in question were the full  three inches across the barrel—not
the two-inch  pipes  that  had little   more  than nuisance value,  but  really
effective weapons which  could  throw  a bomb  over a  mountain and  kill
everything within  a wide radius  at the point of  impact. A  thousand of us,
including the  colonel and all  his officers,  sat around the rim  of  a natural
amphitheatre whde  the  mortar  teams  fired  their   weapons. All   looked
downwards at the mortars with fas cination, except for Ronnie the One, who
was down with the mor tars looking upwards, tirelessly searching for anyone

147
with  too small  a hat.  Team after team  loaded and fired.  The bomb  was
dropped into the mortar and immediately departed towards the stratosphere,
where it  could  be  heard—and even,  momentardy, seen—before it  died
towards its target, which  was a large cross on a nearby hill.  You  saw the
blast, then you heard the sound. It was a bit like watching Ronnie having a
heart attack on the horizon.

   Every team did its  job perfectly  until the last. The last team was Wokka
Clark and Peebles. They had to do something with Peebles. If they had put
him in the Pioneers he probably would have bitten the detonator instead of
the fuse. It went without saying that he could not be allowed to drive a truck
or fire a Vickers machine gun, espe daily after the way he had distinguished
himself on the  day every one in the battalion had had to throw  a grenade.
(One at a  time we  entered the throwing  pit.  The sergeant handed you a
grenade, from which  you  removed the pin.  You then  threw the  grenade.
When he handed Peebles a grenade, Peebles removed the pin and handed
the grenade back to him.) The safest thing to do with Peebles was team him
up with Wokka, who  was so strong that he could throw the base plate of a
three-inch mortar twenty yards. All Peebles had to do was wait until Wokka
had done the calibrations and then drop in the bomb. He must have done it
successfully scores of times in practice. He did it  quite smoothly this time
too, except that the bomb went in upside down.

   If  you  were to rig  a  vacuum cleaner to blow  instead of  suck and then
point it  at a pde of dust, you would  get some idea of what those thousand
supposedly disciplined men did a split second after they noticed the bomb
going into the  mortar with  its fins  sticking up  instead of down. They  just
melted away. Some tried  to  dig  them selves into the earth. Some started
climbing trees. But most of  us ran. I  was running flat out  when an officer
went past me at head height, flapping his arms like a swan. Ronnie stopped
the panic by shouting 'HARD!,'  meaning 'halt.' The noise could have been
the bomb going off, but since it was unaccompanied by shrapnel it seemed
safe to pay attention. Everyone turned and looked down. Ronnie picked up
the whole mortar, base plate included, shook out the bomb and handed it to
Peebles. Silence. Wokka still had his hands over his eyes. Peebles dropped
the bomb in the right way up. The mortar coughed. There was a crackle in

148
the sky and a blast on the  hill.  Then we ad marched thoughtfully  back to
camp.

   By  now I  had made a  career out of  being a private.  Having  made the
mistake of supplying all  the right  answers in the intelligence test (since it
was exactly the same test that I had been studying in Psychology I, this was
no great feat) I was at first put under some pressure to become an officer, or
fading that an NCO. But it  soon became clear to all concerned that I was a
born private.  I had  revived my  joker  persona as a means of  ingratiating
myself with  my fel low conscripts. I  had no wish to lose their  approval by
being  raised   above  them.   Nor   was  I    morally   equipped  to   accept
responsibility for others. But 1 did manage to get better at being the lowest
form of life  in the army. I was a digger. I learned the tricks of looking  neat
without  expending too  much  energy. And  although it  would  have  been
heresy to say so, I actuady enjoyed weapons training. I had the eyes to be
good at  firing   the  .303  rifle,   but  not  the  hands. Yet  I  relished  being
instructed on it.  And the Bren  was such a perfect machine that there was
avid competition to specialise. I never got to  the stage of wanting to sleep
with one, but must admit  that there were times when, as I eyed the Bren's
sleek lines, I discovered in myself a strong urge to fiddle with its gas escape
regulator.

   The weapons sergeants were all regular soldiers with combat experience,
usually in Korea. There was virtue, it seemed to me, in listening when they
talked. They were wise  in their  craft. Every  few  intakes one of them  got
shot by a National Serviceman. None of them wanted to be the one. After
surviving  a long  encounter with   half  a million   glory-hungry  Chinese it
makes no sense to be fin ished off by some adolescent pointing his rifle at
you and saying, 'Sergeant, it's stuck.' They were particularly careful when it
came to instructing us  on the Owen machine carbine. This  was the same
gun I   had once  carted around Jannali.  The  Owen cocked  itself  if   you
dropped it and shot you when you picked it up. It disgorged fat, 9mm. slugs
at a very high rate of  fire  and the barrel clawed up to the right  during the
burst. If  due precautions were not  taken, the man on  the left  of  the line
would mow  down  everyone else, including  the  instructor. The  sergeants
were very cautious about whom they put on the left, and always stood well
to the left themselves. Some of them stood so far to the left they were out of

149
sight. Without  excep tion they refused to let  Peebles fire the  thing at  all.
They parked him behind his usual tree on the way to the range and faked his
score.

   I also enjoyed drill.  Einstein once said that any man who liked marching
had been given his brain  for  nothing: just  the spinal col umn would  have
done. But I wasn't Einstein. Since most of one's time in the army is wasted
anyway, I preferred to waste it by moving about in a precise manner. It was
better than blueing my pay-packet at a pontoon game in the lavatories. As
fit  as I  would  ever be  in my  life,  I  could  fling  a  Lee-Enfield  .303 rifle
around like a baton. When I was ordered to volunteer as Right Front Marker
for the  exhibition  drdl squad, I  sensibly said yes.  Saying no would  have
immediately entaded being lowered into the big dixie,  so it was scarcely a
coura geous decision.

   The drill  squad was one of the  star items on the big  day. Visiting brass
and proud parents lined the parade ground. Dressed in white singlets, khaki
drill  trousers, gaiters and boots, ninety-nine strap ping examples of bronzed
young Australian manhood all took their  time from me. We looked like  an
erotic dream  by  Leni  Riefenstahl. Ronnie  gave  the orders  in  his  usual
mixture  of   Urdu   and  epdepsy, but  by   now   I  could   read  his  mind.
Miraculously dry-handed in the heat, I put the .303 through its paces. It was
all a matter of not worrying.  Just let the body remember. It wasn't until the
routine was over and we were marching off to a storm of applause that the
thought occurred to me: they had done it. They  had got what they wanted
out of me. But on the other hand I had got what I wanted out of them. I had
acquired my first real measure of self-sufficiency, which is something other,
and quieter, than mere self-assertion, and probably the  opposite of being
self-absorbed.

   That night the whole drill  squad was given leave. Blazing with brass and
polished green webbing,  I  got  off  the  train  in  Sydney after  sunset and
headed straight for the Royal George, marching an inch above the pavement
in my mirror-finish   boots. There was a roar of scorn as I entered the back
room. Cries  of'Fascist!' rose  from  ad sides. But  for  once I   was sure of
myself.  Nobody  looking   as unappealing  as  the  Lib ertarians was  in  a
position to sneer at the starched perfection of my

150
   KDs.  Johnny Pitts flailed  his  guitar, launched into  a few  bars of  some
barely comprehensible protest song  about American  militarism,  and  fell
sideways. Grogan, saluting wUdly, jumped up and down on  a table. Once
again he was clad in nothing but G-string Speedo and thongs. Spencer was
pretending to be dazzled by  my beauty. Everyone was in  character. It all
passed me by, because I had noticed that Emu was not present. Lilith Talbot
was unaccompanied.

   I suppose it was just my lucky  night. Emu, it transpired, was somewhere
in the Blue Mountains, hiding from  some people who had threatened to dip
him by  the  heels in  Hen and  Chicken Bay,  a part  of the  harbour much
favoured by  grey nurse  sharks. From the  goodness of her  simple heart,
Lilith  told  me  straight away  that it   would  be a pity   if  we  did  not take
advantage of this opportunity  to complete my  basic training. But  it  could
happen only once, and there must never be a word to anyone, or my death
would fol low shortly  upon hers. Did  I understand that? Transfixed by the
shape of her mouth, I nodded dumbly. We walked out of the room together
—a sound tactic, since it looked  too intimate to  be anything but innocent.
And if  I  couldn't believe my  luck,  all those other help lessly doting males
would be doing their best not to believe my luck either.

   On the ferry  to Kirribilli    we sat on a bench in  the prow. It  was a warm
night in late summer. The breeze would have ruffled Lilith's hair if  her hair
had been less heavy. A  junk-yard  of  light,  Luna Park  spilled  ladders of
pastel across the water, the  Big  Dipper  roaring like   a wounded dragon.
Under the deck of the  Harbour Bridge, the ultra-violet  beacon that guides
the big ships through the dark sent out its cobwebs of lapis lazuli above our
heads. I made Lilith look up at it.  She let me kiss her. I didn't know  it was
allowed. I  kept expect ing a squad of MPs to  appear and place me under
arrest.

   But  there was just  us. Walking  up  the hill  was  like  being shown into
Olympus by  a resident. Everything she had on  must have weighed about
two ounces all  told.  A pale  blue cotton  dress and a pair of  grarile  high-
heeled white sandals were all that I could see. I didn't know what to do with
my hands, but somehow everything was all right. It went on being all right
when we got to her place. Really the house belonged to Emu. It was his one

151
tangible asset. Lilith had a room in it  of her own, although even here there
were signs of Emu's pre-eminence. A crate of empty beer botdes against the
wall could belong only to him. The same applied to the i61b. shot on top of
the cupboard.  In  a  previous incarnation  Emu  had  been GPS shot  putt
champion.

   Lilith  opened the curtains towards where the sun would be when it came
up. It seemed that nothing but darkness was there now. But when she turned
out the light, there was still  enough dlumination to reach her. She took her
dress off over her head and stood there while my eyes began the long task
of getting used to  seeing what before they had only  imagined. For Lilith,
her own beauty was a sufficient reason to exist. I  would like  to be able to
say that we cel ebrated her loveliness together. In fact I hardly knew what I
was doing. She was more tolerant than I was capable of realizing. I had no
idea of delay, and would not have been able to do much about it  even if I
had. It was all too exciting. What an older and wiser man would have made
last for hours was all over in seconds. I gave a spasmodic lurch and kicked
the cupboard. The shot rolled off the top of it and fell into  the crate of beer
bottles. I was too  pleased with myself to  care. Lilith  Talbot is  among my
fondest memories. And you  can stop thinking  that she's a figment  of my
imagination. Of course she is.

    

    

    

   VERY WELL  ALONE

    

    

    

    

152
    

    

    

   THE LAST  WEEK  OF basic training was spent on bivouac at Sin gleton.
The whole battalion camped out in the donga. Our company was instructed
to storm and fortify the top of a mountain. My Pio neer platoon was ordered
to dig a command post out of the virgin rock. Since there was no dynamite,
we had to do it  with  picks and shovels. After  six days the command post
was three inches deep. If the battalion had been commanded by leprechauns
it would  have been an ideal headquarters. I didn't  care. I could  still  taste
Lilith.  Periodically  there was a tremendous hullabaloo as a pair of RAAF
Sabre jets went past below us. They were pretending to strafe the infantry
who were fitfully  shooting blanks at each other down in the valley.

   Around the  campfire at night I  was the expert on sex. I  was still a long
way away from  learning that the main difference between an adult and an
adolescent is the abdity to keep secrets. I betrayed Lilith dreadfully, even to
the extent of telling them her real name. But everybody else was too drunk
to  notice.  The  mortar  platoon kept  us  in   fresh meat.  Accidentally   on
purpose they  blew  a cow  to  smithereens. One  moment it   was grazing
contentedly and the next it was spread all over the landscape. Every platoon
got a smithereen each. We roasted it over the fire and washed it down with
wine bought in  bulk from  a vineyard in  the next valley.  The wine was so
raw that it left your tongue looking like a crocodde-skin handbag.

   A fat soldier called Malouf  had stolen my position as chief joker. He sang
a hundred choruses of 'Old King Cole' and fainted into  the fire. But in  my
new role of sex expert I had enough confidence to serve out my time. It was
steep up that mountain. We slept under ground sheets rigged as pup tents. It
was advisable to pitch your  tent in close contact with  the trunk of  a stout
tree, otherwise you  could end up  as part of  an  avalanche. With my  feet
sticking out of  one end of the  tent and my head out of  the other I  looked
straight up at the stars. There were stars between the stars. The mountain air
was unmixed,  as in  Dante's Paradise: you could  see to  the edge of  the
universe. The Southern Cross was so brilliant   that it  dripped. You  could

153
have picked it out of the sky and hung it  around a young nun's neck. I had
never  felt  more  alive.   From  mdes  away  below   came  the  occasional
snapping of dry sticks and what sounded like the muffled howl of a wombat
being raped. It was Ronnie, Banzai-charging the sentries.

   Buoyant with  well-being,  I  returned to civilian  life.  Between the top of
Margaret Street and our front gate my mother came to meet me. I knew that
look, so  my  mental defence mechanisms were already going  into  action
when she told me that Gary Meldrum had been kdled the day before racing
his motorbike at Mount  Druitt.  I learned the details later on.  He had been
leading a pack of  AJS 7RS when his  telescopic front fork  codapsed on a
bend. The bike went up in  the air with  its throttle  stuck open and when it
came back down again he was lying underneath it. The chain cut his throat
and he died instantly.

   I  walked  my  mother  inside and  made her a  cup  of  tea. I  didn't  feel
anything at all  except a sense that I was fading upwards from  the past. It
was all going away from me. I could feel a vacuum pluck ing at the back of
my shirt. After  the funeral service at Kogarah Presbyterian Church 1 cried
noisily in the street but it was the kind of reflex that would have pleased the
Sydney University Psychol ogy Department, since it was unconnected with
anything going on in my head. I began to suspect that I might have nothing
in there except scar tissue, or else a couple of loose wires that should have
been touching each other but weren't.

   Being a mother's boy is a condition that can be fully cured only by saying
goodbye to mother. Nevertheless I did not entirely revert. I was soon having
my bed made for me again, but I  managed to keep something of my new-
found independence. Justifying callousness as necessary for survival, I did
pretty much what I pleased. The rest of my university course was a steadily
accelerating story of possibili ties explored and studies neglected. Lilith and
I were just  friends again, alas. On the  other hand she had spoiled me for
little girls who,  in the charming jargon of that time, did not come across. So
I left Sally  Vaughan in tears, went in search of something less compli cated,
and had my wishes granted often enough to ensure that the moment of real
involvement  in   somebody else's  life   went  on  being  put   off  into   the

154
indeterminate future, whose outline looked as hazy as ever. All that I could
be sure of was that some form of writing would play a part in it.

   I went on to become literary editor of honi soit, with a page of my own to
look  after   every  week.   Almost   invariably   I   filled   it   with   my   own
productions. Some of them were so pretentious that even today I can't recall
their tone without   emitting an  involuntary  yell  of  anguish. But a  certain
fluency accrued from the sheer exercise, and inevitably a certain notoriety
accrued along with it. There was a shimmering before my  eyes. Narcissus
was beginning the long process of getting his reflection in focus.

   The need to be approved of aided my progress, if progress it was. I never
stopped admiring the talent of Spencer and Keith Cameron, but gradually at
first,  and then  quicker  all  the  time,  my  own  activi ties took  a different
course. The desire to amuse overcame the desire to shock. By my second
year I was already writing a good propor tion of the Revue, and by my third
year 1 was writing  almost half of  it. Against  my will  but  according to my
instincts, I recognised that when 1 mimicked Spencer's mannerisms I made
no connection with the audience, and that when what I wrote was my own
idea, the audience laughed. I tried to  hold  them in contempt for  that, but
could not quite succeed. So I tried to hold myself  in contempt instead, but
could not quite succeed at that either. It was already occurring to me that in
these matters practice might be wiser than theory.

   If  only  everything had been clearer. If  I  had read Sartre at that stage I
might have learned that the obligation to create one's life from  day to day
was an inescapable responsibility. Luckily I read Camus instead. Here was
my first mature literary enthusiasm: instead of merely having my prejudices
confirmed, I was disabused of them. Camus offered consolation by telling
you that yours  was not the  only personality  which felt  as if  it  was lying
around  in   pieces—  every  life   felt   like   that   from   the  inside.   More
importantly, he offered  a moral vision  that went  beyond the self.  Tyrants
conduct mono logues above a million solitudes.' I looked at a sentence like
that until  my eyes grew  tired. It  wasn't poetry. So why  was it  so poetic?
How did he do it? And where could I buy a coat like his? I tilted my head to
the  same angle,  practised  lighting   a  Disque  Bleu   so  that  the   flame

155
atmospherically lit  the lower half  of  my face, and planned to die  in a car
crash.

   The immature enthusiasms continued along with the mature ones. I went
crazy  for   Ezra  Pound.  I   unhesitatingly  incorporated  the   manic  self-
confidence of his critical  manner into my  own prose. Since my  ignorance
far outstripped even his, I was lucky not to fall further under his spell. Once
again instinct was wiser than thought. Even when I was drunk with  awe at
the  sheer  incomprehensibility   of   the   Cantos,  I    was  simultaneously
delighting in  the clear, strong, sane talent of  MacNeice. When  I came to
read Yeats I soon saw what  real grandeur was, and realised that Pound's
grandiloquence was not it.

   The Great Gatsby helped teach me what a real prose style was like. I read
it over  and over. Even at that early  stage 1 could see that if  it  came to a
choice between Hemingway and Fitzgerald, I  would  take Fitzgerald—not
just because his cadences were more seduc tive, but because he was less
sentimental. I never let  it  come to  the choice, preferring  to admire  them
both. I  went mad on the Ameri cans generally. E. E. Cummings made me
drunk. Mencken's scepti cal high spirits  seemed to  me the very  tones of
ebullient sanity. It went without  saying that there was no question of being
interested in Australian culture as such. Nobody had given  it a thought in
the last twenty years.

   Having  finished reading  Keith  Cameron's library, I  started read ing the
university library,  which was named after someone called Fisher. In those
days Fisher Library  was housed in a building  which looked  like  the little
brother of Milan  Cathedral and formed part of the Quad. But  even when I
was wearing a groove up and down the library  stairs I was always careful
not to  read anything  on  the course.  If  the  syllabus said  Beaumont and
Fletcher, I read Mencken and Nathan. If  it  said Webster and Ford, I  read
Auden and Isherwood. Life  would have been so much simpler had I done
what I was asked that today I  never stop wondering why  I  didn't. Two or
three of the English lecturers were of  world  class. I assiduously contrived
never to learn anything about Old English. I faked my way through that part
of the course by memorising the cribs. It  was only my  ability to  conjure a
fluent essay out of  thin  air  that got me  admitted to  the third  year of  the

156
honours school. That,  and the  incidental benefit  of  reading Shakespeare
morning, noon and night. There, for once, I got the horse before the cart.

   Psychology I gave up at the end of the second year, just before it gave up
me. When it  came to statistical  analysis, I was help less. A deep spiritual
aversion to the whole subject might also have had something to do with it.
Not  even   Freud  appealed. I   could   see  the  poetic   fecundity   of   his
imagination, but as an actor in a real-life Oedipus play I felt free to question
his teleological soph istry. Undoubtedly, my father having mysteriously been
killed, I  had inherited exclusive rights to my  mother's favours. But to sug‐ 
gest that  either  of  the  two  survivors  had in   any way  desired  such an
outcome was patently ludicrous. I got through the psychology examinations
on a 'post'—i.e., a viva voce after having written a borderline paper. I would
not have been granted even the 'post' if it had not been for my clinical case
study. During the course of the year we had to assemble an elaborate case
study of some real person. My  clinical  study was little  Toni  Turrell, sexy
Shirley's sister. Five minutes into the Wechsler-Bellevue intelligence test I
realised that little Toni was a hopeless moron who would yield up the same
personality profile as a block  of wood.  So I excused her from any  further
tests and cooked up the whole  thing. It  was, if  I  may  so so, a bridiantly
convincing job. 'Toni:  A  Case Study' was my first  attempt at a full-length
fictional work. (This book is the second.)

   Anthropology  also moved to  a natural demise at the end of  the second
year. It was only a two-year subject anyway. Having absorbed the contents
of  Frigging   Around  in   Fiji   and  regurgitated  them  at  the  appropriate
moment, I was rewarded with the minimum  pass. Edu cation I, which I sat
in my  second year, I failed outright.  I can see now that this  result was an
instinctively correct estimate of  the sub ject's importance, but at the time it
fitted in with a famdiar pattern. Since my mind, or at any rate my heart, was
already on some other path, I was not as worried as I might have been about
the growing evidence that my attention was wandering from my work. But
for my  mother the whole  meandering dereliction was all  too disturb ingly
recognisable, especiady now that I was more often arriving home early the
next morning instead of late that night, and then late the next night instead
of in the early morning.

157
   Between second and  third  years I  tried  to  recoup my  position  in  the
parental eye by  getting a  job  in  the long  vacation. I  was  accepted as a
trainee bus conductor. The buses were green Leyiand diesels operating out
of Tempe depot. The easy routes went overland to places like Bexley  and
Drummoyne. The difficult   routes went  through the  city. 1  found  the job
fiercely demanding even on a short route with  a total  of about two  dozen
passengers. I pulled the wrong tickets, forgot the change, and wrote up my
log at  the end of  each trip  in a  way that  drew hollow  laughter  from the
inspectors. The inspectors were called Kcllics,  after Ned  Kelly,  and were
likely  to swoop at any time. A  conductor with  twenty years' service could
be dismissed if  a  Kelly   caught him  accepting money  without  pulling  a
ticket. If  a hurrying  passenger pressed the fare into your hand as he leapt
out of the back door, it was wise to tear a ticket and throw it out after  him.
There might be a plain-clothes Kelly following  in an unmarked car-Days of
fatigue and panic taught me all over again that I am very bad at what I am
not good at. We worked a split shift with four hours off in the middle of the
day. Effectively  this  meant that we were  on the  job twelve  hours a  day,
since there was nothing  else to  do  with  the four  hours  off  except hang
around the depot. I got so tired  I used to sleep the whole  four hours on a
bench in the billiard  room. Once I  conked out with a lighted  Rothmans in
my hand. I dreamed of a bushfire  burning down Jannali school with  Miss
Turn-bull still  inside it. I woke to face a cloud of smoke. The whole front of
my shirt  had burned away. The billiard   room was full  of  conduc tors and
drivers who had been placing  bets on when I  would  wake up. The white
nylon singlet 1 had been wearing under the shirt was scorched the colour of
strong tea.

   I  lasted about three weeks all  told, which  meant that  I hardly  got past
probation. The routes through town were more  than the mind could  stand
even in the off-peak hours. In peak hours the scene was Dantesque. Ad the
buses from our depot and every other depot would be crawling nose to tad
through town whde the entire work ing population of  Sydney fought to get
aboard. It was hot that sum mer: 1000 Fahrenheit every day. Inside the bus it
was 300 hotter still.  Hammering up Pitt Street in  the solid traffic  at about
ten miles an hour, the bus was like the Black Hole of Calcutta on wheels. It
was so jammed inside that  my  feet weren't touching  the floor.  I  couldn't
blink the sweat out of my eyes. There was no hope of collecting any fares.

158
At each stop it  was all I  could do to reach the bell-push that signaded the
driver to close the automatic doors and get going. I  had no way  of telling
whether anybody had managed to get off or on. My  one object was to get
that bus up Pitt  Street. Passengers fainted and just hung there—there was
nowhere for them to fall. The air tasted as if it had just been squirted out of
the safety valve of a pressure cooker fud of cabbage.

   In those circumstances I was scarcely to blame. I didn't even know where
we were, but  I  guessed we were at the stop  just before  Market Street. I
pressed the bed, the doors puffed closed, and the bus surged forward. There
were shouts and yells  from  down the  back, but  I  thought they were  the
angry cries of  passengers who had not got on. Too slowly  I  realised that
they were emanating from within the bus. The back set of automatic doors
had closed around an  old  lady's neck  as she was getting  on. Her  head,
wearing a black veiled hat decorated with wax fruit, was inside the bus. The
rest of her, carrying  a shopping bag with  each hand, was outside. I knew
none of  this  at  the  time.  When  I  at  last  cottoned  on to   the fact  that
something untoward was  happening and signaled  the driver  to  stop,  he
crashed to a halt and opened the automatic doors, whereupon the woman
dropped to the road. She was very nice about it. Per haps the experience had
temporarily dislocated her mind. Anyway, she apologised to me for causing
so much trouble. Unfortunately the car just behind turned out to  be full  of
Kedies. Since it would have made headlines if a university student had been
thrown off the buses for half-guillotining a woman of advanced years, I was
given the opportunity  to  leave quietly. Once again this  failed  to coincide
with my  own plans only  in the sense that I had already resigned. In fact I
had made my decision at about the same time as the old lady hit the ground.

    

    

    

    

    

159
   FIDGETY  FEET

    

    

    

    

   NOR, IN  MY LAST  YEAR,  did I prove to be any better as a stu dent than
I had been as a bus conductor. I no longer saw fit to attend any lectures at
all. But my extracurricular activities flour ished, following  the principle that
I could  be infinitely   energetic in  those areas where it  didn't  matter. The
Revue that year had my name in the programme thirty-two times. As  well
as writing  most of the  sketches, I was assistant producer to a man called
Waldo Laidlaw,  an  advertising  executive who  was  prominent  in  fringe
theatre. Spencer and Keith  Cameron  despised Waldo's stylishness but  I
couldn't help being fascinated. He ranked as the local Diag-hdev. Under his
aegis, the  Revue's costumes and  decor  took  on  an  unmistakably  self-
confident look—a  fact which  could  be easdy detected by the naked eye,
since Waldo  was in  favour  of  turning  the  lights  right  up.  Most  of  the
numbers I wrote were so embarrassing that I can't recall them even when I
try, but others had the sort of  half-success with the audience that fans the
desire to go further.

   By  now I  was writing  a good  half of  honi soit  every week. The letters
column was full of protests about things I had written. The letters of protest
were nearly all written by me. A certain kind of cheap fame accumulated, in
which I  pretended not to wallow.  More  significandy, the Sydney Morning
Herald asked me to review books. The editor was Angus Maude, who at the
time was serving out the bleak years after Suez, before returning to Britain
and resuming his climb to influence. I owe Angus Maude a great deal. The
bread of exile  must have been bitter enough without  having my cocksure
ignorance to cope with on top of it.  The first reviews I  wrote for him  were
too pig-headed to be publishable. His simplest course would have been to
forget the whole idea. But by a series of gende hints he induced me to write

160
within  the scope of what  I  knew, so that I  could turn  out a  piece which,
whde it did not fail to be dud, was at least seldom outright foolish.

   Tom Fitzgerald, editor  of a new literary-cum-political   weekly called the
Nation,  was the  next  to   pick  me  up.  He  had  already hired   Huggins.
Fitzgerald treated me with great patience. A  man of real learning, he  also
had the gusto to value keenness even when it was uninformed. In Vadim's,
the King's Cross coffee bar where he held court, I would join the table late
at night and pipe fatuous com ments from my position below  the salt. The
other, more venerable literary men present stared deep into their glasses of
Coonawarra claret or hurriedly reminisced, but Tom went on being tolerant
even after the catastrophic week when I succeeded in reviewing the same
book both for his  magazine and the Herald. The Gaggia espresso machine
hissed and gurgled.  The six-foot  blonde  waitress swayed  and swooped.
Huggins blew in with a sheaf of new drawings. This was the life. The Royal
George started seeming less attractive, espe cially when you considered that
Emu was likely  to be sitting in  it. He had a new way  of staring at me that
made me feel cold and sticky, like a very old ice-cube.

   Getting my  name in  the papers helped ease the transition from the last
year of  University   to the  first  year  of  real  life.  My   honours degree in
English was scarcely of the highest grade, but there was no need to tell my
mother that the result was really less impres sive than it looked, and besides,
in the same week that the results came out the Herald offered me a job.  I
was only to be assistant to the editor of the magazine page of the Saturday
edition, but  it  felt  unsetdingly  like  success. As if   to redeem myself  for
betraying their   uncompromising standards, I   spent many  evenings that
summer with Spencer and Grogan, bucketing across the Harbour Bridge in
Grogan's wreck  of   a  Chevrolet  to  crash  parties  on  the  North   Shore.
Unfortunately I  found  it  less easy than they  did to  hate what  was to  be
found there. The  young men  of the  North  Shore might  exceed even the
Bellevue Hill  mob in their  partiality for  cravats and suede shoes, but some
of the girls  were uncomfortably appealing. I resented their gentie manners
but not from  superiority. What unsettied me about the people of the North
Shore was the way they all knew each other. I was, am, and will continue to
be until the grave, incurably envious of all families.

161
   But  I  was  flattered to  find  that  my  name was already  known.  While
Grogan was being thrown  out  and Spencer was being aloof  in  a canvas
chair beside the swimming pool, I  would  be queueing at the wine cask or
holding forth near the barbecue. It seemed to me that the girls hung on my
words. It seemed that they were positively leaning sideways to drink them
in. Then the lawn would  swing up and hit me. After  just such an exploit a
girl called Francoise drove me back to town. She was a diplomat's daughter.
Infuriatingly    she   could    read   Latin,   French    and   German,   looked
marvellously  pretty, and  would  not  let  me  sleep with  her.  She offered
something called Friendship  instead, which  I  grudgingly  accepted. After
vomiting into the glove compartment of her Renault Dauphine, I fell I owed
her the time of day.

   My   year at  the  Herald   can be  briefly   recounted. The  editor  of  the
Saturday magazine page was a veteran journalist called Leicester Cotton.
He was a sweet man whose days of adventure were long behind. We shared
a partitioned-off cubicle just big enough to hold two desks. Whde he got on
with choosing the serials and book excerpts which would fid the main part
of the page, it was my task to rewrite those unsolicited contributions which
might just make a piece. All I had to do was change everything in them and
they would  be fine.  Apart from  the  invaluable parsing lessons at school,
these months doing rewrites were probably the best practical train ing 1 ever
received. Characteristicady I faded to  realise it at  first.  But gradually  the
sheer weight of  negative evidence began to  convince me  that writing   is
essentially a matter of saying things in the right order. It certainly has little
to do with the creative urge per sc. Invari ably the most prolific contributors
were the ones who could not write a sentence without saying the opposite of
what they meant. One man, resident in Woy Woy, sent us a new novel every
month. Each  novel  took  the form   of  twenty  thick  exercise books  held
together in a  bundle. Each exercise book  was full  to  the brim  with  neat
hand writing. The man  must have  written  more  compulsively  than Enid
Blyton, who  at least stopped for the occasional meal. Unlike Enid Blyton,
however, he could not write even a single phrase that made any sense at all.

   But the contributors most to be dreaded were the ones who came to call.
Down-at-heel, over-the-hid  journalists  would  waste hours  of  Leicester's
time discussing their plans to interview  Ava Gardner. Any  of them would

162
have stood a  better chance with   Mary  Queen of  Scots.  Even the  most
sprightiy  of  them  was too  far  gone  to  mind  spoiling  the  effect  of  his
wheeler-dealer dialogue by  producing  in  mid-spiel  a defeated sandwich
from the pocket of his grimy tan gab erdine overcoat. One character used to
drop in personally in  order to press for the return of  articles which he had
never sent. Another was in charge of a pile of old newspapers so heavy that
he had to drag it. He was like a dung beetie out of Karel Capek. Our office
was a transit  camp for   dingbats. Every  form  of  madness used to come
through that door. It was my first,  cruel exposure to the awkward fact that
the arts attract the insane. They arrived in relays from daylight to dusk. For
all the contact they had with reality, they might  as well have been wearing
flippers, rotating bow tics, and sombreros with model trains running around
the brim.

   No  wonder Leicester was relieved  when his  old journalist  friend  Herb
Grady dropped in. Herb Grady bored me  stiff with  his endless talk of  old
times but at  least he looked  normal. He  used to come in  every  morning
about an hour before lunch,  which  he took in  the Botanical  Gardens. He
was retired by  then, so  I  assumed that the small leather  case he always
carried contained sandwiches and a Thermos of tea. I could imagine the tea
growing cold even with its silver  shell as Herb reminisced interminably on.
Leicester didn't seem to mind, however. Then one day, as Herb was getting
up to leave, the hasp on the leather case snapped open and the sole con tents
fell clattering to the floor. It was a single ice-skate.

   Probably because 1 found the work easy to cope with, I felt  as if I  were
marking time.  Like   most people  who  feel that,  1  hung  around my  old
haunts. That  year I  directed  the  Union  Revue. Despite  my  tenaciously
lingering  pretensions, those  items  emanating  from  my   pen  attained a
hitherto unheard-of perspicuity. I also discovered within myself a knack of
delegating  authority—which   essentially  means  recognising  your   own
limitations  and deputing others to do  well  what you  yourself would  only
muck up. The show was called A Rat up a Pump, It came in on budget and
showed a profit. The audience, if it  did not go home happy, at least stayed
to the end. At the back of the hall I preened unobtrusively, praying that one
of the actors would get sick so that I could go on instead. The one who did
was the cast midget. Since all  the sketches he was in  depended for their

163
point on his diminutive stature (he was about 18 inches high in his elevator
shoes) trying to get his laughs was something of a challenge.

   It  was the only  challenge of  that  year. Even Francoise finally  yielded,
although wisely she never ceased to be suspicious. I rather liked the idea of
being thought  of  as a  shit—a  common conceit  among those who  don't
realise just how shitty they really are. In retrospect I wonder that she put up
with me for  a single day. The boredom must have been tremendous, since
on top of  all my  other affectations I  was going through an acute Salinger
phase, start ing off as Holden Caulfield and ending up  as Seymour Glass.
She managed not  to  burst  out  laughing  when  I   casually declared  my
intention  of  learning  Sanskrit.  She  no  doubt  guessed that some  other
influence would drive that remote possibility even further into the distance,
although it  could  have given  her  no  pleasure to discover  that  my  next
persona, when  it   arrived,  had  been borrowed   from  Albert   Finney  in
Saturday Night and Sunday Morning.  Lurch ing from the cinema with  my
hands crammed into my pockets to guard them from  the Northern  cold, I
waited for my breath to form a cloud before my face. Since it was ninety in
the shade, this was not on the cards, but the Flash of Lightning was a long
time hang ing up his cape.

   Things were getting a bit too easy. On the other hand, there was growing
evidence that they were also getting a bit meaningless. There was nothing I
knew worth knowing.  Francoise was a model of tact, but occasionally she
would  unintentionally  reveal that  she had  actu ally read, in  the  original
language, some of the authors upon whose lack of talent I  pronounced so
glibly. Unable to fool  her, I could not hope to go on fooling myself. Slowly
it  began  occurring  to   me  that  the  ability   to  get  things   done  was  a
combination of two elements, the desire to do them and the capacity to take
pains. The mind had to  be both open and single. I  had always shared the
general opinion that Dave Dalziel, one of  my student contemporaries, was
faintly  ludicrous, since he was so fanatical  about films  that he kept note‐ 
books in which every film  he saw was graded according to twenty different
criteria. Then  he suddenly started making  a film  using  all  his friends  as
actors. It took a year to complete. I had turned down his invitation to write
the script. Someone else did it instead. When I saw the film I was envious.
It was no more awful  than my  own work.  More importantly,  it was there.

164
Abruptly I  realised that Dave Dalziel was there too. What he had done once
he would do  again. It also occurred to  me that those who had laughed at
him loudest were the least likely  ever to do anything themselves. Not that
Dave kept his public  short of  reasons to shake their heads over him. One
week end about a dozen car-loads full  of  aesthetes and theatricals drove
south to  hold a  bush picnic  near Thirroul.   I  was braced in  the  back of
Grogan's Chevrolet along with Bottomley  and Wanda. Spencer was in the
front  seat, navigating. Navigation  consisted of  tailing  the car  in  front—
never easy with Grogan driving, since he was unable to go slower than flat
out. Despite  looking  as  if  it   had been gutted  by  a  hollow  charge, the
Chevrolet could do a true eighty. Dave's Jaguar MklV went past us as if we
were standing still. Dave was standing back to front on the driving seat with
his head, shoulders and torso all protruding through the sunshine roof. He
was waving a bottle of wine at us. That night around the campfire Mearned
that his long-legged girlfriend had had one foot on the accelerator, one hand
on the wheel, and the other hand inside Dave's trousers. Something else he
told me that night was that he believed his future lay in England. He seemed
to know exactly where he was going. Thought fully I  helped to put the fire
out by hurling  on it  and crawled into a sleeping bag with  Wanda. Kissing
her was like cleaning an ash-tray with your tongue.

   Huggins came back from a trip to Europe. In London he had actually met
T. S. Eliot. Within a month he was on his way to New York, riding in one of
the  Boeing  707   jet  airliners   which   had  by   now  succeeded the   old
Stratocruisers, Super Constellations and Douglas DC-7S in the eternal task
of shaking our house to its foundations. In Huggins I  could clearly see the
reality of  talent, as opposed to the rhetoric of pretension. What he said he
would do, he would do. What he did was in demand. He was on his way.

   Something told me it was time to move. I still  don't know what it  was. Is
it  restiessness that tells   us we  are  not  at  rest?  Such  questions invite
tautologies for answers. Actually we  all got  the same idea at once. It was
just that  I was  among the first  of  that  particular gen eration to make the
break. Suddenly everyone  was heading towards  England. We  were like
those pelagic birds whose migratory itiner ary is pricked out in their  minds
as an overlay on the celestial map, so that when you release them inside a
planetarium they fly in the wrong direction, but still according to their stars.

165
I  drew my   sever ance pay from the Herald   and bought  a ^97  one-way
passage on a ship leaving at  the very  end of the  year. As I  should  have
expected, my mother, when I  gaily  informed her  of my  plans, reacted as
Dido might  have done if Aeneas had sent a barber-shop quartet to tell her
that he had decided to leave Carthage. She was simultaneously dis traught
and insulted. But my callousness won out. Plainly I would get my way even
in this. How  could I be sure of that, unless I had been spoilt? So it was all
her fault, really.

   In that summer of 1961 I was seldom home to be made impa tient by what
I  considered her unreasoning grief.  During   the week  I  slept  on sundry
floors, infested  the coffee bars,  and swam with  Francoise at  Bronte and
Bondi. At  the weekends I went North with the Bellevue Hid  mob to Frank
Clune's old  house at  Avalon.  Gil bert Bolt's  cousin used  the place  as a
weekender. Consisting mainly  of  verandas, it  could  sleep  half  a dozen
people comfortably and a dozen uncomfortably. We swam ad day at Palm
Beach, got drunk  at night,  and were woken  in  the morning  by the  whip
birds and the kookaburras. The girls wore  sandals, white shorts, tee-shirts
and a dab of zinc cream on their noses. Walking back from the shops with
meat for the barbecue, they were apparitions in the heat haze, dreams within
a dream. I never  drew a sober breath. The mosqui toes who found a way
inside my  net  at  night  got  too  drunk  to  find  their  way  out  again. On
Christmas Eve I woke at ten in  the morning with  a shattering hangover to
find that my  bare feet, which  had been tilted skyward over the rail  of  the
veranda, were burned shocking pink on the soles.

   The last  days ticked  away. I  packed in  an hour, carefully  ignor ing all
advice about warm clothes. The ship sailed on New Year's Eve of 1961. She
was called the Bretagne—an ex-French 29,000-ton liner now flying Greek
colours. The  point   of  departure was  the  new  international  terminal  at
Circular Quay. After nightfall  the farewell party swarmed all over the deck.
All around the quay echoed the confused noises of music, laughter, sobbing
and regurgitation. The water around the ship was lit up so brightly it was as
if  there were lights  below the  surface. It was  a cloudy pastel green, like
colloidal jade. The deck was jammed. Hundreds of people were leaving and
thousands had come to see them off. Johnny Pitts should have been going.
His intention had been to go to Cuba and 'fight  for anarchy' Unfortunately

166
in  the  place  where his   passport application  required  him  to   state his
profession he had put 'Anarchist.' So he was not allowed to leave.

   But the whole  Push had turned up anyway. If the Push didn't crash it, it
wasn't a party. They brought the Royal George jazz band with them. All the
Bellevue Hdl  mob were there.  One of the  two rugby  players sharing my
cabin was of their number. Some of the Bellevue Hill mob were there to say
goodbye to me as well. Spencer and Keith Cameron, Wanda and Bottomley
turned up specifically to wish me luck. My mother was there. Francoise was
there too,  not  saying very  much.  Probably she  was still   pondering my
valedic tory oration of the day before. On Bondi beach, with her neat body
sheltering me  from   the  sandy  prickle  of   the  Southerly  Buster,  I  had
intrepidly told her that I would  be gone five years, and advised her to forget
me. I suppose I expected to be admired for this  heroic stance. As with all
instinctive role-players, my  first  expectation was that other  people would
recognise the scene and  play  their  part  accord ingly. Nor, to  be  fair  to
myself, could  I see why  anybody should miss me. Excessive conceit and
deficient self-esteem are often aspects of each other.

   The last crane-loads of shish kebab and moussaka came swing ing aboard.
The party was reaching its  frenzied height. The  jazz band shouted 'Black
Bottom Stomp.' I stood crammed into a bunch with  my mother, Francoise,
the ever-polite Keith Cameron and half a  dozen other well-wishers. Every
other passenger was surrounded by a similar tight circle. Suddenly a narrow
path of silence opened towards us through the crowd. She always had that
effect. It  was Lilith.   She might have  said 'Armand Duval,  where are  my
marrons glaces}'  but all  she said  was 'Hello.'  After   suavely introducing
Fran coise to her as my mother and my mother as Francoise I steered her to
the rail.

   'Won't Emu miss you?' I croaked offhandedly.

   'He knows  all about you,'  she said, looking down  into the bright  water.
'Don't worry. I told him that if he killed  you I'd never speak to him again.'

   'Why did you let me?'

167
   'I  just liked your  slouch hat. What do you call  that thing in  it  again?' 'A
bash.'

   'Anyway, by the time you get back, I'll be old.'

   'Don't be silly,'  I said, believing her. She turned around and looked up at
the deck of the Harbour Bridge. I fodowed her gaze. She was looking at the
blue cobweb. Then we did one of those quick, awkward kisses where each
of you gets a nose in the eye.

   Then she was gone, the crowd making a path for her as it always did. A
siren went. They piped all  visitors ashore. Drunks fed off  the gangplanks.
Could my loved ones tell from my eyes how much less I felt than they did?
Catching my streamer as she stood with thousands of others at the rail  of
the dock, my  mother was as brave  as if  she had never done this  before.
Which ship was it that she was seeing? Was it her husband or her son who
stood at the other end of the swooping ribbon that grew straight, then taut,
then snapped?

   The  lake of  white  light   between the ship  and  the wharf  grew  wider.
Behind the crowd on the roof of  the dock I could just  see Gro gan jumping
up and down. He appeared to have no clothes on at all. As the year turned,
the tugs swung the ship's prow down harbour. From the stern I watched the
lake of light divide into  two pools, one of them going with me and the other
staying. Passing between the Heads was like being born again.

    

    

   THAT HE SHOULD  LEAVE  HIS HOUSE

    

    

    

    

168
    

    

    

   THE  VOVAG  E WAS too  tedious to be described in detail. Apart  from
the one occasion that I stepped over the border into Queensland, it was the
first dme I  had ever been outside the confines of N.S.W. But the  sense of
adventure was nullified by the living  conditions on the ship. Even a luxury
liner is really just a bad play surrounded by water. It is a means of inducing
hatred for your  fellow  men by trap ping you in  a confined space with  too
few  of  them  to  provide  variety   and too  many  to  allow   solitude.  The
Bretagne was ad that and less. Every acceptable girl on the ship was being
laid by  a crew member before the ship was out  of the Heads. This was a
replacement crew who had all been flown  out from  the Persian Gulf. The
previous crew had walked off the ship at Melbourne after one of the officers
had shot an albatross.

   With  my  two  footballing  companions I  inhabited  a phone-booth-sized
cabinette on Deck Z, many feet below the water line. One wall was curved.
It was part of the propeller shaft housing. If one of us wanted to get dressed
the other two had to go back to bed. After  we cleared the Barrier Reef we
ran into a gale and spent a day heeled over at about twenty degrees from the
vertical. One of the footbaders chucked into the washbasin. The contents of
his stomach, which   had included  two  helpings of  rhubarb  crumble  and
custard, con gealed in the basin. When the ship righted itself the surface of
the solidified  chunder remained at an  angle, not to  be removed until  we
docked in Singapore.

   In  Singapore we went by trishaw  to Raffles, where  I grandly  ordered a
round of  lager for  the  three of  us. The bid  came to  ^47—nearly  all  the
money I had. What little cash was left over I spent on a taxi to Changi. The
gaol was  fud  of  Chinese pirates.  They were  guarded by  Gurkhas. The
Gurkha warrant  officer   showed me  around. In   this  place the  Japanese
commandant had deliberately withheld supplies of rice polishings while the
POWs wasted away from vitamin  deficiency. In  tiiis  place my  father had
weighed as much as I had when I was ten years old. I tried to imagine him

169
hav ing the dead flesh cleaned out of his ulcers  with  a heated teaspoon. I
could not. It  was all gone. He was gone. In Changi I  realised that I would
never find my father as he had been. It was no use looking. One day, in my
imagination, he would return of his own accord.

   On the way out of Singapore harbour the captain misunderstood the pilot.
The ship went the wrong side of a buoy, hit a sand bar and turned towards
the wharves. The anchors were dropped and the brakes were applied to the
chains, but the ship's momentum was not easily checked. The links of the
chains glowed  cherry red.  When  they were  hosed down  the water  was
instantly transformed into geysers of steam. On the dock the stevedores in
black shorts and flat conical hats looked up to see a 29,000-ton liner coming
straight at them. They headed for the tall bamboo. The ship stopped just in
time. A  diver  went down to  check the damage. He surfaced to announce
that one of the propellor shafts had a kink in it. Guess which one.

   At  reduced speed the ship limped  across the Indian  ocean. The Greek
entertainments officer entertained us by organising Greek dancing displays,
in which  the prettier girl  passengers showed us the skills they had learned
from the  crew during  the day. The skids they  had learned from the  crew
during the night we were left  to imagine. Greek dancing consists of a man
holding up  a handker chief, striking a  masculine attitude, and performing
some extremely boring steps until a girl grabs hold of  the other end of the
handker chief and performs some steps even more boring than his. Then a
lot of other girls hold  hands with each other and perform some steps which
make everything you have previously  seen look com paratively exciting. I
would much rather have done lifeboat  drill,  but  all the lifeboats  had long
ago been painted into  position so  that not even  dynamite could  possibly
have released them. This was an addi tional factor to be considered when
you tried to imagine—or rather tried not to imagine—the number of sharks
who were fodowing in our wake, passionate for leftover baklava.

   For  some  reason the  swimming  pool,  just  when  we  needed it,  was
emptied, never to be filled again with anything except beer cans thrown into
it by  the circles  of  formation  drinkers who  sat cross-legged on the deck
chanting 'Who took the cookie from the cookie jar?' Then the ship stopped
altogether. The temperature was roughly  that  of  the  surface of  the sun,

170
which didn't  look  very  far  away. Pray ing for release at the  ship's rail,  I
watched a turtle go past on its way to the Red Sea. That was where we were
supposed to be going, but we weren't. That night, as every other night, the
film  was The Naked Jungle, in which Charlton Heston and Eleanor Parker
battie die kider ants of South America. The next day there was Greek danc‐ 
ing. The day after that, the ship moved.

   Aden  was a revelation. Until   then my  belief in  God's indiffer ence had
been theoretical. In the Crater of Aden there were things on show that might
have made Christ throw in the towel. Certainly there were wounds he would
not  have kissed.  Beggars whose faces  had  been licked  off   by  camels
proffered children   whose bones  had been  deliberately  broken at  birth.
Catatonic with  culture  shock, the  passengers of the good  ship Bretagne
bought transistor radios and binoculars. With the radios they  could drown
out the hum  of flics  and with  the  binoculars they could  look  somewhere
else.

   The Suez Canal still featured some wrecks from 1956. Lacking  the cash
to join an expedition to Cairo, I  stayed on the ship as it crawled through to
Port Said. Nasser's MiGs went by, up above the heat. I was down inside it.
Port Said was like Coles or Woolworths, without the variety. Three products
were on sale, all  of  them cranked out by  a factory  on the edge of  town.
They  sold  fake  leather  whips,   fake  leather  wallets,  and  fake  leather
television pouffes. The  fake leather was made of  compressed paper. The
passengers of the Bretagne emptied the shops, which filled  up again  just
behind them. Nasser's police were omnipresent, making  sure nobody got
hurt.  Nobody  was  going  to   interfere  with  you   as you   purchased the
wherewithal  for   whipping   yourself   and  counting   your   money  while
watching television. You were safer than in St Mary's  Cathedral. The only
danger was of being driven mad by Nasser's charismatic gaze. His portrait
was everywhere.

   We missed out on Tangiers because of the pressing urgency to keep a date
with the dry  dock in  Southampton. But we did have half a day  in Athens.
On the Acropolis I watched one of my compatriots carve his name into the
Parthenon and  heard  another  ask   where  the  camels  were.   The  girl
passengers raced into town to buy hats with pom-poms and handkerchiefs

171
for Greek  dancing. But  I felt  no  less ignorant than  my compatriots. The
stone drapery on the caryatids seemed to give off its own illumination, as if
the bright sun pen etrated the surface before being reflected. It infuriated me
that I couldn't  read the inscriptions. Their clear, clean look  only increased
my  suspicion  that  the  real   secrets of  the   tragedies and  the  Platonic
dialogues, which I had thought I knew something about, lay in the sound of
the language, and that until I could read that I  would know  nothing. I was
right  about that,  but confirmation   lay  far in  the  future.  Now  there was
nothing to do except return to Piraeus and commit myself into the hands of
the sons of Pericles for the last leg of the voyage. I don't suppose the lump
of rock outside the harbour would have looked any more significant if I had
known that its name was Salamis.

   The  Bretagne wasn't  much  of  a  ship.  On  her  next  voyage  back  to
Australia she hit the bottom of the harbour again, this time in  Piraeus. She
caught fire and burned out. There was nothing left but the hulk, which had
to be blown up. But  her job was done. She had got me to England. In  the
Bay of Biscay on our last afternoon at sea she ran before the gale, clumsily
hurdling  the  enormous  swell.   By  midnight   she  was  in   the  Channel.
Undetected from the bridge, I crouched out on deck in the prow, waiting to
see the lights  of  Southampton. They  materialised about  an hour  before
dawn. They were just coloured lights and it was very cold. I had never been
so cold. White  stuff  was falling  out  of  the sky. At  first  I  thought  it  was
manna. The ship ground to a halt and waited for  morning. It  shook gently
on the vibration of  the girl  passengers saying farewell to the crew. I went
back down to Deck Z, lay  on my bunk, and wondered what would happen
next.

   What happened next is  another story. This story  I  had better break off
while I stdl have your patience, if I do. The longer I have stayed in England,
the more numerous and  powerful  my  memo ries of Sydney have grown.
There is nothing like staying away for bringing it with  you. I have done my
best to tell the truth about what it was like,  yet I am well  aware that in the
matter of my own feelings I have not come near meeting my aim. My ideal
of auto biography has been set by Alfieri,  whose description of  a duel  he
once fought in Hyde Park is mainly concerned with how  he ran backwards
to safety. Perhaps because I am  not  even yet  sufficiently  at  peace with

172
myself, I have not been able to meet those standards of honesty. Nothing I
have said is factual except the bits that sound like fiction.

   By  the time this book is  published I will  be forty  years old. When I  left
Sydney I boasted that I would be gone for five years. I was to be gone three
times that and more. During that time most of  those who came away have
gone back. Before Gough Whitlam came to power, having to return felt like
defeat. Afterwards it  felt  like  the natural thing  to do.  Suddenly Australia
began offering  its   artists all   the  recognition  they  had previously  been
denied. It  took a  kind of  perversity  to refuse the  lure. Perhaps I  did the
wrong thing. Eventually  fear plays a part: when you are too long  gone, to
return even for a month feels like time-travel. So you try  to forget. But the
memo ries keep on coming. I have tried to keep them under control. I hope I
have not overdone it, and killed  the flavour.  Because Sydney is so real in
my recollection that I can taste it.

   It tastes like happiness. I have never ceased to feel orphaned, but nor have
I ever felt  less than lucky—a lucky  member of a lucky  generation. In this
century of ad centuries we have been allowed to grow up and grow old  in
peace. There is  a  Buster  Keaton film   in   which  he  is  standing around
innocently when the facade of a house falls on him. An open window in the
facade passes over his body, so that he is left untouched.

   I can see the Fun Doctor juggling for us at Kogarah Infants' School. One
of the balls hits  the floor  with a thud.  Then what looks like  the same ball
lands on his head. I can hear the squeak that the mica window panels of the
Kosi  stove made  when I  scorched them  with   the red-hot  poker. When
Jeanette Elphick came back  on  a visit   from  Hodywood  they  drove her
around town  in a  blue Cus-tomline  with  her  new name painted in  huge
yellow letters along  the side: VICTORIA  SHAW.  On Empire Night  when
we threw pieces of fibro into the bonfire they cracked like rifle shots. Every
evening for weeks before Empire Night  I used to lay my  fireworks out  on
the lounge-room  carpet,  which  became impregnated with   the  smell  of
gunpowder. Peter Moulton kept his fireworks in a Weetabix carton. On the
night, a spark from the fire drifted into the carton and the whole lot went up.
A rocket  chased Gail Thorpe, who  was only just  back from  therapy. She
must have thought it was all part of the treatment.

173
   At the Legacy Party in Clifton Gardens I got a No. 4 Meccano set. On hot
nights before the  nor'castcr came you  changed into your  cossie and  ran
under the sprinkler. At Sans Souci baths I dive-bombed a jelly blubber for a
dare. If you rubbed sand into the sting it hurt less. Bindies in the front lawn
made you limp  to the steps of the porch  and bend over to pick  them out.
Sandfly bites needed Calomine lotion that dried to a milky crust. From Rose
Bay at night you  could hear the lions making love  in Taronga Park. If  the
shark bell  rang and you  missed the wave, you  were left  out  there alone
beyond the third line of  breakers. Every shadow had teeth. Treading water
in frantic silence, you felt afraid enough to run Christ-like for the shore.

   At  the Harvest Festivals in  church the area behind the pulpit  was piled
high with tins of  IXL  fruit  for the old age pensioners. We had collected the
tinned fruit  from  door to  door. Most of  it  came from old  age pensioners.
Some of them must have got their own stuff  back. Others were less lucky.
Hunting for cicadas in the pepper corns and the willows, you were always in
search of the legendary Black Prince, but invariably  he turned out to be a
Redeye. The ordi nary cicada was called a Pisser because he squirted mud at
you. The most beautiful cicada was the Yellow Monday. He was as yellow
as a canary and  transparent as crystal. When  he lifted  his  wings  in  the
sunlight the membranes were like the deltas of little  rivers. The sun shone
straight through him. It shone straight through all of us.

   It shone straight through everything, and I suppose it still does. As I begin
this last paragraph, outside my window a misty afternoon drizzle gently but
inexorably soaks the City  of  London. Down  there in  the street I  can see
umbrellas commiserating  with   each other.  In   Sydney Harbour,  twelve
thousand miles away and ten hours from now, the yachts will be racing on
the crushed diamond water under a sky the texture of powdered sapphires.
It  would be  churlish not  to  concede that the same abundance of natural
blessings which gave us the energy to leave has every right to call us back.
All  in,  the  whippy's  taken. Pulsing like   a beacon through  the days and
nights, the birthplace of the fortunate sends out its invisible  waves of  rec‐ 
ollection. It  always has and it  always will,  until  even the last of  us come
home.

    

174
    

    

    

   ABOUT   THE  AUTHOR

    

    

   CLIVE   JAMES  is  the author  of more  than twenty  books.  As  well  as four
volumes of  autobiography,   Unreliable   Memoirs,  Falling   Towards England,
May   Week  Was  in   June  and   North   Face   of   Soho,  he   has  pub lished
collections   of    literary    criticism,    television    criticism,    verse   and  travel
writing.   His   most  recent  books  arc  Cultural    Amnesia  and  Opal   Sunset:
Selected Poems,  1958-2008.   As  a  television   performer    he has  appeared
regularly  on  both  the  BBC   and  ITV,  and  is  the  host  of  the  online  video
program  Talking  in  the  Library   /  The  Give  James  Show. In  2008  he  was
awarded  the  George  Orwell   Special  Prize   for  a  lifetime   achievement   in
journalism  and  broadcasting.  He  lives  in  London,   Cambridge  and  various
airports.

    

