CRITICAL THINKING

This page intentionally left blank

CRITICAL THINKING
Consider the Verdict
Sixth Edition

Bruce N. Waller
Youngstown State University

Boston Columbus Indianapolis New York San Francisco Upper Saddle River
Amsterdam Cape Town Dubai London Madrid Milan Munich Paris Montreal Toronto
Delhi Mexico City Sao Paulo Sydney Hong Kong Seoul Singapore Taipei Tokyo

Editorial Director: Craig Campanella
Editor in Chief: Dickson Musslewhite
Executive Editor: Ashley Dodge
Editorial Project Manager: Kate Fernandes
Director of Marketing: Brandy Dawson
Senior Marketing Manager: Laura Lee Manley
Production Liaison: Barbara Reilly
Operations Specialist: Christina Amato
Manager, Text Rights and Permissions: Charles Morris
Cover Manager: Jayne Conte
Cover Designer: Suzanne Behnke
Cover Image: tlegend/Shutterstock
Media Director: Brian Hyland
Media Editor: Rachel Comerford
Media Project Manager: Barbara Taylor-Laino
Full-Service Project Management: Shiny Rajesh, Integra Software Services Pvt. Ltd.
Printer/Binder: Edwards Brothers
Cover Printer: Lehigh-Phoenix Color Corp.
Text Font: 10/11 New Baskerville

Copyright © 2012, 2005, 2001 by Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of
America. This publication is protected by Copyright, and permission should be obtained from the publisher
prior to any prohibited reproduction, storage in a retrieval system, or transmission in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or likewise. To obtain permission(s) to use material
from this work, please submit a written request to Pearson Education, Inc., Permissions Department, One
Lake Street, Upper Saddle River, NJ 07458, or fax your request to 201-236-3290.

Many of the designations by manufacturers and seller to distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks.
Where those designations appear in this book, and the publisher was aware of a trademark claim, the
designations have been printed in initial caps or all caps.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Waller, Bruce N.,
Critical thinking : consider the verdict / Bruce N. Waller. — 6th ed.
p. cm.
ISBN-13: 978-0-205-15866-9 (alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 0-205-15866-8 (alk. paper)
1. Critical thinking. 2. Verdicts. 3. Logic. I. Title.
BC177.W3 2012
160.2'434—dc22
2011010803

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2

www.pearsonhighered.com

Student Edition ISBN-10:
0-205-15866-8
ISBN-13: 978-0-205-15866-9
À la Carte Edition ISBN-10:
0-205-15881-1
ISBN-13: 978-0-205-15881-2

Contents

Preface

xiii

Acknowledgments

xvii

1 Introduction

1

Critical Thinking in Everyday Life
Play Fair

1

2

Seating a Jury

2

Jury Research: Eliminating or Selecting Bias?

Impartial Critical Thinking

4

Adversarial Critical Thinking
Cooperative Critical Thinking

3

5
7

Internet Resources

12

Additional Reading

12

2 A Few Important Terms
Arguments

14

Statements

14

Premises and Conclusions

14

16

Deductive and Inductive Arguments
Deduction, Validity, and Soundness

19
21

Induction, Strong Arguments, and Cogent Arguments

23
v

vi

Contents

Review Questions

27

Internet Resources

27

Additional Reading

27

3 Ad Hominem Arguments

28

The Ad Hominem Fallacy

28

Nonfallacious Ad Hominem Arguments
Ad Hominem and Testimony

Distinguishing Argument from Testimony
Tricky Types of Ad Hominem
Bias Ad Hominem
41
Inconsistency and Ad Hominem
Psychological Ad Hominem

47

Inverse Ad Hominem

48

Attacking Arguments

29

31

33

41
44

49

Review Questions

54

Internet Resources

55

Additional Reading

54

4 The Second Deadly Fallacy: The Strawman Fallacy
Straw Man

56

57

The Principle of Charity
58
The Strawman Fallacy
58
Special Strawman Varieties
63
Limits on Critical Thinking
63

Review Questions

65

Internet Resources

66

Additional Reading

65

5 What’s the Question?
Determine the Conclusion
What Is the Exact Conclusion?
Review Question

6

67
67
68

74

Relevant and Irrelevant Reasons
Premises Are Relevant or Irrelevant Relative
to the Conclusion
77

76

vii

Contents

Irrelevant Reason Fallacy

81

The Red Herring Fallacy

81

Review Questions

7

90

Internet Resources

91

Additional Reading

91

Analyzing Arguments

92

Argument Structure

92

Convergent Arguments
Linked Arguments

92
95

Subarguments

96

Assumptions: Their Use and Abuse
Legitimate Assumptions
Enthymemes
111
Illegitimate Assumptions

111

Review Questions

8

109

109

113

Internet Resources

114

Additional Reading

114

The Burden of Proof

115

Who Bears the Burden of Proof?
Appeal to Ignorance

115

117

The Burden of Proof in the Courtroom

117

Presumption of Innocence
118
When the Defendant Does Not Testify
119
Juries and the Burden of Proof
120

Unappealing Ignorance
Review Questions

9

123
127

Internet Resources

128

Additional Reading

128

Language and Its Pitfalls
Definitions

129

Stipulative Definitions

130

Controversial Definitions
Deceptive Language

129

131

131

viii

Contents

The Fallacy of Ambiguity

Amphiboly

132

136

Review Questions

139

Internet Resources

139

Additional Reading

139

10 Appeal to Authority

140

Authorities as Testifiers

141

Conditions for Legitimate Appeal to Authority
Popularity and Tradition
Review Questions

141

148

154

Internet Resources

154

Additional Reading

154

Cumulative Exercises One

156

(Chapters 1 through 10)

11 Arguments by Analogy
Figurative Analogy

164

164

Deductive Argument by Analogy

165

The Fallacy of Faulty Analogy
170
Analyzing a Deductive Argument by Analogy
175
Deductive Arguments by Analogy and Cooperative Critical Thinking
179
The Fallacy of Analogical Literalism
180
Caution! Watch for Analogies That Look Like Slippery Slopes!
182

Inductive Arguments by Analogy
Review Questions

184

201

Internet Resources

202

Additional Reading

202

12 Some Distinctive Arguments and Potential
Pitfalls: Slippery Slope, Dilemma, and Golden
Mean Arguments
Slippery Slope

204

Separating Slippery Slopes from Straw Men
The Slippery Slope Fallacy
206
Genuine Slippery Slopes
206

205

204

ix

Contents

Dilemmas, False and True

211

Genuine Dilemmas
212
False Dilemmas
212
False Dilemma Combined with Straw Man
Consider the Possibilities
216

Golden Mean

216

220

The Golden Mean Fallacy
220
Constructing Golden Mean Fallacies

Review Questions

220

224

Internet Resources

225

Additional Reading

225

13 Begging the Question

226

The Problem with Question-Begging
Arguments
226
A New and Confusing Use of “Begs the Question”

Subtle Forms of Question Begging

227

227

Synonymous Begging the Question
227
Generalization Begging the Question
228
Circular Begging the Question
229

False Charges of Begging the Question
Self-Sealing Arguments
Complex Questions

231

231
233

Review Questions

238

Internet Resources

238

Additional Reading

238

Cumulative Exercises Two

239

(Chapters 1 through 13)

14 Necessary and Sufficient Conditions
Necessary Conditions

253

Distinguishing Necessary from Sufficient Conditions

Sufficient Conditions

253
255

256

Necessary and Sufficient Conditions in Ordinary Language
Conditional Statements

258

Alternative Ways of Stating Necessary and Sufficient Conditions
Both Necessary and Sufficient

256

261

259

x

Contents

Valid Inferences from Necessary and Sufficient Conditions
Modus Ponens
Modus Tollens

267

267
269

Fallacies Based on Confusion between Necessary and Sufficient
Conditions
269
The Fallacy of Denying the Antecedent
The Fallacy of Affirming the Consequent

269
270

Detecting Argument Forms
Review Questions

271

277

Internet Resources

277

Additional Reading

277

15 Scientific and Causal Reasoning

278

Distinguishing Causation from Correlation
The Questionable Cause Fallacy
The Method of Science

279

283

286

Randomized Studies and Prospective Studies
287
Making Predictions
288
When Predictions Go Wrong
289
Faulty “Scientific” Claims
291
Confirmation Bias
293
Scientific Integrity, Scientific Cooperation, and Research
Manipulation
294

Review Questions

297

Internet Resources

298

Additional Reading

298

16 The Truth, the Whole Truth, and Nothing but the Truth
Eyewitness Testimony

300

Potential Sources of Eyewitness Error
Judging the Honesty of a Witness

The Whole Truth

309

Are the Premises True?
Digging for Truth
Consider the Source

Review Questions

300
307

312

312
313

314

Internet Resources

315

Additional Reading

316

299

xi

Contents

Cumulative Exercises Three

318

(Chapters 1 through 16)

17 Thinking Critically about Statistics
All Children Are Above Average
Empty Statistics

343

345

Finding the Appropriate Context
Caught Off Base

345

346

Statistical Apples and Oranges
Statistical Half-Truths

346

348

Sample Size and “Statistical Significance”
348
How to Make Your Study Yield the Results You Want

Surveys

343

349

352

Review Questions

356

Internet Resources

356

Additional Reading

357

18 Symbolic Sentential Logic
Truth-Functional Definitions
Negation
358
Disjunction
359
Conjunction
360
Conditional
360
Material Implication

358

361

Testing for Validity and Invalidity
Punctuation

358

363

366

The Truth-Table Method of Testing for Validity

370

The Short-Cut Method for Determining Validity or Invalidity
Review Questions

387

19 Arguments about Classes
Types of Categorical Propositions

388
389

Relations among Categorical Propositions
Venn Diagrams
Diagramming Statements
Diagramming Arguments

374

391
391
396

390

xii

Contents

Translating Ordinary-Language Statements into Standard-Form
Categorical Propositions
407
Reducing the Number of Terms

Review Questions

409

410

Additional Reading

410

Consider Your Verdict

411

Comprehensive Critical Thinking in the Jury Room
State v. Ransom

411

Judge Schwebel’s Summation and Charge to the Jury

Internet Resources

425

Additional Reading

425

Key Terms

427

Answers to Selected Exercises
Index

445

433

424

Preface

Critical thinking is a valuable skill: whether you are deciding which courses to take or
career to pursue, what toothpaste to use or what stocks to buy, which candidate to vote for
or which cause to support, which reports to believe or what claims to reject, critical thinking can be very useful. One of the most important places for careful critical thinking is the
jury room. Serving on a jury is one of the most significant and basic ways that citizens
actively participate in their government, and jury service makes strong demands on citizen-jurors. Jurors must set aside any biases and judge the issues fairly; they must reason
carefully about what laws are involved and how those laws apply to the specific case at
hand; they must evaluate testimony and weigh both its accuracy and its relevance; and
they must give a fair hearing to both sides, distinguish sound from erroneous arguments,
and ultimately reach a just and reasonable conclusion. The courts offer fascinating cases
for examination and analysis, and the courts have long grappled with many of the key
issues in critical thinking: questions about burden of proof, legitimate analogies, distinctions between relevant and irrelevant reasons, question-begging arguments and unfair
questions, the weighing of testimony (including expert testimony and appeals to expert
authority), the distinction between argument and testimony, the legitimate and illegitimate use of ad hominem arguments.
The courtroom demands a high level of critical thinking skill, and it is also a fascinating place for studying and developing the key skills of critical thinking: determining exactly
what the conclusion is, and who bears the burden of proving it; separating false claims from
reliable information; setting aside irrelevant distractions and focusing on the question at
issue; and distinguishing between erroneous and legitimate arguments. The skills that
make you an effective juror will also make you an intelligent consumer, an effective planner,
and a wise citizen.
The sixth edition of Critical Thinking: Consider the Verdict uses the jury room as the
focus for developing basic critical thinking skills, but it does not stop there. Those skills
are also applied to the various arguments and issues that arise in our daily lives as
consumers, students, planners, and citizens. While the courtroom and the jury room are
valuable laboratories for learning and testing and applying critical thinking abilities,
those abilities must also be exercised when reading editorial columns, debating social
issues, making intelligent consumer choices, working effectively at a career, and
fulfilling one’s responsibilities as a thoughtful critical citizen of a democracy. Thus, most

xiii

xiv

Preface

of the exercises and examples are drawn from advertisements, social debates, political
campaigns, editorials, and letters to the editor. Critical thinking skills are valuable in the
jury room, but they are also valuable in the classroom, the boardroom, the laboratory,
and the grocery store.
Critical thinking is often regarded as an adversarial process, where the stronger
arguments triumph over the weaker. Adversarial critical thinking is common and is often
valuable: Cases in court usually proceed through an adversarial process, and that can be
a useful way of bringing out both strong and weak points in the arguments presented. But
not all critical thinking follows the adversarial model, and the sixth edition of Critical
Thinking: Consider the Verdict gives careful attention to the contexts when cooperative critical
thinking may prove particularly useful. Several factors enhance effective cooperative
critical thinking, and several argument fallacies are especially damaging to a cooperative
critical thinking process. Both the promise and the pitfalls of cooperative critical thinking
are examined in this new edition.
The sixth edition of Critical Thinking: Consider the Verdict contains a number of important changes and additions.
• Extensive new discussion of cooperative critical thinking (as distinguished from adversarial
critical thinking), and examination of its special strengths and the contexts in which it is
most effective.
• New and updated exercises and examples in every chapter.
• A new section on definitions, including examination of misleading definitions.
• Extensive new material on statistical fallacies and deceptions.
• A new section on the importance of scientific integrity and scientific cooperation.
• Additional new exercises in the special-review sections (the sections of cumulative exercises).

Critical Thinking: Consider the Verdict, sixth edition, provides a solid introduction to critical
thinking; Chapters 18 and 19 offer introductory instruction in symbolic logic. Those two
chapters are self-contained, and you may do either or both at any point in the course, or
skip them altogether. The boxed exercises and examples throughout the text are not
essential to understanding the chapters, but they do present interesting material and
challenging questions. You can skip them, but you’ll miss a lot of the fun.

Support for Instructors
and Students

The moment you know. Educators know it. Students know it. It’s that inspired moment
when something that was difficult to understand suddenly makes perfect sense. Our
MyLab products have been designed and refined with a single purpose in mind—to help
educators create that moment of understanding with their students. The new
MyThinkingLab delivers proven results in helping individual students succeed. It provides
engaging experiences that personalize, stimulate, and measure learning for each student.
And, it comes from a trusted partner with educational expertise and an eye on the future.
MyThinkingLab can be used by itself or linked to any learning management system
(LMS). MyThinkingLab—the moment you know.
Instructor’s Manual with Tests (0-205-15875-7): For each chapter in the text, this valuable
resource provides a detailed outline, list of objectives, and discussion questions. In addition, test questions in multiple-choice, true/false, fill-in-the-blank, and short answer formats are available for each chapter; the answers are page referenced to the text. For easy
access, this manual is available at www.pearsonhighered.com/irc.
PowerPoint Presentation Slides for Critical Thinking: Consider the Verdict
(0-205-15877-3): These PowerPoint Slides help instructors convey critical thinking principles in a clear and engaging way. For easy access, they are available at www.pearsonhighered.
com/irc.
MyTest Test Generator (0-205-15878-1): This computerized software allows instructors to
create their own personalized exams, edit any or all of the existing test questions, and add
new questions. Other special features of the program include random generation of test
questions, creation of alternate versions of the same test, scrambling question sequence,
and test preview before printing. For easy access, this software is available at
www.pearsonhighered.com/irc.

xv

This page intentionally left blank

Acknowledgments

I have received help and encouragement from many quarters. The first edition of the
book was completed while I was teaching at Elon College, and my colleagues and students
there were generous in their support and aid. John G. Sullivan read several drafts of the
book, and provided insightful, challenging, and constructive criticism—while making my
work environment congenial and refreshing, and vastly extending my intellectual horizons. Anne Ponder read early drafts of several chapters, and her comments and criticisms
were invaluable. Barbara Plumblee was wonderfully patient in convincing my computer
to cooperate with me. Tom Henricks offered much excellent advice and many words of
encouragement, while regularly thrashing me at tennis. Teresa LePors, the omniscient
reference librarian, found the answer to every question I posed. Gayle Fishel helped
tremendously with design and structure of the book and suggested ingenious ways of
organizing examples. Lillian Pollock was astoundingly efficient in the laborious task of
securing permissions to reprint.
George N. Schlesinger encouraged me to write the book, gave helpful guidance
throughout, and contributed delightful examples. Allen Belsheim read the entire manuscript of the first edition, and made excellent suggestions for improvements.
All the later editions have been completed while teaching at Youngstown State
University, and my colleagues at YSU have built a wonderful collegial working environment.
Tom Shipka’s enthusiasm for the project has been constant, and as a remarkably efficient
department chair he smoothed my path in innumerable ways. Since my misfortune of
becoming department chair (following Tom’s retirement), Tom has been a generous and
wise source of counsel. Brendan Minogue, Charles Reid, Larry Udell, Stephanie DostBarnhizer, Jeff Limbian, Andrew Stypinski, and Martina Haines have used the book in their
classes, and their suggestions for improvements have been particularly useful. The YSU
reference librarians answer all my questions and make it look easy. Our student workers,
Hannah Detec, James Hamilton, and Gina Ponzio, have provided cheerful help on many of
the exhausting details. Our department secretary for several years, Joan Bevan, was remarkably efficient and unfailingly cheerful; I owe her a special debt for making my first years as
department chair run so smoothly. Mary Dillingham, one of the few people in the world
worthy of replacing Joan, has carried on a great tradition of efficiency and dedication; she
is the essential element in the smooth functioning and congenial atmosphere of the department. Many other friends and colleagues at YSU have given aid and advice, and have been

xvii

xviii

Acknowledgments

generous in both intellectual stimulation and warm friendship; special thanks to Nawal
Ammar, Chris Bache, Cynthia Brincat, Walter Carvin, Vince Lisi, Sarah Lown, Mustansir
Mir, Deborah Mower, Bernie Oakes, Dan O’Neill, Gabriel Palmer-Fernandez, Mark Shutes,
Charles Singler, Donna Sloan, Linda “Tess” Tessier, Alan Tomhave, Mark Vopat, Homer
Warren, Victor Wan-Tatah, and Robert Weaver.
My students at Youngstown State University have been of enormous help in the
preparation of the later editions. They have been kind enough to point out—often with
admirable candor—the flaws and difficulties of earlier versions; but of even greater
benefit has been their enthusiasm for the book: the times they have told me of actually
enjoying the reading of a textbook and sharing the book with their friends and families,
their fascination with many of the exercises, and most of all their reports of successful
analyses of deceptive advertisements, of political speeches, and of attorneys’ arguments
during subsequent jury duty. A number of students brought me examples from their own
reading and experience, and many of those examples are incorporated into the later
editions.
My friend Jack Raver has frequently been helpful as a computer consultant, and is
one of the most enthusiastic, energetic, and joyful arguers I have ever encountered. Lia
Ruttan has been a wonderful source of fascinating cases and examples, particularly from
the Canadian courts. Richard White has given me many very helpful ideas, especially in
the area of cooperative critical thinking in special courts. Lauren Schroeder and Fred
Alexander have been particularly helpful on arguments and issues related to politics and
the environment.
Special thanks to all the wonderful people who helped in putting together the
photographs for the cover and to accompany the exercises: Judge Lou D’Apolito who
allowed us the use of his courtroom; two fabulous photographers, James Evans and Carl
Leet; Gabriel Palmer-Fernandez and Deborah Mower, who played the roles of attorneys;
Homer Warren, who looked wonderfully judicial; and all the jury members (many of
whom are current YSU students, together with my long-suffering sons and lovely daughterin-law)—Russell Waller, Adam Waller, Robyn Repko Waller, Zach Robbins, Cary Dabney,
Amanda Benchwick, Sarah Lowry, Rebecca Soldan, William Soldan, Gary Davenport,
Heather Carbon, and Mary Dillingham.
I also benefitted from thorough and insightful review of this edition by Victoria
Rogers, Indiana University–Purdue University Indianapolis; Eli Kanon, University of
North Florida; Glenn Sanford, Sam Houston State University; Jean Miller, Virginia Tech;
Chris Cayton, Portland Community College and from excellent suggestions made by
reviewers of earlier editions: Richard McCarty, Michael A. Principe, and Joan Esposito.
My editors at Pearson, Nancy Roberts and Kate Fernandes, have been everything any
author could ask for in editorial guidance and cooperation: it has been a genuine pleasure to work with them. Shiny Rajesh, the project manager for this edition, is meticulous,
professional, and unfailingly cheerful, and she smoothed the path of taking the book
from rough draft to finished text.
My wife, Mary, has advised on every aspect of the work, made many suggestions for
exercises and improvements, and her constant affection and support have been invaluable.
My sons, Russell and Adam, have read sections of the book, discussed many of the examples
with me, offered valuable suggestions, and have been the great joys of my life.

CRITICAL THINKING

This page intentionally left blank

1

❖❖❖

Introduction

Listen to the Chapter Audio on mythinkinglab.com
You evaluate arguments and assertions every day: when choosing your breakfast cereal,
evaluating reports on the effects of the caffeine in your coffee, reading your morning
paper, deciding how to cast your vote. And occasionally you will consider arguments while
serving on a jury. In the performance of your jury duty you will be expected to weigh
evidence, consider competing arguments, reason carefully, and decide impartially. Some
of your fellow jurors may disagree with your conclusion, so you must be able to evaluate
their arguments and argue cogently for your own conclusions. So as we practice critical
thinking, we’ll examine a wide variety of courtroom and jury arguments: arguments that
are interesting, important, and instructive. But we’ll also study political arguments,
advertisements, scientific claims, and a wide variety of other contexts where critical thinking
skills are valuable.

CRITICAL THINKING IN EVERYDAY LIFE
This book pays close attention to jury deliberation, but it is not exclusively or even primarily concerned with courtroom reasoning. Jury deliberation is profoundly important,
but it is only a tiny fraction of the critical reasoning you must do. Every day you are bombarded with advertisements, and to find any helpful substance in them you will have to
critically winnow out masses of chaff. You are a citizen in a democratic society, and thus it
is your responsibility to carefully and rationally evaluate the policies and programs of your
local, state, and federal government and to vote intelligently (and perhaps campaign) for
the candidates you consider most capable. You encounter advertisements, the evening
news, news magazines, opinion journals, scientific reports, editorials, textbooks—all
making claims that are sometimes contradictory and sometimes slanting the material
presented. Sorting these out, distinguishing fact from speculation, and weighing competing theories and interpretations require the same reasoning skills that are required of
an effective and responsible juror.

1

2

Chapter 1

Introduction

The subject of this book is critical reasoning in all its applications. The only way to
be effective at jury reasoning is to be good at reasoning, and good reasoning requires
practice. It is not something that can be turned on and off like a politician’s charm. Critical
thinking cannot be hoarded for use exclusively in the jury room. Use it or lose it.

A Strong-Willed Jury
In New South Wales, a defendant was charged with the
theft of several cows. The jury finished their deliberations, and returned to the court with this verdict: “Not
guilty, if he returns the cows.” The judge was outraged,

and ordered the jury back for further deliberations.
The jurors, deeply offended, soon returned with a
new verdict: “Not guilty, and he doesn’t have to return
the cows.”1

PLAY FAIR
The first requirement for examining arguments intelligently—whether as a voter, a consumer, a reader, or a juror—is to be fair in your evaluations. Bias and prejudice close minds
and stifle critical inquiry; the first task in good critical reasoning is to eliminate such bias.
At some point you will be in the jury box, and before the jury is impaneled you will be
asked a few questions: perhaps by the judge; by the district attorney, and by the defense
counsel if it is a criminal case; by lawyers for the plaintiff (the person suing the defendant)
and for the defendant in civil suits. The idea is to seat a fair and impartial jury. This process
is called the voir dire. (Voir dire is French, meaning “to see, to speak.” However, voir is a
corruption of the Latin verus, meaning “true”; thus the original meaning is “true talk.”2) The
voir dire process is supposed to detect any bias or narrowmindedness among potential jurors.
If the defendant is your lover, or if you will lose money if the plaintiff wins, or if the
defendant recently ran off with your spouse, then it might be more difficult for you to
remain completely impartial in considering the case. If from reading newspaper reports
you have formed an unshakable conviction concerning the guilt or innocence of the
accused, you will not be an open-minded juror.

Smart Jurors
Philadelphia Assistant District Attorney Jack McMahon
advises rookie prosecutors on selecting a jury:
My opinion is you don’t want smart people [on
the jury]. Because smart people will analyze the
hell out of your case. They have a higher standard.

They hold you up to a higher standard because
they’re intelligent people. They take those
words “reasonable doubt” and they actually try
to think about them. You don’t want those people. You don’t want people who are going to
think it out.3

SEATING A JURY
How far should the voir dire process go? That question is raised by the increased use of jury
selection specialists, who use sophisticated techniques in an effort to discover which jurors
are most likely to favor which side. A defendant being charged with drunken driving might
wish not to seat a teetotaler or a juror whose child was recently killed by a drunk driver. But
not all cases are so obvious. For example, in the famous trial of the “Harrisburg Seven” in
1971–1972 (in which Philip Berrigan and six other antiwar activists were charged by the
federal government with conspiring to kidnap Henry Kissinger and blow up heating tunnels

Chapter 1

3

Introduction

in Washington, D.C.), a group of social scientists did extensive research on the attitudes of
the population around Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, from which the jury pool would be drawn.
They discovered important information for the defense. For example, while one might
expect college-educated persons to be sympathetic to the antiwar defendants, that was not
the case in Harrisburg. As Jay Schulman, who directed the research, states, “Contrary to what
our lawyers expected, college-educated people were not likely to be liberal in Harrisburg.
Liberal college graduates, it seems, leave Harrisburg for other places, and those who stay
support conservative norms.”4 Thus the defense was alerted to be cautious of college graduates.
(That does not mean that in 1972 all college graduates in Harrisburg were conservatives.
It means only that Harrisburg college graduates were more likely to be conservative, and thus
more likely to be unfavorably disposed toward the defendants.)

Jury Research: Eliminating or Selecting Bias?
Is the use of social scientists to investigate potential jurors a good thing? It is certainly
legal, but that is not the question. Does it make a fair trial more likely, or does it subvert
justice by unfairly “stacking” the jury? That is a hotly contested issue. Opponents of jury
selection specialists claim that they rig juries to reach verdicts on the basis of the jurors’
biases rather than on the basis of the evidence and the arguments. Those who favor the
use of social scientific research during voir dire claim that it is essential in order to avoid
seating prejudiced jurors who cannot weigh the case fairly. After all, prejudiced jurors
cannot always be exposed simply by asking a few questions during voir dire. (Suppose a
potential jury member is asked by the lawyer for a black defendant: “Do you know of any
reason why you cannot consider this case honestly and fairly?” The potential juror is not
likely to respond: “Yes, I do; I have an irrational prejudice against blacks.” In fact, those
who are prejudiced are often unwilling to admit their prejudice even to themselves: “No,
I’m certainly not prejudiced against blacks; why, some of my best friends are black; I just
don’t want them moving into my neighborhood.”) Detecting biased and unfair jurors is
not an easy task. Not every prejudiced person has beady eyes and wears a hood.
There are obviously some serious problems in current methods of jury selection.
Procedures that exclude certain segments of the population—for example, systematically
excluding blacks from criminal juries through use of peremptory challenges—are unfair.
Such abuses are too frequent and are sometimes systematic.

Baseball and Juries
Bert Neuborne, legal director for the American Civil
Liberties Union, claims that in New York City during the
1950s (when New York had three major league baseball
teams—the Yankees, the Dodgers, and the Giants), lawyers
used a quick and easy method for selecting jury members:

Yankee fans, the defense dismissed; Dodger
fans, the prosecution dismissed. Giant fans were
acceptable to both sides because, Neuborne
says, they were “the only reasonable people
in town.”5

As Neuborne tells it, attorneys needed only one
question: “What baseball team do you root for?”

A handbook used in 1973 in Dallas County, Texas, gives the following instructions for
criminal prosecution attorneys:
You are not looking for a fair juror, but rather a strong, biased, and sometimes hypocritical
individual who believes the Defendants are different from them in kind, rather than degree; you
are not looking for any member of a minority group which may subject him to oppression—
they almost always empathize with the accused.6

4

Chapter 1

Introduction

But it is essential in a fair trial that at least some members of the jury be able to empathize
with the accused. Imagine how you would feel as a criminal defendant if all members of
your race or ethnic group or political party or religion or socioeconomic group were
systematically excluded from the jury that tried your case: It would hardly be a “jury of
your peers.”

Keeping Women in the Kitchen, on the Pedestal, and off the Jury
them (in some areas, they are still upon a
pedestal) from the filth, obscenity, and noxious
atmosphere that so often pervades a courtroom
during a jury trial.

In 1966, the Mississippi Supreme Court (in State v. Hall,
187 So.2d 861) ruled that women could legally be
excluded from Mississippi juries, for these reasons:
The legislature has the right to exclude women
so they may continue their service as mothers,
wives, and homemakers, and also to protect

In short: It’s for your own good, girls.

IMPARTIAL CRITICAL THINKING
The point of this chapter is that in your deliberations you must try to approach the case
with an open mind, free of bias and favoritism. There will be those who wish to exploit
your fears and prejudices and preconceptions: unscrupulous advertisers who play on our
fears of social stigma to sell us overpriced and often unnecessary “remedies” for bad
breath, body odor, and the terrors of “flaking and itching”; politicians who pander to our
fears to sell us dubious foreign policies; and lawyers who hope that prejudices will substitute for arguments. It requires constant vigilance to avoid substituting our biases for
rational reflection, but it is essential to do so if we are to reason well—in the jury room
and the laboratory and the marketplace and the voting booth.
It is natural to feel a special sympathy with those who have similar goals and interests. Thus if you are a feminist liberal arts major at the old home state university, you may
feel predisposed toward a defendant who is a feminist liberal arts major at the same
school. That may be a natural tendency, but it is not a fair one. There may be some rotten
apples even among the feminist liberal arts majors at state university, and the defendant
may be one of them. It may also be difficult to be fair and impartial toward a defendant
who is your exact opposite: a hard-nosed businessman who thinks the arts are a waste of
time and that a woman’s place is in the home. You may not feel sympathetic toward such
an individual, and you wouldn’t want to be stuck with him at a small dinner party. But if
you are to consider the issues clearly, you must try to set aside that distaste. The issue is
the person’s guilt or innocence of some specific charge, and that has nothing to do with
whether you like or dislike the defendant.
The same objectivity is required as you listen to the lawyers in the case. The district
attorney may be a pompous ass and the defense attorney a great human being. That is
irrelevant to which side has the stronger case, and you must set aside such personal likes

The Courtroom Is Not a Singles Bar
Ideally, jurors should start from a presumption of innocence, but without any bias for or against the defendant;
and try to remain neutral until all the evidence is heard.
One Canadian juror, Gillian Guess, failed to maintain

that neutrality. During the course of a murder trial in
which she served as a juror, she began sleeping with the
defendant. She was later sentenced to 18 months in
prison for obstruction of justice.

Chapter 1

Introduction

5

and dislikes in order to deliberate justly and accurately on the merits of the argument.
Difficult as it may be, it is vitally important to separate argument sources and styles from
argument content.

ADVERSARIAL CRITICAL THINKING
Critical thinking is a useful weapon. People sometimes speak of skill in critical thinking as
“verbal self-defense,” or learning “how to win arguments.” And since you are daily bombarded with arguments from advertisers and politicians, and often by arguments
designed to deceive rather than enlighten you, learning how to protect yourself against
misleading claims and flawed arguments is a very valuable skill. Effective argument and
the effective critical analysis of argument can also serve a more positive function. Under
the adversarial system of justice—practiced in Great Britain, the United States, Canada,
Australia—lawyers on either side present arguments, and from that tough argumentative
contest the truth emerges: or at least, such a struggle, when it functions well and both
sides are represented by honest and skillful advocates, is often our most effective means
of seeking the truthful outcome. From the local courthouse to the Supreme Court, both
sides present their strongest arguments and probe for weaknesses in their opponents’
arguments, and—if all goes well—from this contest the truth eventually emerges.
In some ways science is also an adversarial system. Scientists present their theories
and the evidence in their support; and other scientists challenge those theories and seek
evidence to refute them. Karl Popper, one of the great twentieth-century philosophers of
science, saw this as the basic method of science: present bold theories, expose those
theories to scrutiny and criticism from scientific adversaries, and through this method we
develop better theories. Indeed, Popper thought that often the best scientific work was
done when strong theoretical conjectures were refuted by powerful opposing arguments.
A similar process often occurs in philosophy: Philosophers present their theories and
arguments, and those theories and arguments are subjected to examination and criticism—criticism that often finds flaws in the proposed theory and results in better theories
and better arguments.
The contest between adversaries—whether in the courtroom, the laboratory, or the
philosophy seminar—is often a valuable method for seeking better theories and finding
the truth. But the adversarial process is not a no-holds-barred, eye-gouging, ear-biting,
anything goes brawl. Or at least, it should not be, and—when it works effectively—it is not.
To the contrary, for the adversarial process to work well, it is essential that both sides play
fair and behave respectfully. Sadly, the adversarial system does not always function well;
and when it does not, that is usually because one or both sides have corrupted the
process, and the contest is not fair. Suppose you have a small software development company, and you have developed a really innovative program that is a big improvement in
some area of computer use, and that is likely to be very profitable for your company.
A software giant comes in and steals your innovation, and sells it as their own. You hire a
lawyer and sue the company that stole your product; and in a fair adversarial process, the
evidence will come out, both sides will present their cases and their arguments, and you
will win your case and recover damages. But the software giant has enormous funds at its
disposal, while you have very little money. If their lawyers file motion after motion and
cause one delay after another, then the legal costs for both sides will become enormous—
costs the large corporation can easily afford, but costs that soon take all your money and
force you to drop the suit. That sort of tactic destroys the effectiveness of the adversary
system. Or suppose you are a poor person who is charged with a capital offense, such as
murder. You cannot afford an attorney, so the state will appoint one for you. Unfortunately, in some cases, the state appoints a defense attorney for you who is grossly incompetent: in Texas, there have been several cases in which defendants were “represented” by
attorneys who showed up drunk, or who actually slept through much of the trial. When

6

Chapter 1

Introduction

one adversary is impaired or incompetent or asleep, it is hardly surprising that the
“adversary system” fails to function properly (and it is hardly surprising that a number of
criminal convictions in Texas have been overturned by later tests of DNA evidence). As
Samuel R. Gross states, “The American system of adversarial justice is predicated on the
assumption that both sides are competently represented and have adequate resources to
present their cases. That assumption is often false.”7
And, of course, there are other ways the adversary system can go wrong: if the jury
is racially prejudiced, or the judge is biased, or the evidence is falsified, or a juror is
bribed, then the adversary system cannot work well. But that is not because the adversarial process is flawed, but because one or both of the adversaries break the rules. A baseball contest is a good way of determining which team is actually better—but not if one
side bribes the umpire, and not if one side can afford top quality equipment while the
other side uses equipment that is falling apart. The adversarial process can also work well
in science, but that requires that the adversaries play by the rules. If someone falsifies
research, or covers up adverse results, then the scientific adversarial process can break
down: just as the adversarial process breaks down in criminal trials when there is perjured
testimony or one side has an incompetent attorney, and just as civil adversarial processes
break down when one side subverts the system by expensive delaying tactics.
For the adversarial process to work well, both sides must play by the rules. That is
hardly surprising: it is true of almost any contest. A football match is a good way of determining which team is superior— but not if the referee is bribed, or the star player on one
team has been paid to throw the game. But for the adversarial process to work at its best,
more is required than simply adhering to the rules; in addition, both sides must be
respectful of their opponents and of the process itself. When civility breaks down, the
adversarial process suffers. That doesn’t mean that the adversaries should be less energetic in their efforts to present the strongest case possible, and to find and exploit the
weaknesses in the positions of their opponents. But such efforts should be consistent with
being respectful toward one’s opponent. The importance of respect and civility in the
adversarial process is perhaps best observed in the British courts. There is a long and
glorious tradition of debate and adversarial contest in the British courts; and it is there
that the importance of civility and personal respect is quite clear; indeed, sometimes the
tradition of civility is so strong it seems almost quaint. As the judge enters the courtroom,
all present rise to show respect: a tradition that is found in many courts, following the
British model. But in the British courts, the judge then bows to the barristers, the barristers bow to the judge and to each other. Barristers address one another as “my learned
friend,” and when one barrister rises to make an objection, the other immediately sits
down; when the barrister has made his or her objection, the opposing barrister may then
rise and offer arguments in response to the objection; but they would never stand and
both talk at once. Remarks addressed to “the learned judge” are often preceded by “if
your Lordship (or Ladyship) pleases.” The barristers and the judge all wear white wigs
and gowns, and with all the bowing and the very formal address—“My learned friend
appears to have forgotten the evidence given this morning; perhaps I might refresh his
memory”—may appear quaint; and indeed, if you ever have a free day in London, a visit
to the Central Criminal Courts is wonderfully entertaining, and a better show than the
changing of the guard at Buckingham Palace. But quaint and a bit old-fashioned as this
elaborate formal courtesy may appear, it serves a very important function in the British
adversarial system. It is a powerful reminder that the advocates must present their best
arguments, and be zealous in looking for flaws in the opposing arguments; but that such
a process need not and should not involve attacks on the person giving the arguments.
And if the process is to work well, both sides must be attentive to opposing views, and
neither distort nor misrepresent them in attempting to refute them. The elaborate courtesy and deep tradition of civility is not merely a quaint British tradition; instead, it is a
vital element of an adversarial process that functions well, and that is genuinely interested
in seeking the truth. Anyone who remembers or has seen clips of the O.J. Simpson

Chapter 1

7

Introduction

criminal trial will recall the constant sniping and insulting and bickering between the
prosecution and the defense; and it is clear that the atmosphere of incivility and hostility
was a burden on the entire trial process. Whatever one thinks of the outcome, the nasty
atmosphere and personal animosity in evidence at the trial—not to mention the media
circus—made it difficult for anyone to feel confident that justice had been done.
Sometimes civility is strained, but the forms are generally maintained in the U.S. Senate:
“Will the gentleman yield for a question? Will the gentle lady allow a comment?” In an era
of political grandstanding, it seems almost quaint, like the wigs and the robes worn by
the barristers (lawyers) and judges. But this elaborate courtesy also serves an important
function.

Cooperative Critical Thinking
Adversarial critical thinking —when both sides play fair and play nice—can be a very valuable way of finding the truth and testing theories and trying out ideas: valuable in determining guilt or innocence in the courtroom, valuable for testing theories in the sciences,
valuable for trying out new ideas and examining old beliefs in dorm room debates. But
valuable as adversarial critical thinking is, the adversarial approach is not always best.
Cooperative critical thinking is also valuable, and in some contexts is much more useful.
Consider some rather homely examples of effective cooperative critical thinking, offered
by legal scholar and legal ethicist Carrie Menkel-Meadow:
. . . consider two sisters, who both seem to be fighting about a single orange, when one really
desires the fruit for eating and the other the rind for cooking. Or, from my own personal
experience, when, with a single piece of chocolate cake left, I wanted the icing (frosting) and
my brother desired the cake, demonstrating that a horizontal, rather than a vertical, cut of
the cake would maximize both of our desires. . . . 8

Obviously not all problems yield such neat cooperative solutions; but by focusing on
finding common grounds and shared interests, it is often possible to reach a conclusion
in which no one loses, and everyone comes away satisfied. Notice that the solutions
gained through cooperative critical thinking are not always compromises. In the example
above, Carrie and her brother might have reached a compromise by splitting the piece of
chocolate cake in half, leaving neither very satisfied; by considering carefully what each
really desired, and how those desires could best be met, they found a solution that met
the goals of both.
Carrie wanted frosting, and her brother wanted cake. By considering the problem
cooperatively, they found a solution that worked for both of them. That brings out the
crucial first step in effective cooperative critical thinking: getting clear on exactly what
goals are in play. Getting clear on the goals is vital, but it isn’t always easy. Carrie wants the
piece of chocolate cake, and so does her brother. But in fact, that’s not quite accurate.
Carrie wants the chocolate frosting, while her brother wants the chocolate cake. Only by
examining more critically their actual goals can cooperative critical thinking be successful. Of course, sometimes the goals are basically incompatible: Her brother wants to eat
the entire piece of chocolate cake, frosting and all; and Carrie wants to eat the entire
piece of chocolate cake while her brother watches and suffers, because she is angry at him
for reading her diary. But perhaps even then careful consideration of goals can result in
a favorable outcome for everyone: what Carrie really wants is an apology from her
brother, and for her brother to understand that such an invasion of personal privacy is
wrong, and a commitment that he won’t do it again. In that case, it’s not impossible that
both might have their real wishes fulfilled. But again, that requires looking very carefully
at what their real goals are: in her justifiable anger at her brother, she desires to get even
with him; getting beyond that anger, and thinking carefully, she may gain a clearer
understanding of what her own desires really are.

8

Chapter 1

Introduction

Adversarial critical thinking is often beneficial, but in the case of the chocolate cake
cooperative critical thinking is likely to prove more helpful. In an adversarial contest, the
arguments would probably turn on questions of fairness: who got the last piece of the last
cake, who ate the most of this cake, who asked for the piece of cake first. Such arguments
might eventually lead to a result, especially if mom is acting as judge and jury. But the
loser is likely to feel resentful, and the winner may not get what he or she really wants:
Carrie’s brother gets the cake, but he has to eat through all that frosting to get to the part
he really likes. The cooperative solution would have been better for everyone, including
the winner of the adversarial contest.
The benefits of cooperative critical thinking are not limited to settling sibling
disputes over a last piece of chocolate cake. The legal community has come to recognize
that while the adversarial system is often a good way of resolving conflicts and finding
truth and protecting individual rights, it works better in some settings than in others; and
in those other settings, cooperative critical thinking has proved its worth. In the traditional adversarial divorce proceeding, lawyers for both sides battle to win everything they
can for the party they represent: the house, the bank accounts, the retirement accounts,
the dog, the kids. If I can get 100% of the bank accounts for my client, then I am a more
successful and satisfactory adversarial advocate than if I only get 60%; and if I can get sole
custody of the kids for my client, then that’s a better adversarial outcome than joint
custody. But is that really the best outcome? Assuming that both parents love their
children, and are reasonably good parents, that is very unlikely to be the best outcome for
the children. In fact, it is unlikely to be the best outcome for my client, when my client
steps back from the adversarial conflict and carefully considers what he or she really
wants: because what my client is likely to want most of all is an outcome that is best for the
children, the children who are loved by both my client and my client’s former spouse.
Thus in many areas—particularly in domestic disputes involving children—courts have
set up special alternative ways of handling conflicts and problems. Rather than adversarial procedures, these alternatives are likely to involve cooperative processes, often with
the help of counselors.
In adversarial critical thinking, my goal is to present my own position in its most
favorable light, probe your argument for weaknesses, reveal the flaws in your views, and
establish my position and my arguments as superior: and to the victor, the spoils. In
cooperative critical thinking there is still serious sustained inquiry, but the goals are
different. Rather than trying to find weaknesses in your position, I am trying to find ways
in which our positions can be reconciled. And rather than trying to gain all the spoils for
myself, I am seeking a way that everyone can benefit. Which form of critical thinking is
better? That’s not a very helpful question: it’s like asking which game is better, chess or
tennis. They are quite different, and both are very useful in different contexts and for
different goals.
Adversarial and cooperative critical thinking are quite different methods of thinking critically; but to practice either method effectively, two things are essential. First,
whether the process is adversarial or cooperative, the most important step is being clear
and precise on exactly what is at issue, what is the question. If you are evaluating an argument, you cannot begin to determine whether that argument is good or bad until you
know what the argument is supposed to be proving. An argument that establishes that
coal is a plentiful and cheap source of energy will be useless if the real issue is whether
burning coal increases the danger of global warming. Consider an argument that Jane
might have murdered Allen, that we cannot rule Jane out as a suspect in the murder: that
argument will be useful if the question is being discussed by detectives investigating the
murder; however, it will be useless if the district attorney presents the same argument to
the jury in Jane’s murder, where the question at issue is whether there is proof beyond a
reasonable doubt that Jane did the foul deed. And if we are thinking cooperatively about
where we should go to dinner, it’s important that we each consider what our goal really is:
is my main concern to save money, or eat healthy, or make my ex jealous by being seen

Chapter 1

Introduction

9

with my new lover. So adversarial or cooperative, the vital first step in successful critical
thinking is being clear on exactly what is at issue.
There is a second important element to good critical thinking, useful whether the
context is adversarial or cooperative: be respectful to others. Whether the process is adversarial or cooperative, good critical thinking is best accomplished in an atmosphere of
respect and civility. That is obvious enough when we are dealing with cooperative critical
thinking: after all, cooperative critical thinking can hardly flourish in an atmosphere of
distrust and disrespect. But it also applies, and is just as important, when the critical thinking process is adversarial. An attack on your opponent’s character, or distortion and
misrepresentation of your opponent’s arguments and position, is unlikely to succeed in
convincing that person of the wisdom of your arguments. And if your goal is to uncover
the truth through this adversarial contest, then defaming your opponent and misrepresenting your opponent’s arguments are not promising procedures. Of course if you are
not in pursuit of truth, but instead want to bluster and swagger—the sort of thing you can
hear any day on talk radio—then abuse and distortion are excellent for your purposes.
But such slogan-shouting “argument” rarely qualifies as thinking, much less critical thinking.
Both adversarial and critical thinking are useful in many contexts. If the family is
deciding where to go on vacation, then—so long as the atmosphere remains cordial—
adversarial critical thinking may be a useful way of carefully and critically examining each
of the options under consideration. A cooperative approach could also work, of course,
with careful consideration of all the interests and desires that are in play, and a cooperative effort to find a destination that satisfies everyone’s real preferences.
In criminal court proceedings, the style of argument is generally adversarial; in
domestic court, cooperative procedures may be in place. What about in the jury room?
Suppose we are members of the jury in a criminal case: the defendant has been charged with
burglary, we have heard the evidence and the arguments and the judge’s instructions to the
jury, and now we have arrived in the jury room to consider our verdict. Will our deliberative
process be adversarial or cooperative? In most movies and dramas about juries, the style of
argument is clearly adversarial. Perhaps the most famous dramatic re-creation of jury
argument was the film Twelve Angry Men, starring Henry Fonda. The film is a bit dated—
thankfully, few juries are now made up exclusively of men—but it clearly shows an adversarial
argument within the jury room: some jurors argue the case for conviction, while others argue
for acquittal; they present their best arguments, and attempt to refute the arguments of the
other side. But while real juries often use adversarial critical thinking to reach their verdict,
others adopt a more cooperative approach. Two leading researchers on juries, Neil Vidmar
and Valerie P. Hans, contrast the “verdict-driven” approach (which is more adversarial) to the
“evidence-driven” style of deliberation (which is more in line with the cooperative):
Once the leader is chosen, the jury embarks on deliberating about the case. They begin in
different ways; their choice of how to begin can relate to the jury’s ability to reach a verdict.
Some juries start by taking a formal vote, either through a show of hands or a secret ballot. In
one approach, labeled the “verdict-driven” deliberation, jurors then align themselves with
those who are on the same side and talk about the evidence that supports the verdict favored
by their faction. In verdict-driven deliberations, polling tends to be frequent.
In contrast, in an “evidence-driven” deliberation, jurors tend to embark on a general
discussion of the testimony, the facts, and their meaning. Rather than offer only the facts
supportive of their preferred verdict, jurors tend to talk about all of the evidence as they
collectively aim to develop a common story of the events. . . .
The verdict-driven style tends to be faster but also is more likely to lead to a situation in
which the jurors cannot agree on a final decision.9

Which approach is better for jury deliberation? I don’t know. The fact that one
approach is more likely to lead to a hung jury does not necessarily count against it: after
all, a hung jury is certainly better than a mistaken verdict. Which approach is actually
better is a difficult question to test, and at this point there is no convincing research on

10

Chapter 1

Introduction

that issue. Both approaches can work effectively. My guess is that which approach works
better may depend on who happens to be on the jury. But whichever approach a jury
adopts, they will certainly perform better if they look closely at the conclusion at issue: for
example, the question at issue in a criminal trial is not whether the defendant has been
proved innocent, but whether the prosecution has offered conclusive proof that the defendant is guilty as charged. And whichever approach the jury adopts, adversarial or cooperative, they will deliberate more effectively if they remain civil and respectful.
The cooperative approach is usually confined to civil and domestic issues, but some
Aboriginal peoples in Canada have attempted to apply their community-based nonadversarial approach to the resolution of criminal cases. Starting from a common commitment
to healing the community after a crime has been committed, these groups see the adversarial system as an impediment to that healing. Rather than focusing on who is guilty and
which side wins, the emphasis is on what went wrong in the community and how it can be
fixed, on reintegrating the offender into the community, and on healing the victims, the
offender, and the community.10 It is a very different process from the adversarial contest
of most Western criminal proceedings, but it has some distinct virtues. The Canadian
Aboriginal approach to justice focuses on the deeper source of the problem, and seeks a
problem resolution that repairs the damage to the community and prevents further difficulties. In contrast, most Western court systems impose penalties but do nothing to solve
the root of the problem. Trying to reduce crime by imposing stiff criminal penalties has
been an obvious failure: Among Western industrialized countries, the United States has
by far the highest prison population and is the only country imposing the death penalty,
and it also has a huge lead in the amount of violent crime.
Critical thinking is important in adversarial settings, but it is more than just a sword for
subduing your opponent and winning your argument. Critical thinking is also valuable in
determining exactly what the problems are, exploring the various possibilities for resolving
them, examining the effects of the alternatives, and arriving at the best solution for all concerned. Whether truth is sought by combat or cooperation, critical thinking plays a vital role.

Exercise 1-1
1. Suppose that you are the attorney for the defense, and your client is a 30-year-old black man who
works as a tax accountant for Dow Chemical. He has been accused of assaulting a man in a tavern;
he claims that he was defending himself from attack by a drunken and aggressive patron of the bar
(a 60-year-old white bricklayer). What questions would you ask potential jurors during voir dire? (Be
sure that you phrase the questions in such a way as to get genuine answers.)
2. You are the district attorney, and you are prosecuting a case in which a man—the president of a
small business—is accused of assault and attempted rape. His secretary made the charges, claiming
that the man assaulted her and attempted to rape her one evening when they were working late in
the office. What questions would you ask potential jurors during voir dire? What questions would
you ask if you were attorney for the defense?
3. In the two cases above, do you think you would be a fair and open-minded juror? If you were those
defendants, would you be satisfied to have someone like yourself seated on the jury?

Exercise 1-2
Two women are charged with murder. Sarah is college-educated and works for an accounting firm.
She is 26 years old, of mixed race, and recently divorced. Allison is an old college friend. She is 27,
Irish-Italian, single; she completed 3 years of college, and now works as a sales representative for a
publishing firm. Sarah and Allison had gone to a local tavern for drinks, and were there from 10:00
to 11:00 P.M. While standing at the bar, they began talking with Robert and Jay. Robert is African
American, 25 years old, and recently separated; he drives a truck for a package-delivery company. Jay,
Robert’s friend and coworker, is Polish American: At the time of his death, he was 26, married, and

Chapter 1

Introduction

11

had a 2-year-old daughter. When Sarah and Allison left the tavern, Robert and Jay followed. The
defendants claim that Jay asked them for a ride, and when Sarah and Allison refused, he became
verbally abusive. Sarah became frightened, and took a pistol from her purse, which she handed to
Allison. When Jay advanced toward Allison, she shot him twice. The first bullet grazed his arm, and
the second entered his heart, causing his death. Robert agrees that Jay was angry, but claims that his
friend did not threaten the women, and that the shooting was unjustified. The defense claims that
this was a justified homicide, with the women acting in self-defense. The prosecution is charging
both women with first-degree murder (though the jury may consider lesser charges).
Don’t consider whether Sarah and Allison should be acquitted or found guilty: For that, you
would have to listen carefully to the whole trial. Rather, imagine that you are seating a jury. You are
not an advocate for either the prosecution or the defense; instead, your goal is to seat the best possible jury you can assemble—the fairest and most reasonable and just jury you can get. Describe your
ideally just jury for this case.

Exercise 1-3
There are two major views of the ideal jury (i.e., an ideally fair and just jury). The contemporary
view is that we should strive to seat jurors who are intelligent but who know nothing whatsoever about
the case that they will be hearing (thus ensuring that everything they know about the case will come
from evidence presented at the trial). The earlier view was that jurors should be intelligent,
well-informed members of the community in which the alleged crime occurred. A juror should not
be the brother of the accused nor the sister of the victim; but if the juror knew the setting in which
the crime occurred and perhaps knew some of the witnesses (and also knew how reliable—or
unreliable—those witnesses might be), then that would make them better jurors (rather than
automatically disqualifying them, as would almost certainly happen today). At the very least, good
jurors were expected to know about community events, and be well informed about current
happenings in the community (which of course would likely include knowing of crimes that had
been committed and people who were suspected).
1. Some people claim that the traditional model worked well in earlier times, in settings of small towns
and shared community knowledge, but that this model does not work well in our contemporary
society. Are there any factors in contemporary society (e.g., societal diversity, or the ways people gain
information, or the anonymity of urban life, or whatever) that make the older model less attractive
for contemporary justice?
2. If your goal is to seat the ideal fair jury for a trial today, which model of the ideal jury would you
follow? Or would you favor a different model altogether?
3. Imagine you were trying to seat the ideally fair jury for a highly publicized case: the O. J. Simpson
murder trial. Who would you select as the members of your ideal jury? Is your answer closer to the
contemporary model (jurors with no prior knowledge of the case) or the traditional model (jurors
who are well informed about community events, who have received considerable information about
the case, and have discussed it with their friends and colleagues)?

Exercise 1-4
1. Lawrence Kohlberg was a twentieth-century psychologist who conducted research on moral
development, tracking the developmental stages of moral development in a large group of children in the Boston area, following them from their early years (some as young as 7) well into
adulthood. In his studies Kohlberg often posed moral dilemmas to his subjects, and asked what
they would do and why. One such dilemma was the story of Heinz: A man named Heinz has a wife
who needs a drug to save her life, but Heinz cannot afford to buy the drug from the druggist, and
the druggist will not give Heinz the drug. Should Heinz steal the drug for his wife? When confronted with this dilemma, some of the subjects thought about it, then gave an answer: Heinz
should steal the drug, or he should not. But others wanted more information before deliberating
about the case: Had Heinz attempted to negotiate with the druggist? What sort of person was the
druggist? Wasn’t the druggist concerned about saving the life of Heinz’s wife? What was the
relationship between Heinz and his wife? Does the demand for more detail correspond to an inclination

12

Chapter 1

Introduction

toward one or the other style of critical thinking? That is, would those taking a cooperative approach to this dilemma be more likely to ask for more details than would adversarial critical
thinkers? Or vice versa? Or would the style of critical thinking make no difference to the amount
of detail desired?

NOTES
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

This example is taken from Barbara Holland’s very entertaining brief history of trial by jury: “Do You
Swear that You Will Well and Truly Try?” Smithsonian, March 1995, pp. 108–117.
This information is from Seymour Wishman, Anatomy of a Jury (New York: Times Books, 1986), p. 65.
McMahon’s remarks were taken from a 1987 videotape for training prosecutors; as quoted in a story from
the Philadelphia Inquirer, April 1, 1997.
Morton Hunt, New York Times Magazine, November 28, 1982, p. 82.
Paula DiPerna, Juries on Trial (New York: Dembner Books, 1984), p. 151.
Quoted in Paula DiPerna, Juries on Trial (New York: Dembner Books, 1984), p. 154.
Samuel R. Gross, “The Death Penalty in the United States,” in Adversarial versus Inquisitorial Justice, edited
by Peter J. van Koppen and Steven D. Penrod (New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, 2003).
“Is the Adversary System Really Dead? Dilemmas of Legal Ethics as Legal Institutions and Roles Evolve,” p. 103.
Neil Vidmar and Valerie P. Hans, American Juries (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2007), p. 14.
Brian Donohue describes this approach to justice in “The Third Solitude: Making a Place for Aboriginal
Justice,” Canadian Journal of Native Studies, Vol. 17, no. 2 (1997), pp. 315–328.

INTERNET RESOURCES
The website for the National Center for State Courts is www.ncsc.org. Click on Information and
Resources, then Topic Categories, then Jury to find an abundance of interesting research reports
on juries.
The Justice Information Center is at www.ncjrs.gov. The site is operated by the National Criminal
Justice Reference Service. In addition to a vast number of good files, it has an extensive and wellorganized directory of links to other relevant sites.
The website www.bastionlaw.ca is maintained by the Bastion Law Corporation of British Columbia.
It is a user-friendly site for information concerning Canadian legal issues. Go to www.bastionlaw.ca/
index.asp and click on Criminal Law and Procedure to find informative and readable material on
criminal trials and the role of juries in Canada.
The Virginia Judicial System includes on its website an “Answer Book for Jury Service.” While aimed
at Virginia jurors, it provides good general information concerning jury service. It is clearly written, well
organized, and quite thorough, and it includes a brief but clear glossary of legal terms. The Answer
Book for Jury Service is at www.courts.state.va.us/citizens.html. Click on jury service.
The Jury Rights Project contains a number of files on the history and importance of juries; you
can find it at www.levellers.org/jrp.
Douglas O. Linder, of the University of Missouri–Kansas City Law School maintains a fascinating
site on famous trials in history; you can spend hours there. Go to www.law.umkc.edu/faculty/projects/
ftrials/ftrials.htm.
www.oyez.org is a wonderful website on the U.S. Supreme Court, including both oral arguments
and written verdicts, along with photos of the justices and the courtroom, and even some photos of
the private chambers of some of the justices.
The Innocence Project—at www.innocenceproject.org—has a treasure trove of information on
trials, especially on ways that trials can go wrong and lead to the conviction of innocent persons.

ADDITIONAL READING
A superb book on juries and the jury system is Valerie P.
Hans and Neil Vidmar, Judging the Jury (New York: Plenum
Press, 1986). It provides an excellent history of the jury
system as well as a careful yet readable examination of

many important issues related to the jury system (including jury selection techniques, jury competence, and jury
nullification of the law). The book is particularly well documented, and the notes provide a useful guide to further

Chapter 1

13

Introduction

material. A more recent book by the same authors,
American Juries (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2007),
discusses more recent questions concerning the jury system, as well as giving additional history of the jury system
and its development.
Paula DiPerna’s Juries on Trial (New York: Dembner
Books, 1984) contains interesting information on jury
selection as well as other related topics.
For a well-written and fascinating study of the jury
system that covers both its history and present circumstances, see William L. Dwyer, In the Hands of the People: The
Trial Jury’s Origins, Triumphs, Troubles, and Future in American
Democracy (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2002).
An excellent psychological study of the jury that gives
empirical answers to a number of questions about the jury
that were previously only the subject of speculation is a
book by Saul M. Kassin and Lawrence S. Wrightsman, The
American Jury on Trial: Psychological Perspectives (New York:
Hemisphere Publishing, 1988).
A detailed study of the techniques of jury selection—
which ranges from voir dire techniques to body language
to interaction among potential jurors—is Jury Selection, by
V. Hale Starr and Mark McCormick (New York: Little,
Brown, 1985).
Stephen J. Adler’s The Jury: Disorder in the Court (New
York: Doubleday, 1994) gives good illustrations of some of
the difficulties facing juries, and includes interesting comments on the use of social science techniques for selecting
jury members.
A profound yet very readable examination of the jury is
We, the Jury: The Jury System and the Ideal of Democracy, by
Jeffrey Abramson (New York: Basic Books, 1994). If you
wish to take a serious look at some of the basic issues con-

cerning the jury system—including jury nullification, the
requirement of jury unanimity, scientific jury selection,
and the basic question of whether the jury system should
be preserved or abandoned—this is the best contemporary
book on the subject, and the many fascinating cases and
lively style make the book fun to read.
For those who would like to study some important
instances of critical thinking in famous cases, Peter Irons has
written a wonderful and very readable book that explores 16
twentieth-century cases decided by the U.S. Supreme Court.
The book not only examines the reasoning behind the decisions, but also presents the stories of the people whose court
challenges led to the Supreme Court cases: courageous but
little-known people like Lloyd Barenblatt, who was
imprisoned for challenging the frightening power of the
House Un-American Activities Committee during the height
of the McCarthy era; and Daisy Bates, who braved mob
violence, death threats, drive-by shootings, and bomb attacks
in her struggle for civil rights in Arkansas. See The Courage of
Their Convictions: Sixteen Americans Who Fought Their Way to the
Supreme Court (New York: Penguin Books, 1988).
There are many good books on critical thinking (often
called “informal logic”). DouglasN. Walton has written
extensively on the subject; see his Informal Logic: A Handbook
for Argumentation (New York: Cambridge University Press,
1989); and the second edition of Informal Logic: A Pragmatic
Approach (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2008).
For some interesting articles on the adversarial system
(with comparisons primarily to the inquisitorial system,
rather than the cooperative system), see Adversarial Versus
Inquisitorial Justice: Psychological Perspectives on Criminal
Justice Systems, edited by Peter J. van Koppen and Steven D.
Penrod (New York: Kluwer, 2003).

Read the Document on mythinkinglab.com
Deborah Tannen, The Argument Culture. Deborah Tannen
is a professor of linguistics at Georgetown University.
Much of her work (including her book, The Argument
Culture, from which this passage is drawn) focuses on how
language can be used to increase hostility, as well as to
promote cooperation and understanding. In this passage,
she notes the strong tendency to frame our social issues
in warlike or competitive language. If instead of framing
the severe drug problem as a “war on drugs” we conceptualized it as a “search for workable solutions,” would we
be likely to approach the problem differently?
Deborah Tannen, The Argument Culture, p. 26. When we
are in an adversarial framework, we tend to assume that
there are two opposing sides to an argument; Deborah

Tannen counsels that sometimes it is useful to challenge
that assumption.
Deborah Tannen, The Argument Culture, p. 354.
Deborah Tannen notes that when we are engaged in an
adversarial argument, and eager to win an argument, it is
very difficult to listen carefully to the views and arguments
and concerns of our opponent.
“Changing a Man’s Mind.” This is a reminder of the
importance of genuinely appreciating and understanding
the views of those who oppose our arguments and beliefs.
Gerry Spence, “The Lock.” Attorney Gerry Spence
demonstrates the value of seeking common ground as a
starting point for discussion and argument.

2

❖❖❖

A Few Important Terms

Listen to the Chapter Audio on mythinkinglab.com

ARGUMENTS
Before we plunge into examining arguments, evaluating commercials, debating social
issues, and reaching verdicts, it will be helpful if we are all using the same terms, and we
all agree on what those terms mean. We’ll be concerned with arguments. An argument
offers a conclusion and supports that conclusion with reasons (premises). Not every set of
sentences is an argument. In fact, arguments constitute a comparatively small—but very
important—part of our daily discourse. So the first task is distinguishing arguments from
explanations, reports, contracts, ceremonies, questions, instructions, promises, pleas,
curses, prayers, poems, exhortations, songs, and sweet talk. (Those are not always mutually exclusive categories. A prayer might contain an argument—to God—in the hope of
convincing God to water the drought-stricken crops. A poem might be an argument in
verse: Bob Dylan’s song “Hurricane” argues that the boxer Reuben “Hurricane” Carter
was unjustly convicted of murder. But usually prayers and poems and songs—and pleas
and contracts and instructions—are not arguments.) An argument involves giving reasons
that are supposed to support a certain conclusion. In an argument a set of statements is
arranged in such a way that one is supposed to follow from the others.

STATEMENTS
So what is a statement? The term is used in many different ways: “His statement was false.”
“Senator, could we have a statement?” “Those orange shoes really make a statement.” We
will be using it in a more specific manner: A statement—sometimes called a proposition—is
a claim that is true or false; that is, a statement has a truth value. A statement is expressed in
a sentence, but not all sentences are statements. (“Please close the door” and “Did you
enjoy the play?” are both perfectly decent and honorable sentences, but they are not
statements, since they make no claims and are neither true nor false.) While a statement is

14

Chapter 2

A Few Important Terms

15

expressed in a sentence, it should not be regarded as equivalent to a particular sentence.
For example, this sentence—“The defendant struck Ralph”—expresses a statement, but
the same statement could be expressed with many different sentences: “Ralph was struck by
the defendant,” “The defendant hit Ralph,” “The man seated at the table struck the man
in the witness box,” and so forth. In addition, the same statement might be made in
sentences in many different languages. Furthermore, while the same statement can be
expressed with many different sentences, a single sentence can—in different contexts—
express different statements: “I saw her” expresses an enormous variety of different statements, including Wendell saw Rachel, Wendy saw Vanessa, and Arthur saw the Titanic.
We shall be concerned primarily with statements: claims that are true or false.
Premises and conclusions—the basic elements of arguments—are statements.

Exercise 2-1
For the following, tell which are statements and which are not statements.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.

Please close the door.
If you don’t close the door, the dog will get out.
Read Chapter 3 before the next class.
Why is the sky blue?
Mushrooms are the summer homes of elves.
Go to hell!
I did see an extraterrestrial.
Don’t rush! Think through each question before answering.
Let’s go Mets! Let’s go Mets!
The Mets will definitely win the World Series next year.
Who was the Republican vice presidential candidate in 1964?
Eat your vegetables.
The 2010 Winter Olympics were held in Vancouver.
The 2010 Winter Olympics were held in Miami.
What is your favorite ice cream flavor?
Earth is the only place in the entire universe where life exists.
Why are there no penguins in Lake Erie?
There was a conspiracy to kill President Kennedy.
Joe believes there was a conspiracy to kill President Kennedy.
I believe there was a conspiracy to kill President Kennedy.
Sal loves Sharon.
I love you.
Either there will be a reduction in air pollution or we will suffer severe global warming.
I hope we can reduce air pollution significantly during the next decade.
Add more chocolate chips to the cookie dough.
The cookies will taste better if you add more chocolate chips.
These cookies taste awful.
Did you make these cookies?
Our Sun is one of the smallest stars in this galaxy.
Drive carefully, and watch out for ice patches and potholes.
The Loch Ness Monster really exists, and is a descendant of the brachiosaurus.
Are there any clear photographs of the Loch Ness Monster?
Bill Clinton is the only U.S. president who has played the saxophone while in office.
Don’t play poker with penguins.

16

Chapter 2

A Few Important Terms

35. All penguins cheat at poker.
36. Every human being has lived many past lives, though very few human beings are consciously aware
of their past lives.
37. Jupiter has the most moons of any planet in our solar system.
38. What is the tallest building in Pennsylvania?
39. This is a very tough exercise.
40. Do not look at anyone else’s paper.
41. How many stars are in our galaxy?
42. Critical thinking students study an average of 6 hours each day.
43. The Steelers will win the Super Bowl in 2025.
44. Global warming will cause catastrophic problems in the United States, and especially along the East
Coast.
45. Jupiter is not the largest planet in our solar system.
46. There is a damaged alien spacecraft in a top secret military aircraft storage building near Las
Cruces, New Mexico.

PREMISES AND CONCLUSIONS
Arguments are made up of premises and conclusions. The conclusion is what the argument is
trying to prove. Premises are the reasons given for the conclusion, the statements made in
support of the conclusion. (The American spelling is “premise”; the British spelling is
“premiss.”) It is not always easy to distinguish premises from conclusion. Sometimes the
conclusion is at the beginning of the argument, sometimes at the end, and occasionally it is
stuck in the middle. There are a few words or phrases that usually indicate premises and
others that usually signal conclusions. Premises are often preceded by words such as since,
due to the fact that, because. And conclusions are frequently signaled by such words as therefore,
hence, it follows that, so, consequently. Attention to such words and phrases may be helpful, but
they are not always used and are certainly not a perfect guide to premises and conclusions.
The following arguments all have the same conclusion. Notice that the conclusion
occurs at different points in the various arguments and that sometimes there are words to
indicate the premises and conclusion and sometimes there are not.
There were three eyewitnesses, and they all were certain that the woman they saw running
from the bank was the defendant. So the defendant must be guilty.
Of course the defendant is guilty. You could tell by her weak chin and beady eyes.
No other woman was near the bank at the time, thus the defendant must be guilty of the
crime. Besides, her alibi was very weak.
Since her fingerprints were found in the bank and the money was found near her car, the
defendant must be guilty.

The arguments above are relatively simple: a premise or two, and a conclusion. Arguments
are often much more complex. A newspaper editorialist may offer several different arguments for the same conclusion, or an essay may contain several arguments for several
distinct conclusions. Or you may be presented with a lengthy argument that contains
several subarguments; that is, in some cases there may be an argument within an argument:
“We should bet on (the racehorse) General Assembly. After all, General Assembly runs very
well on muddy tracks. And since it rained all morning, the track must be muddy.” The overall conclusion is that we should bet on General Assembly. The premises that support that
conclusion are: The track is muddy and General Assembly runs very well on muddy tracks.
But there is also a subargument to support the premise that the track is muddy. That subargument has as its premise: It rained all morning. The conclusion of the subargument is:
The track is muddy. Thus the conclusion of the subargument is a premise of the larger
argument. “The track must be muddy” is prefaced by “so,” which indicates it is a conclusion;
only by thinking carefully about the overall argument can you tell that it is also a premise.

Chapter 2

A Few Important Terms

17

Exercise 2-2
Determine which of the following are arguments and which are not. (Don’t worry about whether the
arguments are good or bad; just distinguish the arguments from the nonarguments.) Then for each
of the arguments, state the conclusion.
1. If the moon is made of green cheese, then there are mice on the moon. The moon is made of green
cheese. Therefore, there are mice on the moon.
2. I solemnly swear to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.
3. Raspberry Surprise ice cream has big chunks of real fruit! What a combination! Rich ice cream with
delicious fruit; it’s my all-time favorite ice cream.
4. Wheaties®1 is a nutritious cereal. After all, Mary Lou Retton appeared in Wheaties advertisements,
and Mary Lou Retton is certainly healthy; so Wheaties must be nutritious.
5. Requirements for this course include three exams and two papers. You must pass at least two of the
three exams in order to pass the course, and you must make a B or better on both papers in order
to make a B or better in the course.
6. Last summer Joe promised Sarah he would be faithful to her, and he cheated on her. Last spring he
made the same promise to Veronica, and he cheated. This past winter he promised to be faithful to
Joan, but he ran around on her. And last fall he pledged to be faithful and true to Ann, and he
broke that pledge. So now Joe is telling you that he’s going to be faithful to you; but listen, that
man’s going to cheat on you.
7. The team with the best pitching always wins the World Series. So the New York Mets will win the
World Series, since the Mets have the best pitching.
8. The Yankees won the World Series when they had the best pitching staff in baseball; the Dodgers
won the World Series when they had superior pitching; and when the Cardinals won the World
Series they had the best pitching. So the team with the best pitching staff wins the World Series.
9. When you are cooking fettucine alfredo, be careful not to overcook the pasta. If the pasta is overcooked, it will stick together, and the sauce will not spread evenly over the pasta. Also, I recommend
that you serve a green salad with the fettucine, and be sure to have plenty of red wine.
10. All professors own private jets. My critical thinking teacher is a professor; therefore, she must own
a private jet.
11. Three reliable witnesses saw the defendant in New York just one hour before the murder took place
in Los Angeles. There’s no way the defendant could be guilty of the murder. Besides, the defendant
had no reason to kill the guy—they were good friends.
12. You guys charged too much for fixing my car. It only needed new spark plugs, which are fairly inexpensive and are easy to install. So I don’t think I should have to pay this outrageous repair bill.
13. I am not paying that repair bill! I may have to hire a lawyer, I may have to call the state attorney general’s office, maybe my credit rating will be ruined, perhaps they’ll sue me. I don’t care what happens;
I’m still not paying.
14. I like the way the Modern Jazz Quartet plays. They have a cool, tight, almost dispassionate style. It
projects a sense of tremendous energy being held tautly in check. And the drums, bass, vibes, and piano
work together so perfectly that sometimes it is impossible to tell where one stops and the other starts.
15. To be successful in your critical thinking course, it is important to do as many exercises as possible.
It would also help a lot to read the chapters in the text, perhaps even a couple of times. And attending class regularly wouldn’t hurt.
16. Last year there was an increase in gasoline prices in July, and there was also an increase in July the
year before that, and the year before that: in fact, every year of the last decade there has been a
significant jump in gasoline prices during the month of July. So you can expect to pay more for
gasoline this year in July.
17. When hitting a baseball, you should start with your back elbow up; then swing down. Keep your
back foot stationary, and don’t lunge at the ball, and be sure to follow through with your swing. And
above all: Keep your eye on the ball.
18. If the recession continues, then there will be fewer jobs next year. And the recession is continuing,
so clearly next year there will be fewer jobs.
19. All Cleveland Browns fans hate the Steelers. So Brenda must hate the Steelers, because Brenda is
certainly a Cleveland Browns fan.

18

Chapter 2

A Few Important Terms

20. This year North State University had a tuition increase, and there was also a tuition increase last
year, and the year before that, and the year before that. So very likely North State University
students will be hit with another increase in tuition next year.
21. Look, this is really simple. Either we are sure beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant is
guilty, or we have to vote not guilty. Now obviously we can’t be sure beyond a reasonable doubt that
he is guilty, since the only witness admitted that he was drunk and isn’t sure what he saw. So we have
to vote not guilty.
22. If federal disaster relief had been well organized, then effective aid would have reached
New Orleans immediately after Katrina passed. But in fact effective aid did not reach New
Orleans until long after Katrina passed. So obviously federal disaster relief was not well
organized.
23. I love Cajun music. It has a simple beat, but it’s always great for dancing—especially at a Cajun street
dance, when you mix plenty of wine with the music. If you have a great Cajun fiddler, who keeps a
steady rhythm with the fiddle, and you throw in a good accordion player and maybe a guitar, you
can dance till dawn. You haven’t partied until you’ve danced all night to a Cajun band down deep
in the Louisiana swamps.
24. Sharon must be tall. After all, Sharon is a basketball player, and all basketball players are tall.
25. If you believe in democracy, then you should vote. And of course you do believe in democracy, so
therefore you should vote.
26. Please don’t miss class on Friday. We’ll be studying ad hominem arguments, and that’s one of my
favorite topics, and I would be really disappointed if no one was here to discuss ad hominem arguments with me.
27. If a wealthy country like the United States does not provide decent health care for all its citizens,
then there should be major reform in its health-care system. So clearly there should be major
reforms of our health-care system, because the United States does not provide decent health care
for all its citizens.

Premises and conclusions are statements. They make claims, and they are either true or
false. But while the premises and conclusions of arguments are true or false, arguments are
not true or false. Instead, arguments are valid or invalid, sound or unsound, strong or weak,
cogent or uncogent.
Evaluation of an argument comprises two distinct and essential considerations. First, do
the premises support the conclusion? Second, are the premises true? Start with the second
consideration: Are the premises true? The most obvious way that an argument can go wrong
is by having false premises. “You should immediately send $10 to Reverend Megabucks,
because God commands it, and if you break God’s commandment God will cause blight on
your crops, flat tires on your cars, fumbles by your running backs, and holes in your socks.”
Well, if true, that might provide some reason for coughing up a sawbuck to the Rev; but
before we wonder about whether the conclusion really follows from the premises, we should
first question whether the premises are actually true. Since they are not, the argument is no
good—it is unsound—whether the premises adequately support the conclusion or not.
Now we come to the trickier part of evaluating arguments: Even if the premises are
true, do they provide the right sort of support for the conclusion? Does the conclusion
really “follow from” the premises? That is a separate and distinct question from the question of whether the premises are true. After all, an argument with all true premises may
fail to support its conclusion; for example:
The defendant is named George; George starts with g, and guilty starts with g; therefore, the
defendant is guilty.

And an argument with false premises may strongly support its conclusion:
If there are dinosaurs on the moon, then Earth is the largest planet; there are dinosaurs on
the moon; therefore, Earth is the largest planet.

Chapter 2

A Few Important Terms

19

So in addition to asking whether the premises are actually true, we must also ask, Do the
premises provide the right sort of support for the conclusion?
We’ll look further into the questions of how premises support conclusions, and
whether in a particular argument the premises provide the right sort of support for the
conclusion. But first it is important to note that there are two different ways that premises
can support conclusions, and those two ways mark out two different types of arguments. The
two different types of arguments are deductive and inductive.

DEDUCTIVE AND INDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS
What are the differences between a deductive and an inductive argument? There are
several, but they all stem from this key difference: Inductive arguments go beyond the information contained in the premises; inductive arguments make a projection based on given
information. Deductive arguments draw out the implications of the premises; they draw
conclusions that are already contained in the premises. So what you must look for in
deciding whether an argument is deductive or inductive is the relation of the premises to
the conclusion. If the premises are used as a base from which the conclusion makes a
projection, then the argument is inductive; if the conclusion is purportedly drawing out
implications contained in the premises (rather than going beyond the premises), then
the argument is deductive. (Obviously, a deductive argument may contain a premise or
premises that were established inductively. In determining whether an argument is deductive or inductive, the question is not how the premises are supported; rather, the question
is how the premises are related to the conclusion.)
Suppose that the conclusion of an argument is, The Giants will win their next home
game. Would the argument for that conclusion be inductive or deductive? You can’t tell.
It might be either. For example, you might argue like this:
The Giants have won all their home games for the last 2 years; so they will win their next
home game.

That would be an inductive argument, which projects the result of the next game on the
basis of information about preceding games. But suppose that instead the argument goes
this way:
If the quarterback for the Giants is healthy and able to play, then the Giants will win their
next home game. The Giants quarterback is healthy and ready to play. Therefore, the Giants
will win their next home game.

That is a deductive argument for the same conclusion. Consider another example.
All college students like indie music. The students at the University of Texas are college students. Therefore, all students at the University of Texas like indie music.

That is a deductive argument. The conclusion simply draws out the implications of the
premises. It is in fact a deductively valid argument, and if the premises are true, then the
conclusion must be true. (How do we know that the first premise—“All college students
like indie music”—is true? Perhaps it was established inductively; perhaps we determined
that through asking absolutely every college student; perhaps it was given in a special
revelation from God. Certainly when we are evaluating the soundness of the argument, it
will be important to know what the grounds are for believing the premises and whether
the premises are in fact true. But when we are trying to determine whether an argument
is inductive or deductive, we are not concerned with how the premises are known or
whether they are actually true; rather, we are concerned only with the relation between

20

Chapter 2

A Few Important Terms

the premises and the conclusion.) Contrast that deductive argument with this inductive
argument:
We have interviewed thousands of students at the University of Michigan, Yale University, the
University of Arizona, Florida State, and Bates College. All the students we interviewed like
indie music. Therefore, all the students at the University of Texas like indie music.

That has the same conclusion as the deductive argument in the above example, but it is an
inductive argument that projects a conclusion about students who were not interviewed
(students at the University of Texas) on the basis of people who are somewhat similar to the
students at the University of Texas (other U.S. college students). The moral of the story is
this: In determining whether an argument is deductive or inductive, you must first determine what the conclusion is, but don’t stop there. Examine the relation between premises
and conclusion; only then can you decide whether the argument is inductive or deductive.

Exercise 2-3
For each of the following cases, first tell whether it is or is not an argument; second, for each
argument determine whether it is deductive or inductive; third, for each of the arguments state the
conclusion. In at least one case it may be possible to interpret an argument as either deductive or
inductive.
1. All licensed physicians in the United States are medical school graduates. Ralph is not a medical
school graduate, so Ralph is not a licensed physician in the United States.
2. If you want to live a long and healthy life, then you should eat lots of fruits and vegetables, and stay
away from junk food and fast food. Also, be sure to get some exercise, and try to get a decent
amount of sleep. And, of course, don’t smoke.
3. Susan is a licensed physician, and she is a medical school graduate. Sarah is a licensed physician,
and she is a medical school graduate. Sam is a licensed physician, and he is a medical school graduate. Bradley is a licensed physician, and he is a medical school graduate. And Teresa is a licensed
physician, and she is a medical school graduate. Ralph is also a licensed physician, so he is probably
also a medical school graduate.
4. We have interviewed 1,200 college students, and 900 of them favored 18 as the legal age for the purchase of beer.
5. We have interviewed 1,200 U.S. college students, and 900 of them favored 18 as the legal age for the
purchase of beer. Therefore, a substantial majority of all U.S. college students favor 18 as the legal
age for the purchase of beer.
6. We should set 18 as the legal age for the purchase of alcoholic beverages. If people are old enough
to vote, then they are certainly old enough to drink, and 18-year-olds are indeed old enough to vote.
7. The Yankees won the World Series when they had the best pitching staff in baseball; the Dodgers
won the World Series when they had superior pitching; and when the Cardinals won the World
Series they had the best pitching. So the team with the best pitching staff wins the World Series.
8. The team with the best pitching always wins the World Series. The St. Louis Cardinals must have the
best pitching, because the Cardinals won the World Series.
9. I think Jones—the key witness for the prosecution—probably robbed the bank himself, and is now
trying to pin the crime on Smith. In any case, there is certainly a reasonable doubt that Smith (the
defendant) robbed the bank, so we should all vote not guilty.
10. Look, I don’t know about anything else, but I know for an absolute fact that Jones could never have
killed anyone. So when Smith testified that Jones was the murderer, Smith must have been lying.
11. We have carefully surveyed 500 registered voters, chosen at random from throughout Ohio, on
whether they favor a law making it legal for ordinary citizens to carry concealed weapons. Of those
surveyed, 320 opposed legalizing concealed weapons, 140 supported legalizing concealed weapons,
and 40 were undecided or had no opinion. So obviously most of the registered voters in Ohio are
opposed to legalizing concealed weapons.

Chapter 2

A Few Important Terms

21

12. We had a great camping trip. The weather was warm during the day and nice and cool during the
evening, just right for a cozy campfire. The nights were so clear, you could almost reach out and
touch the stars. And late at night, warm in our sleeping bags, you could hear loons calling on the
lake, and owls calling from deep in the woods. It was perfect.
13. Mighty Casey will almost certainly strike out. For the bases are loaded, and Mighty Casey struck
out the last time he batted with the bases loaded, and he struck out the time before when he
batted with the bases loaded; and, in fact, the two times before that he struck out when the bases
were loaded.
14. Either the Chicago Cubs or the New York Mets will win the World Series. The New York Mets obviously will not win the Series, since they have had lots of injuries, and their pitching and fielding
have both been weak. So the Chicago Cubs will win the World Series.
15. When examining arguments, the most important thing to do is this: First, pick out the conclusion.
After you have the conclusion clearly stated, then you should examine the structure of the argument, and pick out any assumptions made by the argument. Next, you should look for any fallacies
committed, and the last step is to determine whether the premises are true.
16. In the last five World Series, the team that was at home for the first game won the Series. Therefore,
the Toronto Blue Jays are a good bet to win this World Series, since they are the home team for the
first game.
17. All U.S. citizens have a right to vote in presidential elections. Joan Jakobovitz is a U.S. citizen; so
Joan Jakobovitz has a right to vote in the presidential election.
18. There are currently three major danger areas for the outbreak of war: the Middle East, Eastern
Europe, and the border between India and Pakistan. Perhaps the most dangerous of those areas is
Eastern Europe, though there are certainly serious dangers elsewhere around the world.
19. Last quarter there were 18 students in the critical thinking course who never missed a class, and
they all passed the course. The quarter before that, 16 students attended every class, and all of them
passed also. So if you attend every class this quarter, you will pass the course.
20. Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, this is a simple case. Clearly Selena Skowron is not guilty of
robbing the Detroit National Bank. The Detroit National Bank was robbed at noon on March 3,
1996. If Selena Skowron was in Cleveland at noon on that day, then she could not be guilty of
robbing the Detroit National Bank. And she certainly was in Cleveland at noon of that day, as was
proven by the testimony of four reliable witnesses.
21. All students who are registered at the university have a right to use the university library. So Alice
Andrews has a right to use the library, because she is a registered student at the university.
22. Bruce has been late for class every day since the semester started. So he will probably be late for class
again tomorrow.
23. If Joan is a student at Ohio State, then she hates Michigan. Joan is a student at Ohio State. Therefore Joan hates Michigan.
24. Last year all of the critical thinking exams were really hard. And that year before that, all the critical
thinking exams were brutally tough. In fact, for the last ten years every critical thinking exam has
been very hard. So very likely the next critical thinking exam will be a hard one.

DEDUCTION, VALIDITY, AND SOUNDNESS
Deductive arguments are supposed to draw conclusions that are already contained in or
directly implied by the premises. If a deductive argument is correctly structured, then the
truth of the premises will guarantee the truth of the conclusion. If that is the case, then the
deductive argument is valid. So the definition of a valid deductive argument is:
If all its premises are true, then its conclusion must be true.

Notice the italicized words: if and must. They are essential. First the if: We are not saying
that a valid argument does have all true premises; it may or may not. Rather, if all the
premises are true, then the conclusion must be true. Must be true. It is not enough for the
conclusion to just happen to be true. Its truth must follow from the truth of the premises;

22

Chapter 2

A Few Important Terms

the truth of the premises must make it impossible for the conclusion to be false; the truth
of the premises is inconsistent with the falsity of the conclusion.
Obviously the actual truth or falsity of the premises is an important matter, and we
shall certainly return to it. But first we want to know whether the premises, if they are true,
will prove the conclusion true. Consider this example:
If the moon is made of green cheese, then there are mice on the moon.
The moon is made of green cheese.
Therefore, there are mice on the moon.

That’s not much of an argument: It has a false premise, a false conclusion, and besides, it’s
rather silly. But it is a deductively valid argument, because if the premises were true, then the
conclusion would also have to be true. That’s what it means for an argument to be deductively
valid: If the premises are all true, then the conclusion must be true. Or put another way,
it is impossible for all the premises to be true and the conclusion false. And if it is possible for
the premises to be true and the conclusion false, then the argument is deductively invalid.
In a valid deductive argument, the truth of the premises guarantees the truth of the
conclusion. But notice that that is the only guarantee that validity gives you; in particular,
if a valid argument has false premises, then the validity of the argument does not guarantee that the conclusion will be false. Of course it may be false, but it may also be true. For
example, consider this argument:
All turtles are good jumpers.
Michael Jordan is a turtle.
Therefore, Michael Jordan is a good jumper.

That is a valid argument; the truth of the premises would guarantee the truth of the conclusion. All the premises are false: Not all turtles are good jumpers (Ninja turtles may be,
but they are the exception), and Michael Jordan is not a turtle. But the conclusion is still
quite true: Michael Jordan is indeed a good jumper.
The validity of deductive arguments depends entirely on their form. Consider the
two arguments we just examined. The first (about the moon mice) has this logical
form:
If G, then M.
G.
Therefore, M.

The second (about jumpers) has this form:
All T are J.
M is a T.
Therefore, M is a J.

Both argument forms are valid; it doesn’t matter what you substitute for G and M or for T
and J and M, they will still be valid.
If gold grows on trees, then farmers are rich.
Gold does grow on trees.
Therefore, farmers are rich.
If the defendant is charged with a criminal offense, then the defendant has a right to
legal counsel.
The defendant is charged with a criminal offense.
Therefore, the defendant has a right to legal counsel.

Chapter 2

A Few Important Terms

23

All kings are jealous.
William is a king.
Therefore, William is jealous.
All whales are mammals.
Shamu is a whale.
Therefore, Shamu is a mammal.

All of those are valid arguments. In each argument, if all of its premises are true, then its
conclusion must be true.
But obviously not all of those arguments are good arguments; for though they are valid,
some have false premises. So there are two conditions that a good deductive argument must
meet: It must be valid, and all of its premises must actually be true. When a deductive argument meets both those conditions, we say that it is a sound argument. If an argument fails on
either count—if it is invalid or has one or more false premises, or both—then it is unsound.

INDUCTION, STRONG ARGUMENTS, AND COGENT ARGUMENTS
You have used inductive arguments all your life. When you awaken on a frosty January
morning to see snowdrifts outside your window, you pull on a wool sweater and a heavy
coat. This is a snowy January day, and so it will be cold outside. Such is your conclusion, if
you think about it at all. But why didn’t you put on your sandals and your short-sleeved
shirt with the pink flamingos? That is, why were you so sure—by looking out the window
of your warm bedroom and seeing snow—that the snowy day really was cold?
That’s a silly question. But it’s a silly question only because we take inductive arguments for granted. You’ve gone out in the cold snow many times before, so you concluded—quite reasonably—that this snowy day would also be cold. That is good inductive
reasoning. (It’s not very profound or difficult inductive reasoning, but it is accurate.)
A friend tells you about a new film. She likes it very much, and strongly recommends
that you see it. Since in the past the two of you have agreed on movie evaluations, you conclude that you will probably enjoy this film.
You are meeting a friend for lunch. Over the years you have had a standing luncheon engagement with him for every Friday at noon, and every time your friend arrives
about 12:15. So you wait and go to the restaurant about 12:15, confident that your friend’s
tardiness will continue. Again, that is good inductive reasoning. Of course your friend
may surprise you and arrive at 12:00 sharp. That’s the way it is with inductive arguments.
Even though the argument is a good one, the conclusion is never more than very probable.
Another example was first proposed by the British logician Bertrand Russell.
A turkey is living quite contentedly on a farm. Every morning the farmer comes out to the
barn and brings corn, to the turkey’s delight. The turkey reasons inductively that since for
many past mornings the farmer has brought corn, this morning the farmer will again
bring corn. But on one final occasion—perhaps Christmas morning—the turkey follows
that good inductive argument to a fatally false conclusion. The late turkey used a fairly
good inductive argument with true premises: Every past morning the farmer has brought
corn; therefore, the farmer will bring corn this morning. How might the turkey have
improved that inductive argument?
The unfortunate turkey was probably not in a position to gather much additional
information. But what sort of information would have been useful to him, would have
allowed him to develop a better inductive argument? For one thing, the turkey does not
have a very broad range of information to work from: He knows only about his own relation to the farmer. The turkey might have checked around: What happens to other
animals that have been in similar relations with the farmer? The pigs, for example, might
have told the turkey some hair-raising (or feather-raising) stories about pigs in similar
circumstances. Such further information might have allowed the turkey to draw a more

24

Chapter 2

A Few Important Terms

accurate conclusion. On the other hand, had the turkey talked to Fluff the cat or Spot the
dog, the information gained might well have led the turkey to be even more confident of
the farmer’s continued goodwill. Obviously this induction business is important for all of
us, turkeys and otherwise—but it can be rather tricky. So it is not enough to merely gather
information; we must decide what similarities are and are not relevant.
In analyzing deductive arguments, we applied two standards. Deductive arguments
are valid or invalid, and they are sound or unsound. A deductive argument is valid if the
truth of its premises guarantees the truth of its conclusion; that is, if all its premises are
true, then its conclusion must be true. If a deductive argument is valid, and all its
premises are actually true, then the argument is sound. Validity is concerned with the
relation between premises and conclusion, leaving aside the question of whether
the premises are actually true; soundness brings in the question of the actual truth of the
premises. It’s useful to have corresponding standards for evaluating inductive arguments.
But obviously we can’t just use the terms we applied to deductive arguments, because they
won’t fit. In a valid deductive argument, if the premises are true the conclusion must be
true. But because inductive arguments make claims that go beyond their premises, they
cannot be valid and sound, the way deductive arguments are. Excellent inductive arguments that contain all true premises still leave the possibility—however slight—that their
conclusions are false. So instead of validity and soundness, we’ll need new terms for inductive arguments.
We’ll characterize inductive arguments as strong or weak, rather than valid or invalid.
When we say that an inductive argument is strong, we are saying nothing at all about the
truth of its premises. Rather, we are saying that if its premises are true (not that they are
true) then the premises provide strong support for the truth of the conclusion. Consider
an example. Ohio State University has reduced tuition every year for the past 30 years. So
there will probably be a tuition reduction at Ohio State University again next year. That’s
a reasonable conclusion, given the premises. That’s a strong inductive argument. If the
premises are true, then they provide strong support for the conclusion. And we can analyze the strength of that inductive argument without knowing anything at all about
whether the premises are actually true (just as we can analyze the validity of a deductive
argument without knowing whether its premises are actually true). Suppose, on the other
hand, we argued that last year Ohio State University reduced its tuition, so probably it will
do so again next year. That’s a weak inductive argument. Basing the conclusion on only 1
year makes this a weak argument, and it remains a weak inductive argument whether the
premise is true or false. Consider an inductive argument based on a survey. “We surveyed
3 U.S. citizens (selected randomly) and 2 of the 3 favor universal health care. So most U.S.
citizens favor universal health care.” That’s a weak inductive argument. Suppose our
sample were 30, and 20 favored universal health care, and we conclude that most U.S.
citizens favor universal health care. That argument is stronger than the first, but still not
very strong. If the sample were 1,200, and 800 favored universal health care, the argument
would be fairly strong. A sample of 30,000 with 20,000 in favor would be very strong.
You recall that valid deductive arguments can be dead wrong (unsound) because their
premises are false. For example, if the moon is made of green cheese, then there
are mice on the moon. The moon is made of green cheese. Therefore, there are mice on
the moon. That’s a valid argument; but it’s still a lousy argument, because its premises are
false. The argument is valid, but unsound. Something similar applies to the argument about
tuition at Ohio State: Ohio State University has reduced tuition every year for the past 30
years. So there will probably be a tuition reduction at Ohio State University again next year.
That’s a strong inductive argument; but students at Ohio State should not look forward to a
tuition reduction next year, because the premises of that inductive argument are false. Ohio
State certainly has not reduced tuition every year for the past 30 years; to the contrary, like
most universities, it has steadily increased its tuition. Just as the deductive argument about
the mice on the moon is valid but unsound, this tuition argument is strong but not cogent. For
a deductive argument to be sound, it must meet two conditions: it must be valid, and all its

Chapter 2

A Few Important Terms

25

premises must actually be true. Along similar lines, for an inductive argument to be cogent, it
must be strong, and all its premises must actually be true. If a deductive argument is either
invalid or has a false premise (or both), then we say it is unsound. If an inductive argument
is either weak or has a false premise (or both), then we say it is uncogent.
One last point. When we are dealing with deductive arguments, they are either valid
or invalid, sound or unsound. There’s no in-between. It’s sort of like baseball: you either
win or you lose, there are no draws and no middle ground (okay, there could be a game
called off on account of rain, but you get the idea). But inductive arguments are very
different. There are surely some strong inductive arguments (there has been at least one
tornado in Oklahoma every year for the past 100 years, so Oklahoma will probably have
at least one tornado this year), and there are also some weak inductive arguments (I hit
the lottery number yesterday, so I’ll probably win again today). But in-between, there’s a
large area of gray. For example, the United States has had a flu outbreak every year for the
last 5 years, so we’ll probably have one this year. Is that a strong inductive argument? Well,
it’s not all that strong. Certainly it would be stronger if the premise stated that the United
States has had a flu outbreak every year for the past 100 years; it would be weaker if it cited
only the past 2 years. Exactly when does it pass from weak to strong? There’s no bright
line. That doesn’t mean that we can never distinguish between strong and weak inductive
arguments, but it does make things a bit tricky. Sorry about that.

Exercise 2-4
Some of the following arguments are deductive, and some are inductive. For each of the arguments, choose which one of the following alternatives applies. (a) valid, but unsound; (b) invalid;
(c) sound; (d) strong, but uncogent; (e) weak; (f) cogent.
1. All stars produce energy. The Sun is a star. Therefore, the Sun produces energy.
2. The University of Michigan has reduced tuition every year for the past 20 years. So probably there
will be a reduction of tuition at the University of Michigan next year.
3. Rover is a dog. No dogs can play bridge. So Rover cannot play bridge.
4. All dogs are animals. All cats are animals. Therefore, all dogs are cats.
5. If Miami is in Wyoming, then Miami is the largest city in Wyoming. Miami is in Wyoming. Therefore, Miami is the largest city in Wyoming.
6. If the Steelers score 20 touchdowns in their next game, then the Steelers will win. But the Steelers
will not score 20 touchdowns in their next game. So the Steelers will not win.
7. Last year there was snow in Cleveland during February, and Cleveland also had snow in February
the previous year. So Cleveland will probably get snow this year during February.
8. All undergraduates at Ohio State, Oregon State, North Carolina State, Florida State, Penn State,
Arizona State, and Oklahoma State are celibate; so probably all of the undergraduates at Michigan
State are also celibate.
9. Either Jupiter is the largest planet in our solar system, or all professional astronomers are totally
mistaken. But it is certainly not the case that all professional astronomers are totally mistaken. So
Jupiter is the largest planet in our solar system.
10. All dogs can fly. All animals that can fly have teeth. Therefore all dogs have teeth.
11. All basketballs are round, and all billiard balls are round. Therefore, all billiard balls are basketballs.
12. The United States has had a trade deficit every year for the last two decades, so the United States
will probably continue to have a trade deficit for at least the next few years.
13. Either penguins can fly, or the Empire State Building is in New York City. Penguins cannot fly.
Therefore, the Empire State Building is in New York City.
14. There has been a major snow storm in Los Angeles on July 4 every year for the past 50 years; so
probably Los Angeles will have a major snow storm on July 4 next year.
15. All penguins are great mathematicians. George Bush is a penguin. Therefore, George Bush is a
great mathematician.

26

Chapter 2

A Few Important Terms

16. There was a tornado in Oklahoma last year, so there will probably be a tornado in Oklahoma this
year.
17. In St. Paul-Minneapolis there has been at least one day of subfreezing temperature every winter for
the past 50 years; so St. Paul-Minneapolis will probably have at least one day of subfreezing temperature next winter.
18. The last 27 summer Olympic games have been held in Las Vegas, so very likely the next summer
Olympics will also be held in Las Vegas.

Exercise 2-5
The following multiple-choice questions are about valid, invalid, sound, unsound, strong, weak,
cogent, and uncogent arguments. In each case, select the one best answer.
1. In a valid deductive argument, if all the premises are true then the conclusion:
a. is probably true.
b. must be true.
c. may or may not be true.
2. In a strong inductive argument, if all the premises are true then:
a. the conclusion is probably true.
b. the conclusion must be true.
3. If a deductive argument has a false premise, then:
a. the conclusion cannot be true.
b. the argument cannot be valid.
c. the argument cannot be sound.
4. If a deductive argument is valid, then:
a. all of its premises must be true.
b. at least some of its premises must be true.
c. any or all of its premises may be either true or false.
5. If a deductive argument is invalid, then:
a. it must have at least one false premise.
b. it must have a false conclusion.
c. it may or may not have false premises and/or a false conclusion.
6. If a deductive argument has a false conclusion, then:
a. the argument is valid.
b. the argument is invalid.
c. you can’t tell from the information given whether or not the argument is valid.
7. If a deductive argument has a true conclusion, then:
a. the argument is valid.
b. the argument is invalid.
c. you can’t tell from the information given whether or not the argument is valid.
8. If a deductive argument is valid and has a false conclusion, then:
a. all its premises must be false.
b. at least one of its premises must be false.
c. it may or may not have a false premise.
9. If an argument has a false conclusion but all its premises are true, then the argument cannot be:
a. a valid deductive argument.
b. a cogent inductive argument.
c. either valid or cogent.
10. In a sound deductive argument:
a. the conclusion is always true.

Chapter 2

27

A Few Important Terms

11.

12.

13.

14.

b. the conclusion is probably true.
c. it’s impossible to tell from the information given whether the conclusion is always or probably true.
If all the premises of a deductive argument are false, then that argument is:
a. valid.
b. invalid.
c. impossible to tell from the information given.
If an inductive argument contains a false premise, then it cannot be:
a. strong
b. cogent
If an inductive argument has a true conclusion, then the argument must be:
a. strong
b. cogent
c. none of the above
If a strong inductive argument is uncogent, then:
a. it must have at least one false premise.
b. it must have a false conclusion.
c. none of the above.

Study and Review on mythinkinglab.com

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

What is a statement? How does a statement differ from a sentence?
What is an argument? What is a premise?
What is the difference between deductive and inductive arguments?
What is a valid argument?
What is a sound argument?
What is a strong argument?
What is a cogent argument?

NOTE
1

Wheaties is a registered trademark of General Mills, Inc., Minneapolis, Minnesota.

INTERNET RESOURCES
The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy has a nice brief article on inductive and deductive reasoning; go to http://www.iep.utm.edu/ded-ind/
San Jose State University’s Critical Thinking web page is engaging, and the material presented is
clear and well organized; you can find it at www.sjsu.edu/depts/itl/graphics/main.html.

ADDITIONAL READING
For a much more detailed look at deductive and inductive arguments, you might examine Davis Baird, Inductive

Logic: Probability and Statistics (Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 1992).

Read the Document on mythinkinglab.com
Bruce N. Waller, “Deductive and Inductive Arguments,” Consider Philosophy. The important but difficult distinction

between deductive and inductive arguments is discussed in
this passage.

3

❖❖❖

Ad Hominem Arguments

Listen to the Chapter Audio on mythinkinglab.com
We have talked about inductive and deductive arguments, valid and invalid arguments,
strong and weak arguments. But little has been said about the sources of arguments. The
reason is that in analyses of whether an argument is valid or invalid, strong or weak,
the source of the argument is irrelevant. Criticizing the source of an argument rather than
the argument itself commits the ad hominem fallacy.

THE AD HOMINEM FALLACY
Ad hominem arguments are, literally, arguments “to the person.” There are many dangers,
confusions, and temptations associated with ad hominem arguments. But if you faithfully
follow one commandment, you can avoid most of the pitfalls and snares of the ad hominem
fallacy. That commandment is
When considering the quality of an argument, thou shalt not consider the source of the argument.

It does not matter whether the argument was given by Richard Nixon or Mother Teresa or
Al Capone or St. Francis or God Herself: If it’s an argument, it must stand or fall on its own
merits. The argument may come from the mouth of a babe or of a sage, it may be sung in
the rich resonant tones of Pavarotti or screeched in the grating cry of the Jabberwocky, it
may be carved on gold tablets or scribbled on a scrap of paper—it doesn’t matter. You
cannot judge an argument by its source. If we should discover that an argument long
attributed to Socrates was in fact given by Socrates’ favorite sandalmaker, then that would
be important for scholars studying ancient Greek philosophy, but it would have no bearing
on the strength of the argument.
Productive argument—whether the argument process is adversarial or cooperative—
requires an atmosphere of respect for the participants in the argument. The attacks on
character and motives that have become standard practice on talk radio and on many
blogs and message boards destroy the mutual respect that is the essential starting point of

28

Chapter 3

Ad Hominem Arguments

29

intelligent critical argumentative exchange; and when the conditions for fruitful argument
are damaged, democracy itself is threatened. There are still blogs and forums where intelligent civil debate flourishes; but sadly, in many forums name-calling and personal invective have become so common and ugly that room for critical argument is crowded out.
The following remarks—lifted from message boards that are supposedly devoted to
argument about important issues—are typical:
It is clear that Keyboardtek is a Kool-aid drinker and should have been in Jonestown.
Keyboardtek is just another Anti-American Al Quaida collaborator who wants to destroy this
country.
And this:
All you talk about is how evil the government is, you sound like a confederate. I bet you
wish there was still slavery. Yes, the government is out to get you, the moon landing was
a hoax, JFK was a conspiracy, and the government was responsible for 9/11. You are just a
crazy, superstitious bastard.

Such ad hominem attacks have no place in serious critical argument: first, because they
poison the atmosphere and make serious argument impossible (name-calling is not argument); and second, because they are clearly fallacious. The source of an argument is
irrelevant to the quality of that argument: whether I am drunk or sober, conservative or
liberal, a patriot or a traitor, my argument stands or falls on its own merits, and the character of the person giving the argument doesn’t matter. You may admire Barack Obama and
loathe Sarah Palin, or despise Nancy Pelosi and love Rush Limbaugh; but when they give
arguments, you must consider those arguments on their own merits and flaws—and the
virtues and vices of the source of the argument are irrelevant. If you read an argument that
you thought was given by George Washington, and now you learn it was an argument by
Benedict Arnold, that should have no effect whatsoever on your judgment about the
quality of the argument.

NONFALLACIOUS AD HOMINEM ARGUMENTS
The ad hominem fallacy is committed when one attempts to discredit an argument by
attacking the source of the argument. But not all ad hominem arguments involve the ad
hominem fallacy; in fact, most ad hominem arguments do not commit the ad hominem
fallacy. (Many people regard all ad hominem arguments as automatically fallacious. That
has the advantage of being easy; it has the disadvantage of being wrong.) An ad hominem
argument commits the ad hominem fallacy only if it attacks the source of an argument and
claims that because of some flaw in the source of the argument the argument itself is
flawed. If former President Richard Nixon argues that we should improve our trade relations with China, then we must evaluate Nixon’s arguments on their own merits; to claim
that the flaws in Richard Nixon’s character weaken his argument is to commit the ad
hominem fallacy. If Tiger Woods gives an argument in favor of marital fidelity, then we
must evaluate Tiger’s argument on its merits. Tiger himself would be a hypocrite, but his
arguments may still be good arguments.
But imagine a very different situation. We are not discussing arguments at all;
instead, we are simply having a discussion of famous (and infamous) Americans of the
1960s and 1970s. During our discussion, someone asserts that Richard Nixon was a terrible man (“He misused the power of the presidency, he surrounded himself with corrupt
and dishonest men, he lied to the American people, he was vindictive toward those who
opposed his views”). That is certainly an ad hominem argument, but it is not an ad
hominem fallacy. And one may object to such an attack on Nixon: you might think it
ethically wrong (“You shouldn’t hit a man when he’s down”), in poor taste (“If you can’t
say something nice, don’t say anything at all”), or factually mistaken (“Nixon didn’t really

30

Chapter 3

Ad Hominem Arguments

do all those nasty things; he was hounded out of office by the liberal press”). But whatever
faults that ad hominem attack on Nixon contains, it does not commit the ad hominem
fallacy because it does not attempt to refute one of Nixon’s arguments by attacking the
source of the argument (it simply attacks Nixon, not Nixon-as-source-of-argument).
So ad hominem arguments may be legitimate and effective. Let’s say that I am
running for the Senate and my opponent argues that I am unfit to be senator because
I have three convictions for perjury, four for mail fraud, and five for forgery. That information may well be important to voters, who would legitimately wish to consider it in
judging my fitness to serve as their senator. If, on the other hand, my opponent attacks
me because I’m bald and my ears look funny, that ad hominem attack seems irrelevant to my
ability to be an effective senator. It is not an ad hominem fallacy (it does not suggest that my
arguments are no good because I’m bald and have funny-looking ears); but it is an
irrelevant ad hominem argument, even if the ad hominem attacks are true. Consider
another example. If Lionel Lizardliver is a candidate for a position as first-grade teacher,
it will certainly be a relevant—and nonfallacious—ad hominem argument to say: Lionel
should not be hired to teach first grade because he is only marginally literate, he has an
extremely violent temper, and he hates small children. (To argue that Lionel is unfit
because he is bow-legged and wears ugly socks would be an irrelevant ad hominem attack;
it would not be an ad hominem fallacy.)
Notice that it is not the truth or falsity of the claims made in the ad hominem argument that determines whether or not the argument commits the ad hominem fallacy. If
the claims made in the above ad hominem argument against Nixon are false, then the
argument certainly will be unsound, but it will still not commit the ad hominem fallacy
(though it may contain some other fallacy). It does not commit the ad hominem fallacy
because it does not attack an argument source. And if Nixon gives an argument in favor of
more trade with China, then an attempt to discredit his argument by attacking him does
commit the ad hominem fallacy, even if everything said in the ad hominem attack is
perfectly true. When ad hominem arguments are fallacious, they are fallacious not
because the attack on the arguer is false; they are fallacious because the attack on the
arguer is irrelevant to the quality of the arguer’s argument. Arguments must be judged on
their own merits; their origins don’t matter.

Nose Size and Argument Quality
Shortly after the U.S. destruction of the Iraqi army in
2003, the Bush administration awarded an enormous
contract to the Halliburton Corporation. The contract
was for work on the Iraqi oil fields and a few other
projects—it was difficult to know exactly what it covered, since the details were not released—and was
worth at least $600 million (exactly how much the
contract was worth was also left unclear; some estimates
were that it would be worth closer to $6 billion). This
was a no-bid contract for an enormous amount of
money, the details were kept hidden, and the contract
was awarded to a company that was once run by Vice
President Richard Cheney (a company where many of
Cheney’s friends still worked, and a company that had
made large campaign contributions to the Republicans). This contract raised some legitimate questions
(questions that the U.S. media largely ignored); and
Senator Henry Waxman from Oregon criticized the
contract, arguing that it was awarded secretively and was

not open to other bidders. One talk radio show host
rejected Waxman’s argument, on the grounds that Waxman has a large nose with flaring nostrils, and thus
looks funny. You probably didn’t need a course in critical thinking to know that such talk radio ad hominem
attacks, common as they are, commit the ad hominem
fallacy. But suppose that Senator Waxman had been
giving testimony rather than argument. In that case, the
talk radio attack on Senator Waxman would not have
committed the ad hominem fallacy. (The ad hominem
fallacy is committed only when one rejects an argument
based on the argument source.) But even though it
would not be an ad hominem fallacy, it would still be a
lousy ad hominem argument; if Senator Waxman had
been giving testimony, the ad hominem attack on his
appearance would commit the fallacy of irrelevant
reason: The size and shape of the testifier’s nose obviously is irrelevant to the reliability and integrity of the
person giving testimony.

Chapter 3

Ad Hominem Arguments

31

Ad Hominem and Testimony
So not all ad hominem arguments are fallacious. To the contrary, in one situation ad
hominem arguments are quite valuable. When a claim is based on testimony—rather than
argument—then ad hominem arguments are an appropriate and important means of challenging the claim. Testimony takes its strength entirely from its source. If I argue that the
defendant must be the murderer (because his fingerprints were found on the murder
weapon, the victim’s wallet was found in his possession, reliable eyewitnesses saw him
running from the scene of the crime, etc.), then you must focus on the argument (and
not the arguer): Is the argument valid, and are the premises true? But if I testify that
the defendant is the murderer (because “I saw him do the foul deed”), then the strength
of the testimony depends entirely on the source of the testimony, and you can effectively
evaluate my testimony only to the degree that you have knowledge of my character, my
truthfulness, my reliability.
Consider this fictional case of a jailhouse informant (Jones) who testifies against the
defendant on trial for murder (Smith). Jones is in jail, awaiting sentencing on drug
charges. Jones claims that one day while they were eating lunch at the prison cafeteria,
Smith began talking about how he had committed the murder: how he had strangled the
victim in the course of a nighttime burglary, when the defendant awakened and confronted him. After Jones gives his testimony about the confession by Smith, the defense
attorney begins her cross-examination.
“Mr. Jones, have you ever committed perjury? Have you ever lied under oath? Have you ever
taken an oath to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God,
and then lied?”
“I don’t remember ever doing that, no.”
The defense attorney looks at some papers on her desk, and then walks toward the witness.
“You say you don’t remember ever lying under oath? Let me refresh your memory,
Mr. Jones. Two years ago, in this very courtroom, you were on trial for selling cocaine, is that
right?”
“Yes, but those charges were later reduced.”
“Well, we’ll get to that. My question is, were you on trial for sale of cocaine?”
“Yes.”
“When you testified during your trial, you swore under oath that you had never sold
cocaine, that the charges against you were a mistake, is that right?”
“Yes.”
“The trial was stopped, and you were allowed to plead guilty to possession. But during your
sentencing hearing on the reduced charges, you explicitly admitted that you had sold
cocaine, didn’t you? The judge specifically asked if you had sold cocaine, and you answered
that you had done so.”
“Yeah, but what I said was I hadn’t sold much; that I had sold some cocaine, but I was not a
big cocaine dealer, or anything like that.”
“So when you testified—under oath—that you had never sold cocaine, that was a lie, wasn’t
it? You swore that you had never sold cocaine, when in fact you had. Is that right?”
“I didn’t sell much.”
“Mr. Jones, listen carefully to the question. You testified under oath that you had never sold
any cocaine; that was a lie, wasn’t it?”
“Yes, I guess it was.”
“So you lied under oath, didn’t you?”
At this point the district attorney intervenes: “Objection, Your Honor. That question has
been asked and answered.”
“Sustained. Counselor, move on to your next question.”
“Thank you, Your Honor.” The defense attorney turns back to the witness. “My next question, Mr. Jones, is this. You just told this jury, under oath, that you could not remember ever
lying under oath. That was a lie, wasn’t it? Because you certainly did remember lying under
oath, just two years ago, in this very courtroom. So when you testified that you didn’t remember, that was another lie, wasn’t it?”

32

Chapter 3

Ad Hominem Arguments

“Well, my memory was a little vague.”
“Lying just comes natural and easy to you, doesn’t it, Mr. Jones? You lie whenever it’s
convenient.”
“Your Honor,” the district attorney rises to object, but the judge interrupts and addresses
the defense attorney: “Counselor, that is argumentative; save your arguments for your closing.
The jury will disregard the last statement from the defense counsel.”
“Mr. Jones,” the defense attorney resumes her questions, “when you lied under oath about
never selling cocaine, did that keep you awake at night? Did your conscience trouble you?
Were you troubled by telling a lie under oath?”
“Your Honor,” the district attorney again rises, “I object to this question.”
“No, I will allow the question. The defendant will answer the question.”
Jones gives a small half-smile, then answers. “No, it didn’t really bother me, I guess.”
The defense attorney walks back to her desk, looks at a paper, then returns to questioning the
witness.
“Mr. Jones, you said that in your trial for selling cocaine, the trial was stopped, and you were
allowed to plead guilty to a lesser charge, the charge of simple possession, is that right?”
“That’s right.”
“Well, that was very fortunate for you, wasn’t it. Here you’ve got this very serious charge of
selling cocaine, and in fact it was an even more serious charge of selling cocaine near a
school—conviction on that charge would have put you in prison for several years—and the
charges get reduced to simple possession; and you were then released for time served, with
no additional prison time, is that right?”
“That’s right.”
“Mr. Jones, you are presently in custody, aren’t you? You were brought here to testify from
your jail cell, and when you are done testifying you will go back to jail, is that right?”
“Yes, I’ve been in jail.”
“Why are you being held in jail, Mr. Jones? What are the charges against you?”
“I’m charged with possession of cocaine.”
“You’re charged with possession. Was that the crime you were originally charged with?”
“No.”
“What were the original charges?”
“I was charged with selling cocaine, but those charges were dropped.”
“Actually, Mr. Jones, you were charged with selling cocaine on school property, isn’t that
right?”
“Yes, but I’m not charged with that now.”
“No, you’re not. You got lucky again. Charges were dropped down to simple possession.
What happened before those charges were reduced? Did you have a meeting with the district
attorney’s office?”
“I might have.”
“I’m not asking what you might have done. Did you meet with someone from the district attorney’s office?”
“Yes.”
“What happened at that meeting? What did you tell them?”
“I told them about my conversation with Sam Smith.”
“With the defendant in this case, Sam Smith?”
“Yes.”
“Did you tell them that you were willing to testify against Mr. Smith?”
“Yes.”
“Were there any conditions on your testifying?”
“Not really conditions. I told them I was worried about the charges against me, that I was
hoping for a lesser charge.”
“And your hopes were answered, weren’t they? Twice you’ve been charged with selling
drugs, selling drugs in the vicinity of schools—apparently your favorite market for drug
dealing—and twice the charges have been dramatically reduced, after you agreed to testify
against someone else. You’ve gotten a very good return on your testimony, haven’t you? No
further questions, Your Honor.”

This cross-examination brings out a number of relevant facts about the witness: facts
that the jury would certainly wish to consider in weighing the credibility of the witness.

Chapter 3

33

Ad Hominem Arguments

An Unassailable Witness
Not every ad hominem attack on a witness’s credibility is
quite as successful as the attack on Jones. The following
cross-examination occurred during a 1952 murder trial
at London’s Central Criminal Court. Mrs. Fish—a
friendly and spirited Irishwoman—had just testified
that she heard screams coming from an upstairs room,
and when she forced her way into the room she found
the defendant’s wife “naked and streaming wet and
lying on the floor and clinging to the foot of the bath
for dear life, and he [the defendant] with his sleeves
rolled up to his armpits”; and (Mrs. Fish continued) the
wife said: “He tried to drown me. He wants to kill me.
Don’t leave me alone with him.” The defense attorney
begins his cross-examination of Mrs. Fish with the following question:
“I put it to you that you are not a very reliable
witness?”
“And for why should you say that, Sorr?”

“Weren’t you convicted of keeping a brothel at
Liverpool in 1947?”
“Sure,” agrees Mrs. Fish as though brothel-keeping
was the worthiest of occupations.
“And again in 1949?”
“Sure,” replies Mrs. Fish, much puzzled. “But
what’s that got to do with drowning a poor Christian
woman in her bath?”
“And then in 1949 weren’t you sent to prison for
procuring an abortion?”
“I was indeed,” agrees Mrs. Fish fervently. “And it’s
you that would have done it yourself if you’d seen that
poor girl all by herself as she was.”1
The defense barrister’s attack on Mrs. Fish’s character and veracity is certainly relevant (it does not commit the ad hominem fallacy); however, it is doubtful
that questions about this woman’s “bad character” convinced the jury that she was “not a very reliable witness.”

The witness is a drug dealer, who apparently specializes in selling to students; the witness
is quite willing to lie under oath; and the witness is getting substantial benefits in return
for his testimony (some might even say that he is being paid off for his testimony), and
thus he has a motive to lie. (Of course a witness with a special interest may still tell the
truth, but if the witness admits to lying whenever it is convenient, and admits that he also
has a special interest that might tempt him to lie in this case, then the jury might be justified in being skeptical about that witness’s testimony.)
If I am a notorious liar, severely paranoid and delusional, known to take bribes, and
convicted several times of perjury, then that will severely weaken my testimony, but it will
have no bearing at all on the validity of my argument. (Of course you will want to check
carefully on the truth of the premises in my argument; and if any of the premises are
based on my testimony, then my problems and flaws will be good grounds for doubting
the truth of that testimony.) If I am a trained observer with a strong reputation for honesty and no special stake in this case, that will give my testimony substantial credibility, but
any argument I give will have to make it on its own, without any help from my character.

DISTINGUISHING ARGUMENT FROM TESTIMONY
How do you distinguish argument from testimony? It’s not always easy. Testimony often
occurs in court, given by sworn witnesses; but sometimes those witnesses—especially
expert witnesses—actually give arguments rather than testimony. And, of course, testimony occurs more frequently outside the courtroom than inside it. “Come on, lend me
$10; really, you can trust me, I will certainly pay you back.” “I saw your lover last night,
dancing cheek-to-cheek with an attractive stranger at the Backdoor Lounge.” Neither of
those is sworn courtroom testimony; but both are testimony, nonetheless. Both depend
for their plausibility on the trustworthiness of the testifiers.
Suppose that one of your friends meets you at the coffee shop and immediately tells
you the following:
I saw them! They’re here! Just now, as I was walking down Church Street on my way to the
coffee shop, I heard this high-pitched hum, and I looked up just in time to see a small, bright

34

Chapter 3

Ad Hominem Arguments

silver sphere, about the size of a basketball, descending into the vacant lot just across from
me. Six tiny purple creatures, with bright orange eyes, leaped out of their spacecraft, ran
three times around the lot, picked up some bottle caps, and then jumped back into the
sphere, blasted off, and swiftly ascended through the clouds and out of sight. The extraterrestrials have arrived! I saw them with my own eyes!

Doubtful Witnesses
David Eddleman was charged with being the gunman in
a drive-by shooting, and in 1999 was convicted of
second-degree murder and a firearm offense in a Michigan state court. The Sixth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals
reviewed his case and overturned his conviction; and in
the course of that review the Court examined the key
witnesses against Eddleman.
Brian Babbitt received significant benefits from
the police in exchange for his testimony. On
January 3, 1997, Babbitt was arrested for the
killing of Georgescu. On January 7, 1997, he was
arrested again, this time for the murder of
Freddy Sanchez. The Wayne County prosecutor’s
office granted him immunity from prosecution
for both murders on January 22, 1997, in
exchange for his testimony against Eddleman. . . .
At the time, Babbitt also faced charges of felony
assault, using a firearm in the commission of a
felony, and violating probation. After negotiating the immunity agreement, the prosecutor
allowed Babbitt to plead guilty to a reduced
charge of aiming without malice, with a
sentence of time served. . . . . The next witness,
jailhouse informant Ricky O’Neal, testified . . .
pursuant to a plea agreement in which the state
agreed to reduce a pending charge of assault
with intent to rob, which carried a possible life
sentence, to two counts of felony assault, for
which he received concurrent sentences of one
to four years. He had an extensive prior criminal

record, including convictions for breaking and
entering, larceny, and unarmed robbery. The
next two witnesses, Brian Weaver and Thomas
Valastek, both testified that they heard Eddleman
admit to the shooting. . . . Weaver may have
avoided punishment for numerous probation
violations by testifying against Eddleman. . . .
Three other pieces of information call into
question Valastek’s credibility. First, he too
cooperated with police only after he was
arrested in connection with Georgescu’s murder.
Second, he admitted on cross-examination that
his initial statement to police contained “a lot of
lying.” Third, he admitted that he chose to
cooperate fully with police a day after he saw
that Babbitt was receiving special perks in
jail—such as family visits, outside food, and
television privileges—and figured “he must have
told them something really good to give him all
of that.”

Jury members must decide whether witnesses are trustworthy; and the extensive criminal records of these
witnesses, together with the substantial benefits they
received as payment for their testimony (including
reducing possible life sentences to a sentence of one to
four years, and in another case dropping murder
charges and substituting a charge of “aiming without
malice” with a sentence of time served) are certainly
factors that jurors should carefully consider.

Paid Testimony
Recently, several celebrities have appeared on television
talk shows, and talked about their illnesses and the successful treatments for them. Kathleen Turner, on Good
Morning America, discussed her arthritis, and then
mentioned “extraordinarily effective” new arthritis
medications that viewers could learn about at a website
sponsored by Amgen and Wyeth. Olympic figure skater
Peggy Fleming discussed her cholesterol problem on an
ABC show, and heaped praise on the prescription drug
Lipitor, made by Pfizer. Lauren Bacall appeared on the
Today show to talk about the terrible, blinding disease
macular degeneration, and also to mention the eye

drug Visudyne. This is a very effective promotion for the
drug companies: it’s not an advertisement, but an
apparently heartfelt endorsement from people the
viewers know and trust. In all those cases, however, the
drug manufacturers paid the celebrities for their
endorsements, although no one mentioned that on the
shows. It might have been information that viewers
would have considered valuable: Kathleen Turner,
Peggy Fleming, and Lauren Bacall weren’t just praising
these drugs out of their altruistic desire to help viewers
improve their health, but out of a desire to put money
in their own pockets.2

Chapter 3

Ad Hominem Arguments

35

Do you believe any of this story? Well, first you want to know whether your friend has a
drug or alcohol problem, is he taking some sort of medication, has he been under a lot of
strain lately (if 2 weeks ago he burst into the coffee shop and told you that he had just
seen a herd of miniature purple and orange elephants doing tricks in the same vacant lot,
that will certainly count against believing his story). In other words, your friend’s claims
about extraterrestrials are based entirely on his own testimony, and that testimony
depends on his character, his truthfulness, his stability. (Of course you might not believe
him in any case; but if he is sober, reliable, and a pillar of stability, you will give his testimony considerably more weight—and might even decide that he probably did see something strange—than you would if you knew he was a notorious trickster or drug addict.)
In contrast to the above, imagine that your friend earnestly argues that we are even
now being visited by extraterrestrials:
Look, there probably are some extraterrestrials observing our planet, perhaps even visiting
our planet. Think for a minute. How many planets are there in our solar system, orbiting our
little star we call the Sun? Eight, right? Now consider how many stars there are—just counting
our own Milky Way galaxy, leave aside all the other galaxies, some that are vastly larger. As Carl
Sagan would say, there are billions and billions of stars, OK? And it seems likely that most of
those stars also have planets; in fact, astronomers have already observed planets orbiting a
number of relatively nearby stars. So those billions and billions of stars probably have tens and
perhaps hundreds of billions of planets, not to mention several times that many moons. Out
of all those planets orbiting all those stars, does it seem likely that our little backwater planet
is the only one suitable for life? Of course not. No doubt the conditions that made life possible are rather special, and quite rare; but with tens of billions of opportunities, the right
conditions probably existed at least a few thousand—more likely a few million—times. That
being the case, doesn’t it seem likely that life developed, and began to evolve, somewhat
earlier on some other planets? And if that’s so, isn’t it also likely that some—probably many—
species on other planets circling other stars would have discovered scientific method just a few
thousand years ahead of us? And imagine what our science will be like in a few thousand years!
In less than a century, we have gone from uncertain flights of a few hundred feet to spacecraft
that are exploring the outer reaches of our solar system. In another hundred years, where will
we reach? In another thousand, we may have explored what seems almost inconceivable now:
the far reaches of our entire galaxy. So it seems likely that even now, some extraterrestrial
species, just a few thousand years ahead of us scientifically and technologically, is exploring
our galaxy, and probably is sending scouting parties (the way we send explorers and anthropologists) to examine other civilizations and other cultures. So we must conclude that it is
likely that even now we are being observed and perhaps visited by extraterrestrials.

Are you convinced? Probably not. The argument does a good deal of hand-waving and
builds quickly into wild speculations from a rather thin foundation of facts. But notice this:
You do not have to know anything about your friend to evaluate that argument. Whether
your friend is drunk or sober, reliable or untrustworthy, stable or unbalanced, wise or
foolish does not matter. Your friend has offered an argument for the likelihood of extraterrestrials in our midst, and the arguer’s character, motives, and state of mind are irrelevant
to the quality of that argument. Unlike testimony, the argument stands or falls on its own
merits. If the argument had been given by Carl Sagan, it would not be a better argument.
If it had been given by a long-term resident of a facility for the criminally insane, it would
not be a weaker argument.
It is important to distinguish between argument and testimony; unfortunately, that
distinction is not always easy to make. In everyday life we frequently combine testimony with
argument: My argument may contain premises that I testify are true. Suppose there is a disagreement about whether Joe went to a tavern last night. Mary offers the following argument:
Joe certainly did not go to the tavern last night. We all agree that Joe stayed in town the
entire evening; and we all know that there are only two taverns in the town. The Red Lion
Tavern was closed—the health department closed them down last week and they still haven’t

36

Chapter 3

Ad Hominem Arguments

reopened. So Joe obviously wasn’t at the Red Lion. The only other tavern in town is the
Student Prince, and I was there from the time it opened until closing, and Joe never set foot
in the place. So Joe could not have been at a tavern last night.

Okay, that’s an argument. But one of the key premises of Mary’s argument—Joe was not at
the Student Prince Tavern—is based on Mary’s testimony. So testimony and argument get
intertwined here, and that makes things difficult. But if Mary is giving testimony (and in
this case she is) then she is a legitimate target of ad hominem attack. If you decide that a
key premise of her argument is doubtful because it is based on her unreliable testimony,
that would give you good reason to suspect that her argument is unsound.
In ordinary life, argument and testimony are often mixed together. But while argument and testimony are not always separated in day-to-day life, they are—or at least are
supposed to be—in court. Witnesses give testimony, the attorneys give arguments, and the
attorneys are not supposed to give testimony. The distinction is usually drawn quite carefully. Paul Bergman, in his instructional book Trial Advocacy, gives the following helpful
guidance to practicing attorneys:
When no expert has testified, the law tries to steer a course between allowing you [the attorney] to make the factfinder [judge or jury] aware of pertinent scientific knowledge, and forbidding you to insert in argument facts that are not part of the record. The general rule is
that you may read from a scientific authority if it presents matters of common knowledge and
illustrations drawn from common experience. But you may be forbidden to read the author’s
conclusion set forth in the study, or from presenting scientific experiments or theories to the
factfinder if they are not matters of common knowledge.
To focus the dichotomy [between argument and testimony], assume you are questioning
the validity [accuracy] of an eyewitness identification. Clearly you may argue the common
experience of thinking you recognize a friend, only to find out later that you were mistaken.
Just as clearly, you may read from books and newspapers examples of convictions that
resulted from mistaken identification. You may also read from a book describing the factors
that lead to faulty identification, and then argue the presence or absence of those factors in
the evidence. In many jurisdictions, you could also refer to a scientific study showing the likelihood of misidentification. These matters appear to grow out of the common knowledge
and wisdom of the community. But you could probably not read the conclusion of a scientific
study showing that in a case pretty much like yours, there is a great likelihood of misidentification. That would be viewed as placing expert testimony before the factfinder in the guise of
argument.3

Thus if you wish to place expert testimony before the fact finder, you must produce the
expert to actually testify; then the opposing side can (legitimately) raise questions about
the qualifications and integrity of the expert witness, and the fact finder can then judge
whether the witness’s testimony is reliable. (That is why “hearsay” testimony—“I heard
George claim that Ralph robbed the bank”—is generally not allowed. There is no opportunity to cross-examine George, test his truthfulness, and inquire about his character and
biases and reliability.)
This distinction between advocacy (argument) and testimony is especially important
in court, and judges rightfully insist on it. The lawyer is not testifying; the lawyers are giving arguments, and those arguments must be evaluated on their own merits—not on
the merits of the arguer, and not on the basis of whether the arguer does or does not
believe her own arguments. Defense lawyers often try to convey to the jury their own
belief in the innocence of their clients, and prosecutors frequently try to impress upon
the jury the prosecutor’s own belief in the defendant’s guilt. But such tactics are not legitimate. If the lawyers were witnesses, then it would certainly be important that they believe in
what they testify (otherwise they are lying); but when you are evaluating an advocate’s
arguments, you must judge the arguments themselves and not the sincerity (or any other
characteristic) of the advocate—whether the advocate is or is not convinced by the argument is irrelevant. When advocates begin to offer their own testimony rather than confining

Chapter 3

Ad Hominem Arguments

37

themselves to argument (“I sincerely believe that this defendant is innocent”), judges
should point out the irrelevance of the advocate’s own beliefs—as in the following examples from British courts:
Serjeant Shee, while defending the poisoner Palmer, [said] to the jury: “I begin Palmer’s
defence and say in all sincerity that I have an entire conviction of his innocence.” The Lord
Chief Justice who was trying the case, Lord Campbell, told the jury: “I most strongly recommend to you that you should attend to everything that Serjeant Shee said to you with the
exception of his own private opinion. It is my duty to tell you that opinion ought not to be
any ingredient of your verdict. It is the duty of the advocate to press his argument on the jury,
but not his opinion.”
Even Erskine [an outstanding barrister], carried away in defence of Tom Paine, said: “I will
now lay aside the role of the advocate and address you as a man,” to earn the rebuke [from
the presiding judge]: “You will do nothing of the sort. The only right and license you have to
appear in this court is as an advocate.”4

Ideally, attorneys should be giving arguments, not testimony. They are advocates, not
witnesses. But of course attorneys often do insert their own testimony, and judges are
not always scrupulous in preventing it. This example is from the career of Jake Ehrlich, a
famous San Francisco lawyer from the 1920s through the 1950s. In 1936, Ehrlich was
defending a policeman—Lieutenant Henry Ludolph—accused of accepting bribes.
Ehrlich’s summation to the jury was passionate:
I don’t defend Ludolph as a client, not as a policeman—but as an old and dear friend. I know
before God that Henry Ludolph never committed a dishonest act or took a cent of dirty
money in his life.5

Ehrlich’s testimony on behalf of Ludolph may or may not be true; in any case, it is out of
place. The jury should decide the case on the basis of the testimony of the sworn witnesses
and the arguments of the attorneys. But an attorney’s testimony should be given little
weight. In the first place, the attorney obviously has a strong special interest in the case
and so is not giving unbiased testimony. Even more important, there is no opportunity for
the opposing side to challenge the attorney’s testimony. When a witness testifies, the witness
is placed under oath and is liable to perjury charges if he or she lies. Furthermore, the
witness can be challenged and cross-examined by the opposing attorney, and information
about the witness’s character and truthfulness and motives can be brought out by the
opposing attorney. But when an attorney testifies, the attorney is not under oath and is not
liable to perjury charges; the opposing attorney has no opportunity to cross-examine; and
the other side has no chance to bring in evidence about the attorney’s dishonesty, biases,
tendency to exaggerate, drug addiction, general unreliability, or whatever. When you
evaluate testimony, it is essential to know the character of the testifier: Is this person honest,
unbiased, accurate, careful in stating only what he or she actually knows? When one of the
lawyers in the case testifies, the jury cannot learn such things about the testifier. Thus
“advocate testimony” (“I know my client is innocent,” or—from the prosecuting attorney—
“I am absolutely sure this person is guilty”) should carry little or no weight. In sum: Listen
carefully to the advocates’ arguments; their testimony should not be part of the trial, and if
it is, it should be disregarded.
In court, the distinction between advocacy and testimony is relatively clear; so it is
obvious enough that if an attempt is made to discredit an advocate’s argument by attacking the character of the advocate, then that attack commits the ad hominem fallacy.
And attacks on witnesses who are giving testimony—attacks on their honesty, their sanity, their special interests, their mental stability—will be relevant to the strength of the
witness’s testimony (and thus—whether true or false—they do not commit the ad
hominem fallacy). Outside the courtroom, the distinction between advocacy and testimony is not always so easily drawn. In any case, the point to remember is that when a

38

Chapter 3

Ad Hominem Arguments

claim is based on testimony, the claim is only as strong as the person giving the testimony
(and thus questions about the character and reliability of the testifier are legitimate and
important); but when an arguer is attempting to draw out the implications of given facts,
the argument must be evaluated independently of the arguer (and questions about the
character and reliability of the arguer are irrelevant, and attacks on the arguer commit
the ad hominem fallacy).
A closely related point will perhaps help sort out these issues. Suppose the chairman
of the board of a major U.S. auto manufacturer presents an argument for the conclusion
that imports of foreign cars should be drastically restricted. The chairman argues that the
importing of such autos should be restricted because they pose a health and safety hazard
to U.S. consumers: The imported cars are made of inferior steel, the steel is weaker than
that used in U.S.-made cars, and under the stress of high-speed driving the cars are more
likely to wobble and go out of control. In this hypothetical case, the chairman is giving an
argument for restrictions on imported autos. (He is not merely giving his own testimony
against imported cars; he is not saying, “Look, we would all be better off if there were
restrictions on imported automobiles; I know about these things, trust me.”) He is instead
arguing that inferior materials will result in obvious dangers under common driving conditions and that U.S. citizens should be protected from such dangers. Now suppose someone
responds, “Don’t listen to the chairman’s argument! He has a strong reason for opposing
imports. If there are fewer imports then he can charge a higher price for his company’s
cars and make more money! He’s not really interested in the safety of U.S. drivers; that
greedy money-grubber is just interested in making more money.” That would commit the
ad hominem fallacy. Even if the chairman’s motivation is greed rather than concern for
consumer safety, that is irrelevant: The chairman has given an argument, and you must
examine the argument (not the arguer). However, it may still be useful to know that the

bikeriderlondon / Shutterstock

How Do You Rule?

In her closing arguments to the jury in the
O. J. Simpson murder trial, prosecutor Marcia
Clark made the following remarks:
I started on that side of counsel table [referring
to the lawyers for the defense]. I was a defense
attorney. I know what the ethical obligations
are of a prosecutor. I took a cut in pay to join
this office, because I believe in this job.
I believe in doing it fairly and doing it right
and I like the luxury of being a prosecutor.
Because I have the luxury on any case of going
to the judge and saying, “Guess what, Your
Honor, dismiss it, it’s not here.”
Ladies and Gentlemen, I can come to you
and I can say, “Don’t convict, it’s not here.”

I have that right. I have that luxury. This job
gives me that luxury. It doesn’t give me a lot of
money but it gives me that luxury. I can get up
in the morning and look at myself in the mirror
and say I tell you the truth, I will never ask for a
conviction unless I should, unless the law says
I must, unless he is proven guilty beyond a
reasonable doubt on credible evidence.

At that point in her closing argument, the
defense intervened with an objection. The defense
claimed that Marcia Clark’s remarks were improper,
and that she should be forced to retract them,
because she was improperly giving testimony about
her own convictions concerning Simpson’s guilt
rather than presenting argument based on the
evidence. Marcia Clark asserted that there was
nothing improper in her closing argument. She
denied that she was giving any testimony concerning her own beliefs; instead, she claimed, she was
simply giving arguments based on well-known
principles governing legal ethics and the ethics of
prosecutors.
Was Marcia Clark improperly putting her
own testimony before the jury? Or was she, quite
properly, simply giving an argument? How do
you rule?

Chapter 3

Ad Hominem Arguments

39

Arguing for Profit
When argument is given, we must consider the argument:
We cannot reject an argument based on the source of that
argument. So when Dr. Robert Kehoe argued that lead
in leaded gasoline is not a health hazard, it would be an
ad hominem fallacy to reject his arguments on the basis
that he is heavily funded by the lead industry. However,
that does not mean that we should ignore the fact that he
has a special interest in denying the health hazards of
leaded gasoline: it should warn us to give careful scrutiny
to his arguments and his research, since he does have a
special bias. And in the case of Dr. Kehoe’s research, that
careful scrutiny pays off. One of the things Dr. Kehoe
attempted to prove through his research was that the
lead burned in leaded gasoline (7 million tons in the
United States during the twentieth century) does not
accumulate in humans, and so cannot cause lead
poisoning; and that high levels of blood–lead are
common and natural. As proof, he compared a group of
people living in remote rural Mexico—not exposed to
leaded gasoline—with people living in U.S. urban environments. Sure enough, the blood-lead content of the
rural Mexicans was approximately the same level as the
lead-blood level of U.S. city dwellers. Unfortunately, in
his zeal to defend the lead industry, Dr. Kehoe had not
randomly chosen a rural population; instead, the
Mexican village he chose for comparison was heavily
exposed to lead through the lead glazes it used in

making its local pottery, and also from consuming food
prepared and served in lead-glazed pottery. When later
studies compared other rural peoples against U.S.
citizens exposed to leaded gasoline, they found that the
U.S. blood-lead contamination was much higher. So
although we cannot reject Dr. Kehoe’s argument on the
basis of his payoffs from the lead industry, those payoffs
should alert us to look more closely at the research that
forms the basis of his argument. When that research is
shown to be shoddy and biased, it is perfectly legitimate
to point out the serious flaws in Dr. Kehoe’s research,
and the flaws in Dr. Kehoe’s arguments. Such criticisms
of arguments are not ad hominem at all, and so obviously
do not commit the ad hominem fallacy. (If Dr. Kehoe
testified that his research was accurate and unbiased—
“trust me, my comparison groups were not specially
selected”—then of course it would be legitimate to make
ad hominem attacks on his testimony.) Finally, it is also
legitimate to make an ad hominem attack against
Dr. Kehoe: “Dr. Kehoe is a disgrace to the scientific community, who distorts his studies in order to cover up a
major health hazard.” You might make that legitimate
ad hominem attack in pushing to have Dr. Kehoe fired
by his university. But whatever Dr. Kehoe’s flaws, you
cannot reject his arguments because of flaws in him—
though of course you can reject his arguments because
of flaws in the arguments themselves.6

fellow giving the argument is chairman of the board of a U.S. auto manufacturer and does
have a special financial interest in the issue. It will be useful, but not because that knowledge will be good grounds for dismissing the chairman’s argument. Rather, it will be useful
because it will prompt us to look very carefully at the premises of the chairman’s argument:
Are the premises in the argument really true? Is the steel used by foreign manufacturers
inferior? We cannot reject a person’s argument on the basis of the character or special
interest of the arguer; however, knowing that the arguer is dishonest or greedy or has a
financial interest in the issue will be good reason to double-check the factual claims (the
premises). If the premises are false, then the argument will be unsound. If the premises are
true and the argument is valid, then the argument is a sound argument no matter how selfish, despicable, biased, or untrustworthy the arguer may be. (Of course if the support for
one of the premises is simply the testimony of the person giving the argument—“They really
do use inferior steel; I know, because I saw them do it!”—then the character of the person
giving that testimony is directly relevant to the value and reliability of the testimony.)

Exercise 3-1
The following examples involve ad hominem arguments; tell which ones do—and which ones do
not—commit the ad hominem fallacy, and explain why.
1. Ralph claims that pornography ought to be banned because it exploits and degrades those who are
involved in its production and because it provides too many opportunities for organized crime.
However, I happen to know that Ralph frequently rents hard-core pornographic videotapes. Well,
so much for Ralph’s arguments to ban pornography!

40

Chapter 3

Ad Hominem Arguments

2. Bert maintains that there was indeed a conspiracy to assassinate President John Kennedy. He says
that he knows there was such a conspiracy, because he is now confessing to being part of the
conspiracy, along with Oswald. However, I don’t put much faith in Bert’s conspiracy theory; after
all, he also has confessed to being involved in the conspiracy to assassinate Abraham Lincoln.
3. Joan favors developing a system of radio receivers that would monitor the heavens for radio signals
from intelligent extraterrestrials. Joan argues that there are millions of stars similar to our Sun, and
so there are probably also millions of planets orbiting those stars, and thus it is likely that life
evolved on at least some of those other planets. And if there is life on other planets, then it seems
reasonable, so Joan argues, that at least some of those planets began their evolutionary process
earlier than did Earth, and thus might well contain intelligent life that has advanced far beyond the
intelligent life on Earth. If so, we might be able to learn a great deal from intercepting their radio
signals. In any case, Joan thinks it is worth the investment required to try. Joan’s argument sounds
pretty good, and I was almost convinced that her proposed radio receivers were a good idea until
I learned that she also wants to place television cameras deep in the forests so we can record the
dances of the woodland elves! I’m afraid Joan’s elevator doesn’t go to the top floor.
4. Bill claims that Professor Paula Pithy gave him a D in eighteenth-century British history when he
really deserved at least a B. Bill says that Professor Pithy didn’t like him, because several times during class he noted errors in her lectures and corrected her mistakes. He says he knows more about
British history than Professor Pithy does—and that she resented it, and thus gave him a much lower
grade than he really deserves, and that’s the only thing that kept him from making the dean’s list.
Well, maybe so. But Bill also claims that he was an all-state football player in high school, and I went
to high school with Bill so I happen to know that Bill never even made the football team.
5. Senator Scam is running for reelection, and now he claims that he is really concerned about
improving the quality of life for all of our citizens. He says he is an independent senator, and that
his only goal is to promote the good of the people. But don’t you believe it. Senator Scam has been
raking in money from every lobbyist in Washington; in fact, he received more money from the
insurance, tobacco, and health-care industry than any other senator! And those lobbyists got what
they paid for: a senator who has spent the last 6 years blocking every major effort at health-care
reform and blocking investigations into the activities of the major tobacco companies. And now he
claims that he is only interested in the good of the people! His only real interest is in getting your
vote, so he can keep raking in the money. Don’t vote for that sleazy hypocrite.
6. Many physicians claim that active euthanasia is wrong and should be prohibited. They argue that
active euthanasia would undermine trust in the medical profession’s commitment to healing,
that active euthanasia would be subject to abuse by those who simply want to get rid of older
people who are viewed as burdensome, and that proper and aggressive use of pain-control
medications can alleviate suffering and thus eliminate any need for euthanasia as an escape from
suffering. But you shouldn’t trust the arguments of those doctors. For if active euthanasia is not
allowed, then those who are terminally ill will have a longer period of illness leading to their
deaths, and they will require expensive long-term medical treatment, and so those very same doctors
will make more money. It’s not really surprising that physicians argue against active euthanasia:
Blocking active euthanasia means money in their pockets and payments on their Porsches.
7. William H. Webster was named by the Securities and Exchange Commission to head a new board
overseeing the accounting industry, and to clean up wrongdoing in the industry. But it turns out that
when Webster was a director of U.S. Technologies, he was chairman of the audit committee for
the company. While holding that position he was warned by BDO Seidman, a large accounting firm
that was auditing U.S. Technologies, about serious financial problems in the company. Webster,
rather than cleaning up the problems, fired the auditor. And this is the man who President Bush
wanted to clean up the accounting industry. He is obviously not qualified for the job!
8. Don’t take a course from Bruce! He is the most boring professor I’ve ever had: He sits at the desk
and reads passages straight from the book, and then he reads from these old yellowed notes that he
hasn’t changed in 20 years—I think maybe they are notes he took when he was an undergraduate—
and he mumbles, so you can’t even tell what he’s saying. And he gets really angry if you ask him to
repeat anything or explain something. But worst of all is his exams! They are absolutely impossible:
They usually ask about things the class isn’t even covering, and they are so long no one has time to
finish more than half the exam, and then he counts off for all the questions you didn’t have time
to answer. Out of 40 students in his class last semester, 32 made Fs and the rest made Ds. So when
you are considering who to take for your philosophy courses, avoid Bruce like the plague.

Chapter 3

Ad Hominem Arguments

41

TRICKY TYPES OF AD HOMINEM
Ad hominem attacks against arguments are fallacious. And if an ad hominem attack
charges an arguer with stupidity or corruption, you will instantly recognize that as a
fallacious attack on the argument. Unfortunately, some instances of ad hominem fallacy
are more subtle. Instead of making obvious frontal assaults on the arguer (“Don’t listen
to his argument: He is a swindler and a drunkard, and he hates kittens”), the ad hominem
may be more insidious. Even those more subtle forms of ad hominem fallacy will not
deceive you if you always remember that the source of the argument is irrelevant to the
strength of argument (although the source of testimony is relevant when judging the
strength of testimony).

Bias Ad Hominem
Not all forms of ad hominem fallacy are as obvious as calling the arguer nasty names.
Consider the bias form of the ad hominem fallacy. This fallacy occurs when an argument
is disparaged on the grounds that the arguer has some special interest or bias in the
question at issue. For example, the American Tobacco Institute has been running advertisements that contain arguments against tighter restrictions on smoking in public. The
American Tobacco Institute is by no means a disinterested, neutral party. It is the public
relations–lobbying branch of the tobacco industry, and it is funded by cigarettemanufacturing companies. So obviously the American Tobacco Institute and the companies it represents have a special interest in opposing restrictions on smoking: More
restrictions mean less smoking, fewer cigarettes sold, and smaller profits. Thus someone
might argue:
Pay no attention to those American Tobacco Institute arguments against restrictions on
smoking. You shouldn’t take their arguments seriously; after all, those arguments are bought
and paid for by the tobacco industry.

This sounds like an effective and forceful critique of the arguments by the American
Tobacco Institute, but in fact it is an instance of the ad hominem fallacy. For if the
American Tobacco Institute has given an argument, then their argument stands or falls
on its own merits or its own faults. And it is irrelevant whether that argument was paid
for by the tobacco industry or was developed by some pure, innocent, and absolutely
unbiased philosopher, or whether it dropped from the heavens like manna. Remember:
The source of the argument—whether good, bad, or indifferent—is irrelevant to the
quality of the argument.
Don’t misunderstand: If an argument is offered against restrictions on public smoking, it may be useful to know the special interests of the arguer; for if we know that the
argument is being given by someone with a special interest, that may be a helpful
reminder to check very carefully the premises of that argument (to be sure that any
“facts” cited are genuine, that any data given are accurate, that the “truths” stated are not
half-truths). But while it may be helpful to have a reminder to check carefully the soundness of the argument, it is not helpful—in fact it is wrong—to reject an argument because
the source of the argument has a special interest or bias.
If it were true that any argument presented by a paid advocate is unsound, then a
sound argument would be a rare event in the courtroom. Certainly many American attorneys and British barristers are genuinely committed to fair and just trials. But they are also
involved in an adversarial system of justice that functions by having the prosecution
present as strong a case as possible while the defense works to show that the defendant
has not been proved guilty. And in almost all cases the prosecution and defense attorneys
are paid to argue for their respective sides. So if being paid to present arguments or

42

Chapter 3

Ad Hominem Arguments

having a special interest made one’s arguments unsound (fallacious), then a sound
argument would hardly ever occur in court. But having a special interest in a position
does not make one’s arguments for that position unsound, and to claim that an argument
is unsound merely because the person giving the argument has a special interest in the
case is to commit the ad hominem fallacy.
But remember that the situation is completely different when ad hominem arguments are directed against testimony. If a witness is testifying—not presenting an
argument—then the claim that he or she has a special interest in the case (and thus that
one should weigh the possible effects of that special interest when evaluating the truthfulness and reliability of the witness’s testimony) is certainly relevant, and does not commit
the ad hominem fallacy. If the witness is the defendant’s best friend, then the witness has
a special interest that may influence his or her testimony. If the prosecution witness is a
police officer who has worked for months to build a case against a suspected drug dealer,
then convicting the defendant will be a feather in the officer’s cap and the officer has a
special interest in the case: The defense attorney will be justified in reminding the jury of
the witness’s special interest. If Hatfield and McCoy have been mortal enemies for
decades, then Hatfield has a special interest in McCoy’s case; and after Hatfield has testified that he saw McCoy (the defendant) running from the scene of the robbery, it is legitimate for the defense attorney to launch an ad hominem attack against Hatfield’s
testimony by charging Hatfield with a strong bias against the defendant. That is an ad
hominem attack, but not an ad hominem fallacy. (The defense attorney’s ad hominem
attack on Hatfield—which reveals Hatfield’s hatred of McCoy—provides important
information for you as a jury member even if you do not decide that Hatfield is lying. For
while Hatfield’s hatred of McCoy might not lead Hatfield to lie under oath, it might influence Hatfield’s perception of events. Eyewitness testimony is notoriously unreliable;
if Hatfield’s eyewitness perceptions are colored by his hatred of McCoy, that may make
Hatfield’s honest belief about what he observed more open to doubt. For if Hatfield
already believes that McCoy is just the sort of scoundrel who would commit a robbery,
then Hatfield may be more likely to “see” McCoy fleeing the scene of a robbery. If
Hatfield expects to see McCoy running from the robbed liquor store, then the man he sees
running is likely to look like McCoy.)
So it is important that you know the bias or special interest of anyone whose testimony you must evaluate. And it is quite reasonable for attorneys to make the jurors aware
of any special interests or biases the witnesses may have. But of course you must still
exercise caution in drawing your conclusions about the reliability of the testimony. The
police officer does have a special interest in the case, but it certainly doesn’t follow that
the police officer will lie in order to get a conviction. The defendant’s best friend strongly
desires that the defendant be acquitted, but that doesn’t mean that the friend is willing to
commit perjury in order to bring about that acquittal. Hatfield’s hatred of McCoy may not
be as strong as Hatfield’s love of the truth. And the defendant—who certainly has a
special interest in the results of the trial—may nonetheless be testifying honestly. Sometimes people overcome their own personal interests and testify truthfully, and sometimes
they do not. In order for you to decide whether the witness is testifying accurately and
truthfully—and that is one of your major responsibilities as a jury member—you must
weigh all the information you have about the past behavior, character, and special interests of the witness, and then make the best decision you can about the quality of the
testimony. For that task, information about the character of the witness is certainly
relevant, and ad hominem arguments by the opposition are one legitimate means of
providing the jury with information about the person testifying. (Ad hominem attacks on
testifiers do not commit the ad hominem fallacy; however, not every ad hominem attack on
a testifier is relevant. An ad hominem argument against a testifier may make points that
do not have force against the person testifying. If the defense attorney attacks the witness
Hatfield because Hatfield’s ears are ugly, that ad hominem attack certainly should not
count for much against Hatfield’s testimony.)

Chapter 3

Ad Hominem Arguments

43

You might get the impression that in the courtroom all ad hominem arguments are
against testimony, and thus that the ad hominem fallacy never occurs during trials. Not
so. An example of ad hominem fallacy can be found in F. Lee Bailey’s closing argument
for the defense in the trial of George Edgerly (accused of murdering his wife). In The
Defense Never Rests, F. Lee Bailey describes one of the most dramatic moments in his closing
argument:
At one point, I walked over to the D.A. [district attorney, the prosecution lawyer] and
shouted: “Here’s a man so callous as to try to put a man in the electric chair for something he
didn’t do just in order to get reelected.”7

But the district attorney’s motives and interests (whether they are as commendable as
trying to protect society from vicious criminals or as despicable as trying to promote his
own reputation for selfish political purposes) are irrelevant; the district attorney was giving
arguments, not testimony, and thus an attack on the district attorney’s motives is an example
of ad hominem fallacy.
But the ad hominem fallacy is a two-edged sword, and in courtrooms it cuts both
ways. In the famous Loeb–Leopold murder case (in which Loeb and Leopold, teenage
boys from very wealthy Chicago families, stood trial for the brutal murder of a younger
boy), the great criminal defense lawyer Clarence Darrow was accused by State’s Attorney
Crowe of defending the boys only because he received a huge fee. (This was not true;
although it was rumored that Darrow received a $1 million fee, he in fact received only
$40,000, and most if not all of that money went to pay for court costs and office expenses.)

The Scandal of “Jailhouse Informants”
One of the most obvious and troublesome sources for
biased witnesses is the use of “jailhouse informants.”
These witnesses are convicted criminals whom authorities plant in the same cell with a suspect who has been
arrested and is awaiting trial. The authorities tell the
informant to befriend the suspect, and to listen carefully
to everything the suspect says, in hopes that the suspect
will confess his or her crime to the informant. Since the
informant and suspect are together day and night, it is
hoped that the suspect will eventually say something
incriminating to the informant “friend.” The problems
with this process are obvious and profound. In the first
place, the informant is a convicted criminal, and therefore not the most reliable witness in the world. But
second, and even more troubling, the informant is
offered a deal by the authorities: if you testify that the
suspect told you something that will contribute to the
suspect’s conviction, then you will receive a reduced sentence or early parole (and if you cannot provide testimony helpful to the prosecution, you get nothing). So
the informant is being paid for his testimony, and paid
in precious coin: reduced prison time. It is easy to see
how such incentives could lead to false testimony, and in
fact there have been many cases of innocent people
being wrongly convicted by the perjured testimony of
jailhouse informants (and while there have been many
cases of obviously perjurious testimony by such informants, I know of only two cases in which a jailhouse

informant was prosecuted for perjury: one was a case in
which the jailhouse informant embarrassed the district
attorney’s office by going on television and bragging
about the special deals he had gotten from the district
attorney’s office in exchange for his false testimony
against other defendants). With these problems in
mind, the Alberta Department of Justice recently issued
these guidelines for use of such testimony:
1. All testimony from in-custody informants must
first be reviewed by the Crown prosecutor’s office
and then by a Ministry of Justice official outside
the prosecutor’s office.
2. Jailhouse informant testimony can only be used
when there is a compelling public interest.
3. Defense counsel will receive full disclosure concerning the informant’s past and all details of the
deal offered to the informant.
4. Jailhouse informants who lie will be criminally
prosecuted.
These guidelines may not go far enough—some feel
that jailhouse informants have no place in a system of
justice that is supposed to protect the defendant’s rights
and discourage perjured testimony—but at least the
problem is acknowledged, which is more than has
happened in the United States.

44

Chapter 3

Ad Hominem Arguments

How Do You Rule?
bikeriderlondon / Shutterstock

DISTRICT ATTORNEY: Your Honor, I must

You are the presiding judge in a robbery trial.
A witness for the prosecution (Mr. Candor) has
testified that he saw the defendant running through
an alley shortly after a bank robbery was committed
and that the defendant had a large money bag in his
left hand and a pistol in his right hand. The defendant’s attorney is now cross-examining Mr. Candor:

DEFENSE ATTORNEY: Now Mr. Candor, you
say you observed the defendant running
through an alley.
MR. CANDOR: Yes, sir.
DEFENSE: What were you doing in the
alley?
MR. CANDOR: I was talking with friends.
DEFENSE: Mr. Candor, do you spend a
good deal of your time in such alleys?
MR. CANDOR: Yes, sir.
DEFENSE: You are dressed very fashionably
today, Mr. Candor; is that the way you
were dressed when you were chatting
with your friends in the alley? Do you
and your friends normally dress
like that?

object to this line of questioning. What
Mr. Candor was wearing when he
observed the defendant certainly did
not affect his vision; and what Mr. Candor
is wearing today in court is equally
irrelevant. I beg you to instruct counsel for the defense to stop these ridiculous questions and confine himself to
relevant issues.
DEFENSE ATTORNEY: Your Honor, the prosecution knows full well that these are
relevant and important questions. The
jury has a right to know that being a
prosecution witness has been very
profitable for Mr. Candor: the prosecution has bought new clothes for the
witness, has provided him much more
comfortable accommodations—a great
improvement over drafty alleyways—
for the duration of the trial, given him
food and money and comforts far
beyond his usual experience.
DISTRICT ATTORNEY: Your Honor, where
the witness sleeps, what he eats, and
what he wears has no bearing on this
case. The defense is simply trying to
obscure the real issue: Mr. Candor’s
positive identification of the defendant running from the scene of the
crime with a gun and the loot.
How do you rule? Do you sustain the district attorney’s objection and require the defense attorney to
drop this line of questioning as irrelevant? Or, do you
overrule the objection and allow the defense attorney to continue asking about the witness’s new suit?

But even if Crowe’s claim were true, it would still be irrelevant, since Darrow’s motives—
whether selfish or altruistic—were irrelevant to the soundness of his arguments. Darrow
returned the favor, accusing prosecutor Crowe of being a “hanging” state’s attorney who
“would laugh at the hanging of these boys.”8 Now if Darrow’s claim were true, it would certainly indicate a severe lack of basic human sympathy in Crowe’s character, and that might
be good grounds for not wishing to spend your summer holidays with prosecutor Crowe.
But true or not, it is irrelevant to Crowe’s arguments. Both Darrow and Crowe are indulging
in ad hominem fallacies. (Darrow and Crowe apparently did not take offense over this
exchange of fallacious ad hominem attacks, since they remained close friends after the trial.)

Inconsistency and Ad Hominem
The charge of bias is not the only tricky form of ad hominem fallacy. Another subtle use
of ad hominem fallacy is to claim that the arguer’s words are inconsistent with his or her
deeds. If Sandra Smith argues that abortions are wrong, then we must evaluate her argument

Chapter 3

45

Ad Hominem Arguments

A Special Case
A nineteenth-century New York murder trial contains a
striking example of an arguer’s special interest. In the
1857 trial of Mrs. Emma Augusta Cunningham for
the premeditated murder of Dr. Harvey Burdell, the
public prosecutor who argued for the conviction of
Mrs. Cunningham (and thus for her execution) was also
the lawyer for the blood relatives of Dr. Burdell and
represented them in their efforts to claim the property of
Dr. Burdell. Since one of the claims of Mrs. Cunningham
(disputed by the prosecution) was that she was secretly
married to Dr. Burdell, that meant that if her claims were
upheld she would receive the bulk of Dr. Burdell’s
considerable estate. The public prosecutor—in his role
as counsel for Dr. Burdell’s family—thus had a special
interest in having Mrs. Cunningham convicted and
executed: that would get her out of the way and leave
Dr Burdell’s estate for the clients of the prosecutor.
The defense attorney for Mrs. Cunningham made
quite sure that this peculiar situation was emphasized
for the jury:
I ask again, gentlemen, why was it that such a savage attack was made upon this defenceless
woman? There is only one principle upon which I
can understand it. The moment the lifeless
remains of Harvey Burdell are consigned to the
cold and silent tomb, and even before, commences the scramble for his property. We know
with what avidity his heirs, his blood relatives, have
sought to snatch, and divide up among them,
whatever property he left. We know how they have
hunted this unfortunate woman; and I know, also,
that the very Counsel of the members of that

family who has appeared in the Surrogate’s Court,
in order, if possible, to make null and void her
marriage with the deceased, so that they might get
the property—that very Counsel, although a worthy man and an able lawyer, appears here to prosecute this woman to the death. Gentlemen, you all
recollect, upon the Coroner’s inquest, with what
unmingled feelings of disgust was viewed the conduct of a certain lawyer who appeared there as
Counsel for the blood relatives of the deceased,
and took part in the inquest. As you mingled with
your acquaintances and the people in this city,
and read the newspapers, you heard the universal
condemnation of the course pursued by that man;
you heard denounced the indelicacy, and indecency even, of his appearing as public prosecutor,
and, at the same time, as Counsel for those peculiarly interested in the death of my client.9

Certainly the defense counsel is correct that the actions
of the prosecutor—in serving as counsel for the relatives of Burdell and also prosecuting Mrs. Cunningham—
were “indelicate,” and perhaps even indecent. It does
appear that the prosecutor operates from a position of
very special interest in this case. But distasteful as that
may be—even if we regard the prosecutor with “unmingled feelings of disgust” because of such conduct—that
has no bearing on his arguments. The prosecutor, after
all, is not giving testimony; rather, he is presenting
arguments for the guilt of the defendant. And those
arguments must be evaluated on their own merits and
demerits, independently of the character, interests, or
flaws of the person who presents them.

on its own merits. An argument that we should “Pay no attention to Sandra’s arguments
against abortion, for I happen to know that Sandra herself has had three abortions!” would
commit the ad hominem fallacy. If Joe Jones gives an impassioned argument in favor of
vegetarianism (raising and killing animals is cruel to the animals, feeding grain to beef
animals is wasteful in a world where there are many hungry people, and eating meat
causes high cholesterol levels), then Joe’s argument is not weakened by the fact that you
see him wolfing down burgers later that evening. (In evaluating Joe’s argument for vegetarianism, it doesn’t matter whether he was eating veggie burgers or Big Macs; it would
change our opinion of Joe if we learn that his is a hypocrite, but it should not affect our
evaluation of Joe’s argument.) Suppose that the district attorney argues that although the
penalties for drunken driving may seem harsh, we must enforce them, for it is essential
that we get drunk drivers off our highways; if later that evening you observe the district
attorney stagger out of a bar and into the driver’s seat of her car, that is irrelevant to the
strength of the district attorney’s argument. If you point out an inconsistency between an
arguer’s argument and her actions, and conclude that the inconsistency refutes her argument, then you have committed the ad hominem fallacy.
Don’t get me wrong: I’m not approving of people who say one thing and do another.
The television evangelists who preach spiritual values and the rejection of worldly wealth
and then drive their limousines back to their mansions are a sleazy hypocritical lot.

46

Chapter 3

Ad Hominem Arguments

Politicians who proclaim their commitment to civil rights while belonging to segregated
country clubs are despicable. But being a hypocrite has nothing to do with the quality of
one’s arguments. Arguments stand or fall on their own, and the character of the arguer is
irrelevant to the strength of the argument. An argument that smoking is extremely hazardous to health and that no one should smoke may be perfectly sound, despite the fact
that the arguer smokes three packs a day.
If, on the other hand, someone is giving testimony (not argument), then inconsistency between words and deeds does weaken the testimony. Suppose a guru testifies
(rather than argues) that a simple ascetic life is the way to true happiness: “Trust me; as
you can see my own serenity, so you too can find true peace and inner joy through giving
away all your possessions and eating only brown rice.” If you should discover that the guru
in fact owns a fleet of Cadillacs, a mansion with a Jacuzzi in Pasadena, and lives on white
wine and croissants, then you are quite justified in doubting the guru’s testimony. (But if
the guru has given arguments to prove that a simple ascetic life is a happier life, then the
guru’s own luxurious—and hypocritical—lifestyle is irrelevant to the guru’s arguments.
In the earlier example of Joe, the hypocritical meat-eater who argues for a vegetarian diet,
Joe is not giving testimony; thus Joe’s hypocrisy is completely irrelevant to the quality of his
argument.) Suppose the defendant is testifying in court that he is a gentle, peaceful man
who would never hurt anyone and would certainly never have committed the assault and
battery of which he is accused; then if the witness has a pair of brass knuckles in his shirt
pocket and threatens to punch the bailiff’s lights out for mispronouncing his name, you
certainly may count such inconsistent behavior against his testimony.
Another possible confusion must be avoided. If someone gives an argument, then
inconsistency between the argument and actions does not count against the argument.
But, inconsistency within the argument itself is fatal. For if an argument contains inconsistent premises—premises that contradict each other—then at least one of the premises
must be false. And if an argument contains a false premise, then the argument is unsound.
Thus, while inconsistency between words and actions is irrelevant to the soundness of the
argument, inconsistency within an argument is lethal for the argument.
Ad hominem arguments are tricky stuff, and dealing with inconsistency claims is
one of the trickiest parts. Suppose that you and I are arguing about whether it is wrong
to slaughter pigs so that we can enjoy bacon, ham, and pork chops, and you are trying
to convince me that it’s wrong. “Look,” you say, “you oppose killing animals for fur
coats, right? You say that it’s not right to kill animals for the luxury of a fur coat, when
we have other materials that keep you just as warm and that don’t involve killing animals. Well, we have other foods that keep you just as well nourished—better, in fact—
that do not require the killing of animals. So since you believe it’s wrong to kill animals
for the luxury of a fur coat, you should also agree that it’s wrong to kill animals for the
luxury of a pork chop.”10 That is a legitimate and important element of serious argument: consider what beliefs you hold, and then examine whether the claim you are
currently making is consistent or inconsistent with that stock of beliefs. When you assert
that my current position is inconsistent with other views that I hold, then I have several
options. First, you may convince me to change my current claim: “Yes, you are right;
I do think it’s wrong to kill animals for the luxury of wearing their fur, and so now as
I think about it, I have to also conclude that it’s wrong to kill animals for the luxury of
eating their flesh.” Second, I may decide to revise some of my other views, and bring
them into line with the claim I’m currently making: “Well, I still think it’s OK to kill pigs
for the luxury of pork chops; so I guess I’ll have to change my stance on fur coats, and
now I see nothing wrong with killing mink, fox, and seals so that humans can wear
luxurious furs.” Or third, I can attempt to show that my views are not really inconsistent:
“No, fur coats are a luxury; but steaks and chops are a necessity.” “No, the cases are
really different: seals, foxes, and mink suffer when they are trapped and killed for their
fur; but cows, chickens, and pigs live happy lives and die peaceful deaths at the factory
farms and slaughterhouses.”

Chapter 3

Ad Hominem Arguments

47

Pointing out that my current position is inconsistent with my other beliefs is not an
ad hominem fallacy; in fact, it’s not really ad hominem at all. It’s not an attack on me,
but an attack on my argument: my position has implications that I had not thought
through, implications that are inconsistent with the beliefs I hold. But notice: that is very
different from saying that my argument is inconsistent with my actions. If I argue against
killing animals for food while wearing a full-length mink coat, then you may think that
my behavior is somewhat bizarre, and that I am a hypocrite; but no matter how weird and
hypocritical the source of the argument, the argument itself must still be judged on its
own merits, and not by its source. If I am giving testimony, however, then pointing out the
inconsistency between my words and actions is relevant, and is a legitimate ad hominem
argument. “Take my word for it, I know; that bridge is perfectly safe.” If I now refuse to
drive across the bridge, instead taking a long and inconvenient detour, then you have
good reason to doubt the reliability of my testimony concerning the safety of the bridge.
If the owner of a company insists that he absolutely is not a racist, yet there are no
African Americans among his 200 employees, then his actions are evidence against his
words. And if a politician asserts that she strongly supports efforts to protect our environment, but consistently votes against legislation to prevent pollution, then we are justified
in doubting the truthfulness of her pro-environment testimony.

Psychological Ad Hominem
We have examined several subtle varieties of ad hominem fallacy; the last one is perhaps
the most deceptive of all. Call it the psychological form of ad hominem fallacy. This form
occurs in attempts to discredit an argument by questioning the mental state of the arguer.
It is an insidiously effective form of ad hominem fallacy, for it often masquerades as special sympathy for the arguer. Consider an example: Jane Jackson gives an argument against
abortion. Instead of answering her argument, someone says, “Poor Jane, it’s such a tragic
thing: She has always desperately wanted to have children, but she has never been able to.
It’s not surprising that she opposes abortions. It must break her heart when people who
do not want a child have an abortion, while she wants a child so much and cannot become
pregnant.” Notice what such a comment does: It “explains away” Jane’s argument, by
implying that since we now know the unfortunate psychological source of the argument
we need pay no attention to the argument itself. But whether or not that is the correct
psychological account of Jane’s feelings about abortion, it is irrelevant to the validity or
invalidity of her argument. And to focus attention on the arguer instead of the argument
is to commit the ad hominem fallacy.
Bertrand argues that we should immediately ban all killing of whales: Such killing
threatens the survival of several species of these majestic creatures; the killing methods
are cruel and painful to these sensitive mammals; and all the products we obtain from the
killing of whales can be efficiently produced by other means. Someone responds, in a
deeply sympathetic and pitying tone:
Bertrand is such a sad case. You see, his mother abandoned him when he was only 4 years old;
and now he subconsciously identifies whales—those huge, gentle, and powerful mammals—
with the mother he lost. It’s a very sad thing, and we should all be gentle with him.

Bertrand may indeed be a sad case, and his subconscious may be completely screwy; but
neither Bert’s subconscious nor anything else about him is at issue. The question is the
soundness of his argument. And that argument stands or falls independently of the arguer.
The argument may be sound even if Bertrand is a looney tune.
One more example of the psychological ad hominem fallacy is noteworthy. In 1979,
during the Iranian Revolution, Iranian students stormed the U.S. embassy in Tehran, and
held a number of U.S. diplomats hostage for a period of several months. When the U.S.
hostages were released from the Iranian embassy, some of them argued that there should

48

Chapter 3

Ad Hominem Arguments

be an investigation of U.S. interference in the internal affairs of Iran, and they cited
several strong reasons for believing that the United States had used embassy personnel
for covert activities against the Iranian government. But those arguments were quickly
dismissed on the grounds that these unfortunate hostages were suffering from the “Stockholm syndrome”: a psychological disorder that sometimes causes long-term captives to
identify with their captors. Now I’m not sure that this supposed psychological disorder of
Stockholm syndrome is genuine; but I am sure that it is irrelevant to the arguments given by
the returning hostages. If they are suffering from psychological problems, then certainly
we should feel sympathy for them and for their ordeal as hostages. But if they give
arguments, their arguments stand or fall independently of any characteristics—psychological
or otherwise—of the arguers.
Of course if one is giving testimony, then evidence of psychological imbalance—
evidence of paranoia, hallucinations, or delusions, for example—will indeed undermine
the credibility of the testimony. (The testimony of Mehmet Ali Agca is the most dramatic
example I know. Agca attempted to kill Pope John Paul II and later became the key prosecution witness against several defendants accused of plotting to kill the pope. However,
some of his pronouncements during the trial—for example, that he is Jesus Christ
reincarnated and that he has had visions of how the world will end—may prompt a bit of
doubt concerning his mental stability; if so, one might also have some doubts about his
testimony.) But neither an arguer’s psychological imbalance nor an arguer’s well-adjusted
psychological stability have any bearing on the soundness of an argument.

INVERSE AD HOMINEM
There is a flip side to the ad hominem fallacy. Instead of attacking the source of an argument and then claiming that the argument is weak (as in the ad hominem fallacy), one
may praise the source of an argument and then claim (fallaciously) that the argument is
therefore strong: We’ll call that the “inverse ad hominem fallacy.”11 Inverse ad hominem
is not as common as ad hominem—which is sort of depressing, when you think about it,
since it suggests that people give more insults than compliments.
Just as flaws in an argument’s source do not count against the argument, also virtues
in an argument’s source do not count in favor of the argument. For example, “It took a lot
of courage for Senator Blowhard to attend the meeting of the National Organization of
Women and argue against the Equal Rights Amendment. So there must be some
substance in his arguments against the ERA, since he’s so courageous in presenting
them.” Such courage is indeed rare and wonderful, especially in an era when politicians
tend to tailor their speeches to fit the tastes of their particular audience. But while we may
applaud the senator’s courage, that courage scores no points for his argument, which
must stand or fall independently of the arguer’s virtues or vices. Of course if no
arguments are at stake, then simply saying something nice about someone—“Horace is
the kindest person I’ve ever known,” “Claudia is a whiz at calculus”—is certainly not
committing the inverse ad hominem fallacy. And if someone is giving testimony (rather
than argument), then “inverse ad hominem” support is relevant: Knowing that the
witness (the testifier) is highly principled, profoundly truthful, psychologically sound,
and completely unbiased is certainly useful when evaluating testimony.
Think of inverse ad hominem as the happier twin of ad hominem: It is a fallacy
when ad hominem is a fallacy (when it is directed at arguers); and it is legitimate when ad
hominem is legitimate (when evaluating testimony, deciding who to vote for, selecting the
best person for a job, choosing a dentist, and determining what professor to take for cell
biology).
In sum, an ad hominem attack on the source of an argument commits the ad
hominem fallacy. Inverse ad hominem support of the source of an argument (this argument is good because its source is good) commits the inverse ad hominem fallacy. And

Chapter 3

Ad Hominem Arguments

49

just as ad hominem attacks are often useful and legitimate (this witness is biased, this
politician is a fraud, this advertiser is a liar, this card player is a cheat, this teacher is a
bore, this guy is a pig), so likewise inverse ad hominem praise is often valuable and
nonfallacious (this person is a good credit risk, this student is well qualified for your graduate school, this candidate is sincere and high-principled, this witness is honest and
reliable and sober, this surgeon is splendid).
Samuel Johnson used a particularly apt metaphor to capture the important
difference between argument and testimony. Engrave it on your memory, and you
will avoid forever the traps and snares of the ad hominem and inverse ad hominem
fallacies:
Argument is argument. You cannot help paying regard to their arguments, if they are good.
If it were testimony you might disregard it. Testimony is like an arrow shot from a long bow;
the force of it depends on the strength of the hand that draws it. Argument is like an arrow
from a cross-bow, which has equal force though shot by a child.12

Attacking Arguments
One word of caution in dealing with ad hominem arguments. Suppose that I give an
argument for capital punishment. If you attack the source of the argument in an effort to
discredit my argument, you have committed the ad hominem fallacy: it doesn’t matter
how vile or cold-hearted or irrational or self-serving the arguer is, you still have to consider
the quality of the argument. But if you attack my argument (and not the person giving the
argument), then that is not ad hominem fallacy, and it is not a legitimate ad hominem
argument: it is not ad hominem at all. If I give an argument, it is perfectly legitimate to
train all your guns on that argument. You can note that my argument makes a logical error,
or that its premises are false, or that its premises are irrelevant to its conclusion. Arguments
are a fair target; arguers are not. The main purpose of this book is to help you recognize
and construct good arguments, and recognize and destroy bad arguments. So an attack on
an argument is neither fallacious nor legitimate ad hominem, simply because it is not an
ad hominem argument. Your criticism of an argument may succeed or fail, but so long as
you are not attacking the source of an argument, you are not committing the ad hominem
fallacy. So by all means, search out and destroy bad arguments; but leave the arguer out of
it. Don’t attack the person giving the argument; likewise, when someone criticizes one of
your arguments, don’t take it as a personal insult: An attack on your argument is not an
attack on you.

Exercise 3-2
Some of the following examples are ad hominem arguments, some are inverse ad hominem arguments, and some are neither. For each example, first decide whether it is ad hominem, inverse ad
hominem, or neither; if it is ad hominem or inverse ad hominem, determine whether it is a fallacy,
and explain why it is or is not fallacious.
1. Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, the district attorney has argued that you should find the defendant guilty of burglary. But ask yourself what evidence there is that the defendant is guilty. The
prosecution’s whole case rests squarely on the claims made by one witness, Jack Jefferson. Jefferson
claims that he saw the defendant enter the house holding an empty bag and later leave the house
with the bag filled with silver and jewelry. But what about this Jack Jefferson? He admitted that he
himself has participated in burglaries to support his drug habit, that he lied under oath in his own
trial just 3 months ago, and that he is now cooperating with the district attorney in hopes of getting
early work release from prison. I think you must conclude that the testimony of a man like Jack
Jefferson cannot be certain beyond a reasonable doubt, and therefore I believe you must return a
verdict of not guilty.

50

Chapter 3

Ad Hominem Arguments

2. The following is a letter to the editor of the Greensboro Daily News.
To the Editor:
I have seen a lot of ludicrous positions taken by the press, but nothing like your November 21
editorial against tobacco cultivation. I must take a moment to highlight your ridiculous position.
Your editorial suggests that North Carolina farmers should begin to produce more diverse crops
because of your belief in the inevitable decline of tobacco, the “harmful product” which they grow. In
short, you argue they should get away from producing and depending on revenue that comes from
products which you think are harmful.
Your editorial staff must not read too much of your paper. On this same day, two pages over, you ran a
full-page advertisement for a cigarette brand. In fact, you run many ads for cigarettes. I checked your
advertising rates and you make a lot of money from these ads! If your opinions are “a matter of principle,”
then consider how ridiculous you appear publishing principles that your paper does not live up to.13

3. The district attorney argued that the defendant, Sarah Sartoris, must have been the murderer because she was seen near the victim’s house on the night of the murder and she had a motive for
killing him. But that’s certainly a weak argument. After all, Sarah had a perfectly good reason for
being near the victim’s house on the night of the murder: The grocery store where she shops is on
that street. And besides, the victim was quite wealthy, and many people had a motive for killing him.
So you should certainly not accept the district attorney’s argument.
4. Ralph Rivet argues that we should simplify the federal tax code. Ralph argues that the complicated
deductions and exemptions are unfair to most Americans, since only those who can afford to hire
an accountant are aware of them and can benefit from them. He also argues that they lead investors
to focus on avoiding taxes, rather than on investing their capital in developing solid, worthwhile,
profitable industries that would provide good jobs. And Ralph, it so happens, is a highly paid tax
accountant. Obviously if the federal tax code were simplified Ralph would lose a lot of the money
he now makes by preparing tax returns. Yet he still argues for tax simplification! Since he certainly
is not arguing just for his own narrow self-interest, we must consider his arguments to be especially
powerful and convincing.
5. If you haven’t quite decided who to vote for in the school board race, let me make a suggestion: Vote
for Martha Manning. Before her retirement 2 years ago, she was a public school teacher for more than
30 years, including 10 years in this community and before that 20 years in public schools in Pennsylvania. So she has long and varied experience in the public schools, and she knows what is needed for
good public education. Also, she is committed to keeping our schools modern and effective: Just last
year, she took three courses in computer education at a state university, so that she would better
understand how to effectively bring computers into the classroom. And finally, she is profoundly dedicated to providing the best education for our children: She has no further political ambitions, and no
agenda other than helping our children get the best education possible. While she was a public school
teacher, she was named Teacher of the Year in Pennsylvania, and was a finalist for that award while she
was teaching in Ohio. When she was teaching in this community, she often took money out of her own
pocket to buy supplies for her classroom. She is dedicated, progressive, experienced, and committed
to good education for our children, and I think she would make a great school board member.
6. Dr. Andrews argues that abortion should be legal and unrestricted and that each woman has the right
to make such difficult and intimate decisions for herself, with the aid of her own conscience and
through consideration of her own moral principles and in light of her own personal situation and
beliefs. But before you are persuaded by Dr. Andrews’s arguments, here is something you should know:
Dr. Andrews is currently conducting a massive, heavily funded research project on medical use of fetal
tissue. If abortions are restricted, then it will become impossible for him to obtain the fetal tissue for his
research, and he will lose his funding! When you take into consideration Dr. Andrews’s special reasons
for wanting abortion to remain legal and unrestricted, his arguments do not sound nearly so strong.
7. Senator Slidell argues that we should have a national sales tax of one cent for every dollar of purchases,
as a means of eliminating the budget deficit. Senator Slidell argues that such a sales tax is fair to all and
would raise an enormous sum of tax money and would thus eliminate the budget deficit. But in fact a
sales tax is not fair: It falls heavily on the poor, who can least afford it. And besides, it would probably
slow down the economy and thus would not actually raise much, if any, additional tax revenue. So when
we carefully examine Senator Slidell’s argument for a sales tax, we find that it is not very convincing.
8. Look, I know some of you jurors were impressed by the closing arguments of Mary Lanier, the attorney
for the defense. She argued that the prosecution case was built on speculation and that there was
insufficient evidence that the defendant knew he was transporting illegal drugs when he was arrested

Chapter 3

Ad Hominem Arguments

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

51

for hauling a bag of marijuana in the back of his truck. I admit, her argument that the defendant was an
innocent dupe of drug dealers—and that he did not know that the truck he was driving was carrying marijuana—sounded pretty plausible. But before you are persuaded by her arguments,
consider this: She has made a career—a very profitable career—out of defending people accused
of selling drugs, and she is being paid a very generous fee for her work on this case. I don’t think we
should be impressed by the arguments of a person like that.
Professor Lee argues that tuition at Home State University is too high. She says that the university is
spending too much money on fountains, brick sidewalks, and flowers and faculty salaries and that,
if those expenditures were reduced to a more reasonable level, tuition fees could be reduced without any sacrifice in educational quality. And there is something special you should note about that
argument: Professor Lee is arguing for reduced tuition even though that would mean reduced
faculty salaries, and thus a reduction in her own pay! Only a person with strong principles would
argue that her own pay should be reduced! Obviously, then, we must accept her conclusion that
tuition is too high.
On April 14, 1992, Rush Limbaugh (a radio talk show host) discussed the issue of animal rights. In the
course of the discussion, Limbaugh described—and rejected—the arguments put forward by the son
of a wealthy Illinois cattleman. This young man argued that raising beef animals for food imposes
suffering on the animals, wastes grain, and contributes to pollution, and that since we do not require
beef to live—in fact, we would be healthier without it—the factory farming of beef animals is wrong. In
response, Limbaugh asserted that this was a classic case of liberal guilt: The young man had become
wealthy as a result of his father’s beef-farming operation, and the young man had himself done no work
for this wealth; so now he must attack his father and the source of his wealth in order to assuage his guilt
for enjoying wealth he did not earn and in order to establish his independence from his father.
The tobacco companies claim that they are genuinely committed to stopping underage smoking.
They say that if they are left alone, they will voluntarily act to stop minors from getting tobacco
products, and they will make sure that none of their advertising is aimed at children. But you
shouldn’t believe their claims. Their only motive is to put up a smoke screen so that there are no
real regulations imposed that would effectively limit underage smoking. After all, they have long
claimed that they do not attempt to attract underage smokers—but their actions speak louder than
their words. They have purposefully used advertising images of attractive, popular, and athletic
young people smoking in order to attract younger smokers; and they have heavily invested in sports
events attended by younger people—the Winston Cup racing series, the Virginia Slims tennis tournaments—in order to associate sports and tobacco in the minds of youths. Furthermore, they have
used cartoon images—such as Joe Camel—that obviously have great appeal for the young. Given
their long history of trying to make cigarettes and “smokeless tobacco” appealing to young people,
combined with their powerful motive to hook a new generation of young smokers to replace the
ones who are dying (many of them from the effects of tobacco), there is absolutely no reason to
believe their current claims that they are committed to stopping underage use of tobacco.
You say that you are opposed to guaranteed health care for every U.S. citizen. But if you think about
it carefully, perhaps you will change your mind. After all, you have a deep commitment to equal
opportunity: You believe that all people should have the opportunity to make the most of their lives
and go as far as they can go. That’s why you are such a strong defender of our public schools. Just
yesterday you were telling me that there is nothing more important than good, sound public
schools, and that every child should have a fair opportunity to get a good education, because without that guarantee of good educational opportunity there can be no real equality of opportunity. As
a believer in fair opportunity, you should also embrace universal health care. After all, nobody has
a decent opportunity to achieve success if they can’t get decent health care. Inadequate health care
is just as great a barrier to opportunity as is an inadequate education. So as a strong believer in
equal opportunity for all our citizens, you should also be a supporter of universal health care.
Betty Hill claimed that in 1961 she was abducted by a UFO. Hers is perhaps the most famous UFO
case on record. A best-selling book (The Interrupted Journey, by John G. Fuller) was written about it,
and in 1975 NBC ran a movie about it (The UFO Incident). Mrs. Hill is now retired and spends her
time giving UFO lectures and observing UFOs at a landing spot she claims to have discovered in New
Hampshire. The Skeptical Inquirer recently gave the following account of Mrs. Hill’s current activities:
Mrs. Hill claims that the UFOs come in to land several times a week; they have become such a familiar
sight that she is now calling them by name. Sometimes the aliens get out and do calisthenics before
taking off again, she asserts. One UFO reportedly zapped a beam at her that was so powerful that it

52

Chapter 3

Ad Hominem Arguments

“blistered the paint on my car.” Mrs. Hill also reports that window-peeping flying saucers sometimes
fly from house to house late at night in New England, shine lights in the windows, and then move on
when the occupants wake up and turn on the lights. Recently John Oswald, of Dr. J. Allen Hynek’s
Center for UFO Studies, accompanied Mrs. Hill on her thrice-weekly UFO vigil. Oswald, who is
certainly no UFO debunker, reported: “Obviously Mrs. Hill isn’t seeing eight UFOs a night. She is seeing things that are not UFOs and calling them UFOs.” Mr. Oswald reports that during the vigil of
April 15, 1977, Mrs. Hill was unable to “distinguish between a landed UFO and a streetlight.”14

14. Andrew argues that abortion should not be legal, because it weakens respect for life, and thus weakens the entire weave and structure of our system of basic values. Andrew maintains that uncompromising respect for human life is the vital center of all our ethical commitments, and weakening this
center will weaken the entire structure. But then, Andrew is a man, and he never has to worry about
becoming pregnant; so his arguments against abortion are irrelevant.
15. Jesse Ventura, a former professional wrestler who became governor of Minnesota, returned to the
wrestling ring as a referee for a highly promoted professional wrestling show. One of Minnesota’s
major newspapers, the St. Paul Pioneer Press, criticized the governor’s actions, saying that he was
setting a bad example for the children of the state by participating in a professional wrestling show
that promotes staged violence and sexual exploitation (scantily clad young women being a major
part of the pro wrestling spectacle).
16. In response to the criticisms of the St. Paul Pioneer Press (noted in the previous example), Governor
Ventura accused the newspaper of being hypocritical, since they run advertisements for X-rated movies
and for strip clubs. Calling the newspaper the “St. Paul Pioneer Porn,” Governor Ventura said that
The St. Paul Pioneer Press is triple-X. They are lining their pockets with pornography. They are working
together with the X-rated industry. (August 29, 1999)

17. Fellow members of the Pleasant Valley Town Council, we must decide today whether to fire our
police chief, Larry Lucas. As you know, it was recently discovered that after attending a law enforcement training course in New Orleans, Chief Lucas stayed an extra day and charged the cost of his
hotel room to his expense account. No one objects to the chief spending an extra day in New
Orleans, but of course he must pay for it out of his own pocket, and not out of the budget of the
town police department. Whether an intentional or accidental misuse of department funds, this is
a serious mistake, and one that we cannot tolerate in our town’s chief of police. Thus I believe we
must fire Chief Lucas. Now, earlier you heard Council Member Zack Zuriff argue that Chief Lucas
should not be fired. Zack argued that Chief Lucas has been a good and honest police chief for
12 years, and that this mistake in filling out his expense account was merely an accounting error
and not an intentional wrong, that Chief Lucas immediately reimbursed the department for the
cost of the hotel room as soon as he recognized his error, and that such a small mistake does not
justify the dismissal of a person with such a long and outstanding record. But I’m afraid we can’t
give much weight to Zack’s argument for keeping the chief. After all, Zack and Chief Lucas have
been friends since their high school days, and Zack is obviously offering his argument out of loyalty
to his friend. Certainly it is heartwarming to see a friend like Zack stick by his comrade through
adversity. Such loyalty is rare and wonderful. However, once we recognize that Zack’s argument is
merely the support of a loyal friend, it is clear that we should not take it seriously.
18. Alice Wykowski argues that the United States should not impose trade restrictions on China because
of human rights violations by the Chinese government. She argues that reducing trade with China
will only isolate China, and lead to even more restrictions on human rights; but through trade,
China’s people, culture, and economy will be exposed to wider influences, including the influences
of respect for basic human rights. However, you should realize that Alice owns a toy importing business, and almost all of her imports are from China! And so trade restrictions against China could
take money out of her pocket, while fewer trade restrictions might mean more money for Alice’s
import company. Her argument for more trade with China may sound good at first, but Alice’s argument loses its force when you realize that more trade with China means more money for Alice.
19. Look, I know you are planning to have open-heart bypass surgery to correct your heart problems.
That’s fine. But I heard your surgery is scheduled with Dr. Pangloss, and that’s terrible. Dr. Pangloss
has been suspended from practice by the Pennsylvania Board of Medicine for botching several
operations while under the influence of alcohol: that’s why he moved here to Cleveland. And the
Ohio Board is currently reviewing his license because of charges that he caused the death of a surgical
patient through gross recklessness. And I know two people in Cleveland who sued Dr. Pangloss for

Chapter 3

53

Ad Hominem Arguments

malpractice, and they both received large settlements from his insurance company. And he has had
his hospital privileges revoked by at least three area hospitals, reportedly for making his hospital
rounds while intoxicated. In addition, his driver’s license has been permanently suspended for
driving under the influence. So if you want a clumsy, reckless surgeon with a severe drinking problem cutting on your heart, then stay with Dr. Pangloss. But I strongly recommend you to find
another surgeon, and stay as far away from Dr. Pangloss as you can.
20.

JOE: We should stop providing food stamps, welfare payments, and Medicaid to the impoverished.
Such payments make those who receive them dependent, and weakens their desire to do
productive work, and thus traps the recipients in a cycle of poverty. So those payments
actually, in the long run, harm those people who receive them.
MOE: That argument is just an excuse for not wanting to help those who are in poverty; such an
argument is merely an attempt to excuse your own callousness and lack of concern for those
who are less fortunate than you.
21. Adam Forge claims to have miraculous psychic powers. He claims that he has actually made metal
objects—such as spoons—bend through psychic power, and without touching them; and he claims
that he can make objects move from one place to another through his special psychic forces. But
Adam Forge has actually been videotaped bending spoons with his hands, and then claiming that
he never touched them. He makes a lot of money by claiming to be a psychic; but whenever he is
tested scientifically, he can’t do the things he claims to be able to do, and he resorts to trickery. So
Adam Forge is a liar and a fraud—and I see no good reason to believe any of his claims that he has
performed psychic miracles and possesses psychic powers.
22.

PEOPLE WHO LIVE IN GLASS DAY-CARE CENTERS
Agnes Love, the leading opponent of higher state standards for day-care centers, has a secret.
In numerous public hearings and committee meetings at the [North Carolina] General
Assembly, Love has argued against tighter regulations because she said they would price day-care
services out of the reach of many parents—and would force some day-care centers to close.
But, according to documents on file at the N.C. Office of Day Care Licensing, Love’s own daycare center has trouble meeting the current state standards. Her Love and Care Nursery and
Kindergarten in Charlotte was issued a “disapproved” sanitation report in February because of continued improper sterilization of dishes.
Over the past 2 years, compliance officers have found repeated violations of the state’s sanitation standards at Love’s center. And in December 1983, inspectors discovered only one staff
member present for 27 children, rather than the required three.15

23. Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, as you consider this case, weigh carefully the sworn testimony of
Amanda Popovich. Ms. Popovich testified, under oath, that she saw the defendant at a restaurant at
the very time that he is accused of robbing a liquor store on the other side of the city. Ms. Popovich
is a reliable, sober citizen, with an unblemished record of honesty. Her eyesight is perfect, she is not
delusional, and she has long held a responsible position as a second-grade teacher at Western
Elementary, where she was selected Teacher of the Year just last year. She has no motive for lying,
since she is not a friend of the defendant. She is testifying for one purpose only: to see that justice
is done and that an innocent man is not wrongfully convicted. Her sworn testimony is powerful
evidence that the defendant is an innocent victim of mistaken identity, and I ask that you consider
the honest testimony of this good and trustworthy woman and return a verdict of not guilty.
24. Bruce says that he is willing to sell his Beanie Baby collection for a bargain price. He says that his
entire collection is made up of original, authentic Beanie Babies, and he guarantees that every one
of them is authentic and genuine, bought directly from the manufacturer. He claims that he has to
raise money quickly to pay for his mother’s surgery, and so he is going to sell his Beanie Babies for
a special low price. Well, you can buy Beanie Babies from Bruce if you want to, but there are a
couple of things you might want to know. First, his mother died over a decade ago, so I have some
doubts about his story that he’s trying to raise money for her surgery. And second, a couple of years
ago he was offering to sell his baseball card collection, and he guaranteed that every card was
authentic and original, and that the ballplayer signatures were genuine. But it turned out that he
had made the cards himself using a photocopying machine, and that all the signatures were forged.

54

Chapter 3

Ad Hominem Arguments

That time he was convicted of fraud, and he’s still on probation for that baseball-card caper. So you
might want to be a bit careful before buying Bruce’s Beanie Babies.
25. We should select Wanda Willis as Teacher of the Year. She has been a tireless and dedicated classroom
teacher, often staying long hours after school to consult with the parents of her students. She has
developed innovative teaching techniques for helping children learn mathematics quickly and easily.
And her enthusiasm for teaching makes her classroom a warm and happy place for her students. So
I say, Wanda Willis should be our Teacher of the Year.
26. Senator Forge recently argued that there should not be restrictions on the sale of guns at gun shows.
He argues that those who sell guns at such shows are usually small dealers, who sell only a few guns,
and that they don’t have the means or resources to carry out background checks on buyers. Furthermore, since the shows only last a day or so, a waiting period is not really workable. But Senator
Forge is heavily funded by the National Rifle Association, and they give massive support to his election campaigns. In fact, Senator Forge is just a puppet of the NRA, and when they fill his pockets
and pull his strings, out comes the argument against gun control. So in the debate over gun
control, we should pay no attention to Senator Forge’s arguments: They are bought and paid for by
the National Rifle Association.
27. You should certainly accept Donna as a student at Home State University Law School. Donna is a
person of the highest principle, with a profound commitment to honesty. She is also a brilliant
student and a very hard worker. She will be an excellent law student and a wonderful attorney.

Study and Review on mythinkinglab.com

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What is the ad hominem fallacy?
2. When is an ad hominem argument not an ad hominem fallacy?
3. What is inverse ad hominem? When is it a fallacy?

NOTES
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

11

12
13
14
15

The Criminal Law by F. T. Giles (Pelican Books, 1954; 2nd ed., 1961; 3rd ed., 1963; 4th ed., 1967), p. 51,
Copyright © F. T. Giles, 1954, 1961, 1963, 1967. Reproduced by permission of Penguin Books.
Information from a column by Lenore Skenazy, columnist for the New York Daily News, printed October
29, 2002.
Paul Bergman, Trial Advocacy (St. Paul, MN: West, 1979), pp. 323–324.
Richard Du Cann, The Art of the Advocate (Hammondsworth, Middlesex, UK: Penguin Books, 1964), p. 40.
John Wesley Noble and Bernard Averbuch, Never Plead Guilty (New York: Bantam Books, 1955), p. 58.
Example based on information in “The Secret History of Lead,” by Jamie Lincoln Kitman, in The Nation,
March 20, 2000, p. 34.
F. Lee Bailey and Harvey Aronson, The Defense Never Rests (New York: The New American Library, 1971), p. 40.
Irving Stone, Clarence Darrow for the Defense (New York: Doubleday and Company, 1941), p. 465.
Henry Lauren Clinton, Celebrated Trials (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1897), p. 149.
This kind of argument is sometimes called circumstantial ad hominem; and some textbooks treat it as
fallacious. But far from being fallacious, it is a central and legitimate part of careful critical argumentation: determining what views the argument participants hold, and perhaps agree on, and then attempting to work from there to a conclusion that they both accept.
In past editions, I have called this the “good intentions” form of argument; but “inverse ad hominem”
makes clearer the nature of the argument. There does not seem to be a standard name for this argument
form. Douglas Walton suggests it might be called a “negative ethotic argument” (Ad Hominem Arguments,
1998, p. 213), but “inverse ad hominem” seems easier to remember and more descriptive.
Samuel Johnson, Life, May 19, 1784.
Greensboro Daily News.
“Psychic Vibrations,” The Skeptical Inquirer, Vol. 3, no. 1 (Fall 1978), p. 14.
The North Carolina Independent, March 15–28, 1985, p. 2.

Chapter 3

55

Ad Hominem Arguments

INTERNET RESOURCES
The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy contains an excellent article by Bradley Dowden, “Fallacies,”
that not only discusses almost every fallacy ever imagined, but also links to additional essays on most
of them. You can find a discussion of ad hominem, as well as any other argument form discussed in
this book. Go to www.iep/utm.edu/fallacy.

ADDITIONAL READING
Testimony: A Philosophical Study, by C. A. J. Coady (Tony)
(Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1992), is a comprehensive examination of testimony, including but not
limited to courtroom testimony. And Douglas Walton’s

Ad Hominem Arguments (Tuscaloosa, AL: University of
Alabama Press, 1998) is a very thorough and careful
study of ad hominem arguments, both fallacious and
legitimate.

Read the Document on mythinkinglab.com
Bruce N. Waller, “Ad Hominem Arguments,” Coffee and
Philosophy, pp. 4–6. This dialogue discusses both legitimate
and fallacious uses of ad hominem arguments.
Manitoba Justice, “Jailhouse Informants,” The Inquiry Regarding Thomas Sophonow. Thomas Sophonow
spent four years in prison after he was wrongfully convicted of the brutal murder of a young woman who was
working in a Winnipeg doughnut shop. After it became
clear that Sophonow was innocent of the crime for which
he had been imprisoned, the Justice Department of the
province of Manitoba carried out an extensive investigation into why this miscarriage of justice had occurred, and
how such mistakes could be prevented in the future. The
inquiry found that one of the key factors in this wrongful
conviction was reliance on the false testimony of “jailhouse informants” (e.g., jailed inmates who offer to testify
against other prisoners in exchange for such benefits as
reduced charges, reduced sentences, or better treatment
during their term of imprisonment). Several sections of
The Inquiry Regarding Thomas Sophonow describe the character of some of the jailhouse informants who provided
false testimony that helped convict Sophonow, and also
describe in general terms the problems with relying on
jailhouse informants. The ad hominem attacks on
the character and reliability of such jailhouse informants

are relevant and legitimate, and do not commit the ad
hominem fallacy.
Report of the Kaufman Commission on Proceedings Involving Guy Paul Morin, Chapter 3, sections A–D, “Jailhouse
Informants” (Ontario Ministry of the Attorney General).
Another notorious case of wrongful conviction was the case
of Guy Paul Morin, who spent eight years imprisoned in
Canada’s only “supermax” prison for the rape and murder
of an eight-year-old girl who had been his next-door neighbor. The wrongful conviction of Morin—which involved
police misconduct, serious mistakes in the crime lab investigations, and perjured testimony by jailhouse informants—
was profoundly disturbing to Canadian citizens, and it
resulted in an extensive investigation and report by a commission headed by Fred Kaufman, a former judge of the
Quebec Court of Appeal. As in the Sophonow case, the
Kaufman Commission found that the use of jailhouse informants played a major part in this wrongful conviction. The
extensive examination of the jailhouse informants and their
testimony—and the deals they received in exchange for
their testimony—is chilling (and it led to strong restrictions
on the use of jailhouse informants in Canadian courts); as in
the Sophonow case, the ad hominem attacks on the jailhouse
informants who aided in the wrongful conviction of Paul
Morin are a legitimate use of ad hominem argument.

4

❖❖❖

The Second Deadly Fallacy:
The Strawman Fallacy

Listen to the Chapter Audio on mythinkinglab.com
The ad hominem fallacy poisons critical thinking: when argument descends to the level
of personal abuse, productive argument ceases. If the argumentative process is
supposed to proceed cooperatively, then it is obvious that personal attacks poison the
cooperative atmosphere. If instead the argument is conducted along adversarial lines,
the character of the adversarial advocates is irrelevant to the quality of their arguments: a lecherous scoundrel may give excellent arguments, while the arguments of a
paragon of virtue may be lousy. When ad hominem attacks focus on the character of
the arguers, they distract from careful consideration of the quality of their arguments;
and that is why—in forums in which adversarial argument is supposed to be carried on
in pursuit of truth, such as in philosophical and scientific and legal debate—personal ad
hominem attacks are regarded with contempt, and elaborate personal courtesy is
the rule.
So the ad hominem fallacy—the fallacy of attacking the source of an argument—is the
fallacy that is most destructive of productive critical thinking, whether adversarial or
cooperative. But there is a second fallacy that is almost as bad: the strawman fallacy. That
is the fallacy of distorting or misrepresenting someone’s position or argument in order to
make it easier to attack. It is a fallacy that is very common in political argument, which is
probably why political argument so often produces much more heat than light. But wherever the strawman fallacy occurs, whether in cooperative or adversarial contexts, it undermines the critical thinking process. The first step in effective critical thinking is being
clear on exactly what is at issue; and the strawman fallacy cripples that essential first step
by painting a false picture of what is under discussion. Suppose that we are concerned
about the federal budget deficit, and arguing about the best way to reduce the deficit. You
maintain that we should make careful reductions in spending, while I favor a modest
increase in taxes. If you represent my view as a push for much higher taxes on the middle
class, while I claim that you want to cut all health-care funding for the elderly, then both
of us can score cheap shots against our strawman opponents, but we can’t even begin to
have an intelligent discussion or debate—neither adversarial nor cooperative—about the
real issue and what policy works best.

56

Chapter 4

57

The Second Deadly Fallacy: The Strawman Fallacy

Scoring Political Points with Strawman Fallacies
In late December 2009, Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab
was arrested and charged with attempting to blow up a
Northwest Airlines plane that was flying into the United
States, using explosives he had concealed in his underwear. The suspect was read his rights and offered a
lawyer (as required by law for anyone arrested in the
United States). A few days later, former Vice-President
Dick Cheney made this statement about President
Obama’s position on dealing with suspected terrorists:
He [Obama] seems to think if he gives terrorists
the rights of Americans, lets them lawyer up and
reads them their Miranda rights, we won’t be at
war. He seems to think if we bring the mastermind of 9/11 to New York, give him a lawyer and
a trial in a civilian court, we won’t be at war. He
seems to think that if he closes Guantanamo and
releases the hard-core al Quaeda-trained terrorists still there, we won’t be at war.

But Obama’s decision to follow the law requiring
that those arrested in the United States be told of
their Miranda rights and offered a lawyer does not mean

that he believes that will end all terrorist attacks. The
question of whether to try terrorist suspects in military
or civilian courts is a serious one, that deserves serious
thoughtful debate and discussion; but such serious
discussion is impossible, if one side paints a strawman
picture of the other view, claiming that those who
favor a civilian rather than a military court are claiming that having civilian trials would end the threat of
terrorism. Should we close the Guantanamo Prison,
where many suspected terrorists have been held?
That’s a serious question: Some people argue that it
provides an especially safe place to hold those who
might engage in terrorist attacks on the United States;
others believe that it has become a symbol of U.S.
mistreatment of terrorist suspects, and has become a
rallying point for recruiting those who wish to attack
the United States, and that any genuine terrorists still
held there could be safely held in maximum security
prisons in the United States. But no one proposes that
we release any “hard-core al Quaeda trained terrorists,” and that distortion of the issue blocks the possibility of intelligent critical examination of the real
question.

In an adversarial approach, strawman arguments score cheap points, and perhaps
they improve ratings on talk radio shows; but strawman arguments will not convince
anyone to change his or her views: after all, if we are engaged in an adversarial argument,
you know what your own position is, and I’m not likely to convince you to change your
position by attributing to you a view you don’t hold or an argument you didn’t offer. In
cooperative critical thinking, the strawman fallacy is even more destructive. If you and
I are deliberating together with the goal of finding a policy or developing a program that
will best meet all our interests, then if I start by distorting or misrepresenting your goals
and concerns you will not find me a productive partner for cooperative deliberation. The
key to effective critical thinking—whether adversarial or cooperative—is being very clear
on what’s at issue. Strawman fallacies cripple that essential first step.

STRAW MAN
When someone is criticizing an opponent’s argument or position, it is crucial to be sure that
the critic is accurately representing her opponent’s views. And this point is especially important
when we are the critics in question. When we are confronted by a position in conflict with our
own (or an argument against a position we favor), it is sorely tempting to consider that opposing position or argument in its weakest possible form. That makes the argument easy to
dismiss, and it saves us the effort of careful critical thinking. But tempting as that approach
may be, it is obviously not the path to clear thinking. And tempting as it may be to distort your
opponent’s argument to try to achieve a cheap victory, it is certainly fallacious to do so.
It is much easier to win a fight with a straw man than with a real man. And it is much
easier to attack a weak substitute for an argument or position than the genuine article.
That’s why the strawman fallacy is so seductive. The strawman fallacy consists of distorting,
and thus weakening, an opponent’s arguments or views and then attacking the weaker
position rather than the real one.1

58

Chapter 4

The Second Deadly Fallacy: The Strawman Fallacy

The Principle of Charity
Instead of attempting to find the weakest version of an argument, we should do exactly
the opposite: seek the strongest possible version of whatever argument or theory is being
considered. If there are alternative possible interpretations of an argument, consider the
strongest one. If there are different versions of a position, consider the most plausible one.
If the language of an argument is open to several interpretations, select the interpretation that makes the argument most reasonable. In short, follow the principle of charity
when analyzing arguments: Interpret opposing arguments as generously, as charitably, as
is possible. By always giving the benefit of the doubt to whatever arguments, theories, or
positions you are considering, you will have to think a good deal harder, but you will also
think more carefully and be more open to promising new ideas.
If you wish to be comfortably mired in dogma and error, then the strawman fallacy
is an effective weapon for you—both against your opponents’ arguments and against your
own doubts and questions. But if instead you wish to expand your thoughts, critically
evaluate the positions you hold, and honestly examine competing views and new proposals,
then the principle of charity will be invaluable.

The Strawman Fallacy
It is important that we avoid the strawman fallacy when examining arguments, and it is
also important that we not be misled when others commit the strawman fallacy in their
argument critiques. When you are considering a critique of an argument, a position, or a
theory, ask yourself the following questions: Is that an accurate statement of that argument or position? Was that actually what the arguer was arguing? Were those the reasons
given for the conclusion? And in particular: Is that an accurate statement of the conclusion
of the argument?
Many strawman arguments are heavy-handed and obvious. Television evangelist Pat
Robertson mailed a fundraising letter that attacked the advocates of the Equal Rights
Amendment. He asserted that supporters of the Equal Rights Amendment are not really
after equal rights for women: Their actual goal is to destroy the family and encourage
women to leave their husbands, kill their children, destroy capitalism, become lesbians,
and practice witchcraft. Certainly it is easier to argue against killing children than against
the Equal Rights Amendment, but this is such an obvious and absurd distortion that it
would be amusing, were it not so vicious. Slightly more subtle is William F. Buckley’s distortion of the arguments of those who favor a ban on handguns:
Now the anti-handgun fundamentalists will tell you that the mere presence of a loaded pistol
means that Mr. Finnegan is going to get drunk and shoot Mrs. Finnegan. Or that when Miss
Finnegan sneaks in to pay a surprise visit to her mother and father, suddenly she will be dead,
taken for an intruder. Or that the Finnegan grandchild, age 6 will one day play with the
pistol, it will go off, and there will be tragedy. (July 22, 1982, Universal Press Syndicate)

But of course the “anti-handgun fundamentalists” offer no such ridiculous arguments.
They claim instead that the presence of a loaded pistol does increase the likelihood of a
domestic squabble escalating into a domestic homicide, of a contemplated suicide
becoming a successful suicide, of a child being killed while playing with a loaded handgun. But those accurate and depressing facts are much more difficult to ridicule than the
strawman argument that Buckley attributes to his opponents. Or again, those who oppose
decriminalization of drugs sometimes suggest that the proponents of decriminalization
want to make drugs easily and readily available, like candy at the supermarket checkout
counter. Perhaps there is someone somewhere who advocates such open and easy availability
of hard drugs, but that is not the position of most of the advocates of decriminalization.
They want, instead, something like an improved and expanded system of treatment

Chapter 4

The Second Deadly Fallacy: The Strawman Fallacy

59

clinics, or perhaps a system in which addicts must register with the government and
obtain drugs from a physician, or decriminalization (with strict regulation) of marijuana.
In a speech concerning new proposals for economic recovery and federal deficit reduction, President Barack Obama included these remarks: “From some on the right, I expect
we’ll hear a different argument—that if we must make fewer investments in our people,
extend tax cuts for wealthier Americans, eliminate more regulations, and maintain the
status quo on health care, our deficits will go away.” But while most Republicans do seem
to favor extending tax cuts for wealthier Americans, only a small fringe group want to
eliminate more regulations (many do not want additional regulations, but few want to
eliminate those that remain); and almost no one thinks it is a good idea to “maintain the
status quo on health care”; and in any case, those “on the right” do not believe that such
policies will cause “our deficits to go away”—to make that happen, they would be more
inclined to make dramatic cuts in social programs. Conservative columnist Cal Thomas
manages to pack several strawman distortions into a single sentence: “The pursuit of the
radical homosexual agenda to win acceptance and special privileges for a chosen lifestyle
is not consistent with the government’s legitimate interest to ‘promote the general
welfare.’ ” But homosexuals are campaigning for the same rights against discrimination
enjoyed by everyone else: the right not to be denied a job or housing because of sexual
orientation, the right to be protected against threats and violence, the right to marry, the
right to adopt: those can hardly be classified as “special privileges” when they are the
common rights of citizens—rights which are often denied to homosexuals. And of course
these are not special privileges being claimed by those with a “chosen lifestyle,” since
homosexuals no more choose their sexual orientation than do heterosexuals. (If you recall
your “sexual awakening,” did any part of it involve choosing whether you would be sexually
attracted to Jack rather than to Jill?)
The Equal Rights Amendment, gun control, deficit reduction, and drug legalization/
decriminalization are important issues, worthy of debate in a democratic society. But they
should be debated honestly, without the distortions of the strawman fallacy.
The strawman examples mentioned above are rather obvious. Unfortunately, the
strawman fallacy often comes in more subtle and insidious forms. Consider Figure 4-1, an
example from a Mobil Oil “Observations” column. What position is Mobil attacking? How
does Mobil portray that position? Is it an accurate portrayal?
First, Mobil is attacking the view of those who favor increased use of “soft energy”
(such as solar power, hydroelectric power, wind power, wood burning, and other renewable energy sources). What do people who favor increased use of soft energy actually
want? As they are portrayed by this Mobil advertisement, they seem to hold some very
weird views. They apparently want “to give every American family of four a 40-acre farm”
(last paragraph); and they supposedly want to get all our energy from firewood (middle
paragraph). This “back-to-nature” movement (as Mobil calls it) appears to include a
bunch of crazies, and we are easily led to agree with the Mobil conclusion:
[W]e’re uneasy with people who insist it [soft energy] will do the whole job . . . and who then
insist on foisting their dreams on the rest of us. Especially when their dreams can’t stand up
to reality.

But Mobil’s argument is one long strawman fallacy. Of course it would be absurd to
propose that every family live on a 40-acre farm; but the proponents of increased
reliance on soft energy do not propose such a silly thing. To portray soft energy advocates
as holding such a view is to distort their positions, and thus to commit the strawman
fallacy. Again, there are people who believe that we should use more firewood—in heating homes, for example—and less nuclear power. But no one proposes that we rely
completely and exclusively “on energy generated by firewood.” (Have you ever heard
anyone advocate using firewood to power cars, trucks, and buses, for example?) Mobil
points out how absurd it would be to try to rely entirely on firewood for all our energy

60

Chapter 4

Figure 4-1 Mobil Advertisement.

The Second Deadly Fallacy: The Strawman Fallacy

Chapter 4

The Second Deadly Fallacy: The Strawman Fallacy

61

needs: “If the eastern U.S. tried to live, ‘even at a lower standard, on energy generated
by firewood, (that) would mean the end within a few generations of the eastern forest.’ ”
And indeed that would be an absurd proposal. But that is not the proposal soft energy
advocates actually make. The soft energy advocates propose that we use more solar
power, more wind power, and more of other such renewable energy sources and that we
make a greater effort to conserve energy (through stronger minimum mileage standards
for passenger cars, for example) and thus reduce our use of nuclear power and petroleum. The views of the soft energy advocates may ultimately be implausible (or they may
be workable), and certainly Mobil or anyone else should be free to criticize the soft
energy position. But that position is more plausible, and more difficult to attack, than
the distorted positions criticized by Mobil Oil. It’s always easier to attack a straw man
than the real thing.
Notice the last illustration in the Mobil argument: the scarecrow, stuffed with
straw. I have no way of knowing, but I strongly suspect that some devious critical thinker
recognized the strawman nature of the Mobil argument, and slipped that illustration
into their advertisement as a prank. It would be nice if all strawman fallacies were
marked by straw-filled scarecrows; unfortunately, most of the time you will have to pick
out the strawman distortions for yourself. But that’s the problem. How do you recognize strawman fallacies? How do you know that the position Mobil is criticizing is a
distortion and exaggeration of the genuine views of soft energy advocates? Obviously
it’s not easy. You must know something about their position before you read the Mobil
essay; otherwise, how will you know that the position being attacked is not the real
position soft energy advocates take? And there’s no easy way to accomplish that. It
requires that you study the positions in question and that you not rely entirely on the
critics of a position for your information. If an issue interests you, and you want to effectively evaluate the arguments on both sides, you must seek out the arguments and positions of both sides. If you want to know the pros and cons of soft energy use, do not rely
on Mobil Oil. Look up the actual claims and arguments of those who advocate the
increased use of soft energy sources. And to make things even more difficult, you must
be sure you are reading the positions and arguments of those who actually promote
alternative energy, and not the views of some industry front group that pretends to
support alternative energy while actually opposing it and misrepresenting it. Such
groups often pose as grassroots organizations, made up of citizens concerned about a
specific issue, when in fact they are funded and run by industry groups or their public
relations firms (such fake grassroots organizations have become so common that they
are now known as “Astroturf” groups). For example, the Workplace Health & Safety
Council sounds like a good place to get the position of those who favor improving workplace safety; it is actually a lobbying group funded by companies that wish to limit or
block laws promoting workplace safety. The National Wetlands Coalition sounds like a
good source for arguments in favor of protecting wetlands; but in fact it is a phony
citizens group that is funded by oil and natural gas companies and developers that wish
to take over wetlands for development and drilling.
Picking out strawman fallacies will be a little easier in the jury box, since you will
have heard the arguments that are being criticized. For example, if the prosecution
lawyer uses a strawman fallacy against the arguments of the defense lawyer (i.e., the prosecution distorts a defense argument in order to make it easier to attack), you will have
heard that defense argument, and thus you will be in a good position to decide whether
the prosecution is presenting it fairly and accurately. But that is not to say that, as a jury
member, detecting strawman fallacies will be easy. Try your hand at the following case,
taken from the retrial of Clarence Earl Gideon, accused of breaking and entering with
the intent to commit petty larceny. Gideon had been convicted almost 2 years earlier on
the same charges; during that trial Gideon—unable to afford an attorney—had asked for,
and been denied, legal counsel. He appealed his conviction to the U.S. Supreme Court
on the grounds that he had been denied counsel, and the Supreme Court heard his

62

Chapter 4

The Second Deadly Fallacy: The Strawman Fallacy

appeal and ruled that a defendant facing a felony charge has a right to counsel, and that
counsel must be appointed for such a defendant if he or she cannot afford to hire a
lawyer. Thus the Supreme Court overturned Gideon’s conviction, and Gideon, now
represented by a defense lawyer paid by the state, was retried. During that retrial the
leading witness for the prosecution, who had testified to seeing Gideon inside the Bay
Harbor Poolroom, was subjected to a severe cross-examination. He admitted to having
been convicted of car theft and admitted other facts that cast doubt on key parts of his
testimony; a possible interest he might have had in framing Gideon was brought out as
well. During the cross-examination, and later in his summation to the jury, the defense
attorney sketched a quite plausible scenario that involved the prosecution witness’s breaking into the poolroom himself and then attempting to place the blame on Gideon. The
prosecutor, in his final charge to the jury, attacked the defense argument with the assertions that “There’s been no evidence that Cook [the prosecution witness] and his friends
took this beer and wine [from the Bay City Poolroom],”2 thus there is not enough
evidence to prove that Cook committed the crime, and therefore Gideon should be
found guilty of the crime.
But the prosecution’s argument involves a subtle distortion of the defense argument. For the defense was not trying to prove that Cook committed the crime; instead, all
the defense has to establish is that there is a possibility that someone other than Gideon
committed the crime. (Remember, all that the defense has to establish is that guilt has not
been proved; not that the defendant is innocent, certainly not that someone else committed the crime.) So presenting the defense case as if it were attempting to prove that Cook
committed the crime (rather than attempting to establish merely the possibility that
someone other than Gideon committed it) misrepresents the defense argument in a way
that makes it easier to attack, and thus commits the strawman fallacy. (Incidentally, the
jury voted to acquit Gideon.)

Supreme Court Straw Man
Even the U.S. Supreme Court is not immune to the
charms of the strawman fallacy. In the 1986 case of
Bowers (attorney general for the state of Georgia)
v. Hardwick, Hardwick appealed his conviction under a
Georgia statute that prohibited sodomy. Hardwick had
been charged after a police raid discovered him
engaged in homosexual conduct in the privacy of his
own bedroom (apparently the police had broken into
the house on a drug raid, but had somehow gotten
mixed up and gone to the wrong house, and decided to
charge Hardwick under the sodomy statute). Hardwick’s attorney argued that Hardwick’s right of privacy
had been violated: that the U.S. Constitution protects
the right of adults to engage in intimate, consensual,
nonharmful behavior in the privacy of their own homes.
Georgia’s law against sodomy applied to both homosexuals and heterosexuals, and so—as Justice Blackmun
noted—the defendant’s claim that the Georgia law
“involves an unconstitutional intrusion into his privacy
and his right of intimate association does not depend in
any way on his sexual orientation.” The Supreme Court,
by a 5 to 4 majority, upheld Hardwick’s conviction on
the grounds that the U.S. Constitution does not recognize a “constitutional right of homosexuals to engage in

acts of sodomy”: “The issue presented is whether the
Federal Constitution confers a fundamental right upon
homosexuals to engage in sodomy and hence invalidates the laws of the many States that still make such
conduct illegal and have done so for a very long time.”
But as Justice Blackmun pointed out in his dissent, “the
majority has distorted the question this case presents.”
Obviously the U.S. Constitution does not recognize a
“constitutional right of homosexuals to engage in acts
of sodomy”; but that’s a strawman argument that
misrepresents Hardwick’s argument and thus makes it
easier to attack. Hardwick’s attorney had argued that
there is a fundamental right of privacy, that includes the
right of all persons to be free from government interference in their most private and intimate behavior. Or as
Justice Blackmun states it: “The Court [majority] claims
that its decision today merely refuses to recognize a
fundamental right to engage in homosexual sodomy;
what the Court really has refused to recognize is the
fundamental interest all individuals have in controlling
the nature of their intimate associations with others.”3
(In a striking reversal of that 1986 decision, in 2003 the
Supreme Court forcefully agreed with Blackmun’s 1986
dissent.)

Chapter 4

The Second Deadly Fallacy: The Strawman Fallacy

63

Special Strawman Varieties
A few special varieties of the strawman fallacy deserve special note. First, one of the
most effective and deceptive means of distorting a position is to find someone who
holds an extreme or implausible version of that position and then treat that individual’s
version as if it were genuinely representative. For example, it might be possible to find
someone who believes that every family in the United States should be given 40 acres of
farmland and be required to live on that land and farm it; however, such a bizarre view
is not favored by most advocates of increased use of soft energy, and to treat that
position as if it is typical of the soft energy view is certainly a distortion. In a similar
manner, there may be some supporters of capital punishment who believe that condemned prisoners should be tortured on the rack before being boiled in oil, but that is
not the position of most proponents of capital punishment, who favor executions in the
least painful manner. To argue against capital punishment by torture as if it were the
typical view of those favoring capital punishment is to pick on a straw man rather than
the genuine position.
A second special strawman technique is to criticize an early and relatively crude
version of a theory, neglecting the more developed and powerful current versions. Thus,
a criticism of behaviorism that deals exclusively with the work of Watson (and neglects all
the behaviorist work of the past half century) would be an attack on a weak and outdated
strawman version of behaviorism. And an attack on the theory of evolution that dealt
entirely with Darwin’s early evolutionary efforts in Origin of Species (and neglected the
further evidence and theoretical development of the past 125 years) would commit the
strawman fallacy of attacking a weaker version of the target.
One standard strawman trick is to represent everyone in a large group or movement as if they supported the views of one small element of the movement. For example,
suppose there is a rally in favor of Palestinian independence: it may include Jews,
Catholics, Muslims, and atheists, as well as labor unions, peace activists, women’s rights
advocates, and students; and among the participants might be some supporters of
Stalinism. If the rally is represented as being a gathering of Stalinists, that would be a
strawman distortion of the aims and character of the overall group. That would be
just as unfair and illogical as suggesting that because the Republican Party contains
some members of the Ku Klux Klan—David Duke, a former Klan leader, was a Republican
member of the Louisiana Legislature from 1990 to 1992—the Republican party shares
the views of the Ku Klux Klan.
Finally, one insidious form of strawman distortion is taking part of an argument out
of context. For example, suppose a member of the opposition party stated, “We must fight
any administration budget proposal that reduces aid to the elderly.” A member of the
administration might then argue, “How can we possibly develop a budget plan when the
opposition party has resolved to fight any budget proposal the administration offers?” But
of course that was not what the opposition stated; the speaker distorted the opposition’s
position by taking part of it out of its context. Or imagine that a politician claims that we
should first cut military spending, close tax loopholes, and cut many federal programs,
and that if all those measures fail and if the budget deficit is still not substantially reduced,
then we should raise taxes. If her opponent attacks her as advocating higher taxes, then
her opponent is attacking a straw man.

Limits on Critical Thinking
Critical thinking is very useful, in both adversarial and cooperative settings. But if you
are dealing with someone who purposefully misrepresents your views and arguments,
and has no interest in genuinely discussing the issues, then critical thinking runs into
a brick wall. No matter how polished your critical thinking skills, you will not persuade

64

Chapter 4

The Second Deadly Fallacy: The Strawman Fallacy

a tornado to be less destructive; and if you encounter someone who refuses to reason,
and who grossly distorts opposing views, then critical thinking cannot gain much traction.
Critical discussion of health-care policy is vitally important: the United States now
spends better than 1/6 of its entire gross national product on health care, yet we have
millions of people with no access to health care; health-care costs continue to rise, and
major health problems often push hard-working families into bankruptcy. There are
many legitimate questions about what direction the U.S. health-care system should go,
and a lot of careful honest respectful argument is needed, both adversarial and cooperative, in order to find the best policies and the most effective reforms. But if the discussion is poisoned by gross and malicious distortions, those valuable debates cannot
occur. One particularly vicious and obvious distortion was that some reformers wanted
to set up “death panels,” which would review all older patients entering hospitals and
choose which ones would live and which ones should be killed. Obviously no one ever
proposed anything of the sort. Instead, a law had been passed—with bipartisan support,
and signed by George W. Bush—that would require that all persons admitted to
hospitals be offered the opportunity to complete a living will, in which they could
specify the conditions under which they would and would not want treatment. For
example, many people do not wish to be placed on a respirator; others, who have severe
heart problems and perhaps other illnesses, prefer not to be resuscitated should they
stop breathing, but instead be allowed to die peacefully; others wish to reject all artificial tube feeding. On the other hand, some patients want to specify that they do want to
be resuscitated, placed on a respirator, and tube-fed; and they have the right to make
that choice for themselves: a living will empowers them to make their own choices,
rather than leaving such difficult choices to others when the patient is unconscious.
And if patients did not want to fill out a living will at all—“just leave all those choices to
my children”—they could choose not to do so. Of course most patients do want to make
their own choices, and like the idea of having a living will. The problem is that many
patients wanted to discuss the living will with their physicians and get further information: What does tube-feeding involve? Is it unpleasant? If I am placed on a respirator,
what are my chances of ever breathing again on my own? But many insurance companies were refusing to pay physicians for the time they spent discussing these important
matters with their patients. The new proposal—that some people twisted into strawman
claims about death panels—was only that insurance companies compensate physicians
for these consultations with patients. When Congressman Barney Frank held a townhall
meeting to discuss health-care reform, one questioner showed up with a picture of
Barack Obama represented as Hitler, and—based on the death panel straw man—
shouted this question at Congressman Frank: “My question to you is, Why do you
continue to support a Nazi policy.” Barney Frank quickly recognized that this was not a
case in which offering careful critical argument would be productive, instead responding: “You stand there with a picture of the president defaced to look like Hitler and
compare the effort to increase health care to the Nazis. Trying to have a conversation
with you would be like trying to argue with a dining room table. I have no interest in
doing it.” If you are faced with someone who genuinely misunderstands your perspective and arguments, be patient in helping them understand your real view: just as you
should be diligent in trying to understand and appreciate their actual arguments, in
their strongest possible form. But if someone is dedicated to distorting your views, and
is unwilling to honestly consider your actual arguments, then arguing with them is
likely to be a useless endeavor.
In sum, if you remember to seek the strongest version of the arguments or positions
you are criticizing or examining (follow the principle of charity), you will not be guilty of
the strawman fallacy. And if you carefully question whether the attack on a position, argument, or theory is presenting an accurate account of the target, then you will not be taken
in by strawman arguments.

Chapter 4

The Second Deadly Fallacy: The Strawman Fallacy

65

Exercise 4-1
Pick out the distortion in each of the following strawman arguments.
1. The movement to allow prayer in public school classrooms is a major threat to our freedom. The
advocates of prayer in school want to require every school child to participate in a Christian religious program prior to every school day. It violates the rights of those who follow other religions, it
violates the rights of those who do not want their children religiously indoctrinated, and it violates
our basic principle of separation of church and state.
2. Those who oppose prayer in the classroom want to remove religion from American life. They want to
make it impossible for children to learn anything at all about religion in school, and they want to forbid your child to privately murmur a silent prayer to herself before she eats lunch or gets on the
school bus.
3. The anti-abortionists are really out not only to stop abortions, but also to stop every form of birth
control except the rhythm method and abstinence.
4. Those people who push for gun control take an unreasonable position. They want to ban all
firearms in the United States (with the only exception being for official military use), so that not
even the police will be able to carry handguns in the line of duty, and law-abiding hunters and skeet
shooters will have to give up their sports.
5. Those who oppose use of animals in biology labs have it all wrong. Students aren’t cutting up
animals for fun; it’s a key part of their study of nervous systems, skeletal forms, and muscular
systems. Students learn a lot from these studies—they aren’t just fun and games.

Exercise 4-2
1. Smoking (and restrictions on smoking) is a controversial issue, and strawman arguments thrive on
controversy. One dispute concerns whether we should tighten restrictions against smoking in public
places ( e.g., Should all areas of all restaurants be smoke free?). What are some of the strawman
arguments (on both sides) you have heard concerning that issue?
2. Should there be tighter restrictions on promoting and advertising cigarettes to those under age 18?
What are some of the strawman arguments on that question?
3. The reckless financial practices of U.S. banking and lending institutions caused a major financial
crisis in 2008, and the debate about how best to regulate those institutions is ongoing. What are
some of the strawman arguments on both sides of that issue?

Study and Review on mythinkinglab.com

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What is the strawman fallacy?
2. Give an example of a strawman fallacy.
3. What is the principle of charity?

NOTES
1

2
3

Centuries ago, people with straws sticking out of their shoes could be found in the vicinity of law courts.
Wearing a straw in one shoe was the signal that the “straw shoe” was willing to go into court and swear to
anything—for the right price. Thus a “straw man” would offer particularly weak or doubtful evidence. In
the current meaning, a strawman argument is the weakest possible version (perhaps a distorted version) of
an argument, position, or theory.
Quoted in Gideon’s Trumpet, by Anthony Lewis (New York: Vintage Books, 1966), p. 237.
U.S. Supreme Court, Bowers v. Hardwick, 478 U.S. 186 [1986]

66

Chapter 4

The Second Deadly Fallacy: The Strawman Fallacy

INTERNET RESOURCES
The “fallacy files” contains an interesting discussion of the strawman fallacy, with some good examples; it
can be found at http://www.fallacyfiles.org/strawman.html. Another interesting brief discussion of strawman
arguments is found in Sourcewatch, at http://www.sourcewatch.org/index. php?title=Straw_man.

ADDITIONAL READING
Good information on “Astroturf” organizations that are
supported by PR firms while pretending to be objective
citizens’ groups can be found in “Public Interest Pretenders,”

in Consumer Reports, May, 1994. See also Chapter 7 of John
C. Stauber and Sheldon Rampton, Toxic Sludge is Good for
You (Monroe, ME: Common Courage Press, 1995).

Read the Document on mythinkinglab.com
Deborah Tannen, The Argument Culture, p. 352. As Deborah
Tannen notes, the conditions of adversarial argument provide fertile ground for the growing of strawman distortions
and misrepresentations.
Bruce N. Waller, “Straw-Man Fallacy,” Coffee and
Philosophy, pp. 10–12. This is a discussion, in dialogue
form, of the temptations and dangers of the strawman
fallacy.
Holland v. Illinois, 493 U.S. 474 (1990). In this case,
Daniel Holland was convicted of several criminal offenses
in Cook County, Illinois. He appealed his conviction on
the grounds that— by use of peremptory challenges—
blacks were unfairly excluded from the jury that convicted
him. The majority of the U.S. Supreme Court upheld
Holland’s conviction, on the grounds that the right to be
tried by a jury that represents a fair cross-section of the
community does not mean that the actual jury must be a
fair cross-section, but only that the group from which
potential jurors are selected must be a fair cross-section;
and in particular, that there is no requirement that the
actual jury mirror the makeup of the community, and that
the important thing is only that the jury be impartial. Writing for the minority, Justice Marshall argued that the
majority had attacked a strawman position: the question is
not whether an actual jury must “mirror” the makeup of

the community from which it is drawn, nor whether the
jury members are impartial, but whether the jury is seated
in a way that is free of prejudice and discrimination.
Bowers v. Hardwick, 478 U.S. 186 (1986) was a
famous case involving two Georgia men who were charged
with sodomy under a Georgia law which made sodomy a
crime punishable by up to 20 years imprisonment (under
the Georgia law, heterosexuals engaging in consensual
oral sex could also be imprisoned for 20 years; but in practice, the law seemed to be aimed only at homosexual
behavior). In the majority opinion (which upheld the
law), the Court ruled that the Georgia law was not
unconstitutional, because the U.S. Constitution does not
recognize “a fundamental right to commit homosexual
sodomy.” In dissenting from that majority ruling, the
minority argued that the majority had attacked a strawman position: no one was claiming that the U.S. Constitution recognizes a right to commit homosexual sodomy;
rather, the Constitution recognizes a fundamental right of
privacy, and a right to be free of government control and
interference in one’s private life. (In 2003, in the case of
Lawrence v. Texas, the U.S. Supreme Court reversed itself,
and overturned Bowers v. Hardwick, on basically the same
grounds that Justice Blackmun had urged in his dissent in
Bowers v. Hardwick.)

5

❖❖❖

What’s the Question?

Listen to the Chapter Audio on mythinkinglab.com
The vital first step in critical thinking is to determine the exact conclusion. When participants in an argument establish exactly what they are arguing about, they often find that
they have been arguing at cross-purposes. When the issue is clearly defined, there is no
real dispute. If a genuine difference remains, getting very clear on what’s at issue often
leads to a way to resolve the differences. And if you have a tight grip on exactly what is at
issue, you are much less likely to be deceived by argumentative tricks and pitfalls.
Becoming clear on the question is the first and perhaps the most important step in
finding the right answer. When considering an argument, the essential question is this:
What is that supposed to prove? An effective argument in support of one conclusion may
be a total washout in support of some other conclusion. For example, an argument
describing the number of farmers, manufacturing workers, and warehouse workers who
depend heavily on tobacco for their livelihood may be very effective in establishing that
tobacco provides jobs for many people; however, the same argument will be useless in
proving that tobacco is not a health hazard. An argument that cites the combined testimony of a number of eyewitnesses may be a strong argument for the conclusion that Alice
did indeed drive away in Bob’s car. But the same argument may be quite inadequate to
establish that Alice is guilty of auto theft, since that will also involve the question of
whether Alice had Bob’s permission to take the car. A commercial might give you good
reasons for using a fluoride toothpaste but fail to establish that you should be using a
particular brand of fluoride toothpaste (rather than a cheaper brand with the same
ingredients). An advertisement might effectively argue that being overweight is bad for
your health without giving any reason to believe that the diet pills being advertised are
either safe or effective. And the district attorney may clearly establish that a brutal and
horrifying crime was committed, yet fail to prove that the defendant did it.

DETERMINE THE CONCLUSION
So when you reflect on an argument, consider exactly what it is claiming to prove. That is
important any time you confront an argument, and it is critically important when you

67

68

Chapter 5

What’s the Question?

serve on a jury. The conclusions being aimed at by the prosecuting and defense attorneys
are frequently quite complicated. For example, exactly what does the defense attorney
attempt to prove? Exactly what is the conclusion for which the defense attorney is arguing? Stop and think about it for a moment. You are seated on a jury, and the case involves
a charge of first-degree burglary: What exactly is the goal of the defendant’s attorney?
What is he or she attempting to prove to you? How would you state that conclusion?
The most tempting answer is that the defense attorney is attempting to prove that
the defendant is innocent. That’s the most tempting answer, but it’s wrong. The defendant does not have to prove innocence, and if you consider the defense arguments as if
they were aimed at proving the defendant’s innocence, then you will consider them badly.
What is the defense attorney trying to prove? The second tempting answer is that the
defense attorney is trying to establish that the defendant is not guilty. That’s especially
tempting, since if the defense attorney is successful in convincing the jury, then that’s exactly
the verdict the jury will return: not guilty. Even so, that is not actually what the defense is
trying to prove, and it is not the question that you—as a juror—should be considering.
What conclusion is the defense attorney trying to establish? Just this: that the defendant has not been proved guilty. That’s all. But that’s important. A defense argument might
fail to prove that the defendant is innocent of the crime but still succeed in establishing
that the defendant’s guilt has not been proved. For example, if the defense can show that
the prosecution’s key eyewitness is unreliable, that may knock an unbridgeable gap in the
prosecution’s attempt to prove guilt. Thus that may be quite enough to legitimately
convince you to return a verdict for the defense: a verdict of acquittal, a verdict of not
guilty, a verdict that the defendant has not been proved guilty. In this case, the defense
failed to establish that the defendant is innocent of the crime, and if you treat the argument of the defense as if it were trying to establish innocence, you will conclude that it
fails (for it does fail to establish the defendant’s innocence). But that would be a grievous
mistake, for the argument does accomplish its actual goal: It establishes that the defendant
has not been proved guilty.
Consider this example. Imagine that you are a member of the jury in a case in which
the butler is being tried on charges of first-degree murder. You are convinced by the
evidence that either the butler or the gardener did the dastardly deed; you aren’t quite
sure which, but you think that probably it was the butler. In those circumstances you must
find the butler not guilty. Clearly you are not concluding that the butler is innocent, or
even that the butler is not guilty (you think he probably is guilty). Rather, you are concluding that the prosecution has failed to conclusively prove that the butler is guilty.
If stating the conclusion of the defense attorney’s arguments is tricky, it would seem
that stating the prosecutor’s conclusion is easy. The conclusion of the prosecution’s argument is: The defendant is guilty. But it’s not quite as simple as it sounds.
Consider the seemingly clear and straightforward crime of breaking or entering.
Exactly what must the prosecution prove in order for you to reasonably conclude that the
defendant is guilty of breaking or entering? The obvious answer is that you must be
convinced the defendant really did break or enter. That seems plausible enough, but it’s not
even close. One may be guilty of breaking or entering without either breaking or entering;
and one may be not guilty of breaking or entering when one both broke and entered.

WHAT IS THE EXACT CONCLUSION?
This sounds confusing, and it is. To avoid this confusion, you must be clear on the exact
details of the prosecution’s conclusion. (Roughly, the prosecution’s conclusion is that the
defendant is guilty of breaking or entering; but substantially more detail is required.)
Exactly what is involved in that conclusion may vary from state to state. As a jury member,
you are not expected to know the law on breaking or entering, but it is most important to
listen carefully as the judge explains exactly what the prosecution must establish to prove
that the defendant is guilty of breaking or entering. In North Carolina, for example, the

Chapter 5

What’s the Question?

69

prosecution must establish four things to prove that the defendant is guilty of breaking or
entering, and this is how the judge would instruct you if you were a juror in a North Carolina
breaking or entering case:
Now I [the judge] charge that for you [the jury] to find the defendant guilty of felonious
breaking or entering, the State [the prosecution] must prove four things beyond a reasonable doubt.
First, that there was either a breaking (which simply means the opening or removal of anything blocking entry) or an entry (walking or reaching in would be an entry) by the defendant.
Second, the State must prove that it was a building that was broken or entered.
Third, that the owner or tenant did not consent to the breaking or entering.
And fourth, that at the time of the breaking or entering, the defendant intended to commit
some specific felony.1

Obviously what the prosecution is attempting to prove is rather complex. In a later chapter,
we will examine that conclusion in more detail. Right now the points to note are that conclusions are very important, that they often are not at all obvious, and that one must carefully determine the exact conclusion of each argument.
Careful attention to conclusions is also essential outside the courtroom. Consider
an argument that occurs in advertisements for Total®2 cereal. Some poor sod sits down to
a nice bowl of raisin bran, and the announcer spoils it by telling her or him: “Hope you’re
hungry, cause you’ll have to eat four bowls of raisin bran to get the vitamin nutrition in
one bowl of Total.” We are then informed that “Total has 100% of the daily recommended
allowance of all these vitamins and iron,” while the disparaged raisin bran has only about
25% of the recommended daily allowance. When the cereal eater is next seen, he or she
is dutifully munching Total, having concluded that it’s better to eat one bowl of Total
since it has four times the vitamins and iron of raisin bran. At that point the announcer
chimes in with the happy ending: “That’s the Total difference.”
What’s the conclusion? The conclusion of the argument is roughly the following:
Total is more nutritious than raisin bran. And keeping that conclusion clearly in view, we
can evaluate the argument: Does it establish that Total is a more nutritious cereal than
raisin bran? The main premise of the argument (i.e., the main reason given in support of
the conclusion) is that Total contains 100% of the recommended daily allowance of nine
vitamins and iron, and raisin bran contains only 25%. Now, does that premise establish
that Total is more nutritious? Obviously, not by itself. Take a moment to think about what
other premises would have to be added.
In order to move from “Total has more vitamins than raisin bran” to “Total is more
nutritious than raisin bran,” an additional premise is necessary: A cereal that contains
more vitamins is more nutritious than a cereal containing fewer vitamins. And if we add
that necessary but unstated premise to the argument, then the argument is valid (i.e., the
conclusion will follow from the premises). But now we must decide whether that additional premise is true. Is it true that the cereal with more vitamins is more nutritious? No,
it’s false, because clearly there is much more to good nutrition than vitamins. For example, a cereal might contain lots of vitamins yet be nutritionally abysmal—because it has
little or no fiber (and fiber is one of the main things you are supposed to get from cereal)
and because it is very high in sugar. (In fact, when Consumer Reports did a study of the
comparative nutritional value of various cereals, Total ranked about average.3) So that
necessary premise—the cereal with more vitamins is more nutritious—turns out to be
false, and the argument to establish the superior nutritional value of Total is thus
unsound. Or you could simply take the argument as given, without the added false
premise. In that case the argument will be invalid—the conclusion doesn’t follow from
the premises—and thus is still unsound. Two morals can be drawn: (1) Don’t be misled by
deceptive advertising, and (2) whenever you are evaluating an argument—whether in a
jury room or watching television or reading an editorial—first pick out the conclusion of
the argument and then decide how well the argument supports that conclusion.

70

Chapter 5

What’s the Question?

Recognizing the conclusion is always essential to evaluating an argument, for
arguments are not good or bad in absolute terms: An argument is good only if it
strongly supports its specific conclusion. A very impressive argument may give strong
grounds for one conclusion and be totally useless and irrelevant for establishing some
other conclusion. Imagine a prosecuting attorney who—in his or her final argument to
the jury—argues quite convincingly that crime is doing terrible damage to our fair city,
that criminals must be put behind bars for the protection of society, and that it is the
duty of all good citizens to oppose crime. Those are impressive points. But since
the issue is whether the defendant committed the crime (Is the defendant guilty of
the crime with which he or she is charged?), those impressive premises are useless in
establishing that conclusion. If you keep in mind the conclusion—the question at issue—
you will not be misled by such demagoguery.

Exercise 5-1
1. Sometimes politicians who are tried on criminal charges but are found not guilty claim that this
verdict proves they are innocent. What is wrong with that claim?

Exercise 5-2
What is the exact conclusion of each of the following arguments? (The conclusion may not be
stated precisely; in fact, in some of the arguments it may not be stated at all, but only implied.) It is
important that you state it very carefully, perhaps more carefully than it is stated in the original
argument. There is not a single exact way the conclusion must be stated; different people may
phrase the conclusion differently. It is, however, important to specify the key assertion being made
in the conclusion. That is, exactly what does the arguer want to convince you of?
1. When we consider how splendidly the planets are arranged in their orbits, how the Earth is positioned at the right distance from the Sun, how the eye is designed to see and the hand is fashioned
for grasping, we must conclude that it was all arranged by some higher, greater intelligence.
2. Small farms are probably not the most efficient way to produce agricultural products; but efficiency
isn’t everything. We must also consider the heartbreak of those who lose farms that their families
have operated for generations, the satisfaction people receive from owning and operating their
own farms, the independent lifestyles of those who run their own farms and their own lives.
Efficient or not, we must find some way to sustain and support the proud tradition of small farms in
the United States.
3. Capital punishment requires that a number of people participate in deliberately putting a
healthy human being to death. Participating in such a process—dragging a condemned human
to an execution chamber, strapping that person into an immobile position, administering the
killing jolt or the lethal potion, officially witnessing the whole ghastly process—must inevitably
have the effect of brutalizing those who participate, making them more callous and blunting
their human sympathies. Even if capital punishment could be justified on other grounds, that is
too high a price to pay.
4. We should be developing a power source that will last, that will not be depleted. We shall
eventually run out of coal, natural gas, petroleum, and even uranium; but we will never run out
of sunlight. Or at least, when the Sun finally does burn out, there won’t be any humans left to
worry about power needs.
5. There are billions of stars in our galaxy, and it seems doubtful that of all the stars in the Milky Way,
only our Sun would have a planet on which intelligent life evolved. Given the strong possibility that
intelligent life evolved elsewhere in our galaxy, we ought to consider the possibility of contacting
intelligent life forms in other parts of our galaxy. If those other intelligent life forms are only a few
million years ahead of us in evolutionary terms, then there is a strong possibility that they have
solved many of the problems facing our civilization—such as how to avoid destroying ourselves

Chapter 5

71

What’s the Question?

through nuclear war or environmental pollution. Given what we currently spend on nuclear
weapons of potential destruction, shouldn’t we be willing to invest a fraction of that amount in a
research program to try to find some signal from other intelligent life forms in our galaxy?
Compared with the benefits we might ultimately derive, the cost is quite low.
6. Look, I don’t know who robbed the First Federal Bank last September. And the district attorney
doesn’t know, and my client (the defendant in the bank robbery case) doesn’t know, and you,
the conscientious and careful members of the jury, don’t know who robbed the bank. It would be
nice to get that question cleared up. I sincerely wish I could tell you who did rob First Federal, and
we could send the robber to jail, where robbers belong. But we don’t know who committed the
crime—and that is part of being mature, patient, realistic adults: Sometimes we must live with
the fact that we do not know the answers to important questions. But there is one important thing
that you and I and the judge and indeed all good citizens of these United States do know: Every
person has the right to be presumed innocent unless he or she is proved guilty beyond a reasonable
doubt. And it is that certainty, a certainty that is the bedrock of our justice system, that I know each
of you jurors will keep in mind as you consider your verdict.
7. We shall never get anywhere debating the moral right or wrong of abortion. The issue is too
embroiled in conflicting religious beliefs and societal traditions. And besides, there is no agreement about the best way to pursue answers to moral questions: There is no agreed-upon “ethical
method” comparable to the scientific method. So we should leave the question of abortion to each
person’s individual conscience or faith, because certainly it would be foolish to attempt to enforce
a law on an issue on which there is no moral agreement in society. For when we try to force laws
upon people when there is no underlying moral consensus in support of those laws, we simply
encourage lawlessness and disrespect for the law.
8. When suspected witches were tortured, they usually confessed to their crimes—and named other
witches as well. That’s just one of the problems with torture: it often yields information, but that
information is likely to be false; and it is likely to draw in as many innocent people as guilty ones. We
get better and more accurate information when suspects are treated with dignity and respect, and we
gain their confidence and cooperation. But even if torture worked, it is a line we should never cross.
First, we should never ask any of our citizens to become torturers: to deliberately inflict severe pain
on another person. There is no doubt that torture causes severe damage, if not physical then
certainly psychological, to those tortured. But those who do the torturing are also damaged: ask
yourself, would you want your son or daughter to become a torturer? Would you ever again feel
comfortable with yourself if you had engaged in purposefully and systematically inflicting severe—by
design, intolerable—pain on a fellow human? And finally, even if torture were effective in gaining
some information, what about its larger impact? If you, or one of your friends, or your parents or
your children, were subjected to torture by another country, would you ever forgive that country?
Would you be more likely to cooperate with and help that country in the future, or would you do
everything you could to strike back at the country that subjected you or your loved ones to such cruel
and degrading treatment?

Exercise 5-3

Everett Collection / Shutterstock

Consider the Verdict
The defendant, Diana Whetstone, is accused of
having committed the felony of theft by deception
(or false pretenses misappropriation). Whetstone
had approached the Spring Hill Presbyterian
Church in Spring Hill, New Virginia, and offered
to supply pictorial directories for the church and
its members. According to the arrangement, each
member of the church who wished to have his or
her picture included in the directory would pay
$25 and would be photographed by Whetstone.
Each person photographed would receive a set of
photographs, plus a pictorial church membership
directory. For every six members photographed,

72

Chapter 5

What’s the Question?

the church would receive a free directory. There would be no cost to the church. Whetstone agreed to
deliver photographs and directories within 6–8 weeks of the scheduled photography session. On
August 15, 2010, church officials signed a contract with Whetstone to that effect, and on the scheduled
day more than 100 members had photographs made, paying Whetstone in excess of $2,500.
Twelve weeks after the photographs had been made, church officials attempted to contact
Whetstone to inquire about the delivery of the photographs and directories. Whetstone replied
that there had been some technical difficulties with printing, but the photographs and directories should be available within 4–6 weeks. After an additional 7 weeks, church officials again
attempted to contact Whetstone, but with no success. After waiting an additional 3 weeks,
church officials contacted police and filed criminal charges against Whetstone for theft by
deception.
Whetstone testified that she had intended to fulfill her contract to have the directories
printed and the photographs made, but financial difficulties had plagued her. Shortly after the
photography session at Spring Hill, her car had broken down, and she had had to purchase a new
one. The down payment and other living expenses had taken all her funds, including the money
paid by members of Spring Hill Presbyterian. She had attempted to raise money through
additional photography and directory work for churches, but had been unable to secure any
additional contracts for directories. She had contacted a photo processing company—Photo
Power, in New Richmond—and asked about arrangements for having photos processed and
directories printed, but they had refused to do the work without substantial prepayment, and
(Whetstone testified) she had no funds for that purpose. (A representative of Photo Power
testified that Whetstone had asked them about having directories printed, was told the cost and
the prepayment requirement, and had had no further contact with them.) Whetstone testified
that she had avoided contact with Spring Hill Presbyterian because she was embarrassed and
because she still hoped eventually to find the money to have the directories printed.
After the testimony (by church members, Whetstone, and the Photo Power representative),
the prosecution and defense present closing arguments. The prosecution contends that this is a
clear case in which an unscrupulous individual set out to deceive and defraud a trusting and thus
vulnerable group of people—including elderly church members with very little money—stealing
more than $2,500 from them through despicable trickery. The defense contends that the defendant
is an incompetent businesswoman who is lousy at planning and organizing and who also
encountered bad luck, but who never intentionally deceived anyone. After closing arguments, the
judge instructs the jury in the law:
A person is guilty of theft by deception if he purposely obtains property of another by deception.
A person deceives if he creates or reinforces a false impression, including false impressions as to law,
value, intention, or other state of mind.4

Furthermore, the judge instructs, the prosecution has the full burden of proving beyond a reasonable doubt that theft was committed. The defendant does not have to prove innocence. If you have
a reasonable doubt about the defendant’s guilt, you must find her not guilty.
The jury retires to deliberate its verdict. One of the jurors states,
Just think of all those unfortunate people, who trustingly paid their money for their church directories, went to tremendous trouble having their pictures taken, waited and waited for a directory, and
then had their hopes and trust cruelly destroyed.

Another juror adds,
Look, she promised to deliver directories, she took their money; no directories. She’s guilty.

And another juror says,
We have to think about this carefully. Let’s get clear on exactly what’s at issue. Precisely what is the question that must be resolved in this case? What exactly is the prosecution claiming? What is the defense
claiming? What is the key issue?

How would you answer those questions? And having answered them, how would you vote: guilty or
not guilty?

Chapter 5

73

What’s the Question?

Exercise 5-4

Consider the Verdict

Everett Collection / Shutterstock

Look back at the law on breaking or entering. Ed
Quarry, age 35, is charged with breaking or
entering into the Tau Tau Tau fraternity house. It
is not disputed that last October 14, a Saturday,
Ed Quarry entered the fraternity house. The
house was deserted at the time, with all the
fraternity brothers attending the football game
on campus. When one of the fraternity brothers
returned to the house, he found Ed alone in the
house common room, with his hands on a stereo
receiver. When asked what he was doing in the
house, he said he had heard there was to be a
party there, and he was checking to find what
time the party would start. However, he could not name any of the people in the house, and he was
not a student at the university. The fraternity brother called the police, who arrested Ed and charged
him with breaking or entering. The fraternity house was not locked when Ed entered; no one is sure
whether the door to the house was open or closed. The prosecution maintains that Ed intended to
steal stereo equipment from the fraternity house. The defense denies that Ed was intending to steal
anything; instead, the defense says, he was just waiting to find out more details about a party he had
heard about. However, Ed’s intentions are not the focus of the defense. The fraternity brother who
found Ed in the house, Rob Sawyer, has testified as a prosecution witness. Rob testifies that he found
Ed in the house, and that no one else was in the house at the time. He also testified that when he saw
Ed, Ed had one hand on the stereo receiver, and the other was behind the receiver, near the wires to
the speakers. Furthermore, he testified that he did not know Ed, and that Ed was unable to name
anyone who lived in the house, or anyone who had lived in the house recently. The prosecution ends
its questions of Rob Sawyer, and the defense attorney, Janice Carson, begins her cross-examination:
“Mr. Sawyer, was the door to the fraternity house locked when everyone left for the football game?”
“No, we didn’t lock it. Some of the doors to the brothers’ rooms were locked, but not the
outside door.”
“Tell me, Mr. Sawyer, what kind of lock is there on the front door?”
“I’m not sure. I guess it’s just a regular door lock, maybe a dead bolt.”
“You’re not sure. Perhaps if you looked at your front door key, maybe that would help. What
does it say on your front door key?”
“I don’t have a front door key.”
“You don’t have a key to the front door, Mr. Sawyer? You live there, don’t you? How do you
get in?”
“Well, we never keep the front door locked.”
“Never keep it locked. Um hmm. Mr. Sawyer, I’m sure you have lots of friends. When your
friends come over to your fraternity house looking for you, how do they locate you? Do they knock on
the front door, and then your butler informs you that you have guests?”
“No, we don’t have a butler.”
“Well, what happens then? They knock at the front door, and one of your fraternity brothers lets
them in, tells you your friends have arrived?”
“No, they just come in and look for me, maybe walk back to my room.”
“And if you’re not in your room, they might look for you in the kitchen? Or just sit down and
wait for you?”
“Yeah, sure.”
“Mr. Sawyer, do you ever have parties at the Tau Tau Tau house?”
“We have a few.”
“You’re under oath, now, Mr. Sawyer. Wouldn’t it be more accurate to say you have a lot?”
“Yeah, I guess so.”
“How do you invite people to your parties? Do you send out engraved invitations?”

74

Chapter 5

What’s the Question?

“No, no invitations. For most parties we just put the word out, people show up.”
“So you don’t stand at the door checking invitations. People just walk in, that right?”
“Yeah, that’s right.”
“That’s very democratic of you, Mr. Sawyer. Do you ever have parties outside?”
“Yeah, we have outside parties, sometimes after football games.”
“What do you serve at your outdoor parties, Mr. Sawyer? What is the usual beverage? Milk? Fruit
punch?”
“Usually we get a keg, put it on ice.”
“Sometimes more than one keg?”
“Sometimes.”
“Mr. Sawyer, with all this beer drinking, I assume that sometimes your guests have to use the
bathroom, don’t they?”
“Yeah, of course.”
“Well, without going into detail, I assume many of your guests use the bathroom facilities in
your fraternity house, right?”
“Sure.”
“And they don’t get anyone’s specific permission to go in your house and use your bathroom,
do they? People show up at your parties, many of those being people you don’t even know, right? And
they are welcome to just walk on into your house when they need to use the bathroom, is that right?”
“Sure, that’s right.”

Defense attorney Carson asks to approach the bench in order to make a motion to the
judge. “Your Honor, I move for a dismissal of these charges. One essential element of being guilty
of breaking or entering is that the defendant did not have permission to be in the building. But
from the sworn testimony of the key witness for the prosecution, Mr. Sawyer, it is perfectly clear
that everyone had permission to be in the Tau Tau Tau house. People just walked into the house,
went down the halls, looked for people in the house: that was expected, that was the customary
practice. They had a party, everyone came, the house was open if anyone needed to go to the
bathroom, or get some ice, or whatever, you just walked in. That was the practice, Your Honor:
everyone was welcome at Tau Tau Tau, you didn’t have to knock. They wouldn’t have known what
to make of it if you had knocked on their front door. Your Honor, everyone had permission to
enter Tau Tau Tau; so obviously Ed Quarry had permission to enter the house, and he cannot be
guilty of breaking or entering.”
So, how do you rule, Your Honor? Would you dismiss the breaking or entering charges against
Ed Quarry? Suppose that you were the district attorney, and you are trying to prevent the charges from
being dismissed. How would you argue to the judge that the charges should not be dismissed?

Study and Review on mythinkinglab.com

REVIEW QUESTION
1. What is the key difference between the main conclusion of the prosecution’s argument and
the overall conclusion of the arguments by the defense?

NOTES
1
2
3
4

North Carolina Conference of Superior Court Judges and North Carolina Bar Association Foundation,
North Carolina Pattern Instructions—Criminal: Felonious Breaking or Entering.
Total is a registered trademark of General Mills, Inc.
“Breakfast Cereals,” Consumer Reports, Vol. 51, no. 10 (October 1986), pp. 628–637.
Adapted from Model Penal Code and Commentaries, by the American Law Institute.

Chapter 5

75

What’s the Question?

Read the Document on mythinkinglab.com
Holland v. Illinois, 493 U.S. 474 (1990). This is a challenging
case, in which the majority opinion of the Supreme Court
defines the key question in one way, and the minority opinion argues that the real question at issue is quite different.
Take your seat on the U.S. Supreme Court, and draw your
own conclusion concerning what is actually at issue.
Castaneda v. Partida, 430 U.S. 492 (1977). This
case involves the question of whether discrimination was

involved in the selection of members of a grand jury that
was impaneled in the state of Texas. Though the basic
issues are relatively clear, it is very important to note
precisely what is the question before the U.S. Supreme
Court in this case; that is, if you were a justice hearing
this case, exactly what is the question on which you
would be ruling?

6

❖❖❖

Relevant and Irrelevant
Reasons

Listen to the Chapter Audio on mythinkinglab.com
The defendant is on trial for murder. The prosecuting attorney, in her arguments to the
jury, argues that this murder was one of the most brutal, heartless, horrific crimes she has
ever prosecuted. Is her argument relevant or irrelevant?
It depends. If the question is whether the defendant actually committed the
foul crime—the defense is claiming that this is a case of mistaken identity—then the
prosecutor’s arguments are irrelevant: the question is not whether the murder was brutal
(everyone agrees that it was) but whether the defendant is the person who committed
the crime. Arguing that the crime of which the defendant is accused is particularly
heinous when the question is whether the defendant actually committed the crime is an
irrelevant reason argument. But if the jury members are not careful, they will find
themselves agreeing that the crime really was awful, and then concluding—on the basis
of that irrelevant reason—that the defendant must be guilty.
Suppose, however, that the defendant has already been convicted of this terrible
crime, and now we are in the separate sentencing phase of the trial: This is a case of firstdegree murder, and the crime is eligible for the death penalty; and so following the trial
to determine whether the defendant is guilty, there will be a second trial in which the
jury must decide whether this crime was so terrible that it qualifies for capital punishment. In that case, the prosecutor’s arguments about the brutal nature of the crime
will be relevant. The moral of this story is an important one: When trying to decide
whether the reasons given in an argument are relevant or irrelevant, first you must
determine carefully the exact conclusion of the argument, that is, what question is really
at issue. An argument is considered relevant or irrelevant only relative to a conclusion.
An argument that may be vitally important for one conclusion will be utterly irrelevant
to another. Of course the fact that the murder was brutal is not absolutely irrelevant: a
brutal murder is a horrible thing. But the brutality of the murder is irrelevant if the
question at issue is whether the defendant committed the murder or is an innocent
victim of mistaken identification.
“The U.S. demand for electrical energy will steadily increase over the next three
decades.” Is that claim relevant, or irrelevant, to a debate about nuclear energy?

76

Chapter 6

77

Relevant and Irrelevant Reasons

Somebody Has to Pay
A nineteenth-century Devonshire jury found the defendant guilty of stealing hay and added the following
note:

“We don’t think the prisoner done it, but there’s
been a lot taken hereabouts by someone.”1

That is a trick question. It is impossible to say whether a reason or a premise is
relevant until the exact conclusion has been specified. Information that is of vital importance
in proving one conclusion will be irrelevant to some other conclusion. In this case, what is
the argument about? If the argument concerns the safety of nuclear power, then premises
concerning increased need for power will be irrelevant. If, however, the conclusion being
debated is a more general one—“the development of more nuclear power plants is (is not)
a good thing”—then data concerning projected power needs will certainly be relevant. (Of
course a premise can be relevant without being conclusive. In a debate over whether to build
more nuclear power plants, it will certainly be important to know whether more power is
needed: If no new power sources are required, then that will count against building power
plants of any type, including nuclear. But you might still conclude that we should not build
more nuclear power plants—perhaps they are simply too dangerous—even though you
recognize that the increased demand for power is a relevant consideration.) If the issue is
whether nuclear power plants pose a serious threat to life and health, considerations of
need for electrical power are irrelevant. (They are not always irrelevant: Problems of generating sufficient power for an industrialized society are real and important. But such considerations are irrelevant to this specific issue of nuclear power plant safety.)

PREMISES ARE RELEVANT OR IRRELEVANT RELATIVE TO THE CONCLUSION
The key point to remember when considering the relevance or irrelevance of premises is
this: Premises, reasons, and facts are not in themselves relevant or irrelevant; rather, a
premise, fact, or reason is relevant or irrelevant relative to a specific conclusion. So before
you can start judging the relevance or irrelevance of premises, you must first be sure of
exactly what conclusion is at issue.
When examining an argument, first determine the precise conclusion. Then,
when considering the premises of the argument—the reasons given in support of the
conclusion—ask yourself the following questions: Would the truth of this premise make
the conclusion more likely? Would the falsity of this premise make the conclusion less
likely? If the answers to those questions are yes, then the premise is relevant and actually
contributes something to the argument; if the answers are no, then the premise is
irrelevant—chuck it aside, for it can only confuse the issue.
Many long and fruitless arguments result from disputants plunging into argument
before determining exactly what the argument is about. Consider this example from a
Milwaukee jury room. In Wisconsin it is a felony for a person previously convicted of a
felony to knowingly possess a firearm. Under the Wisconsin law it doesn’t matter what the
intentions of the defendant were in buying the gun. Whether the convicted felon bought
the gun for target practice or robbing banks or a wall decoration is irrelevant to whether he
or she violated the law. But even in such a seemingly straightforward case, distinguishing
relevant from irrelevant reasons can be very complicated. In one case,2 the defendant, a
man named Reid, was charged with the crime described above: being a convicted felon
knowingly in possession of a firearm. The Wisconsin law states that a person is guilty of that
crime if he or she (1) has been convicted of a felony; (2) possesses a gun; and (3) knows that
he or she possesses a gun (if a convicted felon bought a sealed trunk at an auction without

78

Chapter 6

Relevant and Irrelevant Reasons

knowing it contained a pistol, then that person would not know that he or she possessed a
gun and thus would not be in violation of the law). Reid’s case was unfortunate. Reid had
been convicted of a felony many years earlier. After his release from prison, he had lived a
number of years without getting into any trouble. He was a man of low intelligence, a
functional illiterate, apparently harmless. He had seen an advertisement for a “training
program” for private investigators. Reid mailed in a few dollars and received a “private
detective’s badge,” which he always carried. Reid desperately wanted to find work that
would allow him to help people (“Like that man on television, the Equalizer,” as Reid
stated). In pursuing this detective fantasy, Reid bought a pistol. While in a Milwaukee courtroom (he was unemployed, and he often passed his days around the courts), a sheriff’s
deputy asked Reid for identification. Reid proudly showed the deputy the receipt for the
pistol he had bought (the receipt had Reid’s name on it). The deputy asked Reid to go
home, get his pistol, and turn it in to the sheriff’s office. Reid immediately did so—and
was arrested and held in jail. When the case went to the jury they debated long and hard
about their verdict.
The jury debate focused on Reid. Many jurors argued that Reid was harmless, hardly
able to understand the charges against him, certainly not aware that he was breaking the
law by purchasing a handgun (the law had been passed years after Reid was released from
prison, and Reid was no longer reporting to a parole officer) and with no intention of
breaking the law, carried away by the hopeless fantasy of becoming an important and
respected private detective who would fight for those who needed help, a man whose goal
was to help others and gain respect for himself rather than to commit a crime or cause
harm. To many jurors, it seemed needlessly cruel to convict this unfortunate man of the
crime. Other members of the jury saw it differently: Reid’s misfortunes are sad but
irrelevant. Under the law there are only three conditions for being guilty of this charge:
The defendant must be a convicted felon, must possess a gun, and must know that he is in
possession of a gun. That’s all. Reid’s intentions may be good, he is probably quite harmless, and certainly his lot has been a hard one, but all those issues are irrelevant. As the law
is written, Reid is guilty.
In fact, Reid’s intentions and misfortunes were relevant to the conclusion being
argued for by one side, and they were irrelevant to the conclusion favored by the opposing
jurors. One group of jurors was arguing that Reid’s intentions were irrelevant because
intentions are irrelevant to whether one is guilty under this particular law. The evidence
presented in court showed beyond a reasonable doubt that Reid violated the law, and our
task as a jury is simply to decide whether or not the state has proved that Reid violated the
law; therefore, we should find Reid guilty.
The other jurors agreed that Reid had violated the letter of the law, but they were
claiming that in this case the exact application of the law led to an injustice. Reid was guilty
of breaking the law—but Reid is also a special case in which it would be better (more just)
to make an exception. Therefore, these jurors argued, Reid should be found not guilty.
What are the different conclusions for which the two groups are arguing? One
group is saying that Reid should be found guilty, and the other is saying he should
be found not guilty. That’s true, but it is not very helpful. The different conclusions must
be stated more precisely. One group is arguing: Reid is guilty under the law, and our only
role is to determine legal guilt or innocence (not to decide whether this result is fair or
just or desirable). The other group is arguing: Reid is guilty under the law, but we as a jury
have a further obligation to decide whether applying the law in this case is fair and just.
Once the conclusions of the two groups are specified, it is possible to see the issue clearly.
Both groups agree that Reid is guilty under the law. The issue is not Reid’s guilt or
innocence. Furthermore, both groups agree that Reid is an unfortunate and probably
harmless person and that convicting him is very harsh. Exactly where is the disagreement?
The disagreement is over the role of the jury. One group maintains that the function of
the jury is strictly as a fact finder: If the jury is convinced that the prosecution proved the
defendant meets all the necessary conditions for being guilty of breaking a specific law,

Chapter 6

79

Relevant and Irrelevant Reasons

bikeriderlondon / Shutterstock

How Do You Rule?

In its 1996 session (Jaffee v. Redmond, No. 95–266), the
U.S. Supreme Court considered whether a licensed
clinical social worker who had provided psychotherapeutic counseling to a police officer could be compelled to reveal in court the contents of those sessions.
The clinical social worker (and her client) claimed that
the conversations between social worker and client were
protected by a “psychotherapist privilege,” similar to
the lawyer–client privilege or doctor–patient privilege,
under which lawyers and doctors cannot be required to
reveal in court what their clients and patients have told
them during professional consultations. The majority of

the Supreme Court ruled in favor of this psychotherapeutic privilege, and the Court’s ruling was that the
social worker could not be required to give evidence
against her client. Justice Scalia dissented, and argued
that there should be no psychotherapeutic privilege for
licensed social workers. During the course of his
dissenting argument he made the following comments:
When is it, one must wonder, that the psychotherapist came to play such an indispensable role in
the maintenance of the citizenry’s mental
health? For most of history, men and women
have worked out their difficulties by talking
to . . . parents, siblings, best friends and bartenders—none of whom was awarded a privilege
against testifying in court. Ask the average
citizen: Would your mental health be more
significantly impaired by preventing you from
seeing a psychotherapist, or by preventing you
from getting advice from your mom? I have little
doubt what the answer would be. Yet there is no
mother–child privilege.

What is your evaluation of Justice Scalia’s argument?
Is it a good one, or is it fallacious?

then the jury must return a verdict of guilty. The other group believes that the jury has
a role in addition to that of fact finder: The jury must decide whether a law or its particular application is just, and must prevent injustices from occurring.
When the different conclusions are specified, arguments can be focused on what is
actually at issue. Should the jury stick to fact-finding, and not question whether a particular law or application of law is just (leaving such issues to legislative bodies)? That is not
an easy question. There are some strong arguments both pro and con. So becoming clear
on exactly what is at issue does not mean that it will then be easy to settle the issue.
However, it does mean that arguments can be directed to what is really at issue. Both sides
agree that the defendant is guilty—that is no longer the point, so at this stage of the
argument, points to show that the defendant is guilty just confuse the issue. Both sides
agree that strict application of the law in this case is very harsh—but that also is now
beside the point. The question is what role the jury should play in our system of justice.
That is what the disagreement turns on, and that is what should be argued.
The Milwaukee jury frequently discussed whether the defendant Reid knew that he was
breaking the law. All agreed that he probably did not know; some insisted that that
was irrelevant, and others that it was relevant and important. Again, the relevance or
irrelevance of that point depends on what is at issue. It is irrelevant to the question of whether
or not Reid actually broke the law (the law says it is a crime for a convicted felon to knowingly
possess a gun; it does not require that the person breaking the law know that he or she is
breaking the law). However, it is relevant to the question of whether convicting Reid would be
treating him unjustly (“It’s not really fair to convict him; he had no idea he was doing anything wrong”). Again, what points are relevant and are not relevant is a function of the conclusion. (Incidentally, in the actual case in Milwaukee, the jury members finally decided that
strict application of the law in this case was unjust, and that as a jury they should prevent unjust applications of the law, and they voted unanimously for a not guilty verdict.)

80

Chapter 6

Relevant and Irrelevant Reasons

JEFF PACHOUD/ Getty Images

Consider the Verdict

Suppose that the jury in the Reid’s case was not convinced that Reid was guilty as charged, and were instead
debating that question (not the issue of whether the
guilty verdict is just, but rather the question of whether
Reid is or is not actually guilty of the crime). Which of
the following reasons are relevant and which are
irrelevant to the conclusion that Reid is or is not guilty?
1. Reid is not guilty because: He did not know that
he was breaking the law; he obviously wasn’t even
aware that there was a law against a convicted
felon possessing a firearm; if he had been aware
of the law, he would not have shown the receipt
for purchase of the gun to a sheriff’s deputy.
Relevant or irrelevant?

2. Reid is not guilty because: He did not really know
that he possessed a firearm. True, he bought the
gun, but his mental faculties were so limited that
he couldn’t distinguish a gun from a stage prop;
it was like a child buying a toy—a detective has a
gun, he wants to be a detective, he buys a gun—
but he doesn’t have sufficient understanding to
really know that he has a gun, since his thought
categories are just too crude. Relevant or irrelevant?
3. Reid is guilty because: He possesses a gun; he
bought it, owns it, knows where to find it, is able
to bring it in to the sheriff’s office when he is told
to do so. Relevant or irrelevant?
4. Reid is guilty because: He is clearly a threat to
society. Look, maybe Reid is not terribly bright,
but that is cold comfort. Here’s a guy who is not
very bright, and likes to buy guns. We ought to
get him off the streets for the protection of
society. What if he decides to act like his hero, the
Equalizer, and starts assaulting people? Relevant
or irrelevant?
If you were on the jury for the Reid trial, would you
prefer that the deliberations proceed in a “verdictdriven” (adversarial) or “evidence-driven” (cooperative) style?

The Scent of Red Herring
In 1986, the National Coalition Against Pornography
ran full-page advertisements arguing that pornography
should be banned and attempting to answer the arguments of those who oppose censorship. One section of
the advertisement was headed “Distortions hard-core
pornographers want you to believe—and facts you need
to know.” The second item under that heading was the
following:
DISTORTION #2: Banning any pornography, no
matter how vile or degrading, amounts to censorship that is not in keeping with the American way.
FACT #2: The effort to eliminate hard-core
pornography is not censorship. It is enforcement of
the laws passed by our elected officials and interpreted
by our duly appointed Supreme Court justices. That is
the very essence of democracy in action!
Many forms of speech are forbidden by law
for the good of all. You can’t shout “Fire!” in a
crowded theater. Revealing national secrets to

foreign governments is illegal. Slander and libel
are against the law, and so is false advertising.
There are also effective laws prohibiting
obscenity. So when judges and juries uphold
those laws, it is not censorship. It is responsible
democracy!3

Leave aside questions about whether that counts as
“responsible democracy” and whether laws banning
pornography are comparable to laws against libel and
false advertising. Instead, focus on this question: Are
the reasons given by the National Coalition relevant
to the question at issue? (Remember: In order to
decide that, you must first decide exactly what conclusion
is at issue.)
The question immediately at issue is not whether
pornography should or should not be banned; rather,
the question in this argument is, Is the banning of
pornography censorship? (It’s not a question of whether

Chapter 6

Relevant and Irrelevant Reasons

censorship is good or bad; rather, is the banning of
pornography censorship?) The conclusion of the
National Coalition’s argument is that banning pornography is not censorship. With that conclusion clearly in
mind, now ask, What reasons are given for that
conclusion, and are they relevant?
The key reason given is that laws against obscenity
and pornography have been passed by our elected
officials, and those officials are our duly elected representatives, and so the laws they pass are democratically
approved. The process is democratic, it is “democracy in
action,” it is “responsible democracy,” and therefore it is
not censorship.
But even if we assume that the process really is
democratic, what relevance does that have to whether
banning pornography counts as censorship? None.
After all, democracies can impose censorship just as

81

dictatorships can. Suppose the United States had a
national referendum on whether to ban all Buddhist
writings from the United States, and 75% of the voters
favored laws banning Buddhist literature. Then Buddhist literature might be censored in the United
States. It would be democratic censorship, and popular
censorship, but it would still be censorship. So even if
it is true that laws banning pornography and obscenity
are democratic, that is irrelevant to the question of
whether it is censorship. That’s how irrelevant reason
arguments work: You are so distracted by important
and dramatic statements (in this case, statements
about responsible democracy) that you forget that the
statements have no bearing on the question at issue.
Democracy is certainly worth talking about. But it has
nothing to do with whether banning obscenity and
pornography counts as censorship.

Consider a case from outside the courtroom. Just prior to the 1984 Olympics, the
Mars Candy Company ran commercials showing athletes munching chocolate and
caramel bars and stating that such candy bars satisfied their hunger in the midmorning
or midafternoon after a tough training session. If the conclusion is that a candy bar
will briefly satisfy hunger, then there is fairly decent support for that (quite trivial)
conclusion. If instead the conclusion is that candy bars are a wholesome part of a good
diet and that it is a good thing for athletes in training to eat a couple of chocolate bars a
day (as the commercials certainly implied), then the fact that eating a candy bar briefly
satisfies hunger is irrelevant to that conclusion. The point is that in order to decide the
relevance and strength of the premises, you must first be certain of the conclusion. And if
you keep the conclusion clearly in mind, you should not have too much trouble deciding
whether the premises support the conclusion or whether they are instead irrelevant.

IRRELEVANT REASON FALLACY
The fallacy of irrelevant reason is committed when the reasons given in support of a conclusion are irrelevant to the truth or falsity of the conclusion. The reasons given may be true,
they may be important in other contexts, they may even be worthy of celebration, but they
have no bearing on the question at issue, and including them in the argument confuses
the issue. Certainly an ax murder is a terrible thing, and we all deplore such vicious
crimes, but that is irrelevant if the question at issue is, Did the defendant do that
deplorable deed? If irrelevant points—like the ghastly nature of the crime—are injected
into the discussion, then attention may be distracted to the horror of the crime and away
from the issue. The power of irrelevant reasons to draw people off the right trail has
caused the irrelevant reason fallacy to sometimes be called by a different and rather
catchy name: the red herring fallacy.

The Red Herring Fallacy
The exact source of the “red herring” name for irrelevant reason is unknown, but at least
there’s a good story. After a foxhunt, a cloth bag of cooked herring (herring turns
reddish, is very oily, and has a strong smell when cooked) was dragged across the trail of
the fox; the strong smell of the herring made the hounds lose the trail (and probably

82

Chapter 6

Relevant and Irrelevant Reasons

What Was the Question?
The Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association placed
a two-page color advertisement in the August 1993 issue
of Scientific American, featuring a picture of an attractive,
smiling, appealing woman, Phyllis, with her cordial cat
perched contentedly on her shoulder. The text was the
following:
Ask Phyllis her opinion of the anti-stroke drug
that lets her hold onto her independence and
life savings.
When medicines can help people like
Phyllis avoid a stroke, that’s obviously a good
thing. What’s not so apparent is how dramatically
the same drugs reduce nursing home costs.
Stroke often leaves survivors so disabled
they require nursing home care, which now averages over $30,000 a year per patient.
But drugs that reduce the risk of strokes are
helping individuals and families avoid such a
huge financial blow. And helping to hold down

the nation’s expenditures for nursing home care,
estimated at $66 billion a year.
America’s healthcare crisis calls for this kind
of cost-saving power. And new prescription drugs
are our best hope for providing it.

Well, certainly drugs that prevent strokes are
wonderful, and keeping Phyllis out of a nursing home
and helping her “hold onto her independence and life
savings” is a great benefit. But the fact that the drug to
prevent strokes costs less than the cost of nursing home
residence is irrelevant. The question is not whether the
drug costs less than a nursing home, but whether the
drug costs more than it should: Are the drug companies
spending too much on advertising and making
excessive profits and overcharging for the valuable lifesaving drugs they produce? The cost of nursing home
care is a red herring designed to draw us away from that
key issue.

their lunch) and thus the hounds could be caught easily. The red herring distracts the
hounds from the proper path, and sends them off the scent. And that’s exactly what a
“red herring”—an irrelevant reason—does in an argument: It distracts people from what
is properly at issue and sends them off on irrelevant pursuits. If the debate is over
whether handguns should be banned, it is relevant to consider how many people have
been killed in handgun accidents. But suppose someone then asserts, “Everybody talks
about handgun accidents! But think of how many people are killed each year in auto
accidents! Why don’t we ban automobiles?” You must hold your breath and cover your
nose and stay on the trail, for a red herring has just been dragged across the argument.
The danger of auto accidents is certainly serious, and perhaps on another occasion we
should discuss how to reduce that danger, but that has nothing to do with the question
of banning handguns. Whether there are other unacceptable dangers in society is not
the issue; the question is instead whether handguns pose an unacceptable risk. Perhaps
they do, perhaps they do not, but no progress will be made on that issue if the arguers
are distracted by irrelevant reasons.
Remember, the first thing to ask when considering an argument is, What is the
conclusion? What is this argument supposed to be proving? What is at issue? With the
conclusion firmly in mind, you will not be tempted down irrelevant sidetracks, no matter
how enticing and true and important they may be. Certainly it is true and important that
society should be protected from vicious ax murderers; but if you remember that the
question is not the proper disposal of ax murderers but rather the guilt or innocence of
the defendant, then such irrelevant reasons will not divert you.
One other point: Determining the relevance of a premise is not the same as determining its truth. A true premise certainly can be irrelevant, as noted in several examples;
but also, a false premise may be relevant. For example, everyone who plays the lottery wins
a million dollars; I wish to win a million dollars; therefore, I should play the lottery. The
first premise is relevant; and its falsity does not diminish its relevance. So in determining
relevance or irrelevance, don’t ask whether the premise is true; instead, ask whether it
matters (for the question at issue) if the premise is true or false. If it doesn’t make any
difference one way or the other, then the premise is irrelevant.

Chapter 6

83

Relevant and Irrelevant Reasons

A Red Herring Under the Influence
Lou Peters is 59 years old, an agnostic, living in Toledo,
Ohio. He was convicted of driving under the influence
of alcohol. At his sentencing, the judge gave him a
choice between 30 days in jail or attending meetings of
Alcoholics Anonymous. Peters chose jail, because he
objected to the religious orientation of AA: part of their
treatment program requires that we “turn our will and
our lives over to the care of God,” meetings often end
with the Lord’s Prayer, and meetings are frequently
held in churches. Peters objected that his treatment was
not fair: an option to jail was provided to religious
people but not to the nonreligious.
The Cleveland Plain Dealer editorialized against
Peters, as follows:
How many options should society have to contrive for people who break the law and endanger
the lives of others by getting drunk, getting in a
car and getting on the road? . . . Peters made a
rational, informed choice. When he decided
against attending the AA sessions and accepting
the rehabilitation that a highly effective program
could have offered him, the suspension of his jail
sentence was revoked, as he knew it would be.
He wasn’t forced to go to AA. He was, however, forced to pay for his misdeed. His dislike

of the price is immaterial. He was in no position
to bargain, nor should he have been.
He drank. He drove. He got caught. What
does he want, a reward?4

The editorial writer carries on at length, but never
takes up the real issue. The question is not whether
those convicted of drunk driving should have an
option, or how many options they should have. The
question is a simple one: if a non-jail option is given to
those who are religious, does fairness (and the U.S.
commitment to not giving government favor to any
religious view) require that a non-jail option also be
available for the nonreligious?
Imagine that a non-jail treatment option were
provided for those convicted of drunk driving, but this
treatment option required that “we take charge of our
own wills and lives and reject the existence of God,” and
thus only agnostics and atheists could participate in this
option. Christians, Jews, and Muslims would be excluded.
Would that strike you as fair? Suppose Christians, Jews,
and Muslims complained that if agnostics and atheists
had a non-jail option, then they should have one also.
Could we legitimately accuse them—as the Plain Dealer
accuses Peters—of wanting a reward?

Exercise 6-1
For these arguments, determine whether the premises are relevant or irrelevant. (i.e., Do any of
these arguments commit the irrelevant reason fallacy?)
1. The Alaskan oil pipeline is certainly not a threat to the environment of the Alaskan tundra (through
which the pipeline passes) or to the Alaskan coastal waters. For after all, it is essential to the
economic well-being of the United States that Alaskan crude oil be shipped out of Alaska through
an efficient pipeline. Alaska contains the largest oil reserves in the United States, and we must have
access to those oil reserves if we are to avoid costly and risky dependence on foreign oil supplies.
And the Alaskan pipeline is the most cost-efficient method of making Alaskan oil available to the
rest of the United States. So quite clearly the pipeline does not threaten the ecology of the Alaskan
tundra or the Alaskan coastal waters.
2. There is now before Congress a proposed amendment to the U.S. Constitution that would make it illegal to burn the American flag as an act of protest. Some people oppose this amendment on the grounds
that it would, for the first time in U.S. history, place a restriction on the right of political protest and of
political free speech. But that’s just false. The proposed ban on flag burning would in no way restrict free
speech. For, after all, the American flag is a great and glorious symbol of our country; and our soldiers
have fought and bled and died for that flag for over 200 years. When it is burned in protest, it causes
great pain and anguish to those who dearly love the stars and stripes. Besides, there are lots of ways one
can protest without burning the flag: by giving speeches, participating in marches, signing petitions,
writing letters; so there would still be plenty of opportunities for political free speech if flag burning were
prohibited. So a ban on flag burning obviously would not be a restriction on free speech.
3. We should certainly vote in favor of legalizing casino gambling in Washington County. For a casino
in Washington County would create new jobs, and it would also have ripple effects: Restaurants and
hotels and theaters would develop in the area to serve the needs of those who come to the casino.

84

Chapter 6

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

Relevant and Irrelevant Reasons

Furthermore, since all of the casino income is subject to taxation, it would significantly increase our
tax revenue. And 25% of that additional revenue will go to our local schools, and so we will be able
to improve our schools and provide better education for our children. And finally, many people in
Washington County now travel to casinos in Detroit, Windsor, Niagara Falls, Atlantic City, and Las
Vegas; and they spend their gambling dollars there, and the money leaves the Washington County
economy; if we allow casino gambling in Washington County, much of that money will stay in
Washington County and will stimulate our economy, rather than being drained away. So when you
consider the advantages, clearly it is time to legalize casino gambling in Washington County.
I urge you to vote against legalizing casino gambling in Washington County. Sure, we will raise some
additional tax money; but that money will be gobbled up by the increased costs of crime, children’s
services, and other social costs that come from the increase in gambling and gambling addiction.
When people have easy access to casino gambling, many people are tempted to gamble a little more
than they can afford—and many of those people are people who can least afford their gambling
losses, but who desperately and falsely hope that luck at gambling will solve their financial worries.
And rather than stimulating other entertainment enterprises in the area, legal gambling sucks money
away from those competing businesses. People who come to the casino stay at the casino when they
eat dinner, and so there is actually a loss for local restaurants. And many people who would have spent
their entertainment dollars at the theater or the movies or a concert will now go to the casino, and so
other entertainment businesses wither away, rather than prosper. And finally, the money that local
folks lose at the casino does not stay in Washington County! Instead, it goes to the casino corporation,
which is located several states away. We do have some economic problems in Washington County, but
legalizing casino gambling will not solve those problems, only make them worse.
Legalizing casino gambling in Washington County would not increase the number of people in the
county suffering from gambling addiction. Most people who gamble find it a pleasant and exciting
evening of entertainment, and they keep their losses well under control. And when you consider the
stimulus to the local economy, the increase in tax revenue, and the new jobs that will be available, you
can see that there are tremendous benefits to legalizing casino gambling in our county. So legalized
casino gambling will not increase the number of gambling addicts in Washington County.
Some students suggest that tuition at Home State University is too high. They claim that through
more cost-efficient methods, Home State could reduce tuition without any reduction in educational quality. But tuition at Home State is not too high. Certainly a college education is very important: Education opens the door to literature, the arts, philosophy, world history, the sciences; it also
opens opportunities for professional training and an interesting career. So when you consider the
wonders of a college education, it is obvious that tuition at Home State is not excessive.
Clearly having stricter gun control laws will not prevent shootings in our schools. Requiring more
background checks and gun locks and a longer waiting period to buy guns will cause a lot of bother
and trouble for honest hunters, target shooters, and legitimate gun collectors. So stricter gun laws
will not be effective in preventing school shootings.
The United States has a very fair and efficient health-care system. After all, many wealthy people
from around the world come to the United States for specialized medical care; and many of the
most important discoveries in medical science were made here in the United States. In addition,
some of the most effective drugs now in use were developed in the United States by U.S. companies.
So it is obvious that the U.S. health-care system is both fair and efficient.
It is sometimes claimed that under our system of capital punishment we may mistakenly execute
innocent people who have been wrongly convicted. But such wrongful executions are not a real
danger. After all, capital punishment was approved by a democratic process, by our elected
representatives, and it represents the will of the majority in the United States. Furthermore, capital
punishment seems to bring a strong sense of closure and relief to the families of those whose loved
ones have been the victims of terrible crimes. Therefore, there is no genuine danger of wrongful
executions in the United States.
Some people argue that our present “War on Drugs” policy—using severe criminal penalties to
imprison thousands of people who use illegal drugs—is not an effective policy for controlling
drugs. But in fact the War on Drugs policy is highly effective. After all, illegal drugs are a major problem, causing many ruined lives and lost work hours and widespread health hazards and numerous
deaths through drug overdoses. Illegal drugs are the source of enormous problems and many
heartaches in this country. Illegal drugs are a serious issue, and a major challenge for our country,
our communities, and our people. Therefore, it is clear that the severe criminal penalties of the
War on Drugs is an effective policy for battling our drug problems.

85

Relevant and Irrelevant Reasons

11. How Do You Rule?
The following is a fictitious case, taken from a story by
John Mortimer, a British barrister and creator of the
splendid old curmudgeon Rumpole of the Bailey (hero
of many of Mortimer’s stories). In this story, an artist,
Harold Brittling, is charged with fraud. Brittling is
charged with having sold a painting as “a genuine Septimus Cragg” (a fictitious artist, who was supposed to be
one of the greatest of the Impressionists, along with
Manet and Degas, and whose paintings are very valuable), when in fact—according to the charges against
him—Brittling did the painting himself. Rumpole is the
barrister (attorney) for the defense; Erskine-Brown is
prosecuting (“appearing for the Crown”); and Edward Gandolphini is the leading expert on the
works of Septimus Cragg. At this point in the story, Erskine-Brown has just finished his examination
of Gandolphini (a witness for the prosecution), and Rumpole is beginning his cross-examination:
Comstock / Getty Images

Chapter 6

Erskine-Brown sat, apparently satisfied, and I rose up slowly, and slowly turned the picture so the
witness could see it. “You said, did you not, Mr. Gandolphini, that this is a beautiful painting.” I began
in a way that I was pleased to see the witness didn’t expect.
“It’s very fine. Yes.”
“Has it not at least sixty thousand pounds’ worth of beauty? [the price for which the painting had
been sold at auction]” I asked and then gave the jury a look.
“I can’t say.”
“Can you not? Isn’t part of your trade reducing beauty to mere cash!”
“I value pictures, yes.” I could see that Gandolphini was consciously keeping his temper.
“And would you not agree that this is a valuable picture, no matter who painted it?”
“I have said . . . ” I knew that he was going to try to avoid answering the question, and I interrupted
him. “You have said it’s beautiful. Were you not telling the truth, Mr. Gandolphini?”
“Yes, but . . . ”
“‘Beauty is truth, truth beauty,’ that is all ye know on earth, and all ye need to know.”
I turned and gave the jury their two bobs’ worth of Keats.
“Is that really all we need to know, Mr. Rumpole?” said a voice from on high.
“In this case, yes, my Lord.”
“I think I’ll want to hear legal argument about that, Mr. Rumpole.” Featherstone [the judge]
appeared to be making some form of minor joke, but I answered him seriously. “Oh, you shall.
I promise you, your Lordship.” I turned to the witness. “Mr. Gandolphini, by ‘beauty’ I suppose you
mean that this picture brings joy and delight to whoever stands before it?”
“I suppose that would be a definition.”
“You suppose it would. And let us suppose it turned out to have been painted by an even more
famous artist than Septimus Cragg. Let us suppose it had been done by Degas or Manet . . . . If it were
painted by a more famous artist it wouldn’t become more of a thing of beauty and a joy to behold,
would it?”
“No . . . but . . . ”
“And if it were painted by a less famous artist—Joe Bloggs, say, or my Lord the learned Judge, one
wet Sunday afternoon . . . . It wouldn’t become less beautiful, would it, Mr. Gandolphini? It would have
the same colourful shadows, the same feeling of light and air and breeze from the harbour. The same
warmth of the human body?”
“Exactly the same, of course, but . . . ”
“I don’t want to interrupt . . . ” Erskine-Brown rose to his feet, wanting to interrupt.
“Then don’t, Mr. Erskine-Brown!” I suggested. The suggestion had no effect. Erskine-Brown made
a humble submission to his Lordship. “My Lord, in my humble submission we are not investigating the
beauty of this work, but the value, and the value of this picture depends on its being a genuine
Septimus Cragg. Therefore my learned friend’s questions seem quite irrelevant.”
At which Erskine-Brown subsided in satisfaction, and his Lordship called on Rumpole to reply.
“My learned friend regards this as a perfectly ordinary criminal case,” I said. “Of course it isn’t. We
are discussing the value of a work of art, a thing of beauty and a joy forever. We are not debating the
price of fish!”5

How do you rule? Are Rumpole’s questions relevant? Will your lordship allow Rumpole to continue this line of questioning, or will you rule that it is irrelevant to the issue before the court?

86

Chapter 6

Relevant and Irrelevant Reasons

12. In the following letter, what is the conclusion of the argument offered by Benny? What reasons
does he give in support of that argument? Is the reply made by Ann Landers relevant to Benny’s
argument and conclusion?
Dear Ann Landers:
I’m a high school senior who is speaking for a lot of others my age (17 going on 18). We have a big
complaint. First I want to make it clear that we don’t go out and get smashed every night. Most of us
are responsible people. The kids who make trouble get the publicity. Good behavior is not news.
What we are mad about is the attempt to raise the legal drinking age all over the country from 18 to 21.
If we are old enough to go to war, we should be old enough to drink.
I’ll be interested in whether you duck this issue or print my letter.
Just Benny
Dear Benny:
The folks who want to raise the legal drinking age from 18 to 21 are not being mean. They are
trying to save lives—and, I might add, they are succeeding.
Every state, without exception, that has raised the drinking age from 18 to 21 has reported a
decrease in alcohol-related teenage deaths and injuries on the streets and highways. I know of few laws
that are such surefire lifesavers.6

13. There is an ongoing debate about whether the District of Columbia should be a state. Those who
advocate a constitutional amendment to allow statehood for the District of Columbia argue that
residents are denied the basic right to be represented by their own senators and members of the U.S.
House of Representatives; thus, among other problems, residents of the District of Columbia have no
voice in federal law-making and so are taxed by the federal government without having representatives
to vote on those taxes. That, say the supporters of statehood for the District of Columbia, amounts to
“taxation without representation,” a rallying cry during the days leading up to the American Revolution. The following is an argument in answer to the taxation-without-representation argument:
“Taxation without representation” can hardly be an argument in favor of this [statehood for D.C.]
amendment since for every 29 cents paid in federal taxation, residents of the District receive $1.00 in
return. (Letter from Linda Atkins to the Greensboro Daily News)

Is that a relevant answer to the taxation-without-representation argument?
14. John Walker Lindh, the young American who joined the Taliban and was captured in the U.S.
invasion of Afghanistan, was charged with conspiracy to murder U.S. nationals. John Walker
Lindh’s attorneys argued that statements he made while interrogated by the U.S. military should be
thrown out: they were not made freely, because the conditions under which he was held were cruel
and coercive. He was confined in a freezing metal container, blindfolded, and bound with
handcuffs that cut off his circulation. Any statements made in such circumstances could hardly be
counted as voluntary, his lawyers noted.
The U.S. attorneys prosecuting Lindh replied that Lindh was in Afghanistan of his own
choice: the United States “had not plucked John Walker Lindh out of the California suburb where
he used to live and dropped him into a metal container in the middle of Afghanistan.” (Reported
by Larry Margasak, Associated Press, March 30, 2002)
15. How Do You Rule?

Comstock / Getty Images

Claudia Klauswitz is on trial for first-degree murder.
She is charged with the murder of her husband. The
prosecution claims that she killed him in a lover’s
quarrel, after discovering his affair with the babysitter. She admits that she shot him; she claims, however,
that she acted in self-defense, to protect herself against
a violent husband who had abused her in the past, had
threatened to kill her, and then advanced upon her
while she held a gun on him.
The prosecution has called as a witness the
operator of a shooting range, who testifies that he knew
Claudia, and that she sometimes came to the shooting
range for target practice. The prosecuting attorney continues with this question: Was the defendant
a good marksman with her pistol? The defense objects to the question and asks for a meeting in

Chapter 6

87

Relevant and Irrelevant Reasons

the judge’s chambers (out of the hearing of the jury) to discuss the issue. The judge, district attorney, and defense attorney go to the judge’s chambers, and the defense attorney puts her objection:

DEFENSE ATTORNEY:

DISTRICT ATTORNEY:

DEFENSE ATTORNEY:

Your Honor, we are asking that you not allow any further questions along these
lines. The prosecutor is trying to inflame the jury with an irrelevant point. The
defendant is an expert shot, whose hobby is shooting at the pistol range;
she has friends there, it’s like a night at the bowling alley. But the prosecutor is
trying to make her look like the suburban version of Billy the Kid, blazing away
with her pistol at every opportunity. Of course she’s an expert shot; but that
has nothing to do with this case. I didn’t object to the prosecution establishing
that she knows how to use a pistol; but her expertise with a pistol is irrelevant.
It has been well established, by the district attorney’s own witnesses, that the
deceased died from a bullet fired from Claudia’s pistol and that the burns on
his clothing indicate that the pistol was fired from a distance of not more than
18 inches. Obviously she doesn’t have to be Annie Oakley to hit someone at a
distance of 18 inches, and the fact that she is a good marksman is irrelevant to
the question of whether she acted in self-defense. The prosecution wants to
paint a picture of a wild-eyed woman blasting away at every target in sight; and
that is an unfair tactic. They have no good reason for trying to show that she is
an expert with a pistol; that is irrelevant in this case, and they are pursuing this
line only to inflame the jury. We’re asking that you not allow any more
questions concerning the defendant’s expertise with a pistol or her enjoyment
of target shooting: They are irrelevant and inflammatory.
Your Honor, these questions are certainly relevant. We want to establish
that the defendant not only owned a gun, but was expert in its use and,
indeed, was ready to use it: She didn’t need any self-defense motive; she was
angry, and she used a weapon with which she was expert to vent her anger
and avenge her hurt pride.
Your Honor, this is ridiculous. It has already been established and we do
not dispute that she owned a pistol and knew how to use it. The fact that
she was an expert marksman and enjoyed target shooting no more indicates that she would be likely to murder someone with a pistol than would
her skill at carving a turkey indicate that she would be likely to murder
someone with a knife.

How do you rule? Will you allow the prosecution to continue this line of questioning, or rule it
irrelevant?

Exercise 6-2

Consider the Verdict

IE235 / Image Source Plus / Alamy

Nathan Jackson is on trial, charged with forgery. As he has
admitted, he forged the signature of one of his
professors—Professor Winston—on a letter of reference
and then sent the letter without the permission or knowledge of the professor. Jackson admits having done this; he
maintains, however, that this is not a case of forgery, since
he had no intention of deceiving. Professor Winston had
already written a letter of reference for Jackson and had
mailed it to the University of North Carolina Department
of Anthropology, where Jackson was applying for admission to graduate studies. However, while Professor Winston was on a trip to Europe and could not be reached,
Jackson had decided to apply for graduate study at the
University of New Virginia. Jackson knew that Professor Winston’s letter was on the hard disk of his
computer, and Jackson—having worked as Professor Winston’s laboratory assistant—had easy and
legitimate access to Professor Winston’s office. So Jackson turned on Professor Winston’s computer,
found the file containing the letter of reference, revised the inside address (but left everything else
the same), and printed it out. Jackson then signed Professor Winston’s name and sent the letter of
reference to the University of New Virginia.

88

Chapter 6

Relevant and Irrelevant Reasons

When Professor Winston returned from Europe, he found a note from the University of New
Virginia, acknowledging receipt of his letter of reference for Nathan Jackson. Thinking that there
must have been some mistake, Professor Winston called a friend on the anthropology faculty at
the University of New Virginia. The friend faxed a copy of the letter of reference back to Professor
Winston, who immediately recognized that the signature was not his own. He confronted Jackson,
who admitted what he had done.
Professor Winston, though disappointed in Jackson, was willing to let the matter drop. The
University of New Virginia, however, had already awarded Jackson one of a very limited and highly
competitive number of slots for admission to graduate study in anthropology. They felt they had
been badly deceived, and that such deceit cut at the integrity of academic programs and scholarly
research. Thus, they decided to take a strong stand against this sort of practice and filed forgery
charges against Nathan Jackson.
The forgery law in New Virginia (where the charges were filed and the case was tried) is as
follows:
A person is guilty of forgery if, with purpose to defraud or injure anyone, or with knowledge that he is
facilitating a fraud or injury to be perpetrated by anyone, the actor:
a. alters any writing of another without his authority; or
b. makes, completes, executes, authenticates, issues or transfers any writing so that it purports to
be the act of another who did not authorize that act.7

The first witness for the prosecution is Professor Winston. In answer to questions from the district
attorney, Professor Winston testifies that though Jackson did have access to Winston’s office and was
allowed to borrow books from Professor Winston’s office, Jackson was not authorized to use
Winston’s computer, was certainly not authorized to send any sort of letter or message on behalf of
Winston, was not authorized to send a letter of reference on behalf of Winston, was not authorized
to sign Winston’s name, and that, specifically, Winston had not given permission for Jackson to send
a letter of reference from Winston to the University of New Virginia, and Winston had not and
would not have given permission to Jackson to sign Winston’s name to such a letter. Then the
defense cross-examines:

DEFENSE ATTORNEY:
PROFESSOR WINSTON:
DEFENSE ATTORNEY:
PROFESSOR WINSTON:
DEFENSE ATTORNEY:
PROFESSOR WINSTON:
DEFENSE ATTORNEY:
PROFESSOR WINSTON:
DEFENSE ATTORNEY:
PROFESSOR WINSTON:
DEFENSE ATTORNEY:
PROFESSOR WINSTON:
DEFENSE ATTORNEY:
PROFESSOR WINSTON:
DEFENSE ATTORNEY:
PROFESSOR WINSTON:
DEFENSE ATTORNEY:
PROFESSOR WINSTON:
DEFENSE ATTORNEY:
PROFESSOR WINSTON:
DEFENSE ATTORNEY:
DISTRICT ATTORNEY:

Professor Winston, you said that Nathan Jackson was your student assistant, is that correct?
Yes, that’s correct.
You had a good deal of confidence in him, did you not?
Yes, I did.
Gave him substantial responsibilities, is that right?
Yes.
When you left for Europe last spring, had you already turned in your final
course grades?
I had finished determining all the grades.
That is not what I asked. Had you turned in your course grades?
No.
Did you ask Nathan Jackson to submit those grades for you?
Yes, I did.
What did that involve?
He had to take the grades from my grade book, write the final grades on
the registrar’s grade lists, and then take the list to the registrar.
That’s not quite all, is it?
What do you mean?
Isn’t there a space on the grade submission forms that calls for the
professor’s signature?
Yes.
You hadn’t signed those forms, had you?
No.
And so you expected Nathan Jackson to sign those for you, didn’t you?
Your Honor, I object to this line of questioning. Whether or not Professor
Winston allowed or even instructed the defendant to sign some other

Chapter 6

Relevant and Irrelevant Reasons

89
document on his behalf has no relevance to this issue; the only question is
whether the defendant fraudulently and deceptively and without permission signed Professor Winston’s name on the letter of reference: that is the
document that is before the court, not some set of class grades.

If you were defense attorney, how would you argue for the relevance of this testimony?
Having heard the arguments of the district attorney, and now your own arguments on behalf
of the defense, place yourself in the position of judge: How do you rule? Is this line of questioning
relevant or irrelevant?
Let’s suppose that the judge allows the question as relevant, and the cross-examination
continues:

DEFENSE ATTORNEY:
PROFESSOR WINSTON:
DEFENSE ATTORNEY:
PROFESSOR WINSTON:
DEFENSE ATTORNEY:
DROFESSOR WINSTON:
DEFENSE ATTORNEY:
PROFESSOR WINSTON:
DEFENSE ATTORNEY:

DISTRICT ATTORNEY:
JUDGE:
DEFENSE ATTORNEY:

PROFESSOR WINSTON:
DEFENSE ATTORNEY:
PROFESSOR WINSTON:
DEFENSE ATTORNEY:

So, Professor Winston, when you asked Nathan Jackson to turn in your
grade sheets, you expected him to sign them for you, didn’t you?
Actually, I didn’t think about it; it really didn’t occur to me, in the rush of
leaving for Europe, that the grade sheets had to be signed.
But in any case, you didn’t have any objection to Nathan Jackson, your
very trustworthy assistant, turning in your grades and signing the forms, is
that right?
No, I guess I had no objections.
So in fact Nathan Jackson was authorized to use your signature under
some circumstances, isn’t that right?
I suppose so.
So when you said, in your earlier testimony, that Nathan Jackson was not
authorized to sign your name, that wasn’t quite accurate, was it?
No, I had forgotten about that occasion.
So just before you left, Nathan Jackson was authorized to sign your name
on your grades. Since he was authorized to sign your name on something
as important as your final grades, it wouldn’t be too surprising if he then
believed that he was also authorized to sign your name to a copy of a letter
you had already sent on his behalf, isn’t that right?
Objection, Your Honor; question calls for speculation.
Sustained.
Professor Winston, I just want to be sure I am quite clear on one point.
The letter that Nathan sent to the University of New Virginia, except for
the address, was identical to the one you sent on his behalf as a letter of
reference to another graduate department, is that right?
That is correct.
And I take it that the original letter of reference that you wrote for Nathan,
that was an honest letter and you believed what you said and you wrote it on
behalf of Nathan because that was your true opinion of him, is that right?
That is right.
Thank you, Professor Winston. No further questions.

At this point, the prosecution rests.
The defense calls the defendant, Nathan Jackson, who testifies that he believed that Professor Winston would have no objection to sending the letter of reference, that he did not think that
Professor Winston would mind Nathan sending the letter himself, that he had tried to contact
Professor Winston before sending the letter, and that he had had no intention of deceiving the
admissions committee at the University of New Virginia. During cross-examination, the district
attorney raises the following question:

DISTRICT ATTORNEY:
NATHAN JACKSON:
DISTRICT ATTORNEY:
NATHAN JACKSON:

Mr. Jackson, why didn’t you sign your own name to the letter of reference
you sent to the University of New Virginia?
Because I couldn’t write a letter of reference for myself; the letters of
reference have to come from professors.
So in fact, you wanted the Admissions Committee at the University of
New Virginia to believe that the letter came from Professor Winston, is that
right?
It did come from him; he wrote the letter.

90

Chapter 6

DISTRICT ATTORNEY:
DEFENSE ATTORNEY:
DISTRICT ATTORNEY:
JUDGE:
DISTRICT ATTORNEY:
NATHAN JACKSON:
DISTRICT ATTORNEY:
NATHAN JACKSON:
DISTRICT ATTORNEY:

Relevant and Irrelevant Reasons

No, he certainly did not; he wrote a letter to the University of North
Carolina; he never wrote the letter to the University of New Virginia.
Your Honor, would you please instruct the district attorney to save her
arguments for her closing speech?
Your Honor, would you please instruct this witness to answer my questions?
That’s enough; let’s get back to the questions. Mr. Jackson, please answer
the questions as directly as you can.
Thank you, Your Honor. Now Mr. Jackson, did you want the Admissions
Committee at the University of New Virginia to believe that the letter came
from Professor Winston?
Yes.
And did you want the Admissions Committee to believe that the signature
at the bottom was Professor Winston’s signature?
Yes.
No further questions.

OK that’s the case. There seems to be little doubt that Jackson faked Professor Winston’s signature
and that he sent a letter over that signature that Professor Winston had not authorized. So if there
is any doubt about Jackson’s guilt, what would that doubt have to turn on? (i.e., what is the key issue
in this case; define it as precisely as possible.)
What is your verdict? Do you find Nathan Jackson guilty, or not guilty, of forgery? (You might
find it interesting to develop the strongest argument you can on behalf of the prosecution, in favor
of finding Nathan guilty; and then develop your strongest argument for the defense, in favor of a
verdict of not guilty.) Suppose that we add a few things to the case; for each of these, are they
relevant or irrelevant? (i.e., would they—or better, should they—have any influence on your likelihood
of finding the defendant guilty, or not guilty, of forgery.)
a. Suppose that Professor Winston testified that sending the letter over his signature was just
what he would have wanted Nathan to do (even though the professor had never authorized
him to do so, and of course did not know of the act when Nathan did it). Relevant or
irrelevant?
b. Suppose that Professor Winston, upon his return, is horrified that such a letter was sent to the
University of New Virginia, since Professor Winston had already recommended another
student to that program, and as a matter of policy Professor Winston never recommended
more than one student to the same graduate school in a single year. (Nathan had no
knowledge of Professor Winston’s special policy on recommendations.) Relevant or irrelevant?
c. Suppose that Professor Winston is horrified because he had already recommended a student
to the University of New Virginia and his policy is never to recommend two; and Nathan knew
of Professor Winston’s policy, and knew that Professor Winston had already recommended
someone, before sending the letter. Relevant or irrelevant?
d. Following Professor Winston’s signature, Nathan added “nj” in parentheses, to indicate that
he was signing on behalf of Professor Winston. Relevant or irrelevant?
e. Instead of this being a letter of reference in support of an application for admission to the
graduate program, it is a letter in support of a joint application for admission and a fellowship worth approximately $20,000 a year. Relevant or irrelevant?

Study and Review on mythinkinglab.com

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What is the first thing you must do before you can determine whether a premise is relevant
or irrelevant?
2. How do you determine whether a premise is relevant?
3. Why is it that a statement may be relevant in one argument and irrelevant in another?
4. Why is the irrelevant reason fallacy sometimes called the “red herring” fallacy?

Chapter 6

91

Relevant and Irrelevant Reasons

NOTES
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Marshall Brown, Wit and Humor of Bench and Bar (Chicago, IL: T. H. Flood, 1899), p. 513.
Frontline, with Judy Woodruff: “Inside the Jury Room.” By the Network of Public Television Stations.
Advertisement in USA TODAY, September 26, 1986, p. 13A; advertisement placed by the National Coalition
Against Pornography; emphasis included in original.
Cleveland Plain Dealer, January 10, 2003.
Excerpt from Rumpole and the Golden Thread, by John Mortimer. Copyright © 1983 by Advanpress Ltd.
Reprinted by permission of Viking Penguin, Inc.
Permission granted by Ann Landers and Creators Syndicate.
Adapted from Model Penal Code and Commentaries, by The American Law Institute.

INTERNET RESOURCES
Michael Quinion has a website—World Wide Words—on “International English from a British
Viewpoint,” and he has an interesting essay on the origins of the expression “red herring.” It can be
found at http://www.worldwidewords.org/articles/herring.htm.

ADDITIONAL READING
Douglas Walton’s Relevance in Argumentation (New York:
Routledge, 2003) is probably the most detailed examination

of the question of relevance in arguments, and of the fallacy
of irrelevant reason.

Read the Document on mythinkinglab.com
Bruce N. Waller, “Fallacy of Irrelevant Reason,” Coffee and
Philosophy, pp. 14–18. This dialogue discusses the
difference between relevant and irrelevant reasons in
argument.
Report of the Kaufman Commission on Proceedings Involving
Guy Paul Morin (Ontario Ministry of the Attorney
General). As noted in Chapter 3, this was a case in which

Morin was wrongfully convicted and imprisoned, and the
Kaufman Commission studies the circumstances that led
to that wrongful conviction. One of the findings was that
“evidence” was allowed into the trial that might have influenced the jury, but which in fact had no relevance to the
question of Morin’s guilt; this passage from the Commission Report describes that irrelevant material.

7

❖❖❖

Analyzing Arguments

Listen to the Chapter Audio on mythinkinglab.com
When analyzing an argument, start with the conclusion. If you are trying to construct a
compelling argument, first decide exactly what conclusion you want to establish. If you are
evaluating someone else’s argument, first determine exactly what the argument is
supposed to prove.
When you have picked out the conclusion, you can examine the structure of the
argument in support of that conclusion. Consider this example.
We should not build more nuclear power plants in the United States. Nuclear power is a dangerous technology: We have already experienced several nuclear accidents, and nuclear accidents
have the potential to be catastrophic; even if the operators are well trained and careful and make
no errors and all safety features are incorporated into the design—which is unlikely—there is
always the danger that a nuclear power plant might be the target of a terrorist strike, with terrible
consequences for public safety. Furthermore, nuclear power places an unfair burden on future
generations: While we gain the benefit of the electricity produced, we leave for future generations the legacy of dangerously radioactive spent nuclear fuel. It’s selfish and unfair to use a technology that benefits the present at the expense of future generations. Finally, we do not really
need the increased power that more nuclear power plants would generate. Through careful
conservation of energy—including strict requirements for energy-efficient appliances and
equipment and automobiles and houses—we could reduce our power needs, and through
greater use of solar and hydroelectric and wind power, we could substantially increase our supply
of energy. So we should put an immediate stop to the building of new nuclear power plants.

Don’t worry right now about whether that is a good or a bad argument. Let’s just look at
the structure of the argument. First: what’s the overall conclusion?

ARGUMENT STRUCTURE
Convergent Arguments
The overall conclusion is just this: No additional nuclear power plants should be built.
(It is important to note the precise conclusion. It is not that there should be no use of

92

Chapter 7

Analyzing Arguments

93

nuclear power; this argument does not attempt to establish that all existing nuclear power
plants should be closed.)
Next, what reasons are given in support of that conclusion?
Three main reasons are given for the conclusion: First, nuclear power plants are
dangerous; second, use of nuclear power is unfair to future generations; third, the power
from additional nuclear power plants is not essential.
The next consideration is this: What is the structure of the argument? How are the
reasons related to each other, and how are the reasons related to the conclusion? In
answering those questions, the first issue is, Do the reasons given hang together, or does
each stand independently? If one of the reasons offered were found to be false, would that
undermine the other reasons also? For example, if we should be convinced that nuclear
power is not placing an unfair burden on future generations (the second reason is
rejected), would that destroy the whole argument? Or would we still have to evaluate the
other two reasons independently?
In this case, each of the three reasons stands or falls independently. Consider the first
reason offered against additional nuclear power plants: Nuclear power is too dangerous.
If you reject that reason (you decide that nuclear power is not excessively dangerous),
what effect would that have on the other two reasons? None. You might still decide that
no new nuclear power plants should be built on the grounds that (second reason)
nuclear energy places an unfair burden on future generations, or on the grounds that
(third reason) alternative energy sources and energy conservation are better ways of
meeting our future energy needs. Or suppose you reject the second reason: You decide
that spent nuclear fuel can be disposed of in such a manner that it does not unfairly burden future generations. You could not just stop at that point and reject the entire argument; instead, you would still have to decide whether the remaining reasons are sufficient
to establish that additional nuclear power plants are undesirable. Don’t misunderstand:
If an argument gives three independent reasons in support of a conclusion and one
reason fails, then certainly that argument is not as strong as it would have been had all
three reasons proved true. Nonetheless, the remaining reasons may still offer substantial
support—perhaps sufficient support—even if one reason is rejected. (If additional
nuclear power plants are very dangerous, unfair to future generations, and unneeded,
those are certainly good grounds for rejecting the construction of additional nuclear
power plants. But one might reasonably be convinced that it’s a bad idea to construct
additional nuclear power plants strictly on the grounds that nuclear power plants are very
dangerous. The first reason alone might be sufficient even if the other two were rejected.
The first reason alone will not offer as much support for that conclusion as all three
together, but it might suffice.)
Since there are independent reasons, each offering independent support for a conclusion on which they all converge from separate directions, this argument structure is often
called a convergent argument type. In a convergent argument, the different reasons are
independent of one another, and when one falls it does not take the others down with it.
Our example convergent argument is diagrammed in Figure 7-1.
Consider another example of a convergent argument. You are a juror in the
burglary trial of Priscilla Prowler. The district attorney is endeavoring to prove that
Ms. Prowler was indeed the villain who burglarized the Jones’ home, and he offers the
following evidence in support of that conclusion: Three eyewitnesses independently
identify Ms. Prowler as the person seen running from the Jones’ house carrying a
crowbar on the night of the burglary; Ms. Prowler’s fingerprints are found inside the
house; Ms. Prowler’s boyfriend testifies that she bragged to him about having “done the
Jones job”; and when Ms. Prowler is apprehended she is wearing a diamond bracelet
that was taken in the burglary, and Jones’ silver is found in the trunk of her car. That’s
a rather strong case against Ms. Prowler. Now suppose that during the crossexamination of Ms. Prowler’s boyfriend it comes out that he and Priscilla had recently
been spatting because he had discovered that Priscilla had been secretly seeing an old

94

Chapter 7

Figure 7-1

Analyzing Arguments

A convergent argument.

flame. As a result, you decide that the boyfriend is probably “out to get” Ms. Prowler,
and you become convinced that his testimony—that Ms. Prowler bragged to him of
doing the burglary—is unreliable. What effect will that have on your evaluation of the
argument as a whole?
Not much, since this is a convergent argument offering independent reasons for the
defendant’s guilt. The boyfriend’s testimony—if it is believable—would support the
conclusion that Priscilla Prowler committed the burglary. The argument for her guilt is
not quite as strong as it would be if the boyfriend’s testimony were believable. But failure
of that one reason does not undermine the entire argument, for all the other reasons for
the guilty verdict remain: They are not undermined by the failure of the boyfriend’s
testimony. Even if we reject the boyfriend’s testimony, there are still some very strong
independent reasons that point to a conclusion of guilty. However, the danger is that so
much attention will be drawn to the failed reason that the remaining reasons in support
of the conclusion will be ignored.

Alibi
The famous British murder trial of Steinie Morrison
(convicted in 1911 of the brutal murder of Leon Beron)
offers a striking illustration of how one failed reason can
overwhelm other independent reasons. Morrison’s
defense barrister pointed out excellent reasons for reasonable doubt of the defendant’s guilt (and remember,
the defense need only establish a reasonable doubt).
The prosecution case rested heavily on the eyewitness
identification of Morrison as the man seen with the murder victim shortly before the murder. It was established
that the light was such that it would have been almost
impossible to identify anyone under such conditions,
and indeed the eyewitnesses admitted that they had seen
newspaper photographs of the accused just prior to
picking him out of a police lineup. The presiding
judge’s doubts are clear in his summation to the jury:

Are you satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that
that is the man . . . ? Think for yourselves. With
what certainty could you swear to a man whom
you saw on a night like that, by the kind of light
there was at those places? Can you feel certain
that a man would not be mistaken? . . . Are you so
sure that they [the eyewitnesses] really took
notice enough, that they had opportunity
enough, to be able some days afterwards to swear
with certainty to the man?1

Unfortunately for the defendant, two girls—who apparently had become attracted to the handsome defendant—testified that they had seen him at a show the
evening of the murder. However, that alibi collapsed
when under cross-examination it was shown that the girls

Chapter 7

Analyzing Arguments

could remember nothing from the show, could not recall
the price of admission, and claimed to have bought tickets at curtain time for a show that had long been sold out.
That was only a small part of the defense case and
obviously had no connection with the weakness of the

95

eyewitness testimony. Apparently, however, the jurors
focused on the weak—almost certainly fabricated—alibi,
and gave little attention to the remaining independent
points that favored reasonable doubt. They deliberated
half an hour and returned a verdict of guilty.

When examining arguments, first determine the conclusion: What is this argument
supposed to prove? Then consider how the argument is structured: Are there several
independent reasons given for the conclusion? If so, you will have to consider each
reason on its own merits and not reject the whole argument because one reason is flawed.

Linked Arguments
Convergent arguments offer independent, free-standing reasons for the conclusion. In
convergent arguments, if one reason is not convincing, perhaps another will be. But not
all arguments have that form. In some arguments, the premises—the reasons given in
support of the conclusion—are linked together like a chain, and if one link breaks, the
entire argument fails: The linked argument is thus only as strong as its weakest link. In
short, a linked argument is an argument in which the reasons given depend on one
another for their strength. Separately, each premise offers little or no support for the
conclusion; together, they may form a powerful argument.
Consider this example. The defendant is charged with murder, and the question is
whether the defendant is actually the person who committed the drive-by shooting of the
victim (i.e., there is no question of self-defense or insanity or accidental death; the only
question is the identity of the person who did the deed). One of the arguments given by
the prosecution is as follows:
White Jaguar automobiles are quite unusual in this area. The defendant owns a white Jaguar,
and the car from which the fatal shots were fired has been identified by several witnesses as a
white Jaguar. Therefore, there is some reason to think that the defendant is guilty of the
drive-by murder.

Would that be sufficient reason to find the defendant guilty? Certainly not. Especially not
when we consider that the prosecution bears the burden of proof and must do more than
establish that the defendant might be guilty, or even that the defendant is probably guilty.
The prosecution must prove the defendant’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, and this
argument doesn’t come close. But leave that issue aside for a moment and look at the
structure of the argument. We have three reasons, all supporting (though not establishing) the conclusion that the defendant is guilty. How do they support that conclusion?
Not independently. Suppose we discover that the witnesses were lying and that the fatal
shots were fired from a red van rather than from a white Jaguar. If the premise that the
shots were fired from a white Jaguar falls, it brings the whole argument down with it: The
other premises—the defendant owns a white Jaguar, and white Jaguars are rare—are now
useless in trying to establish the guilt of the defendant. Or suppose we find that the
defendant does not own (or have access to) a white Jaguar: Again, if that single link is
broken, the entire linked argument fails. Or suppose that white Jaguars are not rare, but
instead are the most popular car in that particular area: Again, the argument collapses.
(If you have trouble seeing that, imagine that the testimony is that the fatal shots were
fired from a car, and the defendant owns a car; since car ownership is hardly rare, that fact
will lend no support to the claim that the defendant is the murderer.) So in this case—as
in all linked arguments—the premises stand or fall together. If we are diagramming an

96

Chapter 7

Figure 7-2

Analyzing Arguments

A linked argument.

argument, we need a special way of showing that. In the diagram of the convergent argument, the different independent lines are shown converging along separate paths toward
the conclusion. With linked arguments, we want to show the premises joined as a team or
unit, all of which together lead to the conclusion. So we might diagram the argument (as
in Figure 7-2) with the premises linked by one line, and another line drawn from the link
to the conclusion.

SUBARGUMENTS
So now you know that it is essential to first pick out the conclusion, and you can distinguish the premises from the conclusion, and also distinguish among convergent and
linked arguments. That’s a good start at analyzing arguments and enough to handle most
arguments quite effectively. But arguments can and do get more complicated, and it’s
important to be able to deal with that complexity; in fact, it’s in dealing with the complex
arguments that argument diagrams are most useful.
Look back at the first example: the argument about nuclear power. That argument
was actually considerably more complex than our diagram indicated. The argument,
you’ll recall, goes like this:
We should not build more nuclear power plants in the United States. Nuclear power is a
dangerous technology: We have already experienced several nuclear accidents, and nuclear
accidents have the potential to be catastrophic; even if the operators are well trained and
careful and make no errors and all safety features are incorporated into the design—which is
unlikely—there is always the danger that a nuclear power plant might be the target of a terrorist strike, with terrible consequences for public safety. Furthermore, nuclear power places
an unfair burden on future generations: While we gain the benefit of the electricity
produced, we leave for future generations the legacy of dangerously radioactive spent nuclear fuel. It’s selfish and unfair to use a technology that benefits the present at the expense
of future generations. Finally, we do not really need the increased power that more nuclear
power plants would generate. Through careful conservation of energy—including strict
requirements for energy-efficient appliances and equipment and automobiles and houses—
we could eliminate some power requirements, and through greater use of solar and
hydroelectric and wind power, we could substantially increase our supply of energy. So we
should put an immediate stop to the building of new nuclear power plants.

The exact conclusion of that argument is that we should build no new nuclear power
plants. In overall structure it is a convergent type of argument: Three distinct and
independent reasons are given in support of that conclusion. First, nuclear power is too
dangerous; second, nuclear power use is unfair to future generations; and third,
additional nuclear power is not necessary. That’s as far as we went in analyzing the
argument, but there’s still a lot further to go. The most obvious next step in analyzing
that argument is to ask, Are the reasons given in support of the conclusion relevant to

Chapter 7

97

Analyzing Arguments

the conclusion? That is, do they actually support the conclusion? If they are true, do they
make the conclusion more likely to be true? We have already examined relevance in an
earlier chapter, so you can determine that the reasons given are relevant. But another
question immediately arises: If the reasons given are true, then they will support the conclusion; but why should we accept the reasons given for the conclusion? That is, are the
reasons given actually true?
In the original argument, some reasons were given in support of those reasons. That
is, there are subarguments within the larger argument, and the subarguments are arguments in favor of the premises of the overall argument. For example, look at the third
reason given for the conclusion: We do not really need the increased power that additional nuclear power plants would generate. That is a key premise in support of the overall
conclusion; but it in turn is the conclusion of a subargument. The subargument is thus:
We do not need the increased power that more nuclear power plants would generate.
Through careful conservation of energy—including strict requirements for energy-efficient
appliances and equipment and automobiles and houses—we could eliminate some power
requirements, and through greater use of solar and hydroelectric and wind power, we could
substantially increase our supply of energy.

The conclusion of that subargument is that the increased power that more nuclear power
plants would generate is not needed. Two reasons are offered in support of that conclusion: First, conservation practices could reduce our demand for energy, and second,
other nonnuclear power sources could supply all the power we need. There you have a
subargument within the larger argument; that is, you have a sort of miniargument in
support of one of the reasons that supports the overall conclusion. And notice that the
conclusion of the subargument functions as a premise in the overall argument. Notice also
that each of the other two reasons given in support of the overall conclusion is in turn
supported by subarguments, and that each of those reasons—while functioning as a
premise in the overall argument—is the conclusion for its respective subargument.
With the added detail, the diagram for the overall argument becomes a bit more
complicated, but taken step by step, it should not be confusing. The basic diagram, shown
in Figure 7-3, remains the same.
To that basic diagram we add diagrams of each subargument. For example, the
diagram of the third subargument is shown in Figure 7-4. And the second subargument
is a linked argument; its diagram is shown in Figure 7-5. Now we put them together, with

Figure 7-3

A convergent argument.

98

Chapter 7

Figure 7-4

Figure 7-5

Analyzing Arguments

A convergent subargument.

A linked subargument.

the conclusion of each subargument operating as a premise for the overall argument
(Figure 7-6).
Piece of cake, right?
By examining and diagramming the above argument and subarguments, you can
see that some of the reasons given in the argument are in turn supported by other reasons
(are supported by further subarguments). But being of an inquiring and reflective

Chapter 7

Analyzing Arguments

Figure 7-6

99

The entire argument.

nature, you no doubt asked, What about the reasons in the subargument? What supports
them? For example, consider the claim that alternative soft energy sources are readily
available: Why should I accept that? Shouldn’t there be a further argument—a
subsubargument—to support that reason?
The answer is that there could be such a subsubargument—and perhaps there should
be. In any case, it should be noted that arguments can be pushed to many different levels:
The conclusion that no new nuclear power plants should be built can be supported by the

100

Chapter 7

Analyzing Arguments

claim that additional nuclear power is not needed, and that claim can be supported by
the claim that alternative soft energy sources are readily available, and that claim could be
supported by data on solar energy, and those data could be supported by claims about the
reliability of the research studies that generated the data, and so on. At some point, of
course, we must stop: when we reach some obvious fact, when we reach some assertion
that everyone accepts, when we reach an assumption that is accepted as true for the purposes of this particular argument, or when we run out of energy and decide not to press
any further back for support. Exactly under what conditions premises should be accepted
as true, when assumptions are and are not reasonable, and what degree and type of justification should be demanded for premises are all important questions that will be examined in later chapters.
In some cases, a linked argument can be one of the convergent elements in a larger
convergent argument. For example, consider the following argument in favor of physician-assisted suicide:
We should legalize physician-assisted suicide for terminally ill patients who wish to hasten
their deaths. First, it is psychologically important that people have as much control over their
situations as possible, and being able to control the process of one’s death gives some terminally ill patients a very satisfying and powerful sense of control. Furthermore, excruciating
pain is always undesirable, and some forms of disease cause excruciating pain that can only
be relieved by death. And finally, competent people should have the right to make their own
decisions about their lives and deaths.

In this argument, the overall structure is convergent. There are three convergent lines
leading to the conclusion: the first is the argument concerning control, the second the argument about pain, and the third the claim concerning rights. But the first and second of
these convergent lines are linked arguments. The diagram for that argument is shown in
Figure 7-7.
Here’s one more example before we turn to some exercises:
Alice should be found not guilty, because Alice did not rob the Key West Convenience Store at 10:00 P.M. on August 9. In the first place, she had no motive. Certainly
she did not need money: Her parents are quite wealthy, and her personal checking
account contained over $8,000 on the day of the robbery. Furthermore, such a crime
would be completely out of character for the defendant. She is a gentle, nonviolent
individual. Her character is shown by the testimony of her biology professor (who spoke
of her adamant refusal to harm a frog in her biology laboratory), the testimony of the
director of Meals-on-Wheels (who testified that she had—for over 3 years—been a dedicated volunteer for their program of providing hot meals to the elderly and disabled),
and by the testimony of three of her friends (who noted that she is fiercely opposed to
firearms, refused to even hold a pistol shown her by a friend, and refuses on principle

Legalize physician-assisted suicide

Control is
psychologically
important

Figure 7-7

Control of
death is an
important form
of control

Pain is
undesirable

A convergent argument with linked elements.

Death only
means of
ending some
pain

Competent
people have the
right to make
their own
decisions

Chapter 7

101

Analyzing Arguments

to attend violent movies). This is not the sort of person who takes a pistol into a convenience store and robs it at gunpoint. And finally, Alice could not have been the robber
because she was not in Key West when the crime was committed. She could not have
been in Key West, because at 9:30 P.M. on August 9 she was in Miami, and there is no way
to get from Miami to Key West in half an hour. There’s no doubt she was in Miami at the
time, for a professor at the University of Miami testified that he talked with Alice at 9:30
P.M. on the night of August 9 while waiting in line to get popcorn at a movie theater in
Miami. And he could not have been mistaken, because he recognized her from two
seminars she had taken with him at the university. Also, the usher at the theater remembered seeing her there.
The basic structure of this argument is convergent. The first strand of the argument
(Figure 7-8) contains a convergent subargument to prove that Alice had no motive. The
second strand of the overall convergent argument ends in the conclusion (the subconclusion) that armed robbery is out of character for Alice. That conclusion is supported by a
convergent (sub)argument, as shown in Figure 7-9. The third part of the overall convergent argument is diagrammed in Figure 7-10. The third reason for the conclusion that
Alice did not rob the Key West Convenience Store is the claim that Alice was not in Key
West at the time of the robbery. That is in turn the conclusion of a linked subargument
(if Miami were only 2 minutes from Key West, the sighting of Alice in Miami would carry
no weight; and of course if Alice was not in Miami, it would make no difference how far
Miami was from Key West). And there is another subargument (this time a convergent
argument) in support of one of the linked premises: Alice was in Miami because her
professor saw her in Miami and the usher saw her in Miami. Those two premises are
convergent (even if the usher’s testimony is mistaken, the professor’s testimony would
independently support the subconclusion that Alice was in Miami).

Figure 7-8

A subargument.

102

Chapter 7

Figure 7-9

Analyzing Arguments

A convergent subargument.

Figure 7-10

A subargument.

Now it’s just a matter of putting all these arguments together. The resulting diagram
is shown in Figure 7-11. The diagram might look formidable at first glance; but taken step
by step, there’s really nothing difficult about it.
As you check your diagram of an argument to see if the pieces are in the right place,
start from the most basic premises and work your way up. At each step, ask yourself: Does
this premise support the claim above it? Does it make sense to use this as a reason in
support of the statement immediately above it? For example, check the line of argument
running from “Alice’s parents are wealthy” up to “Alice should be found not guilty.”

Chapter 7

Analyzing Arguments

Figure 7-11

The entire argument.

103

104

Chapter 7

Analyzing Arguments

Is it diagrammed correctly? Well, does it make sense to say, “Alice’s parents are wealthy”
and therefore “Alice did not need money”? Yes, of course. (And it would not make sense to
say “Alice is gentle and nonviolent,” so therefore “Alice did not need money”; so if you had
the argument diagrammed in that form, working upward would tip you off to your
mistake.) Likewise, it makes sense to say, “Alice did not need money,” so therefore “Alice
had no motive for the robbery.” And the next step also works: “Alice had no motive for
the robbery,” so “Alice did not rob the Key West Convenience Store.” (Of course that’s not
a conclusive reason for thinking Alice did not do the robbery, but certainly it’s a reason.)
And the final step also works: “Alice did not rob the Key West Convenience Store,” and
therefore “Alice should be found not guilty.” One note of caution as you check your
argument diagram by moving up the ladder: You may come to a point at which the underlying premise does not support the next step, and yet your diagram of the argument is still
correct. In that case, you have the correct diagram for a fallacious argument: an argument
that commits the fallacy of irrelevant reason.
Of course this is not the end of argument analysis. We still must decide whether the
premises are in fact true, and whether the premises—even if they are true—provide
adequate support for the conclusion. And there is another essential step in analyzing
arguments: determining what assumptions are embedded in the argument. That’s the
task of the next section.

Exercise 7-1
For the following arguments, state the conclusion; then diagram the overall structure of the argument,
showing whether that structure is convergent or linked; and then add to your diagram the subarguments (if any) for each of the main reasons given in the argument. Finally, decide whether the
reasons given are relevant or irrelevant.
1. You are obviously suffering from the Wyoming Gollywobbles virus; you have green and orange spots
on your knees and elbows, and only the Wyoming Gollywobbles virus causes green and orange spots
on the knees and elbows.
2. Capital punishment should be abolished, because carrying out the execution has a brutalizing effect
on the prison officials involved; there is always the chance of executing the wrong person; and the
violence of executions teaches the wrong lesson—that the way to solve problems is through violence.
3. We should stop eating so many prepackaged microwave dinners, because they contain a lot of salt,
and eating a lot of salt can cause higher blood pressure, and higher blood pressure can cause heart
attacks.
4. The United States must rapidly reduce its enormous stockpile of nuclear weapons. After all, the
United States is now the only real superpower, and there is no country competing with the United
States in a nuclear arms race. And besides, maintaining a large nuclear arsenal is enormously
expensive—and we could use the money for better purposes, such as health care. And finally, we
cannot really discourage other countries from developing and testing nuclear weapons as long as
we hold a huge nuclear arsenal ourselves: It makes us look like hypocrites to say that they shouldn’t
test nuclear weapons while we hold on to thousands of them.
5. The recent outbreak of dizziness and nausea among YSU students was caused by lawn chemicals
used on the lawn between Cushwa and DeBartolo. Lawn chemicals must have been the problem,
because the lawn was sprayed with herbicides very early on Tuesday morning, and all of the students
who became ill attended Professor Ryle’s Philosophy 697 class, which was held that Tuesday morning on the lawn between Cushwa and DeBartolo.
6. We know that it was one of the Teenage Mutant Ninja turtles who assaulted Shredder, because
Shredder was karate-chopped by a reptile, and the Teenage Mutant Ninja turtles—Michelangelo,
Leonardo, Donatello, and Raphael—are the only reptiles who practice karate. Shredder’s assailant
could not have been Michelangelo, Leonardo, or Donatello, since they were all in a newsmaker
interview with April O’Neill at the time of the assault. Therefore, Raphael must have assaulted
Shredder.

Chapter 7

Analyzing Arguments

105

7. The defendant is clearly guilty of murder. After all, the murder weapon was a pistol that was bought
by and registered to the defendant. And when the pistol was found, the only fingerprints on the pistol belonged to the defendant. Also, two reliable witnesses heard pistol shots, and then identified
the defendant as the person running away from the scene. And finally, several people testified that
on the morning of the day when the murder occurred, the defendant and the murder victim had
had a bitter argument, and the defendant had threatened to kill the victim. So, obviously, the
defendant is guilty as charged.
8. When O. J. Simpson was tried for the murder of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ron Goldman, some
of the most important evidence was O. J. Simpson’s blood found at the crime scene. The defense
argued that the blood was from a blood sample Simpson had given to the police, and that the blood
had been planted by the police in an effort to frame Simpson. One key part of their argument was
the following:
EDTA is a chemical that is added to blood when it is drawn as a sample (the EDTA helps to preserve
the blood sample), and EDTA was added to the Simpson blood sample drawn by the police. EDTA
does not occur naturally in blood at the levels that are added to blood samples. Significant levels of
EDTA were found in the Simpson blood evidence from the scene of the crime. Therefore the Simpson blood evidence from the crime scene must have been from the blood sample the police collected
from O. J. Simpson and then planted at the crime scene.2

9. We should stop spraying chemical pesticides and herbicides on the lawns at Western University.
After all, there are good natural alternatives for controlling insects and weeds. Also, the chemicals
used pose a hazard to students, and are especially hazardous to children when they visit the campus.
Another problem is that when it rains, runoff from the chemicals runs into the sewer lines and
contributes to water pollution. And finally, use of strong chemicals sets a bad example for the rest
of the area: Western University should be taking the lead in reducing pollution, not contributing to
pollution with the use of lawn chemicals.
10. Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, you must find the defendant, Elaine Slevert, guilty of fraud.
Let’s review the facts of this case. Elaine Slevert attempted to sell a painting that she claimed was
“a genuine original Jackson Pollock.” But, in fact, the evidence shows that the painting is a forgery,
because it was painted on a canvas purchased from Empire Fine Arts. But Empire Fine Arts did not
open until 1957, and Jackson Pollock died in 1956. And this obviously was not a case in which
Ms. Slevert was honestly mistaken about the work being by Pollock: For when she offered the painting for sale, she claimed that she had been a friend of Pollock’s and had watched Pollock create the
painting. So, in sum, the defendant represented this painting as the work of Jackson Pollock, when
she knew it was not. So she is guilty of fraud, and that is the verdict you should return.
11. Look, we know the burglary was committed by someone on the football team, because all three
witnesses agreed that the person they saw running away with the jewel box was wearing an official
warm-up suit from the North State University football team, and only North State football players
have those warm-up suits. It certainly was not a defensive player, since all the defensive players were
in a team meeting with the defensive coaches. And it wasn’t an offensive player, since all of them
are much too large to squeeze through the window where the burglar entered. The only players left
are the punter and the placekicker. It wasn’t the punter, since he has a broken leg and couldn’t run.
So the burglar must have been the placekicker.
12. Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, you must find the defendant, Morton Miller, not guilty. For it is a
cornerstone of our system of justice that if there is reasonable doubt that the defendant is guilty,
then the defendant must be found not guilty; and surely in this case there is at least a reasonable
doubt. That doubt arises from several sources. There is doubt, first, because the main witness who
claims to have seen Miller rob and shoot the victim admits that the light was bad and that she was
not wearing her glasses; so how could she possibly make a positive identification? And there is
doubt, second, because the defendant had absolutely no motive for committing this vile murder
and robbery: He had recently won a large lottery jackpot, and thus had no need for money. And,
finally, there is doubt because there is good reason to think that the defendant was not even in the
city at the time of the murder. For remember, his brother testified that Morton was with him in
Albany (3 hours north of Brooklyn) the very night the murder was being committed in Brooklyn;
and while you might doubt a brother’s alibi testimony under most circumstances, in this case the
brother is a Jesuit priest, and he has a sterling reputation for honesty. Also, the waitress at Larry’s
Albany Diner remembers someone who looks a lot like the defendant having dinner there—where
Morton said he had dinner—at the very hour when the murder was being committed in Brooklyn.

106

Chapter 7

Analyzing Arguments

All these factors add up to a more than reasonable doubt; and that reasonable doubt requires a
verdict of not guilty.
13. In criminal cases, traditionally a unanimous verdict is required to find the defendant guilty: A
defendant cannot be found guilty by an 11 to 1 or 10 to 2 verdict. But recently there has been a push
to change this requirement. Louisiana and Oregon now allow nonunanimous verdicts, and there
have been proposals in other states to allow criminal convictions by votes of 10 to 2 or 11 to 1. But
such nonunanimous verdicts are a bad idea, for several reasons. The most obvious is that before we
convict someone of a crime, we want to be very, very certain that that person is really guilty. Requiring that all 12 jurors unanimously agree that the defendant is guilty is one way of protecting against
convicting the innocent. But there are other reasons that are almost as important, but are perhaps
less obvious, for preserving the requirement of unanimity.
One of the things that we want the jury to do is not just vote and return a verdict, but to
really deliberate together about the evidence. Requiring unanimous verdicts helps to guarantee
such deliberation. Suppose you are serving on a jury, and you have some doubts about whether the
defendant is really guilty. If a unanimous verdict is required for conviction, then all the other jurors
have to address your reasons for doubting: Everyone has to take your reasons seriously, and try to
show you why your doubts are mistaken. And at the same time, they have to consider your reasons
for doubting, and perhaps they will be convinced by the reasons and arguments you offer. But if the
jury can convict by an 11 to 1 vote, no one has to even listen to your reasons, if you happen to be
the dissenting juror. There are already 11 votes for conviction, so no one need worry whether you
are convinced or not. This is especially important in a diverse society like our own: On many juries,
there may be only one or two members of important minority groups—perhaps only one African
American, or one Asian, or one Latin American. If verdicts can be returned by an 11 to 1 vote, then
minority members of the jury can be isolated and ignored, and their special contributions to the
deliberative process may be lost.
Finally, it is important not only that justice be done, but also that it be seen to be done. It is
important that the public believe, and have reason to believe, that those who are convicted of criminal acts really are guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. But if people are convicted and imprisoned
when some of the jury members who heard all the evidence are not convinced beyond a reasonable
doubt of their guilt, then public confidence that those who are convicted are really guilty is likely to
be undermined.
In sum, it is vitally important that we insist on unanimous verdicts in criminal trials: not only for
the protection of the rights of defendants, but also to preserve some vitally important social goods.3
14. Currently the United States has an inheritance tax, a tax on inherited estates that are valued in excess
of about $2 million (i.e., there is no tax on estates until the value exceeds $2 million, considerably
higher if the estate is a farm or small business). Some people want to entirely eliminate the estate tax,
so that those inheriting estates of tens or even hundreds of millions of dollars would pay no tax on
them. But the inheritance tax is positive and valuable. It ought to be retained, and perhaps increased.
After all, those who inherit huge sums of money, for which they did nothing, are not really benefitted.
To the contrary, having such a huge inheritance tends to make them lazy and less ambitious, and they
tend to waste their talents. Second, the money that comes from inheritance taxes on huge estates can
be used to provide those who are less fortunate—for example, those born in poverty—with access to
good health care and a good education, and thus give them a genuine opportunity to achieve success.
And finally, when huge estates are passed on without being taxed, then over several generations—
through stock investments and other capital investment returns—our democratic system of government is put at risk, for the inherited wealth tends to accumulate and become concentrated in family
dynasties, and those enormously wealthy family groups gain great power and influence over the
political process, and thus our democratic principles are threatened by such concentrated power.
Thus inheritance taxes are beneficial and valuable, and ought to be retained.
15. We should not ban hate speech at universities. For as ugly and hateful as racist and sexist and
homophobic speech is, banning it only forces it underground, where it becomes even uglier and
nastier as those whose ideas are not allowed free expression become even more bitter and resentful. Furthermore, banning such speech is not the best way to change the views of those who use
such speech; instead of banning it, we must bring it out in the open and make clear how hateful
and ugly and unfair such attitudes are, and openly criticize and refute those who hold such views.
And finally, a ban on speech is a dangerous thing: for once we ban speech that we find hateful and
offensive, that opens the door to bans on all sorts of expression of opinion, including radical ideas.

Chapter 7

Analyzing Arguments

107

16. It must have been Gwendolyn who stole the collected works of Spinoza from the departmental
library last night. After all, the only people who have a key to the library are the philosophy faculty
and the religious studies faculty. And it couldn’t have been one of the religious studies faculty,
because they are too honest to steal anything. And all of the philosophy faculty except Gwendolyn
were in Boston at the meeting of the American Philosophical Association, so they weren’t around
the department.
17. We should stop giving faculty special parking places closest to the classroom buildings and instead
give those spaces to students. After all, students deserve the best parking places, because they pay
tuition. Also, faculty need the extra exercise they would get from walking farther to class. And furthermore, students usually have to carry heavier book bags than faculty carry.
18. Every citizen of the United States should have easy access to good quality health care. After all, we
believe in equal opportunity for all our citizens: that belief is demonstrated by our commitment to
the right of every child to have a good publicly funded education. And decent health care is
essential for genuine equal opportunity, since you certainly don’t have equal opportunity if you are
suffering from illnesses and can’t get treatment. So obviously we should guarantee good health care
for every U.S. citizen.
19. Bruce is clearly guilty of robbing the Mahoning National Bank. Consider the evidence against him.
Although the robber wore a mask, the security cameras showed that the robber carried a .38 caliber
revolver, and the day before the robbery Bruce purchased a .38 revolver. Also, the robber told the
bank teller that “Placing all your money in this bag is a necessary condition of not getting hurt,” and
only Bruce would say something that stupid. And finally, the stolen money was found hidden in
Bruce’s garage.
20. It was Brendan Minogue who robbed the Home Savings Bank last week. It must have been Brendan:
obviously the bank robber was Irish, because he was singing “Danny Boy” when he walked into the
bank; and we know the robber was a philosopher, because he was carrying a copy of Aristotle’s
Metaphysics, and only a philosopher would carry Aristotle’s Metaphysics to a bank robbery; and Brendan is the only Irish philosopher in the area.
21. The U.S. government should guarantee that every citizen of the United States has good health
insurance. After all, providing health insurance for all would actually save us money overall, since it
would encourage people to get early treatment rather than waiting until health problems become
very severe and much more expensive to treat. Also, we claim to believe in equal opportunity for all
citizens and health care is essential for equal opportunity. And finally, by providing health care for
all our citizens, we would end the international embarrassment of being the only Western industrialized country without universal health care.
22. Okay, let’s think about this carefully. Two hundred dollars was stolen from the special collection
box in the Springfield Town Hall. Now we know that one of the Simpsons stole the money, because
the money was in the box at 10:00 P.M. last night and then was missing at 8:00 this morning, and
the Simpsons were locked in the Town Hall during that time, and they were the only ones there.
The money was tucked away in a cabinet with a very small entrance, and so we know the thief was
not Homer, since Homer is too fat to get inside the cabinet. And it wasn’t Marge, because Marge
is too honest to steal money; and besides, her hair is so large, she couldn’t have gotten inside the
small cabinet. And it wasn’t Lisa, because Lisa was playing her saxophone the entire time she was
in the Town Hall. And it certainly wasn’t the baby: the baby was always with Marge, and the baby
wouldn’t be interested in the money anyway. So Bart must be the thief: He’s the only one who
could have stolen the money. And after all, Bart is exactly the sort of greedy kid who would do such
a thing. And there’s one other thing: this afternoon, Bart placed a $200 bet in the first race at
Springfield Downs!
23. We should reduce the legal age for the purchase and consumption of alcoholic beverages to 18.
The current law does not really prevent people who are 18 to 20 from drinking: liquor is easily
available to those who really want it. Furthermore, the law is so widely violated that it causes
disrespect for the law, and undermines respect for our legal system among our young people.
Also, by making drinking illegal we force that age group to hide their drinking behavior rather
than learning to drink responsibly and carefully with their families in public settings. And finally,
there is the most basic reason of all: since we expect young people of 18 and 19 and 20 to serve
as soldiers, risking and perhaps sacrificing their lives for their country, it is simply wrong to ask
them to make such adult sacrifices for their country without giving them all the privileges of
adulthood.

108

Chapter 7

Analyzing Arguments

Exercise 7-2

How Do You Rule?

Bob Daemmrich / Alamy

You are the judge in a first-degree murder case. The
defendant, Bryan Beacham, is accused of murdering
Arthur Attlee. The prosecution claims that Bryan and
Arthur had a heated argument in a tavern over a woman
named Isadora Krayzik. Following the argument, Bryan
hid in the tavern parking lot until Arthur left the tavern,
then Bryan ambushed Arthur, striking him in the back
of the head with a heavy object, thus causing Arthur’s
death. (No murder weapon was recovered.)
Several prosecution witnesses testify that Bryan
quarrelled with Arthur the night of the murder, and that
Bryan threatened to kill Arthur. Another prosecution
witness testified that Bryan was hanging around the tavern parking lot after leaving the tavern, and
that he was holding an iron tire tool.
Members of an ambulance crew testified that they responded to an emergency call (the call
was traced to a pay phone outside the tavern, but the caller remains unknown), and when they
arrived at the tavern they found Arthur lying unconscious and with no pulse in the parking lot.
They attempted to restore breathing and pulse, and continued their efforts during the drive to the
emergency room, but without success.
The medical examiner testified that Arthur died as a result of a severe blow to the side of the
head, which caused cardiac arrest and death. On cross-examination, however, the medical examiner admitted that it was possible that death had occurred from a heart attack, and that the blow to
the head occurred after death (though he insisted it was more likely that the blow to the head
occurred prior to the heart attack). Furthermore, the members of the ambulance crew testified
(during cross-examination) that in their haste to get Arthur into the ambulance, one of the crew
members had tripped, causing Arthur’s head to bump against the edge of the rear ambulance door.
The defense called only one witness: Dr. Deborah Firestone, a specialist in forensic medicine,
who testified that the cause of death was a severe heart attack, and that the blow to the head
occurred several minutes after the heart attack.
Following Dr. Firestone’s testimony, the defense attorney asks that you—the judge—dismiss
the charges against Bryan Beacham, since there is reasonable doubt that Arthur was the victim of
murder, and thus the prosecution has failed to present sufficient evidence of Bryan’s guilt. The
prosecution objects, claiming that whether death occurred due to a blow to the head or due to
natural causes is a matter for the jury to decide, and that the evidence of Bryan’s motive, his intent
(as voiced in his threat), and his opportunity to kill Arthur (he was waiting in the parking lot with a
potential weapon) are such strong evidence that they offset any doubts about the medical evidence.
The defense responds that if there is reasonable doubt about the cause of death, then none of the
other evidence matters, and the charges should be dismissed.
How do you rule? Will you dismiss the charges against Arthur, or allow the case to go to
the jury?

Exercise 7-3
Try constructing your own argument, and then diagram it. Then use the diagrams to improve your
argument: Are there any gaps in your argument? Is each step adequately supported by reasons? Are
there any crucial steps that need additional support? The following are some suggestions for arguments you might construct—and then diagram—yourself.
1. For the Consider the Verdict exercise on p. 71 , write a closing argument for either the prosecution
(Diana Whetstone should be found guilty) or the defense (Diana Whetstone should be found not
guilty).

Chapter 7

Analyzing Arguments

109

2. Write a closing argument for either the defense or the district attorney for the case of Nathan
Jackson, in the Consider the Verdict exercise on p. 87.
3. Write a closing argument for either the defense or the district attorney for the case of Robert Ransom
on p. 423.

ASSUMPTIONS: THEIR USE AND ABUSE
We’ve been talking about the structure of arguments and how to get from premises to
conclusions. But there’s another question, of course: How do we get the premises in the
first place? There are lots of sources, and we’ll be examining some of them: eyewitness
testimony, for example. But not all premises require further justification. Sometimes we
simply agree to an assumed premise—everyone participating in the discussion accepts
the premise as true, implicitly or explicitly—and then we go on from there.

Legitimate Assumptions
It is sometimes said—usually in an oracular voice, as if imparting an ageless truth—
that one should never assume anything. Balderdash. We couldn’t function without
assumptions. When I drive through a green light I assume that the drivers for whom
the light is red will stop. (If I refused to make that assumption and stopped to check,
I would get rear-ended by the cars following me.) When I read a scientific report,
I assume that the scientist has not deliberately faked the reported data. (If I felt I had
to personally check all the results before I could profitably read a scientific report,
I should certainly not read many.) When the weatherperson reports a severe blizzard
in Minneapolis, I assume that he or she is honestly reporting from reliable sources,
and I assume that the accompanying video of Minnesotans under the snow was not
taken in Anchorage during 1979. (Sometimes, unfortunately, such trust is misplaced.
Fox News has run inaccurate video reports—such as claiming that a video of a large
crowd came from a Sarah Palin book signing event, when in fact it came from a
McCain–Palin rally during McCain’s presidential campaign. When that happens, we
legitimately lose confidence in that source.) When scientists do research, they operate
from many givens that are not brought into question by that particular research
project. Research on lasers, for example, might make use of our knowledge of
the speed of light—without testing what we believe to be the actual speed of light.
(Of course if the research goes badly, one might then critically examine the underlying
assumptions.)
Consider this argument:
We should ban the manufacture and sale of lead-based paints. Think about what happens
when you paint your house or apartment. You paint over the paint that was there, and eventually your paint is painted over, until the result is a thick coat of lead-based paint that ultimately begins to peel and flake. The small children in the house pick at the paint, then put
their fingers—or even flakes of paint—into their mouths. Through these and other events, a
substantial portion of the lead may ultimately end up in the children, and thus in their
bloodstreams. And when that happens, the children suffer from lead poisoning, which may
cause mental retardation, nervous disorders, blindness, and even death. Therefore, leadbased paints should be banned.

That seems to me a good argument. In fact, it is essentially the argument that brought
about the ban of lead-based paint in most countries. But it contains a crucial assumption
that is left unstated. It is a perfectly legitimate assumption, and it is so obvious and widely
accepted that it is almost impossible to pick out. You may be able to find several unstated

110

Chapter 7

Analyzing Arguments

assumptions in that argument; but the most basic assumption—or at least the most basic
unstated assumption—is quite difficult to detect. Have a go at it before you peek at the
next paragraph.
The assumption is: We don’t want children to suffer mental retardation, nervous
disorders, blindness, or death. Now that is hardly a controversial assumption; in fact, it is
because it is so universally accepted that it is both difficult to detect and unnecessary to
state. (If we added to the argument “And we do not wish children to go blind or die,” that
would strike most people as belaboring the obvious.)
And remember the argument about Alice not being guilty? The main reason was
that the crime was committed in Key West, and Alice was in Miami at the time.
Alice could not have been the robber, since Alice was not in Key West when the crime was
committed. She could not have been in Key West, because at 10:00 P.M. on August 9 she was
in Miami.

But that involves an essential (unstated) assumption: It is impossible for someone to be in
two different places at the same time. That is hardly an assumption that needs to be noted
or supported: No further evidence or expert testimony is required to back it up. (That is
not to say that it is never disputed: Some “psychics” claim to be in at least two different
places—maybe more—simultaneously, through out-of-body experiences. Still, the
assumption that if Alice was in Miami, then she was not in Key West at the same time
seems a safe and legitimate one.) And the moral of the story is a simple one: Assumptions
are sometimes perfectly legitimate.
We often make explicit assumptions—sometimes when we are in fact doubtful of
their truth—in order to consider what would follow from them:
“Assuming that the track remains very muddy, which horse do you think is more likely to win
the Kentucky Derby?”
“If we assume that the inflation rate will be low during the next year, what do you think will
be the average increase in industrial wages?”

In some cases, it is useful to assume things that one believes are false in order to show
that even if they were true a certain conclusion still would not follow:
“Look, even assuming that Richard Nixon knew nothing about the Watergate break-in before
it occurred, he still deserved to be impeached for helping to cover it up.”
“Even assuming that all the Sandinistas are doctrinaire Marxists, it still doesn’t follow that we
should support groups like the Contras who commit terrorist acts against the civilian population of Nicaragua.”
“Even if it were true that the tobacco companies really want to curb teenage smoking, it still
would not be a good idea to leave efforts to reduce underage smoking to the discretion of
the tobacco industry.”

In short, assumptions are not the enemy. Assumptions may be wrong, of course. In
the case of science, if we try to duplicate a scientist’s findings and consistently find it
impossible to do so, we may eventually conclude that we were mistaken in assuming that
that particular scientist was reporting data honestly. If we run experiments and our results
constantly conflict with our predictions, we may eventually come to believe that some of
our operating assumptions were mistaken. We do occasionally find that we operated on
mistaken assumptions; when that occurs we reject that assumption and try again, but we
do not reject all assumptions.
So it is legitimate and probably essential to operate from some assumptions. The
goal is not to eliminate all assumptions; rather, the point is to recognize the assumptions
being made, especially the key ones.

Chapter 7

Analyzing Arguments

111

Enthymemes
While we’re on the subject of unstated assumptions, this may be a good time to talk about
enthymemes, which is just a classy name for a common phenomenon. An enthymeme is an
argument that contains a premise that is regarded as so obvious that it need not be stated.
We’ve looked at a couple already: the argument about Alice not being in Key West
because she was in Miami (the obvious unstated premise is that if she is in Miami,
then she can’t simultaneously be in Key West); and the argument about the hazards of
lead-based paint, with its unstated premise that the damage and death of small children
should be prevented.
My grandmother was fond of enthymemes. When I was a boy, when my grandmother
thought “my eyes were bigger than my stomach,” and that I had taken more food on my
plate than I was likely to eat, she would rebuke me with one of her favorite sayings: “If you
eat all that, then I’m the Queen of Sheba.” Since it was obvious that my grandmother was
not the Queen of Sheba, her conclusion was clear: “You’re not going to eat all that.”
Grandmothers aren’t the only source of enthymemes. “Either I’ve got the best
used-car deals in town, or my name’s not Honest Bill Barton. So come on down to Honest Bill’s Used Cars, ‘cause Honest Bill is dealin’, darlin’.” Well, it doesn’t take a rocket
scientist to figure out that the conclusion of Honest Bill’s argument is that “I’ve got the
best used-car deals in town,” and that the unstated premise in this enthymeme is, My
name is Honest Bill Barton. (Honest Bill’s argument is valid; whether it’s sound is a very
different question.)

Illegitimate Assumptions
In order to combat the mistaken assumption that assumptions are typically false, and
should always be shunned, we have examined some legitimate and useful assumptions.
But, of course, some assumptions are false (such as the common assumption that it is
always wrong to make assumptions) or at least are controversial. Such illegitimate assumptions cause problems, and they are not infrequent.
In uninspired mystery novels, the chief inspector assumes that the foul murder was
committed by either the duke or the cook; and in such cases, you can be confident that
the villain is the duchess, or perhaps the butler, but certainly not the suspects who were
assumed to be the only alternatives. And when the president of the university announces
that the university must either cut classes or raise tuition, that may also be a false assumption: perhaps cutting salaries or reducing overhead should also be considered. When one
of your fellow jurors announces that the defendant must be guilty, because she did not
testify in her own behalf, that juror is operating from a common but false assumption:
that the defendant must prove her innocence.
The problem is not with assumptions as such; assumptions are often legitimate. Nor
is there a special problem with unstated assumptions. In the earlier examples, the assumption that Alice could not be in two places at the same time and the assumption that we do
not want children to die are both left unstated, but they are so obvious and acceptable
that they do not require statement. The problem is with controversial assumptions: assumptions that are false or at least require further support. Such controversial assumptions are
particularly insidious when left unstated.
For example, many of the purveyors of pain-relief medications tout their products
as extra strength. Anacin®4 runs a catchy little commercial in which “the Anacin difference”
is strongly emphasized: The two standard aspirin tablets contain a total of 650 milligrams
of aspirin; but each tablet of Anacin contains 400 milligrams of aspirin, for a total dose of
800 milligrams if two are taken. The announcer in the commercial points out this
difference, and then asks the shopper which she plans to take when she next has a
headache; the answer, of course, is that she plans to take Anacin and get the extra pain
relief, the Anacin difference of an extra 150 milligrams of aspirin.

112

Chapter 7

Analyzing Arguments

The Anacin commercial contains a very important unstated assumption. What is it?
(Leave aside the fact that by simply taking three generic-brand aspirin tablets of
325 milligrams each, you could get more aspirin for less money than by taking two
400-milligram Anacin tablets.) In trying to detect the unstated assumption in the
commercial, first ask, What is the conclusion of the commercial’s argument? With the
conclusion in view, it may be easier to detect the tricky unstated assumption.
The conclusion is just that two 400-milligram tablets of Anacin (aspirin) will be
more effective in relieving headache than two 325-milligram tablets of aspirin. The
unstated assumption is that 800 milligrams of aspirin will provide more effective
headache relief than will 650 milligrams of aspirin. That sounds like an innocent enough
assumption; but in fact it is false. Clinical studies on the effects of different dosages
indicate that at 650 milligrams of aspirin, the dose–response curve levels off markedly. In
other words, most people will not get more effective headache relief by taking 800–1,000
milligrams of aspirin than by taking 650 milligrams. A seemingly insignificant and
unstated assumption turns out to be crucial for establishing the conclusion that Anacin is
better: It is a crucial assumption, and it is false.5 (Though the 800 mg dose won’t relieve
your headache any better than the standard 650 mg, there is one significant difference:
the 800 mg dose is more likely to cause nausea.)
We typically operate under basic assumptions that shape the way we think about our
world and our society. For example, our debate over national economic policies may take
place within a controlling, unexamined framework of assumptions about distribution of
wealth, rights to profits, and control of capital, and those invisible assumptions may tightly
constrain the sorts of options and changes that can be considered. In another instance, a
Senate committee might examine scrupulously the most effective method of distributing
the limited supply of childhood vaccinations, but remain unaware of the structural
assumptions that allow the pharmaceutical industry to control prices and limit supply;
examination of those key assumptions might eliminate the problem of how to deal with
vaccine shortages. The university’s animal research committee may scrutinize new ways of
ventilating cages and reducing the suffering of research animals, while remaining blind to
their basic operating assumption that it is acceptable to use animals for research. The
slaveowner may examine whether working conditions and living quarters could be
improved, while being unable to see the monstrous controlling assumption of the
legitimacy of slavery. And Ptolemaic astronomers may develop elaborate and elegant
accounts of planetary motion, while leaving unexamined the controlling assumption that
the Earth is stationary. Good critical thinking often involves reasoning from assumptions,
but the best critical thinking also requires the ability to critically examine those assumptions, including the most basic social and institutional assumptions of our society.

What Does Fire Consume?
In scientific research—as in other areas of thought—it
is the unrecognized assumptions that are most troublesome. Those assumptions are likely to be embedded in
the questions posed by the scientific investigator. For
example, eighteenth- and nineteenth-century biologists asked what purpose was served by the existence of
such a variety of species. Darwin recognized that the
assumption that such variety had to be explained in
terms of purposes was questionable, and he was able to
develop his mechanistic theory of natural selection by
abandoning talk of purposes. Many researchers of the

seventeenth and eighteenth centuries endeavored to
discover what leaves the object when it is burned (What
does the fire “consume” when something is “consumed
by fire”?). The assumption was so natural and pervasive
that it led to the development of an elaborate theory of
phlogiston: Phlogiston was supposed to be the combustible material in an object, which was removed
when the object burned. But by questioning that
assumption, Lavoisier was able to recognize oxygen as a
distinct gas and thus laid the foundation for modern
chemical theory.

Chapter 7

Analyzing Arguments

113

Assumptions can be legitimate and acceptable in the right setting, and they can be
misleading and suffocating in the wrong setting. When someone tries to slip in as an
assumption a point that is critical to an argument and that is also a point that might be
doubted by some parties to the argument, assumptions are being used in a misleading way
(more about that in Chapter 13 on begging the question). But when assumptions are used
to specify some points of agreement (perhaps tentative or hypothetical or local or conditional agreement) so that attention can be focused on the key issues being contested,
assumptions can do valuable work. It’s impossible to argue about everything at once. If the
assumptions that are operating are clearly spelled out and agreed upon, it may be possible
to focus attention on the key issues. And assumptions need not be carved in stone: Today’s
assumption can be critically examined—and perhaps rejected—tomorrow.

Exercise 7-4
What are the important assumptions in these arguments? (Be sure to note any important unstated
assumptions.)
1. The defense attorney argues, “Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, it is now up to you to consider a
verdict in this case. When you look carefully at the evidence, I am confident you must reach a
verdict of not guilty. The prosecution has simply failed to establish that my client burglarized
Jones’s Grocery. There is no physical evidence placing him at the site, and the only eyewitness
testimony was given by a witness who has a long record of perjury, and who admits that he is giving
testimony in the hope of getting a shorter sentence for himself. In short, the prosecution has not
proved that the defendant is guilty. Therefore, you must return a verdict of not guilty.”
2. It is wrong to raise animals for food. After all, it is wrong to inflict suffering on an animal—on any
sentient creature—unnecessarily (when it is merely for the pleasure of enjoying meat, and not out
of necessity).
3. We must overhaul the U.S. health-care system. The United States spends more per person—and a
higher percentage of its gross national product—for health care than does any other nation. And
our health-care costs continue their upward spiral. Yet while we spend more than any other country, we also have tens of millions of people with no health-care coverage and no access to medical
care. And we have the highest infant mortality rate of any industrialized country. It will not be easy,
but major changes are imperative.

Study and Review on mythinkinglab.com

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.
2.
3.
4.

What is the first step in critically analyzing an argument?
Define, compare, and contrast convergent arguments and linked arguments.
When are argument assumptions legitimate? When should they be questioned or challenged?
Under what circumstances might you accept an argument assumption that you believe to
be false?
5. What is an enthymeme?

NOTES
1
2

Mr. Justice Darling’s summing-up to the jury is quoted in Edgar Lustgarten, The Murder and the Trial
(London: Odhams Press Limited, 1960), pp. 59–60.
The prosecution presented evidence that EDTA (at the levels found in Simpson’s blood from the crime
scene) does occur naturally (in blood that is not specially treated with EDTA). Thus, they attempted to break
the middle link in the chain.

114

Chapter 7
3
4
5

Analyzing Arguments

This argument is adapted from Chapter 5 of Jeffrey Abramson’s We, the Jury (New York: Basic Books, 1994).
Anacin is a registered trademark of American Home Products Corporation, New York.
The information on pain relievers is taken from an interesting and informative article in Consumer Reports
47, no. 8 (August 1982), pp. 395–399.

INTERNET RESOURCES
OpenCourseWare on Critical Thinking, Logic, and Creativity is an excellent site covering many
topics in critical thinking. For good examples of (what they call) “argument mapping,” go to
http://philosophy.hku.hk/think/arg/complex.php.

ADDITIONAL READING
A number of books give excellent guidance in analyzing
arguments. One of the best is Michael Scriven, Reasoning
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1976). Another useful approach
is offered by Steven Toulmin, Richard Rieke, and Allan
Janik in An Introduction to Reasoning, 2nd ed. (New York:
Macmillan, 1984); it also contains an excellent section on
appeals court reasoning.
For an approach that offers insights into the way
reasoning proceeds in the most ordinary settings, see
Douglas N. Walton, Plausible Argument in Everyday
Conversation (Albany, NY: State University of New York
Press, 1992).
Good discussions of the special requirements of
legal reasoning can be found in Martin P. Golding, Legal
Reasoning (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1984) and Kenneth

J. Vandevelde, Thinking Like a Lawyer: An Introduction to
Legal Reasoning (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1996). The
classic text on legal reasoning is Edward H. Levi, An Introduction to Legal Reasoning (Chicago, IL: The University of
Chicago Press, 1949), but it’s not easy sledding.
The great French physical scientist of the early twentieth century Pierre Duhem was particularly clear on the role
of assumptions in scientific research. See Pierre Duhem, The
Aim and Structure of Physical Theory, translated by Philip P.
Wiener (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1954).
For another view of how science operates (and of
how assumptions are used and are overthrown), see the
fascinating book by Thomas Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific
Revolutions, 2nd ed. (Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago
Press, 1970).

Read the Document on mythinkinglab.com
Daryl A. Bergman, “War on Drugs Fails.” If you diagrammed Bergman’s two arguments, would each argument be convergent or linked?
Mary Anne Warren, “On the Moral and Legal Status of
Abortion,” Monist, Vol. 57, no. 4 (1973), pp. 43–61. This is
a well-known argument in favor of the right to an abortion; try drawing a diagram of that argument.
Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York v. Village
of Stratton, 536 U.S. (2002). In this case, a group of
Jehovah’s Witnesses wished to go door-to-door in the

village of Stratton, giving away literature and attempting
to win converts. Stratton requires that all door-to-door
canvassers register with the mayor’s office and secure a
permit. The group of Jehovah’s Witnesses objected to
securing a permit before going door-to-door, arguing that
such a requirement would violate their First Amendment
right of free speech. Starting with Section III of the Court
opinion written by Justice Stevens, diagram the argument
given by the Court in reaching its judgment, including the
conclusion reached in that argument.

8

❖❖❖

The Burden of Proof

Listen to the Chapter Audio on mythinkinglab.com
The first step in critically analyzing an argument is determining the conclusion. The
second step is determining who bears the burden of proof.
I claim that extraterrestrials have built an amazing undersea city, deep in the
Pacific Ocean. They are mining natural resources from below the ocean floor, and
transporting these resources back to their home planet through a fleet of interstellar
cargo ships. You have doubts about the existence of this ET city, and challenge me to
specify its location. I can’t, but I’m still sure it’s there. You ask for photographs of the
city; I have none. Are there unusual findings from oceanographic research that would
indicate the presence of such a deep sea metropolis? I have no such data. Are there any
reliable witnesses who have seen the city? None. But I am firm in my claim: Look, the
Pacific Ocean is vast and deep, and most of the ocean floor is unexplored. If you are so
skeptical about the undersea city, then prove that it does not exist. And if you can’t prove
that the ocean floor does not contain such a city, then that is strong evidence that such
a city exists. At the very least, you should keep an open mind about the possibility of such
a city, and put your skepticism aside.

WHO BEARS THE BURDEN OF PROOF?
You aren’t likely to buy the existence of an ocean-bottom ET city as a result of this flimsy
argument. There was no real proof for the claim, and anyone making a claim or an accusation bears the burden of proof. The person making the claim must prove it true; it is not
up to others to prove it false. The fallacy of appeal to ignorance is committed when someone argues that because his or her claim cannot be proved false, it therefore should be
accepted as true. But the fact that a claim cannot be proved false is no grounds for
believing it true. (Certainly it does not prove that it is not true; it may be true, even though
it is not proved so. But failure to prove a claim false is not proof of the claim’s truth.)
Attempts to shift the burden of proof are common. In 1988, television evangelist
Pat Robertson made an unsuccessful run for president of the United States; during his

115

116

Chapter 8

The Burden of Proof

Placing the Burden of Proof
The “preliminary” question of who bears the burden of
proof often has great influence on which side prevails
in an argument. Suppose that I am a school district
superintendent, and I impose a regulation requiring
that teachers beyond the fourth month of pregnancy
must take an unpaid leave of absence from their teaching jobs. You claim that this rule is unfair to women
teachers, because it unreasonably deprives them of the
opportunity to work. (There is no reason why most
pregnant teachers cannot continue to teach effectively;
some individuals may be incapacitated by pregnancy,
but that should be decided on a case-by-case basis.) Does
such a regulation treat women unfairly?
Before you answer that, think about the prior question: Who bears the burden of proof? You are claiming
that my rule unfairly discriminates against women; is it
up to you to prove that the rule places a special hardship
on women? Or should the burden of proof be on me?
After all, I proposed the rule; should it be my burden to
prove that the rule does not unfairly discriminate?
That is a difficult question. The U.S. Supreme
Court attempts to resolve it this way: If you want to claim
that a law or rule treats you unfairly, then you generally
have the burden of proving that unfairness; however, if

you are a member of a group that has traditionally suffered discrimination and unfair treatment (such as
women, African Americans, members of a persecuted
religion, and the physically challenged) and you claim
that the law treats members of your group unfairly, then
those passing the law bear the burden of proving that it
is not discriminatory. That seems to me a legitimate way
of placing the burden of proof in such cases, though it
is certainly a difficult issue. In any case, we can leave further discussion of that question for your seminar in
Constitutional Law. The immediate point is that placing
the burden of proof can be a very difficult question, and
a very important question. When a pregnancy leave case
came before the U.S. Supreme Court (Jo Carol LaFleur v.
Cleveland Board of Education), the Court ruled on
January 21, 1974, that the school board had failed to
demonstrate that their pregnancy leave rule was not
discriminatory toward women (a group that had
traditionally suffered discrimination), and so struck
down the rule. Women might well succeed in proving
that such rules are discriminatory, even if they bore the
burden of that proof; but with the burden on the other
side to prove that the rule is not unfair, women teachers
certainly had an easier path to victory.1

campaign he claimed that there were—or at least might be—Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Since all indications—from spy satellites, for example—were that there were no such
missiles, the question naturally arose as to what evidence the Reverend Robertson could
offer for his dramatic claim. Having none, Robertson attempted to shift the burden of
proof to the other side: His claims were supported by the fact that U.S. intelligence could
not conclusively prove that no such missiles existed in Cuba. And of course Robertson was
partly correct: Neither the U.S. intelligence service nor anyone else could conclusively
prove that there were no Soviet missiles cleverly concealed deep in some Cuban cavern or

A Burden of Proof Tragedy
Placing the burden of proof may be a life or death question. The 1986 explosion of the Challenger spacecraft cost
the lives of seven people. The accident was traced to
problems with the O-rings, which did not function
properly in the freezing weather at the time of the
launch, allowing fuel to leak and thus causing the deadly
explosion. Morton Thiokol was the company that manufactured the O-rings, and prior to the planned Challenger
launch, engineers from Morton Thiokol raised the possibility of danger from the frozen O-rings. In the past, if
anyone raised reasonable doubts about the safety of a
launch, then there had to be solid proof that the
supposed danger did not exist before the launch could

proceed: The burden of proof was always on those who
claimed that it was safe to launch. But in this case the presumption was reversed: The spacecraft was presumed to
be safe, and anyone raising doubts had to conclusively
prove that there was genuine risk in order to stop the
launch. The Morton Thiokol engineers could show
reasonable grounds for concern (the O-rings had not
been tested in freezing conditions); but they could not
demonstrate that the O-rings actually would malfunction
in the cold and thereby cause an explosion. Since the
burden of proof was (wrongly) placed on the engineers
to prove danger rather than on the launch team to prove
safety, the launch proceeded to its disastrous end.2

Chapter 8

The Burden of Proof

117

hidden in some other unknown—and unspecified—location. But that certainly does not
substantiate Robertson’s claim, no more than the fact that we cannot prove that no
brontosauruses live in caverns deep below New Orleans proves the existence of subterranean brontosauruses, and no more than the fact that we cannot prove that there are
absolutely no extraterrestrials disguised as earthlings proves that we are in the midst of
extraterrestrials. The person making the claim—of Soviet missiles, brontosauruses, or
extraterrestrials—bears the burden of proof.

APPEAL TO IGNORANCE
The sensationalist tabloids have a field day with the appeal to ignorance. They publish
scandalous accusations concerning the lives and loves of movie stars and politicians and
then—in support of those stories—they point out that: “Two weeks ago we published an
exclusive story about Ima Starr’s torrid love affair with the Ambassador to Rutabaga; if it’s
not true, they should deny it, but since they haven’t denied it, much less offered any proof
that it is false, then it must be true.” But Ima Starr and the ambassador are caught in a
bind: If they ignore the story, a few people will believe it, but most will ignore it and it will
soon pass, since none of the major newspapers or television networks will consider the
story reliable. However, if they deny the story, then that is news—whenever a film star and
an ambassador issue statements, the press considers it newsworthy—and those denials
(along with the charges being denied) will receive national news coverage, and the story will
not blow over quickly. So even if there is not a grain of truth to the charges, it’s unlikely
that a denial will be issued. And more to the point, it’s not up to them to prove the charges
false (think for a moment of how difficult it would be to prove that you did not have a secret
love affair with someone); the burden of proof rests on those making the charges.
A variation on this problem occurs when a snake oil salesman—for example,
someone touting the miraculous healing powers of magnets—challenges the medical
community to debate: “I’ve proposed that a panel of distinguished medical researchers
and physicians examine the wonderful benefits of my Salumagnetomed System, and I’ve
offered to meet with them anywhere and give my evidence; I challenge them to debate
me! But they keep refusing!” So why won’t the AMA convene a panel to debate this
wonderful new magnetic health system? For two reasons. First, such systems have already
been examined carefully, and found to be useless; and if researchers took up every new
variation of such quackery, they would have no time for legitimate research. And second,
if a panel of “distinguished medical researchers and physicians” meet with this quack—
even to roundly condemn it as fraud—he will immediately include it in his advertising,
and it will greatly increase his credibility: “Try my new Salumagnetomed System, which
was recently the focus of a full AMA-sponsored conference, drawing the attention of such
distinguished researchers as . . . ”; well, you get the picture. If legitimate scientists and
physicians appear on the same platform with such quacks, it gives the quacks instant
credibility: distinguished medical scientists believe it is worth taking this new magnetic
therapy system seriously, and its inventor is seated on the same panel with legitimate
scientists, just one top medical scientist among others.

THE BURDEN OF PROOF IN THE COURTROOM
There is a special setting in which it is vitally important to remember who bears the
burden of proof, and in this setting—unfortunately—the fallacy of appeal to ignorance
occurs with frightening regularity: the jury room. It is now a cornerstone of the American
and British systems of criminal justice that a defendant is “innocent until proven guilty.”
And in fact, the principle of “presumption of innocence” was already an essential element
of English law when the earliest British settlers arrived in the American colonies, and thus

118

Chapter 8

The Burden of Proof

it can be found in the earliest rules of legal procedure formulated by the British colonists
in New England. The principle that the burden of proving guilt rests on the prosecution
continued to be a feature of colonial American judicial procedure, even when (as in the
witchcraft trials) courts were not particularly careful concerning the quality of “evidence.”
This basic principle of justice is fundamental to the justice systems of many countries; for
example, it is a prominent element of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, it is
a central principle of Australian Common Law (and part of the Victorian Charter of
Human Rights and Responsibilities), and is one of the basic rights recognized in the 1789
French Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen.

Presumption of Innocence
Why is the “presumption of innocence” so important? First and foremost because it is
simply the correct manner of reasoning. The burden of proof rightly belongs on the party
that makes a claim, whether that claim is a pharmaceutical company’s claim that a new
drug is “safe and effective” or a tabloid’s claim that extraterrestrials are hiding in
Mammoth Cave or the state’s claim that an individual committed a crime. If the proof can
be supplied, fine; but failure to either prove or disprove the claim is just that: a failure to
prove anything, which leaves the safety of the drug in doubt and the guilt of the
defendant unestablished.
There is a second reason why the burden of proof lies with the one making the claim.
If one were allowed to “appeal to ignorance” (appeal to the failure to disprove the claim)
in order to “prove” a claim, then one would be able to “prove” the most extraordinary
things. For example, it is quite impossible to prove that there is not a group of invisible
extraterrestrials lurking in the depths of the Indian Ocean, but we should be loath to
count that as proving the presence of such beings. It is not possible to prove that Rousseau
never had a very secret love affair with Marie Antoinette, but lack of disproof of such an
affair does not prove that such a tryst occurred. More to the point, imagine trying to prove
that you are innocent of a murder that occurred at 11:00 P.M. 3 years ago. Unless you keep
a remarkably good diary, you probably don’t have an exact recollection of where you were
at that time, much less a convincing alibi. (Even if you distinctly remember being in the
college library with a friend all that evening, will your friend remember it? And will
your friend be absolutely certain that you didn’t leave—for perhaps half an hour around
11:00 P.M.—just long enough to commit the foul crime of murder?) In fact, if failure to
disprove the charges were counted as proof of those charges, then we would never have an
unsolved crime: Almost any crime that occurred could be “proved”—by appeal to
ignorance—against some unfortunate reclusive individual who was not seen by anyone
during the time of the crime. Such appeals to ignorance certainly have advantages: They
have (to borrow Bertrand Russell’s phrase) “all the advantages of theft over honest labor.”
There is another reason for favoring a strong presumption of innocence. It has less to
do with logic and more with our principles of individual freedom and justice. We believe that
the rights and freedom of the individual are fundamental, and we oppose sacrificing individual rights and autonomy for the benefit of the state; therefore, the general presumption
must be that the individual’s rights and freedom should not be interfered with. Any denial of
individual liberty (through criminal sanctions) requires powerful overriding reasons and the
strongest and most conclusive proof. Placing the burden of proof on the defendant violates
principles of liberty as well as logic. Unfortunately, jurors often reverse the burden of proof.
Dr. Stanley Brodsky tells of a jury questionnaire he gave to potential jurors prior to a murder
trial in Kentucky. One of the questions was, “No matter what the law says, do you agree that
a defendant in a murder trial should have to prove his innocence?” Over 40% of the potential jurors marked their agreement with requiring the defendant to prove innocence—and
it is likely that there were others who agreed but were reluctant to admit it.
What is involved in the “presumption of innocence” for the defendant? Most
obviously, the defendant does not have to prove anything. The full burden of proof rests
on the prosecution, and if the prosecution leaves a reasonable doubt after the presentation

Chapter 8

119

The Burden of Proof

Guilt Not Proven
In almost every country, juries in criminal trials have
only two possible verdicts: guilty or not guilty. (Of
course the jury may not be able to reach a verdict,
resulting in a “hung jury”; and in cases when there are
multiple charges, juries may find the defendant guilty
of some charges and not guilty of others; and in some
cases, juries may choose among different charges, such
as manslaughter or second-degree murder or firstdegree murder; but in each case, the question
ultimately comes down to guilty or not guilty.) Scotland
is different. Juries in Scotland—in a tradition that
is centuries old—have the third option of a “guilt
not proven” verdict. This “guilt not proven” verdict
(sometimes called the “Scottish verdict”) is legally
equivalent to a verdict of not guilty: when a jury returns
a verdict of “guilt not proven,” it means that the
defendant is exonerated and cannot be retried on
those charges. It is sometimes suggested that other
countries adopt Scotland’s third verdict of “guilt not

proven.” Would that be a good addition to our criminal
justice system?
On one hand, the “guilt not proven” verdict seems a
bit silly, since that’s exactly what a “not guilty” verdict is
(or at least that’s what it’s supposed to be). And it seems a
gratuitous slap at the defendant; it’s like saying, “We don’t
have enough evidence to determine that you are guilty,
but we think you might be.” However, if it reminds jurors
of exactly what must be proved (and keeps them from
returning a guilty verdict just because the defendant has
not been able to prove his or her innocence), then it
might be desirable. It would be an important reminder
that the prosecution bears the entire burden of proof, and
that if the prosecution fails to meet that requirement then
the defendant must not be convicted. Under the presumption of innocence, if the prosecutor fails to prove the
defendant’s guilt, then the defendant is entitled to an
acquittal, whether that acquittal is in the form of “not
guilty” or “guilt not proven.”

of its case, the defense need do nothing at all. And if the prosecution has managed to make
a strong argument for the guilt of the defendant, the defendant need not totally shatter
that argument; instead, the defense need only show that the prosecution’s argument is not
quite convincing. The defendant need not establish his or her innocence. Unless the prosecution can build a case that both firmly establishes the defendant’s guilt and withstands
all attempts by the defense to raise doubts about the case, the jury should conclude that
the prosecution has not proved its case and should therefore vote not guilty.

When the Defendant Does Not Testify
The presumption of innocence is a basic principle of logic and of Anglo-American
criminal law. But jurors sometimes forget the principle: They reverse the order and
demand that the defendant “prove he’s not guilty” or “clear herself of the charges.”
And there is a more subtle way in which mistakes are made about the burden of proof in
criminal proceedings. When the defendant does not testify in his or her own behalf, many
jurors weigh that very heavily against the defendant. But the defendant has no obligation
to testify. It is not the responsibility of the defendant to prove innocence: The full burden
of proof rests on the prosecution.
U.S. and Canadian courts recognize that the defendant has no obligation to testify
on his or her own behalf, and judges in both countries are careful to remind jurors that the
decision of a defendant not to testify in no way counts against the defendant. But all too
often the defendant’s decision not to testify does create a presumption against him, due to
the fallacious reasoning of some jurors. Jurors are apt to think that “He didn’t clear
himself of the charges so he must be guilty” or “If he were not guilty he would want to take
the stand and deny the charges, so he must be guilty.” Or perhaps they continue to give lip
service to the principle that the defendant need not testify, but in their actual deliberations
they may still count the defendant’s nontestimony against the defendant. But that is pure
appeal to ignorance: He hasn’t proved the charges false, so they must be true.
Until the end of the nineteenth century, defendants in British criminal cases were
not allowed to testify in their own behalf. The Criminal Evidence Act of 1898 gave the
defendant the right, if he or she chose, to be placed under oath and give testimony.
There are many obvious benefits to such a change, and no doubt it is on the whole a

120

Chapter 8

The Burden of Proof

Sacco and Vanzetti
The fallacy of appeal to ignorance is at home in the
supermarket tabloids and scandal sheets, but it
occasionally shows up in more respectable settings. In
Sacco & Vanzetti: The Case Resolved, Francis Russell argues
that Nicolo Sacco was in fact guilty of the crime for
which he was executed. (The Sacco–Vanzetti case is perhaps the most famous—or infamous—American criminal case in the twentieth century. In 1920, in South
Braintree, Massachusetts, two gunmen shot and killed a
paymaster and guard and stole a payroll. Nicolo Sacco
and Bartolomeo Vanzetti were both active in the
anarchist political movement and were thus mistrusted
by the authorities. They were arrested and—largely on
the basis of some rather shaky eyewitness testimony—
were convicted of murder. They were electrocuted on
August 27, 1927, still steadfastly asserting their innocence.) One of Russell’s arguments for the guilt of Sacco
is the following (it is contained in a letter Russell wrote
to Dante Sacco, the son of the man who was executed):
I cannot look on him [Nicolo Sacco] as an
innocent man. I may be wrong. So much has
always been indeterminate in this case. Yet in the
silence of the Sacco family is, at least to outsiders,
an implication of guilt. That is the only conclusion that I can draw.3

The fact that the son of the executed man refused to
comment on the case proves nothing at all. Certainly it
carries no implication that Dante Sacco agrees that his
father was guilty of murder. No matter what reason
Dante Sacco had for remaining silent, his silence is not
proof that his father was guilty. To suppose that silence

proves guilt (to suppose that silence proves anything) is
to commit the fallacy of appeal to ignorance. In fact,
you can no doubt think of several excellent reasons why
Dante Sacco would remain silent even if he believed his
father innocent.
First, Dante Sacco was only 7 years old when his
father was arrested. Even if he believed his father was
innocent, it is not likely that he would have any strong
evidence to that effect, and he might have thus decided
to keep silent.
Second, Dante Sacco was perhaps traumatized by
the electrocution of his father—it’s not difficult to
imagine that being the effect on a 15-year-old boy—and
thus could never again bear to think of the events,
much less publicly speak about them.
Third, perhaps Dante Sacco wanted to get on with
his own life and put the past behind him, and thus preferred not to be associated with past events. (There
could be some social stigma attached to being in
the family of a famous anarchist, and Dante may have
wanted to avoid such social pressures.)
Fourth, Dante may have kept silent from his desire
to spare his own family, including his children, from
social pressure and stigma.
And finally, if Dante Sacco believed his father was
innocent and had been murdered because of his political views—which is what his father claimed—then
Dante might have had good reason to be fearful of
speaking out against such injustices.
Perhaps those are, perhaps they are not, the real
reasons why Dante Sacco remained silent concerning
the execution of his father. In any case, the moral of the
story is this: Silence is not proof, one way or the other.

great improvement in trial procedure and a salutary extension of the rights of the individual. However, it is by no means an unmixed blessing: Once given the right to give
testimony on their own behalf, jurors started to expect defendants to take the stand and
deny their guilt; and if the defendant did not testify, jurors often switched the burden of
proof—“the defendant would not even deny the charges against him, so he must be
guilty”—and counted the failure of the defendant to testify and to establish his
innocence as proof of guilt. The right of a defendant to testify is an important right; but
if jurors interpret that right as an obligation to testify, or as an obligation that defendants
prove themselves innocent, then that right has become a terrible wrong which can and
does result in wrongful convictions. And after that act there was also a danger that by not
going into the witness box the defendant might lead the jury to conclude that the
defendant is unable to establish innocence, and that is an equally mistaken version of
misplacing the burden of proof and committing the fallacy of appeal to ignorance.

Juries and the Burden of Proof
Consider where the burden of proof lies in this fictional example of a jury debate.5 The
defendant is charged with the criminal possession of a prohibited drug. Two arresting
police officers testify that they chased and caught the defendant, took him to the police

Chapter 8

121

The Burden of Proof

Subtle Shifts
When a juror assumes that the defendant must prove
innocence, the juror obviously has misplaced the burden of proof. But there are more subtle ways of shifting
the burden of proof against a defendant. Imagine that
you are called for jury duty, and the case involves serious
criminal charges (such as murder). You are of course
committed to the principle that the prosecution bears
the entire burden of proving the defendant’s guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt, and you start from the presumption that the defendant is innocent. Before you
are seated on a jury, however, the prosecution asks the
judge for a special ruling to keep the names of all potential jurors a secret and to have all potential jurors
escorted from the courthouse each day by armed federal marshals. What conclusion is a juror likely to draw
from such special “protection”? As William M. Kunstler
has pointed out, jurors will conclude that the “defendant is so far beyond the pale that their very lives would
be in danger if their identities were made public.” Such
a conclusion, prior to hearing any evidence, effectively
torpedoes any “presumption of innocence.” In an article in the Fordham Law Review, Abraham Abramovsky
discussed the problems such policies pose for the
presumption of innocence:

In effect, by his instruction with respect to
anonymity, the trial judge implied that the defendants were so vicious and dangerous that
anonymity was required to protect the jurors and
their families from harassment, physical injury or
even death. In any prior jury service, the jurors
would not have been instructed to remain anonymous. Therefore the only reasonable inference
that a jury could draw . . . was that protection was
mandated by the character of the defendant. . . .
Thus, before any evidence was introduced . . .
the defendants were depicted by implication as
notorious individuals. This characterization . . .
eviscerated the presumption of innocence to
which these defendants were entitled.

If such anonymity were really essential to protect jury
members, we would be faced with a tough choice
between protecting the safety of jurors and protecting
the defendant’s right to the presumption of innocence
and to a fair and unbiased trial. But as Kunstler noted,
“To my knowledge, during the more than 200 years of
this Republic’s existence, no juror has ever been
harmed by a defendant or his or her supporters.”4

The Right to Remain Silent
The “right to remain silent” is closely linked to the presumption of innocence: If you are charged with a crime,
you have a right to remain silent (and cannot be
compelled to testify), because the burden of proof rests
entirely on the prosecution, and you are not required to
say or do anything to establish your innocence. The
right to remain silent was a cornerstone of the British
judicial system, and it became firmly entrenched in the
legal systems of countries—such as Canada, Australia,
and the United States—that were deeply influenced by
the British model of justice: the right is recognized in
the Fifth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution (as one
of the Bill of Rights) and is protected under sections 7
and 11 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and
Freedoms. In the United States, the first words of the
Miranda warnings are “You have a right to remain
silent.” That is the warning given to all who are arrested,
a warning that is a staple of every episode of Law and
Order, and a basic principle of justice. Indeed, the right
to remain silent has been widely recognized as fundamental to human rights and to procedural justice: The
European Court of Human rights holds that “The right
to remain silent under police questioning and the privilege against self-incrimination are generally recognised

international standards which lie at the heart of the
notion of a fair procedure.” Sadly, that right is under
attack in the place of its birth: the British justice system.
The Criminal Justice and Public Order Act of 1994
permits the accused to remain silent, but also permits
the judge to instruct the jury that the jurors may “draw
adverse inferences” from the fact that a defendant
chose not to answer questions or chose not to testify;
that is, the judge can instruct the jury that they may
conclude that because the defendant did not testify, that
can be counted as some evidence of the defendant’s
guilt. Under this law, juries are not supposed to convict
the defendant solely on the basis of the defendant’s
silence; but if there is other evidence against the defendant, then the defendant’s silence can tip the scales
toward conviction. There has been strong opposition to
this law since its passage, and some British politicians
who support the law have claimed that the law does not
undercut the basic right to silence: you still have a right
to remain silent, though if you exercise that right you
will be more likely to be convicted and imprisoned. But
that is absurd. It’s like saying, “You have a right of free
speech; but if you speak freely, you run a greater risk of
being imprisoned.”

122

Chapter 8

The Burden of Proof

station, but did not find the drug on the defendant. The police then (so they testified)
returned to the scene of the arrest and found a packet of tablets of the prohibited drug,
which (the police claimed) the defendant had thrown away when he was caught. The
defendant denies ever having possessed the drugs and denies any knowledge of the
tablets. After long discussion, the members of the jury agree (rightly or wrongly) that
someone placed the drugs where they were found, and that it must have been either the
defendant (who threw them there) or the police (who planted them in order to “prove”
the defendant guilty). At this point an argument develops, and one member of the jury
argues thus:
Look, the question comes down to this: Do we believe the testimony of the policemen or the
testimony of the defendant? It seems to me quite possible that the defendant is telling the
truth, and the policemen are trying to frame him. However, it certainly seems more likely
that the defendant is lying and the policemen are telling the truth. Since we have to believe
one or the other, it seems only reasonable to accept the most likely story, and since the police
story is the more likely to be true, we ought to accept it. And if we accept the police account,
obviously we must find the defendant guilty.

What do you think of that argument? How would you explain what is wrong with it to your
fellow jurors?
If it were only a question of which position is more plausible, then it might be an
effective argument. That is, if it were a question of deciding whether it is more likely that
the defendant discarded the drugs at the scene of the arrest or that the police planted
them, then perhaps the police account is more likely. But that is not the question. Framing
the issue that way misplaces the burden of proof. Instead of the burden of proof resting
squarely on the prosecution (where it belongs), the argument places it equally on the
prosecution and the defense. The proper question is not which side appears more plausible; rather, the question is whether the prosecution proved its case beyond a reasonable
doubt. Even if you agree with the juror that the police story is more likely to be true, that
is far from sufficient. It is not enough for the prosecution to establish that its case is more
plausible; rather, the prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that its account
of the defendant’s guilt is true. The defense need not show that its version of the events
is more likely to be true than the version given by the prosecution; instead, the defense
need only show that there is a reasonable doubt that the prosecution’s case is true.
Whenever a claim is made—that an artificial sweetener is safe, that an arthritis remedy is
effective, that an individual is guilty of a crime—the burden of proof rests on those
making the claim. “Share and share alike” may be excellent advice in some contexts, but
it is poor logic and fallacious reasoning when trying to locate the burden of proof.

Consider the Verdict
This case occurred in 2002, in Pennsylvania. Jennie
Collins went to a party, where she drank what tasted
like (and what she claimed she believed to be) fruit
punch. She left the party and drove to the residence of
a friend, Megan Neff. There she complained of a
headache, then became silent. Jennie and Megan then
left together to go to the home of another friend, with
Jennie driving. Jennie drove past the friend’s home,
drove through several stop signs without stopping, and
then swerved into oncoming traffic. Jennie then
Jim Pickerell / Stock Connection Blue / Alamy

Chapter 8

The Burden of Proof

braked the car while Megan steered it off the road.
Jennie lost consciousness, and when the police arrived
she was slumped over the wheel. An ambulance was
called, and Jennie screamed at and fought the ambulance workers. She was taken to the hospital, and there
she tested positive for PCP.
Jennie Collins was charged with driving under the
influence of a controlled substance, and a jury found
her guilty. In her defense, Jennie had agreed that she
was driving under the influence, but argued that her
intoxication was involuntary. The judge instructed the
jury that the burden of proving involuntary intoxication
rested on the defendant, and that she had to prove by a
preponderance of the evidence that her intoxication
was involuntary. (She was not required to prove beyond a

123

reasonable doubt that her intoxication was involuntary;
but the judge ruled that she still had the burden of
proof: of establishing involuntary intoxication by a
preponderance of the evidence. That is, she must convince the jury that it is more likely than not that her intoxication was involuntary; the prosecution must prove
that she operated a vehicle while intoxicated, but does
not have to prove that her intoxication was voluntary.)
The jury returned a verdict of guilty. Jennie Collins
appealed her conviction, arguing that the trial judge
erred in his instructions, that her presumption of innocence was violated, and that the burden of proving
voluntary intoxication should rest on the prosecution.
As an appeals court judge, the case now comes to
you. How do you rule?6

UNAPPEALING IGNORANCE
A word of caution. Appeals to ignorance do occur with depressing regularity, but be careful
that you don’t start seeing the fallacy when it’s not really there. The fallacy of appeal to ignorance is a very specific fallacy: It occurs only when one argues that a claim is true because it
has not been proved false. Not all ignorant statements and stupid arguments commit the
fallacy of appeal to ignorance. If I claim that evil spirits cause sickness, that will reveal my profound ignorance of modern medicine; it is not, however, the fallacy of appeal to ignorance
unless I argue that evil spirits must cause sickness because no one has been able to conclusively prove that evil spirits are not the cause of sickness. If I assert that invisible martians live
in the sewers under New York City, you may well be justified in concluding that I am an
ignorant—perhaps completely batty—individual, but you would be wrong to charge me with
the fallacy of appeal to ignorance, for I am not appealing to ignorance. I may be ignorant, and
that is unfortunate, but it is not a fallacy. In order to commit the fallacy of appeal to
ignorance, I must actually make that appeal: I would have to argue that there are invisible
martians in the New York sewers because no one has been able to prove that there are none.
So not all claims made in ignorance commit the fallacy of appeal to ignorance. On
the other side of the coin, a person may commit the fallacy of appeal to ignorance without being an ignorant person. Intelligent and knowledgeable persons may easily become
confused about where the burden of proof belongs on some particular issue and thus may
commit the fallacy of appeal to ignorance. To avoid that fallacy, keep a careful watch on
exactly what conclusion is being claimed and who is making the claim. Whoever makes
the claim, brings the accusation, or asserts the theory bears the burden of proving it true.

Exercise 8-1
Each of the following cases requires you to decide where the burden of proof belongs. In each case, you
must decide who is making a claim, which side is asserting something special, and who is entitled to claim
that they are relying on accepted beliefs and are not asserting anything that requires special proof.
1. I am proposing to place a new mouthwash on the market. The Food and Drug Administration
requires that I provide extensive tests demonstrating the safety of the mouthwash. In reply, I give
the following argument:
It’s not fair to require me to prove the safety of my new Merry Mouth Mouthwash. If anyone
has any doubts about the safety of Merry Mouth, then that doubter should be required to offer
proof that Merry Mouth is dangerous. I haven’t made any claims about the safety of Merry Mouth,

124

Chapter 8

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

The Burden of Proof

so why should I be asked for any proof? You’re placing the burden of proof on the wrong back. The
person who makes a claim—namely, a claim that Merry Mouth is harmful—should have to prove that
claim. Those who make the claim should provide the proof.
(In considering this example, think carefully about exactly what claims are made, including
any implied claims.)
The defendant, Joe Sly, is charged with burglary. He is accused of burglarizing the home of Sam
Citizen on the night of October 1, 2003, between the hours of 9:00 and 11:00 P.M., while Sam was at
the movies. Sly offers as an alibi the testimony of Crandall Crook, who testifies that on the night of
the burglary the two of them were playing cribbage at Crook’s apartment from 8:00 P.M. straight
through until after midnight. Unfortunately for Sly, on cross-examination the district attorney
inquires into the history of Mr. Crook and discovers a lengthy record of burglary and perjury
convictions. As you and the other members of the jury settle yourselves around the jury table, one
member of the jury begins the deliberation with the following remarks:
Well, we won’t be here long, will we? That’s the flimsiest alibi I ever heard. I don’t believe a
word of what Crandall Crook said. He’s lied before, and he was lying again. Since we obviously can’t
accept the defendant’s alibi, the defense doesn’t have a leg to stand on. And that’s the end of it,
that’s enough for me: Sly must be guilty as charged.
Has your fellow juror committed a fallacy, or instead reasoned swiftly and sagaciously?
Suppose that an industry wishes to place a landfill on some property near a river. Some environmentalists claim that the landfill is a hazard to the river, since landfills frequently leak and the
leakage from this one would be likely to seep into the nearby river. The industry claims that it will
not pollute the river, that there is no danger to the environment from the landfill, and that the
environmentalists are extremists who are worried about nothing. How should the burden of proof
be placed? Must the environmentalists prove that the landfill is a genuine danger? Or is it up to the
industry to prove that the landfill is safe?
When, in the sixteenth century, Copernicus proposed the heliocentric theory of the solar system
(the Earth travels around the Sun, rather than the geocentric system, with the Earth being stationary
and the Sun and planets orbiting the Earth), it contradicted common sense. It seemed obvious that
the Earth is stationary, and obviously false that the Earth is traveling at a high rate of speed in orbit
around the Sun. People felt that unless Copernicans could supply strong proof of the Copernican
system, the geocentric view should be upheld. Did they place the burden of proof in the right place?
Ann wishes to place a small bird feeder in her yard, in the hope of attracting robins. Her neighbor,
Al, doesn’t like birds and doesn’t want a bird feeder next door. He asserts that before Ann is allowed
to place a bird feeder in her yard, she should have to show that bird feeders are not an environmental health hazard.
Closing argument to the jury by the district attorney in a murder trial: “Counsel for the Defense has
entertained us with the ever-popular defense that lawyers call SODDI: Some Other Dude Did It. But
as you consider your verdict, keep this in mind: the defense lawyer never told you who that other
dude is, and never gave you any evidence that he—whoever that dude is—is the murderer.”
Prior to the U.S.-led attack on Iraq, the United States asserted that Iraq had weapons of mass
destruction (in violation of United Nations resolutions). The United States (and the weapons
inspectors in Iraq) could offer no proof of such weapons, but the Bush administration insisted that
the United States was not obligated to provide such proof. At a Pentagon briefing, Defense
Secretary Donald Rumsfeld asserted that: “The president has repeatedly made clear, and it bears
repeating, that the burden of proof is not on the United States; it’s not on the United Nations or
the international community to prove that Iraq has these weapons. The burden of proof is on the
Iraqi regime to prove that it is disarming and to show the inspectors where the weapons are.”

Exercise 8-2
Should we allow physicians to assist patients suffering with a fatal disease to commit suicide? When supporters and opponents of physician-assisted suicide debate the issue, one of the questions that invariably
comes up is whether allowing physician-assisted suicide (for competent terminally ill patients who voluntarily seek it) might lead to other undesirable consequences. For example, might it weaken the commitment of medical personnel to save lives? Could it lead to the “euthanasia” of patients who have not
requested it? Would it undermine patients’ trust in their physicians? Supporters of physician-assisted

Chapter 8

125

The Burden of Proof

suicide say there is no reason to think such things would happen, whereas opponents of physicianassisted suicide fear they might. But even more basic is the question of who bears the burden of proof.
Those who favor physician-assisted suicide say anyone who claims that allowing physicianassisted suicide would lead to these terrible consequences must give strong reasons for their claim:
The opponents make the claim that the bad results are likely, and they must back up that claim with
support; it is up to those who make the claims to carry the burden of proving them true, or at least
possibly true. But the opponents of physician-assisted suicide insist that the burden of proof rests on
the other side. Those who favor physician-assisted suicide are proposing the new policy; therefore,
it is up to them to show that it has promise, and that it will not cause harm. The supporters claim
we should adopt this new policy, so they must make the case for it (including the case for why it will
not cause more harm than good).
So the question here is not whether we should or should not allow physician-assisted suicide.
Instead, the question is, Who bears the burden of proof? Should opponents of physician-assisted suicide have to prove the likelihood of bad long-term effects on society? Or should those who favor
physician-assisted suicide have the burden of proving that there will not be bad consequences from
adopting their policy?

Exercise 8-3
You are a competent adult, and you make your own decisions concerning medical treatment. No matter what your physician recommends, you cannot be forced to undergo treatment against your wishes
and without your informed consent. If you do not want treatment for your cancer, that’s your decision.
If you decide to “treat” your cancer by eating large quantities of bananas, that is also your decision. But
when children are concerned, the issues become more difficult. Your hospital has diagnosed cancer in
a 6-year-old child; fortunately, the cancer is treatable, and the recommended course of treatment has a
success rate of approximately 80%. The child’s parents refuse to allow treatment for the child. Your
hospital goes to court to force the parents to allow the child to be treated. Don’t decide how the court
should rule in this case. (That will depend on all sorts of factors: How burdensome is the treatment,
what is the prognosis for this particular child, what are the parents’ motives in denying treatment, etc.)
Instead, focus on this basic first question: Who should bear the burden of proof in this case? Parents are
generally presumed to have the best interests of their children at heart, unless it is proved otherwise:
Should we start from there, and insist that the hospital must make the case for why the parents’ wishes
should be overruled? On the other hand, this program of treatment is standard, nonexperimental, and
lifesaving. Should the obvious interest in saving a child’s life be the starting point, and the parents be
required to show why such standard treatment should not be followed in this case?
Suppose the parents had decided to treat their child’s cancer through some special megavitamin therapy, a therapy that is regarded by the medical community as useless quackery. Would this
change the burden of proof? (Do the parents have to prove it is in the child’s best interests? Or does
the hospital have to prove that the parents’ wishes should be overridden?)

Exercise 8-4

How Do You Rule?

Bob Daemmrich / Alamy

Consider the U.S. Supreme Court ruling on the famous
Nancy Cruzan case. An auto accident left Nancy Cruzan
in a permanently vegetative state, with a functioning
brain stem that allowed her basic life-sustaining bodily
processes to continue, but with such severe brain damage that there was no hope that she would ever be able
to speak, recognize anyone, or regain any level of basic
cognitive functioning. After Cruzan had spent several
years in those circumstances, her family—believing that
it would be her wish—asked that all life-sustaining treatment, including the medical provision of nutrition and
hydration, be stopped, and that Nancy thus be allowed
to die. The state of Missouri opposed stopping treatment, and the case went through various
appeals, finally arriving at the U.S. Supreme Court.

126

Chapter 8

The Burden of Proof

The majority of the Supreme Court (in a 5 to 4 decision) ruled that Missouri was within its
rights in establishing an extremely high standard of proof that the incompetent individual (unable
to express her own wishes) really would wish to have treatment stopped in such circumstances; and
the court decided that Nancy Cruzan’s family had not met that high standard of proof, and thus her
treatment could not be stopped. In writing the opinion for the majority, Chief Justice
William Rehnquist asserted that it is quite legitimate for a state to start from the assumption that
human life must be preserved, and thus to impose a strong burden of proof on any exception (such
as the exception requested by Nancy Cruzan’s family on her behalf). A key passage from Rehnquist’s opinion was the following:
Whether or not Missouri’s clear and convincing evidence requirement comports with the United
States Constitution depends in part on what interests the state may properly seek to protect in this
situation. Missouri relies on its interest in the protection and preservation of human life, and there
can be no gainsaying this interest.7

In a review of Rehnquist’s majority opinion, Ronald Dworkin vigorously disputed Rehnquist’s claim
that there is always—even in the case of unfortunate individuals in a permanently vegetative state—
a presumption that the individuals should be kept alive (so that a heavy burden of proof would rest
on the side seeking to allow the individual to die). Dworkin argued that those seeking to stop treatment should not have such a burden of proof:
While Rehnquist concedes that Missouri’s rigid rule may sometimes lead to a “mistake,” he says that
the Constitution does not require states to adopt procedures that work perfectly. But his arguments
that the Missouri rule would even in general work to the benefit of incompetent people are questionbegging; they reflect a presumption that it is normally in the best interests of permanently comatose
people to live, so that they should be kept alive unless there is decisive evidence to the contrary.8

Dworkin regards that as an appropriate assumption when the individual is healthy or can be
restored to healthy cognitive functioning, but:
No such assumption is plausible when the life in question is only the insensate life of the permanently
vegetative. That kind of life is not valuable to anyone.

Therefore, Dworkin maintains,
Fairness argues for only one thing: the most accurate possible identification of what Nancy Cruzan’s
wishes were and where her interests now lie.

Therefore, since Nancy is in a permanently vegetative state, there should be no special burden of
proof imposed on those who maintain that Nancy’s wishes were to be allowed to die and that her
interests are served in having her treatment stopped rather than continued. Instead of being
required to present clear and conclusive evidence that stopping treatment fits her wishes and interests, Cruzan’s family should be required only to show that the weight of evidence tilts to that side.
The burden of proof should be equal, with no starting presumption that continuing to live is in
Nancy Cruzan’s best interest.
So take a turn on the Supreme Court. If you were ruling on this narrow issue of where the burden of proof should be located in the Cruzan case, where would you place the burden of proof?
(There are at least three possibilities: You can agree with Rehnquist that the burden of proof rests
on those who favor allowing her to die; you can rule that the burden of proof rests on those who
want to continue life-sustaining treatment; or you can agree with Dworkin that in such cases there
should be no starting presumption favoring either sustaining life or allowing death.)

Exercise 8-5
This is a controversial issue, one on which there is obviously room for intelligent disagreement. But
there is also room for intelligent thought and argument, and you might enjoy thinking about it.
One of the controversies surrounding the insanity defense is, Who bears the burden of proof
in cases in which the defense pleads not guilty by reason of insanity?

Chapter 8

The Burden of Proof

127

Those who believe that the prosecution should bear the burden of proving sanity argue that it
is up to the prosecution to prove the defendant is guilty, and part of proving guilt is proving that the
defendant intended to commit the crime (if one kills someone by accident, one cannot be guilty of
first-degree murder; if one was incapable of forming a reasoned intention of killing someone, one
cannot be guilty of first-degree murder); so the prosecution must bear the burden of proof of
sanity. Those who think the defense should bear the burden of proving insanity argue that in all our
dealings with one another we naturally assume that those with whom we are dealing are sane and
responsible; if someone wishes to claim an exception to that general rule, then it is up to the person
claiming the exception to provide the justification and proof.
Where should the burden of proof rest when the defendant pleads not guilty by reason of
insanity?

Exercise 8-6
In some professions—such as law—one requirement for admission to the profession is supposed to
be that the applicant is “of good moral character.” This has always been a difficult standard to apply:
trying to agree on what counts as “good moral character” is not an easy task. Leave those difficulties
aside for a moment. Suppose that we decide that one condition for admission into our profession
(whatever our profession is) should be that the applicant is of good moral character. In that case, who
should bear the burden of proof? Should applicants have to prove they are of good moral character
(perhaps through testimonials)? After all, we require that applicants for a medical license pass tests
to prove that they are competent. The burden of proof is on the applicant in that case; is establishing good moral character similar to that? Or should the burden of proof be reversed? After all, we
generally assume that one is of good moral character unless proven otherwise (just as we assume
one is mentally competent unless proven otherwise); so perhaps the applicant should be assumed
to be of good moral character unless someone can prove that she is not.

Exercise 8-7
You have every right to dress as you wish, wear your hair as you like, tattoo and pierce your body to
your heart’s content. You want to wear purple shorts and a day-glow orange shirt, rings through your
ears and nose and tongue and navel and eyebrows, tattoos on your arms and legs and forehead, and
a beard that makes you look like the Prophet Jeremiah; that’s your right, enjoy yourself, it’s a free
country. You may have some trouble getting a job with Wall Street investment firms, and some upscale
restaurants may not welcome you with open arms. Still, how you dress is your decision, your right.
Except, perhaps, in high school. As you may have experienced, some high schools—including
some public high schools—have dress codes, and some of those dress codes can be rather restrictive.
The courts have ruled that high school students do not lose their rights as citizens when they go to a
public high school: they still have freedom of speech, freedom of religion, and freedom of the press,
for example. However, the courts have also ruled that high schools do have the right to restrict dress
in certain ways in order to maintain order, and to prevent disruption of the educational process. My
question is a very narrow one. Assume (for the purposes of this question) that we accept the legal
principle that high schools have the right to restrict dress when necessary to maintain order and prevent disruption of education. Suppose a student wishes to wear a nose ring to school, and the school
objects; who should have the burden of proof? Should the school have to prove the piercing is potentially disruptive, or should the student have to prove that it is not?

Study and Review on mythinkinglab.com

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Why does the burden of proof rest on the prosecution?
2. Define the fallacy of appeal to ignorance.

128

Chapter 8

The Burden of Proof

NOTES
1
2
3

4
5

6

7
8

This case is discussed in Peter Irons, The Courage of Their Convictions (New York: Penguin Books, 1988).
This case is discussed in Richard H. Gaskins, Burdens of Proof in Modern Discourse (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1992), pp. 148–149.
Francis Russell, Sacco & Vanzetti: The Case Resolved (New York: Harper & Row, 1986), p. 191. For another
view of the Sacco and Vanzetti case, see Felix Frankfurter, The Case of Sacco and Vanzetti: A Critical Analysis
for Lawyers and Laymen (Boston, MA: Little, Brown, 1969).
William M. Kunstler, “The Threat of Anonymous Juries,” The Nation, October 22, 1983.
This example is inspired by Sarah McCabe’s remarks on some sociological research with shadow juries
(“Discussions in the Jury Room: Are They Like This?” The British Jury System, University of Cambridge Institute of Criminology, 1975, pp. 22–27); but it differs greatly in details and is essentially a fictional example.
If you want more details, the case is reported in Pennsylvania Discovery and Evidence Reporter, February 3,
2003, under the headline “Sufficiency of Evidence.” [It can be found in Lexis Nexis.] In the actual case,
the Pennsylvania Superior Court rejected the appeal and upheld her conviction.
Taken from the majority opinion, by Chief Justice William Rehnquist. United States Supreme Court,
Cruzan v. Director, Missouri Dept. of Health, U.S. 580 SLW 4916.
Ronald Dworkin, “The Right to Death,” The New York Times Review of Books, January 31, 1991.

INTERNET RESOURCES
A good brief discussion of the burden of proof in legal proceedings can be found at
http://law.jrank.org/pages/4927/Burden-Proof.html. For a more detailed examination, go to
http://www.worldlingo.com/ma/enwiki/en/Burden_of_proof.

ADDITIONAL READING
A particularly good discussion of the burden of proof in
legal proceedings can be found in Chapters 8 and 9 of
A. A. S. Zuckerman’s The Principles of Criminal Evidence
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989). The book also contains
interesting material on a number of other issues, including
relevance of evidence, testimony, and the role of the jury.
For an excellent, clear discussion of physicianassisted suicide and the burden of proof, read Chapter 3
of Bioethics: A Committee Approach, by Brendan Minogue
(Sudbury, MA: Jones and Bartlett, 1996).

The definitive logical analysis of the burden of
proof and the fallacy of appeal to ignorance is by Douglas
N. Walton, Arguments from Ignorance (University Park, TX:
The Pennsylvania State University Press, 1996). The
writing is clear, and Walton offers a wealth of instructive
examples.
Richard H. Gaskins, in Burdens of Proof in Modern
Discourse (New Haven, CT.: Yale University Press, 1992),
offers a detailed but demanding analysis of how burden of
proof questions influence judicial decisions.

Read the Document on mythinkinglab.com
Bruce N. Waller, “Fallacy of Appeal to Ignorance,” Coffee
and Philosophy, pp. 6–8. In this dialogue, students discuss
both the burden of proof and the fallacy of appeal to
ignorance.
McMillan v. Pennsylvania, 477 U.S. 79 (1986). In this
case, the U.S. Supreme Court grapples with the question
of the burden of proof and the standard of proof when
there are special “sentencing factors” (such as use of a
firearm) that could have a substantial effect on the prison
sentence of a defendant who has been found guilty.

Castaneda v. Partida, 430 U.S. 482 (1977). The question of the burden of proof—and how it shifts—is the key
question in this case.
Victor v. Nebraska, 528 U.S. 225 (2000). It is a key principle of our system of criminal justice that the burden of
proof rests on the prosecution, and that the prosecution
must prove every element of a criminal charge “beyond a
reasonable doubt.” But the question of exactly what that
means can be controversial. In Victor v. Nebraska, the U.S.
Supreme Court wrestles with precisely that question.

9

❖❖❖

Language and Its Pitfalls

Listen to the Chapter Audio on mythinkinglab.com
“There’s glory for you!”
“I don’t know what you mean by ‘glory,’ ” Alice said.
Humpty Dumpty smiled contemptuously. “Of course you don’t—till I tell you. I meant
‘There’s a nice knock-down argument for you!’ ”
“But ‘glory’ doesn’t mean ‘a nice knock-down argument,’ ” Alice objected.
“When I use a word,” Humpty Dumpty said in rather a scornful tone, “it means just what
I choose it to mean—neither more nor less.”
“The question is,” said Alice, “whether you can make words mean so many different
things.”
“The question is,” said Humpty Dumpty, “which is to be master—that’s all.”

Words shape the way we reason, perceive, and remember. In one study noted earlier,
witnesses who were asked how fast the cars were going when they “smashed” together
were likely to “remember” a violent crash, and witnesses who were asked about the speed
“at contact” described a less severe crash. Careful use of language is an important tool in
seeking the exact truth and the justified conclusion.

DEFINITIONS
Definitions are tricky; consider ostensive definitions. An ostensive definition is a common
way of defining a term for those who are not familiar with it. If I have never seen a dog,
you might “define” a dog for me simply by pointing to Rover: “That’s a dog,” you say,
indicating the Scottish terrier running to greet us. But while ostensive definitions may be
useful, they may also be very confusing. Are you indicating only this species of dog? Or
perhaps only this color of dog? Or maybe you are indicating any animal with four legs; or
any animal that is running; or any animal with sharp teeth; or any object moving swiftly
along the ground. If you use your German shepherd in your ostensive definition of “dog,”
I may find it difficult to understand why the wolf we see crossing the road should not be
called a dog. Philosophers, burdened with tortured imaginations, have come up with

129

130

Chapter 9

Language and Its Pitfalls

other possible confusions: Willard Van Orman Quine pointed out that when you point to
an animal and say “dog,” you could be indicating undetached animal parts. Okay, that
hardly seems likely. Still, it’s clear that ostensive definitions, while they can prove useful,
often leave a lot unsettled.
Even clear written definitions may leave murky edges and loose ends. Suppose we
define an innkeeper as one who offers rooms designed for overnight accommodation of
travelers. This may be an important definition, as we may set certain legal requirements
on innkeepers: for example, innkeepers may be required to provide a safe for the secure
protection of the valuables of their guests. What about a steamboat taking travelers up
and down the Mississippi River, and providing rooms for the travelers: Does the boat
count as an inn (which would require it to provide a secure safe)? What about upper and
lower berths designed for sleeping on a passenger train—are they rooms designed for
overnight accommodation of travelers? What if I rent out tents to overnight travelers?
What if my motel does not really cater to overnight guests, but rooms are instead rented
by the hour for illicit purposes?
Definitions are often important, and legal disputes often revolve around how a word
or phrase should be defined—what its boundaries are, what it covers and does not cover.
Suppose I sell you my vintage 1962 Cadillac, with the original motor. It doesn’t have the
original spark plugs, of course, but the motor remains the original motor. But what if the
carburetor has been replaced? The pistons? Is there any clear point at which it is no
longer “the original motor”?
And what about the famous claim by President Bill Clinton: “I did not have sex with
that woman!” Was that claim true? Depends on your definition. If “having sex” means
sexual intercourse, then Bill Clinton did not have sex with Monica Lewinsky; if oral sex
also qualifies as “having sex,” then his statement was false.
The definition of a term—especially the redefinition of a term—can have a major
impact on important reports. In 2006, Secretary of the Interior Gale Norton released a
very positive report on the state of America’s wetlands. The Fish and Wildlife Service had
been issuing reports on wetlands since 1954, and this was the first time that they had
reported a net gain in America’s wetlands. Secretary Norton used these figures to assert
that the Bush program for stopping the loss of wetlands was on the right track. But in fact,
the Fish and Wildlife Service reported that during the period covered, there had actually
been a loss of over 500,000 acres of natural wetlands. What had changed was not better
preservation of wetlands; instead, what changed was the definition of wetlands. Instead of
counting only natural wetlands, the Bush administration redefined “wetlands” to include
such things as reservoirs, farm ponds, and even golf course water hazards. So when all of
the man-made lakes, golf course water hazards, irrigation ponds, and so forth—that had
been built over the past decades—were suddenly added to the range of “wetlands,” it is
hardly surprising that there was an increase in the reported “wetlands.” But that tells us
nothing whatsoever about what really concerns us: that there had been a decline in
natural wetlands (and in fact a severe decline in overall “wetlands,” including both
natural and artificial) during the reported period.

STIPULATIVE DEFINITIONS
Stipulative definitions specify the definition for a term in a particular context. “For the
purposes of this law concerning breaking or entering, when any part of the body enters
the building, that shall count as an entry.” If I stick my little finger inside your door,
normally you wouldn’t say that I had entered your home; but under this stipulative
definition, I have met the conditions for an entry. It’s useful to have the term “entry”
specified so precisely; otherwise we get into impossible wrangles about what counts as an
entry: If I reach in through your window with only my hand, is that an entry? What about
with my entire arm? What if it’s only the arm up to the elbow? What if I get my arm and

Chapter 9

Language and Its Pitfalls

131

leg inside, but not my head? With a stipulative definition, we can avoid some—but not
all—of those controversies. We are playing poker, and my three kings loses to your three
aces. I wail and gnash my teeth, and complain loudly and sadly about suffering a bad beat.
In poker parlance, a bad beat occurs whenever a very good hand loses to a better hand:
when Jane’s full house beats Jack’s ace-high flush, Jack has suffered a bad beat. But
suppose a casino poker room wishes to have a “bad beat jackpot,” in which any player who
suffers a severe bad beat wins a pool of money. In that case, the casino will stipulate their
definition of a bad beat: “To qualify as a bad beat, for the purposes of winning the bad
beat jackpot at the Red Diamond Casino, the losing hand must be four of a kind or
better.” If the bad beat is not specified in that manner, then every time a player loses a
hand he or she will try to claim the bad beat jackpot.

CONTROVERSIAL DEFINITIONS
Definitions can be useful, but they can also be deceptive. In the passage quoted at the
beginning of this chapter—from Lewis Carroll’s marvelous Alice in Wonderland—Humpty
Dumpty is well aware of the importance of definitions.
“The question is,” said Alice, “whether you can make words mean so many different things.”
“The question is,” said Humpty Dumpty, “which is to be master—that’s all.”

There’s a lot of wisdom in Humpty Dumpty’s words: whoever controls the definitions is usually master of the discussion.
At what age did you become a legal adult? It all depends. We do not require children
to serve in our armed forces; but once you turn 18, we can draft you and require you to
risk or even sacrifice your life for whatever military ventures the government approves. So
if it’s a question of whether you can be drafted, or whether you can be condemned to
death for your crimes, then you’re an adult at age 18; but if you want to buy a beer, you’re
not an “adult” until you turn 21. Sounds like Humpty Dumpty was right.
“Marriage means a legal union between a man and a woman.” If that’s the definition
of marriage, then same-sex marriage is ruled out; and that is one argument often offered
against same-sex marriage. But even if that’s the definition of “marriage,” that definition
doesn’t settle much of anything; for there would remain the question of whether we
should enlarge that definition to include marriage between gay and lesbian couples. (The
debate over same-sex marriage is not a debate about the current legal definition of
marriage, but a debate over whether that definition should be changed. The fact that the
current definition of marriage excludes same-sex marriage is irrelevant to that debate.)
What counts as a person? The definition of that term is the epicenter of a wide range
of controversies. Is a fetus a person? Is an embryo a person? Is someone in a permanent
vegetative state still a person? Should a chimpanzee—who is capable of affection, careful
planning, deception, and learning language—count as a person? Do corporations count
as persons, and thus enjoy the rights of persons (such as the right of free speech, as the
U.S. Supreme Court ruled in a very controversial 2010 decision which opened the floodgates for unlimited corporate spending to influence elections)?

Deceptive Language
There is a wide variety of ways that language can be used to deceive and mislead and
misinform—and advertisers are experts at using all of them. Lawyers and politicians have
also mastered many of the language tricks. So if you want to be an intelligent consumer,
an effective juror, and a responsible well-informed voting citizen of a democratic country,
it is important that you learn to recognize and protect yourself against these deceptive
forms of language.

132

Chapter 9

Language and Its Pitfalls

Using emotionally charged words to distort the picture of events is a rather obvious—but very common—way of using language to mislead. When I answered a hostile
question in a political forum, I spoke firmly in favor of my principles; but when my opponent answered a hostile question, she railed against her questioner. My opponent wants
to slash social security benefits; I want to place judicious restrictions on those benefits. My
opponent greedily grabs all the pork-barrel money she can get for her district; I actively
seek funding projects that will benefit the people who elected me. I point out important
facts about my opponent’s character and record, while my opponent stoops to vicious
negative campaigning. My opponent goes on junkets; I go on fact-finding trips. My opponent panders to special interests; I strive to consider the concerns of every group.
But the overuse of emotionally charged words is only half of the problem—and it’s not
the trickiest half. Using euphemisms—sometimes called “doublespeak”—to hide practices and
policies and events that might generate legitimate negative emotional reactions is another
and even more devious way of manipulating language. Not every case of euphemism is
deceptive. If we say that someone “passed on” (instead of saying he died), that may be a gentler way of breaking the sad news; certainly it sounds nicer than he “kicked the bucket,” or—
the British phrase—he “dropped off the twig.” But many uses of euphemism (doublespeak)
are not so innocent. Everyone is worried—legitimately—about the enormous number of bad
loans made by financial corporations, leading to mortgage foreclosures, bank failures, and
bailouts. So now companies no longer have “bad loans” on their books; those have become
“nonperforming assets.” And when bad financial management makes it necessary for failing
companies to fire workers, the workers are no longer fired; instead, the company is “downsized” by making “workforce adjustments.” Some people might worry about sludge (a semisolid mixture of bacteria- and virus-laden organic matter, toxic metals, and settled solids
removed from domestic and industrial waste water from sewage treatment plants) being
used as fertilizer in fields in their area; but when sludge is renamed as “biosolids,” it doesn’t
sound so scary. Bad guys torture people, but our country uses “enhanced interrogation
techniques.” When bombs and missiles kill innocent civilians rather than soldiers, the deaths
are due to “incontinent ordinance.” And when the United States invaded Iraq, that was not
an unprovoked attack on another country, but an act of “preemptive defense.”

The Fallacy of Ambiguity
The fallacy of ambiguity occurs when one meaning of a word or phrase is used in the
premises, but a different meaning is used in the conclusion. Such fallacious arguments are
probably the most difficult of all fallacies to detect. When encountering ambiguous
arguments, one often has a sense that something is amiss, but it is very difficult to put your
finger on the problem.
A politician is charged with taking bribes and is tried on those charges. After a
lengthy trial with much evidence and many witnesses, the jury returns a not guilty verdict.
The politician immediately calls a press conference, and asserts that after a thorough trial
he has been found to be innocent: It has been proved that he never accepted bribes.
What is wrong with the politician’s argument?
The politician is trading on two senses, two distinct meanings, of “innocent.” The
jury decided that there was not sufficient evidence to convict the politician of accepting

Doublespeak
Doublespeak is language that pretends to communicate
but really doesn’t. It is language that makes the bad
seem good, the negative appear positive, the unpleasant
appear attractive or at least tolerable. Doublespeak is

language that avoids or shifts responsibility, language
that is at variance with its real or purported meaning. It
is language that conceals or prevents thought; rather
than extending thought, doublespeak limits it.1

Chapter 9

Language and Its Pitfalls

133

bribes; that is, the jury decided that the politician’s guilt was not proved. That sense of
“innocent” merely implies that the prosecution was unable to prove the case against the
politician; the jury may think that the politician was probably guilty of accepting bribes, but
believe there was reasonable doubt that he accepted bribes. If so, the jury rightly voted for
an innocent verdict: “innocent” only in the sense that the politician’s guilt could not be
conclusively proved. But on the basis of that verdict, what does the politician conclude in his
argument to the press? He concludes that he has been proved innocent. “Innocent” as the
politician is using the term means “in actual fact not guilty of the crime.” But those are
two very different meanings of “innocent.” As the jury uses “innocent,” it means only that
the politician is not proved guilty (although he may in fact be guilty); but as the politician
uses the term in his conclusion, “innocent” means in actual fact not guilty. When the
ambiguity is removed, it is clear that the conclusion does not follow from the premises:
The jury has concluded that there is a reasonable doubt that I accepted bribes. Therefore, it
has been proved that I did not accept bribes.

When the ambiguity is eliminated, the invalidity of the argument is plain. But with the
ambiguity in place, the argument is seductively appealing.
Ambiguity does not require a full argument to accomplish its deceptive tricks.
Sometimes a single sentence will suffice. Perhaps the most notorious ambiguous
statement in recent years was forcefully asserted by a U.S. president: “I did not have sex
with that woman.” In one sense that was true. Bill Clinton apparently did not have sexual
intercourse with Monica Lewinsky, and that is one meaning of “having sex.” But the
statement was nonetheless deeply misleading, since “having sex” can also encompass
other intimate sexual relations, such as oral sex. Another, though not quite so fascinating,
example of ambiguity in a single sentence: “We accept all credit applications.” That’s a
sign you sometimes see, printed in large letters, in front of automobile dealerships.
Sounds good, right? I’ve been having a bit of trouble getting credit since I missed several
payments on the mortgage, had my television set repossessed, defaulted on my cell phone
bill, and the repo man got my new BMW. So I’m happy to find a car dealer that accepts
all credit applications. Well, it’s true they accept all credit applications, but “accepting”
credit applications is ambiguous. It can mean they approve my credit application and
actually give me credit (as in “We accept your offer, it’s a deal”); or it can mean we are
happy to accept your application, but we may turn it down after we look it over.

“Myth”
Another example of how ambiguity can cause confusion is found in the criticism made by fundamentalistliteralist Christian sects (who take the Bible “literally”)
against those who believe that the Bible should be interpreted as telling stories that express moral truths rather
than literal facts. The nonliteralists interpret the
Garden of Eden story as teaching moral and religious
truths (e.g., that all humans are created equal) but not
as literal biology or history. That is, they take such
accounts as myths, as stories that teach important truths
but are not themselves literally true. But the fundamentalists, when told that these stories are interpreted as
myths, understand “myth” in a very different sense: as if
the stories were being reduced to mere fables or fairy
tales. “Myth” has those two different meanings: “story

not literally true, but teaching important truths” (as, for
example, Paul Tillich uses the term); and alternatively,
“a fable, a story that is untrue.” Failure to distinguish
the two senses has exacerbated controversy between
various religious groups. The error is illustrated by this
excerpt from a letter to the editor from the very irate
Reverend William W. Robbins:
I believe the first 11 chapters of Genesis are true; the
liberal camp (the higher criticism, documentary
hypothesis approach) has Genesis 1–11 as fable and
myth.2

The “liberal camp” does indeed interpret Genesis 1–11
as myth, but not in the sense of fable.

134

Chapter 9

Language and Its Pitfalls

Consumer Reports (September 1987) took note of a newspaper advertisement that
headlined “A FULLY LOADED VINTAGE WINE CELLAR” for under $1,500. The photograph in the advertisement showed a handsome temperature-controlled cabinet, fully
stocked with 440 bottles of wine. But before you run out to make your purchase, check
the fine print: “Fully loaded vintage wine cellar” does not mean a wine cellar that is fully
loaded with wine; rather, it means a wine cellar that is fully loaded with “free options,”
such as a deluxe handle and lock.
The Folger Coffee Company has a television commercial featuring famous restaurants and showing happy people enjoying splendid food at the restaurants. After they
have enjoyed a sumptuous meal, the diners are served—instead of the restaurant’s
usual coffee—a cup of the sponsor’s instant coffee. They express their delight with the
coffee and then their amazement at the fact that the coffee they have just enjoyed is
instant. The announcer then chimes in with the clincher: “Folgers Instant Crystals:
Coffee rich enough to be served in America’s finest restaurants.” Impressive. After all,
if these super restaurants are willing to serve this instant coffee, it must be good.
But it’s not that simple. The restaurants were not open for regular business on the
night the commercials were made; instead, Folgers rented the restaurants and invited
people in for a free meal. Then, after they’d enjoyed this great meal—at no charge—
they were served coffee and were asked, “How do you like it?” What would most people
answer under those circumstances? But that’s another issue. Focus on exactly what the
announcer said: “Coffee rich enough to be served in America’s finest restaurants.” That
sounds impressive, on first hearing: If America’s finest restaurants will serve it, it must
be rich. But the sentence is ambiguous. It can mean that the restaurant itself is willing
to serve its customers that brand of instant coffee. (That would be the usual meaning,
and that is what the company wants you to think.) Or it can mean something quite different. It can mean just what it literally says: The coffee is “rich enough to be served in
America’s finest restaurants”—not by the restaurant, just in the restaurant—when it is
rented by the Folger Coffee Company. But just how rich does the coffee have to be for
it to be served in the rented restaurant by the coffee company that rented the restaurant?
(If you rent the buildings, you can serve pretty much anything you like “in America’s
finest restaurants.”)
One more example of ambiguity: a favorite among advertisers. “Best” is an
ambiguous term. In ordinary usage, when we say something is best we usually mean it is
better than everything else in that category. “This is the best chocolate chip cookie
I have ever tasted” means that it is better than any other chocolate chip cookie I have
ever eaten. “LeBron James is the best player in the NBA” means there is no other NBA
player as good as LeBron. “This is the best novel I’ve ever read” means I have never read
a novel that can measure up to this one. But “best” has another meaning: In this use of
the term “best,” to say that “this is the best class I’ve ever taken” may just mean: All my

Read the Fine Print
In 1997, Millennium Sales of West Palm Beach sent out
this mailing:
This shall serve as our final notification regarding a
fully detailed 1997 model car we will deliver directly
to you. Failure to respond by the posted deadline
date will nullify your opportunity to claim the
$15,638 automobile. Failure to respond will result in
forfeiture of the 1997 model car pending delivery
to you.

On a separate sheet there is a list of six new 1997
model cars, including a Mustang GT and a Chevy
Blazer. You select one, send in the $21.99, and they
guarantee delivery. And deliver they do: a brand new
1997 model car, the one you chose. It comes in the mail,
in a small box: a 1997 model car. And you are also
entered into a drawing for the “opportunity to claim the
$15,638 automobile”: the full-sized 1997 model car.
Good luck.3

Chapter 9

Language and Its Pitfalls

135

classes have been rather bad, but this one is no worse than the others. “This is the best
lasagna I’ve ever tasted” could mean that I don’t much care for lasagna, and it all tastes
about the same to me, and this one is as good as the rest: none of the lasagna I’ve had
really stands out.” “Mark is the best kazoo player in the world” means that—well, you get
the picture. Advertisers have a field day with this ambiguity. If there is a range of products that are all equally effective—one mouthwash works as well as another in fighting
bad breath, most fluoride toothpastes are equally good at fighting cavities, all detergents are equally effective in removing tough grease stains—then a mouthwash can
claim that it is proven best against mouth odor, a detergent can advertise that tests show
it is “best in cleaning tough stains.”
Ambiguity is tricky. Examine the following argument, tell what phrase is being used
ambiguously, and tell what meaning that phrase has in the premises and what (different)
meaning the phrase has in the conclusion.
Some Americans who hold radical political views (socialists, for example) claim that they
cannot get a public hearing for their views. But that claim is absurd. Of course they can
get a public hearing for their views. After all, we do have freedom of speech in America,
and anyone who wants to stand on a street corner and make speeches is perfectly
free to do so, and as the public walks by and perhaps stops to listen, the public will
hear what the speaker says. So radicals or anyone else can indeed get a public hearing for
their views.

Start by finding the conclusion of the argument, then line up the premises of the argument,
and then decide what phrase is being used with one meaning in the premises and with a
different meaning in the conclusion.
What is the conclusion?
Radicals can get a public hearing for their views in America.
What are the premises?
Radicals are free to speak out in public. Since radicals can speak out in public, their views can
be heard by the public; that is, there is a public hearing of their radical views.
What key phrase is used with two different meanings?
“Public hearing”

What meaning does “public hearing” have in the conclusion? That is, when political
radicals complain that they “cannot get a public hearing” for their views, what are they
complaining about? Obviously they are not complaining that they are unable to speak on
street corners. Instead, “public hearing” to the radicals means access to the public media,
coverage of their views in newspapers, news magazines, and television newscasts. That is
the kind of “public hearing” of which they claim to be deprived.
But what meaning does “public hearing” have in the premises? As used in the
premises, “public hearing” means,
heard by some (usually very small) segment of the public

Now the ambiguity should be plain. “Having access to the national news media” (one
sense of “public hearing”) is obviously quite different from “speaking one’s views to a few
people in public” (the other sense of “public hearing”). With the ambiguity eliminated,
the argument looks like this:
Since radicals speak to people in public, it follows that radicals have their views reported by
the national news media.

Obviously that is an invalid argument.

136

Chapter 9

Language and Its Pitfalls

AMPHIBOLY
Amphiboly is a special variety of ambiguity, in which a modifying word can be read as
applying either narrowly or more broadly; or more generally, amphiboly is a grammatical
form of ambiguity, in which the different possible meanings result from the grammatical
structure. Amphiboly is often the stuff of rather silly jokes, though it can be used for more
sinister purposes. Let’s start with the jokes. My favorite amphiboly joke comes from
Groucho Marx, describing his African hunting trip. “One morning I shot an elephant in
my pajamas. How he got into my pajamas I’ll never know.” But not all uses of amphiboly
are quite so innocent. “This cereal contains 100% natural fruits and grains.” Sounds
good, right? You would be really healthy if you started your morning eating only natural
fruits and grains, with no added sugar or salt or highly processed products; and it sounds
as if this cereal is made up entirely, 100%, of natural fruits and grains. That’s one way of
reading it. Unfortunately, that 100% may not apply to everything in the cereal; instead, it
applies only to the fruits and grains in the cereal: they are 100% natural. And there actually
are some 100% natural fruits and grains in this cereal—along with the sugar, salt, and all
other non-natural highly processed stuff that goes in the cereal mix.
Anacin used to run an advertisement with a very clever—and very deceptive—use of
amphiboly. “Anacin is the strongest pain reliever you can buy without a prescription:
Stronger than aspirin.” So I’ve got a bad headache, and I want a really strong pain reliever,
something even stronger than aspirin. Anacin costs more, but it’s a stronger pain reliever
than aspirin, so I’m willing to shell out some extra money for that stronger pain relief. But
wait a minute. Anacin just is aspirin, with a very small shot of caffeine thrown in. So how
can Anacin be a stronger pain reliever than aspirin, when the pain reliever in Anacin is
aspirin? No, you’ve got it all wrong; and Anacin is very sorry you misunderstood. The
advertisement doesn’t mean that Anacin is a stronger pain reliever; that is, it doesn’t mean
that Anacin is stronger as a pain reliever. The “stronger” doesn’t modify “pain reliever.”
Rather, among all the pain relievers, Anacin is a stronger pain reliever than aspirin, because
it contains an added drug, namely caffeine; and that makes it stronger, but not stronger as
a pain reliever, just a stronger drug combination in the class of pain relievers (all of which
are equally strong as pain relievers).

Exercise 9-1

Consider the Verdict

Everett Collection / Shutterstock

You are a juror in an auto theft case. Weldon
Wheels has been charged with stealing the car of
an elderly lady, wrecking it, and then abandoning
it. Weldon was picked up by the police 4 days after
the theft because he lived in the area of the theft
and he seemed to fit the victim’s description of
the thief. The next day the victim identified Weldon from a police lineup as the young man she
had seen speed away in her car. In court the lady
appears as the chief witness for the prosecution
and again identifies Weldon as the thief she saw
driving away in her car as she looked out her front
window. The case turns on her identification of
Weldon as the thief. The defense claims that this is
a case of mistaken identity, that the elderly lady glimpsed someone driving away and then in the police
lineup simply picked out the person who most resembled her brief impression of the criminal and
latched onto that unfortunate person—the defendant—as the car thief. Weldon insists that he was at
home watching television when the theft occurred and that he knows nothing at all about the stolen
car. One of the jurors offers this argument: Look, here’s what this case boils down to: Was that old lady

Chapter 9

137

Language and Its Pitfalls

telling the truth, or not? Now I don’t know about the rest of you, but I am absolutely convinced of one
thing: that dear old lady certainly did not go up on the witness stand, place her hand on the Bible and
swear before God to tell the truth, and then coolly lie about what she saw. She has taught Sunday school
for over 30 years, has lived in the same house since she was married 52 years ago, and she retired 10
years ago after teaching handicapped children for almost 40 years. She is as truthful, honest, and
upright a person as there is in this country—as indeed several very respectable people testified. She
could no more tell a lie under oath than she could run the high hurdles. There’s certainly no doubt in
my mind that she is telling the truth, and I don’t see how anyone could doubt her truthfulness and
honesty. So I believe she’s telling the truth when she says she saw that fellow driving away in her car, and
that means we must find him guilty. What do you think of this juror’s argument? (Are any of the words
ambiguous? If you need a hint, look back to the beginning of this chapter.)

Exercise 9-2
Identify the language deception involved in each of the following cases. In cases of ambiguity, be
sure to specify exactly what word or phrase is ambiguous, what the different meanings are, and why
this ambiguous use makes the argument unsound or the claim deceptive.
1. Why should anyone believe in the Darwinian account of evolution? After all, the Darwinian theory
is just that—a theory, and theories are merely speculation.
2. Former President Richard Nixon is not guilty of any of the crimes connected with Watergate
(perjury, breaking or entering, burglary, etc.). He certainly was not criminally involved in any of the
Watergate activities. President Gerald Ford granted Nixon a complete and unconditional pardon
for any crimes related to the Watergate events. And since President Ford clearly had the constitutional authority to grant such a pardon to Nixon, that makes Nixon not guilty.
3. Some complain that poor people do not receive equal justice in the U.S. courts; but that is not true,
for all citizens of the United States are equal in the eyes of the law and are treated equally by the
courts, no matter how rich or poor they may be.
4. SELLER:

CUSTOMER:
SELLER:

If you want the low cholesterol of corn oil, buy Happy Heart Cooking Oil. It contains
100% corn oil.
No it doesn’t; look, it says right there on the list of ingredients: Contains palm oil,
cottonseed oil, and corn oil.
Well, still, it does contain 100% corn oil; it just also happens to contain some 100%
palm oil and some 100% cottonseed oil.

5. We must accept some degree of repression in our society and in our political life. After all, as Freud
noted and as psychiatrists generally agree, repression is the price we pay for civilization.
6. Why do prices keep increasing? Why, for example, does the cost of a new car keep going up? As
we know, there are only two basic costs for all products: natural resources and labor. Natural
resources are always there, and Mother Nature has not increased her prices; so all the cost
increases must be coming from the labor side. The increased cost of labor—the higher wages that
are paid to workers, the demands of unions for more pay and better benefits—must therefore be
the real source of inflated prices. It is increased wages—the increased cost of labor—that is the
sole source of inflation.4
7. Fortunately in the United States we live in a democracy, so all our citizens have an equal voice in
our government. In our country, everyone counts equally, and no one’s views or wishes get special treatment, and every citizen has an equal right to serve as mayor, governor, senator, or even
president.
8. Why did you tell me that Professor Sponge is a good teacher? He’s the worst teacher I’ve ever had;
his class is boring, his lectures are incomprehensible, and he knows nothing about current developments in the field. He’s certainly not a good teacher.
No, he really is a good teacher. Of course he’s lousy as an instructor, you’re right about that.
But he’s a very good, warm-hearted, and generous person. He’s genuinely good, through and
through. And he happens to be a teacher, albeit a lousy one. He’s a good teacher; not a good teacher.
9.

“That batter wasn’t out; she beat the throw to first by a full step!
“No, you’re mistaken; she certainly was out. The umpire called her out, so she’s out.”

138

Chapter 9

Language and Its Pitfalls

10. Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, the defendant in this case is charged with assault and theft. He
is accused of a vicious, brutal, even heartless crime: knocking down an 80-year-old woman as she
left the supermarket with her groceries, breaking her left arm and giving her a severe concussion,
then—while she lay groaning and bleeding on the cold parking lot pavement—stealing her purse
and running away. You heard the defendant’s attorney, Ms. Taylor, argue that this is all a case of
mistaken identity, that the defendant didn’t commit this terrible crime, and that therefore the
brutal nature of the crime is irrelevant. Well, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, you will make up
your own minds about that. But I will tell you this: It will be a sad day for our fair city when our
citizens and our good jury members start thinking that a brutal assault on a defenseless elderly
woman is irrelevant. You wouldn’t consider it irrelevant if it was an attack on your mother; and as
far as I’m concerned, no attack on a frail and defenseless and vulnerable woman can ever be
described as irrelevant.

Exercise 9-3

Consider the Verdict

Everett Collection / Shutterstock

The defendant, Ted Zurich, is a major league
baseball player. He is charged with attempting
to bribe a police officer. He was stopped by
Officer Jones, a member of the state highway
patrol, on suspicion of driving while intoxicated. Officer Jones alleges that as she
approached the defendant’s car, Zurich leaned
out the window with his driver’s license in his
right hand, and a fist full of money in his left
hand. When she reached the car, Zurich said
(she testifies), “You can choose either hand;
why don’t you choose the left hand, and we’ll
both be a lot happier, and we can forget this
whole thing.”
The defense attorney, on cross-examination, asks Officer Jones if she knows any professional
baseball players. She testifies that she does not. The cross-examination continues as follows:

DEFENSE ATTORNEY:
OFFICER JONES:
DEFENSE ATTORNEY:
OFFICER JONES:
DEFENSE ATTORNEY:
OFFICER JONES:
DEFENSE ATTORNEY:
OFFICER JONES:
DEFENSE ATTORNEY:
OFFICER JONES:
DEFENSE ATTORNEY:

“Officer Jones, do you know Seth and Louise Arthur?”
“Yes, they lived down the street from me when I was growing up.”
“Do you know their son, Alex Arthur?”
“Yes, I know him; he’s several years younger than I am. He was a teenager
when I moved away, and I haven’t seen him since.”
“But you do know Alex Arthur, don’t you? You’ve known him since he was a
small child, isn’t that right?”
“Yes, I haven’t seen him in 10 years, but I know him, and his family.”
“Officer Jones, Alex Arthur now plays for the Louisville Sluggers. Do you
know what the Louisville Sluggers are?”
“Isn’t it a baseball bat, or something like that?”
“There is a baseball bat by that name, but there is also a professional minor
league baseball team by that name. Alex Arthur has played third base for the
Louisville Sluggers for the last 2 years.”
“Well, that’s nice; I had no idea what Alex was doing.”
“But you testified that you know Alex Arthur, right? And Alex Arthur is a
professional baseball player. So when you testified, under oath, that you don’t
know any professional baseball players, your testimony was false, wasn’t it?”

1. Was the testimony of Officer Jones false?
2. Suppose the defense attorney claims that Officer Jones’s testimony was false, and the prosecuting
attorney claims that her testimony was true. What ambiguous word or phrase might be in dispute?

Chapter 9

139

Language and Its Pitfalls

Study and Review on mythinkinglab.com

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

What is an ostensive definition?
What is a stipulative definition?
What is “doublespeak”?
What is the fallacy of ambiguity?
Give an example of the fallacious use of ambiguity.
What is amphiboly?

NOTES
1
2
3
4

William Lutz, The New Doublespeak: Why No One Knows What Anyone’s Saying Anymore (New York:
HarperCollins, 1996), p. 4.
Greensboro Daily News, June 23, 1985.
Reported in Consumer Reports, November 1997.
Adapted from a letter to the editor, Greensboro Daily News.

INTERNET RESOURCES
Anil Gupta has an excellent and extensive discussion of definitions in the online Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Go to plato.stanford.edu/entries/definition. A nice brief examination of definition can be found at www.philosophypages.com/lg/e05.htm.
The National Council of Teachers of English gives an annual “doublespeak award” for the
most misleading use of language. Some excellent examples of ambiguity and other fallacies can be
found at their site. Go to www.ncte.org; then enter “doublespeak” in “Search NCTE.”

ADDITIONAL READING
For a fascinating—and amusing, though also disturbing—look at how ambiguity, vagueness, and “doublespeak” function in advertising and politics, read
Doublespeak: From “Revenue Enhancement” to “Terminal
Living”; How Government, Business, Advertisers, and Others

Use Language to Deceive You, by William Lutz (New York:
HarperCollins, 1989). A more recent book by Lutz on
the same subject is The New Doublespeak: Why No One
Knows What Anyone is Saying Anymore (New York: HarperCollings, 1997).

Read the Document on mythinkinglab.com
Leonard Pitts Jr., “Can Blacks Be Racist?” This essay
shows the importance of careful definitions in examining
arguments.
Jack Shafer, “Weasel-Words Rip My Flesh!” “Weasel
words” are among the most common language deceptions; they turn what looks like a substantive claim into a
statement that actually has little or no content.
Weeks v. Angelone, 528 U.S. 225 (2000). This case
deals with the question of confusing language in jury
instructions, and whether a jury mistakenly understood
the judge’s instructions during the sentencing phase of a
capital trial. When the U.S. Supreme Court heard the case,

the Court split 5 to 4, with the majority ruling that the jury
had correctly understood the instructions. The minority—
in an argument written by Justice Stevens, and presented
here—insists that there are reasons to believe that the jury
was confused over ambiguities in the judge’s instructions.
Report of the Kaufman Commission on Proceedings
Involving Guy Paul Morin, excerpt from “Chapter II:
Forensic Evidence and the Centre of Forensic Sciences,”
pages 83–89 (Ontario Ministry of the Attorney General).
Disturbing account of how misunderstandings of how
terms were being used by forensic scientists may have
contributed to a wrongful conviction.

10

❖❖❖

Appeal to Authority

Listen to the Chapter Audio on mythinkinglab.com
Much of what you know is based on the testimony of reliable sources. Think for a
moment of your own knowledge of history, geography, physics, and biology. Some of it
may have been gained firsthand: you know where Vancouver is because you’ve been
there; you know that John McCain was the Republican presidential nominee in 2008
because you watched the election coverage; you know that acids turn litmus paper red
because you have done the experiment. But almost all of your knowledge of such
subjects—even if you are an expert in the field—comes from testimony. Through
testimony of reliable authorities you may know the path of the Nile River through Africa,
although you have never actually followed and charted the Nile. You accept the
testimony of biologists that there are penguins in Antarctica. Your knowledge that light
travels at a speed greater than 186,000 miles/second rests on reliable testimony, and it’s
quite reasonable to firmly believe that you know the speed of light (even though you’ve
never measured it for yourself). And you know—by reliable testimony—that Napoleon
was the French general at the Battle of Waterloo, although you did not personally
observe the battle. Testimony is essential, and even in areas of expertise, experts and
researchers must rely for the bulk of their knowledge on the testimony of other
researchers. (That is why fraudulent research testimony—such as Sir Cyril Burt’s
fabricated data on identical twins—is so damaging to scientific work.)
Without the testimony of others, we would not get very far beyond our own noses in
gaining knowledge of the world. (Isaac Newton generously acknowledged his own
dependence on the testimony of earlier scientists: “If I have seen farther, it is by standing on
the shoulders of giants.”) But when we draw from testimony, it is essential that the testimony
be reliable. Judging the reliability of testimony requires consideration of the source.
Testimony must be evaluated by two standards: Is this source of testimony trustworthy, honest? And is this source of testimony really knowledgeable about the topic in
question? (The testimony of a lying expert is no more helpful than the testimony of a
sincere incompetent.) If a witness identifies the defendant as the person who ran from
the scene of the crime, we want to know: Is this witness trustworthy (does the witness have
a special bias, such as a deep hatred for the defendant; does the witness have a reputation

140

Chapter 10

Appeal to Authority

141

for honesty) and is the witness a careful observer with good eyesight (an honest witness
whose eyesight is so bad that he or she could not have made an accurate identification will
not provide strong testimony).
In discussing ad hominem arguments it was frequently noted that ad hominem
arguments against testimony do not commit the ad hominem fallacy. If someone’s
testimony is inconsistent with his or her actions, then that inconsistency is an indication
of insincerity and thus weighs against the testimony. If the person testifying has a
special interest or bias, that bias should be considered when evaluating the testimony.
The credibility of the testimony depends on the reliability of the source. Similar care is
required in deciding whether to accept or reject a special kind of testimony: the
testimony of a special authority, or the testimony of an expert witness.

AUTHORITIES AS TESTIFIERS
Suppose we disagree about which planet exerts the strongest gravitational pull. There
are several ways to settle the dispute. We might visit each of the planets and take
measurements. On a tighter budget, we might appeal to an authority on planetary
astronomy. We could consult a book on the solar system written by some person whom
astronomers recognize as an authority, or look it up in a standard reference book such
as the Encyclopaedia Britannica. Appeal to such an authority is a perfectly legitimate way
of gathering information and confirming beliefs, as long as we keep in mind that no
source is absolute or infallible. Authorities are sometimes mistaken, authorities are
sometimes dishonest, and what authorities in a field agree to be true is sometimes false.
But I am sometimes mistaken about what I have seen “with my own eyes.” Probably no
empirically based beliefs are absolutely certain. If that sort of certainty were required,
then we could hold no beliefs at all about the world. If we set somewhat less stringent
requirements for knowledge, then appeal to genuine authorities will be one way of
gaining knowledge.

CONDITIONS FOR LEGITIMATE APPEAL TO AUTHORITY
In the courtroom, expert witnesses may testify, for example, that the blood found on the
defendant’s shirt was the blood of the murder victim, or that the substance found in the
marmalade was a lethal drug, or that the fingerprints found in the burglarized apartment
were not those of the defendant. But while appeal to authorities and to expert witnesses is
reasonable and useful, there are some special pitfalls: In order for an appeal to authority
to be legitimate in settling an issue, the authority must be a genuine authority on that
subject, and there must be agreement among authorities.
Consider more carefully the first requirement for legitimate appeal to authority:
The person appealed to must be a genuine authority in the area in question. Thus if
we are in disagreement about the gravitational force of various planets, we might
reasonably be guided by the testimony of Carl Sagan. Carl Sagan was an expert on
astronomy. However, if someone claims that smoking is dangerous to health because
Carl Sagan said it is, then that would be a fallacious appeal to authority. Carl Sagan was
not (and did not claim to be) an expert on the health hazards of tobacco. If there is a
question concerning the behavior of chimpanzees, then Jane Goodall’s testimony on
the subject is authoritative, and the fact that Jane Goodall asserts a particular claim
about chimp behavior is good grounds for believing it to be true. But to cite Jane
Goodall’s opinions about foreign policy, quasars, or toothpaste, and then to maintain
that her opinions must be true because Jane Goodall asserted them, is to indulge in a
fallacious appeal to authority.

142

Chapter 10

Appeal to Authority

Failed Authority
There are many famous examples of false claims by
recognized authorities. For example, Lord Kelvin, a
distinguished nineteenth-century physicist, asserted in
1895 that heavier-than-air flying machines were physically impossible; in less than a decade, the Wright brothers
proved him wrong. General William C. Westmoreland,
Commander of U.S. Forces in South Vietnam, thought
it “inconceivable” that the Viet Cong could defeat the
South Vietnamese military forces. Robert Andrews
Millikan, winner of the Nobel Prize for Physics, insisted
that releasing energy by splitting the atom was an
absolute impossibility. Supposedly the Decca Records
executive who rejected the Beatles was confident that

“groups of guitars are on the way out.” Ken Olson,
president of Digital Equipment Corporation, was confident that “There is no reason anyone would want a computer in their home.” Those cases of expert error are a
useful reminder that experts are sometimes wrong. But
don’t go overboard with such cases; remember, appeal
to a consensus of genuine and trustworthy authorities is
often a legitimate means of gaining knowledge.
These glaring examples of mistaken expert opinion
should give you a healthy dose of skepticism. But don’t
throw out the baby with the bathwater. Even the best
authorities are not infallible, but appeal to genuine
authority is often an excellent means of gaining knowledge.

Such fallacious appeals to authority seem rather obvious and would hardly deserve
comment were it not for the fact that such fallacies are so often committed. You cannot
turn on the television without being confronted by an expert test pilot (Chuck Yeager)
giving nonauthoritative testimony concerning batteries, an expert basketball player
(Michael Jordan) giving unwarranted advice about breakfast cereal, or an outstanding
swimmer (Michael Phelps) giving his nonexpert views on submarine sandwiches. Perhaps
the most interesting recent “celebrity” endorsement is the promotion of “BidHere”—an
Internet auction site—by Jamie Jungers, a Las Vegas lingerie model who is best known for
her affair with Tiger Woods. I’m not certain what Jamie Jungers might claim as an area of
expertise, but I’m pretty sure it’s not Internet auctions.
Fallacious appeal to authority is perhaps the most common fallacy occurring in
advertisements (although advertisements are so riddled with fallacies that it may be difficult to get an accurate count on which fallacy is the leader). So the first point to check
when dealing with appeals to authority is whether the individual is really an expert in that
area (he or she may be an authority in some other area, with no special standing in the
subject under consideration, or may be a celebrity with no real authority on any subject).

A Dubious Endorsement
Pfizer Pharmaceuticals has made billions of dollars
from its sales of Lipitor, a cholesterol-lowering drug that
is the all-time leader in sales among prescription drugs.
Recently, however, a much cheaper generic version of
Zocor—another cholesterol-lowering drug—has been
taking market share from Lipitor. To combat this challenge, Pfizer has spent several hundred million dollars
advertising Lipitor. Some of its most prominent
advertisements enlisted Robert Jarvik, a leader in the
development of artificial hearts, as an authoritative
spokesperson. In one of those advertisements, Jarvik is
seen rowing a racing shell across a beautiful mountain
lake. Unfortunately, that’s not actually Jarvik (who is

apparently not very athletic), but instead a stunt double. But that’s the least of the problems. Jarvik claims
that “as a doctor” he endorses Lipitor to lower cholesterol; but Jarvik (though he has a medical degree) is not
a licensed physician, has never practiced medicine, and
cannot prescribe drugs. And while he claims that Lipitor
has been effective for him, in fact Jarvik was not taking
Lipitor at all until about a month after he started promoting the drug (for a payment from Pfizer of well over
a million dollars). When the House Energy and Commerce Committee began an investigation of deceptive
advertising practices by pharmaceutical companies,
Pfizer decided to drop its advertising campaign.

Chapter 10

Appeal to Authority

143

If Tiger Woods offers you guidance on how to hit your short irons, then it is reasonable to
follow his expert advice. In fact, you could hardly be blamed for mentioning Tiger’s
advice on every possible occasion (as in: “You can hit a 7 iron on that shot if you want, but
the last time I played a round with Tiger, he advised . . . ”). But Tiger’s expertise in golf
lends no authority to his recommendations (in television advertisements) of a particular
model of car. And to believe that the car must be good because Tiger Woods recommends
it is to fall prey to the fallacious version of appeal to authority.
If instead of testimony the individual were offering an argument, then all considerations of expertise and authority become irrelevant. If someone offers an argument
(instead of expert testimony) in favor of a particular shaving cream, then that argument must be considered on its own merits, and it matters not whether the arguer is an
ex-baseball player or a nobel laureate.
When dealing with appeals to authority (claims of expert testimony) there is a second
consideration that must be noted. Not only you must be sure that the person to whom you
appeal really is an expert in that subject, but you must be sure that the subject is one on which
authorities agree. If the question concerns the gravitational force on some planet, then
appeal to a genuine authority is legitimate, since there is consensus among authorities
on that question. But if instead the issue is the safety of nuclear power plants or the long-term
effects of low-level radiation or whether Secretariat was the greatest racehorse in history, then
appeals to authority are fallacious: On those questions there is no settled agreement among
the authorities in the respective areas. When that is the case—when genuine authorities disagree—we must consider the competing arguments. Since each side can marshal impressive
and competing authorities, appeal to authority cannot be used to settle the issue.
That may not sound too difficult—and in some cases, it is not hard to distinguish
legitimate from fallacious appeals to authority. But there are some notorious difficulties—problems that have troubled judges and scientists as well as philosophers. In order
for an appeal to authority to be legitimate, there must be agreement among genuine
authorities. But what counts as agreement? If every genuine expert on the subject agrees,
then that is obviously sufficient. But is it necessary? Probably not. If there are 10,000
genuine experts in astronomy, and 9,999 of them agree that Jupiter is the planet with the
greatest mass, then is it legitimate to appeal to authority on the question of what planet
has the greatest mass? Yes, that seems like enough agreement. But what if the issue is one
in which 9,000 of the astronomers hold one view, and a thousand other expert
astronomers dissent? Is 90% enough to count as general agreement among authorities?
Or would it be a fallacy to appeal to the authority of the majority astronomers on such a
case? What if the split is 70 to 30? At 51 to 49, certainly we would say that there is no
general agreement among authorities, and so appeal to authority would be fallacious. But
just how close to unanimity does the agreement have to be? In Frye v. United States,1 the
1923 U.S. Supreme Court ruled that expert testimony is legitimate if the theory or
technique about which the expert is testifying is “generally accepted” as reliable in the
relevant scientific community. But that leaves the question of what counts as “generally
accepted.” In answering that question, U.S. courts have generally followed the rule that if
a scientific judgment has been subjected to and passed peer review through publication
in an accepted scientific journal, then that is sufficient for counting it as being “generally
accepted by the scientific community.” That may be enough to establish that a scientific
opinion is expert, but it obviously won’t answer our question about what counts as sufficient
agreement to make an appeal to authority legitimate: After all, scientific work by scientists
who hold minority views is regularly—and rightly—published in peer-reviewed scientific
journals. Recently the U.S. Supreme Court, in Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc.,2
rejected the Frye standard. In the Daubert case, the Court ruled that publication in an
accepted scientific journal is not a good standard for scientific legitimacy, since some
published scientific work is not reliable and some reliable scientific work has not been
published.3 Under Daubert, the Court ruled that in order to count as legitimate expert
testimony the research results need not be generally accepted by the scientific community,

144

Chapter 10

Appeal to Authority

Dubious Authority
In a 1990 civil trial, the parents of two teenage boys sued
a British heavy-metal rock band named Judas Priest.
The two boys had attempted suicide (one was successful) after listening to an album by Judas Priest. The
plantiffs charged that one of Judas Priest’s songs
contained a subliminal phrase (“Do it”) that triggered a
suicidal impulse in the two boys.
Experts on cognitive psychology generally agree that
subliminal messages have little if any effect on beliefs, attitudes, or behavior. The plantiffs had an impressive expert
witness, Howard Shevrin, who has published reputable
research on subliminal influences. Shevrin testified that

subliminal messages might induce suicidal behavior, and
he insisted that “my expert judgment [is based] on a
corpus of literature, on hundreds of experiments.”
However, when pressed to cite some of this experimental
support, Shevrin could name no studies demonstrating
such powerful subliminal effects on behavior.4
Dr. Shevrin is, of course, “entitled to his opinion”;
but he is not entitled to present it as if it were based on
sound scientific research and the general considered
acceptance of the scientific community. In this case,
Dr. Shevrin is an expert; but the consensus of scientific
expertise goes against his views.

but the methodology used in the research must be based on scientifically sound and
accepted principles. (It will still be up to the “fact finder,” that is, the jury or—in trials
without juries—the judge, to weigh the credibility of the expert testimony.) So directly
or indirectly the Court has retained the basic but troubling standard for legitimate expertise: It must be “generally accepted” by the relevant scientific community. But what counts
as “generally accepted” remains a vexed question.
Appeal to authority can be legitimate, but only when the person to whom appeal
is made is genuinely an expert in that area, and the experts agree on the answer. If the
“authority” cited is not an expert on the subject, or there is disagreement among
authorities, then it is a fallacious appeal to authority.
An example of expert testimony and its evaluation may clarify the issues involved in
evaluating appeals to authority. Suppose that the expert, Dr. Jones, testifies that the deceased
died of a bullet wound before being submerged in water: “The bullet wound was the sole
cause of death; I am absolutely certain of that as a result of my careful and expert examination of the victim, and I would stake my professional reputation on it.” And Dr. Smith, equally
an authority in forensic medicine, testifies that the victim was drowned and that the bullet
wound alone would not have been fatal: “The victim died from drowning; the bullet wound
was a serious injury, but it would not and did not cause death; death was by drowning; I am
absolutely certain of that as a result of my careful and expert examination of the victim, and
I would stake my professional reputation on it.” In such a case, doctors Jones and Smith have
not given arguments for their views; instead, they have given expert testimony. And since the
experts disagree, it would be fallacious for either the prosecution or the defense to appeal to
their authoritative pronouncements as establishing the truth about the cause of death.

Adrift among Authorities
One of the most difficult tasks facing a juror is the evaluation of conflicting expert testimony. The jurors at the trial
of John Hinckley, Jr. (tried in the spring of 1982 for
attempting to assassinate U.S. president Ronald Reagan)
had the “benefit” of hearing many highly qualified
experts, who were summoned by both sides to give testimony about the state of the defendant’s mind at the time
he committed the crime. Unfortunately, the jurors could
not merely accept authority, since there certainly was no
consensus among the experts: one expert testified he was
clinically depressed, while another expert rejected that

claim; one expert diagnosed Hinckley as schizophrenic,
while an equal and opposite expert denied that diagnosis;
an expert for the defense insisted that Hinckley was
severely psychotic, while a prosecution expert insisted
that Hinckley had never been psychotic. In such a case,
the jurors must attempt to decide whether all the
authorities are really experts in the field, and assuming
that there are genuine authorities who give conflicting
testimony, the jurors are then required to weigh the
competing arguments of the expert witnesses (since appeal
to authority is fallacious when authorities disagree).

Chapter 10

Appeal to Authority

145

But since both Jones and Smith are giving testimony (not argument), it is quite legitimate to direct ad hominem attacks against the two experts. An attorney might try to establish
that one of the experts is not really an expert at all (“Dr. Jones, isn’t it true that you bought
your medical degree from a mail-order university you found in the classified section of Soldier
of Fortune?”); or that one “expert” is not very reliable (“Dr. Smith, didn’t you recently serve
3 years at Leavenworth for a perjury conviction?”); or that one expert has a strong bias or
interest that is likely to slant her judgment (“Dr Jones, isn’t it true that the defendant in this
case is your ex-husband, with whom you are currently engaged in litigation for custody of
your three children?”). If the reputation, reliability, or objectivity of one of the “experts” can
be called into question, then the strength of that “expert” testimony will be weakened. In
that case, counsel might argue that there is no disagreement on this issue among genuine,
truthful, fair-minded experts (all the “experts” on the other side are biased, incompetent, or
incapacitated) and therefore the testimony of the legitimate authority ought to be accepted.
This is tricky stuff. For if the expert is giving arguments for her view (rather than
simply saying “take my expert word for it,” she is instead saying “consider these reasons
for this conclusion”), then you must consider the arguments, and forget the credentials
and the character of the arguer. In that case, the witness’s bias, the amount of money the
witness is receiving, and the witness’s credentials don’t count. If the witness is giving
argument, rather than testimony, it makes no difference whether her degree came from
Harvard or the Stumpwater Institute for Delinquent Girls. Cases in which witnesses are
giving argument (rather than eyewitness or expert testimony) are comparatively rare, but
they do occur. If the expert “witnesses” are giving argument, rather than testimony, it is
irrelevant to their arguments that they are hired guns; whether they are hired to give
argument, or are giving arguments out of pure love of justice and truth, or whatever their
motivations, that is irrelevant to proper evaluation of their arguments. But if they are simply
asserting the truth of their claims on the basis of their expertise—“Take my word for it, I’m
an expert”—then their status as advocates or hired guns may be weighed in the balance.
One more point concerning legitimate and fallacious appeals to authority. If there is
deep disagreement among authorities about theory Z, then it is quite legitimate for the genuine authority Dr. Alice Andrews to affirm that “In my best judgment, theory Z is correct.”
The expert is stating her expert opinion, not appealing to authority. However, if Joe then
says that “The respected expert Dr. Andrews says that Z is correct, so Z must be correct,”

A Tarnished Expert
My favorite example of a questionable “expert” witness occurred in a civil case in Cleveland. Claire Freeman-McCown had been fired from her job as chief
executive officer of the Cuyahoga Metropolitan Housing Authority (CMHA) by the CMHA Board on
grounds that she was fraudulently taking money from
the agency (payments on her credit cards and on
mortgages for personal property) through forging a
number of documents. (It was claimed that documents supposedly signed by the CMHA Board were
forgeries.) She sued CMHA for damages, claiming
that the charges against her were false and malicious.
Since the question of forgery was central to her case,
she presented the expert testimony of F. Aurelius
McKanze, who appeared as an expert forensic document examiner. He claimed that he had been a
colonel in the Air Force, had done undergraduate

studies at Ohio State University, and that he had a
doctorate in criminal psychology from the University
of Arizona. The Air Force, Ohio State, and the University of Arizona denied his claims. He also had been in
prison for receiving stolen property and theft. But he
did apparently have some knowledge of forgery: He
had been convicted of forgery in 1973.
Freeman-McCown lost her case, and her “expert
witness”—F. Aurelius McKanze—was charged with
perjury. McKanze pleaded guilty, but at his sentencing
he was placed on probation (rather than receiving an
active prison sentence) because of letters from local
physicians stating that McKanze was dying of prostate
cancer that had spread throughout his body. Unfortunately for McKanze, the judge changed his mind
concerning probation when it was discovered that the
letters from the doctors had been forged.

146

Chapter 10

Appeal to Authority

Is the Authority Sincere?
Tiger Woods appears in commercials for Nike golf balls,
and endorses “Nike Tour Accuracy” golf balls. Suppose
that on the basis of that advertisement I assert that Nike
must be the best golf balls, because Tiger Woods recommends them, and Tiger Woods is an expert golfer. Well,
the fact that Tiger recommends them is certainly
relevant: it’s not like Tiger recommending a particular
model of car, an area in which presumably he is no
more an expert than you and I. When it comes to golf,
Tiger Woods can stake a strong claim to expertise. Still,
there would be some problems with this appeal to Tiger
Woods as an authority on golf balls. First, there is
apparently no consensus among golf experts on which
golf balls are best (most touring professionals use
Titleist), and thus the second condition for legitimate
appeal to authority is not met. Also, Tiger Woods is
getting paid—$100 million over a 5-year contract—for
his recommendation of Nike golf balls. Since Tiger is

giving “expert testimony” on the golf balls, it is legitimate to bring up any special interests he might have
that might make him less than a perfectly objective
expert witness: and receiving $100 million for his
endorsement is a very special interest. Finally, the golf
balls that Tiger actually uses in professional competition are not the “Nike Tour Accuracy” balls he endorses
in advertisements; for his own play, Tiger uses a ball that
is custom made by Nike (with a harder inner and outer
core) that is not sold by Nike. Tiger’s undisputed
golfing greatness notwithstanding, such factors raise
legitimate questions about the legitimacy of Tiger’s
authoritative testimony on behalf of Nike golf balls.
Does Tiger’s well-publicized marital infidelity
count against his expert testimony? Since it raises
questions about his truthfulness (he promised to be
faithful to his wife, and he deceived her) it does tarnish
the reliability of his testimony.

then Joe is offering a fallacious appeal to authority. (And of course if Dr. Andrews, still
testifying about the disputed theory Z, says that “In my best judgment, theory Z is correct,
and since I am a recognized authority on this subject, you ought to accept theory Z as true,”
then in that case Dr. Andrews is fallaciously appealing to her own authority.)
In sum, there are several key points to remember about appeals to expert
authority. When evaluating an appeal to authority (when the authority is offering
testimony on the grounds of his or her status as a knowledgeable expert, and is not
giving an argument), you must consider two main issues. First, is this individual really
an authority in the appropriate area? (Thus ad hominem arguments aimed at
undermining the claimed expertise of the authority will be relevant, and inverse ad
hominem arguments aimed at establishing the wisdom and integrity of the expert
witness will also be legitimate.) And second, is this an issue on which authorities are
generally in agreement? (If not, then no appeal to authority can be legitimate.) But in
many instances, unfortunately, there is a third factor that must be considered. Is this
authority likely to give his or her truthful, unbiased, unslanted expert opinion? Or will
the authority be tempted to slant (or even falsify) his or her expert opinion? That
question will certainly be relevant (and ad hominem attacks on the honesty and
objectivity of an expert authority will be relevant), since experts may be as subject to
temptations of the flesh—including the cash paid by the side that hires them to
testify—as anyone else. Especially in court cases, the expert authorities who appear as
witnesses for both sides may not be the dedicated-only-to-truth-and-science objective
independent authorities that we might wish them to be. One former president of the
American Bar Association put the point quite bluntly:
I would go into a lawsuit with an objective uncommitted independent expert about as
willingly as I would occupy a foxhole with a couple of noncombatant soldiers.5

Often these “hired guns” cannot be trusted; thus it is important for jurors trying to
weigh the value and reliability of their testimony to know something about the character
of such expert testifiers, and about any special biases and influences (including cash
influences) that may slant or distort their testimony.

Chapter 10

Appeal to Authority

147

Biased “experts” are also a problem outside of court. One of the great difficulties in
dealing with claims by “authorities” is in knowing which ones are genuine experts,
presenting impartial expertise, and which ones are charlatans. That problem has become
even more severe in recent years, as industries and public relations firms have put together
sham “foundations” that represent themselves as impartial experts, when in fact
they are front groups that are bought and paid for by special industrial interests. The
American Council on Science and Health claims to be an independent and objective group
of research scientists. In fact, it is funded by the chemical and food-processing industries. It
receives grants from Burger King, and publishes reports praising the nutritional value of
fast food. It criticizes studies showing the health problems generated by tropical oils, while
taking money from palm oil producers. And it asserts that “There has never been a case
of ill health linked to the regulated, approved use of pesticides in this country,” while
receiving funds from a number of pesticide manufacturers.6 Before you trust the reports of
these “objective independent scientists,” you are justified in considering the source.
Consider another example: the “Air Hygiene Foundation” sounds like a wholesome
organization dedicated to improving air quality; it was in fact an industry-funded front,
whose purpose was to provide cover and misinformation on behalf of industries creating
silica dust, which was responsible for thousands of deaths from silicosis, a lung disease
brought on by breathing silica dust, a disease that plagued workers in mining, sandblasting,
pottery, and foundries, and permanently disabled many that it did not kill. Not only do such
foundations carry a false air of concern for safety and the environment along with their air
of disinterested objectivity, they also manage to generously sponsor “research” that conveniently “proves” the results the foundation prefers. As noted by Rampton and Stauber,
By 1960, 63 scientific papers on the subject of asbestosis had been done, 11 of which were
sponsored by the asbestos industry, the other 52 coming from hospitals and medical
schools. The 11 industry studies were unanimous in denying that asbestos caused lung
cancer and minimizing the seriousness of asbestosis—a position diametrically opposite to
the conclusions reached by the nonindustry studies.7

The moral of the story: When evaluating “expert testimony,” it is important to know
whether the “experts” are genuine objective experts or merely paid industry hacks. And
when evaluating expert testimony, it is also important to know—as with the evaluation of
any testimony—whether the testifier has any special incentive that might lead him or her
to testify untruthfully. For example, in the 1990s, tobacco companies paid over $150,000
to 13 scientists simply to write pro-tobacco letters to influential medical journals.8 One
might doubt the objectivity of such expert letter writers.
One last example. Latex gloves, used by nurses and doctors, cause severe allergic
reactions in about 10% of the doctors and nurses who wear them. Some 200,000 nurses
have developed latex allergies, and the allergies can be severely disabling, and even
deadly (four nurses have died from their reactions to latex). Alternatives exist, and are
now being used. But former Surgeon General C. Everett Koop testified before Congress
that concern over latex gloves is a case of “borderline hysteria,” and that the risks were
greatly exaggerated. Dr. Koop forgot to mention in his testimony that a maker of latex
gloves paid him over $600,000 to serve as a spokesman for the company. But a payment of
$600,000 is something you might wish to consider in evaluating the reliability of Koop’s
“expert” testimony: testimony which was far outside Dr. Koop’s area of expertise (his
practice was in pediatric orthopedic surgery).9
Appeal to expert authority can be—and often is—legitimate and valuable; but
before putting your trust in an appeal to authority, you must be confident that the
authority really is an authority on that subject, that there is consensus among authorities
on that question, and that the authority is testifying in an honest and unbiased manner.
That’s a lot to ask of genuine appeals to authority, but no one said that careful critical
thinking would be easy.

148

Chapter 10

Appeal to Authority

bikeriderlondon / Shutterstock

How Do You Rule?

When O. J. Simpson was charged with murder, it was
obvious that a key part of the trial evidence would be the
blood stains found in Simpson’s home and car, on his
socks, on a glove, and at the murder scene. And central to
that evidence would be DNA testing to determine whose
blood it was. With that in mind, Simpson’s defense team
hired an expert on DNA testing: Dr. Kary B. Mullis.
Dr. Mullis was not just any expert on DNA. In 1993, he
had won the Nobel Prize for his breakthrough research
on DNA testing. He had invented the PCR (polymerase
chain-reaction) technique for identifying and reproducing DNA. Dr. Mullis believed that PCR testing was
valuable in the laboratory, but that it was ill suited for
criminal investigation because of the uncontrolled nature
of the crime scene, and that therefore the DNA testing in
criminal cases was unreliable. A major defense theme was
the sloppy work of the police investigators in gathering
blood evidence, transporting the evidence, and running
their tests. The skeptical testimony of a Nobel Prize winner, who won the prize for his work on DNA testing,
would seem to be a major triumph for the defense.
And yet the defense never called Dr. Mullis.
A nobel laureate, willing to testify that the DNA testing
that linked Simpson to the crime was unreliable, and
yet the defense never called him. Why not?

Since Dr. Mullis was testifying as an expert, his
credentials and reliability were open to attack. And
Dr. Mullis was vulnerable to attack on several fronts. In
the first place, since winning the Nobel Prize he had
largely abandoned scientific research to devote himself
to surfing, taking hallucinogenic drugs, and pursuing
women. As a result, he was out of touch with recent
developments in DNA research. For example, RFLP
testing is a recently developed and more reliable way of
making DNA identifications, and a major advance in
DNA research; yet when the defense lawyers interviewed him, Dr. Mullis could not remember what RFLP
testing was. Furthermore, Dr. Mullis had exhibited
rather bizarre behavior and championed views that
placed him well out of the mainstream of scientific
research. He maintained that the HIV virus is not the
cause of AIDS; and he was banned from one scientific
conference after showing slides of nude women during
his lecture.
When the defense was considering calling Dr. Mullis
as an expert witness, they asked Judge Ito to rule that
Dr. Mullis’s lifestyle and character were “completely
irrelevant,” and that the prosecution should not be
allowed to ask questions on those topics. The prosecution responded that:
Should the defense choose to call Dr. Mullis to
voice any relevant criticisms about forensic PCR
applications, the prosecution is fully prepared to
cross-examine Mullis on every aspect of his life
which reflects on his credibility, competency, and
sobriety.

If you were Judge Ito, how would you rule?
Would you allow the defense to ask such questions, or
would you rule that Dr. Mullis’s lifestyle, drug use, and
behavior are irrelevant?

POPULARITY AND TRADITION
Two special varieties of fallacious appeal to authority should be noted. Those special
versions of the fallacy of appeal to authority are the appeal to the (false) authority of popularity and the appeal to the (false) authority of tradition. Remember that in order for appeal to authority to be legitimate and nonfallacious, the “authority” to whom appeal is
made must be genuine and must have special knowledge and expertise in the subject. But
since neither the crowd (popularity) nor tradition has special knowledge, such appeals
are always fallacious. These are common and distinctive fallacies, and we have special
names for them: appeal to popularity and appeal to traditional wisdom.
Appeal to popularity is a common advertising ploy. Advertisements frequently
suggest that a product must be good—or even the best of its type—because it is the most
popular. But such an appeal to popularity would have force only if the people who buy the
product were experts—and obviously they are not.

Chapter 10

Appeal to Authority

149

Being misled by a commercial appeal to popularity may result in wasting money on
inferior products. During jury deliberation, when 12 persons are deciding whether to
find the defendant guilty or not guilty, failure to recognize fallacious appeals to popularity may have more serious consequences. Suppose that after long deliberation 10 or
11 members of the jury favor one verdict, and one or two members favor another. At that
point, the majority will almost certainly appeal to the weight of its numbers in an effort to
persuade the dissenters to agree with them. The one or two in the minority will probably
be subjected to such arguments as: “Look, everyone else on the jury agrees that the defendant is guilty; you are the only one who doubts it. Since there are so many more of us who
have come to the guilty conclusion, doesn’t that show you that your own conclusion must
be mistaken? Be reasonable, and accept the view of the overwhelming majority. After all,
11 heads are better than one.” But such an appeal to popularity is fallacious. The fact that
a view is popular is no grounds for believing that it is correct; no more than the fact that
a brand of pain reliever is the biggest seller is grounds for believing that it is the best.
Neither a crowd of purchasers nor a crowd of jurors are experts. Of course, the members
of the majority—and also the members of the minority—may and should offer arguments
to convince the other side of the correctness of the conclusion favored. But appeal to
popularity is not a sound argument.
Jurors are not the only ones who may be led astray by the seductive appeals of
popularity. Judges have sometimes encouraged jurors to be swayed by majority opinion.
In a famous (or infamous) charge to a hung jury (in Allen v. United States), the judge
instructed the jury:
that in a large proportion of cases absolute certainty could not be expected; that although
the verdict must be the verdict of each individual juror, and not a mere acquiescence in the
conclusion of his fellows, yet they should examine the question submitted with candor and
with a proper regard and deference to the opinions of each other; that it was their duty to
decide the case if they could conscientiously do so; that they should listen, with a disposition
to be convinced, to each other’s argument; that, if much the larger number were for
conviction, a dissenting juror should consider whether his doubt was a reasonable one which
made no impression upon the minds of so many men, equally honest, equally intelligent with
himself. If, upon the other hand, the majority was for acquittal, the minority ought to ask
themselves whether they might reasonably doubt the correctness of a judgment which was
not concurred in by the majority.10

But the fact that a majority disagrees—or agrees—with a conclusion has no bearing on
the correctness of the conclusion. The arguments of any group deserve careful attention,
but their numbers—whether great or small—are irrelevant. In rejecting the Allen charge
to the jury, the Fifth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals cited the opinion of Judge Brown,
who wrote,
I think a mistrial from a hung jury is a safeguard to liberty. In many areas it is the sole means
by which one or a few may stand out against an overwhelming public sentiment. Nothing
should interfere with its exercise. In the final analysis the Allen charge itself does not make
sense. All it may rightfully say is that there is a duty to consider the views of others but that a
conscientious person has finally the right and duty to stand by conscience. If it says that and
nothing more it is a superfluous lecture in citizenship. If it says more to declare that there is
a duty to decide, it is legally incorrect as an interference with that rightful independence.
The time has come, I think, to forbid this practice. Like the silver platter, this is too dear to
keep. The cost in fundamental fairness is too great.11

And there is another cost to being convinced merely by the weight of opinion against
one’s position: the cost of falling into the fallacy of appeal to popularity.
A similar category of fallacious appeal is the appeal to traditional wisdom. The
crowd is not expert, and neither is tradition. That a view or a position has been held for
many years is not evidence of its correctness.

150

Chapter 10

Appeal to Authority

When in the sixteenth century Copernicus argued that the Earth is not stationary
(but instead orbits the Sun), his opponents argued that belief in a fixed and immovable
Earth had endured for centuries. But his opponents then concluded—incorrectly—
that that was good reason to think the belief true. Traditional beliefs of long standing
may be true, of course, but their longevity is not evidence of their truth. Neither tradition nor popularity qualifies as expert. Contrary to popular belief, there is no “test of
time” that a long-held belief has passed. Thus the fact that abortion was for many
decades believed to be wrong is irrelevant to the question of whether it is really wrong.
The fact that for many years there were almost no restrictions on smoking in public
places is irrelevant to the question of whether such restrictions should now be
established. Conversely, while tradition carries no authority, neither does novelty. The
advertiser’s trumpeting of a new headache remedy, a new laundry detergent, or a new
underarm deodorant is just as fallacious as the appeal to traditional wisdom. The
newness of a product or idea counts neither for nor against it, just as the fact that a
belief or idea is old gives it no special weight. Neither the soberness of age nor the fresh
bloom of youth counts for or against a belief, theory, idea, or product. Appeal to
tradition (like appeal to innovation) is a fallacious appeal to a source that is not
genuinely authoritative, a source that has no genuine expertise.
In summary, there are real authorities in some areas, and appeal to the testimony of
such authorities is legitimate. But when the “authority”—whether popularity, tradition, or
an individual—is not really an expert on the subject (or when genuine authorities do not
agree), then appeal to authority is fallacious. And since the authority is giving
testimony (and the strength of the testimony depends on the integrity and expertise of
the authority), ad hominem attacks against such appeals are legitimate: they do not
commit the ad hominem fallacy.

Exercise 10-1
1. The following are appeals to authority; for each one, tell whether it is legitimate or fallacious.
a. I’ve been having trouble getting my lawn to grow—the grass is not very thick, and in some spots
there’s really no grass at all. But yesterday while watching television I saw Don Shula, the coach
of the Miami Dolphins—and he recommended this special new lawn fertilizer from Hyponex.
He says it is great stuff and that it will do wonders for your lawn. Well, Don Shula is a very bright
guy and is perhaps the best football coach in the National Football League. Since he thinks
Hyponex is the best lawn fertilizer, I’m going to get some. It must be good stuff.
b. You remember our argument about how to amend the U.S. Constitution? We were arguing
about how many states must approve an amendment in order to pass it. Well, I have settled that
question. I just talked to former U.S. Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O’Connor and to
Ronald Dworkin (Professor of Constitutional Law at New York University), and they both agreed
that amendments to the Constitution must be approved by three-fourths of the states.
c. The question of whether a computer might ever be programmed to really think—intelligently
and creatively, as well as or better than the most intelligent humans—is certainly hotly debated,
and top computer scientists and programmers, psychologists, and philosophers often disagree
about whether such intelligent computers are really possible. Well, Hans Moravec is head of the
Robotics Institute at Carnegie-Mellon University, he holds a PhD in computer science from Stanford, and he has done major research at the Stanford Artificial Intelligence Institute. In fact, he
is one of the leading authorities in the world on artificial intelligence (computer intelligence)
and robotics. He recently claimed that computerized robots with intelligence fully equal to that
of the most intelligent human beings “will be common within 50 years.” That should settle the
question. If an acknowledged expert like Hans Moravec says such computer intelligence is
possible, then it must really be possible.
d. It is quite clear that high sugar soft drinks are causing health problems and contributing to obesity in elementary and middle school children. The American Medical Association, the American
Heart Association, the National Institute of Health, Harvard Medical School, and the Mayo Clinic

151

Appeal to Authority

have all agreed that children’s consumption of these high sugar drinks is a major cause of both
obesity and health problems in school age children.
e. There is great controversy over the economic impact of opening new casinos in Ohio. Some
economists claim that the new casinos would bring in thousands of new jobs, and greatly
increase the tax revenue to the state. Other economists say that the casinos would not bring in
more jobs, but would instead just replace some current entertainment jobs with casino jobs; and
they say that tax revenue would not really increase, because the state would have to spend more
money regulating and policing the casinos than we would get back in revenue. Obviously this is
a controversial issue among economists. But I recently talked with the chair of the economics
department at the University of Southern Ohio, Dr. Susan Corbett; and Dr. Corbett said that the
casinos would definitely not bring more jobs or increase tax revenue! That should settle the
issue: Dr. Corbett is one of the top economists in Ohio, and if she says the casinos would not
bring more jobs and more tax revenue, we should accept her claim.
f. Lead poisoning is a major health hazard for children who are exposed to lead in lead-based
paints and from other sources. The dangers from lead were recently confirmed by Dr. Alice
Biagiotti, who is chair of the Manhattan University Medical School Department of Environmental Diseases, and has published dozens of articles on the hazards of lead: She stated that lead
poisoning is one of the major causes of neurological damage to children.
g. Dr. James Solomon is one of the world leaders in nanotechnology, and he heads the Nanotechnology Research Institute at New York University for Science and Technology: Dr. Solomon’s
recent research led to a major breakthrough on microradiation treatments for cancer, and he
shared the Nobel Prize in physics for that accomplishment. Dr. Solomon firmly believes in life
after death, and he maintains that evidence from near-death experiences offers conclusive proof
that life can and does continue after death. When the Nobel Prize winner in physics asserts that
there is life after death, that should settle the issue for all reasonable persons.
2.

How Do You Rule?

Bob Daemmrich / Alamy

Chapter 10

DISTRICT ATTORNEY:
DR. COMPETENT:
DISTRICT ATTORNEY:
DR. COMPETENT:
DISTRICT ATTORNEY:
DEFENSE ATTORNEY:

DISTRICT ATTORNEY:

Jacqueline Ripper is on trial for the murder of
Quincy Victim. She is accused of stabbing Quincy to
death after a bitter argument in a local tavern.
Dr. Constance Competent, a leading authority on the
identification of blood types, is appearing for the
prosecution as an expert witness. She has testified that
the blood on a knife identified as belonging to
Ms. Ripper is the same blood type as that of the late
Mr. Victim.
The prosecution continues its questioning of
Dr. Competent as follows:

Now Dr. Competent, you have carefully examined the blood-stained knife,
state’s exhibit number 3?
Yes, I have.
And you have seen the defendant, Ms. Ripper, here in court?
Certainly.
In your expert judgment, would Ms. Ripper have sufficient strength to use
that knife to inflict a fatal wound on a middle-aged man of average size and
strength?
Objection, your honor. The prosecution is asking for speculation. How
would Dr. Competent know how much strength is required to inflict a
fatal wound, much less how much strength is in the defendant’s arms?
Dr. Competent is no expert in such matters.
Your Honor, I submit that Dr. Competent is well-qualified to answer the question. In the course of her work on identifying blood types, she has examined
many fatal wounds and is thus in an excellent position to testify about such
wounds. I’m sure the jury will want the benefit of the full and unfettered
testimony of such an internationally renowned expert as is Dr. Competent.

152

Chapter 10

Appeal to Authority

Should Dr. Competent be allowed to offer expert testimony in response to the district attorney’s
question? That is, do you sustain the defense objection, or do you overrule and allow
Dr. Competent to answer?
3. Aristotle was one of the greatest philosophers in all history. For over a thousand years, he was
so widely acclaimed that he was often referred to as simply “the Philosopher”: when someone
spoke of “the Philosopher,” everyone knew that meant Aristotle. Aristotle insisted that the path
to virtuous living must be a path of moderation. In seeking to live virtuously, one should always
seek the mean: the virtue of bravery is the mean between rashness and cowardice; the virtue of
thrift is the mean between stinginess and wastefulness; and so on. This doctrine came to be
called the golden mean account of virtue, and many people have found it useful for over
2000 years. Therefore, the life of virtue must be one of careful moderation, avoiding extremes
and excesses on both sides.
How would you evaluate that argument?
4. You go to see your doctor, Dr. Joan Jones, for your annual physical checkup. After all the reports are
back, she sits down with you to discuss your current state of health and how it could be improved.
Dr. Jones lights up a cigarette, takes a deep puff, and starts talking:
Look, you’re in pretty good health. Your blood pressure is good, and you seem to be getting enough
exercise. But you really ought to stop smoking. There have now been many reliable studies—by the
American Cancer Society and others—that show that smoking is the major cause of lung cancer and
that it also greatly increases your chances of developing cancer of the mouth, cancer of the throat,
emphysema, or having a heart attack. You want to avoid cancer and heart attacks, right? Then you
should quit smoking.

What effect should Dr. Jones’s smoking have on your evaluation of what she says?
5. You go to see your doctor, Dr. Sam Smith, for your annual physical checkup. After all the reports are
back, he sits down with you to discuss your current state of health and how it could be improved.
Dr. Smith lights up a cigarette, takes a deep puff, and starts talking:
Look, you’re in pretty good health. Your blood pressure is good, and you seem to be getting enough
exercise. However, you really ought to stop smoking. Listen to me: I’ve seen what smoking does to
people, and it’s not pretty. I’ve watched patients die in agony from lung cancer. Take it from me:
Everyone ought to stop smoking.

What effect should Dr. Smith’s smoking have on your evaluation of what he says?
6.

How Do You Rule?

Bob Daemmrich / Alamy

This is a civil case, in which Dr. Lawrence Logan is
being sued for malpractice. Dr. Logan is an oncologist.
The lawsuit against him is asking for heavy damages on
behalf of Janice Joust, a 35-year-old woman whose
family doctor referred her to Dr. Logan. Dr. Logan
examined her briefly, ran very few tests, and concluded
that she was not suffering from cancer, but instead was
feeling the effects of a lingering bronchial infection;
Dr. Logan assured her that the infection would soon
clear up on its own. Unfortunately, Ms. Joust developed
lung cancer; when she was checked by Dr. Logan it
was—the plaintiff claims—at a very early and treatable
stage that could have been discovered with adequate testing. During the months following, while
the patient received no treatment, the cancer spread throughout her body; by the time Ms. Joust
went to another oncologist, the cancer was far advanced. Ms. Joust underwent several treatments,
but a few months after beginning those treatments she died from the cancer. The witness on the
stand is Dr. Carl Covington, who is also an oncologist, and shares a practice with Dr. Logan and
three other oncologists. Dr. Covington has testified—as an expert witness for the defense—that
Dr. Logan carried out a thorough and professionally competent examination of Ms. Joust; and
that—in Dr. Covington’s professional opinion—Ms. Joust’s cancer had not been present when

Chapter 10

Appeal to Authority

153

she was examined, but had begun at a later date. Now, Dr. Covington is being cross-examined by
the plaintiff’s attorney.
“Dr. Covington, you share a practice with Dr. Logan, is that correct?”
“Yes, with Dr. Logan and three other physicians; the Brightwood Oncology Center.”
“Could you tell me, Dr. Covington, how you manage your malpractice insurance? Do you buy
it individually, or as a group?”
“We purchase malpractice coverage through a group policy; all of the physicians at Brightwood are on the same plan.”
“Did your insurance premiums go up last year?”
“The premiums increase just about every year; you lawyers make sure of that.”
“Was there a particularly big increase in your insurance costs last year?”
“There was a substantial increase, yes.”
“Do you know why there was such an increase, Dr. Covington? Did your insurance agent give
you any reason?”
“He said it was because of all the frivolous malpractice suits you lawyers are filing.”
“Is that what he said, Dr. Covington? Or did he give you a more specific reason? Let me
remind you that you are testifying under oath.”
“He said that part of the increase was because of a malpractice suit that had been filed against
a physician in the practice during the previous year.”
“Who was that physician, Dr. Covington?”
“I was.”
“I see. And what was the result of that malpractice suit that was filed against you?”
“The jury found in favor of the plaintiff.”
“Yes, thank you, Dr. Covington. And what damages did the jury award?”
“One and a quarter million.”
“That’s one and a quarter million dollars?”
“Obviously.”
“And the damages against you were for failing to give additional chemotherapy treatments
that might well have prevented the return of a cancer that resulted in the death of a forty-year-old
mother of three; is that right, Dr. Covington? Is that one of the frivolous cases you were referring to?”
“Your Honor,” the defense counsel rises to object; “counselor is badgering the witness, and
that question is argumentative.”
“I withdraw the question. Now Dr. Covington, what would happen to your malpractice
insurance if the jury reaches a verdict against Dr. Logan? Did your insurer tell you anything
about that?”
“No, nothing that I remember.”
“Let me refresh your memory, Doctor. This is a letter from Northern Medical Insurance,
addressed to Brightwood Oncology. Is that a letter from your malpractice insurer?”
Dr. Covington looks at the letter. “It appears to be.”
“Appearances can be deceiving, Dr. Covington. I’m not asking about appearances. Is that or
is it not a letter from your malpractice insurance company, addressed to your medical practice?”
“Yes, it is.”
“What does that letter say?”
“It says that if the company has to pay another large malpractice settlement on behalf of
Brightwood, that they will double our premiums.”
“They will double your premiums. Tell me, Dr. Covington, how much would your own insurance costs go up, how much more would you have to pay, if this jury decides this case in favor of the
family of Ms. Joust? How much would that cost you out of pocket?”
At this point the attorney for Dr. Logan objects. “Your Honor, these questions are irrelevant.
This case is about the professional work of Dr. Logan. This tiresome talk about medical malpractice
insurance, which is a terrible burden on all physicians, has nothing to do with the issue at hand.”
How do you rule? Will you sustain this objection, or overrule and allow the questions along
this line to continue?

154

Chapter 10

Appeal to Authority

Study and Review on mythinkinglab.com

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What is the fallacy of appeal to authority?
2. Under what conditions is appeal to authority legitimate?
3. What is the fallacy of appeal to popularity? Why is it a fallacy?

NOTES
1
2
3

4
5

6

7
8
9
10
11

Frye v. United States, 293 F. 1010–1019.
Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 61 U.S.L.W. 4801–4812.
There has been much discussion of the Daubert case; for a clear and brief examination of some of the
issues, see an article by Alexander Morgan Capron, “Facts, Values, and Expert Testimony,” in Hastings
Center Report (September–October 1993).
For an excellent discussion of the issues in this case, see Timothy E. Moore, “Scientific Consensus and
Expert Testimony: Lessons from the Judas Priest Trial,” Skeptical Inquirer (November–December 1996).
Peter W. Huber, Galileo’s Revenge (New York: Basic Books, 1991), p. 18; quoted from “From the People
Who Brought You the Twinkie Defense: The Rise of the Expert Witness Industry,” Washington Monthly
(June 1987), p. 33.
For more details, see Chapter 11 of Toxic Sludge is Good for You, by John Stauber and Sheldon Rampton
(Monroe, ME: Common Courage Press, 1995); and an article by Howard Kurtz, “Dr. Whelan’s Media
Operation,” in Columbia Journalism Review (March–April 1990).
Sheldon Rampton and John Stauber, Trust Us, We’re Experts (New York: Tarcher/Putnam, 2001), p. 86.
Ibid, p. 199.
Ibid, p. 256.
164 U.S. 492 (1896).
297 F.2d 754, 759 (5th Cir. 1962).

INTERNET RESOURCES
Some very nice examples of appeal to authority and appeal to popularity can be found at
http://www.cbsd.org/sites/teachers/hs/NMUNROE/Student%20Documents/11-%20Basics%20of%20
Rhetoric%20Unit%20Materials/Fallacies%20pp.pdf.

ADDITIONAL READING
A meticulous and extensive study of appeal to popularity
can be found in Douglas Walton, Appeal to Popular Opinion
(University Park, Pennsylvania: Pennsylvania State University
Press, 1999). For a careful study of expert testimony and
appeal to authority, see Walton’s Appeal to Expert Opinion:
Arguments from Authority (University Park, Pennsylvania:
Pennsylvania State University Press, 1997)
For more on expert testimony, see Testimony: A
Philosophical Study, by C. A. J. Coady (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1992).
For a detailed discussion of the Frye and Daubert
legal standards for expert testimony, see Kenneth R. Foster
and Peter W. Huber, Judging Science: Scientific Knowledge
and the Federal Courts (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press,
1997), especially Chapter 9.
Jeff Chesen, in “Canada’s Use of Expert Witnesses and
Scientific Evidence Admissibility,” is a very clear examination
of the Canadian approach to expert testimony, and the

historical development of that approach. The paper was
published by the National Clearinghouse for Science,
Technology, & the Law, July 2006; it can be found online at
www.ncstl.org/evident/July,%202006.
An interesting and very readable case of conflict
over “expert” testimony—including a helpful analysis of
the standards for expert testimony—is found in Timothy
E. Moore, “Scientific Consensus and Expert Testimony:
Lessons from the Judas Priest Trial,” Skeptical Inquirer,
Vol. 20, no. 6, November/December 1996.
Sheldon Rampton and John Stauber, Trust Us, We’re
Experts! (New York: Tarcher/Putnam, 2001), is a fascinating and in-depth study of how “experts for hire” can be
used to manipulate public opinion.
For an excellent article on how “scientific” studies can
be distorted and manipulated, see “The Secret History of
Lead,” by Jamie Lincoln Kitman, in The Nation (March 20,
2000).

Chapter 10

155

Appeal to Authority

Read the Document on mythinkinglab.com
Andrew Fenton, “Rwanda Is So Hot Right Now.” In this essay,
Fenton examines the question of inconsistency between the
actions and the publicized views of celebrities; a crucial question here will be whether the celebrities are offering arguments (in which case, the character of the arguer—whether
sincere or hypocritical—is irrelevant) or whether they are
presenting their views as based on their own special authority
(in the latter case, their inconsistency or hypocrisy would
raise legitimate questions concerning their special testimony).
Tom Brown Jr., “An Opinion with Substance.” This
is an illustration of a genuine authority, whose expert
opinion is worthy of careful consideration.

Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, 509 U.S. 579
(1993). This is the clearest statement of the current
standard adopted by the U.S. Supreme Court for
dealing with questions of expert witnesses and appeals
to expert authority. It marks a significant change from
the earlier standard; whether it is an improvement—and
whether it ultimately offers a workable standard—
remains a matter of debate (note that in his dissent,
Justice Rehnquist clearly thinks the Daubert standard still
has problems).

Cumulative Exercises One
(Chapters 1 through 10)

The following are examples of the various sorts of arguments we examined in Chapters 1
to 10. Some are fallacious; some are not. For each example, first tell what form the
argument is (such as ad hominem), then determine whether the argument is or is not
fallacious. So for each argument, you should write something like this: fallacious appeal
to authority or nonfallacious ad hominem.
As a brief guide, these are the argument forms that may be included in these exercises:
Ad hominem: sometimes a fallacy, sometimes not
Inverse ad hominem: sometimes a fallacy, sometimes not
Strawman: always a fallacy
Irrelevant reason (or red herring): always a fallacy
Appeal to ignorance: always a fallacy
Ambiguity: always a fallacy
Appeal to authority: sometimes a fallacy, sometimes not
Appeal to popularity: always a fallacy
Appeal to tradition (traditional wisdom): always a fallacy
1. Philosophy courses are very valuable for all college students. After all, if students do not take
philosophy, then philosophy professors would lose their job. And since philosophy professors
have no other marketable skills, and many are old and run down, most of them would not be able
to find another job, and their children would go hungry, and they would lose their homes, and
their families would be destitute. So obviously philosophy is a useful and beneficial course for all
students.
2. Ever since the comets crashed into Jupiter a few years ago, some people have been afraid that a
comet might strike Earth, with cataclysmic consequences. There is, of course, a very small danger of
that; but the chances are very small. I have talked with Dr. Alice McGovern, professor of Astronomy
at Harvard University, who assured me that given the vast distances in space and the relatively tiny
size of Earth, the likelihood of a comet striking Earth any time in the next five centuries is very small
indeed. When I called Dr. Seth Zarech, scientific director of NASA, he agreed with Dr. McGovern.
And Dr. George Maravich, who is chair of the Astronomy Department at the University of Michigan,
said exactly the same thing. So obviously there is very little risk of Earth being struck by a comet
anytime in the near future.

156

Cumulative Exercises One (Chapters 1 through 10)

157

3. During the recent intensive debate over health-care reform, Sarah Palin argued that the proposed
reforms were bad, because they would involve setting up death panels that could decide to kill any
elderly patients who were admitted to hospitals. Some people said her argument was not a good
argument: that it committed the strawman fallacy, and distorted the position it criticized. But in fact
Palin’s argument was a good argument, because it was successful in convincing many people to
oppose health-care reform, and that was Palin’s goal.
4. Fifty dollars is missing from the store cash register. Laura Ring was working at that cash register for
part of the day, and someone suggested that Laura might have stolen the money. Well, I don’t know
what happened to that money: maybe it was lost, or someone made a mistake making change, or
whatever. But I do know this: Laura certainly did not steal the $50. I have known Laura for over
10 years, and she is one of the most honest, high-principled people I have ever known. George
Washington would tell a lie before Laura would, and it would never even occur to her to steal
money. When Laura tells you something, you can count on it. And when Laura does a job, she does
it honestly and to the best of her ability. She is completely trustworthy, and honest through and
through; and she certainly is no thief.
5. Some people complain about the profits being raked in by the major oil companies: Exxon made a
profit of 8 billion dollars in the last quarter, and Chevron made 4 billion. They claim that the oil
companies are making enormous and unfair profits, while we consumers are paying painfully high
prices for gasoline. But no one should take their criticisms seriously. Apparently they believe that
people in the oil industry should work for free, and that investors in Exxon and Chevron have no
right to make a profit on their investment. They think that all profits are wrong, and that no
company should ever make a profit for its work. They apparently want to abolish capitalism
altogether, and do away with our free enterprise system.
6. There may be many opinions about music; but we can settle right now the question of what was the
greatest piece of music ever written. Yesterday I heard a lecture by Fyodor Smirnoff, the music
director and conductor of the Moscow Symphony Orchestra. Smirnoff is not only a great conductor, but is also a wonderful composer and an expert on musical history. In his lecture, Smirnoff
asserted that Mozart’s 23rd Symphony is the greatest single piece of music ever written. That should
settle the issue once and for all: if Smirnoff says Mozart’s 23rd Symphony is the greatest music ever
written, then it must be the greatest.
7. There are some people who favor a ban on trophy hunting. That is, some want to ban the hunting
of lions, bears, elephants, and tigers for trophies. But trophy hunting has been a sport enjoyed
for many decades by trophy hunters. All through the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, trophy
hunting has been regarded as an exciting, legitimate, and morally acceptable sport, and so
trophy hunting should certainly not be banned or condemned.
8. Melba Martin has been arguing that more efforts and money should be invested in cleaning up the
Mahoning River. She points out that the pollution of the river poses health hazards, and that if the
river were cleaned up, it would become a valuable recreational resource, and if the river were clean
then restaurants and other businesses would probably be built along the river in Youngstown, just
as happened with the Flats in Cleveland, and that could lead to the revitalization of the Youngstown
urban area. Her arguments sound pretty good, when you first hear them. But then I discovered that
Melba owns some land along the southern Mahoning River, and if the river is cleaned up then
her property will substantially increase in value. So I can’t really give much weight to Melba’s
arguments.
9. The defense has claimed that Melissa Johnson is not guilty of murder, because she shot her husband by accident, and unintentionally. Her husband, Art Johnson, returned a day early from a business trip, arriving in the middle of the night. He didn’t turn on the lights, because he apparently
didn’t want to awaken his wife. When Melissa heard someone enter the house, she thought it was a
burglar; there had been burglaries in the neighborhood, and she was terrified. So when she saw her
husband’s dark figure in the hallway, she aimed her pistol at him and pulled the trigger, thinking it
was an intruder who might harm or even kill her. But notice this, ladies and gentlemen of the jury:
when Melissa picked up that pistol, aimed it, and pulled the trigger, she definitely intended to shoot
the person she saw in the hallway. That person happened to be her husband; and so clearly you
must conclude that she intentionally shot and killed her husband.
10. Art claims that the reason Julie made the dean’s honor list is that she buys all her papers from an Internet term paper service. He said he saw her credit card bill, and it had hundreds of dollars of
charges to TermPaperPro.Com. But you should keep in mind that Julie and Art used to be lovers,
and last year Julie dumped Art, and Art has hated her ever since. And besides, Julie has always

158

Cumulative Exercises One (Chapters 1 through 10)

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

made better grades than Art, and he’s really jealous of her. And Art has been known to spread false
rumors about other people he doesn’t like. So I would be really skeptical of what Art says about Julie.
Some people claim that McDonald’s promotes bad eating habits: they target children in their
advertising and provide toys that reward children, even toddlers, for eating high-fat hamburgers
and fries and high-sugar soft drinks; and those childhood eating habits tend to carry over into adulthood. But such criticisms of McDonald’s are nonsense. After all, McDonald’s provides clean, safe
restaurants where the whole family can enjoy themselves together, local McDonald’s restaurants
often sponsor little league teams and youth soccer leagues, and lots of high school students get
valuable experience in their first real jobs at McDonald’s. So there is no basis for the claim that
McDonald’s promotes unhealthy eating habits.
Recently there has been fierce debate over the best way of preventing and controlling crime, with
some experts pushing for more educational, prevention, and early-intervention programs, and less
use of prison sentences. But former U.S. attorney general Edwin Meese asserts that the best way to
stop juvenile crime is through a get-tough policy that treats young offenders very harshly, giving
them long prison sentences in adult prisons. Attorney General Meese has dealt with issues of justice
and crime for many years, and as attorney general he served as the top law enforcement officer of
the United States; so Meese’s program of getting tough on juvenile offenders must be the best way
of handling that problem.
The U.S. Congress has recently passed legislation that allows people to be held in jail for longer
periods when they have not been convicted of crimes, allows the government to tap into phone
lines and listen in on private conversations almost without restriction, and even suspends the basic
right of trial by jury for some types of crimes. Some people say that these are an assault on our basic
rights and that such policies threaten our liberties. But in fact these policies do not threaten our
basic rights and liberties. For these are desperate and dangerous times, and the threat of terrorism
is very real. Indeed, we are now in a full war against terrorism. So these new policies obviously do
not pose a threat to our basic rights and liberties.
Bill Gates, the chairman of Microsoft, argues that every U.S. citizen should have access to a computer and to the Internet. He points out that the Internet is a very important source of information,
and that if some people do not have access to the Internet they will be left out of the information
age, and they will not have equal opportunity for success. Access to the Internet, Gates argues, is just
a matter of giving everyone fair opportunity. But you should realize that as the chairman and major
owner of Microsoft, Bill Gates obviously stands to make more money as more people use computers and start using the Internet. In fact, the more people use computers and the Internet, the richer
Bill Gates will become. So Gates’s arguments are not really that convincing when you understand
the financial stake he has in them.
Former President Jimmy Carter argued that we should not rush into a war with Iraq. He said that as
the strongest nation in the world, we should set a good example for the rest of the world in showing how to resolve conflicts peacefully. He also noted that the Middle East is already a very unstable
region, and a war there would only increase tensions and perhaps lead to a wider war. And I say we
should have accepted former President Carter’s argument: after all, he has enormous foreign policy experience, and his years of working with Habitat for Humanity instead of using his fame for his
own selfish gains show that he is a person who has dedicated himself to making the world better.
Some people argue that we should stop doing medical tests on chimpanzees: they say that
chimpanzees are very sensitive animals, closely related to humans; they suffer pain just as we do,
and suffer severe depression when kept in isolation, and that it is wrong to inflict suffering on such
sensitive animals, especially when we have other means of running medical tests that would not
impose such suffering on these highly intelligent animals so closely related to ourselves. But we
should pay no attention to the complaints of these anti-science zealots. They want to put an end to
all scientific research, and stop all scientific progress. If they had their way, we would never make
any advances in medical treatment.
This makes me so mad. Jeff’s paper won the Philosophy Department Langston Prize for outstanding undergraduate paper, an award of $500. I should have won that prize. Jeff’s paper was
plagiarized! I just know it was. Okay, I couldn’t find the source he copied it from, and I can’t really
prove he stole that paper. But it’s clear that he did. After all, he couldn’t prove that he wrote it
himself. He said he typed it on his computer, and revised as he went, and so there’s no old version
of the paper. Sounds very suspicious to me! He has no proof at all that he didn’t steal the paper, and
so obviously that’s exactly what he did.

Cumulative Exercises One (Chapters 1 through 10)

159

18. Al Gore argues that we must take steps to reduce pollution: he argues that unless we significantly
reduce pollution we’ll face major problems of global warming, flooding, and severe food shortages.
But it turns out that Al Gore often travels in a private jet, and private jet travel causes major
pollution problems, and in terms of pollution it is one of the worst methods of travel. As long as Al
Gore travels in private jets, there’s no reason to take his arguments against pollution seriously.
19. Bobby Parks claims that some of the university librarians are plotting to kill him. He says that one
afternoon while he was downstairs looking for a book, he overheard four librarians discussing a
plan to poison him. Unfortunately, however, Bobby is addicted to amphetamines, and amphetamine addicts often become nervous and paranoid and fearful of everyone around them. So I
certainly don’t place much confidence in Bobby’s claims that the librarians are trying to kill him.
20. Look, we all agree that Bruce is an honest person, who always tells the truth. So when Bruce says
that he saw extraterrestrials land on Glenwood Avenue, he was telling the truth. Therefore, it must
be true that there were extraterrestrials landing on Glenwood Avenue.
21. One proposal to pay for expanding health care is a special tax of 1% on all income over
$250,000/year for individuals or $500,000 a year for couples. But what those people who are
proposing that tax really want is to tax away all wealth whatsoever, and make everyone in America
exactly equal in income. If they get their way, no one in this country will be wealthy, and no American
child can ever again dream of becoming wealthy.
22. State Senator Owens recently argued that we should increase the state tobacco tax in North
Carolina. He pointed out that North Carolina has the lowest tobacco tax in the country and that
much-needed revenue for our schools could be gained through adding a small state tax of 3 cents
a pack on cigarettes. Well, as everyone knows, the tobacco industry is very powerful in North
Carolina, and it strongly opposes any increase in tobacco taxes. By arguing for an increase in the
tobacco tax, Senator Owens bravely risked offending all the tobacco farmers and tobacco manufacturing workers in the state, as well as all the smokers. It takes a lot of courage for a senator to
argue for such a controversial position, and any politician showing that much courage and conviction must be giving strong arguments.
23. Oysters are an effective aphrodisiac: Eating oysters will improve your love life and make you more
passionate. That is clearly true, since there is no scientific evidence that conclusively proves that
eating oysters does not improve your love life and increase passion.
24. Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, you have heard the chief prosecution witness swear that he saw
the defendant running from the burglarized store the night of the burglary. But don’t believe a
word of it! After all, that witness has himself been convicted of burglary charges, and he is testifying
against the defendant in hopes that the defendant will be convicted and he (the witness) will therefore no longer be a suspect in this burglary.
25. Some people claim that it is important that a defendant be allowed to have his lawyer present at any
lineup in which the defendant participates, so that the lawyer can guard against unfair lineups. But
in fact defendants do not really need lawyers present at lineups. For, in the first place, if the defendant’s lawyer has to be called in before the lineup, then that will take lots of time and probably will
cause delays in setting up the lineup, and it will thus increase the workload of our already
overworked police forces. And besides, since many defendants cannot afford attorneys and instead
have court-appointed attorneys or public defenders, that would greatly increase the cost to taxpayers, since it would be the taxpayers who would have to pay for the time the defendant’s lawyer
spends at the lineup. So lawyers are not really needed to guarantee that the defendant is not placed
in an unfair lineup.
26. Dr. Stanley Steamer has told us that there is no reason to worry about nuclear power. He says that
he has studied nuclear power carefully and is an expert on all the possible hazards as well as safety
features of nuclear power plants. He also says that he can absolutely guarantee that nuclear power
plants currently operated in the United States are not dangerous. But in fact it turns out that
Dr. Steamer was recently fired from his teaching position at the University of Nebraska when it was
discovered that he had falsified research data and lied about his graduate work (his doctorate is in
American history, not, as he had claimed, in nuclear physics). Well, so much for Dr. Steamer’s
assurances about the safety of nuclear power!
27. Ronald Shelby has been accused of bribing a city engineer in order to get a paving contract in New
York City. You heard him testify that he did not know any elected officials in New York City; but now
we have evidence that Mario Tucomia, an elected city councilman for Manhattan, was one of
Ronald’s high school classmates, from 15 years ago, at their Queens high school: Ronald and Mario

160

Cumulative Exercises One (Chapters 1 through 10)

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

were on the same basketball team. Ronald says that he lost track of Mario over the years, and had
no idea that Mario had been elected to the city council. Maybe so. But one thing is clear. Ronald
definitely knows Mario Tucomia; so when Ronald testified that he didn’t know any New York City
elected officials, he lied under oath.
The gene for baldness is a recessive gene. That question was settled when we called James Watson,
professor of Genetics at Harvard and winner of the Nobel Prize for his work on genetics, who stated
that the gene for baldness is indeed recessive.
Governor Fob James of Alabama supports corporal punishment in schools, and backed state legislation allowing public schools to use spanking as punishment. Replying to critics (who cited studies
showing that spanking is strongly associated with antisocial behavior in children), the governor’s
spokesman, Alfred Sawyer, defended corporal punishment thus: “It’s a time-tested method of
discipline. It’s been used for thousands of years by parents and teachers” (Reported by Brenda
Coleman, Associated Press, August 18, 1997).
Wendell Sly is the worst candidate for governor in this century. When he was a U.S. Senator he was
twice censured by the Senate for misusing his office for personal financial gain; and 8 years ago he
was convicted of insurance fraud for faking an automobile accident; and just last year he was
disbarred (lost his license to practice law) because he used a client’s money for his own investments.
He is not a person who can be trusted with the public confidence and the public treasury.
There is concern about the current push to release patients from hospitals more rapidly. Patients
undergoing heart surgery, mastectomies, and other major surgeries are sent home days earlier than
they would have been a few years ago, and some people claim that such early hospital releases
reduce the quality of patient care and pose a risk to patient health. But in fact the earlier releases
do not pose any risk for patient health. Keeping patients in hospitals is enormously expensive, and
every day in a hospital drives the cost of treatment higher and higher. And we have to find ways of
getting our health-care costs under control, so that both insurance rates and government expenditures on health care can be kept to a reasonable level. And releasing hospital patients earlier is one
way of reducing our high medical costs. So clearly the early release of patients does not threaten the
health of patients.
Some people are opposed to the planned missile defense system—the “Star Wars” system—that is
designed to intercept and destroy any missiles that are launched against the United States. Those
opponents of the system say it has never been tested effectively, that it would be very easy to overwhelm with dummy missiles, and that the real danger is not from missiles launched from outside
the United States but instead from bombs smuggled into the United States. But those people who
oppose the missile defense system don’t live in the real world. They believe that we should never do
anything to protect ourselves from attacks. They would just watch while missiles fall on our cities,
and never fight back and do nothing to prevent it. Apparently they think that the world is safe and
peaceful, and the United States is not in any danger of attack from anyone.
Arthur Kraft has been arguing that the Olympic Games have become overcommercialized. He says
that having all the manufacturers of soft drinks, cameras, sportswear, and even junk foods promote
themselves as “official sponsors of the 2008 Olympics” cheapens the games, and he argues that selling
the rights to carry the Olympic torch across the country was a new low in crass commercialization
of the Olympics. But Arthur Kraft’s arguments against overcommercialization of the Olympics are
not convincing: He himself is Vice President of Marketing for Belch Brewery, which makes Spring
Mountain Beer, and Spring Mountain Beer heavily advertised that it is “the favorite beer of America’s
Olympic athletes”!
There are literally millions of stars in our galaxy, and many of them must have planets similar to our
own Earth. Since obviously we have not investigated all of those stars and planets, we certainly
cannot conclude that none of them contains intelligent life. So there must be intelligent life elsewhere in our galaxy.
Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, it is now up to you to decide whether to find the defendant guilty
or not guilty of the charges against him. As you consider your verdict, bear in mind the vicious
nature of the crime with which the defendant is charged. He is accused of stabbing to death an
elderly woman in order to rob her of her life savings. That crime was one of the most vicious murders ever committed in this state. Thus I urge you to return a verdict of guilty.
The chairman of the Northeast Ohio Sierra Club, Brian Ulm, has argued that we should not change
the Endangered Species Act, because through the act we have been able to bring 267 species back
from the brink of extinction, and the cost has not been excessive: He notes that fewer than one

Cumulative Exercises One (Chapters 1 through 10)

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.
42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

161

construction project in 200 is stopped because of enforcement of the Endangered Species Act; and
he argues that that is not too great a price to pay for preserving species and environments for future
generations. But Ulm’s arguments shouldn’t carry much weight: He is just the spokesperson for a
bunch of environmental extremists who really don’t care about economic progress and job
creation, and who are just sounding alarms so they can recruit more members and raise more
money.
The New York Yankees won the World Series, but they did it by cheating: they paid off the umpires
to make sure all the calls went in favor of the Yankees. OK, I don’t have any solid proof that the
Yankees bribed the umpires; but, the Yankees have never offered any proof whatsoever that they did
not bribe the umpires; in fact, they have never denied or answered my charges of cheating. So unless
they can prove that they didn’t pay off the umpires, it is only reasonable to conclude that they did.
James Cash has argued that Central Power’s electric rates are too high: that Central Power’s profits
are excessive and that Central Power could save money through more efficient operation, and thus
that Central Power ought to lower its rates to consumers. And James Cash actually owns a lot of
Central Power stock, and would himself profit from higher electric rates; therefore, obviously James
Cash is unselfishly arguing against his own financial interests, and we should accept his argument
and his conclusion.
The United States still allows capital punishment; but we are almost alone in the world in still using
capital punishment. Canada, Australia, Mexico, all countries in Europe, and all the countries in
South America have abolished capital punishment; and it is obviously time for the United States to
also abolish capital punishment.
Some people are skeptical of astrology and astrological predictions, but obviously there is at least
some truth to astrology, since none of the skeptics has been able to conclusively prove that all forms
of astrology are completely wrong.
Some people are skeptical of astrology and astrological predictions, but obviously there is at least
some truth to astrology, since astrologers and astrology have been around for well over 2,000 years.
Recently there has been great concern about the number of concussions suffered by football
players, and the long-term health effects of repeated concussions for football players. But there is
really no health danger from playing football. After all, football is a wonderful sport that brings
together old friends at tailgate parties, brings alumni back to campus to see their old classmates and
cheer for the home team, and it is lots of fun for kids from peewee football all the way through
college. So this stuff about the health dangers from playing football is just nonsense.
Chanelle argues that we should stop using animals as research subjects, because it involves cruelty
to animals, the research is often unreliable because some chemicals cause little or no harm to
laboratory animals but are very harmful to humans, and by using in vitro cellular studies and computer simulations we can effectively replace animal studies; and above all, Chanelle argues, it is simply wrong to use other living beings that are capable of pleasure and pain for our selfish purposes.
But Chanelle’s arguments are ridiculous; she often wears leather shoes, she always carries a beautiful leather bag, and she frequently wears a leather vest and an expensive leather jacket—not to
mention the beautiful hand-tooled leather seats in her sports car! Unless the animals that provided
the leather for Chanelle’s jacket and shoes and bag donated their skins to Chanelle happily and
voluntarily, Chanelle’s argument against using animals for research is a hypocritical failure.
The Mayan calendar predicts the end of the world in 2012. A lot of people are skeptical: they doubt
that the Mayan calendar is a reliable source. Well, before you make any plans for 2013, just remember this: No one has been able to prove that the Mayan prediction is not accurate. And until someone offers that proof, we should accept the Mayan calendar as an accurate prediction of the end of
the world.
Women in the United States have always taken their husbands’ family names when they married. So
why shouldn’t women today do so? If it was good enough for our mothers and grandmothers, it
ought to be good enough for women today. So contemporary women who want to keep their own
names after marriage are obviously wrong.
Whatever you do, don’t get stuck at a dinner party with Bruce Waller as your dinner companion. He
tells these incredibly long-winded and boring stories about horse racing, his table manners resemble a shark in a feeding frenzy, and he drinks too much and then becomes obnoxious and insulting.
Gary Aldrich wrote Unlimited Access: An FBI Agent Inside the Clinton White House. In the book, Aldrich
claims that Bill Clinton frequently slipped out of the White House in a car driven by one of his aides.
Clinton would supposedly hide in the back seat, covered by a blanket, while the car was driven to a

162

Cumulative Exercises One (Chapters 1 through 10)

48.

49.

50.

51.

Marriott Hotel, where Clinton would meet a woman for late-night affairs. When Aldrich was
challenged to provide proof for this story by George Will (on ABC-TV), Aldrich stuck by his story,
offering the following support for his belief in the truth of the rumor that he had heard and on
which he had based his account: He accepted it as true because “I was unable to knock down that
possibility” that the story might be true.
Opponents of capital punishment sometimes claim that there is a danger that innocent people will
be executed. But that is not really a danger. After all, our society is swamped with violent, vicious
crimes, and we must have strong measures in response. Swift and severe punishment is essential to
control crime and to properly express society’s deep disgust with the most vicious and depraved
criminal acts. So there is no real danger of executing the innocent.
I suppose there will always be disagreement about which movies are best, but the question of what
is the best American movie ever made should no longer be in doubt. Carolyn Ponder teaches film
at the University of Michigan—in fact, she holds the Wickliffe Chair of film studies at the University,
and is a highly regarded scholar and critic—and she has written several excellent books on films,
and American films are her specialty. She states in her most recent book that she considers Days of
Heaven to be the best American film ever made. That settles it. If Professor Ponder says that Days
of Heaven is the best American film, then it must be so.
Representative Henry Hyde argued that President Clinton—in having an affair and trying to cover
it up—was guilty of perjury and obstruction of justice, and that his crimes undermined the dignity
of and trust in the presidency, and that the only way to uphold our basic principle of equal justice
for all would be to convict the president and remove him from office. But then it turns out that
Henry Hyde himself had a long-term affair, and had been lying about it for years. Besides, what
Hyde was really interested in was removing a popular Democratic president from office so that the
Republicans (Hyde’s own party) would have a better chance of winning future elections. So the
arguments of this self-serving hypocrite shouldn’t carry much weight with anyone.
The British monarchy has been under attack during recent years, with one tabloid-reported
scandal followed by another. The monarchy was defended by Prince Philip, the Duke of Edinburgh,
as follows:
The British monarchy has been around for the last thousand years. If it’s lasted that long, it can’t be
all that bad.

52. We should not allow wastewater containing mercury to be discharged near our reservoir. After all,
mercury poses a very serious and long-term health hazard: Dr. Elizabeth Tarski, professor of
Environmental Health at Harvard Medical School, says that mercury pollution is one of the most
severe threats to public water supplies; Dr. Warren Jacobs, scientific director of the Hazardous
Wastes Division of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, says that mercury is especially
dangerous to children, and that water pollution is a main source of mercury poisoning; and
Dr. Laura Systra, recent Nobel Prize winner in biochemistry, asserts that mercury and lead are the
greatest environmental hazards to our water supplies.
53. Everybody seems to be all upset about how much money is being given to politicians for political
campaigns, and how that money gains special influence and special favors for the contributors. But
politicians collecting money in such a way is not really a bad thing: that’s just how the system works.
Members of Congress get money from corporations, state legislators receive money from local
businesses, presidential candidates get money from everywhere. And it’s not just in the United
States. The same thing happens in Europe, in Latin America, in South America; and it’s very common throughout Asia. In short, everywhere you find politicians, you find people and corporations
giving them money and expecting favors and special consideration in return. There’s nothing
wrong with it: that’s just the way the system works, all across the United States and around the world,
from the smallest town council elections to the largest presidential campaign.
54. Naming sports teams “Indians” or “Braves” or “Redskins” cannot really be offensive and demeaning
to anyone or any group. After all, spectator sports are good, wholesome family entertainment.
Sports teams are sources of great school and community pride, and sports teams often enhance the
sense of community of the schools or cities that they represent.
55. You remember we were arguing about who painted the beautiful frescoes in the Sistine Chapel? Joe
said it was Leonardo da Vinci, and Jane said it was Michelangelo. Well, Jane was right: my art history
professor, Dr. Reynolds, said it was Michelangelo; and when I looked up Michelangelo in the
Encyclopaedia Britannica, the Britannica article on Michelangelo agreed with Dr. Reynolds.

Cumulative Exercises One (Chapters 1 through 10)

163

56. I believe we have to find the defendant guilty as charged. Look, I’m not sure that the evidence that
he committed the murder is all that strong. But there’s one thing I just can’t get around: If the
defendant didn’t murder Joe, then who did? After all, the defendant did have a motive; and the
defense was not able to suggest anyone else who had a motive for killing Joe. So if you have doubts
about the defendant being guilty of killing poor Joe, answer me one thing: Who did it? Someone
certainly did, and since the defense couldn’t suggest any better suspect—in fact, could not think of
any other suspect at all—I think we have to conclude that the defendant is guilty as charged.
57. As members of the jury, we have to decide whether the defendant, Brendan O’Malley, is guilty of
arson. Look at the case against Brendan: the key evidence was given by Andrew Johnston, who was
Brendan’s cellmate at the local jail. Andrew swore that Brendan told him about planning the arson,
and about how he needed the insurance money. But can you really trust Andrew? After all, he was in
jail because he was guilty of credit card fraud, passing bad checks, and receiving stolen merchandise—
so his honesty and integrity are certainly open to serious doubt. And his motive for testifying against
Brendan is his hope of getting a reduced sentence for his own crimes, so he obviously has a strong
incentive to make up a story. Thus there are strong reasons to doubt Andrew’s testimony; and if you
have doubts about that testimony, then how can you possibly find Brendan guilty?
58. There is often disagreement about the details of what diet is best for your health. But there are
some truths about diet that are now well established, and the most basic is this: You should eat
several servings of fresh fruits and vegetables every day. That is the unanimous recommendation of
the American Heart Association, the U.S. Department of Health, the Surgeon General, the
Canadian Ministry for Health, and the faculty of the Harvard Institute for Public Health. So it is
clear that eating a diet rich in fruits and vegetables is good for you.
59. Jim Cohan runs a business based in Los Angeles that provides organ transplants in such places as
the Philippines, Mexico, Korea, and other third-world countries. The transplants are available to
any one who can pay for them—but they are not covered by insurance, and are very expensive
(approximately $200,000 for each operation). Some people are concerned that the organs are
being transplanted from third-world peasants into very wealthy Americans, and that desperately
poor people may sell a kidney to support their families, and the very wealthy then receive the
purchased kidney. Cohan does not find that troubling. As he states, “That goes on everywhere. It
goes on in this country, and it goes on elsewhere. That’s how it is.” (This example is based on a
column by Joe Dirck in the June 28, 1994, Cleveland Plain Dealer.)

11

❖❖❖

Arguments by Analogy

Listen to the Chapter Audio on mythinkinglab.com
Analogies are common, useful, and confusing. Helpful as analogies can be, they often
cause problems. The problems start with the different types of analogies. There are at least
three distinct and different uses of analogy, each serving a different purpose. The
figurative analogy draws a picture, and is designed to provide a clearer and simpler
perspective on a confusing or complicated subject. A good figurative analogy can be very
valuable, but it is not an argument, and it must not be used or evaluated as if it were an
argument. In contrast, a deductive argument by analogy certainly is an argument, and it can
have powerful reasons for its conclusion. If you offer an effective deductive argument by
analogy, then your argument carries all the strength and certainty of a sound deductive
argument: given the truth of the premises of a good deductive argument by analogy, the
conclusion must follow. Finally, it is important not to confuse figurative analogies and
deductive arguments by analogy with a third type of analogy: the inductive argument by
analogy. Inductive arguments by analogy are useful analogical arguments, and we often
employ them in our day-to-day reasoning; but they do not establish their conclusions with
the knockdown certainty of deductive arguments by analogy. That does not make inductive
arguments by analogy inferior to deductive arguments by analogy: They function well in
many contexts. But it does mean that inductive arguments by analogy must be carefully
distinguished from deductive analogy arguments, and also from figurative analogies (which
are not arguments at all).

FIGURATIVE ANALOGY
Before attempting to evaluate an analogy, you must first decide what sort of analogy it is, and
what task that analogy is designed to perform. Just as there are different types of boats
designed for different purposes, there are different types of analogies with very different
functions. A sailboat, a fishing boat, and a ferry boat are all useful boats, but for very different tasks. Jill’s sailboat is perfect for an afternoon of sailing in the bay, but if we are going
fishing we’ll be much happier with Kareem’s fishing boat. Neither will be of much use in
ferrying cars across the inlet, but both perform well when used for the right purposes.

164

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

165

The above paragraph contains an analogy. It draws an analogy between the
functions of boats and the functions of analogies. But notice that the boat analogy is not
an argument: It’s an illustration, a picture. It compares analogies with boats, in hopes of
elucidating the way analogies work. It does not argue, but it does explain.
A more elaborate example of a figurative (illustrative) analogy is the comparison
of Freud’s theory of neuroses with steam escaping from a steam boiler. Freud claimed
that neuroses (such as compulsive hand washing, or a compulsion to check that all the
doors are locked) result from a buildup of frustrated desires; when those desires can
find no productive outlet, they are released through nonproductive neurotic behavior.
The situation is somewhat like (here is the figurative analogy) the buildup of steam in
a steam engine. When the steam pressure cannot be converted into productive force
(to drive a piston), excessive steam builds up in the boiler. Either the boiler explodes
or the steam is released unproductively through safety valves and tiny cracks in the
boiler. Just as the steam escapes from the boiler to prevent the boiler from exploding,
so excessive psychological pressure is released through neuroses to keep the psyche
from cracking up.
This is a fairly helpful figurative analogy. It gives us a useful way of visualizing, organizing, and understanding Freud’s rather complex and difficult theory of the neuroses.
But, it does not provide any reason to accept Freud’s theory; it does not offer an argument
in favor of Freud’s theory. The analogy may make Freud’s theory more understandable,
but it does not make it more plausible. So it would be a mistake to accept a theory or claim
because of a particularly good figurative analogy, and it would be a mistake to claim that a
theory or position is true on the basis of a figurative analogy. On the other hand, if
someone gives a figurative analogy, it would also be a mistake to fault that analogy because
it is not an argument. It may be a good figurative analogy without being an argument.
(That would be like—figurative analogy—faulting Jill’s sailboat because it can’t ferry cars
across a river.)
You will occasionally hear it said that analogies never prove anything. That is true, if
it is said of figurative analogies. Figurative analogies do not prove anything because, as
noted above, they do not present arguments. However, there are some types of analogy
that certainly do present arguments and do prove things. One such type will be called
deductive arguments by analogy.

DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENT BY ANALOGY
Consider this example of deductive argument by analogy:
We would think it wrong for creatures from outer space, vastly more intelligent than humans,
to inflict pain on us in raising humans for the luxury of grilled human. So analogously, it is
wrong for us to inflict pain on animals (in raising and killing them for luxury food) just
because we are more intelligent than they are.

That is an argument by analogy, and not merely an illustration. How does the argument
work?
As always, the first step is to pick out the conclusion: It is wrong to inflict pain on
animals in raising them for food (food that is not essential for life). What is the argument
for that conclusion?
It starts by pointing out something that (it is assumed) we all accept: It would be
wrong for superintelligent space invaders to cause human suffering by raising humans for
slaughter. Next we ask, Why do we believe that would be wrong? This is the tricky part. The
principle behind this analogy is not stated explicitly. In fact, there may be disagreement
about the exact principle behind the argument. But the principle might be stated thus:
Beings of superior intelligence are not justified in inflicting suffering on less intelligent

166

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

species in raising them for nonessential food products. The analogy is powerful because if
we believe that, then we are also compelled to conclude that it is wrong for humans to
cause the suffering of less intelligent species (such as cattle) to provide the luxury of steaks
for humans. That is, the same reason we think it would be wrong for superintelligent space
invaders to raise us for their barbecues can also be applied to the case of humans raising
animals of lower intelligence for our steak houses.1 The argument claims that causing pain
and death to animals is similar to—analogous to—having some intellectually superior space
invaders cause pain and death to humans. We all agree that it would be wrong for these
superior invaders to raise us for slaughter. Thus, in order to be consistent we must conclude
that it is also wrong for us to inflict suffering on animals of lower intelligence by raising
them for slaughter.
Let’s look at exactly how that argument goes. It might be outlined in the following
manner:
It would be wrong for superintelligent space invaders to cause humans to suffer by raising
humans for slaughter.
The reason it would be wrong is because it is wrong for one group to inflict unnecessary
suffering on another group just because the former has more intelligence than the latter.
Therefore, it is wrong for humans to inflict unnecessary suffering on other, less intelligent
species by raising them for slaughter.

Is that a good argument? Is that deductive argument by analogy sound? When evaluating
deductive arguments by analogy, you must consider two distinct questions: First, is the
principle behind the analogy true? Second, is it a good analogy (i.e., do both cases fit
under the principle)? Consider first how one might challenge this deductive argument by
analogy by challenging the principle:
That’s a good analogy, but I cannot agree with the principle to which you appeal. I agree that
humans eating beef animals is like space invaders of superior intelligence eating humans,
and if the latter is wrong, then the former is also wrong. But I don’t think either would be
wrong. If there are beings of superior intelligence, then they have a right to inflict suffering
on human beings as they raise us for luxury food; by the same token, humans have the right
to raise less intelligent species for luxury food. In short, it may be a good analogy, but I reject
the principle on which it depends.

If a person is challenging the principle behind the deductive argument by analogy, then as
soon as we say, “It would be wrong for superintelligent space invaders to raise humans for
their human burgers,” that challenger will respond: “Stop right there; I don’t agree with that.
If the invaders are more intelligent than humans, then it would be right for them to slaughter humans.” If someone takes that line then the game is up for that analogy. There may or
may not be other arguments that we could use to convince such a person that it is wrong to
raise and kill animals for food, but this deductive argument by analogy will not help. And that
brings out the limits of deductive arguments by analogy. Such an argument can remind people quite forcefully of principles they already hold, and use of an appropriate analogy can
compel people to recognize that the principles they hold apply in ways they had not considered, such as: “I don’t think that superior intelligence gives one the right to inflict suffering
on others, so I need to rethink my attitude toward other species.” But if someone rejects the
principle behind the analogy, then the argument by deductive analogy will be a nonstarter.
Deductive arguments by analogy do not argue for the principle; rather, they are concerned
with the further implications of a principle that (it is hoped) we all share.
So the first way of rejecting a deductive argument by analogy is to reject the principle
to which the analogy appeals. But there is a second way—perhaps more common—of
rejecting deductive arguments by analogy. One can claim that the analogy is a bad analogy:
The two cases are significantly different and are not really analogous. That is, one can claim
that the two cases do not in fact fit under or point to the same principle. Consider again the

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

167

Losing an Argument with My Kids
When driving on a trip with my kids, I would often be
asked, “How much farther is it, Daddy?” On one occasion I assured them it would only be a few more
minutes, be patient. They watched the clock as the
minutes passed: 5, 10, 15. We still had not arrived.
Finally, after 30 minutes, our destination came in sight.

“I thought you said it would only be a few minutes.”
“Well, that was only a few minutes,” I replied. My kids
were not buying it. “Thirty minutes is not a few minutes.
Suppose we asked if we could eat a few cookies, and you
said okay, and then we ate 30 cookies, would you count
that as just eating a few cookies?”

analogy between extraterrestrials of superior intelligence raising and slaughtering humans,
and humans raising and slaughtering animals of still lower intelligence. Someone might
claim it is not a good analogy, because even if the extraterrestrials have much more intelligence than do humans, that is still only a higher degree of intelligence; whereas the differences between human intelligence and the abilities of lower animals are differences in
kind, not merely differences in degree. Thus—one would argue in rejecting the analogy—the
relevant principle is not that it is right to raise and slaughter animals because humans have
more intelligence than do other species; rather, the real principle is that it is right for
intelligent species to raise and slaughter any species that is not intelligent.
In that rejection of the deductive argument by analogy the analogy is rejected.
One claims that the two cases do not fit under the same principle, that the two cases are not
sufficiently similar, that the two instances are different in relevant and important respects.

A Double-Barreled Attack on an Analogy
On December 16, 1996, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled
in Melissa Brooks v. Mississippi that people cannot be prevented from appealing the termination of their parental
rights just because they cannot afford to pay court costs.
Writing for the majority, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg
argued that a parent’s loss of a child was of such
“magnitude and permanence” that it is “barely distinguishable from criminal condemnation” and since the
court’s precedents had removed financial barriers to
criminal appeals, analogously there should be no
financial barriers to appealing the loss of one’s children.
In opposition, Justice Clarence Thomas argued that
loss of children was not analogous to loss of liberty, and
so the precedents did not apply; furthermore, he argued
that even if the cases did fall under the same precedent,
the main earlier precedent (1956) was wrong and
should be reversed: Persons should not have a right to
criminal appeals if they do not have the money to pay for
them.
In this case, the U.S. Supreme Court is using a
deductive argument by analogy to decide a new case:
Since we agree that criminal defendants should not be
deprived of the right of appeal simply because they are
not wealthy enough to pay for the appeal, we must also,
by analogy, hold that parents should not be deprived of
the right to appeal the loss of their children just because
they cannot pay the high costs of an appeal. Justice

Thomas’s response illustrates the two ways of attacking a
deductive argument by analogy: First, he attacks the
analogy (being deprived of your children is not analogous to being deprived of your liberty); and, second, he
attacks the principle (those who cannot afford the high
costs of appeal have no right to appeal their criminal
convictions: so neither has a right of appeal).
It seems to me—and to the majority of Supreme
Court justices—that there is a strong analogy between
criminal appeals and appeals of loss of parental rights:
The reasons we have for giving citizens special protection against the state depriving us of liberty would also
apply to the state depriving us of our children. Concerning his attack on the principle, here we simply reach different convictions about what seems fair. Justice Thomas
rejects the basic principle that those accused of crime
should have full and fair access to a defense, even if they
are not wealthy. For example, if during the trial the prosecutor concealed evidence that would have proved my
innocence, and I was thus wrongly convicted, then—on
Justice Thomas’s view—unless I can afford to pay the
high costs of filing and pursuing an appeal, I have no
right to seek the overturning of my wrongful conviction.
Thomas considers that my tough luck, but not unfair.
That seems to me callous, cruel, and fundamentally
unfair; but it certainly does reject the basic fairness
principle on which this argument by analogy is based.

168

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

I am not saying that the above criticism of that analogy really works (in fact, I do not think
it works). But that is one important way of criticizing deductive arguments by analogy.
Is that an accurate criticism of the argument by analogy? Is it a good analogy? That
is a tough question. I think that the above argument by deductive analogy is an
accurate analogy, and that the criticism of the analogy is faulty. I do not think that there
is a difference in kind between the intelligence of humans and the intelligence of other
animals. But the present purpose is only to illustrate how deductive arguments by analogy
work, how they can be criticized, and what makes those criticisms strong or weak.

Are Corporations Analogous to Persons?
In Citizens United v. Federal Elections Commission—a case
decided in 2010 by a 5 to 4 majority—the U. S. Supreme
Court ruled that corporations can spend unlimited sums
of money in political campaigns. That decision dismantled the McCain-Feingold Act (passed by Congress with
bipartisan support in 2002 and signed into law by
President George W. Bush), overturned restrictions on
corporate electioneering which had been in place for
over a century, and rejected key precedents established by
a series of earlier Supreme Court decisions. This remarkable exercise in judicial activism was based on an analogy
between corporations and persons. You and I, as persons,
have the right to free speech; corporations are like
persons; therefore, consistency requires that corporations
also have the right of free speech. Therefore, corporations have the right to speak as loudly as they wish:
They may spend unlimited amounts of money speaking
and campaigning—through advertising—for political
candidates the corporations believe will be favorable to
their interests. If a multibillion dollar corporation such as
Exxon-Mobil wants to overturn regulations restricting oildrilling in environmentally sensitive coastal areas, it could
spend a billion dollars electing hand-picked senators to
vote for eliminating those restrictions and giving very
favorable lease arrangements to the oil company; it would
be money well spent, as the resulting profits would be
many times that. If foreign investors have majority control
of a U.S. corporation, they could spend unlimited sums
influencing U.S. elections. If a multibillion dollar pharmaceutical corporation wants to invest a billion dollars
electing senators who will extend the patent life on drugs
and block cheaper generic substitutes while greatly
enriching the pharmaceutical companies—well, you get
the picture. This Supreme Court decision will have an
enormous impact on the democratic process in the
United States. Was the analogical argument used to justify
that decision a good one? Are corporations really analogous
to flesh and blood individual citizen persons? Ronald
Dworkin, a professor of constitutional law at NYU, argues
that the persons–corporations analogy given by Justice
Kennedy (who wrote the majority opinion) is flawed:
The nerve of his argument—that corporations must be
treated like real people under the First Amendment—

is in my view preposterous. Corporations are legal
fictions. They have no opinions of their own to contribute and no rights to participate with equal voice or
vote in politics.2

And indeed attempting to draw an analogy between the
legal fiction of corporate persons and the flesh and
blood citizens of a country is preposterous. It is both
legally and morally acceptable to buy or sell a corporation; it has always been morally wrong to buy or sell a
person, and has been legally prohibited since the Civil
War. When the executives of Enron Corporation
destroyed the corporation for their own personal profit,
they were guilty of a number of financial crimes; but
they were not guilty of first-degree murder, as they
would have been had they purposefully killed a person.
It is perfectly legitimate to split a corporation into parts;
we frown on that when dealing with persons.
But not only is the analogy bad, but the principle
behind the analogy is very doubtful. We do believe in the
personal right of free speech, but few believe that right
should have no limits. My right of free speech doesn’t
give me the right to use my massive resources to drown
out all other participants in the debate. If I am allowed
to spend a billion dollars buying advertising for my political views, then I can overwhelm any opposing voices. If
we are engaged in a political debate, we would agree that
all of us should be able to speak our minds and give our
arguments and critique the arguments given by others:
that is essential for genuine democratic processes and
good critical thinking. But if I use a bullhorn, and every
time someone else tries to offer an argument or criticize
my argument I drown them out, that does not enhance
critical thinking or democratic deliberation. So the
principle that all persons have a right to free speech does
not imply that persons should be allowed to spend
unlimited funds in promoting their own ideas and
blocking consideration of opposing views. Even if we
accept the strained analogy between persons and
corporations, most of us will find the principle of
unlimited spending to amplify the speech of the wealthy
(whether corporations or real persons) a very doubtful
principle. In short, this Supreme Court decision weds a
faulty analogy with a questionable general principle.

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

169

Exercise 11-1
When we are confronted with a deductive argument by analogy, there are two different and distinct
ways to attack the argument by analogy. First, one can argue that the analogy is a bad one: The
principle behind the first case does not apply to the second. Second, one can say that even if the two
cases do fit under the same principle, the principle is wrong.
The examples in the exercises below are all deductive arguments by analogy. For each one,
describe and illustrate the two basic ways of attacking that deductive argument by analogy: First, by
attacking the analogy itself; and, second, by disputing the principle behind the analogy. For example,
consider this deductive argument by analogy: Suppose an 8-year-old child does something really
awful: takes a gun and shoots one of her playmates, for example. You wouldn’t execute that 8-year-old,
would you? We would think it wrong to execute the child, even though she did something terrible.
Well, Randall Flauss is severely retarded, and has the mental capacity of an 8-year-old. He did
something terrible, it’s true. But just as you think the 8-year-old child should not be executed for
committing a terrible wrong, likewise you must conclude that it would be wrong to execute Randall,
who has the same mental powers as an 8-year-old.
How would you attack that deductive argument by analogy? First, you might attack the
principle behind the analogy. The principle is that we think it is wrong to execute children. To attack
the principle, you have to attack the starting point of the analogy: No, there is nothing wrong with
executing children; if an 8-year-old kills her playmate, then the child should suffer lethal injection;
and so should the person with the mental capacity of an 8-year-old. Second, you could argue that
the two cases don’t fit under the same principle: We should spare the child, but not because she has
the mental capacity of an 8-year-old, but because she is a child; but Randall is not a child, whatever
his mental capacity may be. (Incidentally, I think the analogy is a good one, and that this attack on
the analogy is flawed; this merely illustrates the two different ways of attacking deductive arguments
by analogy.)
1. We should not require people to wear seatbelts when they drive or ride in their cars. After all, if
you choose not to wear your seatbelt, that certainly is hazardous to your health and it may be
foolish, but it doesn’t harm anyone except yourself. Requiring adults to wear seatbelts is like
requiring people to exercise regularly. Just like not wearing your seatbelt, it may be foolish not
to exercise, but it doesn’t harm anyone except you. Since we think that requiring people to get
regular exercise would be wrong, we must also conclude that requiring people to wear seatbelts
is wrong.
2. It is wrong to ban smoking on airplanes. It’s just not fair. Maybe smoking is a disgusting habit, OK;
but it shouldn’t be banned on commercial flights. After all, I think chewing gum—people
chomping big wads of gum and blowing big, sticky, gooey bubble gum bubbles—is disgusting; but
it would be wrong to ban chewing gum on commercial flights. So, in the same way, since it’s wrong
to ban gum chewing, it is also wrong to ban smoking.
3. We should not have restrictions on what medications people can take; that is, we should not
require people to get a doctor’s prescription to buy drugs. Once a medicine is approved for
human use, people should be able to buy whatever medications they choose. After all, we think
people should be able to buy any food they want so, in like manner, we ought to let people buy
whatever medication they want. You don’t need a prescription to buy food; why should you need
a prescription to buy drugs? People ought to be free to make their own choices. If you want to
consult a nutritionist for advice on what foods are best for you, fine; but it shouldn’t be required.
And if you want to consult a physician about what drugs are best for you, fine; but that shouldn’t
be required either.
4. University students should not be required to attend class in order to pass a course. When you
enroll in a class and pay your tuition, that gives you the right to attend the class. But it doesn’t mean
you should be required to attend class. It’s like buying a season ticket to watch the Cleveland Indians.
When you buy the ticket, that gives you the right to attend every game, if you wish to do so; but it
certainly doesn’t give the Cleveland Indians the right to require you to attend every game. Likewise,
paying your tuition for a class gives you the right to attend, but it doesn’t give your professor the
right to require you to attend.
5. Look, suppose you are an American citizen who is living in England, France, Argentina, or some
other foreign country. Maybe you have a job there, or you are attending a foreign university. You get
picked up by the police, charged with a crime. You should have the same rights to a fair and

170

Chapter 11

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

Arguments by Analogy

public trial as any citizen of that country, right? Well, if you believe that you, as a foreigner living in
another country, should have the right to a fair trial just like any citizen of the country you are
visiting, likewise you should agree that foreigners who are living in this country and who are
charged with crimes should have exactly the same rights to a fair and public trial that any citizen of
the United States has.
There is currently a severe shortage of organs for transplant, and many persons who need
organs will not get them because of the shortage. Some maintain that given this severe shortage,
we should deny liver transplants to those who need a new liver because of liver damage caused
by excessive drinking. But denying liver transplants to those whose livers were damaged by
excessive drinking would be unfair and unjust. It would be like denying heart transplants to
those who need a new heart because they damaged their hearts through overeating or neglecting to exercise.
Some people object to euthanasia (or “mercy killing,” that is, the killing of a suffering terminally ill
person who requests a painless death) on the grounds that killing a patient is “playing God,” and we
should not interfere in natural processes. But that won’t work. After all, when we actively intervene—through surgery, ventilators, antibiotics, and dialysis machines—to save the lives of those
who are ill, we are certainly going against the “natural process” of disease by preventing death. Since
we think it is alright to actively interfere in natural processes to prevent or delay death when patients
request it, we should likewise approve of intervening to cause or hasten death when a sick and
suffering patient requests that.
In the debate over capital punishment, the opponents of capital punishment always bring up the
danger of mistakenly executing someone who is actually innocent; and they say that the danger of
mistakenly executing the innocent is a reason to ban capital punishment. Well, it’s obviously true
that many people have been wrongly convicted, and so there is a strong possibility that if we
continue with capital punishment we will occasionally execute someone who is innocent. But just
because innocent people may sometimes be killed, that’s no reason to stop our program of capital
punishment. After all, think about our policy of sending fire trucks racing through the streets to put
out fires. When we do that, sometimes the fire trucks accidentally collide with other cars, and
innocent people are accidentally killed. But we don’t think that because fighting fires sometimes
results in accidental deaths we should therefore stop sending fire trucks racing to put out fires.
Likewise, the fact that innocent people may sometimes be mistakenly killed is no reason to stop our
policy of capital punishment.
Suppose you had to have surgery done on your knee. Would you want a surgeon who was favored
by a majority of people who have no expertise in surgery? Would you want to have your surgeon
selected by a vote of people who know nothing about surgery? Selected by taxi drivers and high
school English teachers and farmers, by economics professors and electricians and store clerks? No,
of course not. You would want your surgeon chosen by experts who are experts in medicine and
surgery. Now think about our legislators, the people who write the laws and regulations that govern
us. That’s at least as important to your well-being as some minor surgery on your knee. And likewise,
the best thing would be to have our legislators chosen by experts who really know something about
government and legislation, not voted on by chemistry teachers and construction workers and
truck drivers and police officers. That’s why democracy makes no sense.
You believe that you should have the right to put a large Christmas nativity scene—complete
with angels and star of Bethlehem—in front of your house, right? Well, likewise, you should also
agree that the county has the same right to place a Christmas nativity scene in front of the
county courthouse.

The Fallacy of Faulty Analogy
To get a better sense of deductive arguments by analogy, let’s look at an analogy that is
clearly fallacious. Consider the following argument by deductive analogy:
Why should the government regulate and restrict the rates charged by the utility companies?
Utility companies should be free to set their rates as they wish. After all, if you open a restaurant,
you are free to charge your customers whatever you wish for a hamburger; if you open a dry

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

171

cleaning shop, you can charge what you wish for your cleaning services. Similarly, utility companies should also be free to charge whatever they want, without any government restrictions.

What is the conclusion of this deductive argument by analogy? The argument concludes
that the rates charged by utility companies should not be subject to government regulation; the utility companies should be free to charge whatever they wish. What sort of
argument is given for that conclusion? The argument uses an analogy: It argues that utility rates are similar to prices charged by restaurants and dry cleaners, and since restaurant owners and cleaners are rightly free to charge what they wish, rates charged by
utility companies should also be unregulated. The argument claims that these cases are
relevantly similar, and therefore if we are to consistently hold to our principles, we must
treat like cases alike.
The argument might be outlined thus:
You believe restaurants should be free to set their own prices.
The reason you believe restaurants should be free to set their own prices is because you
believe that all businesses should be free to set their own prices.
Since utility companies are also businesses, they fit under the same principle, and
therefore you should conclude that utility companies should also be free to set their own
prices without government regulation.

But are these cases similar? Do they fit under the same principle? No.
The utility companies are monopolies. If you wish to open a competitive company to
your local electric company and try to beat that company’s prices, you are out of luck: The
utility company is granted, by law, a monopoly on utilities in its area. No one is allowed to
set up a company to compete with it. But of course that does not apply to Joe’s Diner or
Joline’s Dry Cleaning. If you think that Joe is charging too much for a hamburger, or that
Joline is overpricing her cleaning, you can buy your lunch and get your clothes cleaned
somewhere else, and you are welcome to set up a competing diner or dry cleaner and
underprice Joe or Joline. That makes the cases compared in the analogy very different.
Why do we believe that Joe should be free to charge what he wishes? Because we can
always go to a different restaurant if Joe gets a bit too pricey. But if Homestate Power
raises my utility rates, what options do I have? I can either pay them or sit in the dark.
I can’t shop around for a lower rate, because there are no competing utility companies.
So the principle we actually hold is this: We believe that all competitive companies should be free to set their prices as they wish. Utility monopolies do not fit under
that principle, because they are monopolies and are not competitive; therefore, the analogy fails, since the supposedly analogous cases are not really analogous. This deductive
argument by analogy is a faulty analogy (often called the fallacy of questionable analogy).
Notice that there are certainly other differences between restaurants and electric
utilities. So it is important that you pick out the relevant difference, the difference that
actually makes this a faulty analogy. For example, another difference between dry
cleaners and electric utility companies is that electricity is more important to us than dry
cleaning. I would rather sit with dirty clothes in a heated, lighted house watching
television than spend cold, dark evenings in my freshly starched shirt. But in this case,
that is not the relevant difference; that is not why electric utility rates are regulated and
restaurant prices are unregulated. After all, food is at least as important as electricity, but
you can charge whatever you please at your grocery store (since you do not have a
government-enforced monopoly).
Lawyers would call this an investigation of the dispositive facts: What are the key facts
behind the belief that restaurants and dry cleaners should be able to set their own prices?
Not that the services or products they offer are nonessentials; rather, the dispositive facts
are their status as competitive businesses.

172

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

Bubble Gum Beer
A 1999 episode of the popular television series Law and
Order offers a good example of deductive argument by
analogy, and of an attack on such an argument. In this
fictional case, a man had converted a semiautomatic pistol into a fully automatic (continuous fire) weapon and
then used the pistol to attack a group of students in
Central Park, killing 15.
After convicting the gunman, the district attorney
went after the gun manufacturer. The manufacture and
sale of fully automatic pistols was illegal, but semiautomatic pistols were legal. However, the “Rolf 9” (the gun
used in the fictional murder) could be very easily
converted from semiautomatic to fully automatic. The
district attorney claimed that the manufacturer knew that,
and that the manufacturer purposefully designed the gun
for easy conversion in order to increase sales. Mr. Webber,
the CEO of Rolf Firearms, was charged with 15 counts of
second-degree murder. The district attorney’s cross-examination of Mr. Webber contained the following dialogue:

DISTRICT ATTORNEY: You knew your guns
were being sold illegally to criminals

[by people who had converted them
into automatic weapons].
DEFENDANT WEBBER: We have no control
over that. If a liquor store sells beer to
an adult who turns around and sells it
to a minor, is the brewer responsible?
DISTRICT ATTORNEY: He is if he makes
bubble gum–flavored beer.
The defendant is offering an argument by analogy:
Since you think the brewer is not responsible if his beer
is sold illegally to a minor without the brewer’s knowledge, by analogy you must conclude that a gun manufacturer is not responsible if his product is sold illegally
without his knowledge. The district attorney claims that
is a faulty analogy: The reason we do not hold the
brewer responsible is because the beer is not designed
to be particularly attractive to minors; but if a manufacturer (or brewer) purposefully designs a product that
will be particularly attractive for illegal uses (illegal sales
to minors, or conversion to illegal automatic pistols),
then the manufacturer is responsible.

Deductive arguments by analogy can always be restated without the analogy, and it is
often easier to analyze them in that form. Consider the animal rights argument without
the analogy:
It is wrong to inflict suffering on an animal by raising it and killing it for luxury food merely
because the animal is of lower intelligence than whoever is killing it.
The human practice of raising and killing animals for food violates this principle.
Therefore, it is wrong for humans to raise and kill animals for food.

With the argument in this form it is somewhat clearer. Objections to the argument can be
focused more precisely. One might argue that the basic principle is wrong (“It is not
wrong for the more intelligent to inflict suffering on the less intelligent”) or argue that it
is not the relevant principle (“It is all right for humans to raise and kill animals for food
because God granted us a special right to do so; it’s not because humans are more intelligent”); or argue that present practices of raising and killing animals do not fit under the
principle (“Farm animals live very happy and contented lives; they are not discomforted
by being castrated, caged, confined in tight quarters, and herded to the abattoir”).
When analyzing a deductive argument by analogy, you may find it useful to rephrase
the argument by stating the principle explicitly (and eliminating the analogy); however, the
argument without the analogy may not have the same impact as the original analogical
argument. Use of an analogy may be a powerful means of pushing people to think more
carefully about their principles and beliefs. An argument about whether more intelligent
animals have the right to inflict suffering on the less intelligent may have the same logical
implications as an argument about whether superintelligent extraterrestrials have the right
to raise humans for human burgers; but the analogy forces us to come to grips with specific
details of the issue. Deductive arguments by analogy are often difficult to analyze, but they
are important arguments that prod us to serious scrutiny of our beliefs and principles.

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

173

A Faulty Analogy
In one of his columns, William F. Buckley, Jr., criticized
remarks made by (former) Associate Justice Lewis Powell of the U.S. Supreme Court. In discussing why the
Supreme Court had ruled that the voting age should be
lowered to 18, Powell stated,
In the simplest of terms, the Court decided that
when young people were being drafted and asked to
go to war and risk their lives at age 18, the time had
come to extend to them the right to participate as
citizens in the decisions that affected them so
seriously.

Buckley responded to Powell’s comments with this
analogy:
An interesting line of reasoning, which to be sure
could be extended to assert that because girls can and
do bear children at age 11, they should have the vote

concerning the statutory age of marriage. But never
mind the logic.

But let’s mind the logic. Is that a good analogy? Do the
cases fit under the same principle?
Obviously not. Why does Powell think that 18-yearolds should have the right to vote? Not just because there
are governmental policies and issues that affect them;
that would apply at a much earlier age, as Buckley notes.
Rather, Powell’s principle is that the age at which one is
considered old enough to be required to risk and possibly
sacrifice one’s life for one’s country should also be considered an appropriate age for participation as a voting
citizen in forming the policies of one’s government. But
that reasoning cannot be extended to cover 11-year-olds
who bear children: The analogy does not hold, since the
country is certainly not requiring 11-year-olds to bear
children. Like many bad analogies, Buckley’s is cute,
even striking; but it’s still a faulty analogy.

Exercise 11-2
For each of the following analogies, first tell whether it is a figurative analogy or a deductive argument
by analogy; and, second, tell whether it is a legitimate analogy or a faulty analogy. (In some cases, you
may be able to read the analogy as either figurative or deductive.)
1. Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, my client, Seth Briddle, is charged with armed robbery. His
fate now rests in your hands. You will have to weigh the evidence that you have heard, including the
testimony of one eyewitness who saw the robber for only a few seconds on a dark street; and the
testimony of an admitted drug dealer who claims that Mr. Briddle confessed the crime to him in
the prison exercise yard. You are the sole judges of that evidence, of the reliability of the eyewitness
identification and the truthfulness of the claims made by this admitted drug dealer who is eager to
get a reduced sentence for his crimes. And having weighed the evidence carefully, you must decide
whether to find Mr. Briddle guilty or not guilty. You understand that it is a basic principle of our
system of justice that an accused person must be found not guilty unless everyone on the jury is
certain—certain beyond a reasonable doubt—that he is guilty.
“Certain beyond a reasonable doubt” : now exactly what does that mean? It does not mean that
you think he might be guilty. And it does not mean that you think he is probably guilty. And it does
not mean that you think he is very likely guilty. This is a very serious matter, members of the jury; this
is a basic question of justice or injustice. This is serious business. Suppose you are driving on a trip
with your family, and you come to a high bridge over a deep canyon, and that bridge looks sort of
old and rusty and shaky. And there’s a police officer there, and you stop and ask this police officer,
“Officer, is it safe to cross that bridge?” And the police officer says, “Well, I think that bridge might
be safe.” You would turn around, and you wouldn’t drive across that bridge with your family.
Suppose the officer says, “Well, that bridge is getting old and weak, and it shakes a lot, but it’s probably safe.” Still, you wouldn’t take a chance and drive your family on to that bridge. Or maybe the
officer says, “Well, the bridge is very likely safe.” That wouldn’t be good enough, would it? You wouldn’t risk the life of you and your family unless you were certain that bridge was safe, if there was no
reasonable doubt of the safety of that bridge. That’s what it means when you are certain beyond a
reasonable doubt. If you think it is just barely possible that bridge is going to collapse, you would
not take your family onto that bridge. And if you think it is just barely possible that Seth Briddle is
innocent of the charges against him, then you must not find him guilty.

174

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

2. A decent education is essential in order to have genuine equal opportunity for success in our
society. That’s why we guarantee everyone, rich or poor, an opportunity to get a good, publicly
funded education. Likewise, decent health care is also essential for equal opportunity: After all, you
don’t really have much of an opportunity for success if you are sick and can’t get decent medical
treatment. So since we insist that a decent education is a basic right of all citizens, we also ought to
insist that every citizen has a basic right to decent health care.
3. In discussing whether there should be mandatory drug testing for college athletes, sports columnist
Irwin Smallwood drew the following analogy:
As one person asked me the other day in an earnest discussion of the college side of the issue, “What
is the difference in saying you’ve got to make a passing grade in math and saying you’ve got to make
a passing grade in physical condition? Is a random test for dangerous drugs different from a pop quiz
in math?”
Of course, it is not that simple. But maybe it’s not so complicated, either. Is there really a difference
in permitting authorities to test you mentally and allowing them to test you physically? I wonder.3

4. In Italy there are some majestic marble quarries. Huge blocks of marble are cut and then fashioned
into sculptures. Artists send plaster forms, and workmen at the local studios chisel the final, usually
much larger sculpture from a marble block. In a National Geographic article on the quarries, this
process is discussed:
This news, startling at first, made sense when I thought about it. Obviously, an artist like [Henry]
Moore, who may turn out six massive works a year, doesn’t take a chisel and singlehandedly carve a
12-foot-high statue.
Instead, I learned, he creates a plaster mold called a maquette. Then an artisan nails a series of
studs, called points, into the form and uses calipers to transfer the proportions to the larger scale.
In the Henraux studio I held a maquette Moore had created. The doll-size abstract form had
recently been scaled up to an 80-ton sculpture destined for a downtown Miami development. Moore
would visit the studio sometime later to supervise the final stages of production.
“So who is the artist,” I asked Nicoli, referring to the giant thumb. “Your workmen or the sculptor?”
Nicoli waved his hand impatiently. It is an old debate: “The artist is the composer of the symphony. He
does not waste time trying to play all the parts. If he uses the orchestra, or workmen, he can make the
most beautiful music. We are not creators. We are proud to be executors.”4

5. In a Newsweek interview, singer-songwriter Country Joe McDonald made the following remarks
concerning the need for change:
Will the old line let the new take over and save the planet, or will our old thoughts and traditions lead
us to annihilation? The American system is over 200 years old. It’s a very old system. You wouldn’t be
using a 200-year-old toilet in your house and wouldn’t drive on the freeways in a 200-year-old vehicle.5

6. A few health-care professionals object to caring for AIDS patients because they fear that providing
such care may put them at risk of developing the AIDS virus. If proper precautions are taken, the
risk is very small, but it remains a risk. Still, doctors and nurses and other health-care professionals
have a duty to take that small risk and care for patients with AIDS. When they voluntarily decided
to become health-care professionals, they knew that facing some risk from infectious diseases was
part of the job. In like manner, when police officers and firefighters take their jobs, they recognize
that they will sometimes be exposed to danger as part of their work. But having voluntarily taken
the job, they cannot refuse to take on the risks that go with the job. Like professional firefighters,
health-care professionals must not shirk the dangers that are part of their chosen work.6
7. Some people argue that abstinence is the only absolutely safe way to avoid pregnancy and sexually
transmitted diseases, so we should only teach high school students that they should be sexually
abstinent until marriage, and not teach them about contraception or about methods to reduce the
risk of sexually transmitted disease. That’s like saying that since the only way to completely prevent
teenage auto accidents is to not use cars, teenagers should not be taught to drive safely and use
seatbelts, but should instead be instructed never to ride in cars.
8. Students at Home State University are complaining because some of the classes with small enrollments have been dropped, and students now have to take a different class. But it doesn’t make sense
to have a class that is only a third or a quarter full, when there are other classes with plenty of seats

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

9.

10.

11.

12.

175

available. Suppose we have 10 parking lots around campus, and only 2 are full, while 4 are only half
full, and 4 are only a quarter full. It wouldn’t make sense for us to spend money keeping all those
parking lots open, right? Instead, we could close most of the lots that are only a quarter full, and the
students could easily park in the other lots that are half full. In the same way, it makes no sense to
pay people to teach classes that have only a few students when there are lots of other good classes
that still have openings.
The way we fund public schools in Ohio is really unfair: Some school districts in wealthy suburban
districts—like Hudson and Chagrin Falls—have lots of money, and they hire top teachers and provide all sorts of special courses and tutoring and computer facilities; while other school districts—
especially those in poor rural regions—have very little money, and students have much larger
classes, few or no computers, and no special courses or tutoring. It’s unfair, because students from
rich districts get a big educational advantage over students in poor districts. Some people claim that
it is fair, because some students in the poor schools still outperform some of the students in the
wealthy schools. But that doesn’t prove that the funding is fair: Look, suppose you have a 1 mile
race, and some of the runners get top quality running shoes plus a 10-second head start, while the
others have to run in heavy boots and they start 10 seconds later. Some of the runners wearing heavy
boots will still outrun some of the runners in running shoes; but that certainly doesn’t mean that
the race was fair.
The Alaskan Wilderness area is a beautiful wild area that provides essential habitat for many endangered species, and there is no other place like it anywhere in the world. Perhaps there’s some oil
there, and some people want to drill for oil in this fabulous wild preserve; but drilling for oil—with
all the heavy equipment and roads and oil pipelines that requires—would destroy the delicate
ecosystem there, and that wonderful wilderness would be lost forever, and we could save much
more oil than would be produced there simply by adopting stronger fuel efficiency standards for
our cars and trucks. Destroying the Alaskan Wilderness area in order to produce oil is like burning
a beautiful and unique and irreplaceable painting by Van Gogh in order to roast marshmallows.
Some people object to euthanasia (or “mercy killing,” that is, the killing of a suffering terminally ill
person who requests a painless death) on the grounds that killing a patient is “playing God,” and we
should not interfere in natural processes. But that won’t work. After all, when we actively
intervene—through surgery, ventilators, antibiotics, and dialysis machines—to save the lives of
those who are ill, we are certainly going against the “natural process” of disease by preventing death.
Since we think it is alright to actively intervene to prevent or delay death when patients request it, we
should likewise approve of intervening to cause or hasten death when a sick patient requests it.
Imagine that you are watching an enormous fireworks display, perhaps a mile away; flying through
all those bursts of brilliant light, there is a tiny firefly. Now, imagine trying to pick out that firefly as
it flies through the exploding fireworks. That’s what it is like for astronomers trying to discover a
planet the size of Earth in orbit around another star.

Analyzing a Deductive Argument by Analogy
Deductive arguments by analogy are challenging, and working through them requires
careful thought. For practice, consider Judith Jarvis Thomson’s forceful argument by
analogy on the question of abortion. Thomson begins by granting (for the sake of argument) a claim she does not in fact believe: that the fetus is a person from the moment of
conception. She is arguing that even if it were true the fetus is a person, there would still
be cases in which a woman would have a right to an abortion. (The main part of the
argument—and the deductive argument by analogy—begins in the third paragraph,
when Thomson asks you “to imagine this.”)
I think that the fetus is not a person from the moment of conception. A newly fertilized
ovum, a newly implanted clump of cells, is no more a person than an acorn is an oak tree.
But I shall not discuss any of this. For it seems to me to be of great interest to ask what
happens if, for the sake of argument, we allow the premise [we assume that the fetus is a
person from the moment of conception]. How, precisely, are we supposed to get from there
to the conclusion that abortion is morally impermissible? Opponents of abortion commonly

176

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

spend most of their time establishing that the fetus is a person, and hardly any time explaining the step from there to the impermissibility of abortion. I suggest that the step they take is
neither easy nor obvious, that it calls for closer examination than it is commonly given, and
that when we do give it this closer examination we shall feel inclined to reject it.
I propose, then, that we grant that the fetus is a person from the moment of conception.
How does the argument go from here? Something like this, I take it. Every person has a right
to life. So the fetus has a right to life. No doubt the mother has a right to decide what shall
happen in and to her body; everyone would grant that. But surely a person’s right to life is
stronger and more stringent than the mother’s right to decide what happens in and to her
body, and so outweighs it. So the fetus may not be killed; an abortion may not be performed.
It sounds plausible. But now let me ask you to imagine this. You wake up in the morning and
find yourself back to back in bed with an unconscious violinist. A famous unconscious violinist.
He has been found to have a fatal kidney ailment, and the Society of Music Lovers has canvassed
all the available medical records and found that you alone have the right blood to help. They
have therefore kidnapped you, and last night the violinist’s circulatory system was plugged into
yours, so that your kidneys can be used to extract poisons from his blood as well as your own.
The director of the hospital now tells you, “Look, we’re sorry the Society of Music Lovers did this
to you—we would never have permitted it if we had known. But still, they did it, and the violinist
now is plugged into you. To unplug you would be to kill him. But never mind, it’s only for nine
months. By then he will have recovered from his ailment, and can be safely unplugged from
you.” Is it morally incumbent on you to accede to this situation? No doubt it would be very nice
of you if you did, a great kindness. But do you have to accede to it? What if it were not nine
months, but nine years? Or longer still? What if the director of the hospital says, “Tough luck,
I agree, but you’ve now got to stay in bed, with the violinist plugged into you for the rest of your
life. Because remember this. All persons have a right to life, and violinists are persons. Granted
you have a right to decide what happens in and to your body, but a person’s right to life outweighs your right to decide what happens in and to your body. So you cannot ever be unplugged
from him.” I imagine you would regard this as outrageous, which suggests that something really
is wrong with that plausible-sounding argument I mentioned a moment ago.7

In analyzing Thomson’s argument, try to answer the following seven questions:
1. State as precisely as possible the exact conclusion for which Thomson is arguing. (Note that
it is a very narrow conclusion.)
2. Exactly what is the analogy between? (i.e., What two objects or situations are being compared?)
3. What special similarities does Thomson think there are between the two situations?
4. What principle (implied, but not stated) is Thomson’s analogy pointing toward?
5. Do you agree with the principle?
6. Is this a good analogy? That is, do both cases fit under the same principle? (Does the reason
for thinking one has a right to detach from the violinist also apply to detaching from a fetus?)
7. How would you rephrase this argument without using an analogy?

Try your own answers to those questions before you read mine. After all, critical thinking is like chess: It’s more fun to play than to watch (figurative analogy).
1. The conclusion of the argument is as follows: A woman who is pregnant as the result of rape
has a right to terminate the pregnancy. (The conclusion is not that a woman has a right to an
abortion under any and all circumstances; that would not immediately follow from this analogy.
Thomson argues later in her essay that a woman’s right to an abortion is not limited to cases of
rape; but that goes beyond our present concerns.)
2. The analogy is between a woman who is carrying (supporting) a fetus that is the result of a
rape and an individual who is supporting the life of a violinist as a result of kidnap.
3. The special similarity in the two cases is that in both situations an individual has been forced
into a position in which she is supporting the life of another, and in both cases the only way
of escaping this situation involves allowing another person to die.
4. What is the principle behind the analogy? (i.e., Why do we believe—assuming that we do—
that a person has the right to unplug herself from the violinist?) That is the tough part.
Perhaps it is something like this: No one has an obligation to sustain the life of another when

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

177

one has done nothing to take on that obligation. And if that is roughly the principle we share,
then we must agree that both the kidnap victim and the rape victim have the right to detach
themselves. But that probably doesn’t fully capture the principle. In any case, if it were the
principle, it would be open to this analogical counterattack (as developed by J. M. Fischer):
Suppose you have planned for many years to take a trip to a very remote place in the
Himalaya mountains. You have secured a cabin in an extremely remote and inaccessible
place in the mountains. You wish to be alone; you have enough supplies for yourself, and
also some extras in case of an emergency. Unfortunately, a very evil man has kidnapped an
innocent person and brought him to die in the desolate mountain country near your
cabin. The innocent person wanders for hours and finally happens upon your cabin.
You have the following problem. You can radio for help, but because of the
remoteness and inaccessibility of your cabin and the relatively primitive technology of
the country in which it is located, the rescue party will require nine months to reach
your cabin. Thus, you are faced with a choice. You can let the innocent stranger into
your cabin and provide food and shelter until the rescue party arrives in nine months,
or you can forcibly prevent him from entering your cabin (or staying there) and thus
cause his death (or perhaps allow him to die). (It is evident that he will die unless you
allow him to stay in the cabin.)
It seems to me that it would be morally impermissible for you to prevent the
innocent stranger from coming into (or staying in) your cabin. Even though it is your
cabin and allowing the stranger in would cause considerable inconvenience, you may
not let him die on your doorstep.8
So if the principle behind Thomson’s violinist analogy is just that one has no obligation to
save a life if one has done nothing special to take on that obligation, then it is probably a principle we would reject, since (as Fischer’s analogy shows) most of us would say that we do have
an obligation to save the life of the kidnapped stranger, though we have done nothing special
to take on that obligation. (Notice that if we believe that we do have an obligation to take in
the innocent stranger—and I think that Fischer is correct that most of us would agree that we
do—then that is no small obligation. It would imply, for example, that we have strong obligations to save the lives of those innocent victims of war, flood, and drought whom we find on
our world doorstep and whom we could save at considerably less trouble to ourselves than is
being asked of the Himalaya cabin dweller; for whatever the basic principle behind Fischer’s
argument, it would almost certainly apply to saving those other innocent victims as well.)
But it seems to me that the principle involved in the violinist example is narrower than the
one in Fischer’s mountain-cabin analogy. Thus Thomson’s violinist example is not really analogous to Fischer’s cabin example. The more specific principle pointed to by Thomson’s analogy is
something like this: Assuming that one has done nothing to take on some special obligation, one
has no special obligation to allow his or her body to be used for someone else’s benefit. That seems
to capture the essence of Thomson’s analogy much more effectively. After all, it is one thing to
suppose that we have an obligation to provide help to save the lives of innocent strangers; it is
quite another to suppose that each of us has a special obligation to allow our bodies to be used—
without our consent—to provide such help. Thus the principle that Thomson’s analogy
powerfully emphasizes is our basic right to decide what is done to and within our own bodies.
5. Do you agree with that principle? Some will, and some will not. Some will think that Thomson’s principle is correct and that no one who has been kidnapped or raped is obligated to
stay hooked up to a violinist or a fetus. Others will disagree: They will say that one does have
an obligation to others (or at least an obligation to sustain another’s life) in any circumstances whatever. They will believe that it doesn’t matter whether I volunteered to let the
violinist use my kidneys, or was kidnapped, or whatever; if I can sustain a life, then I am always
obligated to do so (even if it means spending the rest of my own life in a hospital bed).
Fischer offers a counteranalogy to this statement of Thomson’s principle. His example
goes like this:
Suppose you are in a hospital room recovering from major surgery. Because of the
nature of the surgery, you must stay in the hospital room in bed for nine more months.
Now the story goes just as in Thomson’s violinist case: A great violinist has been
brought into your room and attached to your kidneys.9

178

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

Figure 11-1 Calvin offers an analogy. From There’s Treasure Everywhere, by Bill Watterson. (Kansas City,
Missouri: Andrews and McMeel, 1996).
Fischer asserts that in this case “it would be impermissible for you to detach yourself from the
violinist and thereby cause his death.” But that hardly seems obvious. Certainly it would be
nice of you to agree to stay hooked up to the violinist in this case; but would it be impermissible
to refuse? It seems to me that it would not be impermissible to refuse to allow one’s body to
be used in this way; to the contrary, one does have a right to decide what will be done to and
what uses will be made of one’s own body. (If you agree with Fischer that one can not refuse
to allow one’s body to be used by the violinist, then that would seem to imply a whole host of
very strong obligations: an obligation to donate organs after death, as well as an obligation—
that cannot be refused—to donate blood or bone marrow or even your single superfluous
kidney to anyone who has a special need for them. While I think all such donations are
morally commendable, I do not think they can legitimately be required of anyone.)
So do we accept Thomson’s principle? That is a complicated and controversial ethical issue,
and we shall certainly not resolve it here. But remember: If an individual rejects that principle—as
Fischer appears to do—then this argument by analogy will be of no use in trying to convince
that individual.
6. Is it a good analogy? I think it is. The two cases do fit under the same principle: If one thinks
the kidnapped person has a right to unhook herself from the violinist, then one must also—
in order to be consistent—conclude that a woman who has been raped has a right to an
abortion.
7. How could we rephrase the argument without using the analogy? Roughly, like this:
Assuming that one has done nothing to voluntarily place one’s self under a special
obligation, then one has no special obligation to allow his or her body to be used for
someone else’s benefit or even to save or sustain someone’s life. A woman who has
been raped has done nothing to take on an obligation to allow the fetus the use of her
body. Therefore, a woman who is pregnant as the result of rape is not obligated to
sustain the life of the fetus and has a right to an abortion.

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

179

What does this deductive argument by analogy prove? Simply this: that if you think that
you have a right to unhook yourself from the violinist (if you think that you cannot be
coerced into such use of your own body), then you must also believe that a woman who is
pregnant as a result of rape has a right to an abortion. That is an important analogical
argument, and it proves something important; but it proves it only for those who agree
with the underlying principle.
Thomson’s deductive argument by analogy illustrates what arguments by analogy
can accomplish. The argument makes us think about a difficult and controversial issue in
a new light, from a new perspective; and it forces us to consider more carefully the exact
implications of the principles we hold. If we agree with the principle behind Thomson’s
argument, then we must also agree that a woman who has been raped has the right to an
abortion. If we reject that principle, then we have much stronger and more burdensome
obligations to other people than we might have realized.

Deductive Arguments by Analogy and Cooperative Critical Thinking
Deductive analogical arguments are often found in adversarial settings. If you listen to the
oral arguments concerning a case before the U.S. Supreme Court, the advocates for both
sides often deploy deductive arguments by analogy to support their respective positions.
One advocate argues that the case currently under consideration is analogous to a
case (a precedent) previously decided by the Court; the opposing advocate argues that
the case is a better fit with a different precedent, and so that second precedent should be
followed. But while deductive arguments by analogy are effective in adversarial contests,
they are perhaps even more important in cooperative critical thinking, when those involved
in the discussion are working together to find an answer satisfactory to everyone.
Deductive arguments by analogy start by seeking common ground: We all agree on this
starting point, right? We all accept this principle, don’t we?
Suppose we are arguing about guaranteeing good health care for all the children of
the United States. “Look,” you might say,
[W]e believe that every child in the United States should have the opportunity to get a good
education, agreed? Well, why do we believe in universal education? Why do we agree that all
children, regardless of the wealth or poverty of their families, should have access to a good
education? The answer is this: We believe that every citizen should have a fair opportunity to
make the most of themselves, to use their talents and abilities and energies effectively; we
believe that everyone should have a fair chance, should not be deprived of a fair chance to get
ahead. And we recognize that an opportunity for a decent education is essential for fair
opportunity. Well, likewise, you can’t really have a fair opportunity in life if you don’t have
decent health care to treat your illnesses: just as being deprived of an education undercuts
your opportunity for success, in the same way being subject to untreated illness also deprives
you of genuine opportunity.

That deductive argument by analogy starts by looking for basic areas of agreement
between us, and then tries to build on that common foundation to develop new areas
of cooperative agreement. Rather than emphasizing what divides us, the key step is
finding what beliefs we share, or what values we hold in common. From that common
cooperative base, we push out to find other areas of agreement—perhaps areas
of agreement that we had not hitherto recognized. Using this deductive argument by
analogy, you might well convince me to think further about the implications of values
we hold in common, and how to extend those values into new questions. Or maybe it
won’t be that easy. Perhaps we both believe in equal opportunity, and I agree that
educational opportunities are essential for equal opportunity, but I don’t think health
care is so important. Because we have already established a common base of agreement,
now we can focus our discussion more precisely and productively on the implications

180

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

of lacking health care, and on what that means for lack of genuine opportunity. Our
further discussion along those lines won’t necessarily convince me that all children
should have access to decent health care; but there is probably no method of argument
that has a better chance of convincing me.
Or perhaps I won’t even agree with your starting point. “Wait a minute,” I say;
“I don’t agree that every child should have an opportunity to succeed. Maybe education
is essential for genuine opportunity; maybe access to health care is also essential; but
I don’t see why anyone should believe that every child should have a decent opportunity.
If some kids lack access to education and health care, and so they have no real chance in
life, that’s tough; but the world is tough; so what? If kids from poor families have no
opportunity for an education and no access to health care, then they have no real chance
of success; but I don’t see anything wrong with that.” If that is my response to your effort
to find a common foundation of shared values, then your deductive argument by analogy
is not likely to get very far in convincing me that all children should have decent health
care. Still, you have learned something valuable: you have learned not to waste your time
arguing with me about this issue. We have such fundamentally different views that it is
unlikely that any argument you could give would make a dent in my beliefs. Critical thinking and critical argument are very valuable, but they aren’t superpowers; and learning
when they are, and are not, likely to be effective is one part of becoming a good critical
thinker. Perhaps good arguments could have reshaped Hitler during his formative years,
but it is very doubtful that any arguments could have impacted the adult Hitler’s vile
views. Critical thinking will also be of little help in stopping the charge of an enraged bull
elephant, or convincing a crocodile that you are a bad choice for lunch. But in the right
contexts, critical thinking can be very helpful in enlarging agreements, settling disputes,
finding solutions, and reaching reasonable conclusions. That’s not bad.

The Fallacy of Analogical Literalism
Good analogies can be powerful arguments and striking illustrations, but they must be
distinguished from fallacious uses of faulty analogy.
A special fallacy related to analogies might be called “the fallacy of analogical literalism.” That is the fallacy of treating an analogy too literally. After all, an analogy is just
that: an analogy. When you offer an analogy, you are claiming that there are some relevant
similarities between cases that are admittedly quite different. That is the whole point of
using an analogy: If the cases were exactly the same, then there would not be an analogy at
all. The usefulness of the analogy lies in comparing things that are different in order to
see the issue in a new light. If one attacks an analogy on the grounds that the cases being
compared are not exactly alike, then one is committing the fallacy of analogical literalism.

Plea Bargaining
“Plea bargaining” is a very common practice in the
United States. In fact, the vast majority of criminal
charges are settled not by trials, but instead by plea
bargains between the defendant (usually represented
by an attorney) and the prosecutor (someone from
the district attorney’s office). In plea bargaining, the
defendant agrees to plead guilty, in exchange for
some concession from the prosecutor: reduced
charges, or perhaps the recommendation of a minimum sentence. Suppose I’m charged with two serious
crimes. If I go to trial and am convicted, I will
probably be sentenced to 15 years in prison. You’re

the prosecutor. Your office is overloaded with cases,
and you want to avoid another trial. Besides, the court
calendar is jammed. So you offer me (and my attorney) a deal. If I will plead guilty to just one of the
crimes, you will drop the other charge, and I’ll get a
5-year prison sentence. Of course I can take my
chances and go to trial. But my chances aren’t very
good: I can’t afford a high-priced defense lawyer, and
the public defender assigned to my case doesn’t seem
all that energetic. So, do I take the definite 5 years, or
roll the dice and maybe get acquitted, but more likely
have to serve a 15-year sentence? (Of course if I’m

Chapter 11

181

Arguments by Analogy

innocent, I don’t like the idea of a 5-year sentence for
something I didn’t do. But I know that the innocent
often get wrongfully convicted, and the odds don’t
look good for me.) So I go along with the plea bargain. Everyone is satisfied: I have to serve 5 years, but
I avoid the risk of 15. The prosecutor eliminates a case
from her overloaded schedule, the judge avoids a
lengthy jury trial that would force the court schedule
even further behind. But has justice been done?
Kenneth Kipnis (“Criminal Justice and the Negotiated Plea,” Ethics, vol. 86 [1976]) argues that plea
bargaining should be eliminated from the criminal
justice system, and that it is fundamentally opposed to
the practices of genuine justice and fairness. Kipnis asks
us to imagine the following scenario. You turn in a term
paper to your professor, who is known to be a tough
grader. You would like to get an A on the paper, but you
really want to avoid a D or F. Your tough professor looks
over the first page of the paper, glances at the rest, and

offers a deal. “If I go ahead and grade this paper, I would
probably give it a grade of D. Of course there’s a chance
that it’s better than it looks at first glance, so it might be
an A, but that’s not likely. But I’m sort of pressed for
time right now. Tell you what I’ll do. If you will pass up
your right to have your paper graded carefully and
conscientiously, I’ll give you a B. What do you say?”
Certainly this might be convenient for both the
professor and student. In fact, if we adopted it generally,
we could save ourselves a lot of time: professors could
eliminate the burden of grading, and students could
spend less effort on their papers. But convenient as this
might be, we would hardly consider it fair and just. After
all, your grade is supposed to be based on what you did,
on what your paper justly deserves, not on the best
bargain you can strike. Likewise, convenient as plea
bargaining might be, it fails to meet the standards of
fairness and justice that our criminal justice system is
supposed to be guided by.

Consider the figurative analogy between a steam engine and neuroses. Neuroses
are not exactly like steam escaping from a steam boiler. The analogy is designed to illustrate
Freud’s theory of neuroses, to describe something that is like Freud’s theory in some respects.
Imagine the following attack on that figurative analogy:

bikeriderlondon / Shutterstock

How Do You Rule?

Imagine that you are a U.S. Supreme Court justice. You
are considering a case—Rosenberger v. University of
Virginia—in which a student organization was denied
funding to publish a Christian magazine (Wide Awake:
A Christian Perspective at the University of Virginia). The
students asked for $5,800 to cover printing costs for the
magazine. The money was requested from the Student
Activities Fund, which provides funding to recognized student groups for various activities, including publications.
The funds come from a mandatory student activity fee,
paid by all university students. The guidelines for the Student Activities Fund specify that funds cannot be used to
promote religious belief, including specifically belief “in

or about a deity or an ultimate reality.” The Rosenberger suit
alleges that the denial of funds on this basis is an illegitimate restriction of the students’ free speech; in opposition,
the university contends that allowing the funds to be used
to promote a specific religious belief would be in conflict
with the Establishment Clause of the U.S. Constitution,
which forbids the state (and thus a state-supported
university) from promoting any religious perspective.
The goals of this Christian publication are not in
doubt: it is the publication of an avowedly Christian
evangelical group of students, the purpose of which is
to promote efforts to convert students to a particular set
of Christian beliefs (their publication is designed to
encourage evangelical activities by members of the
group, and also to publish material that will influence
other students to accept a specific set of religious
doctrines). The question is whether such a specifically
religious publication should be supported by money
from the University of Virginia Student Activities Fund.
As the Supreme Court examined this issue, one
question concerned a precedent established by an earlier
case: the Lamb’s Chapel v. Center Moriches Union Free School
District, which the court had decided in 1993 (just two
years prior to the present case). In that case, the school
district allowed the after-hours use of its facilities
(continued)

182

Chapter 11

by community groups, but prohibited the use of facilities for the purposes of promoting religious beliefs. The
Lamb’s Chapel group wished to use school facilities to
show films that promoted Christianity, and the school
district rejected their request. The Lamb’s Chapel
group sued, claiming that their rights of free speech
were violated by this restriction. The Supreme Court
ruled in the Lamb’s Chapel case that because public
school facilities were being offered for after-hours use
to other community groups, the school district could
not prevent religious groups from using the facilities for
religious programs. The justices who favored the Wide
Awake organization claimed that the Lamb’s Chapel
precedent applied to the new case: by analogy with the
Lamb’s Chapel case, since the Court has ruled that public
schools must make public facilities equally available to
secular and religious programs, by the same principle
a public university must make student funds equally
available to secular and religious organizations and

Arguments by Analogy

publications. The justices who opposed the Wide Awake
demand claimed that the Lamb’s Chapel case was not
analogous: that the two cases do not fit under the same
principle, that there are important differences between
the two cases such that the precedent in the Lamb’s
Chapel case does not apply to the Wide Awake case.
Leave aside the larger question of how you (as a
Supreme Court justice) would rule in this case; instead,
concentrate only on the question of whether the Lamb’s
Chapel case is a good precedent, a good analogy. If you
were an attorney arguing the case on behalf of the
University of Virginia, how would you argue that it is not
a good analogy?
Having considered the analogy carefully, how
would you rule on that specific question: Is the Lamb’s
Chapel case a good analogy to the Wide Awake case? (On
the larger issue, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of
Wide Awake, but the ruling was by only a 5 to 4 majority,
and the Court was deeply divided on the issue.)

That is a ridiculous analogy. You can’t compare human neuroses to steam escaping from a
boiler. A steam boiler is made of metal, and humans aren’t made of metal. And although
human bodies do contain a lot of water, the water certainly never gets anywhere close to the
boiling point. If the water in your body reached the boiling point, you wouldn’t be neurotic,
you’d be dead. So the analogy between human neuroses and escaping steam is a stupid one.

Such an attack commits the fallacy of analogical literalism. It misses the point of the
figurative analogy. The analogy does not claim that neuroses are exactly like steam
escaping from a boiler; rather, it says that they are similar in some instructive ways. The
attack on the analogy picks out some irrelevant differences. It misses the point of the
illustration and thus commits the fallacy of analogical literalism.
Suppose that someone makes this attack on Thomson’s deductive argument by analogy:
Thomson’s comparison of a fetus and a violinist is absurd. Certainly no fetus can play the
violin; and besides, a fetus doesn’t have a problem with kidney failure, since its mother’s
kidneys function for the fetus.

That criticism commits the fallacy of analogical literalism. Whether the individual to
whom the kidnap victim is attached is a violinist or a baseball player or a ski bum is
irrelevant; all that is required is that that individual be a human being. And whether the
individual is suffering from kidney failure or whatever is also irrelevant; all that is
required is that if the kidnap victim is detached, that individual will die. The differences
are irrelevant, because they do not prevent the two cases from fitting under the same
principle. Picking on irrelevant points in the analogy commits the fallacy of analogical
literalism: it treats the analogy too literally.

Caution! Watch for Analogies That Look Like Slippery Slopes!
It is sometimes difficult to tell whether an argument is an analogy or a slippery slope
argument. Slippery slope arguments will be discussed in more detail in the following
chapter: They claim that a proposed policy or act is wrong because it is the first step down a
slippery slope that will lead to some horrible result. “If you let this robbery defendant go
free, more robberies will occur and there will be a breakdown of law and order and we will

Chapter 11

183

Arguments by Analogy

have anarchy in the streets!” But arguments by analogy sometimes look like slippery slope
fallacies. “If you think it is alright to ban books that contain ideas or materials that you
consider offensive, then you must also think it would be alright to ban books like the Bible,
because some groups find it offensive.” That looks a bit like a slippery slope argument, but
it is not. It is instead an argument by analogy, which claims that what you are doing is essentially similar to (analogous to) something else. Banning a novel is like banning the Bible,
and since you do not believe that the Bible should be banned, you should not favor banning
of any books. (That may or may not be a good argument by analogy, but it does not commit
the slippery slope fallacy.) If it were a slippery slope fallacy, the argument would go like this:
“If you start by banning a few novels, the next thing you know all sorts of books, including
the Bible, will be banned.” But that isn’t what the original argument says.
In some cases, however, it is difficult to determine whether an argument is using
an analogy or is instead a slippery slope argument. A few years ago some people,
especially high school principals, became upset when a number of students stopped
wearing bras. One case involved a junior high school student in Portage, Michigan, who
was twice suspended from Portage Central Junior High School for attending class braless.
The principal of the high school defended his policy with this argument: “If I say okay to a
girl who feels more comfortable coming to school without a bra, what do I say to another
student who wants to come in his pajamas or bathing suit?” Is that argument a slippery
slope fallacy (“If I allow her to attend classes braless, tomorrow students will show up in
pajamas and by the end of the school year they will be wearing bikinis to class!”) or is it an
argument by analogy (“Attending class braless is like attending class in your pajamas; it’s
certainly wrong to allow students to attend class in their pajamas, so it is also wrong to
allow students to attend class braless”)? It’s hard to tell; you could call it either way.
(Perhaps it doesn’t much matter: It will be either a slippery slope fallacy or a faulty deductive argument by analogy. In either case it’s a lousy argument.)
The moral of the story is this: Don’t be too hasty in accusing someone of the slippery
slope fallacy; consider whether the argument might instead be a deductive argument
by analogy.

The U.S. Supreme Court and a Questionable Analogy
One of the most significant cases involving capital punishment was the McCleskey case (McCleskey v. Kemp, 481
U.S.), ruled on by the Supreme Court in 1987. The majority of the Supreme Court offered an argument by
analogy that resembles a slippery slope argument.
Warren McCleskey, an African American man, had
been sentenced to death for the murder of a white man.
The crime had occurred in Georgia, and on appeal McCleskey’s lawyers argued that the death penalty was
being unfairly applied, because in similar cases in which
the victim was black, the death penalty was much less
frequent: That is, in Georgia those who murdered
whites were much more likely to receive the death
penalty than were those who murdered blacks.10
The Supreme Court rejected McCleskey’s argument, saying that just because statistics showed that a
much higher percentage of murderers of white victims
received the death penalty, that was not adequate proof
of discrimination against blacks. The majority of the

Court offered this analogy: We must not accept claims
of death penalty discrimination on the basis of statistics
showing that murderers of white victims are more likely
to receive the death penalty; that would be analogous to
(and would open the door for) claiming that because
some study shows that murderers of physically attractive
victims are more likely to receive the death penalty, that
therefore there is discrimination on the basis of the
physical attractiveness of the victims. Since we would
not accept such statistically supported discrimination
claims in the case of the physical attractiveness of the
victims, neither should we accept such claims concerning the race of the victim.
Jeffrey Abramson offers a scorching critique of the
Court’s McCleskey argument by analogy:
The Court makes the fatuous claim that, if it were to
accept mere statistical correlations between race
and the death penalty as evidence of invidious
(continued)

184

Chapter 11

discrimination, then it would also have to accept, as
adequate proof of discrimination, bald statistics showing a correlation between capital punishment and a
victim’s physical attractiveness. But there is a huge
difference between the two demonstrations. In the
case of race, history gives meaning to the statistics.
Throughout the antebellum period, Georgia openly
ran a dual death penalty system, differentiating
between crimes committed by and against blacks and
those committed by and against whites. For instance,
the death penalty was automatic for murders committed by blacks, whereas juries might recommend life
for anyone else convicted of murder. The state penal
code specified that the rape of a free white female by
a black “shall be” punishable by death. Rape by others
of a free white female triggered a prison term of two to
twenty years. Most telling is that if the rape was of a

Arguments by Analogy

black woman, the law provided punishment “by fine
or imprisonment, at the discretion of the court.”
Precisely because the historical connection
between race and the death penalty runs so deeply
and is so ugly, the McCleskey Court erred in characterizing racial disparities in Georgia death sentencing as
“unexplained” but not “necessarily invidious.”
On the other hand, such an agnostic reaction
might well be appropriate to some new social science
study showing a correlation between defendants’ facial
characteristics and death penalty rates. In the absence
of a history of legal discrimination against certain facial types, the numbers are not as important as those
involved when the issue is race. In short, the Court’s
reasoning does not do justice to the special scourge—
the special burden—that race and the death penalty
place upon the land.11

INDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS BY ANALOGY
We have discussed figurative analogies (which are not arguments at all) and deductive
arguments by analogy (which require the truth of the conclusion if one accepts both the
truth of the premises and the correctness of the analogy). There is another use of analogies that should be mentioned: inductive arguments by analogy.
Inductive arguments by analogy are quite common. For example:
Allison Affluent lives in suburban Richmond, she has three children in private schools, she
belongs to two country clubs, she drives a Cadillac, and she wears large diamonds on four
fingers—and she is a member of the Republican Party. So it seems likely that Penelope
Prosperous—who lives in the same suburban neighborhood, also has three children in
private schools, belongs to the same country clubs, drives a Caddie, and wears lots of
diamonds—will also be a Republican.

That’s a decent inductive argument by analogy. If two people have that many characteristics
in common, it’s a fairly good bet that they also share some other characteristic. But notice that
even though it’s a reasonable argument, the conclusion may still be false. It is possible that
Penelope is a Democrat. Although we would expect Allison and Penelope, given their similar features, to have many other similarities, it is quite possible that Allison and Penelope
have absolutely nothing else in common: They may be opposites in every other respect. Thus
inductive arguments by analogy may be quite useful, and may give us probable conclusions, but
the conclusions of inductive arguments are at best highly probable.
Inductive arguments by analogy are helpful, and we often rely on them. If last year
I bought a pair of shoes of a particular brand, price, style, and they were durable and comfortable, then I reasonably expect that if I buy another pair of similar brand, price, and
style the new pair should also be durable and comfortable. That is a reasonable expectation, a reasonable use of inductive argument by analogy; my conclusions, however, might
still be mistaken, and the new shoes may be awful.
Here is one more example of inductive argument by analogy:
Last week the race horse Luscious Lips won a one-mile race on this track under muddy conditions with jockey Jones against horses similar to the ones she is racing against today. So
Luscious Lips will be a good bet to win today, since she is racing at the same distance with the
same jockey under similar conditions.

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

185

Indeed Luscious Lips will be a good bet; that’s a fairly strong inductive argument by analogy. And—an important but tricky consideration—the points of analogy are relevant:
Same jockey, same distance, similar competition (if the points of similarity were that both
races are on Wednesday, both under a new moon, both on a day when the stock market is
up, and in both races the same bugler played the call to the colors and the same track
announcer called the race, these points of inductive analogy would not carry much
weight). So this is a reasonably strong inductive argument by analogy. But don’t bet the
rent money, for that inductive argument by analogy does not make Luscious Lips a sure
winner.
When is an inductive analogy a good analogy? Keep in mind we are discussing
inductive arguments by analogy, so the line will not be quite so clear as the line between
good and bad deductive arguments. There are two basic requirements for a good inductive
analogy. First, they must share some characteristics; that is, they must be alike in various
ways. And second, the ways in which they are alike must be relevant to the conclusion
drawn by the inductive analogy. The more relevant are the points of analogy, the stronger
is the inductive argument by analogy.
Suppose we are discussing movies, and I recommend Days of Heaven to you: I
liked that movie, so I think you will also. Why do I think that? Well, because we are
alike, we are analogous, in many relevant respects: We like the same novels, the same
poems, and the same music; so chances are we’ll also like the same movies. Those are
relevant characteristics on which to draw an inductive analogy. But what if I said, We’ll
probably like the same movies, because we have the same blood type, we’re the same
height, we’re both mammals, and we were both born in the twentieth century? Those
shared characteristics wouldn’t give us much reason to think we’ll like the same
movies. What if we like the same food? Or we vote for the same political candidates?
Are those relevant similarities for movie tastes? I’m not sure; that’s an empirical question that we could only answer by doing research on what characteristics generally go
together. They’re probably better than height and blood type, but they don’t strike me
as particularly important similarities for drawing a conclusion about favorite films.
And finally, characteristics that might be strongly relevant for one inductive analogy
will be useless for another: If we have the same blood pressure, cholesterol level, and
smoking habits, those may be very relevant for an inductive analogy between your state
of health and mine; but they won’t be very useful if we are drawing a conclusion about
similar tastes in novels.
The distinction between inductive and deductive analogical arguments is
important; fortunately, it is not a difficult distinction to draw. A deductive argument by
analogy uses an analogy to point toward a principle that it is assumed we all accept and
then claims that in order to be consistent you must accept an analogous case that also fits
under that principle. In contrast, an inductive analogy draws a comparison between
cases and then suggests that since the analogy holds in some respects, it is likely to hold
in other respects as well (but it does not suggest that there would be some inconsistency
if the analogy did not hold). For example, a deductive argument about vegetarianism
might go like this:
You believe that it would be wrong for superintelligent extraterrestrials to kill and eat us just
because they are more intelligent than we are; therefore, you must also conclude that it is
wrong for us to kill and eat less intelligent animals.

An inductive analogical argument might look like this:
You are disgusted by fur coats, and so is Brenda; you buy cruelty-free cosmetics (that avoid
animal-testing), and so does Brenda; you prefer organic foods, and so does Brenda.
Furthermore, you also believe that it is wrong for us to kill and eat other animals; so probably
[by inductive analogy] Brenda also believes it is wrong to kill and eat other animals.

186

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

But Brenda may be a dedicated carnivore; the suggestion in the inductive argument (as
opposed to the deductive use of analogy) is that it’s likely that Brenda, like you, is a vegetarian;
but there is no claim in the inductive argument that she must be vegetarian in order to be
consistent.
In conclusion, inductive arguments by analogy are quite different from figurative
analogies and from deductive arguments by analogy. Each use of analogy is helpful in its
own way, but each is a very different use of analogy and must be evaluated on its own terms.
Distinguishing inductive analogies from figurative and deductive analogies is relatively
easy. Distinguishing figurative analogies from deductive arguments by analogy is sometimes tougher. Thomson’s violinist analogy is clearly a deductive argument, and the analogy between steam engines and Freud’s theory of neuroses is definitely figurative. But
sometimes the line is not so clear—and in some cases it is possible to interpret an analogy
either deductively or figuratively.

Exercise 11-4
This section of exercises includes questions concerning types of analogy (figurative, deductive, and
inductive); questions about the analysis of both legitimate and fallacious analogies; and questions
that cover the various fallacies associated with analogies (faulty analogy and the fallacy of analogical literalism). Read the specific instructions for each exercise.
1. Marijuana is a lot like alcohol. Since the production, sale, and use of alcohol is legal, we ought to
make the production, sale, and use of marijuana also legal.
What type of analogy is that? What is the principle implied by the analogy? Is it a good
analogy? Describe two different ways one might argue against that argument by analogy.
2. Alcohol is a lot like marijuana. Since the production, sale, and use of marijuana is illegal, we ought
to make the production, sale, and use of alcohol also illegal.
Compare argument 2 with argument 1. On what points would a person giving argument 1
agree with a person giving argument 2? On what crucial point would they disagree?
3. PAULA:

PAUL:

Drinking alcohol is like looking through rose-colored glasses: It distorts our view of reality and makes us less capable of dealing with our real problems.
That’s not true. Drinking alcohol is nothing like wearing glasses. After all, you drink with
your mouth, not with your eyes.

Is that criticism of the analogy legitimate or fallacious?
4. It is not right to expect Senator Foghorn to tell us whether she cast her Senate vote for or against
cutting the Medicare budget. That would be like requiring you or me or some other citizen to tell
how he or she voted in the last election. I have a right to vote in private, and so does Senator
Foghorn.
What type of analogy is that? Is it a legitimate or a faulty analogy?
5. Judith Jarvis Thomson denies that the fetus is a person from the moment of conception. She states
that “a newly fertilized ovum, a newly implanted clump of cells, is no more a person than an acorn
is an oak tree.” But Thomson’s comparison of a fetus to an acorn and a person to an oak tree is
quite ridiculous. They are not at all alike: For one thing, an oak tree is a plant, and a person is an
animal.
What use of analogy is Thomson offering here? Is the criticism legitimate or fallacious?
6. Consider an analogy from the world of sports (or at least from the business of sports). This example
is drawn from 1982, when the National Football League was in the midst of a player strike. The
National Football League Players Association was proposing that the NFLPA receive 55% of the
gross revenues of the 28 NFL teams, and from that money they would pay all players’ salaries,
insurance, severance pay, and play-off and Super Bowl money. One player who opposed the strike
argued against the proposal with this analogy:

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

187

I don’t believe that is very fair. I have my own business (a sporting goods store), and if an employee
told me he wanted 55% of the gross without risking any capital investment, I’d have a hard time
taking him seriously.12

Is that a good analogy? (Note carefully exactly what the analogy is comparing.)
7. Look, you’re going to do fine on the final exam. Last year I had a student just like you: She attended
class regularly, worked hard, studied hard, just like you do. And she flunked the first exam, then did
a little better on the second exam, just like you did. And then she aced the final exam, so there’s a
good chance you’ll also ace the final. What type of analogy is that?
8. In her closing statement in the O. J. Simpson case, prosecutor Marcia Clark noted that jurors must
be convinced “beyond a reasonable doubt” in order to find Simpson guilty, and she suggested that
jurors should think of putting together a jigsaw puzzle when trying to understand proof beyond a
reasonable doubt. In a jigsaw puzzle, all the pieces don’t have to be perfectly in place to see the
whole picture: “If you’re missing a couple of pieces of the sky, you still have the picture.”
What type of analogy is that? Is it a good analogy?
9. Suppose that we are discussing the question of how much information physicians should tell their
patients. For example, if a patient has terminal cancer, should the physician inform the patient? As
we discuss this question, one physician makes the following assertion:
Doctors should give unpleasant information to their patients very carefully and cautiously, and
in small doses, just like medicine. When we give strong medicines to patients, we often “titrate”
the dose, giving small doses over a long period of time in order to reduce any bad side effects of the
powerful and potentially harmful medication. In the same way, when we have unpleasant news to
give to patients, we should “titrate” the information, providing it in small bits and pieces over an
extended period, so the patient will not be harmed by receiving too much bad news all at once.

The physician is here using an analogy. What type of analogy is it? Is it a good use of analogy, or a
questionable analogy?
10. Dr. John Turjanovich is a psychologist. He is in practice by himself, and is ably assisted by his office
manager, Valerie Todd. Dr. Turjanovich has only one complaint about Ms. Todd’s work: She refuses to
run personal errands for him, like picking up his lunch or taking his car to be repaired. When asked,
Ms. Todd firmly declines, “I run your office, and I do it well; but I’m not your personal servant.”
Dr. Turjanovich considers her stance stubborn and unreasonable: “Look, I’m not asking you to work
extra. All I’m asking is that during your working hours, you run a few personal errands for me. I pay
you for every hour you work. As long as the work isn’t immoral or illegal, you should do whatever task
I assign you.”
One day Ms. Todd informs Dr. Turjanovich that the next client, Mr. Winston, had just called
to say that he couldn’t make it for his scheduled 1-hour appointment: He was tied up in a very
important meeting. “I hope you told him that I will have to charge him for the one-hour session,”
Dr. Turjanovich replies. “All my clients know I have a strict policy: Clients must give at least a
48-hour notice prior to cancelling an appointment, or they are charged for the appointment.”
“Yes, I told him,” Ms. Todd answers. “He said that was fine. But he also asked if you could do
a couple of things for him. He’s very busy this afternoon, and he wants you to pick up his airline
tickets at the travel agency on South Madison, and his dry cleaning at the shop on Church Street,
and drop them off at his office. He said that since he was paying for an hour of your time, you
shouldn’t mind spending the time helping him out.”
“No way! The nerve of that guy! I’m his psychologist, not his valet. He can run his own errands.”
“I’m glad you feel that way,” Ms. Todd replied. “I agree with you completely. If anyone wants
personal errands run, they should hire an errand person, or do it themselves—not ask their
psychologist or office manager to do it for them.”
Ms. Todd seized an opportunity to offer Dr. Turjanovich an analogy. What type of analogy is
it? Is it a good analogy, or a faulty analogy?
11. The U.S. Department of Justice filed an antitrust suit against Microsoft, claiming that Microsoft
engaged in unfair and monopolistic trade practices that took advantage of the dominance of the
Microsoft Windows computer program as an operating system. One of the government claims was
that Microsoft forced computer manufacturers to bundle its MSIE browser with Windows 98, and
would not allow Netscape browser (a Microsoft competitor) to be bundled with the Windows operating system, thus gaining an unfair advantage over Netscape. Bill Gates, CEO of Microsoft, claimed

188

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

that no one should expect Microsoft to include Netscape in its Windows operating system; and to
support his claim he offered the following analogy:
Forcing Microsoft to include Netscape’s competing software in our operating system is like requiring
Coca Cola to include three cans of Pepsi in every six-pack it sells.

How would you evaluate Gates’s analogy? Is it legitimate, or a faulty analogy?

Exercise 11-5
For each of the analogies in the exercises below, first identify what type of analogy it is (deductive,
figurative, or inductive); second, tell whether it is a legitimate or faulty analogy; and third, identify
any other fallacies that occur (particularly the fallacy of analogical literalism).
1. Dr. Henry Lee, an expert on the science of criminal investigation, testified for the defense in the
O. J. Simpson murder trial. After noting some mistakes that the Los Angeles Police Department
made in their collection of evidence, Dr. Lee compared it to finding cockroaches in spaghetti: You
find one or two cockroaches in a bowl of spaghetti, you don’t have to go through the whole bowl to
see if there are more cockroaches present or absent.
2. There is now a law making it illegal for health maintenance organizations (HMOs) to restrict what
member physicians can tell their patients. For example, if there were a treatment that the physician
thought would benefit her patient, but the physician’s HMO would not provide the treatment, then
some HMOs would not allow the physician to mention that treatment to her patient. Some
spokespersons for the HMOs argued that there was nothing wrong in such restrictions: after all, if
you go to a car dealer to buy a new car, the dealership may legitimately have a rule that its salespersons are not allowed to tell customers about some other manufacturer’s car that might be better for
them. Such restrictions on what employees are allowed to tell customers are very common, and
doctors employed by HMOs should follow the same rules.
3. Bruce Waller argues that since we think it would be wrong for extraterrestrial invaders—who are
more intelligent and powerful than humans—to raise humans for slaughter just because they enjoy
the taste of humans, then, in a like manner, we must also conclude that it is wrong for humans to
kill and eat cows and pigs just because we are more intelligent and more powerful and because we
happen to like the taste of beef and pork. But Bruce’s argument is lousy. You can’t compare raising
humans for slaughter with raising cattle or swine for slaughter. After all, humans grow much more
slowly than do cows and pigs, and human flesh contains too much gristle to be really tasty.
4. While Enid Waldholtz was a member of Congress, representing Utah, evidence showed that her
husband and campaign manager, Joe Waldholtz, had illegally conned some $4 million from other
people, and that much of that stolen money had been illegally invested in Enid Waldholtz’s election
campaign (in violation of federal election laws). The huge illegal investment of advertising money
had boosted her failing campaign, and led to her victory. Since her congressional seat was won with
stolen money through illegal funding, the question was raised whether she would resign. Someone
posed the question thus:
If Joe Waldholtz had used the stolen money to buy a car for Enid, it would be right for Enid to give up
ownership of the car after discovering it was bought with stolen money. Similarly, since her congressional seat was bought with stolen money, she ought to resign from Congress.

5. (Overheard in a bar, in a conversation between an older man and a young woman he has just met):
“Look, I know I’m older than you, but that shouldn’t keep you from going out with me. Haven’t you
ever heard, the older the violin, the sweeter the music?”
6. JOE:

I never wear my seatbelt in the car. I once heard of a guy whose car flipped upside down, and
he was knocked unconscious. Well, he was wearing his seatbelt, and as he was hanging
there from the shoulder harness, he slipped a bit and the belt got up against his neck. If the
rescue people hadn’t arrived quickly, he would have choked to death! I think it’s a bad idea
to wear seatbelts.

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

189

JOAN: Come on, Joe, that’s just crazy. Of course there might be some fluke accident in which a
seatbelt causes injury, but they certainly prevent lots more injuries than they cause. Saying
that people shouldn’t wear seatbelts because there might be some very unusual circumstances when they cause injury is like telling your children to play in the street instead of
their front yard, because once a child was injured by a car that went out of control and slid
into the yard where the child was playing.
7. Columnist Irwin Smallwood used the following analogy to counter “the criticism of those young
men who choose to forgo their senior [college athletic] seasons in order to sign lucrative professional contracts”:
Imagine, if you will, a brilliant young acting student at the North Carolina School of the Arts. He’s a
junior, but he’s accepted as one of the best in the country. Francis Ford Coppola comes to town and
offers him the lead in the new movie he’s about to produce, with a signing bonus of, say, $500,000, and
a guarantee of $1 million upon completion of the movie.
Out charges the chancellor, baton in hand, and chases Coppola from the campus, screaming something like, “You can’t sign that boy. His class hasn’t graduated yet.”
An impossible scenario, you say?
Of course it is. But isn’t that exactly what is happening in college athletics these days?13

8. The Levenger Company sells pens, lamps, office furniture, and various other articles. In one of
their catalogs they offer the Aeron Chair, which they claim is the “the world’s most comfortable task
chair.” It’s a bit pricey, as they admit: $979, plus shipping and handling. But they claim that that
should not deter you from buying the chair:
The Aeron Chair isn’t cheap. But how much time do you spend in your chair—probably more than
you spend in your car—and what did you pay for that?

9. Last year, I had a patient a lot like you. She is a nonsmoker, a light drinker, a regular jogger, eats lots
of fruit, watches her weight, and she’s only 2 years older than you. She’s also a college student, and
single; and she has strong family support, just like you do. We caught her cancer at almost exactly
the same stage as yours, and she went through precisely the same treatment program that you will
be on. She made a complete recovery, so there’s good reason to believe that you also have an excellent chance of recovery.
10. Robert Eckardt, who deals with health grants for the Cleveland Foundation, claims that the U.S.
health-care system is too concerned with treating short-term acute illness, while neglecting the
preventive measures and early intervention that could prevent severe illnesses. Eckardt compared
the U.S. medical system to treating the injuries from a flood of cars crashing off the edge of a cliff,
without worrying about why so many cars are running over the cliff in the first place.14
11. Suppose that a car dealer is selling cars that he claims are brand new and in excellent condition,
and then it turns out that the cars he is selling as new are really used cars that had been driven
50,000 miles and have had the odometers rolled back and have serious flaws, and the car dealer
made millions of dollars from this deception. Well, that dealer would be guilty of fraud, and he
ought to be put in jail. Kenneth Lay, the chief executive officer of Enron, made millions of dollars
selling Enron stock—stock that was grossly misrepresented: it was supposed to be stock in a company that was making a profit and had very little debt, but in fact the company had large hidden
debts in offshore accounts and was actually losing lots of money, and Ken Lay knew it. So Ken Lay
made a lot of money misrepresenting Enron stock. Since the car dealer who lied about his cars is
guilty of fraud, you ought to agree that Ken Lay is likewise guilty of fraud.
12. In the Pacific Northwest, there has been considerable controversy over logging and its effects on the
environment. Some people who want to restrict logging have pointed out that logging destroys the
habitat of an endangered species, the spotted owl, and that logging should be restricted in order to save
the spotted owl. Rush Limbaugh, in one of his radio discussions, wondered what the problem was. Suppose the loggers cut down the trees where the spotted owls nest; well, they can just move. After all, what
do you do if a construction project—a highway, for example—destroys your home? You move to a new
community. The spotted owls can do the same: When their forest is logged, they can move to a new one.
13. If Professor Jones knows that one of her colleagues is incompetent, and no longer capable of effective teaching (whether because of drug abuse, laziness, or whatever), then Professor Jones has an

190

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

obligation to report the incompetent professor and to have that professor removed from the classroom. After all, it is obvious that if Doctor Smith knows that one of her fellow physicians is incompetent, then Doctor Smith certainly has an obligation to see to it that her incompetent colleague is
not allowed to continue practicing medicine: Doctor Smith is obligated to try to keep the incompetent physician out of the operating room. Thus, in the same way, if Professor Jones knows that one
of her fellow professors is incompetent, then Professor Jones is obligated to take steps to keep that
incompetent professor out of the classroom.
14. Some wealthy school districts spend more than three times as much on the education of each child
in their districts as is spent in educating children from poorer districts. Some people complain that
that is unfair: They say it’s like having a race in which some of the runners get to wear expensive
running shoes, while the others must plod along in clunky old boots. But that’s a silly comparison:
School is nothing like a race; after all, you race with your feet, but school concentrates on your
mind, not your feet.
15. In 1997, the U.S. Forest Service auctioned off timber sales in Washington’s Okanogan National
Forest. The top bid for the Thunder Mountain timber parcel was $15,000. The bid was submitted by environmentalists who wanted to pay the money to the Forest Service, then leave the
huge, centuries-old trees uncut and the area undisturbed. Their bid was rejected, however, in
favor of AA Logging, who planned to cut the trees and sell them. Environmentalists protested
that the tract should have gone to the highest bidder, and that it didn’t matter whether the
bidder wanted to cut the trees or preserve them. Chris West, vice president of the Northwest
Forestry Association (representing logging interests in Oregon and Washington), maintains that
the forestry service was correct in refusing to accept the environmentalists’ bid, and he offered
the following analogy:
Bidding on a government contract is the same whether it is harvesting a timber sale or building a
plane or painting a building. If you don’t intend to do the work, the contract should not be awarded
to you.

16. Some states have proposed that the pay of public school teachers be based on quality of teaching,
and the teaching quality would be determined by the standardized test scores of their students:
teachers whose students make the highest scores would get the largest raises, while teachers with
low-scoring students would get smaller raises or nothing, and the teachers of low-scoring students
would also be first in line for dismissal. But that is a terrible way of determining teacher quality. It’s
like trying to decide who is the best jockey by looking only at the outcome of the race. But if Jorge is
riding Secretariat, and Manuel is on a much weaker horse that rarely finishes higher than last, then
Manuel might be a much better jockey though he loses by 20 lengths to Jorge. Likewise, if Jill has
students who are already excellent readers and have enjoyed every educational advantage, and Joan
is teaching students from much weaker educational backgrounds, then Joan may be the superior
teacher though her students’ test scores fall well below the scores achieved by Jill’s students.
17. A woman needs a man like a fish needs a bicycle.
18. Some Home State University students want more student participation in the administration of
HSU, including more student members on the board of trustees and more student involvement in
the academic senate. But it would be absurd to give students a major role in governing HSU; that
would be like giving inmates a stronger voice in how the prison is run.
19. “A newly fertilized ovum, a newly implanted clump of cells, is no more a person than an acorn is an
oak tree” (Judith Jarvis Thomson).
20. Voters in Cincinnati passed a referendum that denied gays and lesbians the same protection from
discrimination in jobs and housing that the law gives other minorities, and that barred the city
council from ever granting such protection. The law was challenged by advocates of gay rights, and
the case was heard by the Sixth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals. That court upheld the law barring
protection for gays and lesbians; and one of the central arguments given by the court was that
homosexuals were not entitled to civil rights protection because it was possible for them to hide
their homosexual identity. The court claimed that: “Those persons having a homosexual ‘orientation’
simply do not, as such, comprise an identifiable class. Many homosexuals successfully conceal their
orientation. Homosexuals generally are not identifiable ‘on sight’ unless they elect to be so
identifiable by conduct (such as public displays of homosexual affection or self-proclamation of
homosexual tendencies).”

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

191

Columnist Tom Teepen, national correspondent of Cox Newspapers, criticized the court’s
ruling with the following argument (taken from his column of May 23, 1995):
Imagine a court ruling that civil rights protection is due only those Hispanic Americans who, having
duly changed their names to something like Reginald Rutherford-Wiggleroom, still look Hispanic. Or
that even the new Rutherford-Wiggleroom cedes any claim to protection if he slips and blurts out a
little Spanish.
Do Hasidic Jews take themselves beyond the pale of the Constitution because who’d know the difference if they’d just cut their curls, shave their beards, and stop wearing those boring black clothes?
(Reprinted by permission of Tom Teepen and Cox Newspapers)

21. In U.S. college and university athletic programs, football typically receives the lion’s share of the
athletic budget: the most scholarships, the most coaches, the largest expenditures for fields, stadiums, and equipment. There have been proposals to reduce the amount of money spent on college
football; one such proposal is that the NCAA reduce the number of football scholarships allowed
each of its member schools from 95 to 85. Beano Cook, a sports commentator, opposed that reduction in a radio interview. His argument was roughly as follows:
There are about 30 college sports recognized by the NCAA, including football, rowing, gymnastics,
swimming, and many others. For many colleges, football is the only one of those sports that is actually
a money maker. If I had a business that had 30 divisions, and 29 of those divisions were losing money
and one division was making money, and I had an accountant who came in to advise me and he recommended cuts in the division that was making money, then I’d fire that accountant.

22. From the syndicated column of Tim Giago, in Indian Country Today, on the subject of having college
and professional sports teams use “mascots” and team names that depict Native Americans:
On a recent talk show, I spoke with a young lady who had been a cheerleader for a team called the
“Indians.” She said, “When I put on my feathers and war paint, donned my buckskin and beads, I felt
I was honoring Indians.” I asked her, “If your team was called the African-Americans, and you painted
your face black, put on an Afro wig and donned a dashiki and danced around singing songs and
making noises you thought to be African, would you be honoring blacks?” Her answer was “No! Of
course not. That would be insulting to them.” End of discussion.15

23. Richard Aquinas is on trial for kidnapping. Evidence shows that his daughter, Elizabeth, a college
graduate, age 23, had joined an Eastern religion of which Richard disapproved. He hired a group
of deprogrammers to try to convert her away from her new religion. Richard invited Elizabeth to
meet him at a suburban restaurant for dinner; when she arrived outside the restaurant, the deprogrammers forced her into their car and drove her to a remote farmhouse, where she was kept
against her wishes for 1 week, while they made various efforts to turn her against her new religious
beliefs. Richard was at the farmhouse at various times during the week, and Elizabeth frequently
begged to be released and allowed to leave. Richard testified that he refused her requests, because
he thought the religion she had joined was a false one. He was deeply concerned for his daughter’s
physical and spiritual well-being, and he was committed to converting her back to her old beliefs.
The deprogramming efforts failed, and at the end of a week she was released. She went to the
police, and kidnapping charges were filed.
When the case goes to the jury, there is heated discussion. Everyone agrees that Richard did
participate in the kidnapping; but there is a split over whether he really did wrong. One person
argues that Richard could not really be doing wrong, because he really and sincerely believed that
what he was doing was right. Another juror offers the following argument in response:
Look, just because someone believes in what they are doing, that doesn’t make it right. The notorious
Nazi, Heinrich Himmler, was head of the SS and commanded the Nazi death camps. It seems obvious
from his writings and from what is known about him that he sincerely believed in the Nazi goals, and
believed that his dedicated effort to kill all Jews was right. But though he believed in what he was
doing, that certainly did not make what he was doing right. If anything, what he did was made more
vile: He didn’t perform murder out of passion or sudden anger, but instead carried out a reflective
and deliberate policy of mass murder. His deep and genuine dedication to that purpose—and his
belief in its rightness—makes him even more evil, not less.

192

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

Now I’m not saying that Richard Aquinas is anything like Himmler, or that his kidnapping was even
remotely as bad as Himmler’s atrocities. But the point is, Himmler’s sincere belief that he was doing
the right thing was no justification for his acts; and Richard Aquinas’s sincere belief that he was doing
right is no justification for the kidnapping of his daughter.

24. The next example is from Lon L. Fuller’s hypothetical “Case of the Speluncean Explorers.” (The
setting is “the Supreme Court of Newgarth,” in the year 4300.) The case is an appeal of the murder
conviction of four men. The four are cave explorers who, with one other companion, were trapped
in a cave for 32 days without provisions. The five cast lots, and the loser, a man named Whetmore,
was killed and eaten by the other four. Without this desperate procedure, all five would have died.
One of the fictional appeals court judges gives this opinion:
The usual conditions of human existence incline us to think of human life as an absolute value, not to
be sacrificed under any circumstances. There is much that is fictitious about this conception even
when it is applied to the ordinary relations of society. We have an illustration of this truth in the very
case before us. Ten workmen were killed in the process of removing the rocks from the opening to the
cave. Did not the engineers and government officials who directed the rescue effort know that the
operations they were undertaking were dangerous and involved a serious risk to the lives of the
workmen executing them? If it was proper that these ten lives should be sacrificed to save the lives of
five imprisoned explorers, why then are we told it was wrong for these explorers to carry out an
arrangement which would save four lives at the cost of one?
Every highway, every tunnel, every building project involves a risk to human life. Taking these
projects in the aggregate, we can calculate with some precision how many deaths the construction of
them will require; statisticians can tell you the average cost in human lives of a thousand miles of
a four-lane concrete highway. Yet we deliberately and knowingly incur and pay this cost on the
assumption that the values obtained for those who survive outweigh the loss. If these things can be said
of a society functioning above ground in a normal and ordinary manner, what shall we say of the
supposed absolute value of a human life in the desperate situation in which these defendants and
their companion Whetmore found themselves?16

25. When politicians deceive the public, it’s not really so bad; it’s just part of the game. After all,
when you watch a football game, often the quarterback will pretend to hand the ball to a running back, and then actually throw a pass. And at a basketball game, sometimes the player with
the ball will fake a shot, and then pass the ball. And in volleyball, a player at the net will act like
she is going to pound the ball straight down, and then she’ll make a little tap over the frontline.
Likewise, politicians often pretend to be in favor of protecting the environment and guaranteeing patients’ rights to health care while they are campaigning, but those are just tricks, and they
shouldn’t be blamed when they don’t actually live up to their campaign promises. If you approve
of fakes and tricks in football, basketball, and volleyball, then you shouldn’t object to tricks in
politics, either.
26. Students who pay tuition for taking a course should be able to take whatever parts of the course they
wish, and skip any parts they don’t enjoy. It’s like buying a meal at a restaurant: If you buy spaghetti
and meatballs and you eat the spaghetti but don’t like the meatballs and you don’t eat them, the
restaurant certainly doesn’t require you to eat the meatballs.
27. BILL:

WALTER:

I don’t think it’s fair that a woman golfer gets to play on the men’s tour, but men can’t
play on the women’s tour. If Annika Sorenstam is allowed to play on the men’s tour,
then male golfers should be allowed to play on the women’s professional golf circuit.
Look, remember when you played summer league baseball? Remember the year you
were 10, there was a 10 and under division, but you were a really good player, so they let
you “play up” in the 12 and under division, so you would be playing against better competition? Well, it was good for you, right? You had fun, and you improved your skills,
and you certainly didn’t dominate the league. And it wasn’t unfair to the other kids. But
what if some of the 12-year-olds had said, well, if Bill gets to play in our division, we
should get to play in the 10 and under division. But that wouldn’t work: 12-year-olds are
generally bigger and stronger than 10-year-olds, and allowing 12-year-olds to play in the
10-year-old division would wreck it; but letting an occasional outstanding 10-year-old
play against better competition in the 12-year-old division obviously doesn’t put the
12-year-olds at a special disadvantage. Likewise, men are generally bigger and stronger
than women. So letting men play in the women’s division would wreck it; but allowing

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

193
an occasional outstanding woman to play in the men’s division allows an outstanding
woman golfer to hone her skills against tough competition, causes no harm, and puts
no one at a special disadvantage.

28. Mathematician John Allen Paulos, when interviewed on The Motley Fool Radio Show, discussing
whether high school students should be allowed to use calculators: Yes, they should, he said,
because once they’ve learned basic calculations, the important thing is to teach them the
concepts of mathematics, not how to calculate. “People often confuse computation with mathematics, in ways that they don’t confuse other subjects. No one says, ‘You’re a great typist; you
ought to write a novel.’ ”
29. Members of the jury, you have heard the evidence, and now it is up to you to decide on a verdict.
My client, Melissa Rhodes, is accused of robbery. As the judge will tell you, the prosecution bears the
burden of proving that accusation. The defense does not have to prove that she is innocent; rather, the
prosecution must prove that she is guilty. And they have to prove that charge beyond a reasonable doubt.
Now, what does that mean: “beyond a reasonable doubt”? Sometimes it’s described like this: to be
certain beyond a reasonable doubt means that you have the kind of certainty that you would be
willing to act upon in matters of serious consequence. Think of it this way: Suppose you are taking
your family to grandmother’s house for Sunday dinner, and on the way you have to cross a bridge
over a deep ravine. Before you take your family over that bridge, you want to be certain beyond a
reasonable doubt that the bridge is safe. That doesn’t mean that you have to be sure that the bridge
would hold up if somebody dropped an aircraft carrier on top of it: that goes beyond the confidence
you need. But on the other hand, it means that you have to be a lot more confident than just
probably. If you were thinking of driving your family across that bridge, and the county engineer told
you to go ahead, the bridge is probably safe, well, you wouldn’t drive across, would you? Now suppose
that you were 90% confident that the bridge was safe: don’t worry, there’s just 1 chance in 10 that
the bridge will collapse as you drive across; you wouldn’t take that chance, right? What if it were
95% safe? There’s only 1 chance in 20 that you and your family will go plunging down that ravine
when the bridge collapses: that’s not being certain; you wouldn’t act on that sort of probability; you
wouldn’t drive across that bridge. If you are 95% certain that the bridge is safe, then don’t drive
across it, it wouldn’t be reasonable to drive across it; and if you’re 95% certain that the defendant is
guilty, that is not certainty beyond a reasonable doubt, and you should not convict, you should find
Melissa Rhodes not guilty. Don’t drive across that bridge to conviction unless you are genuinely
certain beyond a reasonable doubt. If the prosecution’s case won’t hold up that much weight, then
Melissa Rhodes is entitled to a verdict of not guilty.
30. It’s not surprising that many of the people of Iraq oppose the U.S. troops in Iraq. After all, people
tend to get angry at troops that are occupying their country, even if they believe that the intentions
of the occupying troops are good. I mean, I may not like the president, and maybe I think he has
done terrible things as President of the United States. But if the Canadians sent an invading army
into the United States to get rid of the president, and Canadian troops were occupying the United
States, I would still be really angry at those Canadian troops, even if I believed they were trying to
help us. Likewise, we shouldn’t be surprised that the Iraqis are angry at the U.S. troops in their
country.
31. Cleveland State University and Youngstown State University are both urban universities, both are
located in Northeast Ohio, both are state universities that receive most of their funding from the
state and from student tuition, neither has a large endowment, both are primarily undergraduate
institutions, and both Cleveland State and YSU have had modest enrollment increases over the past
several years. I just learned that Cleveland State will have a tuition increase next fall, so it seems
likely that YSU will also increase tuition in the fall.

Exercise 11-6
When judges make rulings in new cases, they are supposed to be guided by precedents: judicial
rulings in earlier cases that govern the way later cases are decided. But of course no two cases are
exactly the same, so the question often arises: Exactly how does the old precedent apply in this new
case? And since there are many precedents from many old cases, there is also the question of which
precedents apply (and which do not). In civil cases, lawyers for the plaintiff and the defendant often

194

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

argue about which precedents are relevant, and exactly how the relevant precedents should be
applied. That involves trying to determine exactly what the precedents establish; that is, exactly
what is the principle behind the precedent.
Consider an example. Wicker attended a garden party at the home of Young. While strolling
in Young’s backyard, Wicker wandered over to a small pasture where Young’s horse was grazing.
When Wicker leaned against the fence and extended his hand toward the horse, the horse turned
and severely bit Wicker. The injury was quite painful, and required several stitches at a hospital
emergency room. Wicker is suing Young for damages. Suppose that one of the guiding precedents
in the case is Andrews v. Millstone, in which the court ruled that Millstone was liable for damages
inflicted to Andrews (a carpenter whom Millstone had hired to build a backyard gazebo) by
Millstone’s dog, which had bitten Andrews when Andrews walked over to the dog’s pen and
extended his hand.
The attorney for the defendant will argue that that precedent should be interpreted narrowly,
and that it does not apply to the present case: for example, the ruling in the precedent applies only
to dogs, not horses; or it applies only to hired workers, not to invited guests. The attorney for the
plaintiff will argue that the precedent should be interpreted more broadly, so that it covers not only
a carpenter bitten by a dog but also a guest bitten by a horse. But the plaintiff’s attorney must be
careful not to interpret the precedent too broadly: That would make it possible for the defense
attorney to argue that the plaintiff’s interpretation leads to absurd results. For example, if the
plaintiff’s attorney claims that the precedent shows that the owner of the property is liable for any
harm that befalls anyone who is on the property with the owner’s permission, then, the defense
attorney could easily argue, that would make the property owner liable for damages if a meteorite
should strike one of his or her guests, and since that is absurd, that interpretation of the precedent
is obviously mistaken.
In trying to determine how to interpret a precedent, what we are doing is trying to formulate
the principle behind the precedent. Wicker’s attorney might say that the cases are analogous (the two
cases fit under the same principle) because the principle behind the precedent is that the owner of
property has an obligation to warn those he or she invites onto the property of any known hazard.
Young’s attorney replies that the precedent is actually based on a much narrower principle: The
owner of property has an obligation to warn those whom he or she hires of any dangerous dogs.
(What is the true precedent? That is a thorny question, one that logicians, legal scholars, and judges
vigorously debate. Some claim that there is really no hidden true principle behind the precedent;
instead, it is a matter of working out the details of the precedent with further and additional rulings.
Those are questions you can save for your legal philosophy course.)
In the following exercise, you will be given a case, and then a governing precedent
(sometimes more than one). Your job is to interpret the precedent (or precedents) and the new
case, first as the plaintiff’s attorney (interpreting the principle behind the precedent in such a way
that it applies also to the new case), and, second, as the defendant’s attorney (interpreting the
principle behind the precedent so that it does not apply to the new case). That is, as attorney for the
plaintiff you will argue that the cases make a legitimate deductive argument by analogy; and then as
defense attorney you will argue that the principle does not apply to the two cases, and that it is a
fallacious deductive argument by analogy. (Depending on whether the precedent is cited by the
defense attorney or by the attorney for the plaintiff, the roles may be reversed.) So, for the case
considered above, your answer would look like this:

PLAINTIFF:
DEFENDANT:

The owner of property has an obligation to warn those he or she invites onto the
property of any known (and less than obvious) hazard.
The owner of property has an obligation to warn those whom he or she hires to
come onto the property of any dangerous dogs.

And last but not least, you should gather your robes about you and make a judicial ruling: Who is
right, counsel for the plaintiff or counsel for the defendant? (i.e., for each case, is this a legitimate
deductive argument by analogy, or is it fallacious?)
(All of these cases are fictional, as are the precedents cited.)
1. Lawrence Ruggles is suing Alexis Levine for damages suffered at an afternoon barbecue at her
farm. Both sides agree on the basic facts of the case: Lawrence was at Alexis’s farm by her invitation,
attending a party; Alexis owns a large, mixed-breed dog, Prince, that becomes nervous around
strangers and tends to bite; Alexis warned all her guests—she gave a general verbal warning to the

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

2.

3.

4.

5.

195

assembled group not to go near Prince, because (as she said): “He is very excitable, and he can be
vicious.” Lawrence was present, and heard the warning. Prince was chained to his dog house by a
14-foot chain. Lawrence was walking around the farm after eating lunch, talking with another guest,
when (without realizing it) he walked to within about 12 feet of Prince. Prince suddenly rushed at
Lawrence, biting him severely in the leg, causing a deep gash that required emergency medical
treatment.
The attorney for defendant Levine claims that there is a key precedent for the case: Whittle
v. Cox. In that case, Whittle was a guest at an outdoor party at Cox’s house. Cox’s dog was in a fenced
dog yard, with a fence about 4 feet high; there was a sign posted on the fence, saying, “Danger: Bad
Dog.” (Cox gave no verbal warning to his guests.) Whittle, while engaged in conversation, casually
leaned against a corner of the dog yard fence, his hand at his side. When his fingers passed through
the fence, the dog lunged and bit Whittle’s hand, leaving a deep, ragged laceration that required
emergency room treatment. The appeals court had ruled that Cox was not liable for the damages
suffered by Whittle.
First, how will counsel for the defense interpret the principle behind the precedent (so that
it also applies to Ruggles v. Levine)? Second, how could counsel for the plaintiff interpret the precedent so that it does not apply to the present case? And third, Your Honor, how would you rule? Does
the precedent cover this case, or does it not?
Annette Bowers is the plaintiff in Bowers v. West Athens. Ms. Bowers is suing West Athens to compel
the city to allow her to operate a small sewing business out of her home. Bowers designs and sews
custom-made clothing for about a dozen women. She consults with her customers at her home
about the design they want. She then designs and sews the clothing they order, and she also does
the final fitting at her home. The section of West Athens in which Bowers lives is zoned noncommercial, and the city has ruled that her sewing business is in violation of the zoning ordinance. The
attorney for Bowers argues that there is a precedent in the case: The city has allowed Joan Girard to
teach piano lessons in her home to about 15 students, and Girard’s home is on the same block as
Bowers’s house, and the same zoning regulations apply to both houses. How would the plaintiff’s
attorney argue that the precedent established for Girard’s business applies to Bowers’s sewing business (that the two cases are analogous)? How might the city attorney for West Athens argue that the
Bowers case does not fit under the Girard precedent? And finally, how would you rule on the case?
This is the same case as no. 2, above, but with one addition: Bowers’s attorney cites the Girard case,
as well as the additional case of Anthony Torelli, another person living in the same zoning district
with Bowers and Girard. Torelli is a craftsman, who carves wooden figures in a shop in his basement,
and sells the figures on weekends at craft shows throughout the region. Torelli also has approval
from the city to operate his craft business out of his home. With this additional precedent, Bowers’s
case now seems stronger, and the challenge for the city attorney is more difficult: How would the
city attorney interpret the cases so that the precedent established by the Girard and Torelli cases does
not apply to Bowers? How would the plaintiff’s attorney interpret the precedents? (Possibly this will
require no change in the plaintiff’s interpretation, but there may be a way of making it stronger.)
And again, as the judge, how would you rule?
In the village of Breezewood there is a city ordinance prohibiting advertising signs that are larger
than 3 feet by 3 feet. John Albers owns a furniture store in Breezewood, and he has been cited by
the city for violating the sign ordinance. Albers has parked a large truck trailer in front of his store,
near the highway. Painted on the side of the trailer is a sign in bright red letters, with a background
in sky blue; the sign reads, “Albers Furniture: Some Sell Cheaper, but None Sell Better.” The trailer
has been parked in the same place, without moving, for over 3 months.
Albers’s attorney argues that there is a binding precedent in the case. She claims that in the
case of Winston v. West Athens, the city of West Athens filed charges against a candidate for the city
council (Winston) who had a pickup truck in which he had placed a large (12 feet by 15 feet) sign,
saying, “Elect Winston for a Better West Athens.” Every day Winston would drive the truck to his
restaurant in downtown West Athens and park it in a prominent place on Main Street. In that case,
the court had ruled in favor of Winston: that Winston was not in violation of the ordinance, and
could continue to park his truck in front of his restaurant.
How would Albers’s attorney argue that both cases fit under the same principle? How would
the West Athens city attorney argue that the Winston case is not analogous, that the precedent does
not apply, and that the cases do not fit under the same principle? And finally, how would you rule?
Johnny, age 8, is scheduled for a trip to the dentist—and he is not too thrilled about the idea.
However, he does see an opportunity for gain. “Mom, can I have a special present for going to the

196

Chapter 11

6.

7.

8.

9.

Arguments by Analogy

dentist without complaining? I think the whole thing is pretty awful, and I hate it when they poke
around on my gums. But if I could get a present, it wouldn’t seem so bad.”
“No, Honey, you can’t get a present just because you go to the dentist.”
“That’s not fair. Yesterday when Julie (Johnny’s sister, age 6) had to get a vaccination
shot, you promised her she could get a special present if she was brave and didn’t complain.
So if she gets a present for going to the doctor, I should get a present for going to the
dentist.”
The precedent here is Julie’s present as a reward for being brave while getting a shot. How
can the plaintiff (Johnny) interpret that precedent so that going to the dentist fits under the same
principle? How can mom (appearing for the defense) interpret the Julie-present precedent so that
the two cases are not analogous?
This is a case before the student judicial board at Home State University: Teresa Villanti was a
student in Professor Cedric Seisner’s course on Greek mythology. Professor Seisner assigned a
paper, due Friday, November 1. Teresa turned in her paper a day late, and was penalized a letter
grade. She is appealing the grade, on the grounds that the reason she turned her paper in late was
that she drove with friends to a football game that Home State University was playing against a
distant rival, and that she had to leave before class in order to make the drive. Furthermore,
another student in her class, Arthur Wallace, plays in the Home State University band, and missed
class to take the band bus to the same football game; he also turned his paper in a day late, and his
grade was not penalized. Since Arthur’s grade was not penalized, Teresa argues that it is unfair that
her grade be penalized.
Taking the case of Arthur Wallace as a precedent, how would you (as student attorney for
Teresa) formulate the principle behind the precedent? How might Professor Seisner formulate the
governing principle in order to claim that the two cases are not analogous? How would you rule on
this grade appeal?
The hearings of the student judicial board continue with a new case. Professor Sarah Black assigned
a paper to her ancient philosophy seminar, due in class on November 1, with a letter grade penalty
for late papers. Class met from 10:00 to 11:30 A.M. on Fridays. Andrew Wythe delivered his paper to
Professor Black on Friday afternoon (at about 1:00 P.M.) at her office, and was penalized a letter
grade. Laura Strope brought her paper to the classroom at 11:35 A.M.; class was over, but Professor
Black was continuing the discussion of the morning seminar with two students, while she gathered
her notes. Laura’s grade was not penalized.
Using the case of Laura Strope as a precedent, how could Andrew (the plaintiff) present the
principle behind the precedent to argue that (by analogy) his grade also should not have been
penalized? How could Professor Black formulate the principle to justify penalizing Andrew but not
Laura? How would you rule?
This case is a modification of no. 7, above. In addition to the case of Laura Strope, Andrew has
found another precedent: Bryan Nash, another student in Professor Black’s seminar (with an
unfortunate tendency to oversleep), was rushing to class with his paper at 11:45 A.M. As he
approached the classroom building, he saw Professor Black walking across campus with Laura
Strope and another student from the class; they were discussing Home State University’s upcoming
football game. Bryan handed his paper to Professor Black, and his grade was not penalized. How
would the two sides interpret the precedents, and how would you rule?
Travis Carter has been convicted of breaking or entering. To be guilty of breaking or entering, four
things must be established: first, that the defendant either broke into or entered the building;
second, that what he broke into or entered was indeed a building; third, that the defendant did not
have permission to enter the building; and fourth, that the defendant broke into or entered with
the intention of committing a felony. In his trial, there was evidence that Carter had slipped into a
building site late at night, with the intention of stealing plumbing materials. The jury found that he
had intended to steal building materials, that he did not have the permission of the owner to be on
the property, and that he was indeed inside the building that was under construction. The judge
advised the jury that although the building Carter entered was still under construction, it nonetheless counted as a building. (The framing of the building was complete, and the walls were up along
with the overhead beams, but there was no roof on the building at the time Carter entered; instead,
the site was protected from the elements by heavy plastic sheeting.) However, Carter’s attorney is
appealing the breaking or entering conviction on the grounds that the judge’s instruction was
mistaken, and that what Carter entered was not in fact a building, but only a building site; and so
one of the necessary conditions for breaking or entering was not met, and that Carter’s conviction
must therefore be overturned. (Carter could then be tried for illegal trespass, and perhaps theft;
but not for breaking or entering.)

Chapter 11

197

Arguments by Analogy

When Carter’s case comes before the court of appeals, Carter’s attorney argues that there is
a strong precedent for not counting the area Carter entered as a building. The appeals court had
ruled, in the previous year, on a case in which Howard Alston had been convicted of breaking or
entering into a camp house (used during hunting season by a group of hunters) that had a floor
and four rough walls, but was covered by a heavy tarpaulin rather than a permanent roof. In the Alston case, the appeals court reversed Alston’s conviction, ruling that the camp house was really a glorified tent, rather than a real building.
How could Carter’s attorney interpret the precedent to make the governing principle also
apply to Carter’s case? The district attorney, who is the prosecuting attorney in the Carter case,
argues that the Alston precedent does not apply to the Carter case. How would that argument go?
And again, how would you rule?
10. In a variation on case no. 9, above, suppose that, in addition to the defense’s citation of the Alston
case, the district attorney (who is trying to uphold the conviction) offers another precedent: the case
of Patricia Plummer. Two years earlier, the court of appeals upheld the conviction of Patricia Plummer, who had been convicted of breaking or entering after she was apprehended in a building that
was under repair. The building had lost its roof in a tornado, and was covered by a heavy tarpaulin
while repairs were made to the rest of the house. The court had ruled that the house was indeed a
building, and remained so while repairs were being made.
How would the district attorney interpret the two precedents so that the Plummer case is
analogous to Carter’s case, but the Alston case is not? How could the defense attorney formulate
the principle behind the Alston precedent so that the court’s ruling in the Plummer case is not in
conflict with it? Does this additional precedent change your ruling?

Exercise 11-7

How Do You Rule?

Bob Daemmrich / Alamy

You are a member of the Supreme Court of the State of
New Virginia; the case before you is an appeal from
Arnold Avery. Avery was convicted of second-degree burglary for having broken into a station wagon that was serving as the home of Elizabeth Watson and stealing jewelry,
valued at $600, from the front seat. Several facts are not in
dispute: Avery admits to having broken into the station
wagon during the night with the intention of stealing the
jewelry; he admits stealing the jewelry; and it is established
that the break-in occurred at night. It is also established
that the victim, Watson, was living in the station wagon—it
was her sole place of residence—which was parked on a
vacant lot, and that she had been living in the vehicle for 6 weeks prior to the crime. She had covered
the back three windows of the station wagon with brown paper attached with tape; she kept a container
of water and some bread and peanut butter in the back seat, and she slept in a sleeping bag in the back
of the station wagon. Avery was tried on charges of second-degree burglary. He was found guilty.
The law of New Virginia regarding burglary is as follows:
A person is guilty of burglary if he enters a building or occupied structure with purpose to commit a crime
therein, unless the premises are at the time open to the public or the actor is licensed or privileged to enter.
Burglary is a felony of the second degree if it is perpetrated in the dwelling of another at night.
“Occupied structure” means any structure, vehicle or place adapted for overnight accommodation of persons, or for carrying on business therein.17

The defendant appeals his conviction on the grounds that the station wagon was not an “occupied
structure” as defined by the law, and therefore burglary, as defined by New Virginia law, could not
have been committed, and his conviction should be overturned. (Since it is agreed that no weapons
were employed or threats uttered, and it is also agreed that the defendant did unlawfully take the
jewelry from the station wagon, the defendant is willing to offer a plea of guilty to the lesser charge
of third-degree felony theft.)
Your Supreme Court colleagues present opposing arguments. Justice Burdette argues,

198

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

Two years ago we heard a case quite similar to this. A man—with no permanent address—had pulled
his station wagon into a rest area and was sleeping in the back in a sleeping bag. Another man—the
defendant, Molina—entered the front door of the station wagon while the victim slept and stole the
victim’s wallet (containing $600). He was convicted of second-degree burglary; but on appeal, we
reversed that verdict, finding that the victim’s station wagon did not qualify under New Virginia law as
an “occupied structure.” It is obvious that the same thing applies here, and we must follow the
precedent that we set in the Molina case.

Justice Spahn disagrees,
No, Justice Burdette, this case is only superficially similar to that one; the only similarity is in the
station wagons, but there the similarity ends and relevant differences appear. This case is in fact much
closer to the precedent we set last year in the Lowery case. As you recall, Lowery had been convicted
of burglary for entering the camper of the victim and stealing a television and stereo system while the
victim slept in the bunk of the camper. The victim was in the habit of spending six months out of each
year parked in the camper at a campsite near the ocean. We ruled in that case that the camper
certainly was a “vehicle or place adapted for overnight accommodation of persons,” and thus was an
“occupied structure” under New Virginia burglary law, and thus was protected by the laws pertaining
to burglary. So we upheld the conviction of the defendant, Lowery, for second-degree burglary.

Justice Burdette:
But surely you are not comparing that camper—with its fold-down bunk and its sink and refrigerator and
television set—to the station wagon in which this unfortunate woman was sleeping! She was merely
sleeping in her car; it happens that she had been sleeping in her car for a longer time than had the victim in the Molina case; but that doesn’t change anything. That doesn’t transform her station wagon into
a “structure, vehicle or place adapted for overnight accommodation of persons.” It may have been used
for that, but it was not adapted to that purpose, and thus is not an “occupied structure” under the law.

Justice Spahn:
Justice Burdette, that is unfair. It is not just that the victim was sleeping in the station wagon; rather, it
was certainly an occupied structure, that had indeed been adapted for overnight accommodation of
persons. Not very elegantly adapted, that’s true; the victim could not afford a fold-down bunk and a
television set. But she had made the most of what she had. She taped up window coverings, she supplied herself with a water bottle, and she made her home as comfortable as possible for overnight
accommodation. The fact that she couldn’t afford lace curtains and a television set and a refrigerator
should not deprive her of her right of protection of her home under the New Virginia burglary laws.

Which is the appropriate precedent for this case? That is, which analogy is correct? In short,
Your Honor, do you vote with Justice Burdette to overturn the burglary conviction, or do you side
with Justice Spahn in upholding the conviction?

Exercise 11-8
In 1992, the Supreme Court of the United States ruled on the case of Hudson v. McMillian (No. 90-6531,
decided February 25, 1992). The facts of the case were not in dispute, and Justice O’Connor (writing
for the majority) described the situation in this way:
At the time of the incident that is the subject of this suit, petitioner Keith Hudson was an inmate at
the state penitentiary in Angola, Louisiana. Respondents Jack McMillian, Marvin Woods, and Arthur
Mezo served as corrections security officers at the Angola facility. During the early morning hours of
October 30, 1983, Husdon and McMillian argued. Assisted by Woods, McMillian then placed Hudson
in handcuffs and shackles, took the prisoner out of his cell, and walked him toward the penitentiary’s
“administrative lockdown” area. Hudson testified that, on the way there, McMillian punched Hudson
in the mouth, eyes, chest, and stomach while Woods held the inmate in place and kicked and
punched him from behind. He further testified that Mezo, the supervisor on duty, watched the
beating but merely told the officers “not to have too much fun.” As a result of this episode, Hudson
suffered minor bruises and swelling of his face, mouth, and lip. The blows also loosened Hudson’s
teeth and cracked his partial dental plate, rendering it unusable for several months.

Chapter 11

199

Arguments by Analogy

Justice O’Connor (writing for the majority of the Court) argued that this was clearly a case in
which force was not being applied to maintain order, but was instead a case of “maliciously and
sadistically” causing harm: “an unnecessary and wanton infliction of pain” that is in violation of the
Eighth Amendment forbidding cruel and unusual punishment. The beating suffered by the
prisoner Hudson caused no major or permanent injury, but was nonetheless a violation of the right
of all U.S. citizens (guaranteed by the Eighth Amendment to the Constitution) to be free from
cruel and unusual punishment.
In support of the majority opinion, Justice Blackmun stated the principle quite forcefully:
The Court today appropriately puts to rest a seriously misguided view that pain inflicted by an excessive use of force is actionable under the Eighth Amendment only when coupled with “significant
injury,” e.g., injury that requires medical attention or leaves permanent marks. Indeed, were we to
hold to the contrary, we might place various kinds of state-sponsored torture and abuse—of the kind
ingeniously designed to cause pain but without a telltale “significant injury”—entirely beyond the pale
of the Constitution. In other words, the constitutional prohibition of “cruel and unusual punishments” then might not constrain prison officials from lashing prisoners with leather straps, whipping
them with rubber hoses, beating them with naked fists, shocking them with electric currents, asphyxiating them short of death, intentionally exposing them to undue heat or cold, or forcibly injecting
them with psychosis-inducing drugs. These techniques, commonly thought to be practiced only
outside this Nation’s borders, are hardly unknown within this Nation’s prisons.

Justices Thomas and Scalia dissented from this judgment, claiming that such beatings were
not in violation of the Eighth Amendment against cruel and unusual punishment. They argued that
since this was a case in which the prisoner suffered no permanent injury, the case was analogous to
earlier cases in which the Supreme Court had ruled that prisoners’ rights were not violated: specifically, cases in which prisoners argued (unsuccessfully) that since they were being given unappetizing food, they were being subjected to cruel and unusual punishment. Thomas and Scalia argue
that the beating of Hudson (since it involves no permanent injury, but is merely unpleasant) should
be regarded as analogous to being served unappetizing food. And since the Court had in the past
ruled that giving prisoners unappetizing food is not cruel and unusual punishment, therefore beating them (without inflicting permanent injury) is likewise not cruel and unusual punishment.
How would you evaluate the analogy given by Thomas and Scalia? Is it legitimate, or is it
fallacious?

Exercise 11-9

How Do You Rule?

Bob Daemmrich / Alamy

Anderson Jack and George Louie Charlie are members
of the Tsartlip Band of Coast Salish Indians of British
Columbia. They shot and killed a deer for use in a religious ceremony (the ceremony involved burning the
type of food eaten by one of their ancestors, to satisfy the
ancestor’s spirit). Since the deer was killed out of season
(in violation of the Wildlife Act) they were arrested and
tried. During their trial they admitted killing the deer,
but argued that they should not be prosecuted since that
would be an interference with their right to the free
practice of their religion. They were convicted, and they
appealed their conviction to the British Columbia Court
of Appeal ([1982] 5 W.W.R. 193). The court of appeal upheld the conviction, and the opinion was
written by Mr. Justice Craig, who argued as follows, using an analogy:
In this case, I am concerned entirely with a religious practice. Much argument was directed to the question of “freedom of religion,” which phrase I think would be better expressed as “liberty of conscience.”
There can be no question as to the existence of that liberty; but when it comes to the practices which flow
from a religious belief, that is, conduct, the State has a legitimate interest in restricting them, should it
be necessary to do so, in the interest of public order and decency. To take an extreme example, an oldfashioned Aztec in this country could believe as he wished, but when he practiced his rite of human

200

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

sacrifice he would have to answer for it at the Assizes [courts]. It is safe to say, I think, that generally
speaking a practice arising from a sincerely held religious belief may be restrained if it is a breach of the
peace, or interferes with public or private rights or otherwise amounts to an illegal act.

Do you agree with Mr. Justice Craig’s analogy? And do you dismiss the appeal, and let the conviction
stand, or would you grant the appeal and overturn the conviction?
Mr. Justice Hutcheon dissented, and voted in favor of allowing the appeal and reversing the
conviction. He argued,
The ritual [for which the defendants killed the deer] is not harmful to society, is not opposed to the
common good and is not in violation of the rights of any other individual. I have concluded that they
were not guilty of an offence and that this appeal should be allowed. The law is aimed at wildlife
conservation. There is no suggestion that the loss of one deer for the purpose of the ritual would
impair the legislative purpose.

Mr. Justice Hutcheon is attempting to counter the argument of Mr. Justice Craig. Is this an effective
counterargument? That is, consider Mr. Justice Hutcheon’s argument as an attack on Mr. Justice
Craig’s analogy between forbidding the Coast Salish Indians from hunting deer out of season and
forbidding the Aztec ritual of human sacrifice: Mr. Justice Hutcheon claims the two cases are not
really analogous. Fill in the details of Mr. Justice Hutcheson’s argument (in particular, describe how
Mr. Justice Hutcheon interprets the principle behind Mr. Justice Craig’s Aztec analogy, and explain
how he would argue that the principle does not apply to the case of Jack and Charlie).
The case was appealed to the Supreme Court of Canada ([1985] 2 S.C.R. 332). The Supreme
Court rejected the appeal, ruling that the killing of the deer was not part of the ritual (the ritual
involved burning the meat, not killing the deer), thus freedom of religious practice was not an
issue. Suppose that the Supreme Court had offered this analogy:
The defendants were not convicted because of their practice of a religious ritual. The ritual involved
burning meat, and there is no law against that. Instead, the defendants were convicted for killing a deer
out of season. It happens they wanted the deer for purposes of a religious ritual, but that is irrelevant.
After all, suppose my religion involves a ritual of putting money in a collection plate, and I lack the money
for the ritual. If I steal the money, and then use the money in the ritual, I can’t claim that my theft should
not be punished because it is part of a religious ritual. Putting the money in the plate is part of the ritual,
but obtaining the money (by theft or otherwise) is not. Likewise, the defendants have every right to
practice their ritual of burning meat; but they do not have a right to violate the Conservation Act to get
the meat. Getting the meat is no part of the ritual, just as getting the money to put in the plate is no part
of my ritual, and neither of us can maintain that our illegal acts are protected as religious practices.
Would that be a good argument by analogy? Why or why not?

Suppose that the ritual were more elaborate: It requires not only burning the meat, but also hunting and
killing the sacrificial deer on a specific day (a day that is not within the hunting season). Would that
affect your ruling? Under those circumstances, would you uphold or overturn the conviction?

Exercise 11-10

Bob Daemmrich / Alamy

How Do You Rule?
Frank Dallas and Walt Murphy are admitted drug smugglers who use a small freighter, the Seasprite, to haul
marijuana from South America to drop off points in
international waters off the coast of Alaska. They travel up
the coast of Canada, but they make it a point to stay in
international waters so they cannot be stopped by the
Canadian authorities. On one of their trips, they
encounter problems off the Canadian coast: the engine is
overheating, their navigation devices are not working,
and the weather is going from bad to worse. As the storm
worsens, they fear that the ship will be sunk and all hands
lost, so they head for a small bay along the British

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

201

Columbia coast. They make it into the bay, but the storm is severe and their depthfinder is broken,
and so they run aground near the shore. As the tide goes out, the grounded ship begins to list badly
to one side. The captain, fearing that the ship will capsize, orders the crew to unload all the cargo onto
the shore. They do so, and soon about 30 tons of marijuana are sitting on the shore, covered with
tarps. At that point, police officers enter the bay in a police boat, and apprehend Dallas and Murphy
and their crew. Dallas and Murphy are charged with importing marijuana into Canada, and with
possession of marijuana with the intent of trafficking.
Dallas and Murphy go to trial, and are convicted. They appeal their case, arguing that they
had no intent of smuggling marijuana into Canada or of selling marijuana in Canada. Instead, they
came into Canada because their lives were in danger on the high sea, and the storm compelled
them to seek safety.
Justice Carpenter argues that the conviction should be upheld: Dallas and Murphy may have
been forced ashore by the storm, but they still smuggled an illegal substance into Canada, and they
possessed the drugs with intent to sell them, since they were obviously not holding 30 tons of
marijuana for their own personal use.
Justice Miller disagrees. She argues that the convictions should be overturned. They may have
intended to traffic in marijuana, but they intended to do so on the open seas, not in Canada; and it
is not a violation of Canadian law to traffic in marijuana on the open seas, any more than it violates
Canadian law to traffic in marijuana in Sweden. And they certainly were not smuggling drugs into
Canada. Look, suppose they had been hauling a load of tractors, which they had planned to unload
in Alaska. And suppose they were forced ashore by the storm, and forced to unload their cargo on
the Canadian coast. Surely no one would accuse these shipwrecked sailors of smuggling tractors
into Canada. In this case, the cargo was marijuana rather than tractors, but the principle remains
the same. Don’t misunderstand: I think Dallas and Murphy are vile and despicable, but vile and
despicable as they are, they did not violate Canadian law.
So how do you rule? Would you vote with Miller to overturn the convictions, or with Carpenter
to uphold the convictions? Do you agree with Justice Miller’s analogy? Why or why not?18

Study and Review on mythinkinglab.com

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What is a figurative analogy?
2. What does a good deductive argument by analogy prove?
3. There are basically two different ways of opposing a deductive argument by analogy; describe
both.
4. What is the fallacy of analogical literalism?
5. Give an example of an inductive argument by analogy.

NOTES
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

8
9
10

F. Lee Bailey and Harvey Aronson, The Defense Never Rests (New York: Stein and Day, 1971), p. 90.
“The ‘Devastating’ Decision,” New York Review of Books, February 25, 2010.
Irwin Smallwood column, Greensboro News & Record, Sunday, July 20, 1986.
National Geographic, July 1982.
Interview of Country Joe McDonald, Newsweek, November 28, 1983, p. 76.
This example was adapted from Brendan Minogue, Bioethics: A Committee Approach (Sudbury, MA: Jones
and Bartlett, 1996), pp. 335–336.
Judith Jarvis Thomson, “A Defense of Abortion,” Philosophy and Public Affairs, Vol. 1, no. 1 (Fall 1971).
Copyright ©1971, by Princeton University Press. Excerpt, pp. 48–49, reprinted with permission of Princeton University Press.
John Martin Fischer, “Abortion and Self-Determination,” Social Philosophy, Vol. 22, no. 2 (Fall 1991), p. 6.
Ibid, p. 7.
McCleskey’s lawyers relied on an important and extensive study that was reported in David C. Baldus,
George Woodworth, and Charles A. Pulaski, Jr., Equal Justice and the Death Penalty: A Legal and Empirical
Analysis (Boston, MA: Northeastern University Press, 1990).

202

Chapter 11
11

12
13
14
15
16
17
18

Arguments by Analogy

Jeffrey Abramson, We, the Jury (New York: Basic Books, 1994), pp. 233–235. Copyright ©1994 by Basic
Books. Epilogue to the paperback edition Copyright ©1995 by Basic Books. Reprinted by permission of
Jeffrey Abramson, a division of HarperCollins Publishers, Inc.
Greensboro Daily News, July 18, 1982.
Irwin Smallwood, Greensboro Daily News & Record, September 6, 1987.
Reported by Brian E. Albrecht, Cleveland Plain Dealer, December 1996.
Reprinted by permission of Tim Giago and Indian Country Today.
Lon L. Fuller, “The Case of the Speluncean Explorers,” Harvard Law Review, Vol. 62, no. 4 (1949),
pp. 616–623.
The “Law of New Virginia” is adapted from the 1985 Model Penal Code and Commentaries, by The American
Law Institute.
This case was inspired by the case of Perka v. Regina, which was examined by the Supreme Court of
Canada in 1984 (2 S.C.R. 232). I discovered the case in an excellent book by Jerome E. Beckenback:
Canadian Cases in the Philosophy of Law, 3rd ed. Though inspired by an actual case, I have made substantial changes in the case (including the invention of a fictional precedent and fictional arguments by
fictional justices), so the resulting example is pure fiction.

INTERNET RESOURCES
An article by Grant LaMond, “Precedent and Analogy in Legal Reasoning,” can be found online in
the excellent Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (an invaluable resource for almost any topic in
philosophy); go to Plato.stanford.edu.

ADDITIONAL READING
For an excellent discussion of analogies, especially analogical reasoning in the courts, see Martin P. Golding, Legal
Reasoning (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1984), especially
Chapter 3.
Thinking Like a Lawyer, by Kenneth J. Vandevelde
(Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1996), is a very entertaining
and readable discussion of analogy in law. It’s not easy
reading, but it is very clear, uses a minimum of jargon, and
offers wonderful examples.
The classic and still fascinating study of analogy in
legal reasoning is by Eugene. H. Levy: An Introduction to Legal
Reasoning (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1948).
An article by Thomas J. McKay, “Analogy and Argument,” in Teaching Philosophy, Vol. 20, no. 1. (March 1997),
pp. 49–60, presents an interesting analysis of analogies
that is somewhat different from the model presented
here. McKay analyzes arguments by analogy in a way that
is very similar to the analysis of deductive arguments by
analogy presented in this chapter; however, he attempts to
treat all uses of analogy as fitting under that analysis, and
makes no distinction among deductive, inductive, and

figurative analogies. You might find it interesting to read
McKay’s article, and then make your own critical decision
about what model works best: McKay’s account, the model
presented in this chapter, or some new model of your own
contrivance.
Bruce N. Waller, “Classifying and Analyzing Analogies,” Informal Logic, Vol. 21, no. 3 (2001), pp. 199–218,
develops the distinctions among types of analogies in
more depth.
There are two interesting articles in Reasoning in
Ethics and Law: The Role of Theory, Principles and Facts,
edited by Albert W. Musschenga and Wim J. van der Steen
(Aldershot, Hampshire, UK: Ashgate, 1999): “The Reconstruction of Legal Analogy-Argumentation,” by Harm
Kloosterhuis, pp. 89–106; and “Set a Sprat to Catch a
Whale: The Structure, Strength and Function of Analogical Inferences,” by Henri Wijsbek, pp. 63–88.
Cass R. Sunstein, Legal Reasoning and Political Conflict
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996), is an excellent
study of legal reasoning, with special emphasis on the use
of reasoning from precedents and reasoning by analogy.

Read the Document on mythinkinglab.com
David Abel, “Peek Performance.” This argument by analogy deals with a case of student cheating: Is the analogy a
good one, or is it misleading?
Denis Diderot, Conversation with Maréchale de. This
dialogue by an eighteenth-century French philosopher
and essayist, Diderot, is an elaborate argument by analogy,
dealing with the question of whether a just God would
punish those who do not believe in God.

U.S. Supreme Court, Griffin v. Illinois, 351 U.S. 12,
19 (1956). In order for a convicted criminal to obtain an
appeals court review of his or her case, that person must
provide a transcript of the original trial. The transcript
is often rather expensive, and thus poor people often
have no means of obtaining a transcript, and so are
effectively excluded from appealing their convictions.
In this case, Griffin—who was convicted of armed

Chapter 11

Arguments by Analogy

robbery—wished to appeal his case on grounds of error,
but could not afford a transcript; he claimed that this
was a violation of the Due Process and Equal Protections
clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment (because it
deprived poor people of a right to appeal that wealthier
people enjoyed). The Court ruled in favor of Griffin,
requiring that Illinois provide a trial transcript for persons wishing to appeal who could not pay for a transcript.
In the argument for that conclusion, an argument by
analogy plays a key part.
Jack and Charlie v. The Queen [1985] 2 S.C.R. 332. An
interesting Canadian case in which the defendants
acknowledge killing a deer out of season, but argue that it
is required for a religious ritual of the Coast Salish people.
The Court examines and critiques several analogies in the
course of its arguments.

203
M. L. B., Petitioner, v. S. L. J., 519 U.S. 102 (1996). In
this case, a Mississippi Chancery Court declared M.L.B. an
unfit mother for her two children, terminated all her
parental rights toward the two children, and granted full custody of the two children to their biological father and his new
wife. M.L.B. wished to appeal this ruling, but lacked the necessary funds (approximately $2,500) for the appeal. She argued that the state of Mississippi should provide funds for
the appeal, just as it would fund a criminal appeal for someone without the means to pay. The state of Mississippi refused to fund the appeal, arguing that it had no obligation to
fund such an appeal (since this was not a criminal case). The
Supreme Court ruled in favor of M.L.B., stating that the state
was required to pay the necessary costs to make it possible for
M.L.B. to appeal; Justice Ginsburg’s argument for that conclusion relied heavily on an interesting analogical argument.

12

❖❖❖

Some Distinctive Arguments
and Potential Pitfalls: Slippery
Slope, Dilemma, and Golden
Mean Arguments
Listen to the Chapter Audio on mythinkinglab.com
This chapter deals with several types of argument that pose special dangers of deception.
They are not always fallacious—slippery slope and dilemma arguments can be quite
legitimate—but they all have insidiously fallacious forms, present special challenges, and
require special attention.

SLIPPERY SLOPE
You encounter slippery slope arguments everywhere: in the courtroom, in political debate,
in bioethics, in questions of social policy. Sometimes they are legitimate arguments; often
they are not.
As noted in the previous chapter, a slippery slope argument basically claims that an
innocent-looking step should not be taken (or an innocent-looking policy should not be
adopted) because it will lead to a bad result. The first step down the slope may be
tempting; but do not take it, because once you start down that slope, it will be difficult or
impossible to stop, and disaster awaits at the bottom. The argument goes by several
common names. It is sometimes called the wedge argument: Once the thin entering
wedge slips under the bark and into the wood, it can be driven ever deeper into the solid
log, until what had seemed a small break finally results in splitting the log into pieces.
Occasionally people speak of the domino argument: Push down one domino and it starts
a long sequence. Lawyers often call it the “parade of horribles” argument. Politicians
seem to favor “the camel’s nose is in the tent” argument; I’m not quite sure how that
name started, but the idea seems to be that once the camel gets its nose in the tent, it is
difficult to keep the rest of the camel outside.
If good and substantial reasons are given for supposing that the innocent first
step really will lead to bad consequences, then the slippery slope argument is legitimate.
The reasons given need not be conclusive; so long as some substantive reasons are
given, no slippery slope fallacy is involved. The slippery slope fallacy is committed when
one claims that an innocent-looking first step will lead to bad consequences, without

204

Chapter 12

Some Distinctive Arguments and Potential Pitfalls: Slippery Slope, Dilemma, and Golden Mean Arguments

205

giving reasons. If we honor the requests by competent adults suffering from a fatal
disease and intervene to give them the requested quick and painless death, then it will
lead to the forced involuntary killing of the elderly and the disabled and ultimately
anyone deemed “undesirable” or burdensome. If you try a puff of marijuana, you will
move on to cocaine and will wind up a hopeless, homeless, and hardened heroin
addict. Notice that a legitimate slippery slope argument requires more than just a series
of steps leading to a disastrous conclusion; there must be reasons for why those steps
are likely to occur.
You may hear such arguments in court. For example, the prosecuting attorney
may encourage you (the jury) to be stern, severe, and courageous and not to shrink
from your duty of demanding severe punishment for this guilty defendant; otherwise,
this crime will be unpunished, criminals will run amok, and the social fabric of
society will be threatened. Or as the great hero of John Mortimer’s novels—the defending barrister, Rumpole of the Bailey—once described the opening speech of the
prosecution:
I sat containing myself as best I could whilst that aristocratic voice opened the case to the jury
as though, if Dobbs were not convicted, there would be a total breakdown of law and order,
rioting in the streets and human sacrifices in the crypt of St. Paul’s Cathedral.1

Separating Slippery Slopes from Straw Men
In the previous chapter, it was noted that deductive arguments by analogy often sound
like slippery slopes: If we ban burning the American flag in protest, then must we also ban
cursing the American flag in protest? Would we then ban burning copies of the U.S.
Constitution or the Declaration of Independence in protest? Where would this ban on
political protest lead? That sounds like a slippery slope argument: If you start with a ban
on burning the American flag, ultimately you will wind up with a ban on all political
protest. But rather than a slippery slope argument, it is probably more plausible to
interpret this as an analogy. Banning protestors from burning the American flag is like
banning protestors from other forms of political protest; we think it would be wrong to
limit political protest in those ways, so consistency requires that we allow flag burning as
well, even if most people are deeply disturbed by it.
Slippery slope arguments are also easily confused with strawman arguments.
Suppose I say that we should ban physician-assisted suicide (euthanasia) because it
would involve having doctors choose who will live and who will die, and would give
doctors the right to kill any patient the doctor judges unfit or as having a “poor quality
of life.” That is a strawman argument. Those who favor physician-assisted suicide want
very tight restrictions on when it would be allowed, and they would absolutely require
that only those who have freely chosen to end their own lives (because they are suffering
from a debilitating disease) would be candidates for physician-assisted suicide. But if
I argue instead that while the initial plan is to allow physician-assisted suicide only for
those who freely and competently choose it, but that once that is in place it will
gradually lead to the killing of unconscious patients, and then to all patients with
terminal diseases (whether they request it or not) and ultimately to the killing of anyone
society judges unfit, then that is a slippery slope argument. In the slippery slope
argument, I am not attributing that extreme position to those who favor physicianassisted suicide (indeed, I may believe that they would deplore an outcome in which the
“unfit” are involuntarily killed). Rather, I am claiming that the policy they are
advocating would lead to this result, not (as in straw man) that this eventual result is one
they favor. If I claim that gun control advocates want to ban all private ownership of
firearms, that is a strawman argument; if I claim instead that a ban on the private

206

Chapter 12

Some Distinctive Arguments and Potential Pitfalls: Slippery Slope, Dilemma, and Golden Mean Arguments

ownership of automatic rifles and machine guns would lead to a total ban on the private
ownership of firearms, that is a slippery slope argument.

The Slippery Slope Fallacy
Like many argument tricks, slippery slope fallacies are easy to spot once you know what
to look for. Slippery slope fallacies focus attention on some gruesome end result and fail
to show that such a horrible result will actually follow. We are mesmerized by the terrors
at the bottom of the slope and forget to ask whether the slope is in fact that slippery.
Examples are legion. When fluoride was added to the public water supply, the writer
David Reuben argued that this could lead to nutritional supplements in our water, and then
tranquilizers to keep citizens from raising disturbances, and ultimately to birth-control
chemicals directed toward neighborhoods with large populations of “undesirables.”
Now certainly the thought of placing massive doses of tranquilizers in the public
water supply to control the population and birth-control chemicals to reduce the birth
rate of ethnic groups is morally repulsive. It would be a horrible violation of our autonomy, our dignity, and our basic rights as citizens—indeed, a violation of our basic rights as
autonomous persons. But before we become obsessed with the genuine horror of such
programs, we should stop and notice that there is not the ghost of a reason for supposing
that such dreadful results would follow from placing fluoride in the public water system.
There is no reason given for supposing that adding fluoride will lead to adding vitamins,
much less that adding fluoride will lead all the way down to adding tranquilizers and
birth-control chemicals. The slide from fluoride to tranquilizers and birth-control chemicals descends down an implausible and fallacious slippery slope.
Notice that the above slippery slope fallacy does give steps. It’s still a fallacy, because it
gives no reasons why one step leads to another. And providing reasons for some steps is
not enough; there must be a reason for each step down the slope (though, of course, to
further complicate things, the reasons for some of the steps might be considered so
obvious that they need not be stated).

Genuine Slippery Slopes
Not all slippery slope arguments commit the slippery slope fallacy. There are some
dangerous slippery slopes, and it is well to avoid them. Current acts often do have further

A Steep, Slippery Slope
A dramatic example of a slippery slope fallacy occurred in an 1847 murder trial in New York. The climax of the prosecutor’s final speech to the jury was as
follows:
If mawkish sympathy enters the jurybox—if ever
mawkish sympathy takes control of the jurybox, if men
surrender their feelings as men, then there is but one
other step to take. Mawkish sympathy has then but to
ascend to the judiciary, which, thank God, it has not
yet reached! Then strike the scales away from the
hands of Justice, pull the bandage away from one eye
and place it on both, and let the community know that
while it is true that juries

“When human life is in debate
Can ne’er too long deliberate”
yet, that if they deliberate to such an extent as to
give immunity to crime, by acquittal, when circumstances are damning, there will come into the world,
and be inaugurated, that millennial triumph of the
powers of darkness of which we all have read in Holy
Writ.2

Now that is really sliding down the slope: If the jury
fails to convict, then they will usher in the “millennial triumph of the powers of darkness”; in other
words, failure to convict will result in a millennium of
Satanic rule.

Chapter 12

Some Distinctive Arguments and Potential Pitfalls: Slippery Slope, Dilemma, and Golden Mean Arguments

207

effects that warrant examination. Suppose we are considering whether to allow a manufacturer of hydraulic fluid to dump millions of gallons of PCB-contaminated wastes into
a small stream. Someone who opposes such dumping might argue that (because of the
direction of water flow and the cumulative effects of contaminants on animals higher in
the food chain) the PCBs will run from that stream into a downstream river, will accumulate in fish, will pollute our drinking water with a known cancer-causing agent, and will
eventually result in pollution of rivers, the killing of wildlife, and a severe hazard to
humans who use the water downstream. That argument points out further undesirable
effects that will result from allowing the proposed PCB dumping, but certainly the argument does not commit the slippery slope fallacy. The arguer has given good reasons to
believe that undesirable results will follow from this action; thus that argument is not a
slippery slope fallacy. Some actions do have bad effects, and we should be wary of them.
And if one gives reasons for why and how a particular action will lead to bad effects, then
that is not a slippery slope fallacy. The slippery slope fallacy occurs when one claims that
an action will have bad consequences, but fails to give grounds for the claim that such
bad consequences will follow. If I assert that you should not smoke marijuana because it
will result in heroin addiction, then I have committed the slippery slope fallacy. But, if
I argue that you should not try heroin (because it is strongly addictive, and small initial
amounts can easily lead to an addictive desire for regular and increasing doses, and thus
a likely result is the misery of drug addiction), that slippery slope argument is not a slippery
slope fallacy.
Someone might argue that initial marijuana use should be avoided, because doing
a little marijuana makes it psychologically easier to do more, and once you have crossed
the line into any sort of illegal drug use, access to harder drugs is likely to be easier; and
once you have experimented with mild drugs, the temptation to try other, more powerful
drugs becomes stronger. Therefore, in order to avoid the increased likelihood of using
harder drugs, you should avoid even the lightest use of marijuana. That may not be a very
strong slippery slope argument: The reasons given for thinking that the first innocent
step may lead to disaster are hardly conclusive. Still, reasons are given, and those reasons
must be considered: It cannot simply be dismissed as a slippery slope fallacy, even if one
ultimately judges the argument inadequate.
Distinguishing slippery slope fallacies from legitimate slippery slope arguments can
be tough, and sometimes judgments will differ. When we are evaluating a slippery slope
argument, you may decide that the reasons given for some of the steps are so flimsy that
they don’t really count as reasons (and thus the argument is a slippery slope fallacy);
whereas I may think those weak reasons are still reasons, and so not regard the argument
as a slippery slope fallacy (but instead just a very weak argument). Or again, the reasons for
one step may strike you as so obvious that they need not be stated, whereas I may think the
missing reasons not at all obvious (and thus I count the argument as a slippery slope
fallacy). So there’s often room for disagreement: No one promised critical thinking would
be easy or obvious. But the main thing in considering slippery slope arguments is clear:
Are there good reasons to think the slope really is slippery?
By focusing attention on some dreadful eventuality, slippery slope fallacies
distract us from what is actually at issue. Certainly it is important to consider all the
consequences of our acts and policies, but it is also important to think carefully about
what those consequences will be. Do not be stampeded into opposing some act or
policy by someone’s unsupported assertion of the dire consequences that will follow.
Remember: If someone makes a claim, it is up to that individual to give reasons in support of that claim. The burden of proving that terrible consequences will follow rests
with the person making that claim. To simply assert that dreadful results will follow,
without giving any reasons for that assertion, is to commit the slippery slope fallacy. But
don’t jump to the other extreme of supposing that all slippery slope arguments are fallacies. There are some genuinely treacherous slippery slopes, and legitimate slippery

208

Chapter 12

Some Distinctive Arguments and Potential Pitfalls: Slippery Slope, Dilemma, and Golden Mean Arguments

slope arguments perform the important function of warning us of them. As is generally
the case in intelligent critical thinking, there is no cookbook formula for deciding
whether a slippery slope argument is or is not fallacious. You must consider whether
real reasons are given for thinking that the first step will actually lead down a dangerous slope (if there are none, then it is obviously a slippery slope fallacy), and you must
evaluate the strength of those reasons.

Exercise 12-1
Look over the following examples and decide which ones are instances of the slippery slope fallacy
and which ones give well-founded warnings of genuine slippery slope dangers.
1. “[The environmentalists’] real thrust is not clean air, or clean water, or parks, or wildlife but the
form of government under which America will live. Look what happened to Germany in the 1930s.
The dignity of man was subordinated to the powers of Nazism. The dignity of man was subordinated in Russia. Those are the forces that this thing can evolve into.”3
2. It is very frustrating when our manufacturers fail to win a share of a foreign market; and when that
happens, we are tempted to respond by imposing tariffs on goods from the country where we failed
to achieve a decent market share, in an effort to force the other country to open their markets to
our goods. In extreme cases, perhaps such punitive tariffs are necessary, but they should be used
very rarely, and avoided if at all possible. For what happens if we can’t sell our paint in Tangistan,
and so decide to slap a punitive tariff on radios imported from Tangistan? That makes the radio
manufacturers in Tangistan angry, and they pressure their government to respond with a punitive
tariff—and so Tangistan places high tariffs on all the cameras we export to that country. And then
our camera manufacturers get angry, and they call for high tariffs against all fruits and vegetables
imported from Tangistan. And soon you have the makings of an all-out trade war between
the two countries, with all the problems for both manufacturers and consumers that such a
trade war causes.
3. We must stop this movement for a moment of silence in public schools. Because once you allow
a moment of silence it soon becomes a moment of teachers leading prayers, and before long the
schools and the government are supporting a specific religion, and that can soon lead to a
government-sponsored religion and to the ban of all religions other than the one favored by the
government.
4. Mike Huckabee, the former governor of Arkansas, claimed in his recent book (A Simple Government)
that research on the comparative effectiveness of various medical treatments (studies to determine
which medical treatments are actually effective, which are ineffective, and the degrees and
conditions of treatment effectiveness) are “the seeds from which the poisonous tree of death
panels will grow.”
5. Attorney General Edwin Meese III made the following remarks in a prayer breakfast at the Christian
Legal Society, September 29, 1985:
By gradually removing from public education and public discourse all references to traditional
religion . . . and by substituting instead the jargon and the ritual and the morality of cult and of self,
we run the risk of subordinating all other religions to a new secular religion. . . . In its application,
the principle of neutrality towards all religions has often been transformed by some into a hostility
toward anything religious. The danger is that religion, which has been such an important force in
our country, could lose its social and historical, indeed, its public character.
There are nations, we should remind ourselves, where religion has just this status, where the
cause of religion, and its expression, has been reduced to something that people can only do behind
locked doors.4

6. The following is an argument by a district attorney to an assistant district attorney:
I know you are tempted to tell your witness to lie in order to make his identification of the defendant
stronger. None of us doubts that the defendant in this case is really guilty, and we want him to be
convicted. But you must not encourage your key witness to perjure himself in order to obtain a
conviction. For there is always the chance that the witness’s lies will be discovered; and then that

Chapter 12

Some Distinctive Arguments and Potential Pitfalls: Slippery Slope, Dilemma, and Golden Mean Arguments

209

witness—in order to avoid perjury charges—will confess that he was coached to lie by the district
attorney’s office. And if that sort of thing were made public, then juries would stop believing prosecution witnesses, and we would find it almost impossible to convict anyone.

7. Jury nullification is the decision by jury members not to convict a defendant who is guilty under the
law, because the jury members believe the law is unjust or because the application of the law in this
particular case would be wrong. Jury nullification is a very dangerous thing. If jury members can
ignore the law in their deliberations, then next they may decide to ignore the law when they are no
longer jurors: They may ignore laws against filing fraudulent income tax returns, and they may
decide to ignore laws regulating how they dispose of hazardous wastes, and they may even ignore
laws forbidding theft and violent assault. And once some people start ignoring laws, others are likely
to follow their lead. Then before you know it, we are living in an anarchistic and lawless society,
where all laws are ignored and no one is safe in either property or person. So we must stop this jury
nullification movement, and avoid the terrible harms to which it may lead.
8. In truth, a few cigarettes are not likely to do you any real harm. But the problem is, after you smoke
a few cigarettes, it becomes very appealing to smoke a few more. And before long, you have started
smoking as part of a social habit, and then you want cigarettes a bit more often—with your morning coffee, after lunch, while you’re driving, a couple in the evening. Soon smoking becomes a
deeply ingrained habit, and then it swiftly becomes an addiction: Nicotine, after all, is a powerfully
addictive drug. So you wind up with a very expensive smoking habit that makes you smell awful,
leaves you more vulnerable to colds and other infections, significantly increases your risk for cancer
and strokes and respiratory problems, and eventually puts your children at risk from secondhand
smoke. Then you will probably want to quit smoking, and you will find that it’s a difficult or
impossible job to break the smoking habit and the nicotine addiction. So the best way to avoid those
problems is to avoid smoking those first innocent-looking cigarettes.
9. In the following argument, St. John of Chrysostom warns believers of the dangers of laughter:
To laugh, to speak jocosely, does not seem an acknowledged sin, but it leads to acknowledged sin.
Thus laughter often gives birth to foul discourse, and foul discourse to actions still more foul. Often
from words and laughter proceed railing and insult; and from railing and insult, blows and wounds,
and from blows and wounds, slaughter and murder. If then, thou wouldst take good counsel for
thyself, avoid not merely foul words, and foul deeds, or blows, and wounds, and murders, but unseasonable laughter itself.5

10. In 1989, the U.S. Supreme Court struck down as unconstitutional state laws that make it a crime to
burn the U.S. flag as part of a protest or demonstration. The court ruled that since burning the flag
is an expression of political protest, it is protected under the First Amendment guarantees of freedom of speech. Justice William Brennan wrote the majority opinion, and one of his key arguments
was the following:
To conclude that the Government may permit designated symbols [such as the flag] to be used to
communicate only a limited set of messages would be to enter territory having no discernible or
defensible boundaries. Could the Government, on this theory, prohibit the burning of state flags? Of
copies of the Presidential seal? Of the Constitution? In evaluating these choices under the First
Amendment, how would we decide which symbols were sufficiently special to warrant this unique
status? To do so, we would be forced to consult our own political preferences, and impose them on the
citizenry, in the very way that the First Amendment forbids us to do.6

11. J. Gay-Williams offers the following slippery slope argument against active euthanasia (against
active intervention to purposefully hasten the death of one who is suffering during the course of a
terminal disease and voluntarily requests a speedier death). (This is the toughest of the examples,
and there is probably room for legitimate disagreement in analyzing it.)
Finally, euthanasia as a policy is a slippery slope. A person apparently hopelessly ill may be allowed to
take his own life. Then he may be permitted to deputize others to do it for him should he no longer
be able to act. The judgment of others then becomes the ruling factor. Already at this point euthanasia is not personal and voluntary, for others are acting “on behalf of” the patients as they see fit. This
may well incline them to act on behalf of other patients who have not authorized them to exercise
their judgment. It is only a short step, then, from voluntary euthanasia (self-inflicted or authorized),
to directed euthanasia administered to a patient who has given no authorization, to involuntary

210

Chapter 12

Some Distinctive Arguments and Potential Pitfalls: Slippery Slope, Dilemma, and Golden Mean Arguments

euthanasia conducted as part of a social policy. . . . Embedded in a social policy, it would give society
or its representatives the authority to eliminate all those who might be considered too “ill” to function
normally any longer. The dangers of euthanasia are too great to all to run the risk of approving it in
any form. The first slippery step may well lead to a serious and harmful fall.7

12. Critical thinking courses should be banned from universities. For when students take critical thinking, they begin to think more carefully and precisely, and are less easily swayed by emotional
appeals. Pretty soon they begin to be less moved by emotions and feelings generally, whether they
are dealing with arguments or not. Gradually they become colder and more callous, and all feelings
of warmth, kindness, and sympathy begin to dry up, until eventually they turn into cold, calculating,
heartless automatons. So unless we want our students turned into callous, pitiless, and loveless
machines, we must forbid students to take critical thinking.
13. Childhood obesity is a major health problem in the United States, with the number of obese
children increasing, along with increases in childhood diabetes and childhood heart problems.
If we really want to tackle the problem of childhood obesity, the best way is to deal with it early,
because once children become overweight, then it is easy to get a progression into healththreatening obesity. The overweight child tends to tire more quickly and run slower, and so is not
as good at sports; and so the child is often embarrassed when trying to play sports or participate in
exercise, and so avoids them; and by avoiding exercise and sports, the child gains more weight and
becomes even less likely to be active. And when the child gains weight, he or she may be ridiculed
by other children, and become isolated and depressed; and then the child tends to take comfort
in food, and the weight continues to increase. Sitting alone in front of the television with a bag of
potato chips or a box of cookies—rather than running and playing with friends—is the path to
serious weight and health problems. So if we want to deal effectively with the problem of
childhood obesity, we should make serious efforts to prevent the earliest stages of excessive weight
gain in children.
14. Some people want to be allowed to go to Canada and buy prescription drugs from Canadian pharmacies, at significantly lower prices than are charged for the same drugs in the United States. That
doesn’t sound so bad, really; but the problem is, where would it stop? If we allow people to buy
drugs from Canada, then next they’ll want to buy drugs from other countries, as well. And
then they’ll want to buy drugs from anyone they like, without any regulations at all: people will be
mixing up batches of drugs in their basements, and selling them on street corners. But that would
be a tragedy, resulting in many deaths and injuries from drugs that are dangerous and useless. If we
don’t want that kind of terrible abuse, we have to stop those people who are wanting to buy drugs
from Canadian pharmacies.

Exercise 12-2
Slippery slope arguments and strawman arguments often sound very similar. The slippery slope
argument claims that an initial first step is not so bad, but that it will lead to eventual disaster—a
disastrous outcome which no one really wants. Strawman arguments claim that a policy or position
is terrible, and that the policy is what someone wants (when in fact no one actually favors that
policy: the strawman fallacy distorts or misrepresents the opposing view). For the following arguments,
tell which ones are slippery slopes and which ones are straw men.
1. Animal rights advocates think that all life is equal, and that all life is equally sacred, so we shouldn’t
experiment on animals or kill animals for furs. But their position is ridiculous: Potatoes are alive,
and the animal rights advocates dig them up and eat them; and alfalfa sprouts are living things, but
the animal rights people kill and eat them; and bacteria are alive, but the animal rights supporters
take medicine to kill bacteria, and use disinfectants to kill disease-spreading bacteria. So obviously,
on closer examination, the animal rights view falls apart.
2. Advocates of animal rights oppose killing animals for food, and for fur coats; and they push for
alternatives to animal testing in experiments. Okay, it may not seem so bad to ban fur coats, and
there are some good alternatives to animal testing for drugs, and I can even imagine becoming a
vegetarian. The problem is that once you let these animal rights folks get their foot in the door, they
won’t stop there. The next thing you know they will forbid the killing of insects, and so we won’t be
able to control mosquitoes and flies and fleas; and then they will forbid the killing of bacteria, and

Chapter 12

Some Distinctive Arguments and Potential Pitfalls: Slippery Slope, Dilemma, and Golden Mean Arguments

3.

4.

5.

6.

211

so if you get a bacterial infection, you won’t be allowed to take an antibiotic. And finally, they will
declare that all plant life has to be protected, and so you won’t be able to eat any crop that requires
killing the plant—such as potatoes or carrots or peanuts. Pretty soon we’ll all be living on apples
and peaches—if we’re lucky, and the insects don’t destroy the peach and apple trees.
It’s not that regulation of the oil companies is so bad in itself: they are making enormous profits
right now, and just placing some restrictions on their profits might be okay. But what would follow?
Once the oil company profits are regulated, the government will start regulating the profits of other
companies: and before you know it, you’ll have a federal inspector capping the profit you can make
on your hot dog stand, and some government bureaucrat capping the profit you can make on your
soybean crop or in your jewelry store. And once profits are regulated, more regulation will follow—
restrictions on what you can sell, and when, and to whom; and you start down that road, you wind
up doing away with our free enterprise system.
Some people complain about the profits being raked in by the major oil companies: Exxon made a
profit of 10 billion dollars in the last quarter, and Chevron made 4 billion. They claim that the oil
companies are making enormous and unfair profits, while we consumers are paying painfully high
prices for gasoline. But no one should take their criticisms seriously. Apparently they believe that
people in the oil industry should work for free, and that investors in Exxon and Chevron have no
right to make a profit on their investment. They think that all profits are wrong, and that no
company should ever make a profit for its work. They apparently want to abolish capitalism
altogether, and do away with our free enterprise system.
“Medical use of marijuana.” Doesn’t sound so bad, does it? Folks who are having cancer treatments,
maybe marijuana could relieve some of the pain and the nausea: Who would want to deny such
comforts to cancer patients? But let me tell you about the real agenda of the medical marijuana
advocates. They want to make marijuana freely available to anyone who wants it, sick or not, without restriction: to sick people, sure; but also to healthy people, and even to children, without any
regulation. And marijuana is just part of it. They favor a policy of “anything goes” on drugs: they
want not only marijuana, but also cocaine and heroin and meth to be easily available to anyone who
wants to buy it, with no age restrictions. If you think it’s a good idea to have cocaine and heroin
pushers selling drugs to elementary school children, then you will embrace the position of those
people who are in favor of medical marijuana.
There are those who want to allow the medicinal use of marijuana, especially for the relief of pain
for those undergoing cancer treatments. It sounds like a good idea at first, but consider the longer
view: If a cancer patient is allowed to use marijuana, then that patient’s legal marijuana will be
readily available to the family members and friends of the patient; and then cancer patients, in
order to raise some extra money for their expensive treatments, will begin to sell the marijuana to
nonpatients. And once they start to sell marijuana, it’s a very easy step to selling other drugs like
cocaine and heroin. So if we want to avoid a major expansion of the market in illegal drugs, we must
not allow the medicinal use of marijuana.

DILEMMAS, FALSE AND TRUE
After all the witnesses have been called, and all the evidence has been presented, and the
district attorney and the defense attorney have made their closing arguments—and just
before the jury retires to consider its verdict—the judge will give instructions to the jury.
Among those instructions might be something like the following:
Ladies and Gentlemen of the Jury, in order to return a verdict of guilty, you must be certain
beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant really is guilty. Each of you must decide that
question: Every individual jury member must examine the evidence, consider the testimony,
and each of you must conclude—beyond a reasonable doubt—that the defendant is guilty;
or you must vote not guilty. Either you are certain beyond a reasonable doubt that the
defendant is guilty, or you must return a verdict of not guilty.

The judge has posed a dilemma for the jury: You must choose among these limited alternatives; these are the only alternatives available. Is it a true dilemma or a false dilemma?

212

Chapter 12

Some Distinctive Arguments and Potential Pitfalls: Slippery Slope, Dilemma, and Golden Mean Arguments

Genuine Dilemmas
That depends. Are those the only real alternatives? If so, that is a genuine dilemma. If other
alternatives are available, then it is a false dilemma. And in this case, there really are no
other possibilities: You must be certain beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant is
guilty, or you must find the defendant not guilty. That is, there are no other possibilities
if you are honoring the principle of the defendant’s presumed innocence, and if you are
a conscientious juror. And, of course, the judge’s instructions are given in that context,
with those assumptions. Obviously it is possible for a juror to vote guilty when he is not
convinced beyond a reasonable doubt of the defendant’s guilt: A juror might vote guilty
out of prejudice, or out of contrariness, or arbitrarily (without really considering the
evidence and arguments at all). But if you are living up to the responsibilities you
accepted as a jury member, then you must choose between the alternatives posed by the
judge: guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, or not guilty. (Of course there is the possibility
that the jury as a whole will not be able to reach a unanimous verdict, and so will return
no verdict at all. But that is not really a third alternative, for the dilemma posed by the
judge was not to the jury as a whole, but to each individual juror: Each one must decide
between guilty beyond a reasonable doubt and not guilty.)

False Dilemmas
So there are genuine dilemmas; but there are also false dilemmas. A false dilemma involves
a failure of imagination, a failure to consider one or more genuine possibilities. The
defendant is accused of having murdered Lord Rutabaga, and the butler has testified
that as he stepped onto the terrace to serve tea, he looked over to the croquet course and
saw the defendant shoot Lord Rutabaga and then run away. The barrister for the crown
(the prosecuting attorney) argues,
Either the butler actually saw the defendant kill Lord Rutabaga (as he testified), or the butler is telling a particularly vicious lie. But the butler is well-known for his truthfulness: He has
been in service for many years without the slightest stain on his integrity, and many witnesses
have testified to his deep commitment to truthfulness. Furthermore, the butler has no
reason to lie about what he saw: He has no grudge against the defendant, nor does he have
anything to hide. So we must accept the butler’s truthfulness. It is not reasonable to believe
that the butler is lying. And it follows that we must agree that the defendant killed Lord
Rutabaga, as charged.

Consider the Verdict
doubt and not guilty, and he offers the following
objection:

Jim Pickerell / Stock Connection Blue / Alamy

Suppose that one of your fellow jurors is disturbed
by this stark choice between guilty beyond a reasonable

Look, I can’t be forced to decide between definitely
guilty and not guilty; it’s just not that simple. I’m not
quite convinced that the defendant is guilty. The evidence presented by the prosecution left a few holes,
and I think that the defendant’s alibi witness was
fairly believable. But still, I think the defendant
probably is really guilty as charged; so I don’t feel
comfortable voting not guilty, either. There’s got to
be another alternative.

How would you respond?

Chapter 12

Some Distinctive Arguments and Potential Pitfalls: Slippery Slope, Dilemma, and Golden Mean Arguments

213

Pared down to its essentials, the argument goes like this:
Either the butler saw the defendant kill Lord Rutabaga, or the butler is lying. The butler is
not lying. Therefore, the butler saw the defendant kill Lord Rutabaga.

That is certainly a valid argument. Either A or B; not B; therefore, A. If the premises are
true, the conclusion will also be true.
But is it a sound argument? That is, are the premises all true? Is it true that the only
genuine possibilities are that either the butler is lying or the butler actually saw the
defendant kill Lord Rutabaga? What other reasonable possibilities come to mind?
Given the notorious unreliability of eyewitnesses, one possibility is that the butler is
honestly testifying to what he believes he observed, but his observations were mistaken.
Perhaps he saw a man who looked a lot like the defendant kill Lord Rutabaga, but his
identification of the defendant as the murderer is an honest misidentification. Maybe
there are other possibilities. But if there is just one additional genuine possibility that the
argument neglects, then the argument commits the fallacy of false dilemma.
Why Arguments Based on False Dilemmas Sound Plausible. False dilemma arguments
often sound very convincing. In the first place, false dilemma arguments are almost always
valid arguments. In the case above, the conclusion does follow from the premises; the
problem is that one of the premises is false: It is not true that either the butler is lying or
the butler observed the defendant murder Lord Rutabaga, since there is another
possibility. And the second reason why false dilemma arguments sound so compelling is
that one’s attention is usually drawn away to a premise that is true. In the argument
above, what point does the prosecuting barrister emphasize? Not the false dilemma, but
instead the second premise: the premise that states that the butler is not lying. Very strong
reasons are given in support of that premise, and if we are not careful, we shall forget that
no reasons have been given why we should believe the crucial dilemma premise.

Figure 12-1 Hagar the Horrible Cartoon
Reprinted with special permission of King Features Syndicate.

214

Chapter 12

Some Distinctive Arguments and Potential Pitfalls: Slippery Slope, Dilemma, and Golden Mean Arguments

Consider the Verdict
Q:
A:
Q:
A:
Q:
A:
Q:
A:
Q:
Jim Pickerell / Stock Connection Blue / Alamy

The defendant is charged with murder. A shot from a
high-powered rifle, which he admits he was holding,
passed through two victims, killing both. The defendant
admits holding the rifle, but claims he was just showing
the gun to his two friends. The prosecuting attorney is
cross-examining the defendant:
Q:
A:

A:

You don’t know who pulled the trigger?
Well, I don’t know how—
Did Marlene pull the trigger?
No, sir.
Did Marty pull the trigger?
No, sir.
Anyone else in the room?
No, sir.
I will ask you again, Mr. Cartwright. It’s
a very simple question. Please listen to
the question: Who pulled the trigger?
I presume my hand must have done it.8

Has the prosecuting attorney posed a genuine dilemma for
the defendant? (Marlene, Marty, or the defendant
pulled the trigger; and it wasn’t either Marlene or
Marty.) Or is this a false dilemma?

Who pulled the trigger?
Who pulled the trigger? Well . . . I don’t
know. It went off.

Consider another example from outside the courtroom. Money is tight, the university
budget has been slashed by the governor, and the president of the university comes before
the assembled students with this argument:
My friends, we are in a terrible situation. Our funds from the state have been severely cut,
and we are faced with a terrible choice: We must either close the university library or raise
tuition. Now we all agree that the library cannot be closed. The library is the heart and soul
of a university, the vital center of our educational and research activities, the link between
our university community and the thoughts, ideas, and discoveries of all peoples and all ages.
Furthermore, closing the library would mean that we would lose our accreditation, and our
professional schools would have to close. So the library must be kept open at all costs. Thus
we have no choice: It is with profound regret that I inform you that tuition payments will
have to increase.

This argument pulls all the false dilemma tricks. It poses an either–or situation (close the
library or raise tuition) and then rejects one of the alternatives, leaving only one possibility. And the result is a valid argument. Combined with that validity is a premise that is true
and well-supported: Almost the entire argument is devoted to a powerful and convincing
case in support of keeping the library open. So between the validity of the argument and
the ringing truth of one premise, it is easy to overlook the crucial false dilemma lurking
in the first premise: We must either close the library or raise tuition. That, of course, is a
false dilemma. It requires little imagination to think of some other possibilities, such as
cutting the athletic budget, doing an emergency alumni fundraising drive, cutting some
administrative positions, or (God forbid) cutting faculty salaries. So this argument is
valid, and one important premise is true: But the argument is unsound because the
dilemma premise is false.
False dilemmas sometimes come in the form of false trilemmas, false quadrilemmas,
false pentalemmas, and so on. That is, sometimes a false dilemma mentions more

Chapter 12

Some Distinctive Arguments and Potential Pitfalls: Slippery Slope, Dilemma, and Golden Mean Arguments

215

Consider the Verdict

Jim Pickerell / Stock Connection Blue / Alamy

In a breaking or entering case, one juror offers the
following argument in favor of a guilty verdict:

defendant really did go into the vacant house just to
get out of the rain, as he claims. Other jurors think
his motives were not so innocent, and that he was in
fact planning to steal the appliances and light
fixtures, as the prosecution asserts. Well, I think this
is a simple case: Was the guy in the house rightfully,
or was he there illegally? He certainly wasn’t there
rightfully: He didn’t own the house, he wasn’t a tenant, and he did not have the owner’s permission.
Since he wasn’t there rightfully, he must have been
there illegally. It’s simple when you think about it
logically: He was there illegally, and that means he is
guilty of illegal breaking or entering.

Is the juror right? Is the case that simple?
Our deliberations have been going in circles for the
last hour. Some jurors have said that they believe the

than two options—perhaps it considers a great many options—but still fails to consider
all the possible options. “Sally must love or hate me or be completely indifferent to me.
She doesn’t hate me, since she seems to enjoy spending time with me, and she is not completely indifferent to me, since she once sent me flowers. So she must love me.” Unfortunately for this lover’s argument, Sally has some other possibilities: She may be mildly
attracted to me, she may find me pleasant company but think of me only as a friend, she
may find me rather distasteful but still regard me as the least distasteful of the people she
currently knows, and so on. The fact that three options are considered does not prove
that all the possibilities have been exhausted.
Dilemmas in Conditional Form. Dilemma arguments are typically in either–or form,
as in the following example: We must either raise tuition or close the library. But sometimes dilemmas dress up as conditionals, just to keep life interesting: If we don’t raise
tuition, then we must close the library. That’s still the same old false dilemma (if we do not
take the alternative of raising tuition, then the only other possibility is closing the library),
and changing it to a conditional doesn’t make it any less a dilemma or any less false.
Legitimate dilemmas can also be cast as conditionals. Consider this standard
either–or dilemma: “Either we must be certain beyond a reasonable doubt that the
defendant is guilty, or we should return a verdict of not guilty.” That’s a legitimate
dilemma, and it remains a legitimate dilemma when phrased in conditional form: “If we
are not certain beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant is guilty, then we should
return a verdict of not guilty.” Those statements are logically equivalent. It’s not hard to
see that they make the same claim. Suppose I say, “Either you pass the final or you will
flunk the course.” That means the same as: “If you don’t pass the final, you’ll flunk the
course.” The dilemma claims that at least one of the alternatives must be true; so if the first
alternative is not the case, then the second must be. When the judge tells you “either pay
your fine or go to jail,” that means that if you do not pay your fine (the first alternative is
not the case) then the second alternative must be so (you must go to jail).
So you should watch for dilemmas—both false and true—in conditional form.
“If you don’t support this tax levy, then you don’t care about better education for our
children” (i.e., either you support this tax levy or you don’t care about education). “If you
support this tax levy, then you don’t care about the tax burden on retired homeowners.”

216

Chapter 12

Some Distinctive Arguments and Potential Pitfalls: Slippery Slope, Dilemma, and Golden Mean Arguments

“If secondhand smoking does not cause lung cancer, then secondhand smoking is not
harmful” (which is equivalent to “either secondhand smoking causes lung cancer or it is
not harmful”). “If you don’t believe my claim that I saw the Loch Ness Monster, then you
must think I’m a liar.” “If you don’t believe in the Biblical account of Creation, then you
are an atheist.” It might be easier if dilemmas always came in plain vanilla either–or form,
but variety keeps life interesting and critical thinking a challenge.

False Dilemma Combined with StrawMan
One particularly nasty form of the fallacy of false dilemma requires special note. This fallacy is the foul issue of the marriage of false dilemma to strawman. Here is an example:
JACK:
JILL:
JACK:

I think building the MX missiles is a great idea.
I really don’t think we should build the MX missiles; they are tremendously expensive, and our nuclear arsenal is already massive.
Oh, I guess you are one of those people who want to do away with all our weapons
and not have any military defenses at all.

Well, no; that’s not what Jill wants, and it is not what she suggested. Jack has first set up a
false dilemma (either we build additional MX missiles or we do away with our military
completely) and then distorted Jill’s position (set up a straw man) by suggesting that her
view is the extreme position that he falsely presents as the only option to the view he favors.
Consider another example:
We must not ban the sale of cigarettes in vending machines. Of course some people want to
banish all tobacco products, and forbid competent adults from making their own choices
about whether or not to smoke. But we should not consent to such government-imposed
paternalistic restrictions on our right to choose—which includes, of course, our right as free
adults to make choices that others regard as bad for us. So we should not ban cigarette
vending machines.

But the proposal to ban cigarette vending machines (so that children don’t have easy
access to cigarettes) is not the same as proposing a total ban on cigarettes. This argument
sets up a false dilemma (either allow cigarette vending machines or ban cigarettes
altogether) and attributes the strawman alternative (totally ban cigarettes) to those who
are actually proposing only a ban on cigarette vending machines.
As the above examples indicate, it is important to avoid the temptation to suppose that everything can be lumped easily into extreme categories. In the old
Westerns—and perhaps in some soap operas—the good guys are absolutely pure of
heart and the villains have no redeeming virtues, but many items in the world do not
fit so easily into extreme categories. A chocolate-covered granola bar hardly qualifies
as health food, but on the other hand, it’s probably not a severe hazard to your health.
Is Jones brilliant or stupid? Some people are brilliant, and unfortunately some are
stupid, but most of us fall somewhere in between. Not everything nor everyone fits into
extreme categories.

Consider the Possibilities
When reasoning, it is important to be sure you have considered the possibilities
thoroughly. One of the great hazards to effective thought is getting stuck in ruts, the
failure to explore alternatives. It is not enough to judge rationally among the alternatives
if the most promising or most plausible alternatives have been forgotten.

Chapter 12

Some Distinctive Arguments and Potential Pitfalls: Slippery Slope, Dilemma, and Golden Mean Arguments

217

Consider the Verdict
During jury deliberations, one juror argues in favor of a
guilty verdict:
We’ve got to come to a decision. Is the defendant
guilty or innocent? Well, it is certainly doubtful that
the guy is innocent. After all, several witnesses saw
him near the scene of the crime, and everyone agrees
that he had a strong motive for killing the guy. So
which will it be? I say guilty!
Jim Pickerell / Stock Connection Blue / Alamy

How would you respond?

But don’t get carried away. There are possibilities and then there are possibilities. For
instance, if we are weighing the butler’s testimony, it is important that we consider all the
reasonable possibilities: Was the butler describing events exactly as they actually
happened? Was the butler lying? Was the butler honestly mistaken? Was the butler a
demented paranoid with a vivid imagination? Was the butler covering up for the
chambermaid? But we should not accuse someone of the fallacy of false dilemma because
that person has neglected some far-fetched logical possibility. For example, it is conceivable
that an invisible spirit intercepted the bullet from the defendant’s gun before it struck
Lord Rutabaga, and then this invisible being fired its own invisible gun at Lord Rutabaga,
killing Lord Rutabaga with a bullet identical to the one fired by the defendant. Thus, it is
possible that an invisible spirit killed Lord Rutabaga, and the defendant is innocent (or is
at most guilty of attempted murder). If the prosecuting barrister fails to consider that
possibility in her efforts to prove the defendant guilty, we shall hardly be justified in charging the prosecuting barrister with false dilemma.
Exactly where do we draw the line between reasonable and unreasonable
possibilities? That question has no easy answer. What is today regarded as the most farfetched possibility may tomorrow be accepted as scientific truth. The notion that
additional hydrogen atoms could come into being out of nothing strikes me as preposterous, but some brilliant astrophysicists propose it as a genuine possibility. Most
Americans regarded the early Watergate charges brought against the Nixon administration as too incredible to be seriously considered, but they turned out to be true. Most
intelligent people of the sixteenth century regarded the Copernican theory as
ridiculous. You should try to stay open and flexible when considering possibilities, but
without becoming so bogged down in absurdly far-fetched speculations that critical
reasoning is stifled.

Exercise 12-3
In the following arguments, decide whether each is or is not a false dilemma; if it is a false dilemma,
state the false dilemma clearly and describe at least one possibility that has been ignored.
1. New Sweet Lips Sweetener has been proved safe! We have carried out very extensive tests on many
species of laboratory animals, as well as long-term tests on volunteers who have been using Sweet
Lips in food and in beverages, and we have shown conclusively that Sweet Lips is not carcinogenic.
So you and your family can be safe and sweet with Sweet Lips!
2. Jesus of Nazareth was either a lunatic or he is truly God. After all, anyone who goes around claiming that he is God—as the New Testament shows that Jesus did—must be either batty or telling the
truth. Now certainly Jesus was no lunatic: Jesus’s Sermon on the Mount is clearly not the ravings of
a lunatic. So it follows that Jesus must indeed be God.

218

Chapter 12

Some Distinctive Arguments and Potential Pitfalls: Slippery Slope, Dilemma, and Golden Mean Arguments

3. Either we must continue to have strict criminal laws prohibiting possession and sale of such drugs
as marijuana, cocaine, opium, and heroin or we must do away with all restrictions on the use and
sale of such drugs. But eliminating such restrictions is absurd and unthinkable. It would mean that
companies could openly promote and advertise cocaine, opium, and heroin and distribute free
samples to everyone. Obviously we do not want free samples of such drugs handed out at the malls
and stuffed into mailboxes. And we cannot allow anyone to encourage the use of such dangerous
and addictive drugs through slick advertising and promotional campaigns. Therefore, we must
continue to have and enforce strict criminal laws prohibiting the possession and sale of marijuana,
cocaine, opium, and heroin.
4. Here are the facts: Ralph Rambunctious was found lying dead on his kitchen floor; he had suffered
11 deep stab wounds in his chest and back, any one of which would have caused his death. Now clearly
knives don’t just jump off kitchen counters and stab people, so obviously either Ralph must have committed suicide or someone must have killed him. Certainly Ralph did not commit suicide. He might
have stabbed himself once, but he certainly could not have stabbed himself 11 times, and he could not
have stabbed himself in the back. The conclusion is inescapable: Someone killed Ralph.
5. Either studying logic will make me an infallible reasoner or it is useless.
6. You don’t think that every American college student should be required to take a minimum of
six courses in American history? Well, I guess you think it’s not important for students to know
anything about American history.
7. Either there truly is a Loch Ness Monster or a lot of good upright Scots with no motive for lying are
telling outrageous lies.
8. Either the Bible is the literal and absolutely true word of God or it is just a book of silly fables.
9. It’s a simple question: Do you believe in God, or are you an atheist?
10. Either there is truly a strange sea creature in Loch Ness (the “Loch Ness Monster”) or there is not.
If there is some such creature, then obviously it would be worthwhile to find and study it. If there is
not such a creature, then it would be worthwhile to prove once and for all that no such creature
exists. Either way, a serious scientific search for the Loch Ness Monster is worth doing.
11. ROMEO:

JULIET:
ROMEO:

Let’s go to the big Fourth of July celebration! There will be lots of patriotic speeches,
and we’ll celebrate all the great American military victories, and we’ll sing patriotic
songs, and we’ll honor America as the greatest nation on Earth!
No, I don’t think so; I don’t like nationalistic celebrations; I think we ought to concentrate more on international harmony than on patriotism and nationalism.
Well don’t go, then; you must be one of those America-haters.

12. ANTONY:

CLEOPATRA:

I don’t think we should have censorship laws that ban movies, books, or magazines
as obscene.
Oh, I guess you think it’s good for children to attend pornographic movies and for
obscene materials to be presented on public billboards.

13. Imagine a rape case in which a secretary accuses her employer of raping her one night when they
were working late at the office. The defense attorney cross-examines the secretary—following her
testimony for the prosecution:

DEFENSE ATTORNEY: “Ms. Smith, did you hate your boss?”
WITNESS: “No, certainly not.”
DEFENSE ATTORNEY: “Then you were in fact in love with him, weren’t you?”
14. Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, the evidence points conclusively to a verdict of guilty. The prosecution has established that on the night Richard Wiley was brutally murdered, there were only three
people at Richard Wiley’s home: Richard Wiley, the unfortunate victim; the defendant, Amos Steward; and Richard Wiley’s brother, Albert Wiley. Richard Wiley did not commit suicide: He was
stabbed 14 times in the back, and those were not self-inflicted wounds. So obviously he was murdered either by his brother, Albert, or by the defendant, Amos Steward. But his brother is paralyzed
from the neck down, and cannot move his arms. So you must conclude that the defendant, Amos
Steward, is indeed the murderer.

Chapter 12

Some Distinctive Arguments and Potential Pitfalls: Slippery Slope, Dilemma, and Golden Mean Arguments

219

15. Either secondhand smoking (breathing the smoke from cigarettes smoked by others) causes lung
cancer or it is not harmful. Many careful, well-designed studies have conclusively established that
secondhand smoking does not cause lung cancer. In fact, study after study has established that
there is no link between secondhand smoking and lung cancer. Therefore, secondhand smoking is
not harmful.
16. Fellow members of the jury, this is an easy case. Barbara Brent is charged with murdering her
husband. Now either she didn’t kill him or she murdered him in cold blood. But obviously she did
kill him: She admitted that she shot him, as he approached her. She pulled the trigger herself, the
gun was in her hand. So there’s really only one possible conclusion: Barbara Brent murdered her
husband, and we should find her guilty of murder.
17. In 2003, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that a Maryland death-row inmate, Kevin Wiggins, was
entitled to a new sentencing hearing, on the grounds that his lawyers had acted incompetently at
his original trial. During the sentencing phase of his original trial (after Wiggins had already
been convicted of murder), Wiggins’s lawyers had an opportunity to present any mitigating circumstances that might persuade a jury to sentence the defendant to life in prison rather than
capital punishment. Wiggins had suffered terrible abuse as a child—repeated sexual abuse, left
alone for days at a time without food, forced to eat garbage to survive, severely and purposefully
burned by his mother. There was some question about whether Wiggins’s lawyers knew his terrible childhood history (one of Wiggins’s lawyers testified he was aware of Wiggins’s brutal childhood). But whether the lawyer knew or not doesn’t really matter. If the lawyer did not know, then
he did an incompetent investigation into his defendant’s background. On the other hand, if the
lawyer did know and did not use this information as mitigating evidence in his appeal to the jury,
then the lawyer is incompetent in preparing his defense. Either the lawyer knew about the childhood abuse or he didn’t; either way, the lawyer was incompetent, and the defendant is entitled to
a new sentencing hearing.
18. California is running these massive budget deficits, not taking in enough tax money to cover the
costs of schools and prisons and highway construction and all the other programs the state must
run. These deficits are causing major economic problems for the state, and placing the state on
the very edge of bankruptcy and economic crisis. If we don’t want big state deficits and bankruptcy, then we are going to have to make major cuts in spending on education. And certainly we
don’t want deficits and bankruptcy: that would cause economic chaos, and everyone in the state
would suffer, and businesses would leave the state. So California must make major spending cuts
in education.
19. Look, in the United States we have a choice between continuing to run huge budget deficits or
making severe cuts in federal health-care spending. Now we certainly don’t want the United States
to continue running enormous budget deficits: that would eventually wreck our whole economy.
Therefore, the only legitimate economic policy is to make severe cuts in federal spending on
health care.
20. Under the Patriot Act, passed by Congress shortly after the 9-11 terrorist attacks, anyone suspected
of being a terrorist or being connected with terrorists can be picked up and held in prison indefinitely, without having access to a lawyer, without being charged with any crime, and without
anyone even knowing that he or she has been imprisoned. Some people object to such secret
arrests and imprisonments that can be carried out without any right to a hearing in court or access
to a lawyer or opportunity to call friends or family. And true, these do seem like harsh measures.
But the fact is, we are faced with a terrible choice: either we ignore the danger of terrorist attacks,
and just wait passively for the next terrorist strike; or we must suspend the basic rights of our
citizens and allow secret arrest and imprisonment of anyone who is a suspect. Obviously we can’t
just ignore the threat of terrorism: we know how terrible terrorist attacks can be. And so we must
take the other alternative of secret arrests and indefinite secret imprisonment.
21. There are those who argue that we should close the Guantanamo Prison facility, because of the
accounts of prisoner abuse that occurred there. But the problem is, if we close the Guantanamo Bay
Prison, then we’ll have to release the prisoners who are held there. Maybe some of those prisoners
were falsely accused, and some of them probably had nothing to do with terrorism. But still, some of
those prisoners probably are terrorists, and pose a severe threat to the security of the United States.
We can’t just turn them loose to carry out terrorist plots. So we must keep the Guantanamo Bay
Prison open.

220

Chapter 12

Some Distinctive Arguments and Potential Pitfalls: Slippery Slope, Dilemma, and Golden Mean Arguments

GOLDEN MEAN
In the fourth century B.C.E., the Greek philosopher Aristotle taught that we should seek
“the mean”:
[I]t is in the nature of things for the virtues to be destroyed by excess and deficiency. . . .
Excessive or insufficient training destroys strength, just as too much or too little food and
drink ruins health. The right amount, however, brings health and preserves it. So this applies
to moderation, bravery, and the other virtues. . . . Moderation and bravery are destroyed by
excess and deficiency, but are kept flourishing by the mean.9

The Golden Mean Fallacy
This ethical doctrine has come to be known as “the golden mean.” It may—or may
not—be good moral guidance. But whatever its usefulness in ethics, it is certainly a fallacy when appealed to in argument. The fact that a position is the mean between two
extremes (i.e., the “middle-of-the-road” position, the “moderate” or “compromise”
view) does not make it correct. The moderate view may be the correct one, but it may
just as easily be wrong.
Suppose we are considering whether it should be legal for 18-year-olds to purchase
alcoholic beverages. Some people want to deny 18-year-olds the right to buy alcohol;
others favor a legal drinking age of 18. Someone then argues,
Look, allowing 18-year-olds to drink any and all sorts of alcoholic beverages is excessive; but
prohibiting all drinking by 18-year-olds goes too far in the other direction. Obviously, then,
we should allow 18-year-olds to buy beer, but make 21 the legal age for hard liquor.

That is a common type of argument, and many people find it persuasive, but it is
completely fallacious. The fallacy committed is the fallacy of the golden mean. The position
proposed may be moderate, but it does not follow that it is correct.
There are two clear reasons why golden mean arguments are fallacious. First, the
moderate position may be (and often is) simply false: An extreme position is frequently
the correct one. When Copernicus proposed that Earth travels around the Sun, that was
an extreme claim, but nonetheless true. (The more moderate position was proposed by
Tycho Brahe, who suggested that the Sun travels around Earth, but all the planets revolve
around the Sun rather than around Earth. It was a brilliant compromise, but a mistaken
one.) In the mid-nineteenth century, the abolitionists (who wanted to completely abolish
slavery) held an extreme position: those who wanted to continue slavery in the states
where it already existed but not allow slavery in the new Western territories were taking a
moderate position. Certainly the extremist abolitionist view was the right one. In the
late nineteenth century, there was much controversy concerning the age of Earth.
Archbishop Ussher held the extreme view that Earth is only a few thousand years old;
Charles Darwin took the other extreme, maintaining it must be hundreds of millions of
years old; and Lord Kelvin was the moderate, placing Earth’s age at several million years.
In fact, the correct view (about 4.6 billion years) turned out to be much more extreme
than even Darwin had thought. So the first reason that golden mean arguments are
fallacious is that the extreme position has been and often is correct.

Constructing Golden Mean Fallacies
There is another clear indication of the fallaciousness of the golden mean argument: It is
possible to use golden mean arguments to argue for almost any position, even contradictory ones. (And any argument form that can yield contradictory conclusions is obviously

Chapter 12

Some Distinctive Arguments and Potential Pitfalls: Slippery Slope, Dilemma, and Golden Mean Arguments

221

doing something wrong.) Consider an issue currently debated: handgun control. Someone favoring the banning of handguns might argue:
We should not go to the extreme of banning all guns; people should be free to own rifles and
shotguns. But neither should we go to the other extreme, and allow people to own
particularly dangerous and criminally well-suited weapons like handguns. So obviously the
right position is to ban handguns, but allow rifles and shotguns.

The opponent of bans on handguns might argue:
I don’t believe that people should be allowed to own howitzers, mortars, and antiaircraft
weapons, but we should not go to the other extreme and ban smaller firearms like rifles,
pistols, and shotguns. So obviously we should take the moderate path, and allow handguns.

So here we have contradictory conclusions, each supported equally well—or rather,
equally badly and fallaciously—by the golden mean fallacy.
It is easy to contrive a golden mean argument for almost any issue. Consider
the question of whether the use of seatbelts should be mandatory. The proponent of
mandatory use of seatbelts might argue:
It would be wrong to require that every possible safety device be used by all automobile
riders. Riders should not have to wear crash helmets and fire-resistant suits. But it would
also be wrong to allow automobile riders to unnecessarily risk death and injury by neglecting the simple, easy, and effective safety device of seatbelts. Therefore, seatbelt use should
be mandatory.

The opponent constructs an equal and opposite (and equally fallacious) golden mean
argument against mandatory use of seatbelts:
It would be wrong to go to the extreme of requiring automobile riders to wear seatbelts. On
the other hand, we should not forbid people to wear seatbelts if they choose to do so, and
perhaps we should even require that all cars be equipped with seatbelts. The solution, then,
is to have seatbelts available for those who wish to wear them, but not require anyone to
wear seatbelts.

These golden mean arguments lead with equal implausibility to contradictory conclusions.
Simply showing that something can be cast as the “moderate” position does nothing to
establish the desirability or plausibility of that position.
The golden mean fallacy occurs in many contexts, but it is especially common—and
especially egregious—in the jury room. In 1967, Dr. Carl Coppolino was tried in Florida
for allegedly poisoning his wife with succinylcholine chloride. After approximately
6 hours of deliberation, the jury returned a verdict of guilty of murder in the second degree.
Not predmeditated first-degree murder, but unpremeditated second-degree murder. But
the prosecution claimed that Coppolino had planned the murder, bought the drug, and
purposefully injected his wife with a lethal dose of that dangerous drug. If Dr. Coppolino
carried out this murder, it was certainly a carefully planned and premeditated murder, not

Sacred Middle Ground
Often those who commit the golden mean fallacy suppose
that merely affirming a position as the “middle of
the road” is sufficient reason to adopt it. For example,
Lynn Wilhoite, president of the Hudson (Ohio) PTA,

announced support for a moment of silence during graduation ceremonies: “The Hudson PTA endorses the
tradition of a moment of silence, seeing that stance as a
middle ground between official prayer [and no prayer].”10

222

Chapter 12

Some Distinctive Arguments and Potential Pitfalls: Slippery Slope, Dilemma, and Golden Mean Arguments

(as in second-degree murder) a spontaneous unplanned murder, such as might be
committed in the heat of passion. So how could the jury reach a verdict of guilty of second
degree unpremeditated murder?
It is not difficult to imagine how the jury arrived at its verdict. The evidence
presented by the prosecution was all circumstantial, and the testimony of the state’s expert
witnesses concerning traces of the poison left in the system was technical and difficult and
was opposed by testimony from defense experts. The jury apparently believed that the
prosecution had made a fairly strong but not completely convincing case that Coppolino
had poisoned his wife. But (forgetting about the proper placement of the burden of proof
and succumbing to the golden mean fallacy) they probably reasoned,
We aren’t quite convinced that Coppolino poisoned his wife, so a verdict of guilty of firstdegree murder would be too strong; but there is some evidence of his guilt, so we don’t want
to go to the other extreme and find him not guilty; obviously we should take the compromise
route and find him guilty of the lesser charge of second-degree murder.

I don’t know which of the two extremes—not guilty, guilty of first-degree murder—was
the correct conclusion, but clearly the “middle-of-the-road” position was wrong.
This is not to say that the middle-of-the-road position is always wrong. Jim Hightower, former Texas State Commissioner of Agriculture, eloquently expresses his disdain for moderate views: “There’s nothing in the middle-of-the-road except white lines
and dead armadillos.” But that’s overstating it. Sometimes the truth does fall in the
middle. But it can also be found in the extremes. Pointing out that a position or view
is the middle position is not a good argument in its favor; to claim that a conclusion is
right because it is “moderate” is to commit the golden mean fallacy. So mark carefully
what the golden mean fallacy is not—It is not the fallacy of taking the middle-of-theroad position, for there is no such fallacy. And contrast that with what the golden mean

A Jury Compromise
The golden mean verdict in the trial of Dr. Carl Coppolino
is a particularly striking case, but it is not an isolated
one. Juries have long been tempted by such fallacious compromises. The noted nineteenth-century New
York trial lawyer H. L. Clinton mentions the case of
Dr. E. M. Brown, which Clinton calls “an extraordinary
case, full of thrilling and tragic incidents.” According to
Clinton (who acted as defense attorney for Dr. Brown),
one of the tragic incidents was that Dr. Brown was
initially indicted for first-degree murder. Clinton maintains that that indictment was a serious mistake by the
presiding judge: Dr. Brown should have been indicted
on charges of, at worst, manslaughter. As Clinton
describes the problem:
The disadvantages of a trial under that indictment
[for murder instead of manslaughter] were great. As
the District Attorney would ask for a conviction of a
capital offense, and the defendant’s Counsel would
strive for an acquittal, there would be great danger
that the jury would compromise on a verdict for a
minor offense. Had there been a trial on the former
indictment for manslaughter, the effect of the evidence in favor of the defendant would probably
have been to secure an acquittal.

But the charge was murder, rather than manslaughter;
and Clinton describes the result:
[If the defendant had been tried on an indictment for
manslaughter, then] the result would undoubtedly have
been an acquittal. The disadvantages of going to trial on
an indictment for murder were very great. The jury
would be very apt to think that if they refused to sustain
the contention of the prosecution, that the case was one
of murder either in the first or second degree, . . . they
were very liberal to the defense; and that a conviction
for manslaughter in the fourth degree, the lowest grade
of homicide known to the law, would be a substantial
victory for Dr. Brown. Although the evidence entitled
him to a verdict of acquittal, it was not strange, under
the circumstances, that the jury rendered a verdict
against him of manslaughter in the fourth degree.11

If the prosecution is asking for a first-degree
murder conviction, then a verdict of not guilty is certainly the opposite extreme from what the prosecution is
demanding; but if “the evidence entitled him to a verdict
of acquittal,” then that extreme verdict was the correct
one—and the moderate tendency (“let’s convict him of
the mildest possible charge”) was mistaken.

Chapter 12

Some Distinctive Arguments and Potential Pitfalls: Slippery Slope, Dilemma, and Golden Mean Arguments

223

The Charms of the Golden Mean
The temptation to see a compromise as reasonable is
very powerful, perhaps especially so after long deliberation in a jury room. Suppose that you are a juror, and
the defendant has been charged with breaking or entering and arson. The prosecution claims that the defendant broke into an empty house with the intention of
stealing whatever was left there; but finding nothing
worth stealing, he started a fire that caused significant
damage to the house. The defense insists that this is a
case of mistaken identity. You and your fellow jurors
have been deliberating for a long time, everyone is
rather tired and tempers are getting a bit short. Half of
the jurors believe there is sufficient evidence to convict
the defendant on both charges; the other jurors agree
that there is some evidence of guilt, but insist that the

evidence is too weak to establish that the defendant is
guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. Finally, someone
says, “Look, let’s be reasonable. You people don’t think
there’s enough evidence to convict the guy for arson
and breaking or entering. We think there is enough
evidence. Let’s put our heads together and meet
halfway. We’ll agree to find him not guilty of the arson
charge, if you will agree to a guilty verdict on the breaking
or entering.” That will be tempting, and it may seem
like a reasonable solution to the problem. It is tempting, but it’s not reasonable. It’s convenient, and it
avoids the hard work of thinking long and carefully
about but what verdict is actually right; but it commits
the golden mean fallacy, and there is no reason whatsoever to suppose that the compromise verdict is correct.

fallacy actually is: The golden mean fallacy is the fallacy of supposing that if something
is the compromise, moderate, or middle-of-the-road position that is in itself a reason
for thinking that the position is right. It’s not a fallacy to take the moderate position; it
is a fallacy to claim that the moderate position is right simply because it is moderate.
Compromise is sometimes desirable. If we are making plans to have dinner together
and I want to grab a burger and fries at Joe’s Greasy Spoon and you want a leisurely dinner
at Antoine’s, then perhaps we can find some compromise that would please us both. But
finding the truth, as opposed to working out agreeable social occasions, is not so easy.
If Darwin (who placed the age of Earth at several million years) and Ussher (who insisted it
was not more than a few thousand years old) had met in a spirit of friendship and compromise and agreed to work out their differences, they might have come up with a compromise
position that would set Earth’s age at half a million years. But such a compromise would
have yielded a mistaken conclusion. And the same applies to jury deliberations. If the jury
disagrees about where to go for lunch, by all means try to work out an amicable compromise. But jurors should never compromise on a criminal verdict. If half the jurors favor a not
guilty verdict and the other half favor a verdict of guilty of first-degree murder, it will not be
acceptable to compromise on a verdict of guilty of second-degree murder.
The wrongfulness of compromising on a criminal jury verdict is worth repeating, so
I’ll repeat it: Do not reach your verdict by trying to work out a compromise. There will be
a tremendous amount of pressure to do so. After several hours of deliberation, with the
members of the jury still unable to agree on a verdict, pressure will build to come up with
some sort of agreement. But it is much better to agree to disagree—and thus wind up with
a hung jury and no decision—than to reach a decision fallaciously by means of the golden
mean fallacy.

Exercise 12-4
Develop golden mean arguments for each of the following claims. (Make sure that the arguments
you develop are really golden mean fallacies. For an example, look back at the two golden mean
fallacies for and against handgun control.)
1. a. Smoking in public restaurants should be banned.
b. Smoking in public restaurants should not be banned.
2. a. Passive euthanasia should be permitted.
b. Passive euthanasia should be prohibited.

224

Chapter 12

3. a.
b.
4. a.
b.
5. a.
b.
6. a.
b.
7. a.
b.

Some Distinctive Arguments and Potential Pitfalls: Slippery Slope, Dilemma, and Golden Mean Arguments

(Euthanasia is the killing or allowing to die of an individual who is suffering from an incurable
disease, in order to prevent the person from further suffering. Passive euthanasia is allowing
someone to die by withholding medical treatment that would prolong life. For example, not
using an artificial respirator to prolong life would count as passive euthanasia. Passive euthanasia
is contrasted with active euthanasia, in which something, such as the injection of a drug, is done
to hasten death.)
Marijuana should be legalized.
Marijuana should not be legalized.
Capital punishment should be employed.
Capital punishment should be banned.
We should eliminate the inheritance tax.
We should keep the inheritance tax.
There should be mandatory drug testing for all college students.
There should not be mandatory drug testing for all college students.
We should raise the speed limit to 70 mph.
We should keep the speed limit at 55 mph.

Study and Review on mythinkinglab.com

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

What is the slippery slope fallacy?
Under what conditions are slippery slope arguments not fallacious?
Define the fallacy of false dilemma.
How can a false dilemma argument be fallacious when it is a valid argument?
What is the golden mean fallacy?
What is the difference between a golden mean fallacy and a nonfallacious argument for some
moderate position?

NOTES
1
2
3

4
5

6
7
8
9
10
11

John Mortimer, Rumpole for the Defense (Hammondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin Books), p. 112.
The speech of District Attorney A. Oakley Hall in the trial of Cunningham-Burdell, quoted in Henry
Lauren Clinton, Celebrated Trials (New York: Harper & Brothers, 1897), p. 189.
James G. Watt, U.S. Secretary of the Interior, January 24, 1983. Taken from Christopher Cerf and Victor
Navasky, The Experts Speak: The Definitive Compendium of Authoritative Misinformation (New York: Pantheon
Books, 1984), p. 39.
Quotation of Edwin Meese from a news report by the L.A. Times–Washington Post News Service.
Post-Nicene Fathers, V.ix.442. I found this example in Douglas Walton’s Slippery Slope Arguments (see
“Additional Reading”); he credits J. F. Little, L. A. Groarke, and C. W. Tindale, Good Reasoning Matters!
(Toronto, ON: McClelland & Stewart, 1989).
Texas v. Johnson 1989:10; Douglas Walton includes a particularly interesting discussion of this case in his
Slippery Slope Arguments, pp. 267–277 (see “Additional Reading”).
J. Gay-Williams, “The Wrongfulness of Euthanasia,” in Intervention and Reflection, 4th ed., edited by
Ronald Munson (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth 1992), p. 158.
From You’re the Jury by Judge Norbert Ehrenfreund and Lawrence Treat, Copyright © 1992 by Judge
Norbert Ehrenfreund and Lawrence Treat. Reprinted by permission of Henry Holt & Co., Inc.
Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, Book II.
From the Cleveland Plain Dealer, May 14, 1996.
Henry Lauren Clinton, Celebrated Trials (New York: Harper & Brothers 1897), pp. 302, 315.

Chapter 12

Some Distinctive Arguments and Potential Pitfalls: Slippery Slope, Dilemma, and Golden Mean Arguments

225

INTERNET RESOURCES
For a remarkably detailed, extensive, and insightful examination of slippery slope arguments in the
law, see an article by Eugene Volokh, “The Mechanisms of the Slippery Slope,” which was published
in Harvard Law Review and is available online at http://www2.law.ucla.edu/volokh/slippery.htm. Dahlia
Lithwick published a very clear analysis of some often used slippery slope arguments; it is in Slate, at
http://www.slate.com/id/2100824/. There are some nice examples of false dilemma arguments at
http://www.drury.edu/ess/Logic/Informal/Bifurcation.html.

ADDITIONAL READING
For a particularly good study of slippery slope arguments,
see Frederick Schauer, “Slippery Slopes,” Harvard Law
Review, Vol. 99, no. 2 (December 1985), pp. 361–383.
Discussion of slippery slope arguments is a standard
feature in most books on critical thinking, and many helpful discussions and marvelous examples of slippery slope
thinking can be found in such sources. An interesting perspective on slippery slope arguments is offered in Chapter 7
of Garrett Hardin’s Filters against Folly (New York: Viking
Penquin, 1985).
An excellent, insightful, and thorough study of
slippery slope arguments can be found in Douglas Walton’s
Slippery Slope Arguments (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1992).
Walton’s book is rich in examples and perceptive in
analysis, and its special strength is its emphasis on the
legitimate use of slippery slope arguments.
Bernard Williams has an excellent paper on slippery slope arguments: “Which Slopes are Slippery?” It

can be found in Bernard Williams, Making Sense of
Humanity (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
1995).
Eugene Volokh offers a remarkably deep and interesting study of slippery slope arguments—in law and
politics—complete with wonderful examples, and even a
neat cartoon illustration of the slippery slope argument.
Entitled “The Mechanisms of the Slippery Slope,” it
was published in Harvard Law Review, Vol. 116 (2003);
it can be found online at www.law.ucla.edu/volokh/
slippery.htm.
A good example of a jury reaching a verdict
through golden mean reasoning is found in the case of
State v. Schaeffer, in You’re the Jury, by Judge Norbert
Ehrenfreund and Lawrence Treat (New York: Henry Holt,
1992). (If you would like some realistic practice at jury
deliberation, the book by Ehrenfreund and Treat presents
a variety of very interesting cases.)

Read the Document on mythinkinglab.com
Barbara Defoe Whitehead, “What We Owe.” An insightful
rejection of a false dilemma.
Carol Ezzell, “Why? The Neuroscience of Suicide.”
An example of the dangers of false dilemmas in considering causal factors.
Holland v. Illinois, 493 U.S. 474 (1990). This is a case
concerning the use of peremptory challenges to exclude
blacks from a jury. The majority in this case (in a 5 to
4 decision) ruled that the use of peremptory challenges
to exclude blacks from the jury was not a reason to overturn the guilty verdict. Justice Marshall, writing for the
minority, argued that the verdict should be overturned
because the exclusion violated the Sixth Amendment to

the Constitution. In Justice Marshall’s argument (reproduced here), he states that the argument of the majority
contains a false dilemma (a “false dichotomy”) as well as a
fallacious slippery slope argument (the majority claims
that “acceptance of Holland’s argument would be the first
step down a slippery slope”).
Matrixx Initiatives v. James Siracusano, U.S. Supreme
Court (2011). In this case—dealing with a claim that
Matrixx Initiatives concealed unfavorable information from
investors—the Court examines a dilemma argument proposed in defense of Matrixx Initiatives, to the effect that if
data regarding risk factors for one of its medications is not
“statistically significant,” then it is of little or no importance.

13

❖❖❖

Begging the Question

Listen to the Chapter Audio on mythinkinglab.com
When a magician draws a rabbit out of her hat, she simply removes what she had
managed to hide there earlier. It’s a great trick, and it is often done very convincingly—
but it doesn’t create any new rabbits. The same applies to question-begging arguments. It
is easy to pull a conclusion out of an argument if I have previously hidden the conclusion
in the premises. And it often looks impressive, but it doesn’t really prove anything new.
The problem with begging the question is that it spins its wheels, it goes nowhere: It
does not take up the burden of proof and go forward with it. Instead, a question-begging
argument simply assumes as a premise what it purports to be proving.
Arguments are supposed to give us reasons for believing the conclusion. But you
cannot support the conclusion by using the conclusion. If we are trying to build a
bridge across a river, we must first find a solid foundation, then sink the pilings into that
foundation, and finally conclude by placing the trestle onto the pilings. If our civil
engineer proposed using the trestle to support itself, we would look for another civil
engineer. And if someone proposes to support a conclusion by appeal to that same
conclusion, then we should look for another argument.

THE PROBLEM WITH QUESTION-BEGGING ARGUMENTS
Notice that question-begging arguments are certainly valid. A valid argument is one in
which the conclusion follows from the premises; or more exactly, if its premises are true
then its conclusion must be true. If the conclusion is contained in the premises, then the
conclusion must follow from the premises. If the premises are all true, and the conclusion
is contained among the premises, then the conclusion certainly will have to be true. So
the problem with question-begging arguments is not invalidity. Rather, the problem with
question-begging arguments is that they turn in a circle: They don’t give us any real
reasons for believing the conclusion to be true. An argument cannot pull itself up by its
own bootstraps.
When the magician pulls a rabbit out of her hat, we all know that it was done
by sleight of hand, but it’s not always easy to tell how the magician managed to get the

226

Chapter 13

Begging the Question

227

rabbit into the hat. That’s also true of question-begging arguments: It’s not always easy to
recognize the question-begging premises. But take the simplest cases first. If our
magician—in plain view of the audience—sticks a rabbit in her hat and then pulls it out,
we aren’t likely to be very impressed by the trick. And some question-begging arguments
are almost that obvious. They seem to rely on the hope that if the conclusion is repeated
often enough—in a loud and confident voice—then people will believe the conclusion to
be true (despite the fact that no evidence has been given in support of the conclusion).
For example, “Socialism will not work as an economic system, because it is perfectly
obvious that socialism is not workable as an economic system.” Such an “argument” is
rather like the bellman’s “argument” in Lewis Carroll’s “The Hunting of the Snark”:
“Just the place for a Snark!” the Bellman cried,
As he landed his crew with care;
Supporting each man on the top of the tide
By a finger entwined in his hair.
“Just the place for a Snark!
I have said it twice:
That alone should encourage the crew.
Just the place for a Snark!
I have said it thrice:
What I tell you three times is true.”1

Strange as it may seem, many people seem to think that merely repeating the conclusion
is a convincing argument. Thus the district attorney in her closing “argument” to the jury
argues, “The defendant is guilty as charged! He knows it, I know it, and, members of the
jury, you also know it! He is guilty of mugging that poor old lady to steal her grocery
money! He is guilty, and thus justice demands that you speedily return with a verdict of
guilty!” Such “arguments” offer no reason to believe in the defendant’s guilt or the
snark’s proximity. And I trust that neither you nor the bellman’s crew will be deceived by
such brazen uses of question begging.

A New and Confusing Use of “Begs the Question”
Unfortunately, the phrase “begs the question” has recently taken on a new use, a use that
is very different from naming the fallacy described in this chapter. This new use is often
directed at suspected half-truths, as in the following: “Professor Snodgrass told us that
some students do very well in this class; that begs the question of what happens to the
other students.” Or as in this: “The label says that this pesticide does not cause cancer;
that begs the question of what other health problems it might cause, such as nerve
damage.” Obviously there’s no way to ban the use of “begs the question” in this context,
but be careful not to confuse the two very different uses.

SUBTLE FORMS OF QUESTION BEGGING
No one should be misled by the blatant begging the question practiced by the bellman.
Unfortunately, begging-the-question fallacies also occur in much trickier forms. One is
through use of synonyms.

Synonymous Begging the Question
Consider the following brief argument:
Socialism is not a workable economic system, because an economic system in which the
means of production are collectively owned cannot work.

228

Chapter 13

Begging the Question

But socialism is an economic system in which the means of production are collectively
owned. So the premise merely repeats the conclusion, albeit in a slightly disguised
(synonymous) form. The premise gives us no independent grounds for believing the
conclusion to be true, and the argument commits the fallacy of begging the question (the
synonymous form of that fallacy).
The synonymous form of begging the question may sometimes appear in more
elaborate disguises:
Abortion is wrong; for it is always wrong to voluntarily and purposefully destroy a living and
growing and developing human fetus.

But that is precisely what abortion is. Merely restating a synonymous form of the
conclusion is not giving an argument for that conclusion.

Generalization Begging the Question
In some cases of begging the question, the premise is a generalization that contains the
conclusion as an instance of that generalization. For example,
John Hinckley should not be excused on grounds of insanity; for no one should escape
punishment for an assassination attempt on the grounds that he or she is insane.

Certainly if no one should escape punishment on grounds of insanity then it follows that
Hinckley should not. But the question at issue—the claim that the “argument” is
supposed to be proving—is whether Hinckley should be excused on grounds of insanity;
merely stating a general principle that contains the conclusion as an instance is to beg the
question.
Suppose we are discussing what courses should be general requirements for
students at Home State University, and someone offers the following argument:
A critical thinking course should be required of all students at Home State University,
because obviously every university student should have to take at least one course in critical
thinking.

True, if all university students should be required to take critical thinking, then that
includes the students at Home State. But the premise is just a more inclusive, general claim
that begs the question at issue.
Consider another example of the generalization form of begging the question. In
1983, a Korean airliner (Flight KAL 007) was shot down by a Soviet war plane over
sensitive Soviet airspace. Why was Flight KAL 007 flying over a major Soviet naval center
during a scheduled Soviet training exercise?
Was it a strange sequence of tragic errors? Or was it the deliberate use of a commercial airliner for spying? Or what? It is an important question, and there have been interesting arguments for a variety of views. Suppose someone offers the following argument:
South Korean Flight KAL 007 was not on a spy mission because the United States and its allies
never use commercial passenger flights for spying.

Such an argument begs the question. The question at issue is whether this particular
flight was used for spying. To assume—as a premise, and without further argument—that
no such flights are used for spying is to assume the very point in question, and thus to beg
the question.
Of course not all uses of general principles involve begging the question. Suppose
that some mercury is dropped on the floor and forms into small balls. If someone

Chapter 13

Begging the Question

229

inquires why the mercury is in small balls, it may be helpful to explain that mercury always
forms into small spheres in such circumstances. (i.e., no one shaped the mercury into
spheres; it is a natural property of mercury to arrange itself in that manner.) One may
then want further explanation of mercury and its properties and why it behaves so
differently from water; but while the explanation already given may be rather superficial,
it is not a question-begging explanation. Explaining some specific event by subsuming it
under a general principle is a legitimate and common explanatory device, both in science
and elsewhere. It is a legitimate explanatory practice when there is agreement concerning
the specific event and we simply want explanation of why it happened. But if the event or
case is a controversial one, and there is disagreement about the particular event (Was Flight
KAL 007 spying or was it careless? Should students at Home State University be required
to take a critical thinking course? Is Hinckley’s behavior excusable on grounds of insanity, or is it not?), then trying to settle the controversy by appeal to a general principle that
includes the controversial case commits the fallacy of begging the question.

Circular Begging the Question
Begging the question can be even more indirect, and even more insidious. Sometimes
circular arguments travel such a convoluted circular path that it is difficult to detect exactly
where the question begging occurs. Consider a standard, and relatively easy, example:
God exists. We know that to be true, since the Bible plainly tells us that God exists. And we
know that what the Bible tells us is true, since the Bible is the word of God.

In this argument an essential premise (the Bible is the word of God) assumes the truth
of the conclusion (for the Bible to be the word of God, then God must first exist).
But circular begging the question can be more subtle. There has long been controversy concerning whether the U.S. Constitution should be amended to allow residents of
the District of Columbia representation in the Congress and Senate. One person (in a
letter to the editor of the Greensboro Daily News) gave this argument against such a
constitutional amendment:
This past August the U.S. Senate and House of Representatives voted on and approved the
District of Columbia representation amendment [to the U.S. Constitution]. The amendment
is now before the states and must obtain ratification by three-quarters of them by 1985 or it
will die.
Basically this amendment would give the 700,000 citizens of the District of Columbia
voting delegates in either house of Congress. In the words of the amendment, the District
should have representation “as though it were a state.”
Article I of the Constitution directs the members of the House shall be chosen from the
“several states,” and that two senators shall be chosen from “each state.” That should settle
the issue once and for all. The District of Columbia is not a state and giving it representation
as such is an outright and flagrant violation of the Constitution.

In order to see the question-begging trick, the first step—as always in critically examining
arguments—is to determine exactly what the conclusion is. (Without knowing what the
conclusion is, we can’t tell whether it is being slipped in among the premises; we won’t
even know what to look for.) The conclusion here is clear enough: The amendment to the
Constitution giving D.C. representation should not be passed. But why not? Because the
Constitution clearly specifies that members of the House and Senate should be chosen
from the states, and the District of Columbia is not a state; therefore, giving D.C. representation in the House and Senate “is an outright and flagrant violation of the Constitution.”
That’s true: Giving the District of Columbia representation in the House and Senate would
be a violation of the Constitution as it stands, and so would require an amendment to the

230

Chapter 13

Begging the Question

Constitution. But the question at issue is whether there should be such an amendment to
change the Constitution. By assuming that “violating” (changing) the Constitution must
be wrong, the argument moves in a circle and begs the question. Obviously if
“violating”/changing the Constitution is wrong, then it is wrong to change the Constitution, and the D.C. representation amendment must be wrong; but the question is whether
this amendment is a good one, whether it is right in this instance to amend the Constitution.
The circular form of the begging-the-question fallacy can be found in recent
discussions of child abuse testimony. Any case that depends heavily on the testimony of
children poses serious difficulties. There are dangers that children may have trouble
distinguishing fantasy from reality, but there are also dangers that children may be
confused and frightened—or even intentionally intimidated—during their testimony.
Such problems are exacerbated in child abuse cases; there is a danger that the child
abuser may have threatened or physically abused the child in such a way that the child is
afraid to testify against the abuser, particularly when the child abuser is present in the
courtroom. On the other hand, one of our most important safeguards against false
accusations is that the accused has the right to face his or her accuser. If you were accused
of a crime you would certainly want to know who was accusing you and hear your accuser’s
testimony and face that person in court. So there is a genuine problem here, and it is not
at all obvious how it should be resolved. But one question-begging argument is sometimes
given in favor of allowing children in child abuse cases to give their testimony without the
defendant being present. That argument goes something like this:
It is doubly wrong to allow defendants in child abuse cases to be present when the abused
children give their testimony. These child abusers often use terrible threats to keep the
abused children from telling anyone about the abuse. To allow such vicious people to
continue their intimidation of the children by being present when the children testify—and
thus to perhaps avoid conviction—compounds their abuse of the children and extends that
abuse into the courtroom.

There may or may not be good arguments against allowing the defendant to be present
during all testimony, but certainly the above argument is fallacious. To assume that the
defendant’s presence would terrify the testifying children because of the threats the defendant has made against the children is to beg the essential question: Did the defendant
make such threats? Is the defendant guilty as charged? While it is important to make the

Damned If You Do, Damned If You Don’t
The trial of Carlyle W. Harris, charged with murdering
his wife by administering morphine to her, was a
famous trial of several decades ago. In his closing
address to the jury, the prosecuting attorney included
these remarks:

because he can look a jury in the face? Why, could any
man whose conscience wasn’t fairly choked in his breast
look any honest man in the face after there had been
proved against him what has been proven in this case
against Harris? This is not innocence, to my mind; it
shows an utter lack of conscience and of feeling.2

It is pretended by Mr. Taylor [defense attorney], in
solemn mockery of your intelligence and manhood,
that you should acquit his client because throughout all
the nine months that Harris has been in prison and
throughout this long trial he has always maintained his
self-respect, and could look into the eyes of each
juryman with a confidence and assurance which, in
Mr. Taylor’s judgment, could only arise from a sustaining
knowledge of innocence in his heart . . . . Is he innocent

Let us grant the weakness of the defense’s claim that
Harris’s ability to look the jurors in the face is evidence
of his innocence. However, when the prosecution maintains that Harris’s ability to look the jurors in the face
proves that the defendant is utterly without conscience
and feeling—how else could a guilty man look jurors
squarely in the face—that is a case of arguing in a circle,
of begging the question at issue: Is Harris guilty?

Chapter 13

Begging the Question

231

situation as comfortable and secure as possible for children giving testimony, it should
also be remembered that the testimony of children can be terribly and tragically wrong.
The Salem witchcraft trials, in which several unfortunate and innocent women were condemned to death on the basis of the testimony of a group of children, should suffice to
remind us that we must also safeguard the rights of defendants. And in particular, we
must safeguard the presumption of innocence—an essential condition for both fair trials
and accurate thinking.

FALSE CHARGES OF BEGGING THE QUESTION
Begging the question is always a fallacy; but not every case in which the conclusion is
repeated is a case of fallacious begging the question. In a lengthy argument, it may be helpful to have the conclusion repeated several times—otherwise, those listening to the argument may forget exactly what the argument is supposed to be proving. It is often useful to
start an argument by stating what you intend to prove, then giving your premises in support of your conclusion, and finally repeating the conclusion that your argument proves.
That is not begging the question. Begging the question occurs when the conclusion is
used as a premise. Simply repeating the conclusion is not using it as a premise. (Of course
if there is nothing to the “argument” other than repetitions of the conclusion, that would
indeed be begging the question, but don’t make false accusations of begging the question
merely because the conclusion is stated more than once.)
In sum, watch out for the fallacy of begging the question, in all its treacherous
guises. But don’t start seeing the question-begging fallacies when they aren’t really there.
It’s a fallacy to beg the question; it is not a fallacy to restate the conclusion.

Self-Sealing Arguments
There are two important close relations of the begging-the-question fallacy, and they go
by special names: self-sealing arguments and complex questions. Self-sealing arguments
are perhaps the most subtle and misleading of the question-begging arguments. The selfsealing fallacy might also be called the no-true-Scotsman fallacy, in honor of the following
delightful example of that fallacy (developed by Antony Flew3): A particularly proud
Scotsman picks up the morning paper and reads that an Englishman has committed a
horrendous sex crime. “No Scot would do such a thing!” our Scotsman exclaims. But the
very next day he reads an account of the even more vicious and scandalous sex crime
committed by Mr. Angus MacSporran of Aberdeen, Scotland. Confronted with such a
clear counterexample to his claim that no Scot would commit such a crime, our
proud Scotsman ought to withdraw his claim, or at least retreat to the milder claim that
very few Scotsmen would commit such a crime. But instead he “saves” his original claim:
“No true Scotsman would do such a thing.”
That manner of “saving” a claim turns it into a self-sealing fallacy. What begins as a
substantive empirical claim is turned into an empty formula that is “true by definition.”
The original claim was a strong, although doubtful, one: No individual of Scottish descent
would ever commit a vicious sex crime. But when the claim is modified in order to
preserve it, what sort of claim is it? What is a “true Scotsman”? Merely a person of Scottish
descent who would never commit a vicious sex crime. So the claim ends up as: No person
of Scottish descent who would never commit a vicious sex crime will ever commit a vicious
sex crime. That’s true, but it doesn’t tell us much. In fact, it doesn’t tell us anything at all.
Instead, it merely proposes a very peculiar and not very useful definition for “true
Scotsman.” The truth of the claim is “sealed in” by making the claim empty, vacuous, a
mere truth-by-arbitrary-definition.
The self-sealing fallacy is frequently used to make claims that sound important but
are in fact vacuous. You have perhaps found yourself caught in the recurring late-night

232

Chapter 13

Begging the Question

dorm discussion of whether people are selfish or generous. Some provocative individual
asserts that everyone acts always and only for selfish purposes. And immediately that claim
is contested. “My mother,” you say, “certainly is not always motivated by selfishness. I well
remember the nights she sacrificed her own rest, staying by my bedside holding a cool
cloth to my fevered brow for hours on end. And even as we speak, she is sending me all
her extra money in order to pay for my college books.” But your opponent refuses to
budge: “She is still motivated by selfishness; it’s just that she takes more pleasure in
buying you books than in buying for herself, and more comfort in mopping your fevered
brow than in sleeping. She is selfishly doing what she wants to do.” Unless we look closely,
this will appear a strong argument. How can we answer? No matter what examples we
propose—a self-sacrificing mother, a loyal and selfless friend—our opponent can handle
them: The individual is pursuing his or her own interests, is doing what brings the most
pleasure. But what appears a strong position is actually an empty one. This person is using
a peculiar—and self-sealing—definition of “selfishness.” In the ordinary meaning of
“selfish,” we do not count an individual as selfish who does good for someone simply out
of a generous desire to help that person. That is precisely what we regard as unselfish
behavior. If “selfish” behavior is redefined as “all behavior done from any motive whatsoever,” then certainly all behavior will be “selfish” behavior, in an empty sense. Indeed,
under such a definition of “selfish” it would be impossible by definition to do any act that was
not selfish. But that shows the emptiness of the new definition. The claim that all human
behavior is selfishly motivated is supposed to be a real claim about humans and their
behavior. But under the self-sealing definition of “selfish,” the claim has no empirical
content, it tells us nothing about humans or about human motivation; instead, “All
people are ‘selfish’” expresses an empty verbal formula that is true by definition.
This last point shows the way to answer self-sealing arguments. You cannot answer
such an argument by attempting to find a counterexample, as you could if the claim
being made were a genuine empirical claim about the world. After all, the tricky thing
about self-sealing arguments is that they prevent anything from counting as a counterexample. Instead, when refuting a self-sealing argument you must make its actual structure
clear; that is, you must show that its conclusion has been transformed from a factual
assertion to a mere verbal formula. And the best way of showing that is to challenge the
person offering a self-sealing argument to state what he or she would be willing to count
as a genuine counterexample to the claim. If nothing can possibly count against it, then
it is true by definition rather than being a claim about the observable, testable, empirical
world we live in.
In fact, that is a good way to test some of your own beliefs: Possibly some beliefs you
thought were about the real world have degenerated into comforting verbal vacuities.
That can happen quite easily to our particularly cherished beliefs. I strongly believe that
anyone who commits a murder must be psychologically unbalanced, and that therefore
we should think more about how to reform or cure such murderers (while protecting
society against such criminally sick individuals), and reject notions of vengeance against
murderers. I can cite plenty of examples of mentally ill murderers: Loeb and Leopold,
the wealthy Chicago youths who killed a playmate as a sort of bizarre experiment; David
Berkowitz, the “son of Sam” murderer, who received messages from his dog; John Hinckley,
who lived in a fantasy world inhabited by teenage movie stars; Albert DeSalvo, “the Boston
Strangler,” who was driven mad by a sequence of events (including his daughter’s
crippling illnesses). But suppose my claim is challenged: Here is a murderer whom all
competent psychiatrists and psychologists believe to be sane, whose psychological test
results show up normal, who does not exhibit any bizarre behavior patterns, who is not
delusional, who has no neurological damage to his brain, has no history of mental illness;
this murderer robs a bank and coolly kills a witness to prevent identification (and thus
improve his chances of not being captured). Is that murderer a counterexample to my
claim? If I admit that he is a sane murderer, then I must give up my claim that all murderers are insane (“Very well; I should say instead that most, but perhaps not all, murderers

Chapter 13

Begging the Question

233

are insane”) but at least the claim will remain a significant factual claim about the mental
condition of murderers. But suppose that instead I say (as I am very tempted to say): “No,
I still believe he is insane; for anyone who murders another human being must be
insane.” Then my claim is no longer about the mental condition of murderers; rather, it
is an arbitrary verbal stipulation: As I am now using the terms, to murder someone is by
definition to be insane. But then to say that a murderer is insane is no longer to say
something significant: It is merely to say that someone who is insane is insane, because my
special self-sealing meaning of “murderer” includes insanity as part of its meaning. If
I cannot state what I would count as a sane murderer, then that is a sign that what was
originally a significant empirical claim has become an empty verbalism.
Self-sealing arguments are also a means of concealing our prejudices and stereotypes
from the light of critical examination. Bill is driving Jill to the airport, when a car pulls in
front of them and forces Bill to slam on his brakes. The careless driver is a woman, and Bill
exclaims vehemently: “Damn woman drivers. All women are awful drivers and shouldn’t be
allowed on the road.” As they drive on, Bill enlarges on the subject: “See that guy driving
ahead of us? Now he’s a good driver. He stays in his lane, keeps a steady speed, doesn’t talk
on his cell phone or send text messages, signals when he’s about to change lanes. He’s a
good driver, not like those lousy woman drivers.” At the next traffic light, however, Bill
catches up to the car ahead, and as he pulls alongside, the good driver turns out to be a
woman! Jill is delighted: “You see, women aren’t all bad drivers; you’re just prejudiced. That
woman is certainly a good driver, as you yourself pointed out.” However, Bill can hang on to
his prejudices, by swift use of a self-sealing argument: “Well, she’s not really a woman driver;
she drives like a man.” “Woman driver” is now being used by Bill in a self-sealing manner: It
means a driver who is a woman and is a lousy driver. So of course any “woman driver” must
be, by self-sealing definition, a lousy driver. The problem is that once this challenge to his
prejudices is past, Bill is likely to switch back to the larger original claim that all women are
bad drivers. Thus he can maintain his prejudice in the face of almost any contrary evidence.

Complex Questions
“How am I to get in?” asked Alice again, in a louder tone.
“Are you to get in at all?” said the Footman. “That’s the first question, you know.”
It was, no doubt; only Alice did not like to be told so. “It’s really dreadful,” she muttered to
herself, “the way all the creatures argue. It’s enough to drive one crazy!”4

Another fallacy from the begging-the-question family is complex question. “Are you
still drinking too heavily?” Whether you answer yes or no, you seem to be admitting that
at one time you did drink excessively. And that is how complex questions beg the question:
They embed an assumption within a question. By answering the question, you seem to
grant the embedded assumption.
Complex questions are standard stuff for Hollywood depictions of trials. The
shrewd district attorney asks the villainous defendant: “Why did you leave the diamond
necklace behind when you robbed Lady Bigbucks’s country estate?” “I didn’t see a
diamond necklace,” replies the hapless defendant, thereby admitting that he indeed is
the thief. But such loaded questions are not very likely in actual courtrooms. The defense
attorney would certainly, and rightly, object before the witness had a chance to answer,
and the judge would not only uphold the objection but would probably rebuke the
district attorney for asking such a question. If complex questions occur at all in the courtroom, they are likely to be confined to the summation speeches made by the prosecution
and defense just before the case goes to the jury, for lawyers are generally granted a good
deal of latitude in their summations. At that point the defense attorney may rhetorically
ask, “Do you really want to convict this person on such a flimsy patchwork of evidence?”
And the prosecuting attorney may ask, “Do you want to have it on your conscience that
you returned a dangerous criminal to the streets?”

234

Chapter 13

Begging the Question

Incidentally, complex questions are not the same as leading questions. A leading
question leads in a specific direction, but allows the witness to decline going in the
suggested direction: “You hate the defendant, don’t you?” That is a leading question, but
the witness can simply answer: “No, I don’t.” A complex question commits the witness to an
underlying assumption no matter how the question is answered: “Was it the investment
you lost in the defendant’s business that caused you to hate him?” Whether the witness
answers yes or no, the assumption remains that the witness hates the defendant; the only
question left is why the witness hates him (was it because of a failed investment or is there
some other reason?).
Complex questions may be unusual in court, but they are common in everyday life.
When they escape detection, they insidiously control thought. For example, “What type
of therapy is most effective in treating homosexuality?” “How do we gain our knowledge
of right and wrong?” “What is the purpose of human existence?”
All of the above questions contain at least one unstated but controversial assumption. Failure to recognize those assumptions will fix the framework of discussion in a way
that begs important questions. The most important issues may be settled before you even
realize the discussion has started. “What is the most effective treatment for homosexuality?” If we accept that statement of the question, then the whole discussion will presuppose some very dubious assumptions: First, that homosexuality is a disease that should be
treated, and second, that homosexuality is bad (like disease) and should be eliminated.
Revealing those concealed assumptions may make the question irrelevant (we shall not
ask how to treat homosexuality if it is neither a disease nor undesirable).
So be wary of complex (and loaded) questions: They may control discussion and
constrict the range of possibilities considered. Don’t be in such haste to get to the answer
that you overlook dangerous assumptions concealed in the question. In biased surveys,
complex questions are often called loaded questions. They are a common trick in fake or
manipulated “surveys” that are designed to give whatever result the surveyor desires, and
which can then be publicized as “genuine public opinion.” For example, “Do you support
government ‘make-work’ programs that will provide temporary jobs while greatly increasing the budget deficit?” is likely to yield a very different survey result than “Do you favor
job programs that will put unemployed American workers to work on projects that will
make our highways and bridges safer and better?” And, “Do you believe that every child
in America should have good health care?” will get a different result from “Do you want
the federal government interfering in your child’s health care?”
On the other hand, not all assumptions—and not all questions that contain
assumptions—are question begging. A complex question is being used by the automobile salesperson who smoothly slides into the question of how you intend to pay for the
car—“Shall we put this on our special 60-month super-low payment plan, or would you
prefer to pay it off in only 3 years?”—when you have not quite decided whether you want

Figure 13-1

Beware of complex questions!

Chapter 13

Begging the Question

235

to buy the car at all. But if it has already been settled that you are buying the car, then the
same question may not beg the question. In a breaking or entering case, the defendant
denies ever having been in the building he is accused of entering; the prosecuting attorney then asks him: “What were you doing inside the building?” That is a complex question that includes the assumption that the defendant was inside the building—and
whether the defendant was inside the building is a disputed question that should not be
begged by embedding it in a complex question. But suppose that in a different breaking
or entering case, the defendant admits that she was inside the building (but claims she
had the owner’s permission). In that case, if the prosecuting attorney asks the same question (“What were you doing inside the building?”), it will not be a complex question; for
in this case, whether the defendant was in the building is not in dispute. The moral of
the story is this: A question that contains an assumption is not always question begging.
If the assumption is not controversial—but is instead an assumption that all the parties
to the discussion recognize and accept—then no questions are begged by making the
assumption. (Of course the assumption may be false, but the assumption does not beg
the question.) The complex question fallacy occurs only when the assumption being
made is a controversial one.

Complex Cross-Examination
Subtle complex questions sometimes do occur during
cross-examination. (They must be so subtle that the
opposing attorney does not catch them.) The following is
a particularly good—at least a particularly tricky—
example. Seymour Wishman was the defense attorney for
Johnny Sayres, charged with murdering a man named
Leander. The defense would claim that Johnny acted in
self-defense. Wishman describes what happened:
The first witness the D.A. called was a fat lady who said
she had seen Johnny and the victim arguing. When
their words had gotten “really angry,” she testified, she
had sensed danger and jumped over the bar.
“I saw him take out a gun,” she said, pointing at
Johnny, who was sitting next to me at counsel table,
“and I ducked down behind the bar. Then I heard
these shots, four or five of them. Some people
screamed, ‘He shot Leander! He done shot Leander!’
When I looked up, three people was standing over
him. And the man was gone.” . . .
I began my cross-examination by asking this
woman how much she weighed. When she said “two
hundred pounds, more or less,” I had her step down
from the witness stand and walk to the edge of the jury
box. I stood next to her, in front of the waist-high
wooden wall separating us from the jury. . . .
“How high was the bar you say you jumped over?
Hold up your hand to show the height of the bar in
comparison to the jury box.”
The woman looked at me suspiciously, and then
held up her hand.
“Let the record reflect,” I said, “that the witness
is indicating a height of approximately four feet.
Now how much do you really weigh? Something

closer to two hundred fifty than to two hundred
pounds, wouldn’t you say?” Actually, she looked
closer to a thousand pounds to me and probably to
the jury.
“Well, maybe that’s a fact.”
“And you’re telling us you jumped over this bar?”
“That’s a fact.”
“You must have been mighty scared.”
“Ain’t that the truth.”
“They must have been arguing pretty bad, the
two of them, for you to have been that scared.”
“And how! I ain’t ordinarily what you’d call no
high jumper.”
The jury and I laughed.
“So I guess being so scared, you didn’t see, with
your jumping over this bar and hiding behind it and
all, whether Leander reached for his gun before
Johnny reached for his?”
“That’s right.”

Before reading on, examine the above cross-examination and try to pick out exactly where the complex
question occurs, and what important assumption is
hidden in that complex question. (That is not an easy
task, and it is not surprising that the district attorney
failed to notice the use of the complex question.)
The defense attorney continues the story:
I ended my questioning there, leaving the woman
standing in front of the jury. There hadn’t been any
evidence that Leander had a gun, and the witness’s
answer let stand the existence of the gun assumed
in my question. The prosecutor should have objected, but he didn’t.5

236

Chapter 13

Begging the Question

Exercise 13-1
The following examples include begging the question, self-sealing, and complex question fallacies,
and some arguments that are not question begging. (Remember: Simply repeating the conclusion
does not count as begging the question; the conclusion must be used as a premise.) For each
argument, tell whether it is question begging, self-sealing, complex question, or not question
begging at all.
1. Some skeptics claim that people who report seeing flying saucers are not really careful observers
and probably were mistaken about what they thought they saw. But, in fact, people who report
seeing flying saucers are careful observers—for if they weren’t careful observers they wouldn’t have
seen the flying saucers at all, would they?
2. We must place some limit on the amount of money a candidate can be allowed to spend in a
political campaign, since unlimited spending by political candidates must be stopped.
3. REUBEN:

RACHEL:
REUBEN:

When people who are in love get married, the marriage never ends in divorce.
I think you’re wrong about that. After all, Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor were
deeply and passionately in love, but their marriage ended in divorce.
Well, Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor must not have really been in love.

4. How is it that psychics are able to accurately predict details about the distant future? Are they in
touch with some divine force, or is it perhaps a gift from demonic forces? Or does their power come
from some other source?
5. We should find the defendant not guilty. There is certainly reasonable doubt about his identity as
the robber: He was identified by only one person; she admitted under cross-examination that she
wasn’t really certain of the identification; and the faulty lineup from which she originally identified
the defendant was not a fair one. So those are reasons for reasonable doubt, and given that
reasonable doubt, we should return a verdict of not guilty. Besides, the defendant had an excellent
and believable alibi, and that alone is enough to convince me that it is doubtful that this defendant
is the person who robbed the jewelry store, and thus that we should vote not guilty. Those points
put together add up to a verdict of not guilty.
6. The North Carolina Tar Heels are the best college basketball team in the country this year, and they
never lose a game. It’s true that they lost three games to Duke, and two to Maryland; but those
games really don’t count, because Duke and Maryland just caught the Tar Heels on bad days, and
they got a lot of lucky bounces. So the Tar Heels didn’t really lose, even though Duke and Maryland
might have scored a few more points in those games.
7. Atheists should not be allowed to speak on state college campuses, since people who deny the
existence of God should be banned from speaking at state colleges.
8. Smoking is not actually addictive: Smokers can stop smoking if they wish to do so. Some people
seem to try very hard to quit smoking without success, and sometimes they claim that they really
want to stop smoking but just cannot do so. But obviously those people (who say they are trying to
stop smoking but cannot stop) do not really want to stop smoking, for anyone who truly wants to
stop smoking can stop.
9. Some people question whether our government is sufficiently concerned about the safety of
nuclear power plants. Obviously our government does take great care about the safety of nuclear
power plants, for our government allows many nuclear power plants to operate, and our
government certainly would not allow nuclear power plants to operate if they were not safe.
10. We should not pass a capital gains (income from stocks, bonds, and other investments) tax cut.
Almost every dollar of a capital gains tax cut would go to the wealthiest 5% of our citizens, and they
are already the people whose income is increasing most rapidly, and they are obviously the people
least in need of tax savings. Furthermore, such a tax cut would run the danger of overstimulating
the economy, driving up inflation, and thus pose a danger to our economic prosperity. So clearly
there should not be a reduction of capital gains taxes.
11. Alcoholism cannot be considered a disease. Alcoholism is a serious social problem, and no social
problem should be classified as a disease.
12. From September 1972 through January 1973, the California trial of Juan Corona, accused of
the murder of 25 men, was a national news story. The crimes with which Corona was charged were

Chapter 13

Begging the Question

237

particularly gruesome. The bodies of 25 old men were found buried in shallow graves; the victims
had been hacked to death, and the prosecution claimed that Corona was the mass murderer.
During the trial, and during the jury’s week-long deliberation, Corona’s wife and four young
daughters were always nearby. The jury carried on long, intense, and often bitter deliberations,
requiring a full week before reaching a verdict. A number of the jurors doubted that Corona had
committed the murders through several days of deliberation. One of the key arguments for conviction—that was particularly convincing to two of the jurors who originally were most doubtful of
Corona’s guilt—was, briefly, this: “What if we let Corona go and he not only returns to killing more
old men but he harms his own children? . . . What if Corona is indeed guilty but [we] don’t convict
him and so he goes back to not only hurting poor old men but his own family?”6
13. Why is it that Home State University professors are such warm, caring, generous people? Is it
because they love teaching, and it makes them happy and warm? Or because spending so much
time on our beautiful university campus puts them in a warm and generous mood?
14. Home State students are wonderful, and their honesty, honor, and integrity are truly amazing. No
Home State student would ever do anything dishonest, and certainly would never cheat on an exam
or plagiarize a paper. OK, I know that Wendell Wicclair was recently suspended from Home State
for buying three of his term papers online and claiming that he wrote them himself, cheating on
his final exam, and stealing someone’s wallet and a book bag from a computer lab. But Wendell
doesn’t count: he was never a genuine Home State student, because he never really had the true
Home State spirit of honesty and integrity.
15. The United States should have guaranteed health care for every U.S. citizen. We are a democracy, and
we claim to believe that every citizen is equal, and entitled to life, liberty, and pursuit of happiness.
Well, if some of our citizens can’t get medical treatment for their illnesses, and die prematurely from
diseases that could be cured, then we are not living up to our principles of equality and opportunity
for our citizens. So if we really take our democratic principles seriously, we must have health care for
every citizen. Furthermore, not having universal health care actually costs us a lot of money. For when
people don’t have access to health care, they put off checkups and delay treatments, and instead of
being treated at less cost for a minor problem, they wind up in an emergency room requiring very expensive treatment for an advanced illness. Not only that, but we lose a lot of money because people
without health care miss more work, and they contribute less to the economy. So for sound economic
reasons, we should have universal health care. And finally, universal health care is simply the right
thing to do: It should be obvious to anyone that in a wealthy country in which many people live in
mansions and drive limousines and have yachts and beach cottages and ski chalets, it is just wrong for
some people to be denied basic health care while other citizens are living lives of wasteful luxury. So
universal health care is a policy that should be adopted and implemented in the United States.

Exercise 13-2
For each of the following questions, tell what assumption (or assumptions) is embedded in the
question. (In some cases, there may be several assumptions—be sure you note all the important
assumptions contained in each question.)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

Why do women think less analytically than men?
What programs must be cut in order to balance the federal budget?
Why have baseballs become so much livelier?
Who designed the U.S. plan for dealing with an extraterrestrial invasion?
What is the best way to gain knowledge of right and wrong?
What makes humans different-in-kind from animals?
How does my mind cause my body to do things?
What is the purpose of human life?
When did you become a witch?
When did Columbus discover America?
What valuable insights have you gained from reading this chapter?

238

Chapter 13

Begging the Question

Study and Review on mythinkinglab.com

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

What is a question-begging argument?
Give an example of synonymous begging the question.
Give an example of circular begging the question.
How should a self-sealing argument be answered?
What is a complex question?
Under what circumstances are assumptions in arguments legitimate? When are they not
legitimate?

NOTES
1
2
3
4
5
6

Lewis Carroll, “The Hunting of the Snark,” in The Collected Verse of Lewis Carroll (London: Macmillan, 1932),
p. 271.
Reprinted with permission of Macmillan Publishing Company from Gentlemen of the Jury, by Francis L. Wellman,
Copyright © 1924 by Macmillan Publishing Company, renewed 1952 by Ethel Wellman, pp. 132–133.
Antony Flew, Thinking Straight (Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books, 1977), p. 47.
Lewis Carroll, Alice in Wonderland, Chapter 6.
Seymour Wishman, Confessions of a Criminal Lawyer (Hammondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin Books, 1981),
pp. 171–173. First published in the United States by Times Books, 1981. © Seymour Wishman, 1981.
Victor Villasenor, Jury (Boston, MA: Little, Brown, 1977), p. 140.

INTERNET RESOURCES
Some good examples of begging the question and complex question (which the site calls
“Fallacies of Inappropriate Presumption”) can be found at the Critical Thinking Web, at
http://philosophy.hku.hk/think/arg/complex.php.

ADDITIONAL READING
Douglas N. Walton, Begging the Question: Circular Reasoning
as a Tactic of Argumentation (Westport, CT: Greenwood

Press, 1991), is a very detailed study of question-begging
arguments, with a wealth of examples.

Read the Document on mythinkinglab.com
Bruce N. Waller, “Fallacy of Begging the Question,” Coffee and Philosophy, pp. 13–14. Discusses ways in which claims are
made without any genuine support.

Cumulative Exercises Two
(Chapters 1 through 13)

This second set of cumulative exercises is similar to the first (some are fallacious, some
are not); but in addition to the argument types covered in the first set of exercises, this set
also contains examples of argument forms (fallacious and nonfallacious) covered in
Chapters 11, 12, and 13. For each example, first tell what form the argument is (such as
slippery slope), then determine whether the argument is or is not fallacious.
The argument forms included are as follows:
Ad hominem: sometimes a fallacy, sometimes not
Inverse ad hominem: sometimes a fallacy, sometimes not
Strawman: always a fallacy
Irrelevant reason (or red herring): always a fallacy
Appeal to ignorance: always a fallacy
Ambiguity: always a fallacy
Appeal to authority: sometimes a fallacy, sometimes not
Appeal to popularity: always a fallacy
Appeal to tradition (traditional wisdom): always a fallacy
Analogies (deductive, inductive, figurative): Sometimes fallacious, sometimes legitimate
Analogical literalism: always a fallacy
Slippery slope: sometimes a fallacy, sometimes not
Dilemma arguments: sometimes the fallacy of false dilemma, sometimes a genuine dilemma
Golden mean: always a fallacy (though it is not inherently fallacious to advocate a moderate
position)
Begging the question: always a fallacy
Self-sealing argument: always a fallacy
Complex question: always a fallacy (though embedded noncontroversial assumptions do not
commit this fallacy)
1. There have been some people who want to raise questions about the safety of our new BUGMURDER
insecticide. They say that there is evidence that BUGMURDER causes cancer, heart problems, and
nervous disorders. But in fact new BUGMURDER is the most effective insecticide ever introduced! It
absolutely kills all the bugs that damage lawns and gardens, and destroys the insects that damage
agricultural crops; so with BUGMURDER you can have greener lawns, bigger tomatoes, and larger
wheat harvests. So obviously these claims about the health risks of wonderful new BUGMURDER are
just a lot of nonsense.

239

240

Cumulative Exercises Two (Chapters 1 through 13)

2. The American Cancer Society wants to run advertisements and programs to discourage young
people from starting to smoke and encourage smokers to stop. But what they really want is a ban on
all tobacco products: a ban that would make it illegal for anyone, of any age, to use tobacco in any
form. They want to make tobacco use a criminal offense, and give people long prison terms just for
possessing a pack of cigarettes or taking a chew of tobacco. If they had their way, the prisons would
be full of tobacco-chewing baseball players and cigar-smoking executives and cigarette-smoking
adults. But that would place terrible restrictions on our freedoms: after all, we believe that adults
should be able to choose even harmful activities if they wish. So we must stop this American Cancer
Society campaign.
3. There is of course enormous controversy over the Israeli–Palestinian conflict in the Middle East,
and experts have proposed many different and divergent approaches to resolving the conflict. But
Professor Edward Chandler is a political scientist at Harvard University, and is a world-renowned
expert on Middle East politics; and his view is that the best solution is to set up a United Nations
force that will guard the Palestine–Israel border and keep the peace. Professor Chandler has spent
his entire career studying this region, and so his position should be accepted as the most promising.
4. Ohio is now running a large budget deficit: current projections indicate that the state is short well
over a billion dollars. So we are faced with a very tough choice: either close the prisons or make
huge cuts in higher-education spending. But obviously we cannot close the prisons. That would
mean releasing thousands of dangerous criminals onto our streets, and that would overwhelm our
police forces, and might well result in a crime wave. So hard as it is, we are forced to make huge cuts
in higher education.
5. Bruce Waller argues that every college student should be required to take a course in critical
thinking. He says that it is useful for students to learn basic principles of evaluating arguments no
matter what their major: whether they are mathematicians or English majors, engineers or historians,
sociologists or chemists, they can all benefit from the basic reasoning techniques learned in critical
thinking. And Bruce also says that all students should have to take critical thinking because all
students are citizens in a democracy, and they must be competent critical thinkers when they decide
how to vote, when they serve on school boards or juries, and generally to be effective, thoughtful,
self-governing citizens participating in our democratic society. But you should keep one thing in
mind as you listen to Bruce’s argument: he wrote a critical thinking textbook, and every time a new
copy of that text is sold, Bruce picks up a buck or two. If every student took critical thinking and
bought Bruce’s textbook, Bruce would pocket several thousand dollars. So it’s not hard to guess why
that greedy sleaze wants all students to take critical thinking! And when you keep that in mind, it’s
hard to take seriously Bruce’s argument for requiring critical thinking.
6. There is currently controversy over whether we should include “under God” in the U.S. Pledge of
Allegiance. But obviously we should include “under God” in the pledge. After all, we’ve had “under
God” in our pledge for half a century. Our parents and even our grandparents said “under God” in
the pledge. So certainly we should not change it now.
7. You remember we were talking about who was the Union Commanding General at the Battle of
Gettysburg? Well, I called Shelby Foote, the author of an outstanding history of the Civil War, and I
also called Professor Bunting, who teaches Civil War history at the University of Michigan, and both
said that it was General Meade. So Meade must have been the Union Commanding General at the
Battle of Gettysburg.
8. It is very important that you vote. Voting is one of your responsibilities as a citizen. And if you
neglect that responsibility, then soon you may neglect other responsibilities. You start with neglecting
to vote, and next you neglect to obey the traffic laws, and then you neglect your responsibility to pay
your taxes, and you begin to ignore your job responsibilities, and eventually you begin to neglect
your responsibilities to your family. So if you don’t want to end up a useless parasite who takes no
responsibility and makes no contributions to the good of society, then be sure to honor your
responsibility to vote.
9. Suppose the quarterback fakes a handoff to the halfback and then throws a long pass. There’s
nothing wrong with that, right? In the same way, suppose I’m selling a used car, and I fake the
number of miles on the car—it actually has 150,00 miles, but I turn the odometer back to only
50,000. Since you agree that it’s okay to run a fake in football, you should also approve of me running a fake when I sell a car.
10. Remember the Total cereal advertisement? The one that argued that Total cereal is more nutritious
than raisin bran, because it contains more vitamins than raisin bran? Some people say that the

Cumulative Exercises Two (Chapters 1 through 13)

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

241

argument is not a good argument, because the conclusion doesn’t follow from the premises. But in
fact it’s a very good argument, since it significantly increased sales of Total cereal.
Travis Traylor is one of the candidates for Dean of the College of Arts and Sciences at our university.
But he is not the person we should select for that important position. He was fired from his last
position as chair of the philosophy department at North State University when he got in an argument with another professor and took a swing at him. The year before, he had a medical leave to
deal with his alcohol problems. And recently his PhD was revoked, because evidence proved that he
had plagiarized his dissertation. Traylor cheats on his research, he has a nasty temper, and he has a
serious drinking problem: He is not the sort of person we want to hire as our dean.
We can either keep all marijuana use illegal, or we can legalize marijuana and eliminate all
restrictions on the sale and use of marijuana. But it would be absurd to eliminate all restrictions
on marijuana: that would mean that school children could buy marijuana out of vending
machines, and people could smoke marijuana as they drive, and marijuana could be advertised
to children during Saturday morning cartoons. Clearly, then, we must keep all uses of marijuana
strictly illegal.
Legalizing marijuana for recreational use would be going too far. On the other hand, a total and
absolute ban on any use of marijuana seems too severe. What we should do is make marijuana available for medicinal use, only with a doctor’s prescription. That is a good, reasonable solution.
If you want a great bioethics class, take Brendan Minogue. He is a superb teacher, who presents
material in a way that is both clear and entertaining. And he stays very current with the rapidly
changing field of bioethics through his reading, writing, and hospital consulting work. Finally, he’s
a very nice guy, who is generous and fair to his students. If you’re looking for a fascinating class
taught by a wonderful teacher, take Brendan’s bioethics.
John McCain recently proposed dropping the 14 cents a gallon federal gasoline tax during the
summer months. But that’s just silly, and it’s not going to really help us with the basic problem of
super high gas prices. It would be like your university tripling the tuition price, and then dropping
a five dollar lab fee for your chemistry course. It doesn’t really deal with the basic problem of higher
costs.
Professor Webble should be fired from the university! Last year, he accepted bribes from several
students to pass them in his courses, an article he recently published as his own work was in fact
plagiarized from someone else’s writings, he has made racist remarks during his lectures, and over
the past two years at least seven of his students have made complaints of sexual harassment against
him. The man should be fired, and quickly.
The United States has thousands of nuclear bombs. Since we are the only superpower in the world,
obviously we should not build more nuclear bombs. On the other hand, we need not start destroying any of our nuclear weapons. The more moderate course of simply maintaining our present
nuclear arsenal is obviously the best policy.
Philosophy is central and essential for a good university education. All of the really good universities
require students to take several philosophy courses before they graduate, because the best universities
are those that recognize the vital importance of philosophy for a good education.
Senator Shepherd argues that the new combination airplane–helicopter that is being built for the
U.S. military—the Osprey—should be scrapped. He points out that it has been involved in several
crashes already, and thus poses a danger to our troops; that the cost of the project is enormous, and
the funds could be better spent on other projects; and that the aircraft is not fast enough to serve
as an airplane, nor stable enough to really work as a helicopter, and thus will never be an effective
military aircraft. And before you pass judgment on Senator Shepherd’s argument, you should know
that the Osprey is actually being built in his home state, and that stopping the project will cost jobs
in his state, and will be enormously unpopular with the voters of his state, and may ultimately cost
Senator Shepherd his Senate seat! If he is willing to put his political career on the line for what he
believes, then his reasons must be strong ones, and we should accept Senator Shepherd’s argument
for scrapping the Osprey.
There is currently controversy over whether we should include “under God” in the U.S. Pledge of
Allegiance. But we should pay no attention to those people who want to remove “under God” from
the pledge. What they want is to change the pledge to “one nation, with no God.” They want to ban
all public worship and public prayer, and board up all the churches, temples, and mosques. If they
have their way, you could only pray and worship in secret!

242

Cumulative Exercises Two (Chapters 1 through 13)

21. The French ambassador to the United Nations argued that Saddam Hussein was not a threat,
because arms inspection keeps him from building dangerous weapons. And the ambassador also
argued that Saddam’s weapons were being destroyed, that inspections were working, and that war
against Iraq would result in thousands of civilian casualties, and might destabilize the Middle East,
and so we should not go to war against Saddam. But there’s something you should keep in mind:
France got a significant amount of its oil from Saddam, and so France obviously had an interest in
preventing a war against Saddam. That being the case, we shouldn’t be fooled by these self-serving
French arguments against war with Saddam.
22. Some critics have charged that the United States has tortured and mistreated prisoners captured in
Afghanistan and Iraq, soaking them with water and leaving them chained in extremely cold, dark
rooms for many days, keeping them bound and blindfolded for long periods, depriving them of
sleep for days on end, and on one occasion packing prisoners tightly into steel drums that were
exposed to bright sunshine until many died from the heat or from suffocation. But these charges
are clearly false, for the United States never engages in torture or mistreatment of prisoners.
23. New York has recently passed a ban on the use of trans fat (which causes high cholesterol and heart
disease, and is found in many cooking oils) in restaurants. One of the people who campaigned in
favor of the ban on trans fat said that banning trans fat in restaurant foods is like banning lead from
house paint (lead in house paint has been banned in the United States for several years because of
its health risks), since both cause severe health problems. But that’s a bad comparison: paint comes
in many different bright colors, while the cooking oils that contain trans fat are all a dull yellowish
color, and they would look really ugly on the walls of your house.
24. Almost all the Iraqi citizens are delighted that the U.S. military forces are in Iraq, and the Iraqis
fervently hope that the U.S. forces will remain there for many years to run the country and keep
order. True, there have been some massive demonstrations by thousands of Iraqis demanding that
the U.S. military leave Iraq. But those Iraqi demonstrators are just agitators, and not real citizens of
Iraq, because all the real Iraqis are happy to have the U.S. military in their country.
25. The CIA developed the SARS virus, and spread it into China in order to weaken the Chinese military
and undermine the Chinese economy. Some people might have doubts about whether the CIA
would do such a thing. But keep this in mind: The CIA has offered absolutely no proof that they did
not spread SARS, and they have not even denied doing so! So SARS must be a CIA conspiracy.
26. William Bennett is the best-selling author of The Book of Virtues. Bennett constantly argues in favor
of the traditional virtues, such as honesty, thrift, patriotism, traditional family roles, and selfreliance: the values that Bennett and other social conservatives call “family values.” But now comes
news that Bill Bennett is a high-stakes gambler, who has lost hundreds of thousands of dollars
during gambling sprees at a number of Atlantic City casinos. Well, blowing hundreds of thousands
of dollars in sleazy casinos is not exactly practicing thrift, nor is it a great way to spend quality time
with your family. So nobody should be fooled by “Blackjack Bill Bennett” and his arguments for
“family values.”
27. It has been suggested that I plagiarized my term paper. But certainly I did not, because plagiarism
is dishonest, and I am a completely honest person.
28. In the fall of 2000, a study—performed by a consultant who often works for the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, and called “state of the art” by a spokesperson for the American Lung Association—
reported that air pollution for electric power plants in the United States kills more than 30,000
Americans every year. Ralph DiNicola, a spokesperson for FirstEnergy Corporation, had this
response to the report.
“It is one thing to stand on the sidelines and bark about what the problem is, and a totally different
responsibility to produce reliable, affordable electricity in an environmentally responsible manner.
While these people would like to grow food in their back yards, and pedal bicycles to power medical
diagnostic equipment, that is not what the rest of the world wants to do.” (Reported in The Cleveland
Plain Dealer, October 17, 2000)

29. Senator Lodge claims to be deeply concerned about the problems of the small farmer, and he
pledges that if he is reelected he will devote strong and sincere efforts to helping small farmers and
preventing small farmers from being forced into bankruptcy. But his record speaks louder than his
words. During his last term in the Senate, he consistently voted against all proposals to provide debt
relief for deeply indebted small farmers, he opposed every farm-aid bill, he voted to cut funding for
a low-cost federal loan program for farmers; and furthermore, Senator Lodge supported proposals

Cumulative Exercises Two (Chapters 1 through 13)

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

243

to place heavier taxes on farm machinery and on chemical fertilizer, thus making the cost of
operating small farms even more expensive. When you look at Senator Lodge’s actual record,
I think you must conclude that he is lying about his dedication to helping the small farmer. Today
he says he is concerned about the small farmer, but only because he wants the votes of small
farmers. Senator Lodge is not trustworthy.
The views of those who favor the mandatory use of seatbelts are absurd. They claim that if everyone is
required by law to wear seatbelts when riding in a car, then there will be no more automobile fatalities,
and that serious automobile injuries will be almost entirely eliminated. But that is an absurd view.
Clearly some automobile accidents are so bad that even the best seatbelts would not prevent serious
injury or death. (After all, there are still serious injuries and deaths in stock car racing, and stock car
drivers all wear elaborate seatbelts.) And besides, seatbelts could not prevent all traffic fatalities, since
some of the victims of auto accidents are pedestrians—and certainly seatbelts would not save their lives.
So the claims of the advocates of mandatory use of seatbelts are really ridiculous.
It is wrong to place limits on smoking in public places. Tobacco smoking started in North America,
and down through the centuries Americans have always smoked in public. In restaurants, in buses,
in streetcars, in stores—even in stagecoaches—Americans have smoked in public. And now some
people want to restrict smoking in public places. We’ve never had restrictions on smoking in public
places, and we shouldn’t start now.
Some people argue that capital punishment is unfair because the poor are much more likely to be
executed than are rich murderers, who practically never face the death penalty. But what about the
murder victims? Certainly they were not treated fairly. So those arguments about the unfairness of
capital punishment don’t really work.
During the last 3 years, the tuition at YSU has steadily increased while the number of courses
offered for students has decreased. Some students complain that it’s like being charged more and
more for a cheeseburger while the cheeseburger gets smaller and smaller. But that’s a bad comparison: after all, eating cheeseburgers causes high cholesterol, but whatever its problems, a university
education does not increase your cholesterol level.
We obviously cannot stop killing and eating farm animals; we cannot become vegetarians as some
people recommend. If we don’t kill and eat farm animals, what are we supposed to do with them?
We would have to turn the cows and pigs loose to roam over the countryside and wreck people’s
yards and cause danger on the highways. Obviously it’s better to kill the animals for food than to
have them running loose and causing havoc.
It was a sad day for Corn Valley College when it started its MBA program. Once a college starts one
master’s degree program, it soon develops other graduate programs. And then doctoral programs
are developed, and soon a law school and a medical school are added, and more graduate and
professional students enroll, and the undergraduate enrollment becomes massive. Thus starting
from the MBA program, Corn Valley College will be transformed from a small, friendly, personal
college into a huge, impersonal university.
Clearly we should not go overboard with this Star Wars satellite antimissile system and invest hundreds
of billions of dollars in the total system. But at the other extreme, it would be foolish to ignore the possible military advantages of the Star Wars system. Obviously, then, what we should do is invest some
money in developing a limited Star Wars system, but hold off on developing the total system.
This world is the best that could possibly exist. That follows from the fact that it was created by an
infinite and perfect God, and anything created by a perfect God must necessarily be perfect. And
we know that God is perfect, because we can see God’s perfection reflected in the perfection of this
best of all possible worlds that God created.
Phyllis Schlafly claims that we should return to the “traditional” family structure, with the husband
as the head of the household and the woman taking care of the home and family. She argues that
the arrangement will make for more stable marriages and more secure children and stronger
families. But then Phyllis Schlafly leaves her own home to go on lecture tours and to work with her
“Eagle Forum” organization. Well, as far as Phyllis Schlafly is concerned, her actions speak so loudly
against her arguments that I can’t hear a word she says!
BILL: In all groups, some individual steps out as a leader and guides the group’s behavior.
PHIL: That often happens, but not always. What about our discussion group last night? No one
emerged as a leader; instead, we all participated equally in the discussion.
BILL: In that case there is still a leader; it’s just that the group as a whole shares the individual
leader role.

244

Cumulative Exercises Two (Chapters 1 through 13)

40. Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, consider the evidence that the prosecution has offered against
my client, the defendant. The key prosecution evidence is the testimony of Robert Sly, who claims
he saw the defendant stab Albert Oakes to death. But consider carefully: Can you really believe the
unsubstantiated claims of Robert Sly? He has been previously convicted of second-degree murder,
armed robbery, and credit card fraud; and he is testifying in this case in hopes of getting a reduced
sentence. Indeed, he himself might well be suspected of murdering Albert Oakes, and so it would
be very convenient for Robert to have someone else convicted for that crime! The prosecution case
rests on the reliability of convicted murderer and swindler Robert Sly—who obviously has a motive
for lying! No reasonable juror could fail to have a reasonable doubt about the testimony of a
scoundrel like Sly; and so I ask for a verdict of not guilty.
41. This stuff about equal rights for women is nonsense. Those equal rights people want to make wives
the heads of households, they want to require that all major U.S. corporations have a woman
president, that no man ever be paid more than the lowest-paid woman, and they want at least half
the players in the National Football League to be women.
42. Okay, it’s true that our factory does pose some accident risks to our workers: perhaps severe risks of
injury, even death. But people take risks every day: they smoke, they drive too fast, they play dangerous sports, they drink too much. Some even drive race cars and go skydiving and hang gliding, all
of which are very dangerous. We think it’s okay for people to take risks in other areas of life, right?
So likewise we must conclude that there is nothing wrong with workers also facing risks when they
come to work in our factory.
43. It would be going too far to allow doctors to administer lethal drugs to terminally ill patients who
want to die. But then neither does it seem right to force terminally ill patients to continue to receive
life-lengthening treatment. The solution, then, is to allow terminally ill patients to refuse lifesustaining treatment, but not allow the giving of drugs that would actually cause death.
44. People who advocate animal rights claim that dogs, cats, monkeys, cows, and deer have rights—
such as the rights not to be abused, not to have pain inflicted upon them, not to be used in
experiments. But obviously the animal rights position is wrong, because only humans have rights.
45. OK, fellow jurors, this is a tough case. But let’s start with some of the facts. First, the blood found on
the defendant’s jacket was not the same type as the murder victim’s blood. That was established by
the expert testimony of Dr. Cone, of Harvard Medical School; Dr. Jones, clinical director of the
Blood Research Division of the National Institutes of Health; and Dr. Morton, who won the Nobel
Prize for her research on blood transfusions. They all asserted that the blood was not that of the
murder victim, and no testimony was offered that disputed their assertions.
46. Why is it that philosophy majors make so much money? Is it because of their high intelligence?
Their perseverance? Or is it some other factor?
47. It is a mistake to raise the legal drinking age to 21. If this year we raise the drinking age to 21, next
year it will be raised to 25, and then to 30; and before you know it, you’ll be able to draw social
security before you’re old enough to legally drink a beer.
48. It is quite clear that some individuals have actually lived previous lives in past ages, because after all,
no one has been able to prove that such claims of previous lives are false.
49. Bruce argues that we should abolish capital punishment. Bruce argues that it is clearly a cruel
punishment and thus violates our constitutional prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment. He also argues that it focuses too much attention and energy on individuals who commit
terrible crimes, instead of seeking out and changing the social and psychological conditions that
cause crime. And finally, Bruce argues that because of the major problems with eyewitness identification, it is quite possible—even likely—that we will wind up executing innocent people; and in
support of that last point, he notes the many cases of people in prison and on death row who have
been proved innocent of the charges for which they were convicted, mainly through use of new
DNA evidence that proved their innocence. But look, Bruce is really just an aging hippie, and you
know how those people are: they walk around in a daze from all the drugs they did in their youth,
they wear worn-out jeans and flash the peace sign and say, “Whatever turns you on, Man.” Bruce’s
brain was permanently addled during his younger days. His thinking was never very clear, and every
day as he gets older his hair gets greyer and his mind gets more confused. So you needn’t pay much
attention to Bruce’s arguments against capital punishment; Bruce hasn’t lived in the real world
since before Woodstock.
50. If General Motors closes this plant and replaces it with a manufacturing plant in a foreign country
paying lower wages, that is likely to have a terrible effect on this community. Of course only 300 jobs

Cumulative Exercises Two (Chapters 1 through 13)

51.

52.

53.
54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

245

would be lost, which may not sound like much in a town of 50,000; but the bad effects tend to
multiply. Not only are 300 workers unemployed; in addition, those workers and their families will
have their incomes severely cut, and thus they will spend significantly less. They will buy less
furniture, fewer appliances, delay putting a new roof on the house, cancel the plans they made with
a local travel agent for a summer vacation, give up their plans to take their children to the
orthodontist, cancel contracts to have houses painted and decks added, eat out less often at local
restaurants. Thus the ripple effect on the economy is likely to be substantial, affecting not just
300 laid-off workers and their families, but also appliance and furniture stores, painting and building
contractors, travel agents: All are likely to lay off workers to cover the loss of income. Some businesses will probably close. And between closed businesses and unemployed workers, the tax base for
the city and county begins to shrink. And this reduction in tax revenue happens at precisely the
time when more people are unemployed and thus in need of government services. Thus tax money
that would have gone to repair roads and improve education is lost, and more workers, in local
schools and in local government, lose their jobs. So while a company may claim that its decision to
close a manufacturing plant will have little negative impact on the local community, it is not true:
The long-term, overall effects to the local economy and to the local quality of life are likely to be
substantial and painful.
Perhaps 18 is too young for strong liquor like whiskey and vodka. But on the other hand, we shouldn’t
completely prohibit 18-year-olds from drinking alcoholic beverages. We should therefore set 18 as
the legal age for beer and 21 as the legal age for hard liquor.
It is sometimes said that boxing is an excessively dangerous sport that often results in brain and eye
injuries. But such claims are false. Boxing is a fast and exciting sport that requires hard training,
quick reflexes, and tremendous endurance. And if you want to talk about injuries, what about football? Every week some poor quarterback gets carried off the field, and usually some other players
as well.
Capital punishment is wrong, because it is wrong to take the life of a human being, no matter what
crime that human being has committed.
Whatever you do, don’t peek at anyone else’s paper during the exam! If you cheat on an exam, then
tomorrow you will be tempted to cheat on your income tax. And cheating on your taxes may lead
to other sorts of theft, such as shoplifting. And of course it doesn’t take much to go from shoplifting
to armed robbery. So don’t cheat on your exam—it can easily lead to terrible, violent crimes!
Katherine Bonds argues that we must drastically reduce the federal budget deficit, and that the only
fair, reasonable, and effective means of making such a reduction is by placing heavier taxes on the
wealthiest people. She argues that those people made the most money from the policies that caused
the deficit, and that they are the ones who can afford to pay more taxes without suffering hardship,
and that if we really want to reduce the deficit we have to take the money from those who have it:
and the rich are obviously the people with money. Katherine’s argument has special cogency, since
she is a very wealthy woman with an income of well over $1 million a year, and she herself would be
among the most heavily taxed if we adopted the policies for which she argues.
English has been the standard language used in the United States since the birth of the nation. Our
Declaration of Independence and our Constitution were written in English, and all our official
business has been conducted in English for well over 200 years. It has always been expected that
immigrants to the United States would learn English. Through the last two centuries, people have
come to the United States from every corner of the globe, speaking every language; and they and
their children have learned to speak English. Of course it is fine for people to speak another
language as well, and use that language with their family and friends if they wish; but English has
been the common language for all U.S. citizens for our entire history, and it must remain so.
We must stop those people who favor censorship of television. They want to eliminate all programs
that have anything to do with sex, ban any programs that have any violence at all, and forbid shows
that contain even the mildest profanities. If they have their way, the only programs that will be
allowed on television will be Lassie and Little House on the Prairie.
This guy, Merlin Magellan, claims that he can bend spoons without touching them. He claims that
simply by concentrating his psychic powers on them, he causes them to bend. Now either he’s a real
psychic, or he is severely self-deluded and delusional, or he is a fraud. He is not delusional, for he
has been thoroughly tested by competent psychologists who all agree that he does not suffer from
delusions. And it does not seem likely that he really has psychic powers, for he has never been able
to successfully demonstrate those powers under controlled observation, and there are several

246

Cumulative Exercises Two (Chapters 1 through 13)

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.
66.

67.

magicians who can duplicate his “psychic” feats and without any use of “psychic powers.” So we have
to conclude that Merlin Magellan is a fraud.
Our power company is not overcharging for electricity. When you think of all the wonderful things
electricity powers that our ancestors did not have—electric lights, refrigerators, air conditioners,
fans, electric blankets, microwave ovens, radios, televisions, computers—it is obvious that electricity
has greatly enriched our lives and made our homes more convenient, interesting, and comfortable.
So when we consider all the great benefits of electricity, it is obvious that the price we pay for
electricity is a bargain.
Alice Autry argues that children should be in school year round, rather than having a 3-month
summer vacation. She argues that the long vacation period causes kids to forget much of what they
have learned during the year, and so much of the following fall is spent reteaching material
students have forgotten over the summer. Also, with an extra 3 months of school, students would
have more time to study valuable additional materials—such as foreign languages—that are too
often neglected. And there’s something you should know about Alice: she is the owner of a major
water park, and if kids are in school all summer, then they will not be able to go to her water park
as often, and she will suffer serious financial losses. Since she believes in year-round schooling so
much that she’s willing to lose money to support it, that obviously gives special strength to her
arguments in favor of year-round schooling.
Some people object to the logo of the Cleveland Indians, claiming that “Chief Wahoo” is offensive
to Native Americans, that it is probably racist, and that at the very least it is in very bad taste. But, in
fact, there is absolutely nothing wrong with the Indians’ logo; after all, lots of Indians fans from
throughout Ohio love the logo, and clothing and caps with Chief Wahoo on them are among the
top sellers of baseball merchandise. That many fans certainly can’t be wrong.
Obviously we don’t want to impose tests for illegal drugs on everyone in society. On the other hand,
we certainly should not eliminate all tests for illegal drugs. The best program, then, must be to steer
a middle course: Do random drug testing on some groups (such as all people between ages 15 and
25, a prime group for use of illegal drugs) but not on everyone.
Giordano Bruno was an early follower of Copernicus. The Copernican theory (which has the Sun
at the center of the solar system and the planets orbiting the Sun) replaced the older Ptolemaic
theory (according to which Earth is stationary at the center, and the Sun and planets circle Earth).
Bruno believed that one implication of the Copernican theory was that the Sun was only one of
many suns, and that there must therefore be many other worlds with intelligent life, and that each
such world must have its own god or at least its own special manifestation of god. This view was
condemned as heretical by the Catholic Church, and in 1600 Bruno was burned at the stake after
refusing to renounce his views. Bruno’s theory about there being many worlds and thus many gods
may sound a bit strange, but there must be something to it, since Bruno believed it so strongly that
he was willing to die for it.
Logic should be banned from our colleges. When people take logic, they begin to think carefully
and logically. Then they are less swayed by emotions. Soon they completely eliminate emotions and
feelings from their lives. Before you know it, they are cold and uncaring, and they become
incapable of loving.
Everything that happens has a purpose. We know that to be true, since nothing happens without a
purpose.
Elizabeth F. Loftus, an authority on the psychology of perception and on eyewitnesses, has argued
that experts on the reliability of eyewitnesses ought to be allowed to testify in court as expert
witnesses. She claims that most lay persons (including, of course, most jury members) fail to understand how easily an eyewitness can be mistaken about what the witness sincerely believes he or she
remembers observing. But since Elizabeth Loftus is an expert on eyewitness testimony, if such
expert witnesses were permitted to testify for the defense, then she would be much in demand as an
expert witness—and she would make substantial amounts of money for appearing as an expert
witness. When we see her potential profits if experts on eyewitnesses are allowed to testify, we also
see where her arguments are coming from and exactly what her arguments are worth: not much.
There is now a version of the U.S. National Anthem that is sung in Spanish! That’s just wrong! Our
National Anthem has been sung in English ever since it was written, almost 200 years ago; our
grandparents sang it in English, and it was sung in English during World War I and World War II,
and our school children have sung it in English for decade after decade. So it is obviously wrong to
have a Spanish language version of the U.S. National Anthem.

Cumulative Exercises Two (Chapters 1 through 13)

247

68. In the United States, everyone participates in politics. Some people may believe that they do not
participate: those people who do not follow political issues are not registered to vote and do not
vote, are not affiliated with any political party, and never discuss politics. But those people still
participate, since they participate in politics by abstaining. Their refusal to participate is a type of
participation, so actually everyone participates.
69. Laetrile (the drug made from apricot pits, which some people claim cures cancer) should not be
banned in this country. After all, we’re not suggesting that cancer patients should be required to have
laetrile treatments. But on the other extreme, the drug should not be banned. The solution
obviously is to let it be freely available to those who want it.
70. When you are buying a new car battery, it’s hard to know which car battery you should choose. But
remember one thing: Chuck Yeager says that AC Delco batteries are the best you can buy—and
Chuck Yeager is one of the greatest test pilots of all time. So AC Delco batteries must really be
the best.
71. All of the controversy about regulating insecticides is nonsense. In fact, we have to decide whether
to ban all insecticides in the United States or to let farmers use any insecticides they desire. Now
clearly we can’t completely eliminate the use of insecticides, for that would mean that farmers
would have almost no way of keeping insects from their crops, and the result would be tremendous
crop losses, and perhaps even severe food shortages. So we must allow farmers to use any insecticides they desire, without restrictions.
72. We must not legalize marijuana. The legalization of marijuana would mean that it would not be a
criminal act to possess marijuana. But certainly it is, and must remain, a criminal act to possess an
illegal drug like marijuana. Therefore, we must oppose legalizing marijuana.
73. We should not attempt to cultivate marginal land that has thin topsoil. When it is plowed, the light,
poor, sandy soil is subject to the effects of wind and water erosion, and as the soil becomes even
worse through erosion it can hold less water, causing the water to run off faster and hasten erosion.
Furthermore, as the water runs off faster, it cuts gullies and ditches, causing the water to run even
faster and erode the soil still more severely, and, as the soil is blown, the force of the dust particles
blown by the wind also increases the speed of erosion. The result is not just the destruction and
erosion of the plowed area; as the erosion and washing spread, they may undermine surrounding
vegetation, destroy windbreaks, and further hasten and exacerbate the effects of wind and water
erosion. Like many things that we do to our environment, small, innocent-looking acts can cause
long-term devastation.
74. There are people who want to raise doubts about the reliability of eyewitness testimony. They note
that eyewitness identifications are often erroneous, and that juries tend to give eyewitness testimony
and identifications much more weight than they should, since jurors are often unaware of all the
ways eyewitness testimony can go wrong. But it is wrong to cast doubts on the use of eyewitness
testimony in court. Our courts and our juries have relied on eyewitness testimony for literally
hundreds of years, and eyewitness testimony has been a central part of our justice system during all
that time.
75. You’ve got trouble, right here in River City. Some people are planning to open a pool hall. And
once a pool hall opens in town, the next step is gambling. And then pornography. And then
prostitutes and organized crime. You have to stop that trend before it gets started.
76. Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, the defendant has been accused of stealing social security checks
from sick, disabled, and elderly people. He testified that he did not steal the social security checks,
that this is all a case of mistaken identification. But as you consider his testimony, ask yourself carefully and seriously: Can you really believe the testimony of a man who steals money from the sick,
disabled, and aged?
77. Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, you heard Mrs. Smith testify that she saw the defendant standing
on the front porch of the burglarized house on the afternoon of the burglary. She testified that she
had known the defendant since he was a boy and that she talked with him for about 10 minutes that
afternoon on the porch. Now there are really only three possibilities here: that Mrs. Smith actually
did see the defendant on the front porch on that afternoon; or that Mrs. Smith is lying about what
she has sworn to; or that Mrs. Smith was mistaken. Now certainly Mrs. Smith was not mistaken: After
all, she is of sound mind and good eyesight, she has known the defendant for many years, she stood
within 10 feet of him and talked with him, and she remembers the exact date because she had just
returned from an important meeting. And obviously Mrs. Smith was not lying: Her honesty is
beyond reproach, and she would never lie to the court after she has sworn to tell the truth.

248

Cumulative Exercises Two (Chapters 1 through 13)

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

Therefore, you must conclude that Mrs. Smith actually did see the defendant standing on the front
porch of the burglarized house, as she testified.
Vegetarians give arguments against eating meat: they say that it causes suffering for animals, that it
is a very inefficient way of producing food, that it causes health problems, and that raising cattle and
other animals for food causes great environmental damage. But these are people who just can’t face
up to the harsh realities of our brutal world, in which predators kill their prey, and often the predators are in their turn eaten by animals higher on the food chain. These vegetarians just can’t stand
to acknowledge that the world involves killing, whether the killers are army ants or Bengal tigers or
human butchers. Who knows why these vegetarians refuse to face this reality: maybe they saw Bambi
at a tender age, or maybe they are just too weak and cowardly for our harsh world. But whatever the
cause of their problems, it is clear that these weak and unrealistic vegetarians are not saying
anything that deserves our attention.
The position of those who support active euthanasia is not just absurd; in fact, it is profoundly dangerous. They favor allowing doctors to administer lethal drugs to bring a swift death to those who
are suffering, but they want to allow the doctors to make the decision and administer the lethal
drugs, without even requiring the consent of the person to be killed. So the doctors could make all
the decisions. If you go into the hospital with a stomachache, the doctor could decide to put you
out of your misery by swiftly ending your life. This would pose a terrible risk to all of us, and would
severely undermine not only our respect for life but also our rights of self-determination. So
obviously we must oppose and defeat efforts to legalize active euthanasia.
What is the best way of reducing the federal deficit? That question is no longer in doubt. Milton
Friedman, professor of Economics at the University of Chicago and a Nobel Prize winner in
economics, asserts that the best means of reducing the deficit is by cutting federal taxes. So if
Professor Friedman recommends it, that is certainly the best policy.
Either it is always wrong to tell a lie or there is nothing wrong with lying. Now certainly there are
some times when lying is not wrong. For example, when the members of the German resistance
(who worked against the Nazis) were captured, they lied about their membership in the
resistance—but surely telling such lies was not wrong. And those who worked on the Underground
Railroad (to smuggle escaped slaves out of the South and up to Canada) frequently had to lie to
cover up their operations. And again, such lies were not wrong. So certainly it is not always wrong
to tell a lie. And thus it follows that there is nothing wrong with lying.
No scientist believes in creationism. I know that Marshall Murdock—who has a PhD in biochemistry
from Stanford, is currently head of a pharmacological research project at the University of Chicago,
and who has published dozens of major scientific articles in reputable scientific journals—is a
believer in creationism. But he is not a real scientist, since no genuine scientist could believe in
creationism.
Some people suggest that those who lose their jobs will easily be able to secure another. It’s not that
easy. In fact, it often becomes tougher and tougher to get another job after being out of work. Your
work skills may become rusty, and, with rapidly changing technology, they may even become outdated; there’s a gap in your resume, and the longer you are out of work the larger the gap grows;
your contacts with people in your type of work begin to dry up; sooner or later you have less money,
and perhaps can’t afford a classy suit or stylish haircut; you lose employee health insurance benefits, so perhaps your health declines; eventually you lose your confidence and find it tougher to get
to job interviews; as you get more desperate, it shows in interviews, and you get more rejections,
which makes you still more desperate and depressed, and depression breeds lethargy. So we should
recognize that often for those who have lost jobs and have been out of work for a time, it gets harder
and harder to find work, more and more difficult to climb back up the increasingly steep hill
toward productive employment, and thus they may need special programs to help them back into
the workplace.
Don’t vote for Gene Grenling for mayor. He has no interest in making our city a better place for
all our citizens; instead, he just wants to enrich himself and some of his friends by using the
mayor’s office to increase the value of his real-estate holdings. Also, he is not a friend of the environment: He has no interest in protecting our air and water quality, and has been a long-time
opponent of even the most modest recycling programs. Don’t vote for this narrow-minded, selfish,
egotistical man.
Your children will love delicious, new wild tropical fruit poppers! They’re made with real fruit, so
you know they’re good, and good for you.

Cumulative Exercises Two (Chapters 1 through 13)

249

86. One of your fellow jurors offers this argument:
Look, I’m not sure that there is really overwhelming evidence that the defendant is guilty; but there’s
one thing that bothers me: If the defendant didn’t murder Kelly, then who did? After all, the defendant did have a motive, and the defense was not able to suggest anyone else who had a motive for
killing Kelly. So if you think the defendant didn’t kill Kelly, answer me one thing: Who did it? Someone certainly did, and since the defendant couldn’t suggest any better suspect—in fact, couldn’t even
think of any other suspect at all—I think we have to conclude that the defendant is guilty.

87. Okay, it’s true that I took ten dollars from Laura’s purse when we were all at her house for our
review session on critical thinking. But it wasn’t really stealing. After all, Laura served pizza and beer
during the study session, and Brenda ate four pieces of pizza and drank three beers, and she took
them without paying for them. And pizza and beer are expensive: what Brenda ate and drank was
probably worth at least 10 dollars. So if there is nothing wrong with Brenda taking ten dollars worth
of pizza and beer at Laura’s house without paying for it, then obviously there’s nothing wrong with
me taking ten dollars out of Laura’s purse.
88. Lisa claims that she saw Anita’s boyfriend, Angelo, at a tavern on the west side of town. Lisa says that
Angelo was sitting with his old high school girlfriend, in a back booth, and they were being very
friendly. But frankly, I don’t believe a word of what Lisa says. After all, she hates Angelo, and would
do anything to break up Angelo and Anita; and besides, Lisa loves to spread rumors, and she’s not
always very careful about whether the rumors she spreads are actually true.
89. It is sometimes claimed that if funding for school lunch programs is cut, then many poor children
will lose the one nutritious meal that they consistently receive, and many children will go hungry and
suffer from malnutrition. But those claims are false and unfounded. After all, we must make cuts in
federal spending in order to balance the budget, and it is essential that we balance the budget and
stop running up this enormous deficit and debt. So cutting funds for school lunch programs will not
deprive children of food, and will not result in malnutrition among poor children.
90. It would be a mistake to stop using team names such as the Washington Redskins, Cleveland
Indians, and Atlanta Braves. After all, U.S. sports teams have used such names for many decades;
indeed, the use of such team nicknames is almost as old as the games themselves.
91. For several years there has been a profound controversy—involving medical professionals, patients,
politicians, and ethicists—about active euthanasia (“mercy killing”) and physician-assisted suicide.
But Dr. Willard Gaylin, a distinguished psychiatrist who is a former director of the Hastings Center
for Applied Ethics, is widely recognized as an expert in the field of bioethics. And Doctor Gaylin
clearly and decisively asserts that active euthanasia is wrong, and no medical personnel can legitimately participate in such practices. That should settle the issue. When such an outstanding
bioethicist as Dr. Gaylin, who has devoted much of his career to studying, teaching, and writing
about bioethics, says that active euthanasia is wrong, it must really be wrong.
92. Avoid these computer simulation games like the plague! Oh, I know they seem fine the first time
or two you play them: just good innocent fun. But what happens is that the computer-simulated reality becomes very tempting: Your computer is always ready to play, it never complains when you
win a game, it doesn’t even mind if you cheat a bit. So computer simulations soon become more appealing than real life, and before you know it you’re spending all your time with your computersimulation friends, and then you stop going out with your flesh-and-blood friends. You become
more and more isolated and stranger and stranger, until you wind up a total computer hermit,
cut off from all real, personal human contact. The best way to avoid the computer-simulation trap
is simple: don’t start!
93. It would be a terrible mistake to destroy all of our forests and wilderness areas, leaving only a vast,
concrete jungle. But that doesn’t mean we must go to the other extreme, and preserve all our
forests and wilderness areas. Obviously, a reasonable solution, then, is to preserve some of the most
important and beautiful wilderness areas, but to allow the rest to be logged and developed for housing and commercial projects.
94. There is now before Congress a proposed amendment to the U.S. Constitution. This amendment
would prohibit the burning of the U.S. flag as an act of protest or dissent. Some people try to make
the issue seem complicated. It is actually a simple matter, and it comes down to this: Do you favor
protecting and celebrating the American flag as a special honored symbol of our country and our
heritage? Or do you think it’s fine when protestors burn the American flag?

250

Cumulative Exercises Two (Chapters 1 through 13)

95. Lyndon Johnson was definitely involved in the plot to assassinate President John Kennedy. After all,
Johnson had a motive to kill Kennedy: Johnson wanted to be president. And the most compelling
evidence of Johnson’s involvement is just this: He never, during his entire lifetime, offered conclusive evidence that he was not involved in an assassination conspiracy against Kennedy! Obviously,
then, Johnson must have been involved—perhaps even the ring leader!
96. Opponents of capital punishment sometimes claim that there is a danger that innocent people will
be executed. But that is not a real danger. After all, no one is really innocent. As Jesus said, “Let him
who is innocent cast the first stone.” We are all guilty of something. And since no one is genuinely
innocent, there cannot be a danger of executing an innocent person.
97. No genuine patriot, who really loves his country, ever criticizes his country during time of war.
I know that Abraham Lincoln, while he was a senator, argued that the United States was in the
wrong during the U.S. war against Mexico; and many decorated U.S. war heroes from World War II
opposed U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War. But those people couldn’t really be patriots, for no
genuine patriot would question his own country’s acts during wartime.
98. Professor Lisa Lawrence argues that all university students should be required to take a minimum
of 16 hours of a foreign language. Lisa notes that the rapid expansion of the world economy makes
it vital for students to be able to communicate with other cultures if they are to be successful in
business, and she also argues that it is a vital part of a broad education for students to study another
culture, in order to gain more perspective on their own culture. And, Lisa argues, in order to
genuinely understand another culture, it is necessary that students be able to read the literature of
that culture and to communicate with its members in their own language. Perhaps the most important thing you should note about Lisa’s argument is this: She is not a member of the foreign
language faculty; she teaches in the philosophy department, and, in fact, if all students were
required to take 16 hours of foreign language, then fewer students would have the time to take
philosophy courses. That means that Lisa’s own department would be threatened by a loss of
students—and Lisa’s own job might be jeopardized by a declining enrollment in philosophy
courses! And yet Lisa’s commitment to the study of foreign languages is so strong, she is willing to
put her own job at risk by arguing for the importance of foreign language study. Since Lisa’s convictions are so strong and sincere, we obviously ought to accept her arguments.
99. The health-care system of the United States is the fairest and most efficient in the world. After all,
we have a tremendous number of dedicated doctors, nurses, and medical specialists, and we have a
large number of hospitals. We lead the world in performing transplant surgery, and much of the
most important medical research takes place in the United States.
100. Members of the jury, this is not a difficult case. The defendant, Sandra Banks, shot and killed her
husband. Now either that shooting was an accident, or she is guilty of cold-blooded and calculated
first-degree murder. But certainly it was not an accident. As she herself testified, she intended to
shoot him. So it follows that she must be guilty of murder in the first degree.
101. So now researchers in England have actually cloned a sheep! This is an exciting scientific breakthrough, but it also carries risks of abuse. We should not place a total ban on this important area of
scientific research; but, of course, neither should we allow it to move too swiftly into areas that may
cause problems and for which we are not adequately prepared. The best policy, therefore, is to continue to allow cloning and research on cloning, but place a strict ban on the cloning of humans.
102. Former President Bill Clinton argues that it is very important that we raise the minimum wage. He
points out that the minimum wage has not been raised for years, and that those who work for a minimum wage work full time for wages that leave them deep in poverty. He also notes that the salaries
of CEOs are the highest in history, and he argues that it is fundamentally unfair for them to receive
millions of dollars while some of their workers receive wages that leave them in poverty. And
Clinton also points out that if the minimum wage is increased, then workers will have more money
to spend, and their spending will provide a needed boost for the economy. But you should keep in
mind that Bill Clinton is a man who lied under oath about a sexual affair, and who also lied to his
wife and to the American people about his affair. It’s clear that the man is a liar, and his argument
for raising the minimum wage is worthless.
103. Bruce Waller says that there are bald eagles nesting in Mill Creek Park. He claims to have seen
several bald eagles there, and says that he saw one bald eagle sitting on a nest containing eggs. Well,
Bruce probably does believe that he saw bald eagles in Mill Creek Park. But Bruce knows absolutely
nothing about birds: He couldn’t distinguish a bald eagle from a Canada goose, much less tell an
eagle from a hawk. Plus his eyes are so bad, even if he knew what a bald eagle looked like, he still
couldn’t see an eagle well enough to identify it if the eagle were more than 10 feet away from him.

Cumulative Exercises Two (Chapters 1 through 13)

104.

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

251

And while Bruce certainly wouldn’t lie about what he thought he saw, he does have a vivid imagination: Last year he was walking through Mill Creek Park and reported seeing a grizzly bear. It
turned out to be just a large raccoon! So we should be very skeptical about Bruce’s reports of seeing
bald eagles in Mill Creek Park.
Look, half of us think the defendant was driving recklessly when he struck and killed a jogger, and
so he should be convicted of aggravated vehicular homicide. The others on our jury maintain that
he was not driving recklessly, that the accident was unavoidable and was the result of the jogger’s
recklessness. Well, we’re never going to settle that. So let’s meet in the middle: Let’s find him guilty
of the lesser charge of vehicular homicide, which merely requires driver negligence, not recklessness.
That should satisfy everyone.
Those who want to increase the speed with which capital punishment sentences are carried out
hold a completely unreasonable and unworkable position. They want to string people up without
any review of the charges against them, and without any opportunity for them to appeal their convictions to higher courts, and for the worst crimes without having any trial at all. They want to bring
back vigilante justice, in which gangs of citizens swiftly execute anyone they happen to think is
guilty. And they want capital punishment not just for murder and treason, but also for any crimes
of theft, including shoplifting and passing bad checks. Thus their position is vicious, unreasonable,
and totally unacceptable.
If I am suffering from a painful and fatal disease, it is my right to decide whether I want to end my
life more swiftly by taking (or by having a physician give me) a lethal drug. To deny me the right of
determining when my life will be ended is to deny my right to self-determination concerning how
I will live and how I will end my life. Once we start down that path, it is just a short step from
deciding that I cannot decide to end my life to deciding that I cannot decide to reject medical
treatment. And from there, if we can require people to get medical treatment, then we can require
people to exercise, to eat fruits and vegetables, and to floss their teeth after every meal. Indeed, that
path leads to total control of every individual’s life, and total denial of all individual freedom. So we
should not start down that path toward loss of freedom by denying individuals the freedom to
choose to end their own lives through active euthanasia or physician-assisted suicide.
Students complain that the Home State University tuition increase is too much; but in fact, the
tuition increase is very modest and reasonable. By law, the maximum amount that HSU could have
raised tuition was 8%; and certainly that would have been too much. On the other hand, it would
hardly be reasonable to have no tuition increase at all. So the tuition increase, of a modest 4%, is
actually a good, moderate solution to a difficult issue.
Premarital sex is wicked and evil. The best evidence for this is that those who engage in premarital
sex often feel guilty about it. There are, of course, some people who engage in premarital sex and
do not feel guilty, but they are obviously people who are so depraved that they have reached the
point that they can do wicked things without even feeling guilty.
Betsy Hart is a commentator on CNN and the Fox News Channel. In a newspaper column on June
12, 1998, she discussed a resolution passed by the Southern Baptist Convention: a resolution that
affirms as a Biblical principle the doctrine that “wives must submit to their husbands.” The resolution drew widespread criticism, but Betsy Hart defended it, claiming that its critics are “elites” who
look down on the Southern Baptists; she then offered this answer to all the criticism:
So, back to the Southern Baptist Convention and the specifics of what’s causing all the fuss. I can’t
imagine elites really would say, for starters, that contrary to this Scripture, women should always
demand their own way. Is that a healthy model for anyone?

110. We have to make a basic choice in our society. Either we allow continued development, construction,
expansion, industrial buildup, and accept the fact that sometimes that development must involve
destruction of natural environments, increases in pollution, and even the extinction of some species;
or we must take the other alternative, and stop all construction projects, halt any further development, and slowly bring our industrial society to a painful, grinding stop. Since we obviously cannot afford to call a halt to all construction and development, it follows that we must continue development
and stop worrying about destruction of the natural environment and the extinction of species.
111. Some folks complain that the United States has a larger percentage of its population in prison than
any other Western country; well, that’s true. But then they say that we ought to try to reduce the U.S.
prison population, that the United States is imprisoning far too many people. But that’s just nonsense.
Apparently these people think that murderers, bank robbers, and rapists should be free to commit

252

Cumulative Exercises Two (Chapters 1 through 13)

112.

113.

114.

115.

116.
117.

118.

their crimes without any prison time. When people do the crime, they should do the time—and those
people who think we should reduce the U.S. prison population haven’t really thought enough about
how terrible it would really be to turn these vicious criminals loose with little or no punishment.
Many people have a very strong desire to smoke cigarettes. Since many people genuinely do have
such a desire to smoke, it is obvious that smoking is desirable. Furthermore, anything that is truly
desirable cannot really be a bad thing. Therefore, smoking cannot really be bad.
There are many people who believe that the United States should sign the international treaty
agreeing to a ban on the use of land mines. But in fact, the United States certainly should not sign
the test ban treaty, and then get rid of all our land mines. If today we eliminate land mines from our
arsenal, then tomorrow someone will want to do away with tanks, and the next day there will be a
push for eliminating bombers—after all, bombers kill civilians too. And then there will be a ban on
machine guns, hand grenades, and rifles; and before you know it, the United States will be totally
disarmed, and at the mercy of any hostile nation that wishes to attack us. So we must not agree to
this proposed ban of land mines.
Some people argue that we must place limits on the amount of medical care and medical resources
that people can consume. They claim that without some limits on the amount of health care that
can be demanded by individuals, it will be impossible to provide health care for all citizens. But we
obviously should not place limits on the health-care resources consumed by individuals, for there
must be no restrictions on the amount of health-care resources available to individuals who want
them and can afford them.
Suppose you own a restaurant, and a customer comes in and orders a steak with a baked potato. In
your restaurant, the steak is served with a nice green salad and some hot bread; but your customer
says, “No, no bread or salad for me; I’ll just have the steak and potato.” You wouldn’t say, “No, sorry,
you must eat the salad before you can have your steak.” That would be ridiculous. Well, in the same
way, when a student comes to Home State University and wants to take courses in biology or sociology or English literature, HSU also offers to teach them courses in math and in composition. And
if a student says, “No, thank you, I just want to take the biology courses, or the sociology courses; no
math or composition for me,” then it’s also ridiculous for HSU to say, “No, sorry, you must take the
math and the composition before you can have the courses in biology and sociology.” Just like the
diner who is free to choose what he does and doesn’t want to eat, students at HSU should be free to
choose what courses they do and do not want to take.
You can certainly trust us, because we are men of integrity.
Some people have criticized my closing argument for the prosecution, claiming that it was not a
good argument because it played on the emotions of the jury, inflaming them over the gruesome
nature of the crime, and blinding the jurors to the lack of solid evidence against the defendant. But
in fact it was a very good argument: It convinced all 12 jurors to vote for conviction; and that’s what
I call a damned good argument.
George J. Annas, a bioethicist, favors a ban on the cloning of humans. (Cloning is a technique of
producing a genetically identical organism through the use of genetic material from the original
organism.) He has claimed that a cloned human would be the first human genetically identical to
its one parent. His claim was challenged by R. C. Lewontin, a biologist and population geneticist,
who argued that:
A child by cloning has a full set of chromosomes like anyone else, half of which were derived from a
mother and half from a father. It happens that these chromosomes were passed through another
individual, the cloning donor, on the way to the child. That donor is certainly not the child’s “parent”
in any biological sense, but simply an earlier offspring of the original parents. (R. C. Lewontin,
“Confusion over Cloning,” New York Review of Books [October 23, 1997], pp. 20–23)

Annas responds to Lewontin’s challenge as follows:
Lewontin takes genetic reductionism to perhaps its logical extreme. People become no more than
containers of their parents’ genes, and their parents have the right to treat them not as individual
human beings, but rather as human embryos—entities that can be split and replicated at their whim
without any consideration of the child’s choice or welfare. Children (even adult children), according
to Lewontin’s view, have no say in whether they are replicated or not, because it is their parents, not
they, who are reproducing. (George J. Annas, “Why We Should Ban Human Cloning,” The New
England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 339, no. 2 (July 9, 1998), pp. 122–125)

14

❖❖❖

Necessary and Sufficient
Conditions

Listen to the Chapter Audio on mythinkinglab.com
Whether you are reading an editorial, watching a commercial, or serving on a jury,
detecting the exact conclusion is of the first importance. But that is often a complex task.
If you are serving on the jury during a breaking or entering case, it is easy enough to state
the conclusion that the prosecution is attempting to prove: The defendant is guilty of
breaking or entering. That’s right as far as it goes, but it doesn’t go very far.

NECESSARY CONDITIONS
The judge’s instructions to the jury will describe exactly what must be proved in order to convict of breaking or entering. If you don’t know exactly what counts as breaking or entering,
then your careful attention to the evidence and your finely honed logical capacities will be
useless. This is true for every argument you examine: If you aren’t clear about the conclusion of the argument, it will be impossible to effectively evaluate the argument.
If you are serving as a jury member (in North Carolina) in a breaking and entering
trial, the judge’s instructions will probably include the following:
Now I [the judge] charge that for you [the jury] to find the defendant guilty of felonious
breaking or entering, the State [the prosecution] must prove four things beyond a
reasonable doubt.
First, that there was either a breaking (which simply means the opening or removal of
anything blocking entry) or an entry (walking or reaching in would be an entry) by the
defendant.
Second, the State must prove that it was a building that was broken or entered.
Third, that the owner or tenant did not consent to the breaking or entering.
And fourth, that at the time of the breaking or entering, the defendant intended to commit
some specific felony.1

So the judge instructs, along with some other points. And the jury retires to consider its
verdict. Now we come down to brass tacks, and probably to rampant confusion. For
Chauncey (one of your fellow jurors) the verdict is perfectly clear: The defendant was

253

254

Chapter 14

Necessary and Sufficient Conditions

caught in the house, so obviously the defendant is guilty as charged. Now suppose that you
agree with Chauncey that the evidence shows the defendant was caught in the house;
does that prove the defendant guilty of breaking or entering?
No, of course it doesn’t. Chauncey is so fixed on the fact that two of the conditions
for breaking or entering have been met (the defendant did enter, and entered a building)
that he has neglected the other two conditions. That is, Chauncey has confused necessary
conditions with sufficient conditions. One necessary condition for finding the defendant
guilty of breaking or entering is that you be convinced that the defendant either broke
or entered. (Thus if you think that perhaps the defendant neither broke nor entered,
you would have to vote not guilty.) But while that is a necessary condition for guilt, it is
not sufficient.
In many cases in which the defendant is charged with breaking or entering, there is no
doubt that the defendant entered the building. In such a case the defendant may admit that
she entered the building, but claim that the owner had given permission. Or perhaps the
defendant will admit entering, but claim that he had no intention of committing any felony.
(“I lost the key to my apartment,” he claims, “and when I went around to the back to crawl in
a window, I got confused and crawled in the window to the neighboring apartment thinking
it was my own; they all look alike, there are 12 identical apartments running along the back
of the building, the light was bad, and I didn’t realize my mistake until I was in the apartment
and heard someone yelling for the police. It was an innocent mistake: certainly I wasn’t
intending to steal anything.”) This is a case in which the defense admits that the first three
conditions for breaking or entering are met; but the defense case rests on its claim that the
fourth necessary condition (that at the time of the entering the defendant intended to
commit a felony such as larceny) was not met. And if you—as a juror—decide that there is
a reasonable doubt that the defendant intended to commit a felony, then you must vote
not guilty.
Each of the four conditions is a necessary condition for finding the defendant guilty
of breaking or entering. Taken altogether, they are sufficient for finding the defendant
guilty of breaking or entering. That is, if you are certain that all four conditions are met
(one, the defendant did either break or enter; two, it was a building into which the defendant either broke or entered; three, the owner or tenant had not given permission; and
four, the defendant did intend to commit a specific felony), then you should conclude
that the defendant did violate the law.
We have been considering the charge of breaking or entering: It has four
conditions, each of which is necessary and jointly they are sufficient. But for other
charges the necessary and sufficient conditions may be quite different. Consider
a case in which a defendant in North Carolina (the law and conditions will obviously

Everett Collection / Shutterstock

Argue Your Case
You are defense counsel for Corena, a teenager charged
with breaking or entering. Corena was picked up by the
police in a high school late at night: There’s no question that she was there, and that she had broken into
the locked building (she has admitted prying a window
open in order to get inside). What questions would you
now ask Corena—this is your first interview with her—
in order to decide what sort of defense to present (or
perhaps whether to plead guilty and ask for mercy)? In
other words, what sort of defense could you make
against the breaking or entering charges?

Chapter 14

255

Necessary and Sufficient Conditions

differ from state to state) is charged with illegal gambling. The judge instructs the jury
as follows:
Now I charge that for you to find the defendant guilty of gambling, the state must
prove one of two things beyond a reasonable doubt:
First, that the defendant bet money on a game of chance.
Or second, that the defendant played at a game of chance because money was being bet on it.
So I charge that if you find from the evidence beyond a reasonable doubt that on or about
August 15, 2010, the defendant either bet money on a game of chance or played at a game of
chance because money was being bet on it, it would be your duty to return a verdict of guilty
as charged. However, if you do not so find or have a reasonable doubt as to both these things,
it would be your duty to return a verdict of not guilty.2

Having heard all the evidence, the closing arguments, and the judge’s charge to the
jury, you retire to the jury room to begin deliberation. Beatrice (one of the jurors)
argues that the verdict must be not guilty: “I’m convinced that the defendant was in the
alley where the dice game was taking place, and he was betting money on it. But the
game was broken up by the police before he ever had his turn at rolling the dice.
There’s really no evidence that he ever held the dice in his hand, and certainly no
evidence that he ever rolled them. So it has not been proved that he ever played the
game at all. And since there is at least a reasonable doubt about whether he played the
game, we can’t find him guilty of gambling.” What is wrong with Beatrice’s argument
for acquittal?

Distinguishing Necessary from Sufficient Conditions
Beatrice has confused sufficient conditions with necessary conditions. If the defendant either played at a game of chance because money was being bet on it or bet money on a
game of chance, then the defendant is guilty of gambling. Each of those conditions is sufficient; neither of those conditions is necessary. If the law were that in order to be guilty of
gambling one must both bet money on and play a game of chance, then Beatrice’s point
would strongly support a verdict of not guilty; but since to be guilty of gambling (in contrast to felonious breaking or entering) each condition is sufficient, Beatrice’s argument
does not offer grounds for acquittal.

Everett Collection / Shutterstock

Argue Your Case
You are a defense attorney, and your client has been
charged with felonious gambling. Apparently there is
no evidence that the defendant himself placed any
bets. However, there are several eyewitnesses who are
willing to testify that he was a major participant in a
darts match at the Dew Drop Inn, in which other people bet large sums of money. Thus the prosecution is
arguing that the defendant meets a sufficient condition for being guilty of felonious gambling: He played
at a game of chance because money was being bet on
it. What line would your defense take? On what
grounds might you argue that the defendant is not
guilty (or at least that there is reasonable doubt of the
defendant’s guilt) of felonious gambling?

256

Chapter 14

Necessary and Sufficient Conditions

SUFFICIENT CONDITIONS
In sum, when considering exactly what conclusions the prosecution and the defense are
trying to prove, it is crucial to understand the necessary and sufficient conditions for
verdicts of guilty and of not guilty. In order to be quite certain that you are comfortable
with this, try thinking about the breaking or entering case from another angle. We
considered what the prosecution was trying to prove in order to prove the defendant
guilty of breaking or entering, and certainly that is the best way to think about it, since
the prosecution bears the burden of proof, and the defense does not have to prove
innocence. However, as an exercise think about what would be sufficient for a verdict of
not guilty in a case of felonious breaking or entering. That is, when the defense presents
its case (in answer to the prosecution’s arguments), exactly what is the defense trying to
prove? Exactly what would be sufficient to support a verdict of not guilty? Or in other
words, give one sufficient condition for a verdict of not guilty.
If you answered that a sufficient condition for a not guilty verdict is that the defendant neither broke nor entered, then you are correct: That is sufficient for a verdict of
not guilty. But in fact it is more than sufficient. Is there a weaker claim that would still be
a sufficient condition for a verdict of not guilty? (Remember: The burden of proof is on
the prosecution.)
A weaker claim that would still be a sufficient condition for a not guilty verdict is:
There is a reasonable doubt that the defendant either broke or entered. That is, it is a sufficient condition for a not guilty verdict if one can show that there is a reasonable doubt
about any one of the necessary conditions for a guilty verdict. If one of the necessary conditions is not proved beyond a reasonable doubt, that is sufficient for a verdict of not guilty. Of
course, if the defense can prove that one of the necessary conditions for guilt is not met
(not that it is merely doubtful, but that it actually is false), that would be more than sufficient
for a verdict of not guilty.

NECESSARY AND SUFFICIENT CONDITIONS IN ORDINARY LANGUAGE
When we talk about the judge’s instructions to the jury, then necessary and sufficient
conditions can sound rather formidable. Actually, you think in terms of necessary and
sufficient conditions all the time—though you may not use those terms. Sitting in the
coffee shop this morning, one of your friends asserted: “The Maple Leafs have to have a
good goalkeeper to win the Stanley Cup.” That is, a good goalkeeper is a necessary (not a
sufficient) condition of the Maple Leafs winning the Stanley Cup. And before your
history class, you told a friend: “If I make a B on this exam, then I’ll pass the course.”
Which is to say, making a B is a sufficient condition for passing the course. Consider a few
more examples. If the Cardinals had one more good starting pitcher, they would win the
pennant; if I finish my term paper tonight, I’ll go to the beach this weekend; if you hit
the ball to Sarah’s backhand, you will beat her; if the inflation rate drops, the Democrats
will win the election. All those cases make claims about sufficient conditions. One additional good starting pitcher is a sufficient condition for the Cards to win the pennant; finishing your term paper is a sufficient condition for going to the beach; and so on. You
have also made many statements about necessary conditions, although again you probably did not use that phrase. You said, for example, that the Celtics would win the title
only if they had a healthy point guard, that you would have another drink only if someone would drive you home, that you would shop at Walmart only if it were unionized,
that you would go out with Ralph only if he were magically turned into a handsome
prince. In those cases, you are claiming that a healthy point guard is a necessary condition
for winning the title, that having someone drive you home is a necessary condition for

Chapter 14

Necessary and Sufficient Conditions

257

taking another drink. So don’t let all this talk about necessary and sufficient conditions
intimidate you: You have been thinking in terms of necessary and sufficient conditions
for years.
One more illustration. Suppose we are driving rather aimlessly around North
America. After a few days of wandering, we find ourselves facing an enormous body of
water. We’re uncertain of our location, but we know (somehow) that this is either Lake
Ontario or the Pacific Ocean, but we don’t know which. Suddenly, off in the distance, you
spot a whale surging up through the waves. “Hark,” you say, “this must be the Pacific
Ocean!” So, how did you reach that conclusion?
There are two possibilities. Probably you thought that since there are whales, this
must be an ocean. That is, whales are a sufficient condition for determining that the
water is an ocean. But you might also have reasoned from the other direction: An ocean
is a necessary condition for whales. Both ways of thinking are equally correct: Whales are
a sufficient condition for the existence of an ocean, and an ocean is a necessary condition for whales. In sum, when A is a sufficient condition for B, then B is a necessary
condition for A.
Here are some rather pedestrian examples. Drinking a quart of gin is a sufficient
condition for drunkenness. So if you know that Alisdair drank a quart of gin, you can safely
conclude that Alisdair is drunk; and if Alisdair is not drunk, you are justified in concluding
that Alisdair did not drink a quart of gin. But you are not justified in concluding, from the
fact that Alisdair is snookered, that Alisdair drank a quart of gin (he might have drunk a
quart of vodka, which also suffices for drunkenness). And from the fact that Alisdair has
sworn off quarts of gin, you cannot conclude that Alisdair is not drunk; he may have substituted a quart of bourbon. In short, a quart of gin is sufficient for drunkenness, but not
necessary.
Having four legs is a necessary condition for winning the Kentucky Derby. Thus if
we know that Secretariat won the Kentucky Derby, we are justified in concluding that
Secretariat has four legs. And if we know that Raunchy Runner has only three legs, we
know that Raunchy Runner cannot win the Kentucky Derby. But from the fact that Run
Dusty Run did not win the Kentucky Derby, we certainly cannot conclude that Run Dusty
Run does not have four legs. That is, four legs is a necessary—but not a sufficient—
condition for winning the Kentucky Derby.

Exercise 14-1
For these cases, look back at the conditions for breaking or entering, and tell whether the
following testimony would count for or against conviction on charges of breaking or entering
(the testimony might also count in favor of or against conviction on some other charge—don’t
worry about that).
1. George is charged with breaking or entering into Mary’s apartment and stealing her television set.
Mary is testifying: “Sure, I told George he could come in and watch the football game on my television while I was at work—in fact, I told him to have a beer and make himself at home. But I certainly
didn’t tell him he could steal my television set and sell it!”
2. Jim is charged with breaking or entering and theft of Joe’s lawnmower. Joe is testifying: “Look, I saw
the guy with my own eyes. I was sitting in the den watching Monday Night Football. The outside light
was on, and I happened to glance out the window as Jim came sneaking into the yard. He broke the
lock on the back gate of the fence and then uncovered the lawnmower (I store it under a tarpaulin
in the backyard) and rolled it away.”
3. Mary is charged with breaking or entering a store with the intention of stealing a television set. Mary
is testifying: “OK, so I did crawl in through the window. But I didn’t break the window. That window
has been broken for over a month. I just stuck my hand in and moved the latch and raised the
window. I never broke anything.”

258

Chapter 14

Necessary and Sufficient Conditions

Exercise 14-2
For each statement, select the statement that expresses the same idea as the original.
1. If we score three touchdowns, we’ll beat State.
a. Scoring three touchdowns is a sufficient condition for beating State.
b. Scoring three touchdowns is a necessary condition for beating State.
2. We must have dreams in order to change the world.
a. Dreams are a sufficient condition for changing the world.
b. Dreams are a necessary condition for changing the world.
3. Confidence is essential for being a good athlete.
a. Confidence is a sufficient condition for being a good athlete.
b. Confidence is a necessary condition for being a good athlete.
4. If the hurricane turns north, then Galveston will be evacuated.
a. The hurricane turning north is a sufficient condition for Galveston being evacuated.
b. The hurricane turning north is a necessary condition for Galveston being evacuated.

Exercise 14-3
Sutliff is caught in an empty apartment in an area known for heavy drug dealing. He testifies that
he is addicted to cocaine and that he was attempting to find an apartment where he had previously
purchased drugs for the purpose of buying cocaine. In order to avoid suspicion, the drug dealer required that those wishing to purchase drugs had to climb in a side window that opened onto an
alley. Sutliff claims that he had been under the influence of drugs and in the dark he had mistakenly climbed into the wrong window. He thought he was going into the apartment of the drug
dealer, which he certainly had permission to enter. Unfortunately, in his confusion, he entered a vacant apartment in the same building, where he was apprehended by the police and charged with
breaking and entering. Since he also was carrying a very small amount of cocaine, he was also
charged with drug possession, and he pleaded guilty to that charge.
Sutliff’s defense attorney argues:
This is all a terrible mistake. Poor Sutliff is an addict, true enough; and he has already entered a plea of
guilty of drug possession. But he’s not guilty of breaking or entering. He did of course enter the building,
but it was an accident: He intended to go somewhere else. This is like you having a bit too much to drink,
and then coming home and walking into the wrong apartment by mistake. It’s an accident, not a crime,
and whatever else you may be guilty of, neither you nor Sutliff is guilty of breaking or entering.

The prosecuting attorney argues:
Think carefully, Ladies and Gentlemen of the Jury, and you must conclude that Sutliff is guilty. Even if
you believe that Sutliff entered the apartment by accident, certainly he did not enter it with the permission of the owner. And he did enter the building, as he admits. And as he further admits, he entered
with the intention of committing a felony, namely, purchasing illegal drugs. That’s all that is required in
order to be guilty of breaking or entering, and since there is certainty on each and every point, you
must return a verdict of guilty of breaking or entering.

What’s your verdict? Guilty or not guilty?

CONDITIONAL STATEMENTS
A few terms will make it easier to discuss necessary and sufficient conditions. An “if-then”
statement—such as “If the sun shines, we’ll go on a picnic”—is called a conditional statement. The first part of the statement (“the sun shines”) is called the antecedent. (That’s
easy to remember: “ante” means prior to.) The antecedent is the first, or prior, part of the

Chapter 14

Necessary and Sufficient Conditions

259

conditional statement. When you play poker, each player makes an ante prior to dealing
the cards; antebellum mansions are mansions built before the “bellum,” or before the war;
antediluvian means that something is so old and outdated that it existed before the Biblical
flood. (Of course, that model doesn’t always fit: An antelope is not an animal that
precedes a lope.) The last half of the conditional statement (“we’ll go on a picnic”) is
called the consequent. (Please notice that that’s consequent, and not consequence.) So
a conditional statement is simply one in which the antecedent is a condition of the consequent. The consequent is true on the condition that the antecedent is true; in other words,
the consequent is asserted to be conditionally true.
It is sometimes useful to write conditional statements in shortened symbolic
form. To do so, we need a symbol for “if-then.” There are two standard ones: → and 傻.
(Not very imaginatively, logicians call the first symbol an arrow, and the second a horseshoe.) You can use either symbol you prefer; I’ll use the arrow. So if we use S to stand for
“the sun shines” and P to stand for “we’ll go on a picnic,” then “If the sun shines, we’ll go
on a picnic” would be symbolized as:
S:P
What this states is that S is a sufficient condition for P. It claims that if S is true, then P must
also be true.
In actual fact, the antecedent is rarely a completely sufficient condition for the
consequent. What the conditional statement should be understood to say is that if the
antecedent is true (and there are no weird extraordinary circumstances), then the consequent will also be true. If the sun shines, we’ll go on a picnic; the sun shining is a sufficient
condition for going on a picnic. But there are a lot of other conditions that are assumed and
that are so numerous and so obvious that it would be useless to try to specify them. If I tell
you that “If the sun shines, we’ll go on a picnic,” you take for granted that that means something like “If everything remains normal and the sun shines, then we’ll go on a picnic.”
Obviously, the sun shining by itself is not entirely sufficient, for if the sun shines but I am
severely injured by a meteorite or there is a major earthquake or there is a meltdown at a
nearby nuclear power plant, then we certainly cannot go on a picnic. I can’t state all those conditions in my conditional statement (“If the sun shines and there is no nuclear meltdown
and no meteorite falls on me and there is no earthquake and the air continues to contain
sufficient oxygen to sustain life and I am not arrested for conspiracy and the car does not
turn into a pumpkin, then we’ll go on a picnic”). When I say that “If the Cardinals get
another good starting pitcher, they will win the pennant,” I obviously mean if all conditions
remain the same, then the additional pitcher will be sufficient for the Cards to win the pennant. (I am not claiming that the Cards would win with an additional pitcher even if all the
other players suddenly decided to become Buddhist monks and quit the game of baseball;
but since that would be a great change from current conditions, it is not necessary to add that
qualification.) Even in court it is rightfully assumed that jurors will understand that a statement of sufficient conditions does not state every condition, but instead assumes that the
situation is normal. For example, betting money on a game of chance is a sufficient condition
for being guilty of violating the North Carolina gaming statutes. But of course there are other
conditions that are assumed: No one is holding a gun to the head of the bettor, the bettor is
not working as an undercover agent for the police, and so on.

ALTERNATIVE WAYS OF STATING NECESSARY
AND SUFFICIENT CONDITIONS
Consider this statement: “If the defendant’s fingerprints are on the pistol, then the
defendant is guilty.” (Don’t worry for the moment whether that conditional statement is
true; just focus on exactly what it means.) How would you express that statement in terms
of necessary conditions? In terms of sufficient conditions?

260

Chapter 14

Necessary and Sufficient Conditions

“The defendant’s fingerprints are a sufficient condition for the defendant’s guilt.” Or
alternatively, and a little less naturally—but still correctly—it could be stated: “The defendant’s guilt is a necessary condition of the defendant’s fingerprints being on the pistol.”
The sentence—“If the defendant’s fingerprints are on the pistol, then the defendant is guilty”—might be phrased differently without changing the meaning: “The
defendant is guilty if the defendant’s fingerprints are on the pistol.” (The sentence still
means the same: “The defendant’s fingerprints are a sufficient condition for the defendant’s guilt.”) In this case, the antecedent (“the defendant’s fingerprints are on the pistol”)
occurs last in the sentence, while the consequent (“the defendant is guilty”) occurs first.
The moral is this: Don’t assume that the first part of every conditional statement is the
antecedent; you must read the sentence carefully and determine what it actually means.
You must determine what is being presented as the condition, the if, the antecedent, and
what is said to follow from that condition (the consequent).
Suppose that instead the sentence is this: “The defendant is guilty only if the defendant’s fingerprints are on the pistol.” That “only” seems an innocent addition, but it
changes the claim entirely. How would you express that sentence in terms of necessary
and sufficient conditions? (Think carefully about it. If you can answer that question, then
you have a good grasp of necessary and sufficient conditions. Of course if you cannot
answer it, that does not imply that you do not have a good grasp of necessary and sufficient
conditions. It is a sufficient—rather than necessary—condition of understanding.)
How can “The defendant is guilty only if the defendant’s fingerprints are on the
pistol” be stated in terms of necessary and sufficient conditions? That sentence asserts
that the defendant’s fingerprints are a necessary condition for the defendant’s guilt. (If
there are no fingerprints, the defendant is not guilty.) Or another way of putting it: The
defendant’s guilt is a sufficient condition for finding the defendant’s fingerprints. (That is,
if the defendant is guilty, you will find the defendant’s fingerprints on the pistol.) This is
a common and useful way of focusing on necessary conditions. For example, a defense
attorney who wants to focus the attention of the jury on the essential role played by a
rather weak prosecution witness might say in her summation to the jury, “You can find the
defendant guilty only if you believe the testimony of the prosecution’s key witness—that
scurrilous character who has been convicted three times for perjury and twice for fraud.
The prosecution’s entire case rests on that sleazy foundation.”
Necessary and sufficient conditions can be a trifle tricky. Here’s a hint that might help
you keep track of them. Consider a statement like this: If the economy improves, then the
Democrats will win the election. We could represent that as a conditional statement, thusly:
E(economy improves) : W(Democrats win)
That is,
E:W
Once we have it in the form of a conditional statement, it’s easy to read off statements of
sufficient and necessary conditions. Just remember this golden rule of conditional statements: The antecedent is a sufficient condition for the consequent, and the consequent is a
necessary condition for the antecedent. Thus, the economy improving is a sufficient condition for the Democrats’ winning; and the Democrats’ winning is a necessary condition of
the economy improving. So, of course, once you know necessary conditions you can easily
state sufficient conditions (and vice versa), just by plugging in that handy formula. When
you know, for example, that oxygen is a necessary condition of life, then you also know
that life is a sufficient condition for oxygen (i.e., where you find life you know there must
be oxygen); and that could also be written as:
Life : Oxygen

Chapter 14

Necessary and Sufficient Conditions

261

BOTH NECESSARY AND SUFFICIENT
One more thing. Occasionally we want to assert a particularly strong relation. For
example, some television evangelists claim that “You will go to Heaven if and only if you
follow my religion.” That is, you will go to Heaven if you follow my religion, and you will
go to Heaven only if you follow my religion. Or in other words, following my religion is
both a necessary and a sufficient condition for going to Heaven. Another example: If the
only way you can develop collywobbles disease is by being bitten by the collywobble bug,
and if the bite of the collywobble bug always causes collywobbles disease, then the bite
of the collywobble bug is a necessary and sufficient condition for collywobble disease;
one develops collywobble disease if and only if one is bitten by the collywobble bug. But
note that that claim is stronger than—and quite different from—the claim that if one is
bitten by the collywobble bug, one will develop collywobble disease. And the “if and
only if” claim is also stronger than the claim that if one develops collywobble disease,
then one was bitten by the collywobble bug. The statement that “One develops collywobble disease if and only if one is bitten by the collywobble bug” is stronger than either
of those claims because it combines both of them. (If you know that it’s true that “If one
is bitten by the collywobble bug, one develops collywobble disease,” then from the fact
that you have collywobble disease, what can you conclude about what bit you? Nothing.
Perhaps you were bitten by the collywobble bug, or perhaps you were bitten by some
other bug that carries collywobble disease; perhaps you developed collywobble disease
from some other source. But, if you know that it’s true that “One develops collywobble
disease if and only if one is bitten by the collywobble bug,” then from the fact that you
have collywobble disease you could rightfully conclude that you must have been bitten
by the dreaded collywobble bug.)
Suppose the judge instructs you that “A person is not criminally responsible if
and only if his unlawful act was the product of mental disease or mental defect.” In
that case, if you determine that the defendant’s assault was the product of mental
disease, then you know that the person is not criminally responsible. And, if you
determine that the assault was not the product of mental disease or mental defect,
then you know that the defendant is criminally responsible (according to the judge’s
instructions).

Exercise 14-4
For each statement, select the best description of the necessary and sufficient conditions claims.
1. “Lots of teams with great quarterbacks never win the Super Bowl; but no team can win the Super
Bowl without a great quarterback.”
A great quarterback is ______ condition for winning the Super Bowl.
a. a necessary
b. a sufficient
c. a necessary and sufficient
d. neither a necessary nor a sufficient
2. “People who smoke are much more likely to develop lung cancer than are people who don’t; of
course, some people who do not smoke also develop lung cancer, and many smokers never develop
lung cancer.”
That statement claims that smoking is what sort of condition for lung cancer?
a. necessary
b. sufficient
c. necessary and sufficient
d. neither necessary nor sufficient

262

Chapter 14

Necessary and Sufficient Conditions

3. “You must pass the final exam in order to pass logic.”
Passing the final exam is ______ condition for passing logic.
a. a necessary
b. a sufficient
c. a necessary and sufficient
d. neither a necessary nor a sufficient
4. “If you drink lots of lime juice, then you’ll never suffer from scurvy.”
Drinking lots of lime juice is ______ condition for avoiding scurvy.
a. a necessary
b. a sufficient
c. a necessary and sufficient
d. neither a necessary nor a sufficient
5. “If we are going to have a real democracy, then we must place limits on how much money the
wealthy can spend to control elections.”
Limits on money spent to control elections is ______ condition for a real democracy.
a. a necessary
b. a sufficient
c. a necessary and sufficient
d. neither a necessary nor a sufficient
6. “If you think positively, then you’ll be a success; if you don’t think positively, then you’ll never amount
to anything.”
Positive thinking is ______ condition for success.
a. a necessary
b. a sufficient
c. a necessary and sufficient
d. neither a necessary nor a sufficient
7. “If the track is muddy, then Muddy Mother will win the race.”
A muddy track is ______ condition for Muddy Mother’s winning the race.
a. a necessary
b. a sufficient
c. a necessary and sufficient
d. neither a necessary nor a sufficient
8. “Muddy Mother will not win unless the track is muddy.”
A muddy track is ______ condition for Muddy Mother’s winning the race.
a. a necessary
b. a sufficient
c. a necessary and sufficient
d. neither a necessary nor a sufficient
9. “A heavy rain within the next 3 days is our only hope for saving the wheat crop.”
A heavy rain within the next 3 days is ______ condition for saving the wheat crop.
a. a necessary
b. a sufficient
c. a necessary and sufficient
d. neither a necessary nor a sufficient
10. “I’m not going on a picnic in the rain.”
Rain is ______ condition for my not going on a picnic.
a. a necessary
b. a sufficient
c. a necessary and sufficient
d. neither a necessary nor a sufficient

Chapter 14

Necessary and Sufficient Conditions

263

11. “I’m not going on a picnic in the rain.”
The absence of rain is ______ condition for my going on a picnic.
a. a necessary
b. a sufficient
c. a necessary and sufficient
d. neither a necessary nor a sufficient
12. “If you exercise regularly, then you will reduce your chances of a heart attack—though of course
regular exercisers sometimes have heart attacks. And if you do not exercise regularly, then you are
more likely to suffer a heart attack—though some who never exercise do manage to avoid heart
attacks.”
Regular exercise is ______ condition for avoiding heart attacks.
a. a necessary
b. a sufficient
c. a necessary and sufficient
d. neither a necessary nor a sufficient
13. “Wages will increase only if the budget is balanced.”
A balanced budget is ______ condition for increased wages.
a. a necessary
b. a sufficient
c. a necessary and sufficient
d. neither a necessary nor a sufficient
14. “The Giants will win if their quarterback is healthy, but the Giants cannot win if their quarterback
is not healthy.”
A healthy quarterback is ______ condition for the Giants to win.
a. a necessary
b. a sufficient
c. a necessary and sufficient
d. neither a necessary nor a sufficient
15. “You will pass the exam if you studied all weekend.”
Studying all weekend is ______ condition for passing the exam.
a. a necessary
b. a sufficient
c. a necessary and sufficient
d. neither a necessary nor a sufficient
16. “You will pass the exam only if you studied all weekend.”
Studying all weekend is ______ condition for passing the exam.
a. a necessary
b. a sufficient
c. a necessary and sufficient
d. neither a necessary nor a sufficient
17. “Enrollment will increase if the tuition is reduced; but there are many other things that could also
increase enrollment, without reducing tuition.” That statement means that:
a. Reduced tuition is a necessary condition for increasing enrollment.
b. Reduced tuition is a sufficient condition for increasing enrollment.
c. Reduced tuition is both a necessary and a sufficient condition for increasing enrollment.
d. Reduced tuition is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for increasing enrollment.
18. “I would go on a date with Bruce only if he owned a bright red Porsche.” That statement means that:
a. Bruce owning a bright red Porsche is a necessary condition for my going on a date with
Bruce.
b. Bruce owning a bright red Porsche is a sufficient condition for my going on a date with Bruce.

264

Chapter 14

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

Necessary and Sufficient Conditions

c. Bruce owning a bright red Porsche is both a necessary and a sufficient condition for my going
on a date with Bruce.
d. Bruce owning a bright red Porsche is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for my going
on a date with Bruce.
“If the Ohio legislature appropriates more funds for YSU, then there will not be a tuition increase at
YSU; unfortunately, however, more funds from the Ohio legislature is the only way YSU can avoid increasing tuition.”
That statement implies that:
a. More funds from the legislature is a necessary condition for not increasing tuition.
b. More funds from the legislature is a sufficient condition for not increasing tuition.
c. More funds from the legislature is both a necessary and a sufficient condition for not increasing
tuition.
d. More funds from the legislature is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for not increasing tuition.
“Doing well on the first exam is nice, but you don’t have to do well on the first exam to make a good
grade in the course; on the other hand, it’s also possible to do well on the first exam and still get a
lousy grade in the course.” That statement implies that:
a. Doing well on the first exam is a necessary condition for getting a good grade in the course.
b. Doing well on the first exam is a sufficient condition for getting a good grade in the course.
c. Doing well on the first exam is both necessary and sufficient for getting a good grade in the course.
d. Doing well on the first exam is neither necessary nor sufficient for getting a good grade in the course.
“If the Pirates have strong pitching, then they will be contenders for the pennant; but without
strong pitching, they can’t be contenders for the pennant.”
a. Strong pitching is a necessary condition for the Pirates to be contenders for the pennant.
b. Strong pitching is a sufficient condition for the Pirates to be contenders for the pennant.
c. Strong pitching is both a necessary and a sufficient condition for the Pirates to be contenders for
the pennant.
d. Strong pitching is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for the Pirates to be contenders for
the pennant.
“If you have good friends, then you will be happy; but without good friends, happiness is impossible.”
Good friends are ______ condition for happiness.
a. a necessary
b. a sufficient
c. a necessary and sufficient
d. neither a necessary nor a sufficient
“Without good friends, happiness is impossible; but even good friends cannot guarantee happiness.”
Good friends are ______ condition for happiness.
a. a necessary
b. a sufficient
c. a necessary and sufficient
d. neither a necessary nor a sufficient
“I’ll take critical thinking only if it is required for graduation.” Being required for graduation is
what kind of requirement for my taking critical thinking?
a. necessary
b. sufficient
c. necessary and sufficient
d. neither necessary nor sufficient
“If you are good at critical thinking, then you will become wealthy; and in fact, no one can become
wealthy without being good at critical thinking.” Being good at critical thinking is what kind of
condition for becoming wealthy?
a. necessary
b. sufficient

Chapter 14

Necessary and Sufficient Conditions

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

265

c. both necessary and sufficient
d. neither necessary nor sufficient
“The conflict between India and Pakistan can be resolved only if the United Nations intervenes.”
According to that statement, United Nations intervention is what kind of condition for resolving
the conflict between India and Pakistan?
a. necessary
b. sufficient
c. both necessary and sufficient
d. neither necessary nor sufficient
“If the Palestinians have an independent homeland, then there will be peace in the Middle East, and
having an independent Palestinian homeland is the only way to have peace in the Middle East”
means that an independent Palestinian homeland is:
a. a necessary condition for peace
b. a sufficient condition for peace
c. both a necessary and sufficient condition for peace
d. neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for peace
“If the United States signs the treaty banning land mines, then the use of land mines will be greatly
reduced around the world.” The United States signing the treaty is what kind of condition for a
great reduction in use of land mines?
a. necessary
b. sufficient
c. necessary and sufficient
d. neither necessary nor sufficient
“If the university is struck by a massive meteorite, then the exam will be cancelled; but that is the only way
the exam will be cancelled.” The university being struck by a massive meteorite is what kind of condition
for cancelling the exam?
a. necessary
b. sufficient
c. both necessary and sufficient
d. neither necessary nor sufficient
“If you use special insider information when you buy or sell stock, then you are guilty of a criminal act.” That statement implies that using special insider information is what kind of condition
for being guilty of a criminal act?
a. a necessary condition.
b. a sufficient condition.
c. both a necessary and a sufficient condition.
d. neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition.
“If there are bloodstains on the knife, then the butler is guilty of murder.”
Bloodstains on the knife are ______ condition of the butler’s being guilty.
a. a necessary
b. a sufficient
c. a necessary and sufficient
d. neither a necessary nor a sufficient
“The butler is guilty of murder if there are bloodstains on the knife.”
Bloodstains on the knife are ______ condition of the butler’s being guilty.
a. a necessary
b. a sufficient
c. a necessary and sufficient
d. neither a necessary nor a sufficient

266

Chapter 14

Necessary and Sufficient Conditions

33. “The butler is guilty of murder only if there are bloodstains on the knife.”
Bloodstains on the knife are ______ condition of the butler’s being guilty.
a. a necessary
b. a sufficient
c. a necessary and sufficient
d. neither a necessary nor a sufficient
34. “Only if there are bloodstains on the knife is the butler guilty of murder.”
Bloodstains on the knife are ______ condition of the butler’s being guilty.
a. a necessary
b. a sufficient
c. a necessary and sufficient
d. neither a necessary nor a sufficient
35. “If there are bloodstains on the knife, then the butler is guilty of murder.”
The butler’s being guilty of murder is ______ condition of there being bloodstains on the knife.
a. a necessary
b. a sufficient
c. a necessary and sufficient
d. neither a necessary nor a sufficient
36. “The butler is guilty of murder only if there are bloodstains on the knife.”
The butler’s being guilty of murder is ______ condition of there being bloodstains on the knife.
a. a necessary
b. a sufficient
c. a necessary and sufficient
d. neither a necessary nor a sufficient

Exercise 14-5
For the following, rephrase each sentence into two statements: one of necessary conditions and
the other of sufficient conditions. (In some cases, it may seem more natural to speak of sufficient
conditions, and in other cases it may seem more natural to speak of necessary conditions;
remember, all if-then sentences can be correctly recast both ways, even though one way may
sound better.) Third, diagram each sentence using an arrow.
Example: If Tiger Woods putts well, he will beat me at golf.
Sufficient: Putting well is a sufficient condition for Tiger beating me at golf.
Necessary: Beating me at golf is a necessary condition of Tiger putting well.
(Note that it would be wrong to say that Tiger putting well is a necessary condition for beating me at
golf; in fact, Tiger could putt atrociously and still destroy me.)
Diagram: T : B
1. If Joe is guilty of breaking or entering into Jack’s apartment, then Joe did not have Jack’s permission to enter the apartment.
2. If the defendant drove the getaway car, then she is guilty of armed robbery.
3. The Red Sox will win the pennant only if their hitting improves.
4. There is no joy in Mudville if Mighty Casey struck out.
5. If it doesn’t fit, you must acquit.
6. We will stop the killing in our schools only if we have stronger gun control.
7. You have to play to win. (Advertising slogan for one of the state lotteries.)
8. We should find the defendant guilty only if we are certain beyond a reasonable doubt that he
committed the crime.
9. You will pass the course if you answer this question correctly.

Chapter 14

267

Necessary and Sufficient Conditions

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

You will pass the course only if you answer this question correctly.
If the groundhog does not see his shadow, then we will have an early spring.
You’ve got to see it to believe it.
If I see it then I’ll believe it.
If there is snow, then the tomato crop will be ruined.
Having this surgery is your only chance of survival.

VALID INFERENCES FROM NECESSARY AND SUFFICIENT CONDITIONS
Suppose we are deliberating our verdict in a case of first-degree burglary. A witness for the
defense has claimed that she was with the defendant during the entire night on which the
burglary occurred and that the defendant never left her house. This testimony, if
believed, establishes a strong alibi for the defendant. One juror comments, “If the alibi
witness was telling the truth, then the defendant is not guilty. And certainly she was telling
the truth: I believed every word she said. Therefore, the defendant is not guilty.” That
juror’s argument might be presented thus:
The truthfulness of the alibi witness’s testimony is a sufficient condition for finding the
defendant not guilty. The alibi witness was truthful. Therefore, the defendant is not guilty.

The argument might be presented in symbolic form as follows. (A stands for “the alibi
witness is telling the truth”; D stands for “the defendant is not guilty”; the three dots in a triangle shape mean “it follows that”—they mark the conclusion; and, as you remember, the
arrow stands for “if-then.”)
A:D
A
‹ D

Modus Ponens—Valid

Modus Ponens
That is a deductively valid argument. I don’t know whether the premises are true or are
not true (perhaps the alibi witness was in fact lying), but certainly the conclusion follows
from the premises. If the premises are true, then the conclusion must be true. A is a sufficient condition for D; A is the case; therefore, D must follow. This form of argument is so
common that it has been christened with a special name: modus ponens. Sometimes it is
also called affirming the antecedent. That’s a good name for this argument form, since that’s
exactly what it does. It makes a conditional statement, and then affirms the antecedent of
that conditional statement, and draws as a conclusion the consequent of that conditional
statement.
So far in this chapter we have talked mainly about sufficient conditions, but conditional statements also make claims about necessary conditions. Back to the jury room. One
juror says, “If the alibi witness was telling the truth, then the defendant is innocent.”
Another juror replies, “Well, the defendant must be innocent, because certainly that
angelic alibi witness was telling the truth.” In this case, the juror is focusing on the innocence of the defendant as a necessary condition of the truthfulness of the witness. The point
to note is that any conditional statement can be expressed either in terms of necessary conditions or in terms of sufficient conditions. Thus, a conditional statement such as “If the
witness is telling the truth, then the defendant is innocent” can be correctly expressed in
terms of sufficient conditions (“The truthfulness of the witness is a sufficient condition for
the innocence of the defendant”), and it can also be correctly expressed in terms of
necessary conditions (“The innocence of the defendant is a necessary condition for the

268

Chapter 14

Necessary and Sufficient Conditions

truthfulness of the witness”). Sometimes it will seem more natural to express a conditional
statement in terms of sufficient conditions; at other times it will seem more natural to
express a conditional statement in terms of necessary conditions (which way seems more
natural probably depends on what our particular interest is). For example, the statement
“If there are whales, then that is saltwater” could be stated as “Whales are a sufficient
condition for saltwater” (we would find that the natural way of stating it if we were trying
to decide whether a body of water was saltwater or freshwater, and we saw a whale cavorting in it); or it could be stated as “Saltwater is a necessary condition for whales” (that would
be the natural way of stating it if we were interested in knowing where to look for whales
or what sort of conditions we would have to maintain in order to keep whales in our
fishbowl).
With the whale–saltwater example in hand, it is easy to see why it is essential to
keep the antecedent and consequent in the proper order. It is one thing to say: “If there
are whales, then there is saltwater.” It is something quite different to say: “If there is
saltwater, then there are whales.” The former statement is true; the latter statement is
false (there was saltwater for millions of years before whales evolved). If whales are a
sufficient condition for saltwater, then saltwater is a necessary condition for whales;
but whales being sufficient for saltwater does not make saltwater sufficient for
whales, and saltwater being necessary for whales does not make saltwater sufficient
for whales. If I make a perfect score on every exam, then I’ll pass logic; that is not the
same as saying that if I pass logic, then I’ll make a perfect score on every exam. It is true
that if tuition, room, and board are provided free at State U., then many students will
attend State U.; it is false that if many students attend State U., then tuition, room, and
board will be free.
Now go back to the juror who focused on necessary conditions: “The defendant
must be innocent, because certainly the alibi witness was telling the truth.” That is, the
innocence of the defendant is a necessary condition of the truthfulness of the alibi
witness. In this case, the juror is again reasoning by modus ponens: If the witness is telling
the truth, then the defendant is innocent; the witness is telling the truth; therefore, the
defendant is innocent. But imagine another juror, who is absolutely convinced that the
defendant is not innocent, but is instead guilty as charged. (We need not worry here
about why the juror is so certain of that—perhaps because the juror believes, as many
jurors do, that anyone charged with a crime must be guilty, or perhaps because the
juror took one look at the defendant and decided that the defendant looked like the
“criminal type.” This juror accepts the truth of the conditional statement (“If the witness
is telling the truth, then the defendant is innocent”) but also believes that the defendant is not innocent. What conclusion must that juror draw concerning the truthfulness
of the alibi witness?
That juror would have to conclude that the alibi witness is not telling the truth. Since
the innocence of the defendant is a necessary condition of the veracity of the witness, if the
juror believes that the defendant is not innocent then the juror believes that a necessary
condition of the witness being truthful is not met; therefore, the witness cannot be telling
the truth. The same symbols will be used: A stands for “the alibi witness is telling the
truth”; D stands for “the defendant is innocent”; → is the symbol for “if-then”; and ~ will
be used as a negation sign, simply meaning “it is not the case that.” Using those symbols,
the juror’s deduction can be symbolized as follows:
A:D
~D
‹ ~A

Modus Tollens—Valid

This form of argument is very common. You use it all the time. Your friend Joe is a
notorious procrastinator who never works on anything until the very last moment.

Chapter 14

269

Necessary and Sufficient Conditions

Thus you know that “If Joe is in the library, then Joe must have a term paper due tomorrow morning.” But you also know that “Joe does not have a term paper due tomorrow morning.” Thus you conclude—as the conclusion of a valid deductive argument—that Joe is not in the library. Or take another example: “If Louise drank that
entire fifth of gin last night, then Louise will have a terrible hangover this morning.
But Louise obviously does not have a hangover. Therefore, Louise did not drink the
entire fifth of gin.”

Modus Tollens
This is such a common form of valid deductive argument that it has been given a special
name: modus tollens. You might prefer to call it denying the consequent, since that is exactly
what it does: One premise is a conditional, another premise denies the consequent of that conditional, and the conclusion is the denial of the antecedent of the conditional. (Another
way of thinking of it is that a modus tollens argument denies a necessary condition of X, and on
the basis of that denial concludes that X is not the case.)

FALLACIES BASED ON CONFUSION BETWEEN NECESSARY
AND SUFFICIENT CONDITIONS
We have looked at two very common valid argument forms that use conditional statements:
modus ponens and modus tollens. Unfortunately, there are also some common invalid, fallacious
argument forms that look and sound a lot like the valid ones. It is important to reason correctly from necessary and sufficient conditions, but it is equally important to detect and avoid
some very common errors. Back again to the burglary case and the alibi witness. All the jurors
agree that “If the alibi witness is telling the truth, then the defendant is innocent.” Suppose
a juror now says, “It’s true that if the alibi witness is telling the truth, then the defendant is
innocent, but I just did not believe that alibi witness—her story didn’t ring true to me.
Therefore, the defendant is not innocent: The defendant is guilty as charged.” That sounds
like a good argument; it sounds a lot like the valid argument form modus tollens. But it is not.
It is an invalid argument. Think carefully about that argument, and try to state exactly how it
differs from modus tollens. Also, try to state, in terms of necessary and sufficient conditions,
exactly what error that argument commits.
The valid argument form modus tollens goes like this:
A:D
~D
‹ ~A

Modus Tollens—Valid

The Fallacy of Denying the Antecedent
In modus tollens, the second premise denies the consequent. But in the invalid argument
under consideration (“If the alibi witness is telling the truth, then the defendant is
innocent; the alibi witness is not telling the truth; therefore, the defendant is not innocent”), the second premise does not deny the consequent; instead, the premise denies
the antecedent:
A:D
~A
‹ ~D

Denying the Antecendent—Invalid

270

Chapter 14

Necessary and Sufficient Conditions

That may appear to be an insignificant difference, but in fact it makes all the difference in
the world: Modus tollens is a valid argument, but this argument—which denies the
antecedent—is an invalid, fallacious argument. (That’s exactly what this invalid argument form
is called: the fallacy of denying the antecedent.) The difference is that in modus tollens the premise
denies a necessary condition for A and then deduces—correctly—that A is not the case. In the
fallacious argument the premise denies a sufficient (not a necessary) condition for D, and
from that, one cannot conclude that D is not the case. Perhaps that sounds a bit tricky. It’s not.
Think of it this way: If LeBron James and Kevin Durant play basketball for Western High
School, then Western High will have a winning season. (That’s true, right? I mean, no matter
who the other players are, if LeBron and Kevin play for Western High, then Western High is
going to win more than its share of basketball games.) But LeBron James and Kevin Durant
will not play for Western High (that’s also true; both LeBron and Kevin have other plans for
the basketball season). Does it follow that Western High will not have a winning season?
Certainly not. LeBron and Kevin are a sufficient condition for a winning season, but they are
not a necessary condition. To conclude that because LeBron and Kevin will not play for Western, therefore Western will not have a winning season is to mistake a sufficient condition for
a necessary condition. Take another example, one that is perhaps more immediately relevant.
If you study logic 8 hours every day for the rest of the semester, then you will pass logic
(I personally guarantee it). But, you say, I can’t possibly study logic 8 hours every day—it
would take all my time from my other courses, not to mention cutting into my social life. So
what follows? That you will not pass logic? Of course not. Studying logic 8 hours every day is
a sufficient condition for passing logic, but it is by no means a necessary condition.
If I study logic 8 hours every day, then I’ll pass logic.
I shall not study logic 8 hours every day.
Therefore, I shall not pass logic.

That argument commits the fallacy of denying the antecedent. It is an invalid argument.
It mistakenly treats a sufficient condition as if it were a necessary condition.

The Fallacy of Affirming the Consequent
There is another fallacious argument form that sounds and looks a lot like a valid argument
form but is invalid. Once again to the jury room. The jurors agree that if the alibi witness
is telling the truth, then the defendant is innocent. Now suppose that there is a dispute
about the truthfulness of the alibi witness: Some jurors think she is telling the truth, others
insist she is lying. In the middle of this dispute, word comes from the judge that the jurors
can go home! Another person has just confessed to committing the burglary, and all
charges against the defendant have now been dropped. The trial is over; the defendant is
innocent. At that point one of the jurors who had been insisting on the truthfulness of the
alibi witness turns to one of the doubters and says, “There, now you see, she was telling
the truth, just as I claimed.” Is the truthfulness of the witness in fact proved by the
innocence of the defendant?
The juror has made a mistake: The fact that the defendant is innocent (together
with the conditional that if the witness is telling the truth, then the defendant is innocent) does not prove that the witness is telling the truth. The juror has confused a
sufficient condition with a necessary condition. The truthfulness of the witness is a sufficient
condition—but is not necessary—for the innocence of the defendant. If Sabrina makes a
perfect score on every exam, then she’ll pass the course. So suppose that Sabrina passes
the course. Can we conclude that Sabrina made a perfect score on every exam? Of course
not. Making a perfect score on every exam is sufficient for passing the course: a perfect
score on every exam would guarantee a passing grade. But that is not necessary for passing
the course. Or if you prefer, we can look at this from another angle. Passing the course is
a necessary result of perfect scores on every exam; passing the course is a necessary condition

Chapter 14

271

Necessary and Sufficient Conditions

of making perfect scores on all exams. But a passing grade in the course is not a sufficient
condition of making perfect scores on every exam. Thus Sabrina may pass the course
even though she did not achieve perfection on every exam. In the same way, the innocence of the defendant is a necessary condition of the truthfulness of the alibi witness, but
it is not a sufficient condition. The defendant may be innocent even though the alibi
witness is not telling the truth.
Look closely at the form of the argument. The form of the juror’s argument is as follows:
A:D
D
‹A

Affirming the Consequent—Invalid

That looks and sounds a lot like a valid modus ponens type of argument. But there is a very
important difference. In the valid argument form modus ponens, the second premise
affirms the antecedent of the conditional statement, and then draws the consequent as a conclusion. But in the invalid argument above, the juror affirms the consequent (not the
antecedent) in the second premise, and then draws the antecedent as a conclusion. And
that invalid, fallacious argument form is called by exactly that name: the fallacy of
affirming the consequent.
Like denying the antecedent, affirming the consequent is a very common fallacy. It
sounds like a perfectly good argument—and usually both the person giving the argument and the persons hearing the argument are deceived by it. For example, a senator
supporting a tax decrease argues, “If taxes are too high, then the economy slows down;
and the economy certainly has slowed down; obviously, then, taxes must be too high.”
And it does sound obvious, until one examines the argument closely and recognizes the
fallacy of affirming the consequent. “If grading becomes easier at Home State U., then
the grade point averages of students will increase. And indeed students are getting
higher grade point averages. So grading at Home State U. must be getting easier.”
Sounds plausible and maybe the conclusion is true, but certainly that argument does not
prove that the conclusion is true, since it is invalid: It commits the fallacy of affirming the
consequent.

DETECTING ARGUMENT FORMS
Recognizing valid modus ponens and modus tollens arguments (and distinguishing
them from the look-alike fallacies of affirming the consequent and denying the
antecedent) requires careful attention to the forms of the arguments. But those forms
can be tricky to detect. For one thing, the premises can be switched around (the
conditional premise isn’t always first), and the conclusion isn’t always stated last. For
example:
If Jill drove the getaway car, then Jill is guilty.
Jill drove the getaway car. Therefore, Jill is guilty.

That’s the valid argument form modus ponens. But suppose the argument is stated
like this:
Jill is guilty, because Jill drove the getaway car.
And if Jill drove the getaway car, then Jill is guilty.

That’s exactly the same argument, with exactly the same argument form: modus
ponens. The premises and conclusion are in a different order, but that doesn’t change the
form of the argument.

272

Chapter 14

Necessary and Sufficient Conditions

Another source of potential confusion is negation. Look again at the modus ponens
argument just considered:
If Jill drove the getaway car, then Jill is guilty.
Jill drove the getaway car. Therefore, Jill is guilty.

That argument could be diagrammed like this:
D:G
D
‹G
Like all modus ponens arguments, one premise affirms the antecedent of the other premise.
But what about this argument:
If Joe did not intend to steal the jacket, then Joe is not guilty of shoplifting. Joe did not intend to steal the jacket. Therefore, Joe is not guilty of shoplifting.

That argument could be represented in symbols like this:
~I : ~G
~I
‹ ~G
At first glance the form of that argument may look very different from the modus ponens argument of the previous example. But in fact the form is the same: The argument is just dressed
up with a few negations. The antecedent of the conditional is this: Joe did not intend to steal.
The other premise affirms that antecedent. Since the antecedent is a negation, the affirmation of that antecedent is also a negation. If I say “Nixon was not a good president,” you affirm
what I say by also stating a negation: “True, Nixon was not a good president.” To deny my
negative statement, you would say: “Nixon was a good president.” Or you could say: “It is not
the case that Nixon was not a good president,” which—through double negation—is the
equivalent of saying simply “Nixon was a good president.”
The same points apply to argument forms like the fallacy of denying the antecedent.
The standard form of that fallacy is this:
If the Maple Leafs score five goals, then the Maple Leafs will win. But the Maple Leafs will not
score five goals. Therefore, the Maple Leafs will not win.

In symbolic form, this is stated as:
S:W
~S
‹ ~W
Compare that with this argument:
If Joe did not know the car was stolen, then Joe is not guilty. But Joe did know the car was
stolen. Therefore, Joe is guilty.

In symbolic form, that’s:
~K : ~G
K
‹ G

Chapter 14

273

Necessary and Sufficient Conditions

Again, that may look rather different from the prior example of denying the antecedent;
but it’s exactly the same form. The antecedent of the conditional is a negation: Joe did not
know. The negative antecedent is denied by saying: Joe did know.
If that seems confusing, think more about negations and denials of negations. It’s a
snowy, overcast day. Since I love the snow, I greet you cheerily: “It’s a beautiful day!” Your
taste in weather runs to balmier temperatures, and you deny my statement with a negation:
“It is not a beautiful day.” If I am in the mood to argue, I may deny your negation, in either
of two ways: “It is a beautiful day” or alternatively (by negating your negation), “It is not
the case that it is not a beautiful day.” So don’t let negations obscure things: Just look at
the forms of the arguments.
When we add negations to our arguments, and then try to figure out what form the
argument is, sometimes it looks a bit scary. For example,
L:G
~G
‹ ~L
You immediately (or almost immediately) recognize that as modus tollens, right? But
suppose it looks like this:
~L : ~G
G
‹L
That’s just the same thing: the second premise denies the consequent of the first premise
(the consequent is not G, and the second premise denies that by asserting G). When we
put it in that form, it may look a bit intimidating. But it’s not. You use that argument form
all the time, and you immediately understand it when you hear it. There’s a great old
blues song, and the main line of the song goes like this: “If I don’t love you, baby, then
grits ain’t groceries, eggs ain’t poultry, and Mona Lisa was a man.” If someone says that to
you—“If I don’t love you, baby, then grits ain’t groceries”—you immediately know that he
or she is saying that “I do love you, baby.” Right? But how did you reach that conclusion?
By modus tollens. The argument goes like this:
If I do not love you, then grits are not groceries.
Grits are groceries.
Therefore, I love you.

Four Argument Forms
These are the four argument forms discussed in this
chapter. Modus ponens and modus tollens are legitimate,
nonfallacious arguments; denying the antecedent and
affirming the consequent are fallacious.
P:Q
P
‹ Q

This is modus ponens; it’s a valid
argument form.

P:Q
~Q
‹ ~P

This is modus tollens; it’s a valid
argument form.

P:Q
~P
‹ ~Q

This is denying the antecedent; it’s an
invalid argument form.

P:Q
Q
‹ P

This is affirming the consequent; it’s
an invalid argument form.

274

Chapter 14

Necessary and Sufficient Conditions

Loses something in translation, doesn’t it? Still, it’s just the modus tollens form of argument;
symbolized, it looks like this:
~L : ~G
G
‹L
Actually, as originally stated, the argument is an enthymeme. One premise (“Grits are
groceries”) is regarded as so obvious that it need not be stated. But you have to fill it in to
get the whole argument.
Now, that’s as hard as these get; and if you don’t get frightened by all the squiggles
and arrows, that’s really not so hard, right? One last point, but an important one: when
diagramming arguments, you will find it much easier if you start with the conclusion.

Exercise 14-6
For the following arguments, identify the form of each argument (modus ponens, modus tollens, denying the antecedent, or affirming the consequent).
1. A → B
B
∴A
2. A → B
A
∴B
3. A → B
~A
∴~ B
4. ~ A → ~ B
~A
∴~ B
5. ~ A → B
~A
∴B
6. A → ~ B
B
∴~ A
7. ~ A → B
A
∴~ B
8. ~ A → ~ B
A
∴B

Exercise 14-7
For the following arguments, identify the form of each argument (modus ponens, modus tollens, denying
the antecedent, or affirming the consequent), and state whether the argument is valid or invalid.
1. If OPQ Enterprises stock is a good investment, then OPQ must have strong management. But the
management of OPQ is not strong. So OPQ stock is not a good investment.

Chapter 14

Necessary and Sufficient Conditions

275

2. If Dusty Dancer can get the early lead, then Dusty Dancer will win the race. But Dusty Dancer cannot
get the early lead (since he starts from the outside post position), so Dusty Dancer won’t win the race.
3. If Susan knew that the diamond necklace was stolen, then she is guilty of receiving stolen merchandise. And she certainly did know that the necklace was stolen, so Susan is guilty.
4. If critical thinking is hazardous to your health, then several critical thinking students would suffer
from colds this semester. And several critical thinking students have suffered from colds this semester. Therefore, critical thinking must be a health hazard.
5. If Julie had Jim’s permission to be in his (Jim’s) apartment, then Julie is not guilty of breaking or
entering. But Jim never gave Julie permission to enter his apartment, so Julie must be guilty of
breaking or entering.
6. If you don’t get nervous, then you’ll do fine on the exam. And you are not going to get nervous, so
you’ll do fine on the exam.
7. If the doctor did not check the level of dosage for the prescribed medication, then she is guilty of
medical negligence. But it is well established that she did carefully check the level of dosage; and so
clearly she is not guilty of medical negligence.
8. If Ron had Rachel’s permission to stay in her mountain cabin for the weekend, then Ron is not guilty
of burglary. And Rachel did give Ron permission to stay in her cabin, so Ron is not guilty of burglary.
9. When I bought this car, you warned me that if I failed to keep the car properly serviced, then there
would be no guarantee on the car. Well, I have kept the car properly serviced—I have it completely
serviced every 3,000 miles. Now the car has broken down, and I expect you to fix it—I kept the car
properly serviced, so the car must still be guaranteed.
10. Wow, Jill must have won the lottery! Yesterday she said that if she won the lottery, then she wouldn’t
be in class today. And sure enough, Jill is not in class today.
11. If there were no process of appeals and review, then there would be a danger of imprisoning innocent people. But we do have an extensive appeals and review system, so there is no danger of imprisoning the innocent.
12. If studying logic improves your sex life, then there will be a great demand for logic. And there is a
great demand for logic: The logic courses are all filled. Therefore, the study of logic must improve
your sex life.
13. The defendant is guilty of breaking or entering only if she intended to commit a felony when she
entered the house. Now certainly she had no intention of committing a felony when she opened
the door and walked in: She saw the “For Sale” sign in the yard and was simply looking the house
over with the idea that she might like to buy it. Therefore, the defendant is not guilty of breaking
or entering.
14. I shall pass tomorrow’s history exam if I study all night. Well, I guess I won’t pass my history exam,
since I have to work at the restaurant late tonight and so I obviously can’t study all night.
15. I shall pass tomorrow’s history exam only if I study all night. I certainly shall pass that history exam:
I’ve never flunked a history exam, and I’m not about to start now. I guess that means I’ll have to
study all night.
16. If capital punishment is to be morally acceptable, then there must be no possibility of mistakenly executing the innocent. But obviously there is a possibility of executing innocent people (after all, there
have been dozens of convictions overturned by newly discovered DNA evidence, cases in which people were wrongly convicted and imprisoned). So capital punishment is not morally acceptable.
17. The United States is a very wealthy country and spends about 16% of its gross national product on
health care. If the United States had a well-organized and efficient health-care system, then no one
in the United States would be denied decent health care. But in fact many people—millions of people—in the United States are denied decent health care. So obviously the United States does not
have a well-organized and efficient health-care system.
18. If the defendant drove the getaway car, then she is guilty. So she is obviously not guilty, because it is
well established that she did not drive the getaway car.
19. The defendant is guilty of breaking or entering only if she intended to steal something. But she certainly never intended to steal anything. Therefore, the defendant is not guilty.
20. If the defendant is guilty, then the alibi witness did not tell the truth. It is obvious that the alibi witness did not tell the truth: She lied from beginning to end. So the defendant is certainly guilty.
21. If the defendant is guilty, then the alibi witness did not tell the truth. The defendant is certainly
guilty: You can tell by her weak chin and beady eyes. So the alibi witness lied.

276

Chapter 14

Necessary and Sufficient Conditions

22. If the defendant is guilty, then the alibi witness did not tell the truth. So the defendant is not guilty,
since the alibi witness certainly told the truth.
23. If the defendant had carried a pistol, then she would be guilty. But she is obviously not guilty, since
she did not carry a pistol.
24. If we did not have effective means of controlling and alleviating severe pain, then active euthanasia
(mercy killing) would be morally acceptable. But through medical advances we now have very effective methods of controlling and alleviating even the most severe pain. So, obviously, active euthanasia
is not morally acceptable.
25. If this exam is too hard, then critical thinking students will look tired and miserable. So obviously this exam is indeed too hard, since critical thinking students look extremely tired and
miserable.
26. If the defendant was in California on the morning of July 1, then she could not have robbed the
Mahoning National Bank that afternoon. So the defendant must not have robbed the Mahoning
National Bank the afternoon of July 1, since it is certainly well established that she was indeed in
California on the morning of July 1.
27. If the murder weapon did not belong to Jones, then we might conclude that Jones is not guilty. But in
fact it has been conclusively proved that the murder weapon did belong to Jones. So we must conclude
that Jones really is guilty.
28. The only way to ban pornography from the Internet is to have some powerful police group control
all Internet traffic. But we don’t want police control of the Internet: It should be free and open. So
we should not attempt to ban pornography from the Internet.
29. Robert is guilty of negligent homicide only if he did not exercise due caution. But Robert is a
careful driver, and he was exercising due caution. So we must find Robert not guilty of negligent
homicide.
30. If Rachel is guilty of first-degree murder, then she intended to kill Ralph. And, indeed, she did
intend to kill him, as she admitted in her own testimony. Therefore, Rachel is guilty of first-degree
murder.
31. Certainly Jones is not guilty of breaking into West Building. After all, as a registered student at the
university, Jones had permission to be in West Building. And if Jones had permission to be in West
Building, then he cannot be guilty of breaking or entering into West Building.
32. If no one passed the critical thinking exam, then it was too difficult. But some people did pass the
critical thinking exam, so clearly the exam was not too difficult.
33. Bruce is guilty of check fraud only if he knew there was no money in his account. But Bruce
certainly did not know that there was no money in his account: He is a complete idiot about everything related to finances. So Bruce is not guilty of check fraud.
34. If you do not make any mistakes on this exam, then obviously you are sober. So clearly you are not
sober, since you did make a mistake.
35. MORTON: “Barbara just said she would go out with me!”
ALLEN: “You’re kidding! I thought she said she hated your guts, and that she would never go
out with you under any circumstances.”
MORTON: “Well, she must have changed her mind. I just called her and asked her to go out, and
she said she wouldn’t go out with me if I were the last man on Earth. So, since I’m certainly not the last man on Earth, that must mean that she’s willing to go out with me.”

Exercise 14-8
In the case depicted in Figure 14-1, Larsen E. Pettyfogger originally intends to draw the conclusion
that, I can beat your rap and have you out on the streets in 3 days. The first premise of his argument
is, if I can’t beat your rap and have you out on the streets in 3 days, my name isn’t Larsen E. Pettyfogger. That argument has a second premise, which is so obvious that he does not bother to state it
(thus the argument is an enthymeme). What is that premise? Is that argument (that he originally
intends to make) deductively valid? Is it sound?
Things do not turn out as Larsen E. had expected. He winds up concluding that his name is
not Larsen E. Pettyfogger (thus his letterheads are useless). The first premise remains the same.
What is the second premise—again, it is left unstated—in the new argument? Is that argument
deductively valid? Is it sound?

Chapter 14

277

Necessary and Sufficient Conditions

Figure 14-1

Study and Review on mythinkinglab.com

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.
2.
3.
4.

What is a conditional statement?
Diagram the valid argument form modus ponens.
Diagram the invalid argument form denying the antecedent.
Explain, in terms of necessary and sufficient conditions, the error that is made in the fallacy
of affirming the consequent.

NOTES
1
2

North Carolina Conference of Superior Court Judges and North Carolina Bar Association Foundation,
North Carolina Pattern Instructions—Criminal: Felonious Breaking or Entering.
North Carolina Conference of Superior Court Judges and North Carolina Bar Association Foundation,
North Carolina Pattern Instructions—Criminal: Gambling.

INTERNET RESOURCES
The BBC has a nice page for Valid and Invalid Argument, which covers all the argument forms
examined in this chapter; it is at http://www.bbc.co.uk/dna/h2g2/A821107

ADDITIONAL READING
Almost any introductory logic text will provide more
extensive coverage of all of these argument forms; one
excellent source is the text by Virginia Klenk, Understanding

Symbolic Logic, 5th Edition (Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 2007).

Read the Document on mythinkinglab.com
Mary Anne Warren, “On the Moral and Legal Status of Abortion,” Monist, Vol. 57, no. 4 (1973): 43–61. In the section of
the essay included here, Mary Anne Warren examines the
necessary and sufficient conditions for being a “person.”
Weeks v. Angelone, 528 U.S. 225 (2000). This
involves the sentencing phase of a capital murder case
that occurred in Virginia. After Weeks was found guilty
of capital murder, the question became one of whether

the defendant should be sentenced to life imprisonment or to death. The dissenting opinion by Justice
Stevens (included here) argues that there was indeed
confusion on the jury concerning the necessary and
sufficient conditions for the death sentence.
State of North Carolina v. Rich, 351 NC 386. This is a case
that came before the Supreme Court of North Carolina,
involving the necessary conditions for second-degree murder.

15

❖❖❖

Scientific and Causal
Reasoning

Listen to the Chapter Audio on mythinkinglab.com
You flipped a switch and caused the light to turn on. You turned the key and caused the
engine to start. Hatfield shot McCoy through the heart and caused McCoy’s death.
The drought caused the failure of the corn crop. Those are perfectly reasonable and
legitimate causal claims. But determining causes is not always easy. In fact, causal
reasoning is subject to a variety of pitfalls and problems. Consider a case:
Lawyers sometimes hire “jury selection specialists” to help them in seating a jury. These
specialists use social science research techniques in an effort to select favorable jurors for
their side, or, at the very least, to weed out any unfavorable potential jurors. The practice has
been a controversial issue in recent years. Most of the debate has been over whether such
methods are fair. However, there has also been debate about whether the methods really work.

There have been strong claims in support of the effectiveness of social science
methods in jury selection. For example, Litigation Sciences, a company that provides
such services, claims in its promotional literature that: “To date, where our advice and
recommendations have been employed, our clients have achieved successful results in
over 95 percent of the cases in which we have been involved.”1 Certainly when the
defense has used jury selection experts in criminal cases the acquittal rate has been
much better than average.
What does that show? It seems to indicate that “scientific jury selection techniques”
are effective, that such techniques can result in a favorable verdict. But is that the correct
conclusion? It’s true that legal teams using scientific jury selection techniques have a high
success rate. But does it follow that the scientific jury selection techniques are the cause of
the success?
Before going further, try to think of at least one reason for doubting that scientific
jury selection causes successful trial results.
(If you need a hint, consider this: Hiring social scientists to do the research necessary
for effective scientific jury selection is quite expensive.)
Okay, why are defense teams that use scientific jury selection techniques successful?
Perhaps because the scientific jury selection techniques are so effective that they cause the

278

Chapter 15

279

Scientific and Causal Reasoning

Who Is Guilty?
Thinking about causality can be perplexing, but also
entertaining. Here’s a favorite law school puzzler.
Arthur, Bert, and Carl are all members of the French
Foreign Legion, stationed far out in the desert. Both
Bert and Carl hate Arthur, and separately they plot his
murder. When Arthur is ordered to go alone on a long
mission across the hot, dry desert, both men see their
opportunity. Shortly before Arthur leaves, Bert puts a

deadly poison in his canteen. A few minutes later, Carl,
not knowing about the poison, pours all the (poisoned)
water out of Arthur’s canteen, and replaces the water
with sand. Arthur goes on his journey, and dies of thirst.
Now obviously both Bert and Carl are evil men who
plotted murder and attempted to murder Arthur. But the
question is this: Who was the actual murderer? That is,
who caused Arthur’s murder?

side using them to win. But perhaps not. Perhaps the scientific jury selection techniques
are ineffectual and other factors are the cause of success. One such factor might be that
the hiring of teams of social scientists is costly; defendants who can afford such teams
must have large sums of money to spend on their defense teams (which means that they
not only hire social scientists but also hire a number of high-powered defense lawyers,
private investigators to seek out evidence in their favor, and experts to testify for the
defense). In short, it may not be the scientific jury selection techniques that are the cause
of success; it may instead be that defendants who can afford those techniques can also
afford all the other trial advantages that money can buy. Perhaps the actual cause of
success is the advantage of having a team of highly qualified lawyers who are working full
time on the case (rather than the public defender who, for most criminal defendants,
squeezes a few minutes out of an overloaded schedule).2

DISTINGUISHING CAUSATION FROM CORRELATION
So the first problem in determining causes is distinguishing genuine causal factors from the
various incidental associations. If two sets of phenomena are strongly correlated (when one
occurs the second usually follows), that indicates there may be a causal relation between
the two, and further inquiry along those lines would certainly be justified; but that would
not be sufficient to prove a causal link. There are several possible reasons for such correlations among events. One, the first may indeed be the cause of the second. Two, the causal
relation may go in the opposite direction. A striking example of that sort of confusion is the
case of the New Hebrides Islanders. The islanders believed that lice caused good health.
They based this belief on the fact that healthy islanders were all infested with lice (lice lived
in abundance on the tropical islands and it was all but impossible to avoid infestation),
while sick islanders had no lice on them. A natural conclusion was that lice caused good
health, and loss of lice caused sickness. But in fact the causal relation was exactly the reverse:
Lice prefer a narrow range of body temperatures in their hosts, and when the islanders became sick their body temperatures rose above the louse comfort level and the lice sought
other lodgings. Being healthy caused the presence of lice and being sick—with a fever—
caused the absence of lice. Loss of lice was the result of sickness, not the cause.3
A third way in which two positively correlated phenomena may be related is that both
may be causally linked to some third set of events. Consider again the use of scientific jury
selection techniques. Defendants who have used such techniques have enjoyed an unusually high acquittal rate. But it may be that the cause of the acquittals was not the use of scientific jury selection techniques; rather, the cause may have been another factor that caused
both the use of scientific jury selection techniques and the acquittals—namely, the financial
resources that employed both the scientific jury selectors and the time and undivided efforts
of the best defense lawyers. Even if scientific jury selection techniques are totally useless,

280

Chapter 15

Scientific and Causal Reasoning

one would still expect to find a high positive correlation between the defense’s use of
scientific jury selection techniques and acquittals—at least, one would expect to find such a
correlation so long as the most expensive defense lawyers believe that such jury selection
techniques are useful. (This is not to suggest that scientific jury selection techniques are
ineffective. But the mere fact that there is a positive correlation between acquittals and
defendants’ use of such techniques does not prove a causal relation between the two.)
Suppose that a study discovers that parents who drink bottled water have healthier
children. Obviously the people who sell bottled water would be delighted, and probably
feature it in their advertising. But would it actually indicate that drinking bottled water
causes parents to have healthier children? No, by no means. After all, parents who drink
bottled water are probably more affluent, and thus can afford better health care for their
children, and are less likely to live in hazardous surroundings and thus their children are
less likely to be exposed to environmental hazards. Furthermore, parents who drink
bottled water may be more health conscious than most, and thus are more careful about
their children’s diets, exercise, vaccinations, and checkups. Those are more likely to be the
significant causal factors affecting the health of their children. All of those are confounding
factors that make it difficult to determine whether the parents’ drinking of bottled water
is actually the cause of better health in children.4 A study of heavy coffee drinkers—those
drinking eight or more cups of coffee a day—found that they were more likely have heart
attacks. One possibility, of course, is that drinking lots of coffee is a causal factor for heart
attacks. But consider for a moment some of the other characteristics that heavy coffee
drinkers are likely to have. First, they are more likely to smoke (of course many heavy coffee drinkers do not smoke; but heavy coffee drinkers are more likely to smoke than are
those who drink little or no coffee, and thus it might be the greater likelihood of smoking
that is the actual causal factor for the increased number of heart attacks). And as a heavy
coffee drinker, where do I get my afternoon fix of coffee? At the coffee shop, where there
is always a tempting array of pastries; or maybe at the drive-thru window of the donut shop.
So perhaps it’s not the coffee, but the fact that heavy coffee drinkers are more likely to be
eating fattening pastries. Also, heavy coffee drinkers are probably less likely to be getting a
lot of exercise; and maybe they are not getting enough sleep; and perhaps they are more
likely to be under considerable stress at work. So if people who drink lots of coffee are
more likely to have heart attacks, it may be all those associated/correlated factors that are
the real causal culprits; in fact, it could be that if these smoking non-exercising pastry-eaters
were not drinking coffee they would be having heart attacks at an even higher rate.

Figure 15-1

The Middletons Cartoon

Chapter 15

Scientific and Causal Reasoning

281

What A Lucky Person
Coincidence can be very persuasive. Here’s an example
favored by both statisticians and philosophers. We hold
a quarter-flipping contest. The quarters used are perfectly balanced, the contest is not rigged, and there is no
way to cheat (a machine flips the quarters): the quarters
are just as likely to land heads as tails. Approximately a
million people enter the contest, and they are paired off,
with the winners at each stage meeting in the next stage

of the contest. After about 20 rounds, we finally have a
winner. The way the contest was set up, someone had to
win. But after winning 20 rounds, the winner would very
likely conclude that he or she was a “lucky person,” that
he or she had the special property of being lucky. That is,
there’s a strong temptation to attribute a specific cause,
impose a causal pattern, on events that are merely
coincidence.

There is a fourth possibility for why there is positive correlation between two sets
of phenomena: It’s possible that the correlation is accidental, that there is no causal
relation at all. If I rub my rabbit’s foot just prior to the drawing of the daily lottery
number and then my number is drawn, I may conclude that rubbing the lucky rabbit
foot caused my good fortune; if next week I repeat the procedure and win again, I may
become firmly convinced of the positive causal efficacy of rabbit-foot rubbing. There is
a positive correlation between the two. But what I am forgetting, of course, is the
number of times that I crossed my fingers, wore my lucky cap, gripped a horseshoe, and
kissed a four-leaf clover without success. If I, and thousands of other lottery players, try
a multitude of “lucky charms,” then some of them, by chance, will be positively
correlated with good luck in the lottery. (And, of course, the positive correlation of the
lucky charm with lottery luck may be exaggerated: The times I rubbed the rabbit’s foot
and won tend to be quite memorable; the many times I rubbed the rabbit’s foot and lost
are easily forgotten.)
A nice example of coincidence masquerading as a special cause is discussed by
Michael Shermer.5 Michael Drosnin recently wrote a couple of best-selling books called
Bible Code and Bible Code II. The Bible Code game is easy to play. Start with the first few books
of the Old Testament. Then have your computer generate a printout of every 7th letter
(or 3rd, or 13th, or whatever you wish), filling page after page with your printout. Then
start looking through the dozens of pages. Look hard: right to left, left to right, diagonally, up and down, in circles or squares, whatever you like. Lo and behold, you will find
all sorts of wonders! When Drosnin did this, he found “predictions” or “prophecies” of all
sorts of amazing things: the Oklahoma City bombing, the September 11 attack on the
World Trade Center, the collision between Jupiter and comet Shoemaker-Levy 9, the
notorious affair between President Bill Clinton and Monica Lewinsky, and the assassination of Israeli prime minister Yitzhak Rabin. When skeptics scoffed that these were not
genuine predictions, but merely after-the-fact concoctions, Drosnin offered a challenge:
“When my critics find a message about the assassination of a prime minister encrypted in
Moby Dick, I’ll believe them.” Australian mathematician Brenda McKay took the challenge, and soon generated nine “encrypted predictions” of political assassinations in Moby
Dick. The moral of this story is a simple one: If you look hard enough for a pattern, you
can almost always find one (whether you are looking for a pattern in the numbers worn
by the winning Super Bowl quarterbacks or a pattern generated by choosing the seventh
letter from a book); and when you find a patterned correlation between events, that
correlation may be the result of coincidence, and not the result of any causal link.
Suppose we do a study at your old high school. We randomly select 20 students who
drink beer, and 20 students who do not drink, and we track them for a year. At the end of
the year the students who do not drink had a GPA of 3.1, while the beer-drinking students
had a GPA of 2.9. And so we conclude: drinking beer causes high school students to make
lower grades.

282

Chapter 15

Scientific and Causal Reasoning

Chain Letter Causation
Trust the Lord and He will light your way. This prayer
has been sent to you for good luck. The luck has been
brought to you. You are to receive good luck within
4 days of receiving this letter. Send copies of this to people you think need good luck. Do not keep this letter. It
must leave you within 96 hours after you receive it.
While in the Philippines, General Walker lost
his life 6 days after he received this letter. He failed to
circulate the prayer; however, before his death he

received $775,000. Take note of the following: C. S.
Dias received the chain in 1953. He made 20 copies
and sent them; a few days later he won $2 million.
Carlice Grant received the chain letter and forgot it,
and a few days later he lost his job. He found the letter
and sent it, 5 days later he got a better job. Darin
Fairchild received the chain and not believing it,
threw it away. Nine days later he died. For no reason
whatsoever should this chain be broken.

Well, maybe. Certainly that’s possible. But even if our results are accurate (and none
of our subjects are lying about their drinking habits), that would not establish that drinking beer causes lower grades. Not even close. We can think of three other possibilities (other
than drinking beer causes lower grades) to account for our results. First (and perhaps
most likely), there is some other factor associated with both beer drinking and lower
grades that is the actual cause: For example, it might well be that students who do not
drink beer have more parental supervision and parental involvement, and not only do
their parents discourage them from drinking beer, but they also encourage them to get their
homework done, make sure they get any needed tutoring, take them to the library, and
praise them for good grades. The involvement of parents would be a confounder, a factor
that confounds and confuses the relation between the factors studied. So perhaps it is not
the beer drinking that causes lower grades, but instead the lack of parental involvement
and encouragement.
Or second, maybe the causal relationship runs in reverse. Rather than beer drinking
causing lower grades, making lower grades drives students to drink.
Or third—and a distinct possibility in a study this small—maybe the results were
mere coincidence. We happened to get one nondrinker who is a brilliant student with a
4.0 average, and one occasional beer drinker who is a lousy student (with a 0.1 average).
In a study this small, that would be enough to skew the results.
What can we conclude from our study? Maybe beer drinking causes lower grades; but
just as likely, maybe there is a third factor (a confounder) that is the actual cause, or maybe
the causal relationship runs in reverse, or maybe the results were simply coincidence.
In short, causal claims are important, but it is also important to consider them critically,
and to be skeptical of causal claims drawn on insufficient evidence.

Exercise 15-1
In discussing the difference between causation and correlation, we discussed four different possibilities when two events are correlated. One is that the first may be the cause of the second; what are
the other three, and how would they apply to the cases below?
1. We recently did a study, and found that elderly people who had pets were significantly healthier
than elderly people without pets. One possibility is that having a pet causes better health among
elderly persons. But there are three other possibilities for explaining that correlation, OTHER
THAN that having a pet causes better health; what are the other three possibilities?
2. Mary Spio, editor of the singles lifestyle magazine One2One Living, cautions singles against living
together before marriage, because studies have shown that living together leads to less relationship
stability, lower chances of the couple getting married, and greater likelihood of divorce if they do
marry. Perhaps living together before marriage does have those effects, but this data certainly does
not establish that; what are the other possibilities?

Chapter 15

Scientific and Causal Reasoning

283

3. When high school band and orchestra directors are trying to convince parents to invest the
money and time required to have their children participate, they often tell the parents—what is
true—that high school students who learn to play a musical instrument and participate in musical groups consistently make (on average) higher grades and score higher on SAT and ACT
exams than do students who are not involved in instrumental performance. The directors
conclude that participating in band or orchestra causes high school students to improve their
academic performance. I’m not questioning the value of band and orchestra for high school
students: I think they’re great. But the fact that student musicians perform better academically
does not show that playing an instrument caused the students to have greater academic success.
What are the other possibilities?
4. A recent study found that elderly people who gamble at casinos are generally in better health than
those of similar age who do not engage in casino gambling. So if you want to keep her healthy take
grandma to the casino! Well, maybe: perhaps there’s something about the lights and sounds and
excitement that gets the blood moving and the energy flowing, and maybe casino gambling really
does promote good health in the elderly. But I doubt it. What are the other possibilities?
5. We recently checked the data, and found that Western State University students who take
critical thinking have a higher graduation rate than Western State students who do not take critical thinking. One possibility is that taking critical thinking causes students to be more successful
students and more likely to graduate. But there are three other possibilities for explaining that
correlation, OTHER THAN that taking critical thinking causes higher graduation rates; what are
the other three possibilities?

THE QUESTIONABLE CAUSE FALLACY
An unjustified causal claim commits the questionable cause fallacy. (In polite company the
fallacy of questionable cause sometimes goes by a classier name: post hoc, ergo propter hoc.
Its close friends sometimes call it by its first name: the post hoc fallacy. Post hoc, ergo propter
hoc is a Latin phrase meaning “After this, therefore because of this.”)
To see the difficulties in ascertaining genuine causal relations, consider the
problem of placebos. You’ve seen the pain-reliever commercials: A woman is struggling to
control three energetic children and prepare dinner—and then the dog knocks over a
table, breaking a vase and scattering water and flowers all over the living room. The
woman, not surprisingly, yells at the kids, kicks the dog, and develops a bit of a headache.
The concerned announcer suggests that she try two tablets of this wonderful, new, superstrength, fast-acting miracle pain reliever: new Happy-Head. We see her 10 minutes later,
wearing a warm smile and playing tag with the kids and giving the dog a doggy treat.
“What happened to your headache?” inquires the good Samaritan announcer. “It’s gone,
and I feel great,” she replies, “that Happy-Head really works.”
Well, perhaps it does. But even assuming that this is an accurate story, and the
woman does feel much better after taking the medication, it does not follow that it was the
medication that caused her to feel better. It may well have been the placebo effect of taking
the medication. (A placebo is a pill that looks like medication and passes for medicine, but
in fact contains no medication: a “sugar pill.”) Studies have shown that in many instances
subjects who are given a placebo will be relieved of their pain, especially if the placebo is
given with dramatic flourish, as a wonderful new product. So it will be easy enough for
purveyors of a new headache remedy to obtain glowing testimonials for the effectiveness
of their product, simply as a result of the placebo effect—even if the product itself is
totally useless. (The notorious Head-On headache remedy—with the loud obnoxious
commercials—made a lot of money with the placebo effect. The only drugs in Head-On
have no proven effect on headaches; but even if they did, it wouldn’t matter, because the
Head-On that is sold over the counter is diluted to less than one part per billion of active
ingredient. By the time it goes in the package, it is basically just water: water at a very steep
price. But apparently rubbing water on your head—if you believe it’s a powerful
medication—can be a very effective headache placebo for many people.)

284

Chapter 15

Scientific and Causal Reasoning

How, then, can we tell the real cause? Is it the medication itself? Or is it the
placebo effect? That is, if we wanted to test the effectiveness of a new pain-relief
medication, how would we do it? By testing two groups: an experimental group, who get
the actual medication, and a control group that is as closely matched as possible
with the experimental group and is given placebos (the pills are the same size and
color, so that both groups think they are receiving identical medication). Then we test
to see whether the group taking the medication has a higher rate of pain relief than
does the group taking the placebo. If the group receiving the actual medication (the
experimental group) has a higher rate of pain relief than the placebo group (the control
group), and the two groups are evenly matched, then it is reasonable to conclude
that the medication does contribute to the relief of pain, that it is causally effective in
relieving pain.
Returning to the question of the causal efficacy of scientific jury selection
techniques in gaining favorable verdicts, we can see another possible complication in
sorting out the causes: the placebo effect. Perhaps the use of elaborate jury selection
procedures has the side effect of encouraging the lawyers who employ the techniques
and daunting the opposing lawyers. For example, if the defense has used such
techniques, then the defense lawyers may believe—rightly or wrongly—that the jurors
are sympathetic to their side, and thus the defense lawyers will be more confident and
probably more effective. The opposite will be true for the opposing lawyers: They are
likely to feel—again, rightly or wrongly—that the jurors are regarding them unfavorably, and thus may be less cordial to the jury as well as less effective in their arguments.
In short, use of scientific jury selection techniques may operate as a sort of placebo;
thus the use of the techniques might cause success even if the techniques in themselves
are of no value.6

Exercise 15-2
The following exercises make causal claims. It is possible that the causal claims are true; but for
most of the cases, it is more likely that the causal claims are false.
A. For each claim, explain why you might have doubts about the claimed causal relation. (What relevant
factors have been omitted from consideration? What other factors might account for the result?)
B. We noted that when there is a correlation, a causal claim based on that correlation may be false
because of these other possibilities: (1) the causal relation might run in reverse (good health
causes lice infestation); (2) there may be some other factor that causes both series of events (defendants who use jury consultants are successful in their defense and they also have enough money to
afford jury consultants and top lawyers, expert witnesses, and detectives); and (3) the correlation
may be accidental. For each of the following cases, tell which of those three other possibilities
might account for the correlation.
1. Last year, the Lake Wobegon Whippets won only 2 games and lost 18. This year they actually had a
winning season, winning 11 games and losing 8. The team is made up of the same players as last
year, except that one additional player was added: a substitute outfielder, Walter “Molasses” Inqvist.
He didn’t seem like that great a player, but the facts speak for themselves: Walter is the only new
player, so he must be the cause of the Whippets’ great improvement.7
2. We have done a careful study, and we have found that the alumni of Old Ivy College, an exclusive
and outrageously expensive private college, had an average income last year of over $300,000.
It is expensive to attend Old Ivy College, but the facts speak for themselves: it’s clearly worth it.
Attending Old Ivy obviously results in much higher income.
3. We ought to look into the new reading program that was developed last year at the Frog Junction
High School. Frog Junction High is a small school—2 years ago its graduating class was four, and
the same number graduated last year—but it is clear that their new reading program works. After
all, the SAT scores of their graduating seniors jumped an average of almost 100 points the year they
started the reading program.

Chapter 15

Scientific and Causal Reasoning

285

4. When people who have smoked regularly for a number of years stop smoking, their mortality rate
(roughly, the rate at which they die) is actually higher during the first year after they stop than is the
mortality rate for those who continue to smoke. Obviously there is something about stopping
smoking that is hazardous to your health. (Hint: Consider under what circumstances many people
finally stop smoking. [Incidentally, the study results cited in this example are accurate: The
mortality rate for those who stop smoking is higher during the first year than for those who
continue; in subsequent years the mortality rate for the continuing smokers is substantially greater
than for those who stopped.])
5. I had been feeling sort of tired and run down the last few months. A friend suggested I try
taking a special tonic: Professor Wonderful’s High-Potency Maximum-Strength Power Booster.
He said it worked wonders for him. Well, the stuff tastes vile, and it’s expensive, but it works
great! I’ve got my old vim and vigor back. Dr. Wonderful makes a wonderful—and genuinely
effective—tonic!
6. We had a cookout last night, and I got a terrible case of indigestion later that evening. We had
basically the same stuff we always have: hot dogs, potato salad, coleslaw, and beer. I ate and drank
about the same amount I usually do, and everything we had was our usual brand—except the hot
dogs, which were a new brand we hadn’t tried before. Believe me, I won’t try them again. I never get
indigestion, but I did last night. Must have been those new hot dogs.
7. In 1996 in the United States, states which had the death penalty had a murder rate that was almost
twice as high as the murder rate for states without the death penalty: states with the death penalty
had a murder rate of 7.1 for every 100,000 residents, while states without the death penalty had a
murder rate of 3.6 for every 100,000. Year after year, states that practice capital punishment have a
higher murder rate than states that have abolished capital punishment. The evidence is clear: the
death penalty actually causes a higher murder rate.
8. Since the 1950s, rock music has become increasingly popular in our society, and during the same
period, the crime rate has risen and the use of illegal drugs has also increased. The evidence is
clear: Rock music causes crime and drug abuse.
9. Yesterday I went to the track and discovered something that is going to make me rich. In the first
race, the jockey on the winning horse was wearing green colors—and he was the only jockey in the
race wearing green. The second race had 10 horses, and only two of the jockeys wore green silks:
Sure enough, one of the jockeys wearing green won. In the third race only one jockey was wearing
green, and his horse finished out of the money. But in the fourth race three jockeys wore green, and
one of them won and another finished third! In the next five races, there were at least eight horses
in each race, and in each race there was only one jockey in green silks—and in those five races, the
jockeys wearing green won twice, finished second twice, and finished out of the money only once.
I don’t know what it is, but obviously there is something about having its jockey wear green silks that
makes a horse run faster.
10. Some years ago, there were people who claimed that when babies hear recordings of the music
of Mozart, that experience enhances and strengthens their intelligence. Some people were
skeptical, but now the results have proven that claim is true! We have followed the development
of 50 children whose mothers played the music of Mozart for them when they were infants, and
those children are now 19 years old; and they had a higher than average rate of graduation from
high school, their SAT scores were substantially above the national average, and a significant
number of them—much greater than chance—have been admitted to very prestigious colleges
and universities. So clearly when babies listen to the music of Mozart, it makes them smarter.
11. University Hospital has a very high mortality rate; that is, a higher percentage of patients admitted to University Hospital die during their stay than at some of the other hospitals around the
state. So University Hospital must be a lousy hospital that is placing the lives of its patients in
great jeopardy.
12. You may have heard that Arizona is a great place for people suffering from respiratory diseases: warm,
very dry, and its desert environment produces relatively few plants that provoke allergic reactions. But
don’t you believe it! In fact, Arizona is a particularly hazardous state for people with respiratory diseases:
It has one of the highest death rates from respiratory diseases of any state in the United States.
13. I finally figured out why good old Home State University loses. It’s because they get nervous when
they have to play in front of very large crowds! Just look at the record. Last year we lost only two
games, to Michigan and Florida, and those games had the biggest crowds of any games Home State
played. The year before, Home State again lost only two games, to Penn State and Florida State,

286

Chapter 15

Scientific and Causal Reasoning

again, these games drew the biggest crowds of the year. And the year before, Home State’s only
losses were to Notre Dame and Nebraska, and those games also drew the largest crowds that year.
So if we want Home State to have an undefeated season, we have to figure out some way to reduce
the crowd size in their big games.
14. We recently did a study, and found that teenage boys who play violent video games (such as Grand
Theft Auto) are significantly more likely to commit crimes. Clearly these violent video games are
causing an increase in crime among our young people.

THE METHOD OF SCIENCE
The method described above for testing pain-relief medication makes use of a randomized controlled experiment; in medical research, it would be called a randomized clinical
trial. We take two cases that are as close to identical as possible, with the exception of
one key difference. Then we see if the results in one case are different from the results in
the other case. If there is a difference in results, then the factor that was present in the
one case but not in the other must be the cause of that difference. Thus if we are testing
the causal efficacy of a proposed pain-relief nostrum, we need two groups that are as
similar as possible. (Obviously we would not want the control group—which takes the
placebo—to be college students and the experimental group—which takes the medication—to be members of a retirement community; in such a case, we would not know
whether the cause of any difference was age, differences in health, or the powers of the
medication.) Furthermore, it is essential that the only difference in the test situation is
that one group gets the medication and the other does not. That’s why the control group
receives a placebo: We don’t want one group taking a pill and the other group doing
nothing. It is also important that the placebo and the medication are identical in size,
weight, color, and taste. And it is essential that the two groups be treated the same by the
people administering the medication and the placebo (the placebo should be dosed out
with the same care as the actual medication); thus, we may use what is called a “doubleblind” procedure, in which those giving the pills do not know whether they are giving
placebos or medication (it’s double-blind because there is a double layer of “blindness” as
to who is getting placebos—both the test subjects and those who deal directly with those
subjects are ignorant of which pills are medication and which are placebos).
It is a difficult task to isolate a single difference between groups that are otherwise
essentially similar. For example, some of the earliest studies of the effects of smoking on
development of lung cancer were almost useless because the smokers included a higher
percentage of city dwellers than did the nonsmokers, and people who live in cities are
somewhat more likely to develop cancer than are those who live in rural areas. Only when
studies matched smokers and nonsmokers for every relevant characteristic (diet, work
environment, age, gender, residence) could it be reliably determined that the significant
difference in lung cancer rates between smokers and nonsmokers was caused by smoking.
The case of the causal relation between smoking and cancer offers an opportunity
to repeat an oft-repeated but never stale maxim of logical thinking: Be careful to note the
exact conclusion. In the above case, the conclusion of the lung cancer–smoking researchers
was not that smoking is the cause (or the only cause) of lung cancer. Rather, the conclusion
is that smoking is a cause of lung cancer, that if one smokes one is more likely to develop
lung cancer than if one does not, that if everyone smokes there will be more cases of lung
cancer than if no one smokes. It’s important that the exact conclusion be noted; otherwise, one might think that the causal conclusion could be refuted by an argument like this:
“Well, Uncle Joe smoked two packs a day for 60 years, and he died last year at age 79 when
a tree fell on him. He certainly never had lung cancer. So don’t tell me that smoking
causes lung cancer.” That argument would work if the smoking studies concluded that
smoking always causes lung cancer; but that is not the claim. Rather, the claim is that
smoking is the cause of some cases of lung cancer: that there are people who develop

Chapter 15

Scientific and Causal Reasoning

287

lung cancer because of their smoking, people who would not have developed lung cancer
had they not smoked. So pointing out one individual who smoked but did not develop
lung cancer will not refute that argument.

Randomized Studies and Prospective Studies
In 1846, Ignaz Semmelweis was a physician at Vienna General Hospital. He noticed that
between 1844 and 1846, in the First Maternity Division (where the mothers were attended
by physicians), 10% of the women giving birth died from childbed fever. During the same
period, the mortality rate from childbed fever in the Second Maternity Division (in which
midwives attended the mothers) was only 2%.
Semmelweis wondered why there was such a large difference. He realized that the
physicians attending women in the First Maternity Division were also working in the
autopsy room, studying cadavers, just prior to assisting in deliveries. The midwives, of
course, had not been in the autopsy room. Semmelweis hypothesized that there might be
some source of infection being spread by the hands of the doctors from the cadavers to
the mothers. Semmelweis tested his hypothesis by requiring that all physicians entering
the maternity ward first wash their hands in a solution of chlorinated lime to remove
whatever it was that was causing childbed fever, and then comparing the number of cases
of childbed fever now occurring with the previous rate.
In Semmelweis’s experiment, the control group are the women who gave birth earlier
while under the care of physicians who had not washed their hands. The experimental
group are the women who are now giving birth under the care of physicians who had
washed their hands. This was one of the great experiments in medical history, but it had
some problems. It might have been better if he had randomly selected a group of doctors
to use lime solution, and others to wash with something much weaker, or not wash at all;
but if he reasonably thought that washing might save lives, then it might be unethical to
use that sort of control group. However, there might have been some important differences between the earlier circumstances when doctors were not washing their hands and
the later situation when doctors were. For example, suppose that during the earlier
period there had been an epidemic of fever, but it had subsided by the time Semmelweis
tried his experiment. Or there might have been a large turnover among the doctors, and
some very bad doctors had retired and been replaced by newer, more effective doctors. Or
some new delivery technique had been developed that was now widely in use. Or maybe
the doctors were simply older and more experienced. We wouldn’t know if the reduction
in childbed fever was the result of washing hands or from some other cause. That’s why
the best way to run the experiment would be by randomly dividing the doctors into wash
and not-wash groups, and then recording the difference in childbed fever rates. (It might
be even better if each doctor alternated washing and not washing, and then the results
were compared.) That way any differences are controlled for through randomization, and
any factors that might have influenced the number of childbed fever cases would be
cancelled out, with the single exception of washing and not washing. Suppose that in the
past year many women of childbearing age had begun to eat a new food, perhaps a new
type of vegetable, that (unknown to anyone) gave limited immunity from childbed fever
to those who ate it. In that case, Semmelweis would have gotten a lower rate of childbed
fever, but the cause might not have been the washing. If the nonwashing and washing
doctors had been divided randomly, then the patients of both the control and the
experimental groups would be equally likely to eat the new diet, and any differences in
rate of childbed fever could safely be attributed to the new routine of hand washing.
So randomized experimental design is the scientific ideal. But it’s not always possible
to use that design. For example, suppose we want to know the effects of smoking two
packs of cigarettes a day, starting at age 16, over a period of 10 years. The best method for
determining that would be by taking a group of several thousand 16-year-olds, dividing
them randomly into two groups, and having the experimental group smoke two packs a

288

Chapter 15

Scientific and Causal Reasoning

day for 10 years and keep the control group from smoking at all. But that would be a
morally appalling experiment. After all, several years ago we suspected that cigarette
smoking was profoundly harmful to health; and so we certainly can’t run an experiment
in which we have people do something that we strongly suspect will cause them great
harm. Instead, we might run a prospective (sometimes called an epidemiological) test: We will
search out a thousand kids who started smoking two packs a day at age 16, and then find
a thousand nonsmoking kids (for our control group) who we can match with the smokers
in our experimental group. The problem is, what features should we match for? It won’t
be enough just to match a 16-year-old male smoker with a 16-year-old male nonsmoker.
Smokers and nonsmokers may differ in many other ways that are very important to
health. For example, it may be that the smokers generally don’t get as much exercise, or
perhaps they drink more on average, or maybe they don’t get as much sleep, or maybe
they tend to eat more junk food, or perhaps they are more likely to work around pesticides or industrial chemicals, or maybe they tend to live in urban areas and are more
likely to breathe polluted air. And even if we can find a match on all those characteristics,
there might still be some characteristic that we hadn’t considered. It turns out that
prolonged exposure to asbestos increases one’s risk for developing cancer. But we didn’t
know that until recently, and so we would not have thought to control for asbestos exposure. That’s not to say that prospective studies are useless. If they are carefully conducted,
they can reveal very important causal results. But they are difficult to run, and it is very
difficult to be sure that we have controlled for all the potential causal factors.

Making Predictions
Semmelweis used a controlled experiment to test his theory. The test turned out as he had
hoped, and indicated that washing hands with chlorinated lime reduces the spread of
childbed fever. But in this case the test was also designed to prove a larger hypothesis:
roughly, the hypothesis that disease is spread by something (germs, though Semmelweis
didn’t call it that) that is transmitted from others with the disease. That is, many diseases,
including childbed fever, are caused by infection from an external source, rather than by
some internal process (such as an excess of “black bile”). Semmelweis used a controlled
experiment as part of his scientific work, but important as controlled experiments are, they
are not the whole of the scientific process. Exactly how does the “scientific method” work?
A popular but false notion of scientific method is that scientists gather lots of data,
collect many observations, and finally devise a hypothesis to account for all their observations. It’s a pleasant image, the scientist working in her lab or looking through her telescope or rambling around the rain forest gathering more and more samples and data and
information, then finally squeezing it all together into a true scientific theory. But it’s not
really the way the scientific method works. One problem with that popular image is that
there is just too much to look for. A scientist might make an enormous number of observations, but they would be a terrible jumble, and it would be all but impossible to winnow
out the important and relevant data from the distractions. Instead, in applying the
scientific method, scientists devise a hypothesis; then they make a prediction based on that hypothesis; and the success of that prediction confirms the truth of their theory. That’s a bit
oversimplified, but it’s at least a rough outline of what scientific method involves.
None of this is to deny the importance of scientific observation and data collection,
of course. After all, if Semmelweis hadn’t noticed that the mortality rate was much higher
in the First Maternity Division than in the Second Division, he would not have formulated
his hypothesis. But in order to test and prove his hypothesis, Semmelweis could not just
go on collecting data. Instead, he had to follow the basic three steps of scientific method.
First, devise a theory or hypothesis that would account for the phenomena (in the
popular model, that is the final step; in the actual scientific method, it is the first step).
Second, make a prediction based on that theory (Semmelweis predicted a dramatic drop in
childbed fever). Third, test to see if that prediction is accurate.

Chapter 15

Scientific and Causal Reasoning

289

Consider one of the most famous of scientific theories: Newton’s laws of motion. In
1687, Isaac Newton proposed that everything—balls that are hit in Fenway Park, spacecraft that orbit the Earth, the planets that orbit the Sun—is subject to a set of simple laws:
In the absence of any force, the momentum of a body remains constant; if there is a force
acting on a body, that body will accelerate by an amount directly proportional to the
strength of the force and inversely proportional to the mass of the body; if a body exerts
a force on a second body, then the second exerts an equal and opposite force on the first;
and finally, any two bodies exert forces on each other that are proportional to the product of their masses divided by the square of the distance between them. This is an exciting and extraordinary theory, building on the work of Copernicus, Kepler, and Galileo,
and bringing together both celestial and terrestrial motions under one set of simple and
precise laws. But was it true? Some scientists remained skeptical: After all, these gravitational forces Newton was talking about, forces acting over enormous distances and requiring no physical contact, sounded a bit mysterious. But in 1705, Edmond Halley published
a remarkable prediction, based on Newton’s theory and on astronomical reports of
earlier comets. Halley predicted that a comet would reappear on Christmas, in 1758. Now
that is a prediction! It’s not like predicting that Bruce will drink coffee tomorrow morning, or that undergraduates will show up in Florida in the spring, or that Buffalo will have
a blizzard in February. Comets were strange and mysterious: they seemed to follow no set
pattern, they showed up out of nowhere, and they were often seen as divine warnings of
doom and disaster. Halley’s prediction was not only dramatic, it was also remarkably
accurate, with the comet appearing right on schedule. Newtonian theory had already
established its worth by 1758, but the success of Halley’s prediction was the crowning proof.

When Predictions Go Wrong
But not every prediction is so successful. In the sixteenth century, Copernicus proposed
the Copernican theory, in opposition to the reigning Ptolemaic theory. According to the
Ptolemaic theory, the Earth is stationary and unmoving, and the Sun, the planets, and
the realm of fixed stars (the sphere on which all the stars are fixed) all circle around the
stationary Earth. Copernicus proposed that the Sun was the center, and the Earth and the
other planets were all in orbit around the Sun, while the Earth revolved daily on its axis.
According to Copernicus, it took 1 day for the Earth to turn and 1 year for the Earth to
travel around the Sun (rather than, as in the Ptolemaic theory, it took 1 day for the Sun
to orbit the Earth). Which theory was right, the Copernican or the Ptolemaic? How would
you test them? (Remember, it’s the sixteenth century: there are no telescopes, no space
shuttles, no space stations.)
Think about what each theory predicts. According to the Ptolemaic theory, the
Earth is stationary, fixed. But the Copernican theory claims that the Earth travels all the
way around the Sun, every year. Suppose today is October 1. The Ptolemaic theory says
that 6 months from now, on April 1, the Earth will be exactly where it is today; it will not
have moved an inch. But the Copernican theory asserts that on April 1 the Earth will be
an enormous distance from here, way over on the other side of the Sun. So if the Copernican theory is true, then when we take a sighting on the stars today, and calculate the
angles between them, and then take another sighting from our new position on April 1,
we should get a different result because of the differences in our locations (just as when
you look from a distance at two skyscrapers and measure the angle between them,
and then move a few hundred yards and take another measurement, you should get a
different measurement). That observed difference is called the stellar parallax. The
Copernican theory predicts you will observe the stellar parallax; the Ptolemaic theory
predicts you will not.
A very ingenious experiment. So they ran the test, and the result: No stellar parallax.
So what do we conclude? The Copernican theory is false. We have to give it up. The
prediction failed.

290

Chapter 15

Scientific and Causal Reasoning

Well, no, not exactly. Some people rejected the Copernican theory; but many
who believed the Copernican theory were disappointed, but they did not reject the
theory. Instead, they questioned some of the background assumptions that had been
made in testing the theory. In particular, they questioned one crucial assumption: that
the stars are close enough that moving from one side of the Sun to the other should
make a measurable difference in the angles of the stars. Instead of rejecting the Copernican theory, they rejected that assumption, and concluded the stars are so far away
from us (compared to the distance the Earth travels around the Sun) that we are
unable to detect any difference in angle (like if you moved only an inch and looked
again at the skyscrapers).
It turns out, of course, that the Copernicans were right: The stars are much farther
away than the people of the sixteenth century had imagined (in fact, at distances so
enormous that most of us have difficulty getting any sense of it). The Copernican
prediction, incidentally, was finally confirmed: The stellar parallax was observed, but not
until centuries later with much better observational instruments.
The moral of the story is this: The scientific method involves making predictions, and the success of those predictions supports the truth of the theory. But the
falsification of a theory is not quite as simple and straightforward as it might first
appear. If our prediction proves false, it may mean that the theory is just wrong, and
should be rejected. Or it may mean that we need to reexamine some of the background assumptions that the theory makes, or question some of the data involved in
our prediction.
Suppose you run an experiment: Dip a piece of litmus paper in acid. Your chemistry professor tells you about acids and bases, and your prediction is that the litmus
paper will turn red when you dip it in the acid. You grasp the paper, dip it in the liquid,
and it turns green, not red. Don’t get your hopes up. You didn’t just make a great
scientific breakthrough, and refute the entire theory of acids and bases. You probably
dipped it in your coffee. Or perhaps your acid solution got contaminated when you
spilled your beer in it. Or maybe you got the wrong paper: your chemistry professor said
litmus paper, and you thought she said Christmas paper, so you used bright green
Christmas wrapping paper. Before we count your litmus experiment as a refutation of
our theories of acids and bases, we will check very carefully for any errors you made in
procedures and calculations. And you would have to duplicate your experiment, while
we observe closely.
So confirming and refuting hypotheses is a complicated process, involving drawing predictions and testing them; and failure of the predictions does not always entail
rejection of the hypothesis. We may instead question the background assumptions
(Are the stars really so close?) or the specific data (Was that really litmus paper that
you dipped in the acid?) Still, there are some important points to note concerning
the legitimate testing of hypotheses. First, there must be a prediction. Merely finding a
hypothesis that will account for the data is not enough. After all, there are always
plenty of hypotheses that would account for any phenomena. How do we account for
the spectacular “northern lights,” the aurora borealis that spreads curtains of shimmering color across northern skies? They are caused by Jill Frost: She is the magical
sister of Jack Frost, who paints all the trees in their autumn colors. Jack paints leaves,
Jill paints skies. It “explains” the existence of the northern lights; but unfortunately
for my Jill Frost hypothesis, it makes no predictions and gives us no guidance for our
further investigations into the aurora borealis phenomenon. In contrast, consider the
hypothesis that the northern lights are caused by electrically charged particles from
the Sun that are trapped by the Earth’s magnetic field. That hypothesis allows us to
predict that solar eruptions will be followed by displays of the northern lights, that as
the Sun moves toward a period of sun spot maximum there will be more displays of
the northern lights, and as the sun spot cycle approaches sun spot minimum there
will be fewer.

Chapter 15

Scientific and Causal Reasoning

291

Faulty “Scientific” Claims
So it is not enough that our hypothesis “account for” the phenomena. That’s the easy
part. Consider Erich von Daniken’s “ancient astronauts” hypothesis in Chariots of the Gods.
Why did ancient peoples build a set of gigantic lines on the plain of Nazca? They were,
according to von Daniken, aircraft runways built according to instructions from ancient
astronauts who visited Earth from other stars. (Why did these extraordinary visitors,
whose super-advanced technology had mastered the ability to travel the almost unimaginable distances between stars, need the help of ancient peoples to construct a set of
runways? That’s not altogether clear, but let that pass.) Well, that would explain it. But so
would many other hypotheses: An ancient earthly civilization learned to fly, and built the
runways themselves; or an ancient civilization built the lines as astronomical calendars, or
perhaps for religious ceremonies, or maybe just for esthetic enjoyment; or Jill Frost built
the lines as a break from painting the northern lights. Coming up with a hypothesis to
explain the phenomena is not the hard part; the challenge is to develop a hypothesis that
is testable (that makes testable predictions) and that passes the test.
Second, it is not enough that the hypothesis involve predictions. The predictions
must be of a special sort: They must be predictions that could not be made without the
hypothesis, and they must be predictions that are sufficiently detailed and specific that
they could be wrong. Suppose you predict, based on my astrological sign or the lines in my
palm, that I will suffer disappointments. That prediction will surely be accurate, but the
success of that prediction won’t provide any support for the hypothesis that astrological
forces shape my destiny. After all, the prediction is hardly surprising: It’s a prediction
anyone could have made, and without any use of astrological theory. Also, the predictions
must be specific enough that they could possibly be wrong. In the summer of 1993,
Washington, D.C., was the scene of a great experiment in the powers of transcendental
meditation. More than 5,000 trained meditators from around the world converged on the
capital. Their purpose was to meditate together, thus producing a “coherent consciousness
field” that would have a calming effect on the entire city. They predicted that the intense
meditation would reduce crime in the city by 20%. Unfortunately, the summer of 1993 was
the most violent in the history of the district, with the murder rate reaching record highs—
records that still remain. One might imagine that this would refute the hypothesis that
group transcendental meditation can reduce violence. No, not at all. It turns out, according to the organizers of the meditation “experiment,” that violent crime in the district
had been reduced by 18%! But how could that be? The murder rate had hit record highs,
hadn’t it? True; but the violent crime rate had been reduced 18% from what it would have
been without the transcendental meditation. How did they arrive at that figure? By a
rigorous analysis that included considerations of fluctuations in the Earth’s magnetic field.
But of course a prediction that there will be a decrease from the unknowable data of what
the murder rate “would have been” is the sort of prediction that can not be wrong.9
Another way to make “safe” predictions is by making them vague, or ambiguous, so
that lots of things can be said to fit them. The “prophecies” of Nostradamus are a good
example. You can also make your predictions safe from falsification by using a scattergun
approach: Make lots of predictions, and surely at least one will be a hit (and most people will
forget the failures). This is a favorite technique of “psychics” who see into the future. Jeane
Dixon was one of the most famous. She successfully predicted that John F. Kennedy would
die in office (since he would likely spend 8 years in office, that was not too amazing, but still,
not bad). She also predicted (shortly before his unpredicted death) that Elvis Presley would
give several benefit performances, she predicted that Princess Diana would have a daughter,
that during the 1970s the two-party system would vanish, Richard M. Nixon has “good
vibrations” and will serve the country well, Vice President Agnew will rise in stature (he was
convicted of accepting bribes and resigned in disgrace), the pollution problem will be
solved in 1971, and Fidel Castro will be removed from office in 1970. But she did get some
right: She predicted that there would be earthquakes “in the eastern part of the world.”

292

Chapter 15

Scientific and Causal Reasoning

How to Be a Successful Psychic
Tamara Rand is a “psychic to the stars” who provides
(for a generous fee) psychic advice to Hollywood stars.
She offered a videotape (shown on the Today show,
Good Morning America, and CNN) of a local television
show from January 6, 1981. On the videotape of a local
television show, Tamara Rand predicted that President
Reagan would be shot in the chest by a sandy-haired
young man with the initials J. H. The young man would
be from a wealthy family, and the assassination attempt

would occur during the last week of March or the first
week of April. Sure enough, on March 29, 1981, John
Hinckley—the sandy-haired son of a wealthy family—
shot Reagan in the chest. That’s indeed an amazing
and specific prediction. However, it turned out that the
supposed local television show had never actually
aired, and the tape was made by the show’s host
with Tamara Rand on March 31, two days after the
assassination attempt.10

As noted before, if a prediction fails, it may yet be possible to salvage the hypothesis:
perhaps a background assumption was wrong, or the experiment wasn’t carried out
correctly, or the observations were in error. But there is a limit to this “ad hoc rescue” of
favored hypotheses. Consider the famous “Shroud of Turin” (the shroud kept in the
cathedral of Turin, which shows an image of a man and which some claimed to have been
the burial shroud of Jesus). In the late 1980s, small samples of the shroud were, with the
permission of the Roman Catholic Church, tested by radiocarbon dating. The test was
quite elaborate: samples were given to independent labs in Oxford, Zurich, and Tucson.
In addition to the samples from the shroud, each lab was given control substances for
which the age was already known: threads from an 800-year-old garment, linen from a
900-year-old tomb, and linen from a second-century mummy of Cleopatra. None of the
samples were identified for any of the labs. All the control samples were correctly dated
by all three labs, and the three labs also agreed in dating the material from the shroud at
approximately 1350. Does that disprove the claim that the Shroud of Turin was the burial
shroud of Jesus? By no means, suggests one defender of the shroud: The reason the
carbon-dating gave the origin of the shroud as fourteenth century is because a burst
of neutrons from the body of Christ as He arose from the dead created additional
carbon-14 nuclei, making the cloth appear centuries younger than it actually is. But that
is merely the ad hoc rescue of a cherished hypothesis: there is no reason whatsoever to
believe that such a burst occurred (it was not mentioned in Scripture), except to save the
theory.11 In short, when a prediction does not work out, it is possible that some of the
background assumptions or procedures were flawed; but then the burden of proof rests
on those who claim such errors, and ad hoc rescues cannot carry that burden.
Occam’s Razor. Legitimate scientific claims must be subject to test, and in particular
they must be subject to tests that expose them to the possibility of falsification. There is a
second standard for scientific reasoning, and it has a catchy name: the principle of parsimony, which is better known as Occam’s Razor. The principle was formulated by William of
Occam, a fourteenth-century philosopher and theologian. Occam (sometimes spelled
“Ockham”) formulated the principle as “What can be done with fewer assumptions is
done in vain with more.” It is sometimes stated thus: “Entities are not to be multiplied
without necessity.” Or in other words, be parsimonious, be thrifty, in formulating scientific
explanations. That may sound strange, but it’s an idea you will likely recognize as one of
your own.
“’Tis a blessing to be simple,” says the opening line of the famous folk song, and
scientists agree. If we favored more complicated explanations over simpler ones, then we
could “explain” anything; but the explanations would be rather weird, and they wouldn’t
offer much help. My watch has stopped. “Must need a new battery,” you say. “No,” I reply,
“it’s not the battery; the problem is that my little watch elf is taking a nap, and so he’s
stopped moving the gears.” “There’s no watch elf! It’s just an old battery.” “No, I’ll show

Chapter 15

Scientific and Causal Reasoning

293

you.” I bang the watch briskly on a table, and the hands start to move again. “You see,
I awakened the elf, and he started moving the gears again.” When the watch soon
stops, it’s because the elf returned to slumber. You open the watch, and find no elf. “You
see, there’s no elf there.” “He’s there alright,” I reply. “But he’s very shy, and he hides.
Besides, he can make himself invisible.” You place a new battery in the watch, and now it
runs fine, without stopping. “You see, it’s the battery that drives the watch; there’s no elf.”
“There is too an elf,” I insist; “but he’s a battery-powered elf, and he was getting really run
down. That’s why he was sleeping so much. Now that he has a new battery, he’s back on
the job driving the gears and running the watch.”
This is a silly dialogue, of course. But it’s silly only because of our commitment to
the principle of parsimony, our commitment to Occam’s Razor. When giving explanations, don’t make assumptions that are not required. Or another way of stating it: When
there are competing explanations, both of which give adequate accounts of what is to be
explained, the simpler or more parsimonious explanation is better. I can “explain” the
workings of my watch quite effectively by means of my elf hypothesis: when the watch
stops, the elf is asleep; when the watch slows down, the elf is tired; when the watch keeps
accurate time, the elf is on top of his game; when the watch is inaccurate, the elf has been
drinking. The problem is that this explanation is not as parsimonious as the competing
explanation: it adds to the explanatory story a very special additional entity, an elf (and
not just any elf: an elf that can make itself invisible). If you let me add elves, ghosts, and
miracles to my explanatory scheme, then I can “explain” anything; but the explanations
violate the principle of Occam’s Razor, and are not as efficient and effective as the simpler
explanations in terms of rundown batteries and rust.
Think back to Von Daniken’s “explanation” of the lines on the plain of Nazca. The
hypothesis that they were constructed as landing strips for ancient astronauts would
certainly account for them; but as already noted, that hypothesis is not open to falsifiability. As it turns out, it also violates Occam’s Razor: it is hardly the simplest hypothesis
that would account for the phenomena. After all, many ancient peoples constructed
elaborate astronomical devices (Stonehenge was apparently one), since they spent many
nights observing the skies, and keeping track of seasons would be valuable to them
(berries ripen in different areas at different times, game migrates at specific times of the
year, crops must be planted within a relatively narrow opportunity range in order to
avoid the last frost and be harvested before the first). Such an explanation not only
involves predictions (some arrangement of the lines should mark the vernal equinox,
for example), but is also simpler: it appeals to practices we already recognize, and does
not require the positing of very special extraterrestrials who could somehow swiftly travel
billions of miles between stars and yet had not learned to land without long runways, and
who disappeared with little trace and have never returned.
It often happens that the extra entities that violate Occam’s Razor also make
theories unfalsifiable. The watch elf, for example, is not only a superfluous complication,
but also a complication that makes the watch elf theory unfalsifiable: no matter what my
watch does, an invisible watch elf is always a ready explanation. Ancient astronauts are
blessed with similar powers.

Confirmation Bias
There is one more problem with the elf hypothesis. The “predictions” it makes are so
general and vague that the hypothesis is subject to “confirmation bias.” This is a problem
that plagues attempts to determine causation, and that provides false support for dubious
scientific hypotheses. Suppose I have devised a new treatment for the common cold: lightintensive therapeutic energy, or LITE. My treatment procedure consists in giving patients
very brief sessions under a sun lamp, at regular intervals, for 2 days. Following the sun
lamp sessions, I check on my patients: sure enough, many are showing significant
improvement. LITE therapy is a success!

294

Chapter 15

Scientific and Causal Reasoning

Well, maybe; but that certainly is not proved by my tests. First, as we noted earlier,
this “test” is useless because there is no control group for comparison. It may be that
patients would start to feel better after a couple of days with or without LITE therapy
(their cold symptoms eventually go away with or without treatment). Or it may be that the
patients benefit from a placebo effect: They expect that this wonderful new treatment will
cure them, so they start to feel better. Or maybe it’s not LITE therapy that helps, but just
the fact that these patients spend more time lying down and resting during “LITE
therapy,” and it is the additional rest that causes improvement. Or maybe patients who
come in for special treatment for their colds also drink more orange juice and get more
exercise, and so they would recover more swiftly anyway. Without a control group, this
“test” is useless. But there’s another problem if I am running the tests and reporting the
results. I have great confidence in and high hopes for my new LITE therapy. So I fully
expect to see significant improvements in my LITE therapy patients; and sure enough,
I see what I expected. After all, what will count as “improvement”? The standards
are vague: fewer sniffles, less coughing, maybe fewer aches and pains, or just a little more
energy. Any of those might count as improvements, and if I expect to see such improvements, then it is likely that I’ll find what I’m looking for. Not because I’m being deceitful,
but because “confirmation bias” is influencing what I notice (and what I fail to notice: this
patient’s sniffles and coughs have increased, but she seems to have a bit more energy; looks
like therapeutic improvement to me). Confirmation bias comes into play in lots of
situations: the vague predictions of your horoscope seem accurate, because you are
inclined to look for ways they are confirmed and ignore the ways they are wrong.
Eliminating confirmation bias is not easy, but it is hardly impossible. Before we run
the test of LITE therapy, we agree on the standards for improvement in patient condition.
Then we have someone else (who does not know whether the patient being examined is in
the control or the experimental group) evaluate the patient’s condition. That is, the
experiment must be double-blind: The patient does not know if she is in the control or the
experimental group, and the evaluator does not know what group the patient is in. If any
confirmation bias remains (and by having an independent evaluator, it should be
minimized), then it will apply to both the control and the experimental groups, and thus
the effects of the bias will be canceled out.
So if you’re taking a new “natural delight herbal energy boost and serenity
enhancer,” and sure enough you notice that you have more energy and you are becoming
more serene and less bothered by everyday annoyances; well, maybe this new natural
herbal remedy really works. Or maybe it’s the placebo effect. Or maybe you are subject to
confirmation bias: You are simply more attuned to the times when you have greater
energy and greater serenity, and pay less heed to periods of exhaustion and anxiety.
The moral of this story is a simple one: Determining causality is a very difficult
process. There are many ways that careful, honest experimenters can go wrong, and there
are lots more ways that frauds and charlatans can fabricate what appear to be plausible
causal claims. Merely observing that one event followed another, or that there is a
correlation between two sets of phenomena, indicates that there is a possible causal link;
but such observations fall far short of establishing causality.

Scientific Integrity, Scientific Cooperation, and Research Manipulation
The flourishing of science requires trust, trustworthiness, freedom, and openness. When
science is at its best, the scientific enterprise is a special combination of both cooperative
and adversarial critical thinking. Good scientific inquiry builds on a foundation of trust
and openness. Jane’s research—whether in sociology, psychology, biology, physics, or
pharmacology—builds upon and draws from the research of many others. Isaac Newton,
one of the greatest scientists of all time, expressed this idea modestly and accurately: “If
I have seen farther than others, it is because I stood on the shoulders of giants.” Without
the work of Copernicus, Kepler, and Galileo, Newton could never have made his great

Chapter 15

Scientific and Causal Reasoning

295

discoveries. If their work had not been made public, or if their research had been
falsified, then Newton could not have developed his famous laws of motion. And what is
true of Newton’s work in physics is true for all scientists in all disciplines
Effective scientific research is a cooperative process that requires trust and openness.
Research typically builds on the work of other researchers: when those research findings
are hidden (because, for example, someone believes that the research results can be
turned to a profit-making enterprise, and thus keeps the results secret in order to gain an
economic advantage) scientific research is slowed; when the research results are flawed, or
even purposefully distorted (as when a pharmaceutical company manipulates a study to
make a drug seem more effective than it actually is), other researchers who rely on the
honesty and accuracy of that research are led in the wrong direction. When published
research indicates that a new type of drug may be a significant improvement in the
treatment of a disease, not only are those who use the drug deceived, but the researchers
who rely on that research to push their own research in this new and promising direction
will have been led badly astray. Thus, effective scientific research requires a basic level of
trust and cooperation.
Though cooperation is basic to successful scientific research, there is also a vital role
for adversarial argument. In the sciences, all ideas and theories and hypotheses are open
to challenge. If you start from the principle that humans were created by God (and that
humans did not evolve through natural processes), and you hold that principle as an
article of faith and refuse to consider challenges to that principle, then you may call your
position “creation science,” but it is faith rather than science. The best scientific theories
make bold claims and original testable predictions; and open themselves to strong
challenge and possible refutation. A theory that makes very safe “predictions”—and
which makes such careful or uncertain claims that it is protected from challenge—is not
a useful scientific hypothesis; in fact, it may not be a scientific hypothesis at all. Science
grows and develops through bold theories that invite challenge and criticism. A vital
element of good science is the adversarial attempt to refute theories. Sometimes that effort
succeeds, and a theory is rejected; indeed, most scientific theories are ultimately challenged and rejected and replaced, but we learn a great deal through the process of developing the theory and testing its implications (the phlogiston theory of combustion—a
burning fire consumes phlogiston; paper is rich in phlogiston, and iron has little—was a
valuable framework for the research leading to the discovery of oxygen and ultimately to
our theory of gasses). Often the effort to refute a theory leads to major discoveries and
theoretical improvements: For example, when the failure to detect a stellar parallax
challenged the Copernican theory, astronomers began to take seriously the idea that the
distance between the Earth and the stars is much greater than we had imagined. Only
when a theory deals successfully with the most rigorous challenges scientists can devise do
we accept the theory as true. Ideally, this essential adversarial process should remain
cordial and cooperative; in fact, some of the most rigorous challenges to the theory may
be devised by those who hope the theory can meet the challenges. Above all, it must
remain open: when theories are treated as immune to challenge—as the Catholic Church
treated Aristotelian physics and Ptolemaic astronomy theory from the Medieval period
until well into the seventeenth century—scientific inquiry is stifled and scientific development is slowed or stopped. Sadly, the blocking—rather than welcoming—of challenges to
scientific claims can still happen, and the results are still damaging. When a pharmaceutical company wins FDA approval for a drug, it must offer scientific evidence that the drug
is reasonably safe and effective; and when the profits from sale of that drug may amount
to billions of dollars, the pharmaceutical company may not be eager to consider scientific
challenges to the efficacy or the safety of its major moneymaker. Vioxx—a drug developed by Merck to reduce pain, especially for arthritis sufferers, which had annual sales in
excess of $2 billion—has been withdrawn from the market because it was found to
increase the danger of hypertension, blood-clotting, strokes, and heart attacks. Evidence
of the danger from Vioxx became available soon after the drug was released (one study

296

Chapter 15

Scientific and Causal Reasoning

found that patients on Vioxx were five times as likely to suffer heart attacks than were
patients taking an alternative painkiller). But rather than encourage scientific inquiry
that might threaten its profits, Merck exerted pressure to silence its critics: Dr. Gurkipal
Singh, a Stanford University researcher, was told by Merck representatives that his career
would be ruined if he continued challenging the safety of Vioxx. When an in-house study
of aprotinin—a drug marketed by Bayer to control bleeding in surgical patients—
indicated that the drug could cause kidney failure and congestive heart failure, the company suppressed the study. Eli Lilly hid a study showing that Prozac could cause suicide;
GlaxoSmithKline did the same with its study showing that its antidepressant best-seller,
Paxil, might increase the risk of suicide among children and adolescents. A GlaxoSmithKline drug, Avandia, is used in the treatment of diabetes; in 2006 its sales exceeded
$3 billion. When research indicated that the drug increased the danger of heart attacks
(in comparison with a competing drug that produced the same positive results without
the increased risk), GlaxoSmithKline responded by attacking its scientific critics.
Dr. John Buse, Professor of Medicine at the University of North Carolina, was threatened
with lawsuits if he continued to raise questions about the safety of Avandia (and a threat of
legal action by a multibillion dollar corporation with unlimited legal resources is a frightening threat indeed). A report by a bipartisan Senate committee—chaired by Montana
Democrat Max Baucus and Iowa Republican Charles Grassley—found that in response to
the research challenging the safety of Avandia, executives at GlaxoSmithKline:
Attempted to intimidate independent physicians, focused on strategies to minimize or
misrepresent findings that Avandia may increase cardiovascular risk, and sought ways to
downplay findings that a competing drug might reduce cardiovascular risk.

Perhaps the most notorious contemporary case of attacking—rather than welcoming—
scientific criticism is the case of Dr. Nancy Olivieri, a researcher at the University of
Toronto who did research on a drug produced by Apotex (used to treat a rare blood
disorder). Dr. Olivieri discovered that the drug was not very effective, and that the study
indicated the drug might have lethal side effects. Though warned by Apotex not to
publish her results, Dr. Olivieri went ahead with publication. She was fired by the
university (it was later revealed that Apotex was discussing with the university president a
12.7 million dollar donation to the university) amidst charges of wrongdoing; later she
was cleared of all charges, and returned to her university position. Whatever the motive—
whether protecting religious doctrine or protecting profits—the suppression of scientific
challenges has a chilling effect on scientific inquiry.

Exercise 15-3
1. A few years ago, a study was done that showed that hospital patients in rooms with windows
recovered faster (i.e., they were released from the hospital earlier) than patients in rooms with no
windows, and patients in rooms with windows also had a lower mortality rate. It may have been a
reliable, carefully controlled study. But suppose there is a causal study that simply compares
patients in rooms with windows with patients in windowless rooms, and concludes on the basis of
that study that patients in rooms with windows recover faster and are less likely to die in the
hospital. Can you think of some factors that might invalidate that causal claim? That is, it turns out
to be true that patients in rooms with windows recover faster, but it may be that having a window is
not the cause of their swifter recovery. What would be some of the potential causal factors that you
would have to control for in order to do a reliable study on this issue? What are some of the possible
causes for swifter recovery that might be associated with having a room with a window, even if having
a window is not itself a cause of the improved recovery rate?

Chapter 15

Scientific and Causal Reasoning

297

2. Think back to the example at the beginning of the chapter: Does the use of scientific jury selection
techniques cause success for the side employing them? You will recall that one of the problems with
answering that causal question is the fact that the side using jury selection techniques probably also
has the funds to secure other advantages (such as a team of outstanding lawyers). Another problem
in determining whether the jury selection techniques are causally effective is the problem of the
placebo effect: Perhaps it is not the jury selection techniques themselves that are causally effective,
but the fact that use of such techniques increases the confidence of the side that uses them. Suppose
that you are a social scientist—with substantial funding—and you want to find out whether the jury
selection techniques are genuinely effective, whether they are a real cause of success for the side
using them. Describe in detail how you would develop a test or experiment to answer that causal
question. (Obviously you cannot use real cases with real juries; instead, you will have to set up mock
cases with mock juries that simulate as closely as possible the real thing. That, incidentally, is how
much of the jury research is carried out by social scientists.)
3. You are a state public health investigator. A small community, Riverboro, in your state has experienced an unusually high number of thyroid cancers. For a community its size, three to five cases of
thyroid cancer in a 5-year period would be normal; during the past 5 years, Riverboro residents have
suffered 20 cases of thyroid cancer. Your task is to find the cause of this high incidence of thyroid
cancer. Develop in detail a plan for discovering the cause.

Study and Review on mythinkinglab.com

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. There can be a strong correlation between phenomena when there is no causal relation
between them; describe several ways that might occur.
2. What is the placebo effect?
3. What is a double-blind experiment, and why are double-blind experiments used?
4. What is a randomized controlled experiment?
5. What is a prospective experiment?
6. What is the principle of Occam’s Razor?

NOTES
1
2

3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

Quoted in Valerie P. Hans and Neil Vidmar, Judging the Jury (New York: Plenum Press, 1986), p. 90.
For a powerful and disturbing discussion of the inequities in our judicial system—and the difference in
treatment received by the wealthy and the impoverished—see Lois G. Forer, Money and Justice: Who Owns
the Courts (New York: W. W. Norton, 1984).
This example is taken from Darrell Huff, How to Lie with Statistics (New York: W. W. Norton, 1954),
pp. 98–99.
This example is adapted from John Allen Paulos, A Mathematician Reads the Newspaper (New York: Anchor
Books, 1995), p. 137.
Michael Shermer, “Codified Claptrap,” Scientific American (June 2003), p. 35.
This point was suggested in Valerie P. Hans and Neil Vidmar, Judging the Jury (New York: Plenum Press,
1986), p. 91.
Fans of Garrison Keillor’s “Prairie Home Companion” program on Public Radio International will have
no trouble recognizing the inspiration for this example.
Letter to the Editor, Greensboro Daily News.
For more on this example, see Robert L. Park, Voodoo Science (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000),
pp. 28–30.
This story is told in Kendrick Frazier and James Randi, “Predictions after the Fact: Lessons of the Tamara
Rand Hoax,” Skeptical Inquirer (Fall 1981), pp. 4–7.
This case is discussed by Chet Raymo, in Skeptics and True Believers (New York: Walker and Company,
1998), pp. 14–17.

298

Chapter 15

Scientific and Causal Reasoning

INTERNET RESOURCES
Sheldon Krimsky, the author of Science in the Private Interest: Has the Lure of Profits Corrupted Biomedical Research?, has an excellent website on “corrupted science”; go to www.Tufts.edu/~skrimsky/
corrupted-science.htm.

ADDITIONAL READING
Among the classic philosophical works on causality is
David Hume’s Inquiry Concerning the Human Understanding,
Edited by L. A. Shelby-Bigge (Oxford: Open Court
Publishing Company, 1946).
An excellent, more recent study by a philosopher
who is an authority on Hume is John Leslie, The Cement of
the Universe (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1974).
John Stuart Mill’s influential work on causality is A
System of Logic Ratiocinative and Inductive, 8th ed. (London:
Trubner and Co., 1886).
For more on the relation of legal issues to questions
of causation, see the powerful study by H. L. A. Hart and
Tony Honoré, Causation in the Law, 2nd ed. (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1985).
An excellent introduction to causal reasoning in science is Ronald N. Giere, Understanding Scientific Reasoning,
4th ed. (New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1997).
Cynthia Crossen, Tainted Truth: The Manipulation of
Fact in America (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1994), is a
very readable account of how “scientific” research is

sometimes manipulated for the benefit of advertisers and
pharmaceutical companies; the chapter on use of scientific experts and scientific evidence in the courtroom is
especially interesting. Sheldon Krimsky, Science in the
Private Interest: Has the Lure of Profits Corrupted Biomedical
Research? (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2003),
is a powerful account of the problems that have developed as scientific research has become entangled with
the goals of corporate profit.
Marcia Angell—a physician who is the former editor
of The New England Journal of Medicine—has written an incisive critique of flawed research in the pharmaceutical industry: The Truth About the Drug Companies: How They Deceive Us
and What to Do About It (New York: Random House, 2004).
Thomas O. McGarity and Wendy E. Wagner,
Bending Science: How Special Interests Corrupt Public Health
Research (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
2008), is a detailed examination of the misuse and distortion of scientific evidence and scientific studies, especially
in the court system but elsewhere as well.

Read the Document on mythinkinglab.com
Anthony Schmitz, “Food News Blues.” An interesting essay
on the limits and problems of popular press reporting on
science.
Jerome Groopman, “How Doctors Think.” Discusses some of the problems physicians encounter in
drawing conclusions about diagnoses.
Matrixx Initiatives v. James Siracusano, U.S. Supreme
Court (2011). This case involved serious questions of

possible side effects of a drug, and the related causal
questions.
Report of the Kaufman Commission on Proceedings Involving Guy Paul Morin, Executive Summary, pp. 4–9,
“Chapter II” (Ontario Ministry of the Attorney General).
This passage outlines some serious errors of forensic science that contributed to the wrongful conviction of Guy
Paul Morin.

16

❖❖❖

The Truth, the Whole Truth,
and Nothing but the Truth

Listen to the Chapter Audio on mythinkinglab.com
Our main concern has been with what follows from premises: If the premises of this
argument are true, do they give us good and sufficient reason to believe the conclusion?
But obviously that is not all there is to evaluating arguments. It is equally important to ask:
Are those premises really true?
How do we decide whether the premises are true? As noted in the discussion of
assumptions, we don’t always decide. Sometimes—and sometimes legitimately—we
simply start from premises we all accept: premises that we all assume to be true, at least for
the moment. But sometimes we require stronger support for our premises. One common
source of support was discussed in Chapter 10: Appeal to the testimony of an appropriate
authority is one way of attempting to establish the truth of premises. But authorities and
experts aren’t the only ones who testify to the truth of premises. There is another sort of
testimony that deserves special attention: eyewitness testimony.

Figure 16-1

Drawing of seven human heads

299

300

Chapter 16

The Truth, the Whole Truth, and Nothing but the Truth

EYEWITNESS TESTIMONY
In Chapter 10, there was extensive discussion of expert testimony: psychiatrists who testify
about the sanity or insanity of the defendant, ballistics experts who testify concerning
what gun fired the fatal bullet, and so on. But what about eyewitness testimony: the
person who claims to have observed the defendant running from the scene of the crime,
the witness who testifies that she saw the defendant holding a gun on the bank teller,
the individual who swears that he heard the defendant planning the crime? How do we
evaluate such eyewitness testimony?
Cautiously. Very cautiously.
Is the witness telling the truth? That’s an ambiguous question: It can mean two very
different things. In one meaning the question is this: “Is the witness telling the truth as
she remembers it (is she lying or telling the truth)?” But the question can also mean
something very different: “Is this witness—who is trying his best to be honest—really
describing the events accurately, or are his honest efforts mistaken?” In one sense,
“truth” means honesty, and telling the truth is contrasted with lying. In the other sense, “truth”
means an accurate statement, and it is contrasted with error. Thus a witness may be
telling the “truth” (in the sense of testifying honestly to what she remembers) and still be
giving false (erroneous) testimony. This point is made quite elegantly by Hugo Munsterburg in On the Witness Stand:
We are too easily inclined to confuse the idea of truth in a subjective and in an objective
sense. A German proverb says, “Children and fools speak the truth,” and with it goes the
old “In vino veritas.” Of course, no one can suppose that children, fools, and tipsy men
have a deeper insight into true relations than the sober and grown-up remainder of
mankind. What is meant is only that all the motives are lacking, which, in our social
turmoil, may lead others to the intentional hiding of the truth. Children do not suppress
the truth, because they are naive; the fools do not suppress it, because they are reckless;
and the mind under the influence of wine does not suppress it, because the suppressing
mechanism of inhibition is temporarily paralyzed by alcohol. The subjective truth may thus
be secured, and yet the idle talk of the drunkard and the child and the fool may be
objectively untrue from beginning to end.1

Potential Sources of Eyewitness Error
At least four things must be considered when evaluating eyewitness testimony: First, was
the witness in a position to make accurate observations; second, how were the witness’s
observations influenced by the witness’s state of mind, her prior beliefs and expectations,

Mistaken Identity
One of the most famous cases of mistaken identity
involved a Roman Catholic priest, Father Bernard
Pagano. In 1979, Father Pagano was on trial, charged
with six armed robberies that had occurred in
the Philadelphia area. Seven eyewitnesses confidently
identified Father Pagano as the well-dressed, soft-spoken,
and unfailingly courteous “Gentleman Bandit” who
had robbed them at gunpoint. The eyewitness evidence seemed quite convincing, and Father Pagano
was well on his way to conviction for armed robbery,

when another man—Ronald Clouser, who at age 39
was 14 years younger than the taller balding accused
priest—confessed to the robberies. Clouser turned
himself in, stating that he could not live with himself
if he allowed the priest to be wrongly convicted.
Clouser knew details of the robberies that only the
robber could have known, and he was ultimately
convicted of the robberies. The trial of Father Pagano
was halted, and the court apologized to the wrongly
identified priest.

Chapter 16

The Truth, the Whole Truth, and Nothing but the Truth

301

perhaps even by mental disorder; third, in what ways have the witness’s recollection of the
events been influenced during the time between making the observations and giving
testimony; and finally, is the witness testifying to the truth as she remembers it, or is the
witness lying?
Notice that of the four key questions concerning testimony, only one focuses on
the honesty of the witness; three of the conditions are concerned with whether an honest
witness is testifying accurately. Let’s start with those. First, was the witness in a position to
accurately observe the events in question? (Was the light good? Was the car moving too
fast for the witness to get a clear view of the driver? Was the distance too great for the
witness to make an accurate identification? Was the witness wearing his glasses?) It is not
uncommon for people to be so eager to help—they sincerely want to help solve a crime
or make sure that the right person is blamed for an auto accident or perhaps they just
like the importance of being a witness—that they convince themselves they clearly
observed events they could not have seen. Thus it is important for attorneys to ask
about—and for jurors to consider—the situation in which the observations were made:
Is it plausible to believe that the witness could observe what he or she claims to have
observed? Consider this example:
In a very celebrated capital trial . . . the prosecution encountered difficulty in identifying
the prisoner. She was charged with murder and with robbing the home in which the
murder was committed. It was claimed that she left the house and crossed from Brooklyn
to New York in a ferryboat before daylight. A woman was called as a witness for the
prosecution who testified that she saw the prisoner on board, that she knew her, and she
seemed to think she could not be mistaken. Upon being asked on cross-examination why
she was so positive as to the identity, she said that she had not seen her since she (the
prisoner) was a little girl about four or five years old (she was then about forty); but she
identified her by her nose. She was asked if she saw the prisoner’s nose. She said: “Oh no,
I could not see her nose; she had on a thick veil, and, besides, it was dark. But I saw the
impression the tip end of her nose made on her veil, so that I recognized it as the nose
peculiar to her family.”2

Even if the witness was physically in a position to make accurate observations, there
is another question that must be answered: Was the witness’s state of mind such that
she could make accurate observations? Was the witness so frightened that he saw only the
pistol and could not possibly identify the robber? Did the witness’s belief that Jones is an
aggressive bully influence her perception of who actually threw a punch? Was the witness
so prejudiced that he merely assumed—rather than actually observed—that the person
who pulled the knife was the black man rather than the white man?
Observations of criminal activity are stressful—particularly if the observer is the
victim of a violent crime. It is commonly supposed that people observe and remember
more accurately under stress, but experiments indicate that instead of stress improving
perception, it is more likely to weaken it. As Elizabeth Loftus (an authority on the
psychology of eyewitness observation) states,
People are characteristically upset when they see a crime or an accident, the time when the
information that makes up the memory is acquired. Many people think that their memory
becomes more precise at these times. “I was so frightened by him that I’ll never forget that
face” is a common remark of victims of serious crimes. In fact, people who witness fearful
events remember the details of them less accurately than they recall ordinary happenings.
Stress or fear disrupts perception and, therefore, memory.3

Preconceptions. Stress is not the only influence that can distort perceptions. One of
the most important influences on our perceptions—and our memories, and thus our
testimony—is our expectations. A dramatic example of how expectations can influence
perceptions is afforded by the famous study done by Jerome Bruner and Leo Postman.4

302

Chapter 16

Figure 16-2

The Truth, the Whole Truth, and Nothing but the Truth

Drawing of seven animals

They showed subjects cards that were very similar to ordinary playing cards but were
changed in a clear way. For example, they flashed pictures of normal playing cards and of
cards in which the colors were reversed (including a black ace of diamonds and a red two
of spades). Subjects found it very difficult to correctly describe the trick cards; because of
their strong expectations, they frequently “saw” the black ace of diamonds as red, or saw
the red two of spades as a heart rather than a spade, or saw the card as “black and red
mixed” or as “grayish red.”
Look at Figure 16-2. What do you see when you look at these drawings? You see
some clever drawings of ordinary animals, right? A goose, a fish, a rooster, a rabbit, a dog,
a cat, a rat. Now think back to the drawings in Figure 16-1: the sketches of seven human
heads. Do you see any similarities between the bald-headed man—the second drawing in
the second row—and the drawing of the rat? In the first case, the other drawings
influenced you to expect a human head, and that is what you probably saw, but when the
same drawing is placed with animal drawings, you see a rat.5
Preconceptions influence not only the way we see objects, but also the way we
see events. Albert Hastorf and Hadley Cantril6 studied observers’ memories of a
Dartmouth-Princeton football game that had become quite nasty. They found—perhaps
not surprisingly—that Princeton fans perceived that the Dartmouth team was responsible for most of the dirty play, while the Dartmouth fans had seen more dirty play by the
Princeton players. In watching identical films of the game, Princeton fans “saw”
Dartmouth players commit twice as many infractions as were observed by Dartmouth
fans, and the Princeton fans were much more likely to see the Dartmouth infractions as
“flagrant,” while the Dartmouth fans tended to classify the Dartmouth infractions as “mild.”
Along the same lines, it is a quite common occurrence in civil trials concerning the collision of ships that the crews of the ships testify without exception in support of their own
ship and place the blame on the movements of the other ship. Some of that result may
be attributable to pressure from shipmates, but it is likely that much of the conflicting
testimony is simply the result of people “seeing” what they want and expect: their own
ship being navigated correctly, and some other ship committing the violation. In short,
expectations can and do strongly influence what is observed—and thus they can have
terribly distorting effects upon testimony. A person who has strong expectations
concerning some event—and particularly someone who is prejudiced against some of
the participants—may sincerely believe that she is testifying truthfully. But there is a
strong possibility that the witness’s preconceptions are causing false perceptions, false
memories, and false testimony.

Chapter 16

303

The Truth, the Whole Truth, and Nothing but the Truth

Veterinarian Says Flying Objects, Cattle Mutilations May Be Related
(Headline in Sioux City Journal, September 1974)
The 1974 reports of “cattle mutilation” in Nebraska
and South Dakota offer an example of how changed
expectations can lead people to see ordinary events as
bizarre and sinister. During the late summer of 1974,
there were widespread reports of UFO sightings (and
scattered reports of a “monster thing”) in Nebraska and
South Dakota. Around the same time, there was a
report of a “cattle mutilation”: someone or something
had supposedly carried out a bizarre mutilation of some
beef animals in northeastern Nebraska. It did not seem
to be the work of thieves, since the carcasses had not
been stripped of high-quality meat. Since the authorities paid little attention to the question of what had
caused the “mutilations,” speculation quickly took over
and the mutilations were linked with the UFOs and
the monster. Soon reports of cattle mutilations were
rampant: nearly one hundred cases were reported
between mid-August and the end of October.

Who were the cattle mutilators? Extraterrestrials who
had arrived on the UFOs? The “monster thing,” as some
suggested? Or was it members of a Satan-worshipping
cult, as others believed? None of the above. When the
state veterinary-diagnostic laboratories of Nebraska and
South Dakota examined the “mutilated” carcasses,
they found that every one of them had died of natural
causes, and that the supposed mutilations were caused by
predators tearing away soft parts of the dead animals.
Obviously cattle which had been partially eaten by
predators had been seen prior to the mutilation hysteria; but under the strong influence of belief that mutilations were occurring (the newspapers were filled with
headlines about “mutilations,” and law enforcement
officials warned people to watch out for strange incidents) people expected to see mutilations when they
found dead cattle—and that expectation caused many
people to see purposeful mutilations where before
they would have seen merely a partially eaten carcass.7

Observing a UFO
In 1968, the breakup of a Soviet launch rocket provided
an excellent example of how honest witnesses can “see”
remarkable things that are not really there. When the
rocket reentered the atmosphere, it began to break up
into bright, glowing fragments that scattered across
several states. Many people saw the fragments pass high
over head, and filed a number of detailed reports:
A group of observers in Indiana all agreed that they saw
cigar-shaped aircraft with bright windows moving in

silence at an altitude of 1,000 feet; and other observers
saw craft in the shape of inverted saucers, flying in a low
formation. In earlier centuries it might have been a band
of angels, or perhaps sky serpents. But with UFO preconceptions, it is easy to see flaming fragments as remarkably
detailed spaceships. And rather than a group observation
being more accurate, the group members may feed off
each other’s excited reports to become increasingly
confident and unified in their erroneous perceptions.8

When judging the reliability of eyewitness testimony, you must consider whether
the witness was in a position to accurately observe, and you must also consider whether
the witness’s observations may have been distorted by expectations or prejudices. But
even if the witness observes events correctly, the testimony may still be unreliable. The
third thing to consider when evaluating the “probative value” of testimony (lawyer talk for
the reliability or trustworthiness of the evidence) is this: Does the witness accurately recall
what he or she observed?
Filling-in Memories. The accuracy of a person’s memories is a difficult thing
to gauge. Memory is a complicated process, and as all of us are painfully aware, our
memories can play tricks on us. Elizabeth Loftus describes the problem:
Human memory does not work like a videotape recorder or a movie camera. When a person
wants to remember something, he or she does not simply pluck a whole memory intact out of
a “memory store.” The memory is constructed from stored and available bits of information;
any gaps in the information are filled in unconsciously by inferences. When these fragments
are integrated and make sense, they form what we call “memory.”9

304

Chapter 16

The Truth, the Whole Truth, and Nothing but the Truth

Thus some of our memories of events are there because that is exactly what we observed,
but some of our memories are parts that we created—from our assumptions, expectations,
beliefs, imaginations—to fill in the gaps. The problem is, we can’t tell which is which, so
we may honestly testify to something we distinctly remember observing, but which is in fact
a part of our “memory” we filled in (but did not actually observe).
Loftus offers this example of how honest people can confidently fill memory gaps
with elaborate illusions.
Some years ago during a course on cognitive psychology I gave my students the following
assignment: I told them to go out and create in someone’s mind a “memory” for something
that did not exist. . . . One group of students conducted their study as follows: Two female
students entered a train station, one of them leaving her large bag on a bench while both
walked away to check the train schedules. While they were gone, a male student lurked over
to the bag, reached in, and pretended to pull out an object and stuff it under his coat. He
then walked away quickly. When the women returned, the older one noticed that her bag
had been tampered with, and began to cry, “Oh my God, my tape recorder is missing!” She
went on to lament that her boss had loaned it to her for a special reason, that it was very
expensive, and so on. The two women began to talk to the real eyewitnesses who were in the
vicinity. Most were extremely cooperative in offering sympathy and whatever details could be
recalled. The older woman asked these witnesses for their telephone numbers “in case I need
it for insurance purposes.” Most gladly gave their number.
One week later an “insurance agent” called the eyewitnesses as part of a routine investigation of the theft. All were asked for whatever details they could remember, and finally, they
were asked, “Did you see the tape recorder?” Although there was in fact no tape recorder,
over half of the eyewitnesses “remembered” seeing it, and nearly all of these could describe it
in reasonably good detail. Their descriptions were quite different from one another: some
said it was gray and others said black; some said it was in a case, others said it was not; some
said it had an antenna, others claimed it did not. Their descriptions indicated a rather vivid
“memory” for a tape recorder that was never seen.10

The Power of Suggestion. Unconscious filling in can play havoc with memory,
causing an honest and sincere person to affirm as true what may be objectively false.
There are many subtle factors that may influence the way memories are filled in,
including the way questions about the events are asked. Elizabeth Loftus describes an
experiment she conducted with some other researchers that revealed how the way
questions are asked can affect memories:
People viewed films of automobile accidents and then answered questions about what they
saw. The question “About how fast were the cars going when they smashed into each other?”
elicited a higher estimate of speed than questions using the verbs collided, bumped, contacted,
or hit in place of smashed.
Smashed had other implications as well. A week later, the same people were asked, “Did
you see any broken glass?” In spite of the fact there was no glass involved, those who had
been asked the question with the verb smash were more likely to answer yes than the others.11

For a more mundane example of how the wording of questions can affect memories,
consider this case. A number of people were interviewed during market research about
headaches and commercial headache remedies. Half were asked, “In terms of the total
number of products, how many other products have you tried? 1? 2? 3?” Those asked that
question reported trying an average of 3.3 other products. The other half of the interview
subjects were asked, “In terms of the total number of products, how many other products
have you tried? 1? 5? 10?” Those asked the question in that form remembered using an
average of 5.2 other products. In the same survey, half of those interviewed were asked,
“Do you get headaches frequently and, if so, how often?” They answered that they had an
average of 2.2 headaches per week. The others were asked, “Do you get headaches
occasionally and, if so, how often?” The question is almost identical; but the subjects
asked the question in that form reported an average of only 0.7 headaches per week.12

Chapter 16

305

The Truth, the Whole Truth, and Nothing but the Truth

Asking the Right Question
The way a question is framed can influence the answer,
as illustrated by this story by Leo Katz:
. . . two monks, Theophilus and Gottlieb, . . . are quarreling over whether one may engage in smoking and
praying at the same time. Theophilus, an unbending
ascetic, says no. Gottlieb, an easy-going smoker,
says why not. They meet again some weeks later.

Theophilus triumphantly reports, “I took the issue to
the pope. I asked him point-blank ‘Is it permissible to
smoke during prayer?’ and he said ‘Absolutely not.’ ”
Gottlieb protests: “That’s not what he said when
I asked him.” He smiles sheepishly. “Of course I did
phrase the question a little differently. I asked him
‘Is it permissible to pray while I smoke?’ and he said
‘Of course.’ ”13

Nowhere is the danger of suggestion more severe than in eyewitness identifications.
Again, Elizabeth Loftus offers the best account of the problem:
Keep the obliging nature of witnesses in mind, and also the circumstances surrounding a
criminal identification. Usually the police show witnesses several photographs or a lineup.
In both cases the witnesses look at a set of faces to see if anyone appears familiar. Witnesses
know that the culprit may not be in the set, but many believe that the police would not
conduct the test unless they had a good suspect. Although witnesses try hard to identify
the true criminal, when they are uncertain—or when no one exactly matching their memory
appears in the lineup—they will often identify the person who best matches their
recollection of the criminal.14

Even the most carefully conducted procedures of suspect identification may therefore
yield false—but sincere—identifications. Unfortunately, not all lineup procedures are
scrupulously conducted (see Figure 16-3). As Loftus notes,

Figure 16-3

Cartoon—four people in a lineup

306

Chapter 16

The Truth, the Whole Truth, and Nothing but the Truth

But many lineups used in actual criminal cases are grossly suggestive, and the identifications
they produce should be considered worthless. In a lineup conducted in Minnesota, a black
suspect stood next to five white men; in another case, a six-foot-three-inch suspect was placed
in a lineup with nonsuspects who were all under five feet ten inches tall; in a case where the
offender was known to be in his teens, an eighteen-year-old suspect was placed in a lineup
with five nonsuspects, all over the age of forty. In a case I worked on from 1986 to 1988, a
man was accused of murdering eight people on a fishing boat in Alaska. Eyewitnesses had
provided police with a general physical description of the man they saw at the murder scene,
including one very specific detail—the man they saw wore a baseball cap. In the photo
lineup, the suspect was the only person wearing a baseball cap.15

Other problems can arise with identifications on the basis of witness memories.
“Photo-bias” can play tricks on a sincere person’s memory, as indicated by this experiment
at the University of Nebraska:
An hour or so after “witnesses” watched some “criminals” committing a “crime,” they looked
through mugshots that included some of the “criminals” they had seen. A week later, lineups
were staged and the “witnesses” were asked to indicate those who had taken part in the
original “crime.” Eight percent of the people in the lineup were identified as criminals; yet
they had neither taken part in the “crime” nor been among the mugshots. A full 20 percent
of the innocent people whose photographs had been included among the mugshots were
falsely identified also. Despite the fact that none of these people had committed a crime, nor
had they ever before been seen in person, they were recognized from photographs and
identified as criminals.16

Thus seeing photographs can cause an “unconscious transference” in which someone
seen in one situation is confused in memory with persons from a different situation.
Photo-bias is a special problem in eyewitness identification: After being assaulted and
robbed, I go to the police station to look through photographs. I see a mug shot that

Improving Lineups
Lineups are a common means of having eyewitnesses
pick out the person who committed the crime. But even
at their best, eyewitness identifications from lineups are
notoriously subject to error (and as already noted, the
actual lineups are often far from being at their best).
There is probably no way to make lineup identifications
really reliable; but are there ways to significantly
improve the procedure?
As an obvious starting point, we should occasionally use “control” lineups, in which no suspect appears
in the lineup. If I walk into the observation room, fully
expecting that someone in the lineup must be the person
who robbed me, then I am likely to pick out the person
most resembling my memory of the robber (and then
fill in that memory with the more exact image I now
have of the person in the lineup). If instead I know that
sometimes lineups are set up with no suspects included,
as a check on the accuracy of identifications, then I will
be less likely to latch onto someone in the lineup who
has some superficial resemblance to the robber.
Another major improvement would involve “blinding” the lineup: that is, make sure that the person who
observes the lineup with the eyewitness does not know

which person in the lineup is the suspect. Even if the
police officer with the eyewitness is not trying to coach
the eyewitness to pick the “right person” from the
lineup—and sadly, that sometimes happens—the most
conscientious officer may still give the eyewitness subtle
and unintended cues to help in identifying the suspect.
It doesn’t have to be something as gross as “Did you take
a close look at number two?” It could be only that the
officer looks more at the suspect, or speaks differently
to the suspect than to the other persons in the lineup:
when the eyewitness asks person number three in the
lineup to turn sideways, the police officer—who relays
the order to the lineup—might speak more courteously
than when giving the order to number two, the suspect.
Or perhaps when the eyewitness indicates it might be
number three (not the suspect) the police officer
frowns and urges her to take her time; but when the
eyewitness indicates it might be number two, the officer
smiles and says thanks for your help.
Finally, all lineup procedures should be taped, so
that any irregularities in the lineup—that could lead to
mistaken identifications—can be challenged by the
defendant’s counsel.

Chapter 16

307

The Truth, the Whole Truth, and Nothing but the Truth

I think might resemble my assailant. Later the person from the photograph shows up in a
lineup. Now I am certain that he is the man who assaulted me (and by the time I see him
again in court, my confidence in that identification is even stronger). Perhaps I’m right.
But there is also the possibility that my identification is the result of photo-bias: I remember
the person in the photograph, and use that memory to fill in the forgotten face of
my assailant. At that point, my complete confidence in my (mistaken) eyewitness
identification may well persuade the jury to convict an innocent defendant.
Similar memory tricks can occur without photographs. After being held up at
gunpoint, a railway ticket agent observed a police lineup and confidently identified a
sailor as the armed robber. However, further evidence proved that the sailor could not
have been the robber. It turned out that the sailor had purchased tickets from the
railway agent on three occasions prior to the robbery, and thus when the agent saw
the sailor in the lineup, the sailor looked familiar. The agent apparently made an
unconscious transference of the memory of the ticket-buying sailor to the event of the
robbery.17
In short, there are many ways that a sincere witness’s memory may make mistakes:
It may be influenced by subsequent events (such as seeing a photograph); it may fill in
with other beliefs and assumptions (including prejudices); it may be colored by the way
questions are asked; it may latch onto a current image and substitute that image for a
fading and fuzzy memory (as when a witness replaces his vague memory of the actual
criminal with the vivid image of the person standing before him in a lineup). In spite of
all this, eyewitnesses may testify accurately—but it is important to be aware of the pitfalls
and dangers of even the most honest and sincere eyewitness testimony, and to realize
that when an attorney is questioning the way lineups were carried out or the way
identifications were handled she may be raising very significant questions.

Judging the Honesty of a Witness
There is probably a greater problem with sincerely mistaken witnesses than with witnesses
who consciously and purposefully mislead—that is, who lie. Still, the fourth factor to
consider when evaluating witnesses is whether the witness is honest. If we assume that the
witness really could see what happened, that no presuppositions or prejudices clouded

Filling-in Memories
One of the most interesting and ironic cases of mistaken eyewitness identification—based on memories
“filled-in” from other experiences and observations—
involved an experimental psychologist and memory
researcher who found himself charged with a brutal
assault and rape:
Donald M. Thomson, an Australian psychologist
and lawyer, undoubtedly will never forget the day
15 years ago when he walked into a Sydney police station on routine court-related business and was arrested
for assault and rape in a weird turn of events worthy of
an Alfred Hitchcock movie.
The evening before his arrest, Thomson appeared
on a local television program, where he discussed
psychological research on eyewitness testimony and
how people might best remember the faces of criminals
observed during a robbery. As he spoke, a Sydney

woman watching the show was attacked, raped, and left
unconscious in her apartment. When she awoke several
hours later, she called the police and named Thomson
as her assailant.
The following day, after Thomson’s arrest, the
woman confidently selected him as the perpetrator
from a lineup of possible rapists at the police station.
Thomson, of course, professed his innocence.
“The police didn’t believe me at first,” he recalls, “but
I had appeared on a live television show when the crime
occurred, so I had a good alibi.”
Officials quickly dropped the charges when they
realized the woman had unwittingly substituted
Thomson’s televised face for that of the attacker. “She
had apparently watched my television appearance
very closely, but it’s not clear if she ever saw her
assailant’s face,” says Thomson.18

308

Chapter 16

The Truth, the Whole Truth, and Nothing but the Truth

the witness’s perception, that the witness’s memory has not filled in inaccurate details,
and that no suggestions have distorted the witness’s memories, then there is still a final
question: Is the witness telling the truth as he or she remembers it?
We may have difficulty with the sincere but mistaken witness: the witness who is
testifying falsely but honestly believes he is telling the truth. The lying witness is another
matter—surely we can distinguish a liar from an honest person.
Or so we imagine. But like many of our cherished beliefs, that one is probably false.
When we think carefully about it, we realize that distinguishing truthful witnesses from
dishonest ones is a very difficult task. Honest witnesses may—due to nervousness or
shyness or insecurity—give an appearance of uncertainty or even dishonesty. For many
people, speaking in a public courtroom (before a judge, attorneys, a dozen jurors, and
possibly a number of spectators) is a frightening experience. The courtroom and judicial
procedures may be quite familiar to the judge and the attorneys, but they are often
strange and alien to witnesses. When a hostile attorney is subjecting the witness to harsh
cross-examination, in a strange setting, before a crowd of strangers, the situation may be
terrifying. It is hardly surprising that in those conditions an honest witness may become so
nervous that he or she gives the impression of not being quite certain about testimony, or
the impression that he or she is being evasive and dishonest. Furthermore, those with less
education or who have less self-confidence may be more hesitant in answering questions,
and less assertive and forthright in their answers. Jury members might easily conclude that
such a witness is less certain of the testimony being given, while the testimony of a more
confident or “higher status” witness may appear more believable. Whether a witness is
well-educated and self-confident has nothing to do with whether that witness is honest,
but it may have a great deal to do with whether jurors believe the witness is honest.
Several studies have been made of whether it is ordinarily possible to distinguish lies
from honest reports. All indications are that—despite the confidence most people feel in
being able to detect liars—generally we are not able to distinguish liars from the truthful.
In fact, research findings show that people’s ability to distinguish honest witnesses from
liars is no better than chance; that is, if one is attempting to determine whether or not a
person is lying by simply observing that person’s behavior while talking, then flipping a
coin is likely to work as well as watching the person carefully.19
That does not mean that it is always impossible to tell when a witness is telling the
truth and when a witness is lying. It simply means that trying to distinguish a liar from a
truth-teller by watching whether the witness is nervous, squints, answers slowly, smiles
uncomfortably, or has a weak chin is not going to work. The best way of going about that
is by judging carefully the content of what the witness says: Does it conflict with known facts?
Does it contain inconsistencies? Is it inherently implausible? Does it hold together as a
whole? Also, keep in mind that when judging the reliability of testimony it is legitimate and
useful to consider the source of the testimony: Does the witness have a strong reputation for
honesty, or does his past behavior reveal evidence of disregard for truthfulness? Does the
witness have ulterior motives or prejudices?
A “jailhouse informant” is promised a substantial reduction in prison time if he
hears—and testifies to—incriminating statements made while the defendant is in jail
awaiting trial. That strong motive for lying is a much more important factor in judging the
truthfulness of the witness than is a weak chin, beady eyes, or nervous twitch. Listening
carefully to testimony and evaluating it for consistency, coherency, and plausibility is
harder work than merely looking for easy (but inaccurate) “tip-offs” to lying or truthtelling. But as already noted, discovering the truth is often hard work.
Four possible sources for the inaccuracy of eyewitness testimony have been noted: the
witness may not have been in a position to observe accurately; the witness’s preconceptions,
prejudices, or some other influence may have distorted the witness’s observations; even if
the witness’s original observations were accurate, subsequent events and the passage of time
and the filling in of details may have resulted in inaccurate memories of the events; and
finally, the witness may be consciously lying.

Chapter 16

The Truth, the Whole Truth, and Nothing but the Truth

309

Eyewitness testimony is often important, and it should be examined closely. But
the point is, it should be examined, and all the ways it could be misleading and false
should be kept in mind. Even the most sincere eyewitness report can be mistaken, and
unfortunately not every eyewitness is trying to give an accurate report.
In sum, listen carefully and cautiously to eyewitness testimony. It may be accurate
and useful, but there are also ways it can go wrong. True premises are essential for
legitimate arguments; if we mistakenly take false premises for true, it will not be too
surprising if we reach false conclusions. And false conclusions can have unfortunate
consequences: They may lead us to eat the wrong breakfast cereal, buy the wrong car, vote
for the wrong candidate, or convict an innocent person.

Exercise 16-1
1. For each of the following, tell why it would be important to know who is making the statement.
a. I was at the Republican campaign rally for the Republican candidate for governor, and it was
quite successful. There was a huge crowd, at least a thousand people.
b. I was in Chile last week, and while I was there I talked to a great many people. Almost all of
them are very supportive of the present government and think things are getting better in
Chile.
c. I think Old State University’s football team is getting better. I was at their game last week, and,
although they lost, they worked hard and played well the entire game.
d. The Chevrolet Cavalier must be an excellent car. I talked with a number of people who own
them, and they are really pleased.
e. I really don’t think there is any sexual harassment at this college. I have never talked to anyone
connected with the college who has complained of sexual harassment.
f. The president of our university is very popular with the faculty. In fact, every faculty member
I have ever talked with about President Logan speaks very highly of him.
g. I am certain that the person I saw running out of the convenience store with the gun in his hand
was the defendant.
2. Imagine that you are an absolutely unscrupulous district attorney, willing to do anything—including
convicting an innocent person—in order to get a conviction in a particularly notorious criminal
case. (i.e., you don’t much care who is convicted—guilty or innocent—so long as you get a conviction
of someone.) You have two witnesses to the crime—a murder during the robbery of an all-night
diner—but neither is very confident of being able to identify the killer. What could you do to
influence those witnesses so that they will not only identify someone as the killer, but also testify
confidently (you aren’t concerned about whether they testify accurately) that that person is the killer
and that the murder was a particularly brutal one. (Describe the steps you would take, from the first
steps of “identification” to the day of the trial.)

THE WHOLE TRUTH
It’s important that arguments contain true premises, that witnesses tell the truth. It is also
important that arguments and witnesses tell the whole truth. A particularly deceptive style
of argument involves using true premises but omitting or suppressing some points that
would lead to a very different conclusion.
A clear case of omission of important information is an old Shell Oil commercial. You
might remember it. The commercial starts with two identical cars lined up on a track. An
equal measure of gasoline is placed in each car; the gasoline in the two cars is identical,
except that the gasoline in car A contains platformate (the wonder additive that goes in all
Shell gasoline) and the gasoline in car B does not contain platformate. The cars start down
the track. Car B soon sputters to a halt, while car A whizzes along, tears through a huge

310

Chapter 16

The Truth, the Whole Truth, and Nothing but the Truth

banner, and looks as if it could continue forever! The moral of the story: If you want great
gas mileage, then buy New Shell with platformate.
Sounds good, right? Shell gasoline has platformate, gasoline with platformate gives
better mileage—so, since I want better mileage, I think I’ll buy Shell.
It does sound good, and it sold a lot of gasoline. But the commercial left something
out. The commercial did not tell a lie; it just did not tell the whole truth. What important
information was omitted?
Platformate really does increase gasoline mileage. It truly is a valuable gasoline additive. The Shell commercial neglected to mention one thing: Practically all the standard
brands of gasoline sold in the United States at that time contained platformate. So the
fact that Shell also contained platformate was not a good reason to buy Shell rather than
some other brand. That’s an example of suppressed evidence. By failing to mention that almost all gasolines contain platformate, Shell implied that Shell gasoline was unique—
which it was not. The evidence suppressed was certainly relevant and important. Once the
suppressed evidence is included, it is clear that the conclusion—Shell gasoline gives
better gas mileage than other gasolines—does not follow.
Shell is not the only company to advertise a “special feature” of its product while
suppressing the fact that its competitors also have that feature. Since people have become
concerned about having artificial preservatives in their foods, some jam and jelly producers
have begun to put “NO ARTIFICIAL PRESERVATIVES” in bold letters on their labels.
The label is true, but misleading: No jams or jellies contain artificial preservatives, because
sugar is the only preservative agent used in jams and jellies. Since people are now concerned—legitimately—about cholesterol, one company now advertises that its canned
pineapple contains “no cholesterol.” Certainly the advertisement is true: Cholesterol is
found only in animal products, so there is no cholesterol in that brand of canned pineapple.
But if consumers are led to believe that that particular brand of canned pineapple is
therefore different from other brands, then the advertisement is misleading (by suppressing
the fact that no canned pineapple contains cholesterol).
Zest soap used a dramatic television commercial showing a woman holding two
photographs in front of two transparent containers of soapy water. She dipped one of
the photographs into (what the announcer called) “her favorite soap,” the other into the
container with Zest. After rinsing the pictures in clear water, she held them up to the
camera. The photograph from the Zest container had rinsed clear and bright; but
the soap from the other container had left a film on the photograph. The woman then
hammered home the point: “I don’t like the fact that the soap is staying on our skin like
that!” We at home, lounging through another commercial, began to feel a sticky soap
film clogging our pores, and we resolved to buy a few bars of that clear-rinsing Zest. And

Maybe Not the Whole Truth
When the Enron financial scandal became public
(Enron filed the largest bankruptcy in U.S. history in
late 2001, destroying the investments of many stockholders and the pension funds of employees), the close
friendship between Enron CEO Kenneth Lay and President George W. Bush threatened to become embarrassing.
Enron executives had been deeply involved in the Bush
administration development of an energy plan, and
some of the provisions in that plan resulted in large
benefits for Enron; and Enron executives, particularly
Kenneth Lay, had been major contributors to Bush’s

political campaigns. When news broke that Lay had
sought help from high-ranking administration officials
shortly before declaring bankruptcy, reporters questioned Bush about his close relationship with Lay, and
how long it had lasted. “He was a supporter of Ann
Richards [Bush’s Democratic opponent in the campaign
for governor of Texas] in my run in 1994,” Bush
answered. And that was true. But what Bush neglected to
mention was that in that 1994 race Ken Lay and Enron
donated $12,500 to Richards and $146,500 to Bush.
(Information from Texans for Public Justice)

Chapter 16

The Truth, the Whole Truth, and Nothing but the Truth

311

it’s true: Zest does rinse off, it doesn’t leave a sticky film. When a consumer reviewer
(writing for the Atlanta Constitution) tested Zest, Zest did indeed rinse clean, leaving no
sticky film on a photograph. However, the reviewer tested five other standard brands of
soap (Ivory, Palmolive, Dial, Camay, and Coast) and none of them left a sticky film. Zest
does not leave a sticky film, true enough; but neither do any of its major competitors.
Anacin has used a variety of advertising pitches that trade on the same basic ploy:
“Four out of five doctors recommend the pain reliever in Anacin!” “Anacin has the pain
reliever DOCTORS recommend MOST!” True, true; or rather, half true. The “pain
reliever in Anacin” is “the pain reliever doctors recommend most,” since doctors most
often recommend aspirin (as in, “Take two aspirin and call me in the morning”), and the
pain reliever in Anacin is just aspirin. It’s the same aspirin you can buy for a fraction of
the price of Anacin’s slickly advertised version.
Advertising for Triumph—a brand of low-tar cigarette produced by Lorillard—
attempted to win points against a major low-tar competitor, Merit. The advertising claimed
(correctly) that in a taste test of Triumph against Merit “an amazing 60% said Triumph
tastes as good or better than Merit.” Sounds like Triumph won the taste test by a wide
margin, right? Well, not quite. Turns out that 40% preferred Merit, 36% chose Triumph,
and 24% said they couldn’t tell the difference.
Advertisers are not the only ones using half-truths. Not long before Enron’s
falsification of financial records became public and Enron stock crashed, CEO Kenneth
Lay assured Enron employees that Enron stock was a good buy, and told them that he
himself had recently purchased Enron stock. That was true: He had exercised a stock
option to buy Enron stock. What he failed to report to the Enron employees was that he
had recently sold far more Enron stock than he had purchased.
Important social debates can also trade on half-truths and suppressed evidence. In
2009 and 2010, there was a huge struggle over health-care reform in the United States.
One reform package, supported by President Obama and most Democrats, called for
expanding medical care to cover most of the millions of uninsured, preventing insurance
companies from refusing to cover those with pre-existing conditions or dropping from
coverage those who develop major health problems, and placing limits on the increases
in premiums that insurance companies could charge—with the goal of making affordable
health insurance more widely available, and preventing citizens from being excluded
from coverage. In criticizing that plan, Republican Senator Lamar Alexander stated that
if the health reform issue passes, then “for millions of Americans, insurance premiums
will go up.” Economist Paul Krugman had this response to Senator Alexander’s half-truth:
Wow, I guess you could say that he wasn’t technically lying, since the Congressional Budget
Office analysis of the Senate Democrats’ plan does say that average payments for insurance
would go up. But it also makes it clear that this would buy more and better coverage. The
“price of a given amount of insurance coverage” would fall, not rise—and the actual cost to
many Americans would fall sharply thanks to federal aid.

In 2009, the United States spent more than 17% of its gross national product on health
care—far more than any other country in the world—yet millions of U.S. citizens have
no health care, and many others have health-care coverage only periodically or have
severely substandard health care. And the United States—while spending more money
per person on health care than any other country—has one of the highest infant
mortality rates of any industrialized nation. So what should the United States do?
The question of what sort of health-care reforms would work best is an issue of vital
importance that deserves complete and open and honest debate. When the whole
truth is obscured by half-truths, such debate is impossible. And that observation
applies whether the issue is health care, the innocence or guilt of a defendant, or the
quality of a breakfast cereal. But how do we find the whole truth when an important
part of it is hidden from view?

312

Chapter 16

The Truth, the Whole Truth, and Nothing but the Truth

ARE THE PREMISES TRUE?
Getting the truth—and the whole truth—is an essential part of deciding the soundness of
arguments. It is important to question the truth of premises, whether they occur in
commercials, editorials, or courtrooms. But there’s the rub. How do you discover
whether the premises are true? How do you know whether the advertiser is lying to you?
How can you tell whether the editorial writer is omitting important facts? How do you
determine whether the witness is telling the truth? Certainly it’s important to know
whether the premises are actually true and that no relevant information is concealed;
but how can you know?

Digging for Truth
Unfortunately, there’s no easy way. You can lounge in your hammock and analyze
arguments for validity to your heart’s content. Does the conclusion follow from the
premises? That’s a question we can answer without research, observations, experiments,

An Innocent Man on Death Row
In 1976, a Dallas policeman was brutally gunned down
as he approached a car he had stopped. In 1977,
Randall Adams was convicted of the murder. Sentenced
to death, he spent the next 12 years on death row. He
was finally released when evidence that had been
hidden during the trial was uncovered and a key prosecution witness admitted that he (and not Adams) had
killed the policeman, that Adams had not been present,
and that he had testified against Adams to avoid being
blamed himself and also to receive lesser sentences for
other criminal charges.
During the trial a star witness for the prosecution
was Emily Miller, who testified that she drove slowly past
the stopped car as the policeman approached it. She

identified Randall Adams as the man she had seen in the
car that was stopped by the policeman, shortly before
the policeman was murdered. She testified that she had
picked Adams out of a lineup, which was true. What was
left out of her testimony, however, was much more
important than what was included: She came forward
only after she learned that there was a large reward for
evidence in the case; she initially reported that the man
she had seen in the car was African American (Adams is
white); and when she looked at the lineup, she first
identified someone other than Adams—finally identifying Adams only after she was told that she had picked
the wrong man, and after Adams was pointed out to her
as the primary suspect.20

Urban Myths
Starting in 1997, dire warnings began to circulate by way
of e-mail, faxes, and even a business traveler warning
posted by travel agents: Highly efficient medical crime
rings were operating in major American cities. Targeting business travelers who stop by hotel or airport
lounges for a drink, a gang member offers to buy the
traveler a drink, and then slips a drug into the drink.
When the drugged traveler awakens, he is sitting in a
hotel room bathtub, submerged in ice, with a note
instructing the traveler to call 911. The traveler discovers a neat incision in his back, and learns that a criminal
gang of medical experts have carefully removed one of
his kidneys, which has been used for a very profitable
kidney transplant. So beware!

That is, beware of this and other “urban legends”
that make the rounds and gather momentum as they
spread. They take on a life of their own, backed up by
testimony from an elusive “friend of a friend” or “cousin
of a friend of one of my coworkers” or a “reliable source
that told my brother-in-law” (or other impossible-tocheck hearsay evidence). The implausibility of this
story—Why would wealthy surgeons participate in such
a scheme? How would such purloined organs be
checked for tissue matches? Why has there never been a
documented case of such kidney theft reported in the
United States?—does not prevent it from spreading and
gaining wide acceptance?21

Chapter 16

The Truth, the Whole Truth, and Nothing but the Truth

313

or expert authorities. But when we ask about the truth of the premises—and whether
some relevant information has been omitted—we must go out into the cold world and try
to find the facts. That’s hard work.
Suppose you are examining arguments about the desirability of using landfills for
the disposal of solid hazardous wastes, and in an argument in favor of using landfills, this
premise occurs: “The new landfill technology makes it possible to design hazardous waste
landfills in such a manner that there is absolutely no danger of wastes from the landfill
contaminating groundwater.” It’s not difficult to see that that premise is relevant to the
question of whether we should use landfills. In fact, when that premise is combined with
the premise that landfills are one of the least expensive ways of dealing with hazardous
wastes, the result is strong support of the conclusion that we should use landfills for
disposing of hazardous wastes. But is the premise true? We cannot answer that question
by looking more carefully at the argument; instead, we must go out and get reliable
information about landfill technology—and since that is a controversial topic, it will not
be easy to find reliable information that will tell us whether that premise is true.
There’s no simple menu for determining the truth or falsity of premises. Determining the truth of premises means determining the way things are in the world, and that is
what physicists, detectives, historians, economists, meteorologists, sociologists, physicians,
astronomers, microbiologists, consumers, and jurors—indeed all of us at various times—
spend their lives trying to ascertain. There is no easy answer to the question of how to tell
whether the premises are true and complete. I’m sorry about it; that’s just the way it is; it’s
not my fault.
However, a couple of suggestions may help. First, try to get information from a
variety of sources, especially on controversial topics. If you read only one newspaper, you
will get only the news—and the perspectives on the news—that the paper selects. The
same applies even more strongly to watching only one network newscast, in which time
constraints make the selection of news even more important. (Some of the journals of
news analysis do an excellent job of providing detailed reports on topics that newspapers
cover superficially or not at all.) And there are a number of excellent online news
resources that can give you access to news perspectives from around the world. One of the
toughest problems in considering arguments is discovering what has been omitted; to find
what is left out of one source you must examine the same issue as discussed by other
sources. If two sources differ in their premises (one source asserts as a premise that landfills are safe, while another source asserts that all landfills will ultimately leak hazardous
wastes), then you may still have a difficult time knowing which to believe, but at least you
will know which premises must be questioned and examined.

Consider the Source
A second suggestion for dealing with the problem of detecting false premises and
important omissions is this: Consider the source. If the source of the argument has a
special interest in the issue or a special bias, then you should be on guard against false
premises and important omissions. Obviously when you watch a television commercial
you should keep in mind that the commercial is designed to sell you something: The
commercial is not a neutral, unbiased source of information, and you should be alert
for false claims and significant omissions. When the American Tobacco Institute—the
public relations group for the tobacco industry, paid for by the tobacco industry—offers
an argument against restrictions on smoking in public, it is well to bear in mind that the
American Tobacco Institute has a special ax to grind, and you should therefore
scrutinize its premises closely. However, while it is good practice to use special care in
considering whether a biased arguer’s premises are true and whether they omit important facts, it would be wrong to reject an argument simply because the person giving the
argument has a special interest. Knowing that the arguer has a special interest should
make us more cautious in examining the truth of the premises, but it is not a reason to

314

Chapter 16

The Truth, the Whole Truth, and Nothing but the Truth

reject an argument. If the American Tobacco Institute gives an argument against
restrictions on public smoking, then that argument must stand or fall on its own merits.
If the premises are false, or if the argument is invalid, then those are good reasons to
reject an argument. If the source of the argument is biased, that is good reason to give
the argument and its premises special scrutiny—but that is not in itself a reason to reject
the argument. To reject an argument solely on the grounds that the source of the argument is biased or has a special interest is to commit the ad hominem fallacy. Arguments
from interested sources are sometimes sound arguments, just as arguments from
neutral sources are sometimes unsound. However, if rather than arguments you are
examining reports or testimony (when, for example, a pharmaceutical company assures
us that they have tested this new drug and it is quite safe) then consideration of the
special interests and motives and truthfulness of the source is essential.

Exercise 16-2
Below are several claims (the sorts of claims that might serve as key premises in arguments).
Obviously you cannot know, merely by reading the claims, whether they are true or whether they
involve significant omissions. But you can decide what further checks you would want to run, what
further information you would want to obtain, before accepting those claims at face value.
(In particular, think about what is implied by each of these claims and whether they might be
“half-truths,” where what is left out changes the significance of what is included.) For each claim,
state what further information would be helpful in evaluating the claim.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

An apple juice label proclaims in bright letters: “Contains no added sugar!”
A brand of toothpaste advertises: “Contains fluoride, proven effective in combatting cavities.”
A candy company advertises that one of its candy bars is an “official snack food of the 1992 Olympics.”
A power company that operates nuclear power generators claims that its containment procedures
make it all but impossible for dangerous levels of radiation to escape into the atmosphere.
The producer of a powerful commercial herbicide claims that there is no evidence that that
herbicide causes cancer in humans.
A politician asserts that during his term as governor, cocaine use among teenagers dropped significantly.
A politician claims that under her proposed tax cut, most of the people receiving tax cuts will be
middle-class families.
In 1999, a battery-powered Sanyo cheese grater was advertised with the assurance that “this product
is Y2K compliant.”22
Some people are concerned that widespread exposure to toxic chemicals (from insecticides,
pesticides, and pollution) pose a significant and increasing health threat. David Shaw of the
Los Angeles Times wrote an article challenging such claims. In the article he quoted Paul Portney (of
“Resources for the Future”): “If everything is as harmful as we’re told, how come we’re healthier
and living longer than ever before?” To back up this point, Shaw quoted data from the National
Cancer Institute: “The age-adjusted mortality rate for all cancers combined except lung cancer has
been declining since 1950, except for those 85 and over.”
Taken by themselves, these points would seem to suggest that our environment is getting
healthier, not more hazardous; but is anything of importance left out?23

Study and Review on mythinkinglab.com

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What are the major sources of error in eyewitness testimony?
2. What is photo-bias?
3. What are the dangers of eyewitness identifications from lineups?

Chapter 16

The Truth, the Whole Truth, and Nothing but the Truth

315

NOTES
1
2
3
4
5

6
7

8
9
10

11
12

13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23

Hugo Munsterburg, On the Witness Stand (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, Page, 1913), p. 47.
Henry Lauren Clinton, Celebrated Trials (New York: Harper & Brothers, 1897), pp. 347–348.
Elizabeth F. Loftus, “The Eyewitness on Trial,” Trial (October 1980), p. 32.
Jerome S. Bruner and Leo Postman, “On the Perception of Incongruity: A Paradigm,” Journal of Personality,
18 (1949), pp. 206–223.
The drawings were originally developed by B. Richard Bugelski and D. A. Alampay for an experiment
described in “The Role of Frequency in Developing Perceptual Sets,” Canadian Journal of Psychology,
15 (1961), pp. 205–211. Used by permission.
Albert H. Hastorf and Hadley Cantril, “They Saw a Game: A Case Study,” Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, 49 (1954), pp. 129–134.
The story of the cattle mutilations is told in detail in “Cattle Mutilations: An Episode of Collective
Delusion,” by James R. Stewart, in Paranormal Borderlands of Science, edited by Kendrick Frazier (Buffalo, NY:
Prometheus Books, 1981), pp. 288–299; the information in this example is from that essay.
For details on this episode, see Philip J. Klass, UFO’s Explained (New York: Random House, 1974); and an
article by Klass, “UFOs,” In Science and the Paranormal (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1981).
Elizabeth F. Loftus, “The Eyewitness on Trial,” Trial (October 1980), p. 31.
Reprinted by permission of the publishers from Eyewitness Testimony by Elizabeth F. Loftus (Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press). Copyright ©1979 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College,
pp. 61–62.
Elizabeth F. Loftus, “The Eyewitness on Trial,” Trial (October 1980), p. 32.
Reprinted by permission of the publishers from Eyewitness Testimony, by Elizabeth F. Loftus (Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press). Copyright ©1979 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College,
pp. 94–95.
From Leo Katz, Bad Acts and Guilty Minds: Conundrums of the Criminal Law (Chicago, IL: The University
of Chicago Press, 1987, p. 197)
Elizabeth F. Loftus, “The Eyewitness on Trial,” Trial (October 1980), p. 33.
Elizabeth Loftus and Katherine Ketcham, Witness for the Defense (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1991), p. 24.
Elizabeth F. Loftus, “The Eyewitness on Trial,” Trial (October 1980), p. 33.
This example is taken from Patrick M. Wall, Eyewitness Identification of Criminal Cases (Springfield, IL:
Charles C. Thomas, 1965).
From G. Bower, “Awareness, the Unconscious, and Repression: An Experimental Psychologist’s Perspective.”
In J. L. Singer, ed., Repression and Dissociation (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1990).
John E. Hocking, Gerald R. Miller, and Norman E. Fontes, “Videotape in the Courtroom: Witness
Deception,” Trial (April 1978), pp. 53–54.
For details of the Randall Adams case, see Adams v. Texas, by Randall Adams, William Hoffer, and Marilyn
Mona Hoffer (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1991).
For an amusing but instructive study of this and many more “urban legends” or “urban myths,” see
Jan Harold Brunvand’s Too Good to Be True: The Colossal Book of Urban Legends (New York: W. W. Norton, 1999).
I discovered this example in the section of Consumer Reports dedicated to reporting on misleading
advertisements.
This example was drawn from John Stauber and Sheldon Rampton, Toxic Sludge Is Good for You (Monroe,
ME: Common Courage Press, 1995), p. 191.

INTERNET RESOURCES
One of the best websites I’ve ever visited is at www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/dna. The site is
based around a superb Frontline documentary, “What Jennifer Saw.” This is the best site I know of
concerning eyewitness identification. Be sure to check out the section “The Photos,” where you can
try your hand at making a composite picture of a suspect, and see exactly how confusing photo
spreads and lineups can be. (There are connections at this site to other documentary-based sites
done by Frontline; all are worth a visit.)
Elizabeth Loftus, an expert on the psychology of eyewitness testimony, has a home page at
www.faculty.washington.edu/eloftus. It contains many of her articles on eyewitness identification, psychology of memory, problems with claims of “repressed memories,” and a variety of related topics.

316

Chapter 16

The Truth, the Whole Truth, and Nothing but the Truth

Gary Wells, Distinguished Professor of Psychology at Iowa State University and an expert on eyewitness testimony, has a wonderful and very accessible website investigating many aspects of eyewitness
testimony, ways it can go wrong, and suggestions for improving it. Go to www.psychology.iastate.edu/
faculty/gwells.
www.caught.net/cases/eyewit.htm is an interesting site, focusing on cases of mistaken eyewitness
testimony and mistaken identifications.
The Innocence Project has been a major force in increasing awareness of the number of
innocent people who have been wrongly convicted, and they have done remarkable work in helping
to overturn the unjust convictions of many prisoners and freeing inmates who served many years in
prison for crimes they did not commit. Their website—www.innocenceproject.org—is very good, with
many links as well as excellent articles and studies. If you go to their site and then go to “Understand
the Causes,” you will find their very informative material on eyewitness misidentification: one of the
major factors leading to wrongful convictions.
The site of the James Randi Educational Foundation is www.randi.org. James Randi, a magician, is a dedicated and outstanding debunker of pseudoscience and psychic frauds. (Read about
Randi’s “$1 Million Paranormal Challenge!”)
The address for the Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims of the Paranormal is www.csicop.org. They publish Skeptical Inquirer (a delightful journal), and their site features
examination of “paranormal” and psychic claims, and also includes an excellent annotated bibliography.
Factcheck.org (a project of the Annenberg Public Policy Center of the University of Pennsylvania) is a wonderful site for uncovering half-truths in politics and advertising. It attacks deceptive
claims without fear or favor, revealing false and misleading claims from across the political spectrum.
It is far and away the best source for finding and analyzing half-truths.

ADDITIONAL READING
For an excellent account of research on eyewitness
testimony, see “The Reliability of Eyewitness Testimony: A
Psychological Perspective,” by Steven Penrod, Elizabeth
Loftus, and John Winkler, in The Psychology of the Courtroom,
edited by Norman L. Kerr and Robert M. Bray (New York:
Academic Press, 1982), pp. 119–168.
The classic work on eyewitnesses and eyewitness
reliability is Hugo Munsterburg, On the Witness Stand (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, Page, 1913).
A particularly good work is Elizabeth F. Loftus,
Eyewitness Testimony (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1979).
A very readable book, describing cases in which Loftus
has testified, is Elizabeth Loftus and Katherine Ketcham,
Witness for the Defense (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1991).
A disturbing account of mistaken convictions, many
based on eyewitness testimony, can be found in Edwin
M. Borchard, Convicting the Innocent (Garden City, NY:
Garden City, 1932). Borchard, a law professor at Yale
University, wrote the book in response to a district attorney’s statement that “Innocent men are never convicted.
Don’t worry about it, it never happens in the world. It is a
physical impossibility” (From the Preface).
A contemporary study of wrongful convictions can be
found in Actual Innocence: Five Days to Execution, and Other
Dispatches from the Wrongly Convicted, by Barry Scheck, Peter
Neufeld, and Jim Dwyer (New York: Doubleday, 2000).
Focusing on false convictions discovered by the use of DNA
evidence, the book documents a number of mistaken convictions and examines the major factors contributing to
such miscarriages of justice.

Who Will Tell the People: The Betrayal of American Democracy, by William Greider (New York: Simon & Schuster,
1992), is a profound yet very readable book that details and
documents how democracy in the United States has been
corrupted by the vast and concentrated power of special
economic interests, and describes the deceptions and halftruths that are used to cover the process. Greider’s book is
disturbing, but he also includes some positive suggestions
for reclaiming democratic processes.
A book that is very entertaining while also highly
informative is Toxic Sludge Is Good for You!: Lies, Damn
Lies and the Public Relations Industry, by John Stauber
and Sheldon Rampton (Monroe, ME: Common
Courage Press, 1995). It is particularly good on the
deceptions spun by many of the corporations portraying
themselves as “environmentally friendly,” and anyone
concerned with environmental issues will find the book
of special value.
An incisive study of how public opinion is manipulated by half-truths (and sometimes whole lies) is PR!:
A Social History of Spin, by Stuart Ewen (New York: Basic
Books, 1996).
How to Think About Weird Things, 6th ed., by
Theodore Schick, Jr., and Lewis Vaughn (New York:
McGraw-Hill, 2011), contains excellent material (especially Chapter 5) on faulty eyewitness observation and
the development of false (particularly pseudoscientific)
beliefs.
The back inside cover of Consumer Reports is devoted
to misleading advertisements, often involving half-truths
and ambiguities.

Chapter 16

317

The Truth, the Whole Truth, and Nothing but the Truth

Read the Document on mythinkinglab.com
Clive Thompson, “There’s a Sucker Born in Every Medial
Prefrontal Cortex.” A report on how “image” can affect
our sensory and taste perceptions.
Report of the Kaufman Commission on Proceedings Involving Guy Paul Morin, Chapter 3, sections A–D, “Jailhouse
Informants” (Ontario Ministry of the Attorney General).
Describes the severe problems associated with reliance on
the testimony of “jailhouse informants.”

Manitoba Justice, “Jailhouse Informants,” The Inquiry
Regarding Thomas Sophonow.” Gives accounts of some of the
less than reliable testimony offered by jailhouse informants
that led to the wrongful conviction of Thomas Sophonow.
Manitoba Justice, “Jailhouse Informants,” The Inquiry
Regarding Thomas Sophonow. “Eyewitness Identification.” Describes in detail some of the problems that can arise in eyewitness identification, especially when photo lineups are involved.

Cumulative Exercises Three

The following examples cover all the various sorts of arguments examined in this book,
with the exception of statistical fallacies. As always, some are fallacious and some are not.
For each example, first tell what form the argument is (such as questionable cause); then
determine whether the argument is or is not fallacious.
The argument forms we have examined are as follows:
Ad hominem: sometimes a fallacy, sometimes not
Inverse ad hominem: sometimes a fallacy, sometimes not
Strawman: always a fallacy
Irrelevant reason (or red herring): always a fallacy
Appeal to ignorance: always a fallacy
Ambiguity: always a fallacy
Appeal to authority: sometimes a fallacy, sometimes not
Appeal to popularity: always a fallacy
Appeal to tradition (traditional wisdom): always a fallacy
Analogies (deductive, inductive, figurative): sometimes fallacious, sometimes legitimate
Analogical literalism: always a fallacy
Slippery slope: sometimes a fallacy, sometimes not
Dilemma arguments: sometimes the fallacy of false dilemma, sometimes a genuine dilemma
Golden mean: always a fallacy (though it is not inherently fallacious to advocate a moderate
position)
Begging the question: always a fallacy
Self-sealing argument: always a fallacy
Complex question: always a fallacy (though embedded noncontroversial assumptions do not
commit this fallacy)
Modus ponens: not a fallacy, a valid argument form
Modus tollens: not a fallacy, a valid argument form
Denying the antecedent: always a fallacy
Affirming the consequent: always a fallacy
Causal arguments: some are legitimate, some commit the fallacy of questionable cause
1. Felicia Staunton argues that we should lower the legal age for buying tobacco products to 16. She
points out that teenagers who really want to smoke are usually able to obtain cigarettes, and making
that illegal encourages them to make a habit of breaking the law. Also, she argues that making

318

Cumulative Exercises Three

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

319

tobacco legal only for those age 18 and older leads younger teenagers to regard smoking as something adult, and thus makes it more appealing. But before you accept her arguments for lowering
the legal age for tobacco, you should be aware that Ms. Staunton is a major investor in Philip
Morris, the world’s leading cigarette manufacturer, so the more teenagers who are hooked on
cigarettes, the more money she makes. Ms. Staunton’s arguments are designed to increase her
wealth rather than arrive at the truth.
Guaranteeing health-care coverage for every citizen of the United States would be too expensive;
on the other hand, as a wealthy country, it is wrong for the United States to have almost 40 million
people without health coverage. A good solution is to guarantee health care for all citizens under
age 18, but not provide guaranteed health care for all adults.
Obviously we should find the defendant guilty of burglary. He claims that he was nowhere near the
scene of the burglary. On the night of April 19, when a burglar broke into two homes on Glenwood
Avenue, the defendant claims he was home alone watching television, and that he went to bed early
and never even left the house that night. But that’s about the weakest alibi I’ve ever heard! No one
saw him at home, as he admits; he didn’t receive any phone calls that he can remember. And so in
fact he has absolutely no proof that he was at home anytime that night, much less that he was home
for the entire night. Based on that, we must find the defendant guilty as charged.
Downloading copies of songs off the Internet is stealing music that belongs to the performers and
publishers. It’s just like taking a gun and robbing a bank, stealing money that belongs to others: just
because the money is there and you can take it, that doesn’t make it right. Likewise, just because you
have a modem, and the music is there, that doesn’t make it right. Both cases are simply theft. If you
think bank robbery is wrong, then you should also condemn the unpaid downloading of music
from the Internet.
Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, it is now up to you to decide whether Wayne Winston is guilty of
arson. As you consider the evidence in this case, keep in mind the testimony given by Laura
Hammond. She testified that on the night of the fire, just one hour before the fire that burned
down the Winston Shoe Store, she saw Wayne Winston walking into the store carrying a can of gasoline. And Laura knows Wayne Winston well, and her eyes are very good, and so she was unlikely to
be mistaken. Furthermore, Laura has no motive whatsoever for lying about what she saw: she is not
getting any reward or benefit for her testimony; in fact, she had to give up part of her vacation to
come here and testify. And she has a strong reputation for honesty, and is well known in the community for being a reliable and trustworthy person.
There are those who want to restrict the amount of money that private citizens can give to political
campaigns. It may sound like a good idea to have politics less dominated by money. But watch out!
Once there are laws limiting how much money you can give to politicians, next will come limits on
how you spend the rest of your money: there will soon be limits on how much you can spend on
medical care, and how much you can spend to send your kids to college. And before you know it,
you’ll need government permission to buy your kid a birthday present, and a government permit to
buy a cup of coffee at the local diner. If you don’t want the government controlling every dime you
spend, then don’t let them get a foot in the door: vote against this dangerous proposal to limit private contributions to political campaigns.
Art Sinn has been recommending that people buy vacation condominiums in the new Mahoning
River Woods development. He says that the Mahoning River will soon become a major vacation
spot, and the condominiums will quickly increase in value, and are thus an excellent investment.
Well, maybe. But before you rush out and drop a hundred grand on a Mahoning River Woods
condo, you ought to know that Art Sinn is making a hefty commission on every condo sold; and the
last condo development he pushed, Green Lake Leisure Condos, turned out to be a real bust, and
the buyers wound up losing a lot of money.
Look, don’t worry about it, riding with Bill is perfectly safe. Of course if Bill were not sober, then it
would not be safe to ride with him. But he is sober: he hasn’t had a drink all day. So it is safe to ride
with Bill.
Some people complain that the U.S. drug companies charge excessive prices for the drugs they sell,
and that the excessive prices and excessive profits of the pharmaceutical industry cause hardships
for many people who need the drugs. But those people who complain about the high costs of drugs
apparently believe that the researchers, salespeople, managers, and workers in the drug industry
should just work for free, and that stockholders and investors in the drug companies should not be
allowed to make any return on their investments, and that the drug companies should just manufacture and then give away for free any prescription drug that anyone needs or wants. Obviously if

320

Cumulative Exercises Three

10.

11.

12.
13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

they got their way, the entire pharmaceutical industry would quickly go bankrupt, and then no one
would produce the drugs that are so vital for our health and well-being.
For several years, there has been controversy about allowing snowmobiles in Yellowstone National
Park. One argument given by those who oppose snowmobiles is that in the winter, Yellowstone is
beautiful and quiet, and in the wonderful stillness one can experience a sense of the sublime, and
can quietly commune with nature in its pure essence; they say that allowing noisy snowmobiles into
the park would be like allowing loud noise in a symphony hall: it disrupts the whole experience, it
makes it impossible for those who want to enjoy the sublime sounds of music to really have that
experience. But that comparison is absurd. When you are listening to an orchestra concert, you are
listening to beautiful sounds; when you are at Yellowstone in winter, you are experiencing silence,
rather than trying to listen to music.
There has been a proposal that the university holiday decoration include a large Christmas nativity
scene on the lawn between Kilcawley and Cushwa Halls, complete with angels and music and a large
star of Bethlehem. Some people object that the university should not have a nativity scene on campus, because that would be an endorsement of Christianity and would violate the requirement that
state schools not endorse religions. But a nativity scene would not be an endorsement of Christianity.
After all, nativity scenes are very beautiful, and many people enjoy them, and a beautiful nativity
scene would probably encourage many area residents to visit the university campus over the holidays.
So a nativity scene would not violate the rule that state schools cannot endorse religions.
If everyone fails this final exam, then it is too hard. But certainly not everyone will fail this final
exam, so clearly the exam is not too hard.
I went online and bought a term paper on colonial history—I paid $25 for it!—and turned it in to
Dr. Meredith for my early American history seminar term paper; and she had the nerve to give me
an F on the paper, and claim that I cheated! That’s just totally unfair. I bought the paper with my
own money, it belonged to me, and so I had the right to use the paper any way I wished. Suppose
you buy a car, and pay for it with your own money. You didn’t make the car, but when you pay for it,
the car belongs to you and you can do whatever you wish with it: you can drive it, or sell it, or give it
to a friend. Likewise, when I bought the term paper with my own money it was mine, even though
I didn’t actually make it; and therefore I should be free to do whatever I wish with the term paper:
read it, give it to a friend, or turn it in for my class.
Why does President Obama want to destroy our health-care system? Is it some sort of hatred for
doctors and nurses? Or is it because he is young and healthy, and so he doesn’t see the importance
of health care?
If there was no effective communications in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina, then the
Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA) did a lousy planning job. So obviously
FEMA did do a lousy job, because New Orleans did not have effective communications after
Hurricane Katrina.
On the campus of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, in the main entrance
quad-rangle, there is a large statue of a Confederate soldier, in honor of the Confederate soldiers
who fought during the Civil War. Some people are now complaining about the statue: they say
that it is wrong for the university to have a statue honoring those who fought to preserve slavery.
But in fact the statue has been there for more than a century, and for almost that entire time
there were no complaints; to the contrary, for many decades the statue was a special beloved part
of the university—the students nicknamed the soldier in the monument “Silent Sam.” Silent Sam
has been a part of the University of North Carolina for over a century, and so it would be wrong
to remove him now.
In the main quadrangle of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, there is a large statue of
a Confederate soldier, as part of a memorial honoring those soldiers who fought for the Confederacy. The statue has become controversial, because many students believe that it is wrong for the
university to have a monument honoring those who fought to preserve slavery. Some suggest that if
we place a statue honoring some abolitionist—such as Sojourner Truth—nearby, that will solve the
problem. Now a statue honoring Sojourner Truth would be a fine thing, but it won’t solve the
problem. Look, suppose someone had erected a statue honoring Adolph Hitler or Nazi prison
guards; if we now placed a monument nearby honoring the brave Jewish resistance fighters in the
Warsaw Ghetto, that would not make everything fine: we still shouldn’t have a statue honoring the
Nazis. Likewise, we shouldn’t have a monument honoring those who fought to preserve slavery,
whether we have some monument in honor of the abolitionists or not.

Cumulative Exercises Three

321

18. Recently there has been controversy over whether the parking deck between Cushwa and
DeBartolo is safe. Well, I happened to be walking through that parking deck with Terbucky, who is
a professor in the psychology department, and a brilliant researcher whose work has been
published in the top psychology journals in the world. Professor Terbucky looked carefully at the
parking deck, and she said it was structurally sound and perfectly safe. That should settle the issue:
when Professor Terbucky says the deck is safe, you know it’s really safe.
19. If we did not have effective means of controlling and alleviating severe pain, then active euthanasia
(mercy killing) would be morally acceptable. But through medical advances we now have very
effective methods of controlling and alleviating even the most severe pain. So obviously active
euthanasia is not morally acceptable.
20. Several studies have shown that Scotch drinkers have an average income that is almost twice as high
as the income of people who do not drink Scotch. So clearly if you want to make money, you should
drink Scotch: I don’t know what it is, but there must be something about drinking Scotch that
causes people to make more money.
21. Some people are concerned about the effects of the enormous amount of violent and hardcore
pornography on the Internet, and the easy access that children have to such sites. But such Internet pornography sites are not really a danger to our children. The Internet is in fact one of the
greatest educational resources in the world: students, even including very young children, can
easily explore a vast range of topics, finding material for their papers and just browsing to explore
anything from dinosaurs to space travel. It is like having a vast library at your fingertips, a wonderful and constantly updated world encylopedia, an opportunity to meet people and explore cultures
all around the world. When we put the whole thing in perspective, it is clear that there is no danger
to children from Internet hardcore pornography.
22. Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, we have presented you with solid, substantial evidence to show
that Happy Nose cold remedy is in fact a dangerous and hazardous drug that has caused a number
of cases of kidney damage and even complete kidney failure in the unfortunate people who took
this drug. As you recall, the defense called Dr. Jones, an “expert on drugs and pharmaceuticals,”
who testified that in his expert opinion the kidney damage was merely coincidental, and that there
was nothing in Happy Nose cold remedy that could have caused kidney damage. But as you weigh
Dr. Jones’s testimony, keep in mind that he makes his living—and a very handsome living—by being
a hired gun who testifies for drug companies that are being sued. He has appeared in 14 different
cases over the last 6 months, testifying about drugs that patients had claimed to be harmful, and in
every one of those cases he testified that the drug in question was not harmful. And in every one of
those cases, he received a consulting fee of $50,000, plus an additional fee of $1,000 for every hour
of testimony! Dr. Jones claims to be an “impartial expert” on drugs; but when he is being paid over
$50,000 for his testimony, do you really think he is just an impartial expert?
23. You remember our discussion of whether jurors were allowed to discuss a case during the trial,
before the case goes to the jury? I said that they were not permitted to discuss the case during the
trial, and I was right! I talked to F. Lee Bailey, Marcia Clark, Cardozo Law School Professor Barry
Scheck, and Supreme Court Justice Alan Souter; all agreed that jurors are not allowed to discuss
cases while the trial is still in progress.
24. Darling, you shouldn’t be angry at me; I’ve never been unfaithful to you. OK, I admit that I did
spend that weekend with Tony, and then there was that time I had a little fling with Robert, and last
year I did slip off to Abe’s apartment a few times during lunch, and maybe there were one or two
others. But I wasn’t really cheating on you, because I was always faithful to you in my heart, even if
my body occasionally strayed. So I’ve never really been unfaithful.
25. When you download music off the Internet, you are basically stealing that music from the artists
and composers and producers who own the rights to that music. And maybe you think taking a
song or two or three is not such a big deal. But if you think it’s okay to steal music, then maybe
next you will think it’s okay to shoplift a few items when you’re visiting the mall, and soon you’ll
be embezzling money from your employer, and from there it’s not far to holding up convenience
stores and robbing banks. So to avoid a life of violent crime, don’t start with stealing music
through the Internet.
26. The United States has recently passed legislation suspending some of our basic liberties, such as the
right not to be held in prison without being charged, and the right of private conversation between
attorneys and their clients, and the right of an accused person to know who his or her accusers are.
There is some opposition to this suspension of our liberties, but in fact the suspension is perfectly

322

Cumulative Exercises Three

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

justified. After all, the United States is at war, and we have always suspended liberties in war time:
During the Vietnam War, we limited the freedom of the press; during World War II, we placed
severe restrictions on freedom of speech and also held many Japanese people in prison without
bringing charges against them; and similar things happened in the Civil War. So there’s nothing
wrong with suspending liberties during the war on terrorism; it’s what we have always done in times
of war.
We are now embroiled in controversy over whether to drill for oil in the Alaskan wilderness area.
The Bush administration wants to open the entire area to oil exploration, while environmentalists
want the area preserved in its natural wilderness state with no oil drilling. But there’s no reason this
controversy cannot be resolved reasonably: obviously the right solution is to keep half the wilderness area wild and not allow drilling there, but open the other half for oil wells.
Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, you have listened carefully to all the evidence and all the testimony in this case. As district attorney, I ask that you find the defendant guilty of the charge of bank
robbery. And as you deliberate your verdict, I want you to especially remember the testimony of Lisa
Falcone, the bank teller who was robbed. She testified, under oath, that the defendant was the man
she saw rob the bank. Now clearly Lisa Falcone has no motive for lying or deceiving, and I think you
must conclude that she is a truthful witness, who went into the witness box and swore to tell the
truth and did tell the truth. And she testified that the defendant was the man who robbed the bank.
If you believe that she was testifying truthfully, then you must conclude that what she told you was
the truth: that the defendant really was the man who robbed the bank.
We are now spending millions of dollars on increased airport and air travel security. But it’s a total
waste of time and money. Either the new security measures must make air travel absolutely safe, or
they are totally useless. But there’s no way airport security measures can make air travel perfectly
safe; after all, there is always the possibility of pilot error or mechanical failure. So clearly we must
conclude that the airport security measures are useless.
We recently did a study of graduating seniors, and we found that students who made a grade of A
in critical thinking were significantly more likely to graduate with honors than were students who
had never taken critical thinking. So clearly doing well in the critical thinking class causes students
to make higher grades in all their classes.
If the United States had adequate banking and financial market regulation, then we would not have
had massive bank failures and the bankruptcy of major insurance and investment companies. But
we certainly did have those bank failures and bankruptcies. So clearly the banking and financial
market regulation in the United States is not adequate.
Our economy is going through a rough patch right now; but that should not lead people to worry
about the basic health of the U.S. economy. In fact, the U.S. economy is still basically in good shape,
because the U.S. economy is fundamentally sound and healthy.
The United States tortured some of the prisoners now being held in Guantanamo Bay Military
Prison—they were waterboarded, beaten, deprived of sleep for long periods, exposed to long
periods of cold, and spent many hours chained into stressful positions from which they could not
move. Some people say that the confessions that these prisoners gave after being tortured should
not be used against them in court. But that’s silly. Look, think of medical experiments. Sometimes
people who volunteer for those experiments suffer harm; but we don’t conclude that because
someone suffered harm during the experiment, we should throw out all the information we gained
from the experiment. So likewise, just because the prisoners suffered harm from being tortured,
that doesn’t mean that we should throw out the information—the confessions—we gained from
the torture.
Jimmy Carter is a warm, generous man, who since serving as president has devoted his life to working with Habitat for Humanity to provide homes for the homeless, and who has worked tirelessly to
promote democracy and stop conflicts around the world. Carter argues that the United States
should negotiate with the Hamas movement, because Hamas is a major force in the Middle East
and the elected government in Gaza, and that therefore we cannot have real peace in the Middle
East without serious talks and negotiations with Hamas. There are those who say that Hamas is a
terrorist group, and that we should never talk with Hamas. But if someone as self-sacrificing, sincere, and dedicated to peace as Jimmy Carter argues in favor of negotiating with Hamas, then
clearly his argument should carry special force, and so negotiating with Hamas must be a good idea.
There were many great artists of the Renaissance period—Michelangelo, Da Vinci, Raphael, and
many others. Some art experts say Da Vinci was the best, some say Michelangelo was greatest,

Cumulative Exercises Three

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

323

some favor Raphael, and others have their own favorites. But my art history professor—Alice
Krokowski, who has her doctorate in art history from Yale—says that the greatest of all Renaissance artists was Albrecht Durer. So that should settle it: Durer was the greatest artist of the
Renaissance period.
The defendant is guilty of breaking or entering only if she intended to commit a felony when she
entered the house. Now certainly she had no intention of committing a felony when she opened
the door and walked in: She saw the “for sale” sign in the yard and was simply looking the house
over with the idea that she might like to buy it. Therefore, the defendant is not guilty of breaking
or entering.
A recent study showed that people who drink at least two glasses of wine each day are generally
healthier than people who do not drink wine. It’s clear, then, that drinking wine every day is good
for you.
If the United States had been a democracy in 1800, then all adult U.S. citizens would have had the
right to vote. But certainly it was not the case that all U.S. citizens could vote: women, African
Americans, and people without property were all denied the right to vote in 1800. So clearly the
United States was not a democracy in 1800.
This whole debate about gay marriage is really very easy to settle. Certainly we do not want to deny
all rights to gays: that would clearly be wrong. On the other hand, there’s no need to go to the other
extreme, and allow gays all the rights that heterosexuals enjoy, including the right to marry.
Obviously the best solution is to allow civil unions for homosexual couples, but not allow homosexual marriage.
Bruce is guilty of check fraud only if he knew there was no money in his account. But Bruce
certainly did not know that there was no money in his account: he is a complete idiot about everything related to finances. So Bruce is not guilty of check fraud.
Closing argument to the jury by the district attorney in a murder trial: “Counsel for the Defense has
entertained us with the ever-popular defense that lawyers call SODDI: Some Other Dude Did It. But
as you consider your verdict, keep this in mind: the defense lawyer never told you who that other
dude is, and never gave you any evidence that he—whoever that dude is—is the murderer. So if the
defense can’t prove some other dude did it, you should find the defendant guilty as charged.”
Almost every authority on health and smoking—the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the
American Lung Association, the American Cancer Society, and health researchers throughout
Europe and North America—agree that secondhand smoke (sometimes called passive smoke or
environmental tobacco smoke) causes lung cancer. So we should acknowledge the fact that secondhand smoke causes lung cancer.
Almost every authority on health and smoking—the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the
American Lung Association, the American Cancer Society, and health researchers throughout
Europe and North America—agree that secondhand smoke (sometimes called passive smoke or
environmental tobacco smoke) causes lung cancer. But there is an exception: Gary Huber was a
professor at the University of Texas, where he ran a health research center. Professor Huber has
published a number of articles on secondhand smoke, and Professor Huber maintains that secondhand
smoke poses no health risks. But there’s something you should know about Professor Huber: He
receives enormous sums of money from the tobacco companies. During his few years at the University
of Texas, he was paid $1.7 million by the tobacco companies—in secret payments—for writing and
speaking against research showing links between secondhand smoke and health problems, and over
the years he received more than $7 million in tobacco company funds. So Professor Huber is very
well paid for his “expert opinion” that secondhand smoke does not cause health problems; so well
paid that it casts doubts on his status as an objective expert (Information for this case drawn from
Sheldon Rampton and John Stauber).
Look, we all agree that every child, rich or poor, should be provided with a decent education, since
without a good education one does not have a real opportunity to succeed, right? So likewise, we
should also make sure that every child has good health care, since lack of good health care also
destroys a child’s opportunity for success: a child who is sick or chronically unhealthy is deprived of
opportunity, just like a child who is not taught to read or write.
Some people believe that we should legalize marijuana for medicinal purposes: for example,
marijuana can be very effective in relieving severe nausea following certain types of cancer treatments. But it would be a mistake to legalize medicinal marijuana, because we should never legalize
marijuana for any use whatsoever.

324

Cumulative Exercises Three

46. Critical thinking is obviously a worthless class, because either learning about critical thinking
will make you wealthy or critical thinking is worthless. But it’s perfectly clear that learning to
think critically will not make you wealthy. After all, Bruce knows about critical thinking, and he’s
poor as a church mouse. And in fact if you look at the people who teach critical thinking, they
all look pretty seedy: not a wealthy person in the bunch. Therefore, the critical thinking class is
worthless.
47. The people who are pushing for increased airport security claim that they can make air travel
completely safe from terrorist attacks. But of course they are sadly mistaken. After all, even if we
have much better security checks in the airports, there’s always a chance that terrorists could shoot
down an airliner with a surface-to-air missile; or some terrorist might become a professional airline
pilot and pass all security checks and then crash the plane; or even if we prevent any passenger from
carrying weapons, some passenger who is a karate expert might overpower the crew and crash the
plane. So obviously those people who want better airport security, and who believe that they can
find fail-safe methods of stopping terrorist attacks against passenger planes, are just wrong.
48. Congressman Jim Traficant was recently convicted of taking kickbacks and payoffs while in office,
and now he is serving a term in prison. But really, what he did wasn’t so bad. Sure, he took some
payoffs for helping people get government contracts, and he took kickbacks from some of the office
staff he hired. But think of it this way: Suppose you were baking some cookies for a friend, and while
you’re mixing the cookie dough and spooning the cookies out on the baking sheet, you take just a
few bites of the cookie dough. There’s nothing wrong with that, is there? You’re not stealing cookies, you’re just taking a little taste. Well, that’s really all Congressman Traficant was doing: he was
just taking a little taste of the contracts, jobs, and deals that he was cooking up. Nothing to get
excited about, and certainly not any reason to send him to prison.
49. There are those who want to allow the medicinal use of marijuana, especially for the relief of pain
for those undergoing cancer treatments. It sounds like a good idea at first, but consider the longer
view: If a cancer patient is allowed to use marijuana, then that patient’s legal marijuana will be readily available to the family members and friends of the patient; and then cancer patients, in order to
raise some extra money for their expensive treatments, will begin to sell the marijuana to nonpatients. And once they start to sell marijuana, it’s a very easy step to selling other drugs like cocaine
and heroin. So if we want to avoid a major expansion of the market in illegal drugs, we must not
allow the medicinal use of marijuana.
50. If the U.S. unemployment rate were over 10%, then the U.S. economy would not be healthy. So clearly
the U.S. economy is in good shape, because the unemployment rate is certainly lower than 10%.
51. If Ohio did not have a lottery, then our schools would not have enough money. But Ohio does have
a lottery. So obviously our schools do have sufficient money.
52. During this entire week of final exams, the University Library has been open extended hours,
usually until midnight every night. And during the same period, it is obvious that university students
have been more stressed, irritable, worried, and tired. Obviously having the library open for
extended hours is causing greater stress, worry, and exhaustion for our students, and such extended
library hours should be stopped immediately.
53. Martin Fielding argues that we should make a major investment in our transportation system, and
make the needed repairs on our highways, railroads, and bridges. He notes that the federal budget
provides lots of money for building new bridges and highways, but very little money for maintenance of existing bridges and highways; and that state budgets have been very tight for many years,
and so states have not had enough money to make the needed repairs and do the essential upkeep.
And Fielding points out that the bridge collapse in Minneapolis cost many lives and even more
injuries, and that there are bridges in similar need of repair posing potential dangers all over the
country, and that therefore we should spend the money needed to make extensive needed repairs.
But before you accept Fielding’s argument, consider this: Martin Fielding owns a major bridge
construction and repair company, and if there is more money for bridge repairs then Fielding will
probably make a bundle of money. When you factor in Fielding’s financial stake in this question, his
argument loses all plausibility.
54. If we have real doubts that the defendant committed the crime, then we should find the defendant
not guilty. So clearly we should find the defendant not guilty, because we do have real doubts about
whether he committed the crime.
55. If you do not make any mistakes on this exam, then obviously you are sober. So clearly you are not
sober, since you did make a mistake.

Cumulative Exercises Three

325

56. Look, if you are in an auto accident and have to go to an emergency room, whatever you do, stay at
our little local hospital, and don’t let them transfer you to the big Capitol City Hospital Trauma
Center. Because it turns out that the mortality rate at the Capitol City Trauma Center is much higher
than at our local emergency room! That is, a higher percentage of Capitol City Trauma patients die
than do patients at our local emergency room! So obviously you get better medical care at our local
hospital emergency room than you would at Capitol City Trauma Center.
57. Allowing children to watch too much television is likely to have bad long-term effects. They
watch passively, and thus get less exercise and tend to snack more, so they gain weight, become
lethargic, are slower, and are less competent in sports. Then they may be ridiculed when they
attempt sports or exercise, and that may cause them to avoid sports and perhaps turn to television and food for comfort. Thus when they start watching excessive television, the result may be
a spiral of lethargy, increased weight, absence of exercise, and eventual depression that spins
ever deeper.
58. Clearly the courts in London used to go too far in inflicting the death penalty: They hung people
for the theft of a few scraps of food, for pickpocketing, for a whole host of minor crimes. But on the
other hand, we should not go so far as to entirely eliminate the ultimate criminal penalty of capital
punishment. The right policy, then, is to keep the death penalty, but only as punishment for the
most awful and hideous crimes.
59. The Senate seat held by Senator Foghorn, who recently died, should be given to Senator Foghorn’s
wife. After all, if a person who owns a grocery store dies, the grocery store normally goes to the
person’s spouse. In the same way, now that Senator Foghorn has died, his Senate seat should go to
his wife, at least for the remainder of his term.
60. Jill is guilty of breaking and entering only if she did not have Joan’s permission to enter Joan’s apartment. But Jill certainly did have Joan’s permission, as Joan herself testified. Therefore, Jill is not
guilty of breaking or entering.
61. We must either do random drug testing of all segments of society or abandon all efforts to stop the
use of illegal drugs. Now certainly we cannot abandon our efforts against illegal drugs, for illegal
drugs are causing addiction, increased crime, and, with alarming frequency, death. Thus, even
though it may seem an extreme measure, we must do random drug testing of all segments of
society.
62. It has often been claimed that the U.S. Air Force keeps a secret file—a top-secret “green book”—
containing conclusive evidence of extraterrestrial visitations to Earth. Now of course the Air Force
always denies such a secret file, but they have never provided one shred of hard evidence to prove
that such a file does not exist. Until they offer such proof, it is only reasonable to conclude that
there really is such a secret file.
63. Some people argue that capital punishment is necessary, because it is the only appropriate punishment for those who commit the most atrocious and depraved crimes. However, we should not pay
any attention to such arguments. It is well established that those who argue for capital punishment
are usually people who see themselves as helpless and inadequate in a changing, complex world,
and subconsciously such people see capital punishment as a way of striking back at a confusing
world.
64. No one who has really experienced faith healing ever doubts that a spiritual power, beyond anything
in the natural world, genuinely exists and can miraculously heal the body and soul. Of course some
claim to have had similar experiences that they try to explain away as merely natural psychological
processes; but such persons obviously have never felt the real miraculous healing of true faith, since
those who have that true experience can never doubt it.
65. Industrial pollution is not harming our environment. Pollution control devices are very expensive,
and they raise the prices American consumers pay for manufactured products. Also, if American
industry must spend money on pollution control, that will make American industrial products
more costly, and will thus make it more difficult for American-made products to compete in the
international market. Therefore, our environment is not being damaged by industrial pollution.
66. I had been wondering what would be a good nutritious breakfast, but now I know! Just yesterday
I saw Michael Jordan, one of the finest basketball players of all time, on television, and he recommended eating Wheaties. Well, Michael Jordan is an NBA all-star, so if he says Wheaties are the right
cereal to eat, then they must be, so I’m going to take his advice and eat Wheaties.
67. Meetings of the U.S. Senate Budget Committee should be closed and confidential, because
obviously the discussion of the Budget Committee should not be open to the public.

326

Cumulative Exercises Three

68. Now that you are the manager of this store in our chain, you will have the opportunity—and the
temptation—to “manipulate” the books: for example, to show more profit than the store really
made during one quarter in order to impress the regional manager. But don’t do it! For if you overstate the profits a bit this quarter, then the profits next quarter will seem especially low—and you’ll
be even more tempted to make larger exaggerations to keep the profits increasing; and having
done it once, it will seem easier to do it a second time. And those exaggerations will have to be
covered up with other falsifications. Before you know it, you are deeply enmeshed in a web of fraudulent accounting records from which you cannot extricate yourself. Better not to ever start with
those small manipulations of the books.
69. It is sometimes claimed that an artist who creates a model for a sculpture and then has someone else
actually do the sculpting is still really the artist: like a composer who writes a symphony and then has
an orchestra perform it. The composer doesn’t play the instruments, but is still the artist; and in a
similar way, some people claim, the artist who creates the model doesn’t actually use a hammer and
chisel, but she is still the artist. But that’s not a good comparison, because sculptors work with solid
materials like marble or steel and composers work with sounds.
70. Janie Jenkins insists that we should avoid using drugs. She argues that nicotine, marijuana, cocaine,
and amphetamines all are proven to be dangerous to health, that they can be addictive, and that at
the very least they impair intellectual abilities. But then it turns out that Janie drinks a full bottle of
Scotch whiskey every evening—and certainly alcohol is also a drug, and it can also be dangerous to
health, and drinking large quantities of whiskey can certainly be detrimental to one’s intellectual
abilities. Janie has no business arguing against drugs if she can’t get her own drinking problem
under control.
71. There is currently a movement to raise the speed limit above 65 mph on interstate highways. But
the program of those who want to raise the speed limit is quite absurd. They want to eliminate
speed limits altogether—according to them, it would be perfectly alright for people to drive 90 mph
through school zones and race through residential neighborhoods and drive as fast as their cars will
run through busy downtown traffic. It’s easy to see what sort of carnage would result, for drivers as
well as for pedestrians. Obviously the position of those who are campaigning to raise speed limits is
ridiculous.
72. There are those who are opposed to random drug testing of college athletes, because they say it
violates the individual rights and liberties of the athletes. But that is just false. Random drug testing
is the only means of reliably determining whether an athlete is using drugs; such random drug tests
are an effective means of discouraging drug use among athletes; and, since college athletes are
often role models and heroes for high school students, it is very important that we prevent drug use
among college athletes. Therefore, such random drug tests are not a violation of the athletes’
rights.
73. This painting is signed “Vincent van Gogh.” It is certainly in the vivid post-impressionist style of van
Gogh, and it is being offered at auction as the work of the great nineteenth-century Dutch artist
Vincent van Gogh. So it must be either a genuine painting by van Gogh or a forgery. But it cannot
be genuine: It uses a type of oil paint that was not developed until 1891, and van Gogh died in 1890.
Therefore, the painting is a forgery.
74. Obviously there is controversy over the best way to handle the drug problem in the United States,
and different experts on the issue are recommending different policies. But Ramsey Clark, former
attorney general of the United States, says that we should decriminalize drugs such as cocaine and
heroin, have doctors dispense them by prescription to addicts, not impose any criminal penalties
on those who possess and use such drugs, and provide good medical treatment programs for any
addicts who wish to overcome their drug addictions. Ramsey Clark is obviously an expert on law
enforcement (since he once held the position of attorney general), and he has made a special study
of the drug problem. Therefore, since Ramsey Clark recommends decriminalization as the most
effective policy for dealing with our drug problem, it must certainly be the best policy.
75. I had a terrible cold last week, so I bought a bottle of Dr. Dogood’s Miracle Fast Action Cold
Medicine, and I took two tablespoonfuls every morning and every night all last week. Now my cold
is completely gone, and I feel great. Dr. Dogood’s Miracle Medicine is really an effective medicine
for curing colds.
76. Donald Dobble should not be honored with selection as Central State’s “Outstanding Graduate of ’12.”
While it’s true that he has superb grades and has been active in student government, those good
qualities are more than offset by the fact that he has twice violated the honor code by cheating
on exams, and twice while a student at the university he has been convicted of driving while intoxi-

Cumulative Exercises Three

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

327

cated, and this very semester he pleaded guilty to shoplifting jewelry from Southern Park Mall. So
when we look at his record as a whole, it is obvious that he does not deserve the honor of being
named “outstanding graduate.”
We should not place any government requirements on the energy efficiency of cars sold in the
United States; that is, we should not require auto manufacturers to design their cars to exceed
a minimum number of miles per gallon. For if we allow fuel-efficiency restrictions, then that will
open the door to other restrictions, such as restrictions on the size of the engines; and then will
come restrictions on the shape of the car; and before you know it, automobile design will be
so completely regulated by the government that you will not even have a choice about what color
of car you wish to buy.
We should not abolish capital punishment because we have had capital punishment in this country
since the Colonial period. Even in the early days of Western expansion, the death penalty was imposed. In short, we have had capital punishment in the American colonies and the American
nation for some 300 years, and we should not change now.
The position of those who push “soft energy” or “renewable energy use” is quite ridiculous. They
want us to get all our energy from windmills! But it would require thousands and thousands of windmills to provide us with all the energy required by our highly industrialized society, and in some
areas of the country there is not a sufficiently strong and steady wind to generate much electricity.
In those areas, energy would have to be wired in from long distances, and at tremendous expense.
When we look closely and soberly at the windmill schemes of the “alternative energy” people, we
can see that they simply would not work.
On rare occasions all the planets, in traveling their respective orbits, wind up roughly in line on the
same side of the Sun. In fact, that will happen sometime next year. Some people have claimed that
the combined gravitational force of all the planets is likely to lead to cataclysmic events: tidal waves,
floods, perhaps terrible earthquakes. But there is really no cause for alarm: Carl Sagan, a wellrespected professor of astronomy, assures us that because of the enormous distances involved, the
combined force of gravity of all the planets upon Earth will still be negligible, and certainly will not
be enough to cause floods or tidal waves—not even a slightly higher tide. And in fact, all the
astronomers at MIT, Oxford, and the University of Toronto agree with Sagan that there is no
danger. Therefore, we have no need to worry about the claims of cataclysmic events caused by the
alignment of the planets.
The cities of Boston, Chicago, and New York all have rapid transit systems (public subway systems)
and they also have among the worst traffic and the most traffic jams of any cities in the country.
Obviously, then, rapid rail transit systems cause traffic problems rather than solving them.
Some people say that building more nuclear weapons when we already have enough to kill everyone
on Earth many times over is like standing knee-deep in gasoline and asking for more matches. But the
cases aren’t really analogous: A gasoline fire certainly is not the equal of a nuclear attack.
Critics of the pharmaceutical industry argue that pharmaceutical manufacturers overcharge for
prescription drugs, taking advantage of their exclusive control over some vitally important drugs to set
prices excessively high, thus making excessive profits. For example, critics note that (according to data
compiled by USA TODAY, March 2, 1993) in 1991 the top 20 drug companies averaged over 15% profit;
the average profit of all the Fortune 500 companies was just over 3%. This extremely high rate of profit
indicates that perhaps the pharmaceutical manufacturers are setting prices too high.
The Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association countered with a series of glossy newspaper
and magazine advertisements, offering the following counterargument:
When prescription drugs can save ulcer patients from surgery, it’s obviously a good thing. What’s not
so apparent is how dramatically the same drugs reduce healthcare costs.
In 1976, the year before the introduction of the first modern anti-ulcer drug, there were
155,000 ulcer operations. By 1987, the number had dropped to under 19,000.
And today, while ulcer drug therapy costs a sizable $1,000 a year, it is far less expensive than
surgery, which averages $25,000, resulting in an estimated savings of $3 billion a year.

84. There should not be any controversy over the teaching of evolution and the teaching of creationism in public schools. The correct solution to the problem is obvious. Certainly it would be
excessive to ban the teaching of evolution and teach only the creationist view. And it would be going
too far in the opposite direction to teach only evolution and totally neglect the creationist position.
Obviously, then, the correct solution is to simply give equal time to both views.

328

Cumulative Exercises Three

85. Business is like playing poker. In poker it’s OK to deceive someone with a bluff, if you can get away
with it; and in the same way, if you can get away with a “bluff” in business, such as false advertising,
then it’s OK to do it.
86. Senator Scam has been tried on two charges of accepting bribes, and after a lengthy trial the jury
returns a verdict of not guilty. Senator Scam offers the following argument:
I am glad to have it proved once and for all that there is absolutely no substance to the charges that
I accepted bribes. I have insisted all along that I am not guilty of those charges, and now a jury has also
asserted their belief in my innocence by returning their verdict of not guilty.

87. We should adopt a policy of requiring drug tests for every high school athlete in Mahoning County.
Some people may oppose such tests, but clearly such testing is a good idea. After all, the great majority of college and professional teams require drug testing for their athletes, and so does the
Olympics. Besides, many businesses now require drug testing for all their employees. So drug testing, especially for athletes, is becoming more and more common. In fact, if Mahoning County does
not require drug testing for all its high school athletes, it will soon be one of the few areas that does
not require such testing. So obviously we ought to adopt a policy of required drug testing for all Mahoning County high school athletes.
88. There are those who argue that marijuana should be legalized, because, they say, we generally agree
that alcohol should be legal; and marijuana is basically very similar in its effects to alcohol; so if alcohol should be legal, then marijuana should also be legal. But that is a lousy argument. It’s silly to
compare legalization of marijuana to legalization of alcohol, because the cases are not really similar: Alcohol is a beverage, and it can be mixed with soda, juices, and tonic; but you can’t drink marijuana, and certainly it cannot be mixed with soda or fruit juice.
89. If Rachel is guilty of first-degree murder, then she must have intended to kill Ralph. And indeed she
did intend to kill him, as she admitted in her own testimony. Therefore, Rachel is indeed guilty of
first-degree murder.
90. In an article discussing the morality of fetal-tissue transplants (the use of tissue from aborted fetuses
in the treatment of such diseases as Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s), John A. Robertson claimed that
using such aborted fetal tissue for research and treatment does not imply approval of abortion.
Therefore (he argued), even those opposed to elective abortions should have no objection to fetaltissue research and treatment. His argument goes like this:
A researcher using fetal tissue from an elective abortion is not necessarily an accomplice with the abortionist and woman choosing abortion. The researcher and the recipient [of a fetal-tissue transplant]
have no role in the abortion process. They will not have requested it, and may have no knowledge of who
performed the abortion or where it occurred since a third-party intermediary will procure the tissue.
They may be morally opposed to abortion, and surely are not compromised because they choose to salvage some good from an abortion that will occur regardless of their research or therapeutic goals.
A useful analogy is transplant of organs and tissue from homicide victims. Families of murder victims
are often asked to donate organs and bodies for research, therapy, and education. If they consent, organ
procurement agencies retrieve the organs and distribute them to recipients. No one would seriously argue
that the surgeon who transplants the victim’s kidneys, heart, liver, or corneas, or the recipient of the organs,
becomes an accomplice in the homicide that made the organs available, even if aware of the source.
If organs from murder victims may be used without complicity in the murder that makes the
organs available, then fetal remains could also be used without complicity in the abortion. (John A.
Robertson, “Rights, Symbolism, and Public Policy in Fetal Tissue Transplants,” Hastings Center Report
[December 1988], p. 6.)

91. From “In Defense of a Little Virginity,” an advertisement run in July 1992 by “Focus on the Family”
(in order to raise money to “reach out to America’s kids”):
Condom distribution programs do not reduce the number of kids exposed to disease . . . they radically
increase it!
Want proof of that fact? Since the federal government began its major contraception program
in 1970, unwed pregnancies have increased 87 percent among 15- to 19-year-olds. Likewise, abortions
among teens rose 67 percent, unwed births went up 61 percent. And venereal disease has infected a
generation of young people. Nice job, sex counselors. Good thinking, senators and congressmen.
Nice nap, America.

Cumulative Exercises Three

329

92. I have the right to smoke cigarettes if I want to; therefore, it’s right for me to smoke cigarettes
if I so desire.
93. We should not place any waiting period requirement on the purchase of handguns. For if you first
start with a required waiting period for handguns, then soon other restrictions on handguns will
occur, and then the ban of handguns, and before too long there would be a ban on all private ownership of firearms—and you wouldn’t even be able to own a shotgun for hunting or skeet shooting.
94. Obviously some people really do have genuine experiences of having lived previous lives. Of course
there are some skeptics, who doubt the reports of those who claim to remember past lives. The
skeptics suggest that those who claim to remember past lives are lying or have an overactive
imagination. But we should keep in mind that those who can remember their past lives are in a
spiritually advanced stage, for only those who achieve such spiritual advancement can recall their
past lives. And certainly no one who has reached such a spiritually advanced state would lie or be
deceived by his or her imagination.
95. You keep saying you don’t want to vote guilty, because you still have doubts about whether the
defendant is guilty. OK, Mr. Reasonable Doubt, you say you aren’t convinced that the defendant
murdered James Finn. Well, I know one thing: James Finn was murdered, and someone murdered
him. And there are no other suspects, and the defendant does not have an alibi. So unless you can
give me some reason to think that the defendant really is not guilty, then I have to conclude that the
defendant is guilty as charged.
96. During a friendly basketball game, Joe trips and hurts his foot. The injury causes Joe a good deal of
pain, and it appears that Joe’s foot might be broken. You insist that Joe should go down to the emergency room and have his foot checked, and you volunteer to drive him to the hospital. On the way
there, your speed slips up to 50 mph in a 35-mph zone; a city policeman pulls you over and proceeds to write you a speeding ticket. You protest as follows: “Look, Officer, this isn’t fair. A week ago
my wife’s mother had a heart attack while driving to lunch with my wife, Sarah; Sarah immediately
drove toward the hospital emergency room and was driving 55 mph in a 35 mph zone when a city
policeman waved her over. When Sarah explained the situation and said that she was on her way to
the emergency room with her mother, the policeman waved her on without giving her a speeding
ticket. So it’s not fair for you to ticket me for speeding on the way to the emergency room.”
97. Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, you heard Dr. Greta Garringer testify that in her expert
opinion the blood on the hands of the defendant certainly was type AB negative, the rare blood
type of the murder victim. But remember this: Dr. Garringer—this “expert witness” that the prosecution case depends on—was recently barred from medical practice by the American Medical
Association for falsifying treatment records, and last year she lost her license to practice medicine
in Virginia because it was discovered that she had lied about her medical education. It turns out
that Dr. Garringer’s medical degree was not from Duke University, as she claimed, but instead
came from a small college in Bolivia. And she was recently fired from her position at Western
Hospital when it was discovered that she had been drinking heavily during working hours. So
I ask you: Can you really trust her claims about the blood type?
98. The following is an argument by Thomas Aquinas to support belief in miracles:
If you object that no one has seen miracles occurring, I can give an answer to that. It is well known, in
fact, that the whole world used to worship idols and to persecute Christ’s faith. To this even the histories written by pagans give testimony. Today, however, all are converted to Christ—the wise men, the
nobles, the rich, the powerful, and the great—all are converted to the preaching of those who are simple and poor, of those few men who preach Christ. Now, this was either accomplished miraculously, or
it was not. If done miraculously, the point is proved. If not, then I say that there could be no greater
miracle than this fact, that the whole world was converted without miracles. So, we need not look for
anything else.

99. If long prison sentences were actually effective in preventing crime, then the United States, by virtue
of having the largest prison population in the world, would not have a high crime rate. But in fact
the United States has a very high crime rate. So, clearly, long prison sentences are not effective in
preventing crime.
100. Senator Zane claims that he has strong and conclusive evidence that his opponent, Lewis Clark,
accepted bribes while he was governor. Senator Zane says he can’t reveal his evidence, because that
would undermine ongoing investigations. But he assures us that he has solid evidence, and he says
that he will make it all public as soon as possible. But I see no reason to believe Senator Zane. He is
a politician who is trying desperately to defeat Clark in the senatorial election. So given Senator

330

Cumulative Exercises Three

101.

102.

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.

108.

Zane’s strong motives for lying, or at least exaggerating the “evidence” he claims to have against
Clark, no one should have any faith in his unsubstantiated claims. Besides, Senator Zane has played
this sort of game before. During his first campaign for the Senate, he claimed to have conclusive
evidence of serious lawbreaking and moral depravity by his opponent, but he said he couldn’t
reveal the evidence. After he won the election, he finally revealed his “conclusive evidence”:
It showed that his opponent had once been ticketed for driving 10 mph over the speed limit, and
had once paid a small tax penalty for filing his state income tax returns 3 days late! So we should
ignore Senator Zane’s claims of “secret evidence” against Clark: Senator Zane should put up or shut up.
Managed medical care systems sometimes have a rule that no physician in the system is allowed
to say critical things about another physician in the system when talking with a patient. That is, if
both Dr. Green and Dr. White are members of XYZ Managed Medical Care, Dr. Green cannot tell
her patient that Dr. White is an incompetent surgeon and that the patient should not have
surgery done by Dr. White. Some people claim that such rules are wrong, and that they undermine the relation of trust between physician and patient. But there is nothing wrong in such
rules. After all, suppose you own a large department store: How would you like it if a salesperson
in appliances went around telling her customers not to buy clothing at your store, because the
clothing sold by the store is lousy? You would certainly have a rule against any of your employees
telling customers negative things about other departments in your store, and there is nothing
wrong with such a rule. Likewise, there is nothing wrong with a managed medical care company
having a rule against allowing its physicians to tell patients negative things about other physicians
in the practice.
Some people object to children dressing up as monsters and ghosts for Halloween, claiming that it
glorifies violence and promotes superstition. But Halloween has been celebrated with monsters,
ghosts, and costumes for decades, even for centuries: Our grandparents celebrated Halloween, and
so did our parents; we dressed up in Halloween costumes when we were children. So obviously
there’s nothing wrong with our children celebrating Halloween with scary costumes.
Obviously we should not have unlimited violence and gore on television programs, especially
during hours when children are likely to be watching. However, that doesn’t mean that we have to
completely eliminate violence from television. A workable solution is to allow unrestricted violent
programming late at night, but to restrict violent programming during the hours when children are
usually watching.
The laws protecting endangered species seem innocent enough. Let’s protect endangered species:
save the bald eagle and the whooping crane and the spotted owl. But of course that means protecting
the natural habitats of those endangered animals, and that means restricting logging in some areas.
And soon we find that not just the areas where the animals nest have to be protected, but also their
foraging areas. And then that’s not enough: We have to protect the habitats of the animals they feed
on. And then we have to protect all the areas they fly over. But since bald eagles and whooping
cranes fly over tremendous distances, that means that almost every place in the continental United
States will become an endangered species habitat, with no construction, logging, road-building, or
new houses allowed! So when you consider where these endangered species laws are really leading,
it’s clear that we should cut them off at the roots: We should drop all laws protecting endangered
species, and not pass any new ones.
Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, the defendant, Alice Andrews, admits that she was in the apartment of Catherine Colvin on the night of December 15. Now, this case is really very simple. Either
Alice had a right to be in that apartment, or she is guilty of breaking or entering. But certainly she
had no right to be in the apartment: She was never invited in, she doesn’t rent or own the apartment, and Catherine did not even know her. Obviously, then, the defendant had no right to be in
the apartment, so we must conclude that she is guilty of breaking or entering.
Over the last 30 years in the United States, we have had a steady increase in the number of abortions
performed. During the same period, there has also been a sharp increase in violent crime. The conclusion is inescapable: Abortion causes violent crime.
Some people claim that sending U.S. troops to the Middle East is like stepping into a deep swamp,
filled with quicksand, where every step can pull the United States deeper and deeper into this terrible conflict. But that’s ridiculous. After all, the Middle East is full of deserts, not swamps, and there
probably isn’t any quicksand in the whole area.
Columbus Day has been celebrated for many years in the United States, and became a federal
holiday in 1937. While it celebrates the voyage of Christopher Columbus, for many years it has also

Cumulative Exercises Three

109.

110.

111.

112.

113.

114.

331

been a celebration of Italian American achievements and pride. But now some people want to eliminate Columbus Day; they claim that it is wrong to celebrate Columbus, because in their view he is
not worthy of celebration. They claim that he was particularly vicious toward the native peoples of
the Americas, murdering many, and on at least one occasion burning alive a large group of Indians
as part of a celebration. But we should reject the views of those who want to end Columbus Day: they
seem to think that no Italians deserve to be honored, and that Italian American heritage is somehow disgraceful, and should not be celebrated.
During the 1996 election in the United States, Reform Party presidential candidate Ross Perot
frequently made accusations against President Bill Clinton: that he was guilty of illegal campaign
fundraising, that he had misused the powers of the presidency, that he had engaged in illegal realestate deals. Clinton generally refused to comment on the charges, focusing instead on his plans for
improving the U.S. economy and education. Perot attempted to use Clinton’s silence on the
charges as evidence against him, claiming that if someone was falsely accused of arson, auto theft,
or bank robbery, then “every impulse in your body would be to speak out to clear your good name.
If you were guilty, you would remain silent, knowing that anything you may say could be used later
against you in a court of law.”
You remember our old friend Spencer Garrett? He was a faithful fan of the Pittsburgh Steelers, and
had bought season tickets every year for 40 years. Then when he got older, and trips to the stadium
got to be just too much for him, he passed on his season tickets to his son, Arthur Garrett, and
Arthur took his dad’s seats at the stadium. Well, now our old senator, Ben Burgoyne, is getting too
old to keep his Senate seat, and he wants to pass his seat on to his son, Ben Jr. And if that is Senator
Burgoyne’s choice, then I think it ought to be respected. After all, when Spencer wanted to pass on
his Steelers seats to his son, we all thought that was fine; so now that Senator Burgoyne wants to pass
on his Senate seat to his son, that also ought to be fine.
It is sometimes claimed that Christopher Columbus was a cruel and brutal man, who seemed
to take pleasure in the torture and murder of many of the indigenous people whom he encountered in his journeys of exploration. But those charges against Columbus are ridiculous. After
all, Columbus was an extraordinarily brave explorer and a brilliant navigator and mariner,
who took his small sailing ship on extraordinary voyages into uncharted oceans, risking his life
in terrible storms and in unknown waters, and greatly increasing European knowledge of the
American continents and islands. So clearly it is false that Columbus brutally mistreated the
natives of those lands.
“It is absurd to deny money to religious schools on the grounds that it offends the rights of those
who don’t believe in such schools. Every other democratic society in the Western World sees no
such violation of rights in partial support of denominational schools.” (Andrew M. Greeley,
Religion News Service, November 21, 1995)
Look, the defendant is charged with breaking or entering. The judge was very clear on what is
required to be guilty of breaking or entering, and one of the necessary conditions for being guilty
of breaking or entering is that the defendant must have intended to commit a felony when he broke
into or entered the building. Now there’s no question that the defendant broke into Jones house:
The police caught him in the house, and he admitted that he broke down the door and entered the
house. But he didn’t intend to commit a felony. As he said, what he was intending to do was beat up
Joe Jones, but he wasn’t intending to commit a felony. In fact, I doubt that the defendant even
knows what a felony is, so he certainly never intended to commit one.
Some people argue that capital punishment should be abolished because of the danger of making
a mistake and executing an innocent person. But it would be ridiculous to stop capital punishment
just because we sometimes make mistakes. If we applied that standard, then humans would never
do anything!
Consider the U.S. program of space exploration. Mistakes were made, despite the best efforts
of NASA scientists to avoid them: rockets exploded, satellites were lost, and in some tragic cases
astronauts died. But just because mistakes were made, and innocent lives were lost, that did not
mean that we should abandon the program of space exploration. NASA learned from its mistakes,
and continued with its space program—and after all, NASA has had lots more successes than
failures. Likewise, when we make mistakes in capital punishment, and innocent persons are
executed, we must learn from those mistakes, and improve our capital punishment policies; but a
few mistakes are no reason to abandon capital punishment altogether, no more than a few mistakes
should lead us to abandon space exploration.

332

Cumulative Exercises Three

115. In order to properly consider health-care issues in the United States, we must start with a key
question: Why is it that the United States has managed to develop the most efficient, fairest, and
most economical health-care system in the entire world?
116. Members of the jury, the defendant, David Doyle, is charged with writing bad checks on an account
he had closed a week before he wrote the checks. Now let’s consider the possibilities. Either he wrote
the bad checks by accident, or he did it on purpose. Of course we’ve all bounced a check now and
then: We spend a bit more than we had in the account, we forget to write down one of the checks we
wrote, or maybe we make a mistake in calculating the balance in our account. That sort of error or
memory lapse happens to everyone. But when David Doyle wrote those bad checks, it was no accident,
no error in calculation, no memory lapse. David Doyle had only one bank account; he himself closed
it out, and took the entire balance of the account in cash just one week before he wrote the bad
checks. And after closing the account, he himself wrote six checks, totaling over $3,000, on an account
that he knew was empty. Members of the jury, either David Doyle wrote those checks because of
forgetfulness and error, or he intentionally wrote bad checks on a closed account. And, as we just went
over, he certainly didn’t do it by error; so you must conclude that he did it intentionally.
117. There are those who favor guaranteed universal health care for every U.S. citizen. But their position
is impossible and absurd. They want everyone in the United States to have complete and unlimited
access to every medical procedure they want: not just vaccinations and basic health care and needed
surgeries, but anything anyone wants in the way of medical services. So if you want seven pairs of
designer eyeglasses—one for each day of the week—then that would be completely paid for. If you
felt a bit tired, you could go and spend a week or two in a fancy health spa, again, completely paid
for by the government, and guaranteed for everyone! And if you don’t like the way your nose looks,
you could have plastic surgery; and if you don’t like your new nose, you could try another. How
about a facelift? You could have one every year—twice a year, if you wish! But if you think medical
costs are high now, just think of the incredible costs that would be involved in providing such
services for everyone in the country. We are a wealthy nation, but no country could afford the costs
of that kind of lavish and extravagant medical care. So the proposal of universal health care is
obviously unworkable, impractical, and ridiculous.
118. It is sometimes claimed that if we start with voluntary active euthanasia—allowing the purposeful
killing of a suffering, terminally ill patient at that patient’s specific request—that will inevitably lead
to involuntary, coerced killing of those who have no wish to be killed. But that is absurd. The gap
between voluntary and involuntary is too wide to be bridged so easily. After all, when I ask someone
to act as my agent in taking something from me that is mine to give, or in doing something to me
that I am asking them to do, it does not lead to people taking things from me without my consent
or doing things to me against my wishes. I voluntarily give my old truck to a charity, and ask the
charity to collect the truck and take it away, and that doesn’t mean that my voluntary act will
increase the likelihood that the charity will move toward truck theft. I instruct my plastic surgeon to
nip off the end of my nose, but that does not make it more likely that my surgeon will start slashing
people against their wishes. It is one thing for my physician to act as my agent in giving me a drug
that will cause the swift and painless death that I voluntarily request; it is something very different
for my physician to kill me, against my own wishes, because he or she thinks I should be killed.
There is no reason to think the former will lead to the latter.
119. “18,812,563 customers can’t be wrong.” Worldwide Auto Parts (billboard advertisement).
120. There is not a health-care crisis in the United States. If there were a severe shortage of hospitals and
hospital beds, then the United States would have a health-care crisis. But there is no shortage of hospitals and hospital beds. If anything, there are too many.
121. DONNA: The way education is funded is just not fair to the children of our state. In some wealthy
districts, schools spend more than three times as much on each student as in other, poorer districts. So the kids in the wealthier districts have smaller classes, better maintained and more
modern school buildings, more computers, better libraries, newer books, more classes: In
short, they get a better educational opportunity than the kids in the poorer districts. That’s not
equal education, it’s not equal opportunity, it’s not equal treatment—and it’s not fair.
DANIEL: OK, so some students in some districts do have a lot more educational funding than
do students in other districts. But that doesn’t mean that they have unfair or unequal
educational opportunities. After all, some students from the best-funded schools are
dropouts, and students from the poorest schools sometimes do well in high school and then

Cumulative Exercises Three

333

successfully finish college and even professional school. So there’s nothing unfair about
school funding.
DONNA: Come on, Daniel, it is too unfair. Of course some of the kids from the poorer districts, who
have unequal educational opportunities, wind up being more successful students than some of
the kids from the wealthier districts. But that doesn’t mean they both had fair educational
opportunities. Look, suppose we have a race between the red team and the blue team. The red
team is given perfectly fitted, light, and speedy track shoes; the blue team has to wear heavy,
oversized combat boots. No doubt a few of the blue team racers may still finish ahead of some
of the red team racers; but that doesn’t change the fact that the race was unequal and unfair.
122. It would be wrong to require a specific prayer at graduation services, because we are a very diverse
society and no prayer can satisfy everyone. However, it would also be a mistake to completely eliminate all opportunity for prayer from the graduation ceremony. A good, reasonable solution is to
allow for a brief moment of silence at some point early in the ceremony, during which time people
may pray or not, as they choose.
123. The problem with religion is that religion promotes intolerance and dogmatism. In Judaism, one of
the basic principles is that “Thou shalt have no other God before Me”; and Christianity insists that
salvation and truth come only through Jesus: “I am the way, the truth, and the light; no man cometh
unto the Father but by me.” Islam is just as bad: “There is one God, and Mohammed is His Prophet.”
All religions claim that they have a monopoly on the truth, and that all other religions and beliefs are
wrong. Of course people may say that some religions are not like that: Hinduism, for example,
teaches that there are many paths and approaches to God, and that we can learn from other
religions; and Buddhism insists that each person must seek truth, and that religious doctrines should
not be imposed on others. But Hinduism and Buddhism don’t count: They aren’t genuine religions,
because all real religions claim to have the one and only truth, and all real religions insist that everyone must follow their specific doctrines and beliefs. Hinduism and Buddhism may be philosophies
or thought systems, but they aren’t real religions, because all real religions promote intolerance.
124. Recently, some states have passed laws requiring that teacher salaries be based on “merit,” and in
many of those cases the “merit” will be measured by the test scores of their students: Teachers whose
students score highest on the standardized tests will receive raises; teachers whose students score
lower do not get raises, may suffer pay cuts, and ultimately may be fired. Perhaps it makes sense to
reward teachers on the basis of merit; but the proposed “merit” pay policies are terrible. Merit
policies are like penalizing physicians who treat the most difficult cases: Linda is an outstanding
cancer specialist who treats the most difficult cases, and manages to save a number of patients
whose cancers were regarded as inevitably fatal, but who only has a “success” rate of 50%, may be
the best oncologist in the state; Lawrence is a second-rate lazy physician, who does not keep up with
research in the field and uses outdated treatment methods, but who treats only relatively healthy
patients who are likely to eventually recover whether they get medical treatment or not, will have a
very high “success” rate, even though he may well be the worst physician in the state. In the same
manner, Andrew is a brilliant, creative, and dedicated teacher who teaches children in
impoverished crime-ridden neighborhoods—children who may have very unstable family lives, who
have never been read to, who have never had anyone help them or encourage them on their homework, where no one taught them colors or letters or numbers or the names of animals at a tender
age, where they may not get good food and likely will suffer from inadequate health care and
possibly from lead poisoning; and if Andrew manages to help 50% of his students pass the
standardized tests, then he has done a splendid job. Anita teaches in a luxurious suburban school,
and her students have been read to every day since they were toddlers, they have had the
opportunity to travel, their parents expressed delight when they learned the names of colors and
“what sound the cow makes” at a tender age, and taught them the alphabet song when they were
three years old. Even if Anita is an abominable teacher, it is very likely that almost all her students
will easily pass the same standardized tests. Just as we do not count the brilliant oncologist as a “bad
doctor” because her “success rate” with her desperately ill patients is low, it is nonsense to judge
teacher merit on standardized test scores without taking into account the condition of the students
when they enter that teacher’s classroom.
125. As use of the Internet by teenagers has steadily increased over the past decade, the teenage use of
cocaine during the same period has steadily dropped. So whatever good or bad effects the Internet may
have had, we should celebrate one very positive result: Internet use has reduced teenage drug abuse.

334

Cumulative Exercises Three

126. It is sometimes claimed that persons in prison have a right to private phone calls with their family
and friends. But prisoners do not have a right to private phone calls, because people who have been
convicted of crimes and are serving time in prison have no rights whatsoever.
127. Certainly there was no conspiracy to assassinate President John Kennedy. After all, the Warren
Commission investigated the assassination of Kennedy, and they reported that Lee Harvey Oswald
acted alone, and that there was no conspiracy. So either Oswald really did act alone, or the entire
Warren Commission lied and purposefully covered up an assassination conspiracy. But it makes no
sense to suppose that all the Warren Commission members would have lied and taken part in a
massive cover-up, and that their lies and the cover-up would never have been exposed. So we must
conclude that the Warren Commission report is true, and that there was no assassination conspiracy.
128. Some people in this country favor legalizing marijuana, but it would be a dreadful mistake to accept
their proposals. They want to make marijuana use legal, and they want to remove all criminal penalties and all restrictions on the sale and use of marijuana. If they have their way, there would be no
restrictions whatsoever on marijuana use: Vending machines would supply packs of marijuana
cigarettes to anyone with a few quarters to feed the machines, and marijuana would be available
without restriction to high school and even to elementary school students. Children would no
longer have milk and cookies after school, but instead would light up a couple of joints. And
marijuana sellers could legally offer free samples to children, and advertise their products during
Saturday morning cartoons on TV. When we look closely, then, at the program of those who favor
legalization of marijuana, it is obvious what a disastrous program it really is.
129. Rachel argues that it is wrong for humans to eat animals for food since meat-eating is a luxury
and not a necessity for humans, and because such indulgence in luxury cannot justify the
suffering imposed on the slaughtered animals. But Rachel is wearing leather shoes, a leather belt,
and carrying a matching leather handbag: all luxuries, not necessities; and they are all made from
slaughtered animals. So Rachel’s arguments against eating meat are undermined by her own
actions!
130. There are people who want to raise doubts about the reliability of eyewitness testimony. They note
that eyewitness identifications are often erroneous, and that juries tend to give eyewitness testimony
and identifications much more weight than they should, since jurors are often unaware of all the
ways eyewitness testimony can go wrong. But it is a terrible mistake to cast doubts on the use of
eyewitness testimony in court. Our courts and our juries have relied on eyewitness testimony for
literally hundreds of years, and eyewitness testimony has been a central part of our justice system
during all that time. Thus the testimony and identifications of eyewitnesses must keep their
honored roles in our system of justice.
131. Everything that happens shows the generous loving hand of God in our midst. Of course sometimes
there are events that seem harsh and terrible, and we can see no good coming out of them: the
bombing in Oklahoma City, for example, or the crash of a jetliner. But those also show the loving
and generous kindness of God, because they show that some of our infinite God’s kindnesses are
inscrutable to mere human understanding.
132. It is sometimes suggested that we should allow the buying and selling of body parts, such as kidneys
and hearts, which are used in transplant surgery. At first glance it may sound like a fairly innocent
way of increasing the supply of organs for transplant—organs that can save lives, and that are always
in chronically short supply. Dear old Uncle Joe dies and Aunt Sarah sells his heart and kidneys to
pay for the funeral and perhaps help their grandchildren get through college. Or Uncle Joe himself
sells the organs, and gives the buyer the right to collect those organs after his death. But innocent
as it sounds, we should never take that step of allowing the sale of body parts. For once we have done
that, we are taking the view that the body and its parts can simply be treated as property. Maybe
Uncle Joe had some loans that he didn’t manage to repay before he died. Then the bank could
come in and claim his property for repayment of those debts—Uncle Joe’s car, but also Uncle Joe’s
heart and kidneys. And just as it wouldn’t matter whether or not Uncle Joe (or his widow, Aunt
Sarah) wanted his car taken, likewise it wouldn’t matter whether he wanted his organs taken: the
bank that held the loan could simply claim them. And it gets worse. Suppose you run up a credit
card debt that you can’t pay. The credit card company seizes your car, but that doesn’t cover the
debt. Now they can demand your heart and your kidneys and your corneas for payment of the debt.
And it doesn’t matter that you haven’t finished using them. After all, you hadn’t finished using your
car, either. So once we see what the sale of organs could lead to—persons being butchered just for
the price of their organs—it’s clear that we should never allow the sale of body parts.

Cumulative Exercises Three

335

133. Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, the defendant is charged with attempted murder. You have listened to all the evidence that we have presented, and now we ask you to find the defendant, Pierre
Boudreaux, guilty as charged. As you heard from several witnesses, Pierre became very angry when
his girlfriend dropped him and started seeing Jean Arbonne. Pierre swore that he would kill Jean,
and he went to a shop that sells voodoo materials. He bought a doll to represent Jean, and even put
some of Jean’s hair on the doll. And then he went through an elaborate voodoo ritual and curse
that was supposed to cause Jean to suddenly die. Of course, the curse didn’t work, and we are not
really surprised that it didn’t work: we don’t believe that voodoo rituals have any power. But what we
believe doesn’t matter here. The point is that Pierre Boudreaux did believe that the curse would
work, and that it would kill Jean; and so Pierre did attempt to murder Jean, and you must find him
guilty of attempted murder.
You remember that Pierre’s defense attorney argued that since the voodoo ritual had no real
power to kill, Pierre should not be found guilty of attempted murder. But just because Pierre’s
murder attempt was faulty, that doesn’t change the fact that it was still an attempted murder. Look,
suppose I plan to kill you, and I go out and get a pistol. I think the pistol is loaded, and I believe that
it will cause your death, and I aim the pistol at you and pull the trigger. Now in fact the pistol is not
loaded, so of course it doesn’t fire. But I still attempted to murder you, even though my attempt was
flawed. I can’t murder you with an empty pistol, and Pierre couldn’t murder Jean with a voodoo
curse, but we can both attempt to murder. So you should find Pierre guilty of the crime he committed: the attempted murder of Jean Arbonne.
134. The United States spends an enormous amount of money on health care: far more than any other
country in the world. Now, if the United States had an efficient health-care system, then we would not
have a high infant mortality rate. But the United States does have a high infant mortality rate (one
of the highest in the industrialized world). So obviously the United States does not have an efficient
health-care system.
135. We should not give students credit for taking online courses. Education has always involved personal,
face-to-face contact between teacher and student. From the time that Plato taught Aristotle, and
Aristotle taught Alexander, right through to the medieval universities, and all the way up to the
present, we have always had students actually meeting with their professors, with questions and
answers going back and forth, in situations where the students and teachers can see, hear, and even
touch one another. And now people want to abandon all that, and have students take courses online,
without ever actually meeting their professor or even their fellow students. We’ve had face-to-face
education for well over 2,000 years, and I don’t think we should let online courses change that.
136. Well, researchers in England have now cloned a sheep! We must put a total stop to this cloning
business right now: all cloning must be banned. Just consider what will happen if we allow cloning
to continue. It won’t stop with cloning sheep, cows, and mice. It’s an easy step from there to cloning
humans. And once we begin cloning humans, it will lead to all sorts of terrible abuses. Basketball
coaches will be hiring biologists to clone whole teams of Michael Jordans and Shaquille O’Neals;
orchestras will clone copies of Isaac Stern. And lots of parents will want “their” kids to grow up to be
famous political leaders, so you’ll see thousands of duplicate Bill Clintons, George Bushes, Jesse
Jacksons, and Margaret Thatchers; other parents will want their kids to be outstanding lawyers, so
there will be a huge crop of Marcia Clarks and Johnnie Cochrans. Soon the entire population will
be made up of copies of a few “ideal types”; and then we will have lost the genetic diversity that
makes successful evolutionary development and adaptation possible. So we must stop all cloning
immediately.
137. Now that President Hazim has announced his upcoming retirement, Western State University will
soon begin the search for a new president. Some WSU students are pushing for more student
involvement on the search committee, in the evaluation of candidates, and in the final selection of
WSU’s new president. But what they are asking for is completely unreasonable. What they want is
total student control of the selection of a new president, with no input from faculty, administration,
or the board of trustees. They want the student government to have complete control over how the
position is advertised, who is interviewed, and who is finally hired. But they are obviously forgetting
that they are not the only ones who have an interest in who the new president will be. If they have
their way, the faculty, administration, and trustees will be left out of the search process altogether,
and that’s obviously not fair.
138. Since the United States is no longer locked in a nuclear arms race, it would be silly to keep building
more and more nuclear weapons. But of course, that’s no reason to go to the other extreme and

336

Cumulative Exercises Three

139.

140.

141.

142.

143.

144.

145.

start dismantling our nuclear arsenal. The right course, obviously, is to simply maintain our current
nuclear warheads in good working order, but not build more.
The North State University Board of Trustees should be allowed to hold closed meetings when they
wish, because obviously the board of trustees should be able to meet confidentially when that is
their preference.
Criminal acts by juveniles are a serious problem in our country. Children who are 12, 13, or 14 years
old—and often younger!—are committing assaults, robberies, even murders. Either we must
prosecute those juveniles as full adults, and when they are convicted lock them up in maximumsecurity prisons, and perhaps even execute them; or we have to just ignore the problem of juvenile
crime, and do nothing at all to control violent crime by juvenile offenders. Since we obviously
cannot ignore the problem of violent crimes committed by juveniles, it follows that we must start
treating juvenile offenders just like adults.
Joan claims that health care is like education: that a decent education is essential for equal opportunity, and likewise that decent health care is also essential for equal opportunity. So, since we
believe that there should be universal access to a decent education for every citizen, we must
conclude that there should be universal access to decent health care for every citizen. But Joan’s
analogy is ridiculous. After all, decent health care often involves prescribing drugs; and you can’t
educate people by giving them drugs.
As unemployment rates in the United States and Europe remain high, there is much controversy
about how to create new jobs for all the people who desperately need them, and a wide variety of
economics and financial experts are proposing a wide variety of solutions. Some believe that we
should cut government spending and regulation, and then private employers will create many new
jobs. Others claim that the big problem is that jobs are being shipped to other countries with lower
wages, and that we should restrict trade in order to prevent such job losses. But Paul Krugman, who
teaches economics at Princeton University and won the Nobel Prize in Economics, maintains that
in order to increase the number of jobs we need to make a bigger investment in education and in
public works projects that rebuild our bridges and highways and rail system. Professor Krugman is
one of the top authorities on economics and the economic system, so clearly his solution to the
problem of creating more jobs is the path we should follow.
Some animal rights advocates insist that it is wrong to inflict suffering on animals such as
chimpanzees in order to conduct medical research that might provide benefits to humans. But the
animal rights position is obviously wrong, since it can never be wrong to cause the suffering or even
death of an animal in order to provide medical benefits for humans.
Some people think that the Cleveland Indians’ logo (the “Chief Wahoo” cartoon of an Indian with
a huge grin) is offensive to Native Americans, and that the Cleveland team should find another logo
and change their team name. But obviously it would be going too far to demand that the Cleveland
team completely change both its name and its logo, uniforms and all. On the other hand, we should
not be completely insensitive to the demands of Native Americans who find the name and logo
offensive. A good, reasonable solution is to allow the team to use “Indians” as a name, but get rid
of the “Chief Wahoo” logo, which many Native Americans find particularly offensive.
In 1999, Senator Mitch McConnell, chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee,
mailed a fundraising letter to several thousand people. The letter conducted a “survey” on how
people felt about the danger of nuclear attack by North Korea on cities of the United States (presumably most thought it was a bad idea), and asked for donations to “protect our country from a
potentially devastating nuclear attack.”
Some advocates of campaign-finance reform expressed outrage that the specter of nuclear
war was being used for political fundraising, calling it an effort to play on people’s fears in order to
increase political donations. Steven Law, the executive director of the committee that mailed the
fundraising letter, responded to the criticisms:
This is standard fare for direct mail, and it is a good deal less incendiary than some mailings I’ve seen.
These letters have been a staple of direct mail fund-raising drives for years. (Based on an article by
Don van Natta, Jr., New York Times, September 4, 1999)

146. Some people criticize the United States for its huge and still increasing gap between rich and
poor—a gap that is now the largest of any industrialized nation. But if we tried to make all U.S.
citizens exactly equal in wealth and income, then that would have terrible effects on the U.S. economy, and probably leave everyone worse off; and the sort of government interference and oversight

Cumulative Exercises Three

147.

148.

149.

150.

337

that would be required to enforce strict equality of wealth and income would be intolerable. So
obviously the citizens of the United States are better off leaving our economic system and wealth
distribution as it is.
Recently Congressman Peter King, New York Republican, held a congressional hearing on the
dangers of terrorism among American Muslims. The hearings were very controversial, because they
seemed to imply that American Muslims posed a special terrorist threat, and that we should be
suspicious of American citizens who are Muslims. Critics of the hearings pointed out that American
Muslims have not supported terrorism, and that in fact American Muslims—like other American
citizens—have worked hard to combat terrorism, and have sometimes been the victims of terrorism
(such as Mohammed Salman Hamdani, a medical technician who lost his life in heroic efforts to
save victims of the World Trade Center attack). Other critics argued that it was wrong to focus a
terrorism hearing on American Muslims, when in fact the white supremacist groups have been by
far the greatest source of terrorist acts by American citizens. Representative Dan Lungren, a California
Republican, insisted that there was nothing wrong with focusing a terrorism hearing on American
Muslims, rather than on the broader threat of terrorist groups such as white supremacists; Lungren
pointed out that when there was a House hearing on youth gang violence, “We didn’t talk about
non-youth gang violence,” and so in a hearing on the threat of American Muslim terrorism we
shouldn’t talk about threats from non-Muslims.
It would be a grave mistake to pass a constitutional amendment banning the burning of the
American flag. Now obviously many of us are deeply disturbed when a protester burns the
American flag; but there is no doubt that that is a form of political protest, a voicing of deep
disgust with American policies—and unpopular and distasteful as that protest may be, we have
always held fast to the principle that all citizens have a right to express even the most offensive and
disgusting political views with protests: It is part of our basic commitment to freedom of speech,
protected by the First Amendment of our Bill of Rights. But if we pass an amendment to the
Constitution that bans the burning of the American flag, then we are making a basic exception to
the principle of freedom of speech. And once we have made one exception, it will be easier to
make others: Some people are, understandably, deeply offended by pro-Nazi propaganda, and
may wish to ban such speech. Others will want to silence those who advocate communism. And
once we make one exception to our principle of freedom of speech, it will be difficult to stop
there. If we pass laws banning the burning of the American flag, why not also a law banning the
burning of the U.S. Constitution? Or a law banning any satirical use of our national anthem? The
problem is, once the basic principle of freedom of speech is compromised, it is more tempting to
try to ban any speech that we don’t like. And in our highly diverse society, there will always be views
that are extremely unpopular, and that some people want to ban. The dangerous, long-term result
of a constitutional amendment banning flag-burning is likely to be a threat to the freedom to
express any unpopular political view; and when that happens, freedom of speech will no longer be
one of our cherished liberties.
There are some people who believe we should stop killing animals for food and become
vegetarians. But asking humans to stop eating meat really doesn’t make sense. After all, humans
have been meat-eaters for thousands of years. The earliest recorded dietary laws placed some
restrictions on what type of meat could and could not be eaten, but they clearly approved of meat
eating. And obviously, for thousands of years before any written history or formalized dietary
rules, humans had been eating meat from a wide variety of animals. And in the thousands of years
since those dietary laws, humans have continued to eat meats from many different animals,
prepared in many different styles. As we look through human history, we find many different
cooking styles, but almost always one of the main items that was cooked and eaten—the most
important and most valued thing on the menu—was the meat dish. Sometimes the meat dish has
been wild boar, and sometimes meat from a deer or a water buffalo or a rabbit or an alligator, and
sometimes the meat is a thick juicy burger; but humans have always eaten meat, and we should
continue to do so.
For our trip to the critical thinking conference in Toronto, we should certainly leave all the driving
to Janice. She grew up in Toronto, so she knows the city well; and she did both her undergraduate
and graduate work in Los Angeles, so she is certainly familiar with driving in heavy city traffic.
Furthermore, she has been driving for over 20 years, and she has never been involved in an accident,
and never received a ticket! She has excellent eyesight, good reflexes, and she would absolutely
never drink and drive: she refuses to drink even a small glass of wine if she has to drive anywhere in
the next hour. She is committed to safe driving, and will not talk on a cell phone while she drives—

338

Cumulative Exercises Three

151.

152.

153.
154.

155.

156.

157.

much less text while driving! Janice is a safe, conscientious driver, and she should be the person
driving our van to Toronto.
The governors and legislatures in a number of states have recently passed laws that block collective
bargaining by state and local government employees, such as firefighters, police officers, and teachers. Many people complain that denying public employees the right to form unions and bargain
collectively is a violation of human rights, in particular the right to join together to have some voice
in their own working conditions and to protect themselves against exploitation; they point out that
Article 23 of the United Nations Universal Human Rights Declaration recognizes collective bargaining
as a basic human right. But it is simply not true that state laws blocking collective bargaining
undercut human rights. Many states are in severe financial difficulties, and must find ways to reduce
their costs. By blocking collective bargaining, it becomes easier for states to reduce wages and cut
pension benefits of state workers, and that is one way that states can save money and balance their
budgets. Cutting collective bargaining is a useful step toward balancing state budgets, not an attack
on human rights.
Drug companies sometimes run multiple studies of a drug they are proposing for market, and if
a study indicates that the drug is ineffective or harmful they simply put the study back in their
files and never publish it, and instead only release studies that indicate the drug is safe and
effective. Critics have complained about this practice, but there is really nothing wrong with it.
Suppose that you are trying to come up with a new recipe for a cake, and you try half a dozen
recipes, and five of the recipes give you a cake that tastes awful, but the sixth recipe gives you a
cake that tastes delicious. In that case, you wouldn’t be obligated to tell everyone about all the
bad recipes; you would only publish the recipe that produces a good result. Likewise, there is
nothing wrong with the drug company publishing only the studies that yield good results, and
hiding the other studies.
Increasing taxes to balance the federal budget is a bad economic policy, because economic policies
that raise taxes are policies that harm the economic well-being of the country.
Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, consider the case against my client. He is accused of hiring John
Jefferson to plant a bomb in the car of Waylon Wiley. Now, there’s no doubt that John Jefferson did
indeed plant a bomb in the car of Wiley, and that the bomb exploded and killed Wiley. Jefferson
admits that he planted the bomb. But what reason is there to believe that the defendant hired
Jefferson? Just this: the testimony of John Jefferson. Now, how reliable is that testimony? How
reliable is the testimony of a man who admits that he has lied under oath on many occasions, who
is now testifying against the defendant in the hope of receiving a reduced sentence for his own
crime, and who has lived his whole life dedicated to crime, deceit, and money, and who has never
shown the least regard for decency and honesty? You wouldn’t trust John Jefferson to sell you a used
car; don’t trust him to sell you these desperate lies against the defendant. You can’t take the word
of a man like John Jefferson; and since you can’t trust John Jefferson, you have no grounds for
finding the defendant guilty.
Certainly Jones is not guilty of breaking or entering into West Building. After all, as a registered
student at the University, Jones had permission to be in West Building. And if Jones had permission
to be in West Building, then he cannot be guilty of breaking or entering into West Building.
Recently the voters in our county passed a law requiring a Christian prayer at all public school
graduation ceremonies. Some people claim that the law is fair because it was passed democratically. And it was passed democratically—a majority of the voters favored it—but that doesn’t
make it fair. Just because something is done democratically is no indication of its fairness. After
all, the vast majority of us are right-handed. Now suppose that we right-handers began to
develop a deep dislike of left-handers. It gets so bad we propose a law banning all left-handers
from attending public schools and colleges, and banning all left-handers from holding public
office. That law would be passed democratically—but it certainly would not be fair. So maybe the
law requiring a Christian prayer at graduation is fair, or maybe it’s unfair, but one thing is clear:
Just because it was passed democratically, and a majority of people favor it, certainly doesn’t
make it fair.
Thomas Jefferson always insisted on the vital importance of small farmers and small merchants to
the well-being of American democracy. Jefferson argued that small farmers and small merchants
would have a strong stake in the success of the country, that they would be independent thinkers
who would not be controlled by special interests and so they could critically evaluate government
policies, and that they would give long-term stability to both the economy and the government.

Cumulative Exercises Three

158.

159.

160.

161.

162.

163.

164.

165.

166.

167.

339

But before you sign on to Jefferson’s argument for small farmers and small business owners, you
should know this: for many years Jefferson had sexual relations with one of his slaves, Sally
Hemings, who had several children by Jefferson; and Jefferson actually kept his own children—the
children born to Sally Hemings—as slaves. Anyone who could enslave his own children is not
someone whose arguments can be taken seriously.
Some people have criticized our new children’s cereal, Cotton Candy Crunch. They say that Cotton
Candy Crunch is not a good children’s cereal because it is loaded with sugar, high in salt, and
contains no fiber. But Cotton Candy Crunch is in fact a very good cereal. Kids love it, and there are
many adults who find it very tasty.
Some people suggest that distributing condoms to high schools students encourages them to be
sexually active. But of course it doesn’t; instead, it only encourages those who decide to be sexually
active to practice safe sex. Claiming that condoms encourage students to be sexually active is like
claiming that seatbelts encourage students to ride in cars.
This person is surely a true messenger from God, because he performs wonderful miracles. And
clearly the works he performs are genuine miracles, and not cheap, deceitful tricks, for no true
messenger of God would stoop to using cheap tricks.
There is a lot of debate over whether we should have a large tax cut, and whether such a tax cut
would be good for our economy. But recently Dr. Lynn Akkad, a biochemistry professor at MIT
who was recently awarded the Nobel Prize for her work on genetic links to cancer, stated that she
firmly believes that a large tax cut is the best way to keep our economy from sliding into a recession. That should settle the issue: if the brilliant Dr. Akkad favors a tax cut, it must be a good
idea.
Look, it’s not at all fair for you guys to raise my insurance rates; after all, I’m a very safe and
cautious driver. OK, it’s true that I was responsible for four small traffic accidents during the last
2 years, and have received several tickets for reckless driving. But all those things happened
when I wasn’t really driving: I was distracted by something, or I was daydreaming or talking on
my cellular phone. So those don’t really count as driving. So when I drive, I am always a very safe
and cautious driver.
Teenagers who attend religious services with their parents every week are much less likely to
commit crimes than are teenagers who rarely or never attend religious services with their parents.
The evidence is clear: When parents take their teenagers to religious services regularly, it prevents
teenage crime.
Look, we were faced with a tough choice. Either we carry out a full-scale military attack on Iraq and
occupy the country, or we allow Saddam Hussein to build nuclear weapons, biological weapons,
and any other weapons of mass destruction that he pleases. But of course we could not allow
Saddam to build such weapons of mass destruction. That would have posed a threat to the United
States, and also would have destabilized the Middle East. So we were forced to launch a military
attack against Iraq.
John Walker Lindh was accused of fighting against the U.S. in Afghanistan, a charge he denied.
But just remember this: he was an armed fighter in Afghanistan. And either he was fighting for
the U.S. forces, or he was fighting against them. Now certainly he was not fighting in support
of the U.S. forces. So obviously we must conclude that he was indeed fighting against the
United States.
I recommend we hire Dr. Ruth Salidas as the new dean of Arts and Sciences. Dr Salidas has a
brilliant publication record, and recently won a national book award. Also, she has excellent
administrative experience as Chair of the English Department at Michigan State, and both her
colleagues and her students at Michigan State agree that she is a person of great integrity and
warmth who has innovative ideas and a cooperative spirit. Dr. Salidas is bright, articulate, energetic, and well organized, and she would be the perfect person to lead our School of Arts and
Sciences.
Okay, so Bill now says that he has turned over a new leaf, and he’s through with Barbara, and he’ll
never cheat on you again. But girl, if you take that man back, you’re crazy. That’s exactly the same
thing that he said last month when you caught him with Julie, and 2 months before that, when he
spent the night with Ginger. And you remember after he had that affair with Sandra, he swore that
was the last time, and that he would be faithful and true forever. That guy is a liar and a cheat, and
you’re better off without him.

340

Cumulative Exercises Three

168. Some people suggest that chimpanzees have higher intelligence: that they can make plans, solve
problems, and even use language. But clearly chimps do not have higher intelligence, because
humans are the only animals that have higher intelligence.
169. Some students claim that when a professor cancels a class—due to sickness, or whatever—students
should receive a tuition refund for that class. If a rock concert is cancelled because the lead
guitarist is sick, those who bought tickets get a refund; so students should likewise get a refund
when their classes are cancelled. But that’s a bad comparison: professors are lousy guitarists, and no
one would buy a ticket to hear a bunch of professors play a rock concert.
170. Some people want to guarantee health care for every citizen of the United States. It may sound
like a good idea at first glance, but when you think about it carefully, it would obviously have terrible consequences. Because if you start by guaranteeing every citizen health care, then next
people will want a guarantee of decent housing, and then a guarantee of food, and soon a guarantee of a good job, a new car, a beautiful lawn, a yearly vacation cruise, and stylish clothes, and
before you know it everyone will expect to be given everything, and no one will want to work for
anything.
171. Some students think that if they suffer a special hardship during the semester—a prolonged illness,
for example—that makes it impossible for them to complete their coursework successfully on time,
then they should be allowed to drop the course without any penalties. But what they want is clearly
wrong. After all, if you hire a construction company to build a building for you, and they agree to
complete the building by a specific date, then if someone at the construction company gets sick and
the building is not completed on time, they can’t just drop their contract: they have to pay a penalty.
Likewise, students who don’t complete their coursework on time should be penalized, even if they
couldn’t complete the work because they were sick.
172. There are several U.S. citizens suspected of planning terrorist acts who are being held in U.S. prisons—
and they have not been charged with any crime, they are not allowed to see a lawyer or judge, they do
not get to hear the evidence against them, and they are being held in prison indefinitely (perhaps for
many years) without any real proof of guilt. Some people complain that this violates basic principles of
the U.S. Constitution, and that it is simply wrong to imprison citizens without a fair trial. Apparently
those people who complain about such practices believe that we should just let the terrorists do whatever they like and kill as many people as they want without taking any action to stop them.
173. Philosophy has been a central and prominent area of study since the earliest universities were
started many centuries ago, and during all that time university studies have included philosophy. So
it is clearly desirable that we continue to make courses in philosophy a central part of the university
curriculum.
174. Obviously priests should not be allowed to sexually abuse children repeatedly and continue in the
priesthood. But we shouldn’t go to the other extreme and force people out of the priesthood for a
single case of sexual abuse. Clearly the best policy, then, is to allow priests to continue in the priesthood
if they have been guilty of only one case of sexual abuse, but remove them if they are repeat offenders.
175. Alyssa Squires is a candidate for Common Pleas Judge. She holds a law degree from Yale University,
and she has been a leading attorney in the Mahoning Valley for many years. She has donated her
valuable time and expertise to United Way, the Sierra Club, and the Mahoning Public Legal Foundation; and she has frequently taken on cases, without pay, for impoverished people who needed
legal help. She has been endorsed by the Bar Association, and she has fought against corruption in
the Valley for many years. She is brilliant, dedicated, and honest; and if elected she will be a fair,
just, and hard-working judge for the people of Mahoning County. I strongly urge you to vote for
Alyssa Squires for Judge.
176. If Homer Simpson works at the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant, then the Springfield Nuclear
Power Plant is not safe. So clearly the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant is not safe, because Homer
Simpson does work there.
177. JOE: Spring in the Mahoning Valley is wonderful: warm spring days, bright sunshine, birds
singing, and flowers blooming.
JOAN: Are you crazy? Spring in the Mahoning Valley is cold, grey, rainy, muddy, windy, and often
snowy—and any flowers foolish enough to bloom are quickly frost-bitten.
JOE: Well, sure there are some days like that; but those cold rainy days aren’t real spring days. The
real spring days are the warm sunny days, filled with birds and flowers, and the real spring is
wonderful in the Mahoning Valley.

Cumulative Exercises Three

341

178. There is now controversy about sending children ages 10–12 to adult prisons. But when
you think about it, locking children up in high-security prisons is not as bad as it sounds. After
all, parents have long punished their children by requiring them to stay in their rooms, or
“grounding” them. And if we think it’s OK for a parent to force a misbehaving child to stay in his
or her room, then we should have no objection to a judge forcing a misbehaving child to stay in
a prison cell.
179. Why is critical thinking the best course offered at the university? Is it the witty and charming
professor? Or perhaps the fascinating textbook? Or the high quality of the students who enroll
in the class?
180. Robert is guilty of negligent homicide only if he did not exercise due caution. But Robert is a
careful driver, and he was exercising due caution. So we must find Robert not guilty of negligent
homicide.
181. Stan Stohlmeyer has argued that we should have a very strict policy against plagiarism at North State
University. He argues that plagiarism cheats students who actually do their own work, because their
original work is then graded in comparison to high-quality stolen work. And he says that when
plagiarism is not punished, it becomes more widespread, and that puts pressure on more and more
students to cheat in order to compete. And finally, he argues that if it becomes known that
plagiarism is common at North State, employers will be more suspicious of all North State students,
and so even the honest students will be under suspicion and have a harder time getting jobs. His
arguments sounded pretty good, until I learned from one of Stan’s roommates that Stan buys all of
his term papers from an online term paper service! So much for Stan’s arguments against
plagiarism!
182. Some people are concerned that the U.S. balance of payments is so large; that is, they are
concerned because the United States spends much more on imported goods than we are paid for
our exported goods. They suggest that we restrict imports in order to reduce the balance of
payments. But Michael Kinsley claims that we should not be so concerned with the balance of payments, for that is not the real problem:
The balance of payments is a measure of economic health, not a cause of it; restricting imports to
reduce the deficit is like sticking the thermometer in ice water to bring down a feverish temperature.
(This example is from Michael Kinsley, “Keep Trade Free,” The New Republic, Vol. 188, no. 14 [April 11,
1983], p. 11.)

183. Christianity is a religion of peace, tolerance, kindness, and mercy, and Christians are tolerant
and peaceful people. Of course some Christians participated in the Inquisition, in which Jews,
nonbelievers, and heretics were tortured and killed. At other times Christians went on Crusades
into the Middle East, and slaughtered thousands of Muslims. And then there was the period
when Christians were burning or hanging people suspected of witchcraft, and there were also
decades of brutal war between Protestants and Catholics. But the Christians who did such things
were not really Christians, because genuine Christians would never commit such warlike and
brutal acts.
184. Some critics have claimed that the current tax cut is unfair because by far the largest share of the
tax cut goes to the wealthiest 5% of Americans, while the lower and middle classes just get crumbs.
But the tax cut is certainly not unfair! After all, we have been in an economic slump for over a year,
and a tax cut will help stimulate the economy. And tax cuts can also help simplify the tax code, and
make it easier to file tax returns. And when the tax cuts were passed, the government had a budget
surplus, so it was a good time for a tax cut. So obviously there is nothing unfair about the current
tax cut.
185. Recently there have been arguments about abolishing the inheritance tax, as some politicians want
to do. But Bill Gates has recently argued that the United States should increase the inheritance tax.
Gates argues that by having a larger tax on inherited wealth, we could provide fair opportunities for
those children who suffer the severe disadvantages of inadequate health care and inferior education; and Gates also argues that allowing people to inherit enormous wealth that they haven’t
earned makes them lazy and less ambitious. And notice this: Bill Gates is one of the richest people
in the world, and an increase in the inheritance tax would greatly increase his own taxes. So when
Bill Gates argues that we should increase the inheritance tax, we must count that as a very strong
argument.

342

Cumulative Exercises Three

186. Some critical thinking students think that they should be able to use a list of all the argument forms
on the exam. Professor Adams says they should not be allowed to use such a list: She insists that
students having a list of the argument forms would be like a surgeon using a list of steps and instructions during surgery. But Professor Adams’s analogy doesn’t work. After all, surgery is a matter of
life and death, and critical thinking exams aren’t life-and-death activities.
187. Janice argues that instead of electing judges, they should be appointed by a special judicial commission: a commission of nine distinguished former judges, attorneys, and good, honest citizens
who have been selected by the governor, the state Senate, and the state House. That way, Janice
says, we could get away from the nasty attacks made on judicial candidates and people would have
more confidence in our judges; and furthermore, she argues, judges could be more fair and
impartial and pass judgments they believe are just and right, rather than worrying about how their
judgments will play on Election Day. But Janice’s arguments about justice and impartiality are just
a smoke screen. Actually, she worked hard for a judicial candidate who got trounced in the general
election, and she’s really bitter about the whole election process. Her only real reason for wanting
judges appointed by a special commission instead of being elected is because she’s angry about
this candidate losing the election. If her candidate had won, she would be singing the praises of
judicial elections.

17

❖❖❖

Thinking Critically
about Statistics

Listen to the Chapter Audio on mythinkinglab.com
Statistical reasoning is vitally important. Without statistical calculations, medicine would
be at the mercy of quacks who promote useless or harmful “cures.” Snake oil promoters
can always tell dramatic stories of a few people who “recovered” (probably from placebo
effect, perhaps by natural remission) while under their “treatment.” Only by making
exact statistical analyses can we determine that any new treatment (perhaps successful in
75% of the cases) is significantly more promising than some old treatment, which
perhaps works for only 60% of patients. Without careful statistical study a few dramatic
“successes” for an old treatment, coupled with touching accounts of the failures of a new
treatment, might lead us to reject a promising new therapy.
Unfortunately, many people, particularly politicians and advertisers, lean on
statistics the way a drunk leans on a streetlamp: for support, rather than illumination.
Often we must sift out the chaff before finding the valuable grain of truth in statistical
reasoning. This chapter is not intended as a substitute for a good course in statistics, but
it should help you see through some common statistical deceptions. If you have had the
benefit of a statistics course, you may still discover some subtle statistical tricks that
sometimes deceive even knowledgeable statisticians.

ALL CHILDREN ARE ABOVE AVERAGE
Averages are a common source of statistical confusion. Professor Longstreet has a 10-point
grading scale: 60–69 is a D, 70–79 a C, 80–89 a B, and above 90 is an A. I squeaked by with a
70 on the first exam, soared up to a 71 on the second exam, and then the bottom fell out: a
40 on the final. Professor Longstreet informs me that I have a D for the course. “That’s not
fair, Professor,” I reply. “After all, my average grade was a C. So obviously I have a C average,
and I should get a C in the course.” And in fact, I do have a C average, in two senses of the
term: a grade of C is both the median and the mode of my test scores. That is, speaking of “the
average” is ambiguous (as discussed in Chapter 9) since there are three different things that
it might mean.1 First, there is the arithmetic mean, or just “mean,” for short. The mean is what

343

344

Chapter 17

Thinking Critically about Statistics

Skewed Averages
Several years ago, there was some very interesting data
about graduates of the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill. If we look at UNC alumni who graduated
20 years earlier, which undergraduate major do you
suppose had the highest average income? I guessed
philosophy, but that was wrong. Finance, maybe? Or
possibly chemistry? Perhaps economics? None of the
above. It was geography. But before you switch majors,
you should consider one thing: Geography is a relatively

small department at Chapel Hill, with few majors, and it
produces very few graduates. And the year in question
happened to be the graduation year for one of the
better known geography majors: Michael Jordan. When
you add in his annual income of several million dollars,
and then divide it by the small number of graduates for
that year, you get a very high—and very misleading—
average: the mean, in this case, is not very helpful. The
median would be considerably more informative.

you get when you add all the values together, and then divide by the number of values. If
there are seven people in the class, and they scored 100, 95, 90, 85, 80, 80, and 16 on the
exam, then the arithmetic mean is 78. That is the mean, but in this case the mean is not very
helpful: It makes the grades on the exam look somewhat lower than they actually were. In
fact, most people did quite well on the exam, while one poor sod had a rough day. When
the distribution of values is skewed—as it is in this example, in which one score is much
lower—the arithmetic mean can be deceptive. It would be more informative to report the
median as the “average”: that is, the value in the middle, in this case 85 (three students
scored higher, and three scored lower). Or the mode might be a useful measure: the score
that occurred most often (in this case, the score of 80).
While it is convenient to have these three measures, there is also great potential for
deception. In 1999, the Republicans in the U.S. House of Representatives proposed an
“across the board” tax cut, which would have provided several hundred dollars in annual
tax cuts to the “average American.” True, if you use the arithmetic mean; true, but very misleading, for almost half the tax cut would go to the top 1%, those with incomes over
$300,000 a year: they would have received annual tax cuts of $40,000 a year, often more;
while the working poor, who work for minimum wage with no benefits, would have received
a tax cut of only $15 a year. When a distribution is tilted so heavily in one direction, claims
about the “average” can hide that tilt. Information about the median or mode would be
much more helpful; but then, if you are trying to pass a tax package in which half the money
would go to the richest 1%, you aren’t eager to help most people understand it.
Though the mean is the measure most often abused, the others also offer possibilities of distortion. For example, imagine a small company whose workers make the
following incomes: $900,000, $850,000, $800,000, $750,000, $50,000, $15,000, $12,000,
$12,000, and $12,000. If they report that their “average” salary is $50,000 (and that
their workers thereby receive good, solid, comfortable, middle-class incomes), this will

A Misleading “Average”
George W. Bush pushed the huge tax cut package in his
“economic growth package” by claiming that: “Under
this plan 92 million Americans receive an average tax
cut of $1,083. That’s fair. Twenty-three million smallbusiness owners across America will receive an average
income tax rate cut of $2,042. That matters.” Literally
true, but a very misleading use of averages, since the
tax cut is weighted heavily toward the wealthy, which
brings the “average tax cut” way up. It turns out that

those in the middle fifth of the income spectrum would
receive a tax cut of only $256. But the “average” is
much higher, since the top 1% would receive tax cuts
of $24,100, and those with annual incomes above
$1 million would receive tax cuts averaging $90,200.
And that $2,042 “average tax cut” for small-business
owners is also heavily tilted toward the wealthiest, with
the majority of small-business owners actually receiving
less than $500.2

Chapter 17

Thinking Critically about Statistics

345

certainly be a deceptive use of the median. Suppose the worker making $15,000 complains
about her salary, and is told to count her blessings, since she makes well above the average
salary of $12,000: that would be a deceptive use of the mode. (In fact, the salary distribution for this company is so skewed, there is probably no use of “average” that would be
very helpful.)
So reports of “averages” may be informative, but they can also cover deceptive
ambiguity, since “average” may indicate mean, median, or mode; and depending on which
measure is selected, the results can be easily manipulated.

EMPTY STATISTICS
Claims about averages can be misleading, but at least when you sort things out you are usually left with something meaningful. Some statistical assertions have no substance at all: for
example, claims like “New Plate Glow dishwashing detergent gets your dishes 43%
cleaner!” Certainly it makes sense to talk about some things being cleaner than others. For
example, adolescent boys often become significantly cleaner after they become interested
in adolescent girls. (I mean physically cleaner, not morally more wholesome.) And we can
compare two plates, and say that one is cleaner than another. But 43% cleaner? I’m not
sure what such precise plate cleanliness data could possibly be measuring.
In addition to the problem of trying to pin a precise number on a measure that does
not lend itself to such quantification, there is also the problem of 43% cleaner than what?
The older version of Plate Glow detergent? The leading competitor detergent? Or is it
supposed to get dishes 43% cleaner than washing with no detergent at all? Or perhaps
43% cleaner than the dishes were before they were washed? Unless the comparison base
is specified, the statistical claim is meaningless.

FINDING THE APPROPRIATE CONTEXT
Sometimes data can be accurate, but misleading in the context in which it is used. The
assault victim remembers that her assailant was wearing a Cleveland Browns stocking cap.
The police spot Jones walking a few blocks away, wearing a Cleveland Browns stocking
cap. Is it reasonable to conclude that Jones is a likely suspect? (Obviously we could
not reasonably conclude that Jones is the assailant on such flimsy evidence, but does his
wearing of the cap give reasonable grounds to identify him as a suspect?)
Consider the fact that less than .01% (less than one in 10,000) of men in the world
wear Cleveland Browns stocking caps. And Jones is one of those rare birds wearing such a
cap. That makes him a likely suspect, right?
Maybe if the crime occurred in Cairo, Mumbai, or Peking, where Cleveland Browns
stocking caps are unusual headgear; but if the assault occurred in Cleveland or Akron
during the month of November, then there would be much less reason to consider Jones
a likely suspect.
Swift Singer has won 70% of his races over his lifetime; so we should bet on Swift
Singer. He’s got a great chance of winning this race, right?
Not necessarily. Before we can conclude that, we need a better context for that 70%
winning percentage. Were those winning races against competition similar to the horses
Swift Singer is facing today? (If he dominated his races against very inferior competition
at small tracks, but is now facing top-stakes horses at Saratoga, then that winning
percentage may not be very reassuring.)
Sluggo has a lifetime batting average of .333, so there’s a one in three chance that
he will get a hit. Well, true, so far as it goes. Over his career he has 2,000 official at-bats,
and has gotten hits 667 times; so he has a one in three chance of getting a hit this time.
But lots of factors can complicate this calculation. Suppose Sluggo has been in a terrible

346

Chapter 17

Thinking Critically about Statistics

slump this year, and is only hitting .195 (most of his hits came in the early years of his
career, and now his skills are eroding). In that case, the more recent data would give a
better indication of his likelihood of getting a hit. Or suppose that Sluggo is great when
he plays at home (where he consistently hits over .400) but is mediocre on the road
(where he hits about .250), and this game is on the road. Or perhaps Sluggo has a great
batting average against right-handed pitchers, but can’t hit lefties with a tennis racquet,
and this pitcher is left-handed. Or maybe Sluggo does hit .333, but today he is facing
Tim Lincecum, who is a much tougher pitcher than average.
In short, determining the appropriate sample can be tricky, and very important. For
example, suppose someone is trying to decide whether to undergo a very expensive and
debilitating treatment that her doctor recommends as her only chance of surviving cancer.
Before embarking on this treatment program, she would want to know its chance of success.
She is told that this treatment has a 60% 5-year survival rate. That sounds promising, but she
needs more details. What’s the survival rate for cancer detected at the stage she is in (e.g., if
the cancer has already metastasized, the survival rate may decrease dramatically)? What’s
the survival rate for people over age 70, which is her category? (Some treatments are more
successful with younger patients.) What’s the survival rate for patients who also suffer from
diabetes and emphysema, as she does? (Of course there is also the problem that if we narrow down the sample too far, the sample will become so small that the results are meaningless: What’s the survival rate for 72-year-old Italian mothers of four who have diabetes and
emphysema, and smoke two packs a day, drink dry martinis, and live in Buffalo?)

CAUGHT OFF BASE
Even when the base of comparison is specified, that does not always clear things up. One
way to manipulate statistics is by using a favorable comparison base. For example, “Over
the past 5 years, our mutual fund has outperformed the market index by 14%.” This can
be helpful if the fund has been a poor performer during the last 2 years, but made strong
gains the 3 years before that. Funds tend to have good years and bad years, as their investment specialties flourish or falter. But by picking the right base year for comparison,
almost any fund can put a positive spin on the numbers.
Finally, there is another way of manipulating the base that is sometimes used by
retailers. An automobile dealership says that its markup on a particular model is only
10%: We are selling the car for $20,000, and it cost us $18,000. Two thousand is 10% of
20,000, so our markup is 10%. In one sense that’s true. But the customer may point out
that the actual markup on the car is over 11%: the cost of the car is $18,000, and the
dealer is selling it for $20,000, a markup of $2,000; and a markup of $2,000 is a little over
11% of the $18,000 base. To see the difference, suppose that you are making $50,000 a
year, and your employer comes to you with a plan: things are tough for the company this
year, so we have to cut your salary by 20%; but don’t worry, next year things will turn
around, and we’ll raise your salary by 20%, and you’ll be back where you started. Well, not
quite. The 20% cut drops your salary to $40,000. When you now receive a raise, 20% of
$40,000 is only $8,000, and you wind up with only $48,000.

STATISTICAL APPLES AND ORANGES
A special kind of deception occurs when statistical comparisons are made between groups
that are not comparable.
“Some people claim that snowmobiles are dangerous, because there have been
dozens of deaths and severe injuries to people who were riding on snowmobiles. But before
you jump to the conclusion that snowmobiles are dangerous, consider the thousands
of people who are killed and injured in automobiles. Of course there is some danger from

Chapter 17

Thinking Critically about Statistics

347

riding snowmobiles, but obviously not nearly so much danger as riding in your automobile.
In fact, when you add up the numbers, you will find that over a hundred times more people
are killed in automobile crashes than in snowmobile crashes; so we have to recognize that
while snowmobiles do pose some risk, they are at least a hundred times safer than cars.” It’s
not too difficult to see through that comparison. It’s obvious that more people will be killed
and injured in cars, because people ride in cars a lot more than they ride in snowmobiles.
It compares apples and oranges. (It’s like saying that riding your car is more dangerous than
playing Russian roulette, because more people are killed in cars than by playing Russian
roulette.) To make this a legitimate comparison, we would have to have a comparison of
how many people are killed or injured in cars for each hour of driving, compared to how many
are killed or injured on snowmobiles during each hour of riding.
The faulty comparison of cars to snowmobiles is rather obvious, but faulty statistical
comparisons are often more subtle. For example, suppose someone offers the following
argument: “Ninety-eight percent of all smokers live past age 25; only 97% of the population as a whole reaches age 25. So perhaps smoking actually increases your chances for
avoiding an early and untimely death!”
Suppose this data is correct. It shows nothing at all about whether smoking helps you
survive past age 25, because this is an example of comparing apples and oranges.
Fortunately, very few infants take up smoking. So the comparison is between people age 14
or 15 (when they start smoking) and people at birth: Obviously if you are age 14, you have
a much better chance of living to age 25 than does a newborn infant (the 14-year-old has
already avoided all the infant and early childhood mortality risks that the newborn must
now face). Instead of comparing the mortality rate of smokers for a 10-year period
(ages 15–25) with the mortality rate of nonsmokers from a 25-year period, it would be
more helpful to compare the mortality rates of smokers aged 15–25 with the mortality rates
of nonsmokers in the same age period.
Uncritical use of such comparisons can lead to absurd conclusions. For example, it
was reported some years ago (around the time that the movie Jaws came out) that shark
attacks on men were much more common than shark attacks on women. Some people
started to wonder why sharks apparently found men tastier than women. But there was
really no mystery to solve. It’s just that a large proportion of shark attacks were on surfers,
whose search for the “perfect wave” had drawn them a good distance away from shore,
and there were more men surfers than women.
In a 1978 study of male symphony conductors in the United States, a medical
researcher discovered that their mean length of life was 73.4 years. The mean length of
life for the overall U.S. male population was only 69.5. The researcher looked for what
caused symphony conductors to live longer, and concluded that their increased life span
was probably due to their unusual talent, drive, and sense of accomplishment. Nice
theory. But in fact there was nothing to explain. Even the most talented musicians rarely
become symphony conductors before age 32 (very few symphony conductors take that
job at birth). But the researcher used life expectancy from birth; the appropriate
comparison would be to examine the life expectancies of those who have already lived to
be age 32. In 1978, a U.S. male, age 32, had a life expectancy of an additional 40.5 years,
until age 72.5. The sample of symphony conductors averaged 73.4, which indicates there
is actually very little difference to be explained. The researcher was comparing baby
apples to adult oranges.
In 1981, the District of Columbia reported a wonderful and amazing drop in the
number of tuberculosis cases reported: from 341 in 1980 to 239 in 1981, a drop of 30%.
What caused this encouragingly steep decline? Better treatments? An improved
environment? Before answering, make sure there was really a decline to explain. In
1980, all suspected cases of TB (that were not definitely ruled out) were reported to the
TB control clinic as tuberculosis; in 1981, the reporting changed: Only cases that were
definitely confirmed as TB were reported. Again, a comparison of doubtful oranges with
certain apples.3

348

Chapter 17

Thinking Critically about Statistics

STATISTICAL HALF-TRUTHS
Chapter 9 noted that sometimes what is not stated is more important than the narrowly
true statement that is actually made. Statistics are not infrequently used for such deception and obfuscation. “Some people complain that the income of the top executives at
Strato Manufacturing is too high, while most of the workers get low wages and lousy
benefits. But that claim is simply untrue. In fact, the CEO at Strato receives an annual
salary of $600,000, and he has the highest salary at the company. Certainly that’s a decent
salary, but it’s not out of line; in fact, it is considerably less than the salary of most top
executives at similar companies.” The statement is literally true, but only half the truth is
being told. The CEO does make a salary of $600,000, but most of his money does not
come from his salary but instead from bonuses and stock options (not to mention
memberships in country clubs and a very generous retirement program). When those are
added in, his actual annual pay may be several times his salary.
Half-truths can also be employed to manipulate a company’s level of profits. There
are complaints that the XYZ nursing-home chain employs staffs that are too small to care
adequately for their residents, and that their workers are underpaid (usually minimum
wage, or just over minimum wage). But the XYZ nursing-home chain opens its books, and
shows that its profits are so low that it simply can’t afford to hire more caregivers or pay
them better. True, the profits at XYZ were low, but XYZ owns several subsidiary companies: X nursing supply company, Y maintenance company, and Z therapy specialists
staffing company. XYZ gets all its supplies from X, pays Y for all its maintenance, and contracts with Z for therapy services: and it pays all those companies very generously (well
above market rates) and those companies make handsome profits. So now XYZ can open
its books and show that its profits are minimal, while not mentioning the profits that are
being funnelled into these other companies they own. (It’s an old trick, but it never goes
out of fashion. Some states allow private operators to run bingo gambling games, so long
as a high percentage of the profits from the games goes to legitimate charities. So private
operators run games, and give 80% of the profits to charity. But, unfortunately, their profits are never very high, because they have high expenses: For example, hiring a janitorial
service to clean the facility. The janitorial service is paid a king’s ransom for its services,
and so the bingo company makes very low profits; but the janitorial service happens to be
owned by the guy who owns the bingo company.)
A variation on this game is sometimes played by large corporations that wish to portray their profits as very low. A huge petroleum company acknowledges that its overall
profits are huge, but claims that it makes a very small profit on each gallon of gas sold.
“Sure, Scrooge International Oil made several hundred million dollars in profits last year;
but we made a profit of only 3 cents on each gallon of gas we sold. That’s hardly excessive,
right?” The trick is that Scrooge Oil may have “sold” that gallon of gasoline several times
before it finally comes out of the pump to your car: Scrooge International sold the gallon
of gas to Scrooge North American, who sold it to Scrooge U.S., who sold it to Scrooge East
Coast, who sold it to Scrooge Pennsylvania, who finally sold it to you. The gallon of gas
never left the possession of Scrooge Oil, but it is “sold” five times, through paper transactions within the company. And so they make a profit of “only 3 cents per gallon sold,” but
you ultimately pay them a profit of 15 cents when you pump the gallon into your car.

Sample Size and “Statistical Significance”
In the popular image of medical research, the researcher administers the new experimental drug to patients dying of some terrible disease (such as pancreatic cancer) and
they all recover, and the researchers rejoice. It hardly ever happens that way. Instead,
researchers compare patients in the experimental group (patients who are actually taking
the experimental drug) with patients in a control group (who are usually taking whatever

Chapter 17

Thinking Critically about Statistics

349

treatment is standard treatment for this disease) and look to see if the patients in the
experimental group recover faster or (in the case of a disease such as pancreatic cancer,
which is almost invariably fatal) live a little longer than the patients who received the standard treatment. If enough of the patients in the experimental group live longer than the
patients in the control group, then the researchers have found a statistically significant
difference between the two groups; and while they will not have found a cure for pancreatic cancer, they will have discovered a better treatment method—and they will have some
indication that their research is heading in the right direction, and might eventually lead
to a cure. Basically, a statistically significant result is a result that statisticians determine
was very unlikely (less than one chance in 20) to occur by chance. Suppose I’m testing a
new drug to prevent colds. Of the 10 people in the experimental group (who received the
new drug), four develop a cold over the next 3 months; of the 10 people in the control
group (who received a placebo), six people suffered a cold during the same period. Have
I found a drug that is at least slightly effective in preventing colds? Probably not. That difference does not rise to the level of statistical significance; the result is more than likely
just the result of chance. On the other hand, if I run the same study with 10,000 subjects
in each group, and 4,000 people in the experimental group develop colds while 6,000 in
the control group suffer colds, then it is unlikely those results were the product of chance:
those results are at least 95% likely to be the result of a difference between the medication and the placebo, and so the results are statistically significant. I may not have found
the cure for the common cold, but at least I have likely found a medication that does some
good. So the larger your study, the more likely that you will gain a statistically significant
result. (There’s nothing strange about that: Flip a coin 10 times, most of the time—by
chance—it will not come out exactly five heads and five tails; in fact, if you do that several
times, you are likely to get some runs of only one or two heads, and some with heads
coming up eight or nine times. But if you flip a coin 10,000 times—and the coin is not
specially weighted, and no trickery is involved—then it is very unlikely that you will get
heads showing up less than 4,000 or more than 6,000 times.) So suppose there are some
reports about the bad effects of studying critical thinking: Several critical thinking
students have experienced insomnia, and some people are concerned that the study of
critical thinking may disrupt sleep patterns and cause insomnia. (I think it’s very doubtful: The students in my critical thinking classes never seem to have any difficulty sleeping.)
Anyway, I want to run a study that shows that there is no evidence that studying critical
thinking causes insomnia. If I keep my study very small, then even if the study shows that
the experimental group (who study critical thinking) have more instances of insomnia
than do the “placebo” control group (who are studying something else), that difference
will probably not be great enough to yield a statistically significant result. Those who want
to claim that a product—such as a herbicide or pesticide—is not harmful have taken this
lesson to heart: if you keep your studies very small, the results will hardly ever be statistically significant (even if your product is in fact quite harmful).

How to Make Your Study Yield the Results You Want
When your goal is to get a result, rather than discover the truth, there are ways to manipulate your study to get that result. The pharmaceutical companies are awash in cash, and
they are quite willing to spread it around in order to increase their profits. Unfortunately,
the temptations of the billions of dollars they can make from a popular drug can sometimes lead them to very questionable practices: practices that are scientifically flawed and
morally bankrupt. The problem is not so much with consciously and purposefully falsified
research—though that happens, especially when there is money to be made. Rather, the
more common problem is in responding to pressures and hopes and profits that lead one
to interpret research results—or even subtly shape research results—to reach the desired
conclusion. Certainly there are some researchers who cannot be bought or influenced;
unfortunately, there are some who can be. Suppose MegaPharma corporation has given

350

Chapter 17

Thinking Critically about Statistics

me a very generous contract for testing the safety and effectiveness of their new arthritis
drug: a research contract that has brought in lots of money and prestige to the university,
and made my dean very happy; has allowed me to hire several assistant professors and
generously fund a large number of graduate students; and has also paid me very handsomely for my own efforts. It’s not like MegaPharma came to me and said, “Look, here’s
several million dollars; your job is to create a research study that makes our new drug look
very effective and wonderfully safe.” But the pressures are certainly there: I know this is
potentially a blockbuster drug that could bring in billions in profits to MegaPharma; they
have given me—as “part of the MegaPharma family”—large stock options that will be
worth lots of money, if my research shows positive results and makes MegaPharma stock
shoot up; and I know that if I want to receive additional research contracts from
MegaPharma, then my chances will be much better if the research results are positive. So
I run the study, and now I have to evaluate those in the control group (who are taking a
placebo) and those taking new MPX (the experimental group). Do those arthritis sufferers taking MPX experience less joint pain? Do they show gains in flexibility? Are they—
my great fear—more likely to experience depression, or severe indigestion, or even heart
attacks or liver failure? Let’s see, here’s Joe, he’s in the experimental group who are taking MPX; and it looks to me as if he is feeling substantially better, and he seems to have
less trouble walking around; maybe he seems a little down, but that’s just normal mood
swing, not really depression. On the other hand, when I observe Jim—from the control
group, so taking a placebo rather than MPX—it seems to me that he is suffering increased
loss of flexibility; he says he is not, but in my judgment he is. But my judgment is obviously
influenced by what I want (and perhaps expect) to see: dramatic improvement in the patients taking MPX. That is the problem of confirmation bias, and that is why good medical
researchers use double-blind research—in which neither the test subjects nor the researchers interacting with the subjects know who is taking the drug and who is taking the
placebo. If my goal is to carry out accurate research, controlling confirmation bias—
through double-blind testing—is essential; but if my goal is to get the “right result,” confirmation bias can be very useful. (All scientists recognize that confirmation bias is a
major problem, and therefore—whenever possible—double-blind experiments are a
basic requirement of good medical science. But a recent study of 192 randomized trials,
at least half of which were funded by drug companies, found that almost half the trials
were not double-blind and thus did not control for confirmation bias. The study also
found that industry-sponsored research was much more likely to report favorable outcomes for the tested drug than were the studies not funded by the drug companies; and
the company-sponsored studies that were double-blind were less likely to reach conclusions favorable to the company.4)
If my “confirmation bias” is not enough to push the results for MPX into the positive column, then there are other possibilities: the results weren’t very good after
6 months; but maybe if we extend the study another 3 months, things will look better
(and if I’m getting positive results after 7 months, that would be a good stopping point).
Or maybe I can go back to the data from 4 months: If the study showed positive results
then, perhaps we can just make that the end point. Or possibly the test showed positive
results for those 55–60, but no one else, then we can report the positive results for that
group (“That was the group we really wanted to study anyway, right?”). If we look hard
enough at the data, we can almost always find some group during some time period that
had positive test results from MPX. After all, if we study enough people for long enough,
eventually chance will give us a positive result even if the drug we are testing is useless.
That is called cherry-picking or data-dredging: We dredge through all the data until we can
cherry-pick something positive, and we leave everything else out of the report. (And if
nothing I can do can turn the results of this study into something positive, MPX won’t
despair. They may have other researchers running similar studies; if my study fails to show
a positive result—or reveals that the drug may cause harmful results—then MPX can
decide not to publish my study, and instead publish one that looks more positive.)

Chapter 17

Thinking Critically about Statistics

351

Suppressing Unfavorable Results
In the mid-1990s, GlaxoSmithKline wanted to market
Paxil, an antidepressant drug with huge sales, for the
treatment of children. It ran three clinical trials in an
effort to show that Paxil was safe and effective for the
treatment of depressed children. The results were
terrible: Paxil didn’t work for treating childhood
depression; worse, significantly more children on
Paxil attempted suicide than did those in the control
group. In an internal memo to senior executives
at GlaxoSmithKline, the director of the studies made
this report:
The results of the studies were disappointing. The
possibility of obtaining a safety statement from this
data was considered but rejected. Consultation of the
marketing teams confirmed that this would be unacceptable commercially.

In fact the marketing people, in internal memos, were
quite clear that they did not want this study released:
Originally we had planned to do extensive media
relations surrounding this study until we actually viewed
the results. Essentially the study did not really show
paroxetine [Paxil] was effective in treating adolescent
depression, which is not something we want to publicize.

Not only did the study show Paxil was ineffective for treating
adolescent depression; it also indicated that Paxil was likely
to increase the risk of adolescent suicide. So GSK buried
the study, for several years; and rather than marketing
directly, they paid doctors to act as spokespersons, reporting that their adolescent patients had experienced positive
results when treated with Paxil (as no doubt some had: but
the studies indicate it was probably a placebo effect).5

Suppose my study shows a problem: turns out more of the subjects in the experimental group had heart attacks than did those in the control group—that’s the kind of
bad result that damages sales, and maybe even keeps the drug off the market. But let’s
look really closely at that result: The increased number of heart attacks occur only when
we compare experimental and control group subjects who were over 75; and now that
I think more carefully about the experimental design, it seems to me that we should limit
the experiment to people under 75, and drop all the data from subjects over 75; and
when we do that, the heart attack results disappear. Or if that doesn’t work, let’s look
again at the people we enrolled in the study: you know, several of those people who suffered the heart attacks while taking MPX probably shouldn’t have been in the study in the
first place; now that we look really closely, we find they didn’t fit the experimental design
(maybe one of them drank a bit more than he admitted when he was enrolled; another
didn’t really fit, because her arthritic condition wasn’t really as severe as the testing protocol required; and a third doesn’t really fit, because his work environment posed special
hazards). And once those “unsuitable” subjects are eliminated from the study, now we
find there was no significant difference in heart attack rates. (In an early study of Paxil—
a drug widely used for treatment of depression—suicide rates for those taking Paxil were
substantially higher than for those taking a placebo; but GlaxoSmithKline, the pharmaceutical giant that produces Paxil, apparently added to the study a number of suicides
that occurred to members of the control group during the “washout” period: the period
before the actual study starts, when subjects take no drugs so that any previously taken drugs
could washout of their systems and not affect the study. When those pretest cases were
added, the suicide rates for the Paxil experimental group and the control groups were
similar. Harvard psychiatrist Joseph Glenmullen, a researcher who analyzed the Paxil
study, claimed that if the research results had been reported correctly—without adding
the suicides that occurred prior to running the study—they would have shown the suicide
risk for those taking Paxil to be eight times the risk on a placebo.) If you suggest that I am
deliberately manipulating the research results—much less falsifying the research—I shall
reject and resent your accusation. And, in fact, I may not even be aware—or at least
not admit to myself—that such manipulation is occurring; but the pressure to produce
positive results can have a profound effect on how tests are run—and can result in

352

Chapter 17

Thinking Critically about Statistics

“cutting corners” on careful controlled objective testing, leading to results that are unreliable. Of course eventually MPX will be found to be useless—and even dangerous—to
arthritis sufferers, but that will take a long time (the placebo effects will carry us for quite
a while). And in the meantime, my stock option will make me wealthy, MegaPharma will
make billions of dollars off MPX, and arthritis sufferers will pay a lot of money for a
useless drug—and some will die of heart attacks caused by the drug. Will my reputation
as a scientist suffer? Perhaps, but not with the drug companies that hand out the huge
contracts and big bonuses. When other drug companies see that I was able to make a silk
purse out of an MPX sow’s ear that was not only useless but actually harmful, my attractiveness as a “researcher” will be greatly enhanced.

Exercise 17-1
What additional information would you need in order to know whether the following claims are
meaningful and useful, or misleading (or perhaps empty)? Explain what sort of statistical deception
might be involved in each of these claims.
1. Over the last 7 years, the average tuition increase at Home State University has been only 4%.
2. It is sometimes claimed that heavy smoking poses a severe health hazard. But, in fact, in the United
States over 50% of people who smoke live past age 70.
3. I pay my employees very fairly. In fact, my average employee makes $50,000 a year; and that’s not bad.
4. Skydiving is really much less dangerous than soccer: Last year in Canada, there were fewer than 100
serious injuries from skydiving, and more than 300 serious injuries from playing soccer.
5. Chromo cars are wonderfully durable and reliable. In fact, over 80% of Chromo cars sold in the
United States during the past 10 years are still on the road.
6. You will get superb, careful, quality care at GreenBriar Hospital, and the data prove it. At GreenBriar,
we have a mortality rate of only 1%: fewer than 1 out of every 100 GreenBriar admissions dies in our
hospital. University Hospital, by comparison, has a mortality rate of 3%, triple the GreenBriar rate.
So for the best in care, go to GreenBriar.
7. Super Cleano gets your dishes 30% cleaner!
8. Enrollment at Home State University has increased by 20% over the past 5 years. Obviously Home
State is doing something right!

SURVEYS
Since public opinion surveys play such a prominent part in contemporary political life—
surveys on how many people want restrictions on abortion rights, what percentage of the
population favors capital punishment, how many people would vote for Senator Scam if
the election were held tomorrow—it is important to recognize some of the ways that surveys can be hazardous to the truth.
The first difficulty with drawing conclusions from samples—including survey
samples—is making sure that the sample is sufficiently large to support a reliable conclusion. We are all tempted to make faulty generalizations on the basis of inadequate
samples. I get lost while driving through Winnipeg, and stop to ask directions. The person I ask spends 10 minutes giving me detailed directions, and even draws a map to help
me. “The people in Winnipeg sure are friendly,” I say to myself. The next day I am again
lost, on this occasion in Edmonton. The person from whom I request guidance answers
rather abruptly that he is in a hurry, telling me I should buy a map. “Edmonton residents
certainly are a rude and surly lot,” I conclude. We are all tempted to such faulty inductive
conclusions on the basis of ridiculously small samples. If I ask directions of another

Chapter 17

Thinking Critically about Statistics

353

Edmonton citizen who also brusquely refuses, I may conclude that the people of Edmonton are among the nastiest on Earth. But obviously it is impossible to draw an accurate
conclusion about the people of a large city on the basis of a two-person sample.
The toughest and most common challenge for surveys—a problem that can bedevil
even honest efforts to secure reliable survey results—is drawing the survey from a
representative sample. If you want to do an accurate survey of Canadian citizens, then you
must be sure that your survey covers all ethnic groups, all age groups, new immigrants as
well as longtime citizens, urban and rural and suburban citizens, rich and poor and middle class, citizens from every province, from all education levels, from a broad spectrum
of employment categories (bankers and oil field workers, physicians and the unemployed, secretaries and farmers); and on top of that, you have to be sure that your sample
is proportionate to the entire target population (it won’t work to include 20 French
Canadians in your sample of 1,000, if the actual proportion of French Canadians in the
population as a whole is much greater). Also, you must be sure that the people interviewed are randomly selected. If you mail survey letters all across Canada, and base your
survey on the responses of the 10% who went to the trouble to fill out the survey and mail
it back, then you are not getting a representative sample. The people who feel strongly
enough to complete the survey may have stronger opinions about the issues than those
who did not complete the survey; they may be more (or less) educated; they have more
leisure time than the population as a whole. The problem is even worse if you do a “survey” based on self-selected respondents (and worst of all if respondents actually have to
pay for the privilege of being included, such as “surveys” that require respondents to call
a 900 toll number). For example, Ann Landers did a “survey” on how parents felt about
having children: If they had it to do over again, would they have children?
Dear Ann Landers:
Saw another letter in your column from a complaining woman—bogged down by two children—sorry she can’t live the same kind of life as before. Travel! Fun! Such happy days! Now
she is “dead-tired” and “tied-down.” Then you, Ann Landers, bring up your survey again—the
one where you asked, “If you had it to do over again, would you have had children?” You said
70 percent replied, “No.” I ask you, Ann, when did you survey this 70 percent? When the children were babies? One year old? Six years old? Teenagers? College graduates? Or after they
had children of their own? I found the time raising my children the most exciting and fun
years of my life. I wouldn’t have missed them for anything. I don’t believe your survey. Anyone can publish a “survey,” and the public will believe it if it is printed in the newspaper—
Suspicious in Palo Alto

Dear Palo:
That 70 percent represented parents from every group you mentioned. The majority of “No”
responses came from (1) young parents with babies and (2) parents of teenagers. I am not
surprised that you are suspicious about the survey. I wouldn’t have believed it either, except
for the evidence right there in huge piles on my desk. I still haven’t recovered from it.6

Ann Landers claims that this is a reliable survey because it has a huge sample and it
covers parents of children of all ages. But that is far from sufficient to make it reliable. We
must be sure that it includes wealthy, middle-class, and poor parents; single parents;
parents who had children at a very early age, and parents who had children late in life;
well-educated parents and poorly educated parents; conservative parents and liberal parents; parents from west Texas and Long Island and Seattle; fathers as well as mothers. And
it’s not enough just to include survey respondents from each of those groups: They must
respond to the survey in numbers proportionate to their actual size. (If 10% of the target
population—the group that the survey is supposed to tell us about—have household
incomes under $15,000, then approximately 10% of the survey respondents must share

354

Chapter 17

Thinking Critically about Statistics

that characteristic.) It’s easy to see that one group of parents will be badly underrepresented in Ann’s sample: namely, parents who rarely read newspapers. And there is also a
group that is heavily overrepresented in the sample: parents who like to participate in
surveys. In order to be a part of the sample, a parent had to write a letter, address an
envelope, buy a first-class stamp—and only a small and unrepresentative fraction of
parents would go to that much bother to participate in Ann’s “survey.” Thus even if Ann’s
sample includes a tremendous diversity of responses, it still will not provide a reliable
survey. The moral of the story: It is very difficult to obtain a genuinely representative
sample of a large and diverse population. If you see a “survey” in which people are invited
to fill out a magazine questionnaire and mail it in, then you should treat that “survey” as
exactly what it is: public entertainment rather than a reliable survey.
In addition to the problems of small sample and unrepresentative sample, there can
be problems with the survey questions. Suppose we are conducting a survey on whether
the people of our state favor a ban on dove hunting. The phrasing of the question may
influence the survey results. If we ask, “Should hunters be allowed to shoot doves?” then
the question appeals to our general preference to let people do as they wish. If we ask
instead, “Should doves be protected from hunters?” we tap the desire to protect the
innocent. Even more obviously, we might get the answer we want by asking, “Should
gentle mourning doves be protected from being stalked and gunned down by hunters?”
or, for the opposite result, “Should the dove population be regulated and kept in check
by allowing hunters to harvest a limited number of doves?”
Rigged “surveys” often used rigged questions: “Do you favor a tax cut that will stimulate investment, increase personal savings, and boost the economy?” And from the other
side: “Do you favor a tax cut that will increase inflation, take needed money from
medicare and social security, and threaten our healthy economy?” When such “survey
questions” are mailed out to a “sample” that probably already favors the side sending the
mailing, it is not surprising when it turns out that “almost 70% of the American
people favor” a tax cut and simultaneously “more than two-thirds of the American people
oppose” the same tax cut. Another example (given by Joel Best, in Stat-Spotting: A Field
Guide to Identifying Dubious Data) comes from competing surveys concerning school
voucher programs. The National Education Association (which represents public school
teachers, and opposes vouchers) included this question in their survey: “Do you think tax
dollars should be used to assist parents who send their children to private, parochial, or
religious schools, or should tax dollars be spent to improve public schools?” The Center
for Education Reform (a pro-voucher organization) ran their own survey, with this
question: “How much do you support providing parents with the option of sending their
children to the school of their choice—public, private, or parochial—rather than only to

Getting the Survey Results You Want
If you are simply interested in getting survey results that
support your position—rather than accurate survey results—
there are many ways of doing that. One way, as already
mentioned, is to rig the questions to get favorable answers; for example, one “survey” that was designed to get a
result opposing sex education in schools posed the question this way: “Do you favor providing school children
with pornographic material in the guise of sex education?” Not surprisingly, most people “surveyed” objected
to sex education.
There is another method that is also effective in
producing slanted results: simply “survey” people you

are confident will agree with your views. If you want a
survey that opposes handgun registration, survey
members of the National Rifle Association. If you are
looking for survey results opposing legalized abortion,
survey active members of the Catholic Church. If you
want a survey opposing oil drilling in Alaskan Wilderness areas, survey members of the Sierra Club. Or if
you want a survey favoring public funding for a new
football stadium, survey subscribers to Pro Football
Weekly.

Chapter 17

Thinking Critically about Statistics

355

the school to which they are assigned?” Not surprisingly, the two surveys yielded very
different results.
Another source of survey problems is the subtle (and sometimes not so subtle)
influence of the surveyor. A sweet old lady, who reminds me of my grandmother,
arrives at the door wearing her Daughters of the American Revolution pin. She wants
to ask a single survey question: “Do you favor a constitutional amendment that would
outlaw the burning of the American flag?” “Well, I love Old Glory, and I hate it when
our flag is burned. I’m a bit worried about restricting free speech, but surely there are
other ways of protesting. So yes, I suppose I would favor an amendment banning flag
burning.” Later, a pleasant surveyor arrives on my doorstep wearing a button from the
American Civil Liberties Union, and asks exactly the same question: “Do you favor a
constitutional amendment that would outlaw the burning of the American flag?”
“Well, I’m not really in favor of flag burning, but I don’t like the idea of placing restrictions on free speech. And after all, flag burning is a very rare occurrence. Overall,
I would have to say that such an amendment is not a good idea.” So what’s going on?
Am I just being two-faced? Not really; well, maybe a little. It’s just that I, like many
people, would rather make people happy than upset them, and I suspect that the
surveyor wearing the DAR pin supports the amendment, and the ACLU surveyor
opposes it. My views on the issue aren’t that strong one way or the other, so I’m willing
to go along with what the surveyor wants. Obviously there are many people who do
have strong feelings about the subject, and their survey opinions would not change
from interviewer to interviewer. But if only one in five are undecided, and will go along
with whoever happens to be asking the question, then it should not be surprising when
one group reports their survey shows that Americans favor the amendment, with 60%
in favor and 40% opposed; and the other group reports a survey showing exactly the
opposite result. For a legitimate survey, it is essential that those surveyed do not know
the views of the surveyors.
Politicians sometimes use “surveys” that abandon even the pretense of objectivity.
Called “push polls,” these are designed to sound like surveys but are actually an attempt
to influence those who are “surveyed.” For example, “If you knew that candidate Joe
Jones wants to increase the tax burden on the middle class, would you vote for him for
Senate?” “If you knew that candidate Joan Salter favors destroying social security, would
you vote for her as your member of the House of Representatives?” Such “surveys” pull
out all the tricks: loaded questions, obvious identification of the source of the “survey,”
and probably unrepresentative samples as well.

Exercise 17-2
1. We want to know what proportion of the graduates of Home State University are pleased with the
education they received. Which of these would be the best source for a sample, and why? Which
would not yield a representative sample?
a. The names and addresses of graduates supplied by the alumni affairs office.
b. The homecoming football game.
c. The registrar’s records of graduates.
2. Do most baseball fans favor the use of a designated hitter? Which of the following samples would be
most representative?
a. A call-in survey during a televised major league baseball game.
b. A survey included in programs sold at major league baseball parks.
c. A survey included in the sports sections of several major daily newspapers. (None of the
above are very good. How would you get a representative sample? You must think carefully
about exactly who your target group is.)

356

Chapter 17

Thinking Critically about Statistics

3. If you wanted to find out whether most students at your college favor banning smoking in classrooms, how would you go about setting up a reliable survey to answer that question? In particular,
what would you do to make sure your sample was representative?
4. Suppose we are trying to obtain a representative sample of all adult residents of the United States.
The samples below are becoming progressively more representative (i.e., B is more representative
than A and C is more representative than B). Explain why.
a. Interviewing from randomly selected residential telephone numbers.
b. Interviewing from randomly selected residences.
c. Random selection of individuals from census records.
5. Suppose that you want to do a survey that you can release to the press showing that most citizens
favor (or oppose, you can take your choice) a ban on private ownership of assault weapons. How
would you manipulate such a survey?

Study and Review on mythinkinglab.com

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

What are the three measures that fall under the heading of “average”?
Give an example of an “empty” statistic.
Give an example of statistical “apples and oranges.”
What is “statistical significance”?
What is “confirmation bias,” and how can it be prevented?
Describe some of the problems that can result in inaccurate surveys.

NOTES
1
2
3

4

5
6

Actually, there are five, including the geometric mean and the harmonic mean, but those measures are less
common.
Figures from an analysis by the Urban Institute-Brookings Institution Tax Policy Center.
The last two examples were drawn from an excellent book by Abram J. Jaffee and Herbert F. Spirer,
Misused Statistics: Straight Talk for Twisted Numbers. See the additional readings at the end of this chapter for
more details.
Lisa Bero, Fieke Oostvogel, Peter Bacchetti, and Kirby Lee, “Factors Associated with Findings of Published Trials of Drug-Drug Comparisons: Why Some Statins Appear More Efficacious Than Others,” PLoS
Medicine, June 5, 2007.
Information taken from “GlaxoSmithKline’s Deadly Cover-Up,” by Shelley Jofre, posted on Alternet, August 8, 2007.
Reprinted by permission of Ann Landers and News America Syndicate.

INTERNET RESOURCES
A superb source for extensive, clearly presented information on surveys and polls is at
www.publicagenda.org. This is the site for “Public Agenda Online: The Inside Source for Public
Opinion and Policy Analysis.” It is a treasure trove of accurate and useful information on almost any
major political or social issue, from abortion to euthanasia to welfare reform. Be sure to check their
“Cautionary notes about survey findings,” included in the material on each issue.
An informative, very interactive site with clear information on political polling and its pitfalls
is www.learner.org/exhibits/statistics (part of the Annenberg/CPB Projects). It is presented in the form
of planning an ongoing political campaign.

Chapter 17

357

Thinking Critically about Statistics

ADDITIONAL READING
For a more extensive introductory treatment of induction, see Brian Skyrms, Choice and Chance: An Introduction to Inductive Logic (Belmont, CA: Dickenson, 1966).
A book that raises some of the most famous questions
concerning inductive logic is Fact, Fiction and Forecast
by Nelson Goodman (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1955).
A very readable book on the difficulties involved in
surveys is Michael Wheeler, Lies, Damn Lies, and Statistics
(New York: W. W. Norton, 1976).
A slightly dated but still entertaining look at statistical skullduggery is offered by Darrell Huff, How to Lie with
Statistics (New York: W. W. Norton, 1954). A more recent
book along the same lines is A Mathematician Reads the
Newspaper by John Allen Paulos (New York: HarperCollins, 1995). My favorite of the books on statistical

fallacies is perhaps Herbert F. Spirer, Louise Spirer, and
Abram J. Jaffee, Misused Statistics: Straight Talk for Twisted
Numbers, 2nd ed. (New York: Marcel Dekker, 1998). Another
excellent book on statistical errors and deceptions—
aimed at journalists, but readable and interesting for
anyone interested in the subject—is Statistical Deception at
Work by John Mauro (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum,
1992). Still another is Joel Best, Stat-Spotting: A Field Guide
to Identifying Dubious Data (Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press, 2008).
An excellent and very readable book on everyday
statistical reasoning, and on the confusions that can arise
from common misconceptions concerning probability, is
Robyn M. Dawes, Everyday Rationality: How Pseudo-Scientists,
Lunatics, and the Rest Systematically Fail to Think Rationally
(Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 2001).

Read the Document on mythinkinglab.com
Matrixx Initiatives v. James Siracusano, U.S. Supreme Court
(2011). This case focuses on questions related to statistical
significance, lack of statistical significance, and their
implications.

Castaneda v. Partida, 430 U.S. 482 (1977). This
Supreme Court case examines statistical studies and their
significance for drawing conclusions concerning racial
and ethnic discrimination.

18

❖❖❖

Symbolic Sentential Logic

Listen to the Chapter Audio on mythinkinglab.com
In Chapter 14, we talked about the valid deductive argument forms modus ponens and
modus tollens (and about their scurrilous invalid impostors, affirming the consequent and
denying the antecedent). Modus ponens and modus tollens arguments intuitively appear to
be valid; the problem is, denying the antecedent and affirming the consequent also
appear to be valid, and they are not. We know that they are invalid, because we can find
examples of arguments having that logical form, but having premises we know are true
and a conclusion that is false: If Michael Jordan scored 100 points in every game, then the
Chicago Bulls won the NBA championship; Michael Jordan did not score 100 points in
every game; therefore, the Chicago Bulls did not win the NBA championship. True
premises, false conclusion, invalid argument.
But there’s got to be an easier way of determining whether a deductive argument is valid
or invalid. After all, it requires considerable imagination to come up with such examples—
especially as arguments become more complicated—and on most mornings my imagination
gutters. Even worse, while finding an example of true premises and false conclusion will
always prove an argument form invalid, the failure to find such an example does not prove that
an argument is valid (it may prove only the poverty of one’s imagination). So we need some
means of proving arguments valid and a more convenient method of proving arguments
invalid: a method that imposes less stress and strain on the imaginative capacities.

TRUTH-FUNCTIONAL DEFINITIONS
Fortunately, such a method is readily available, it is simple to use, and it does both jobs
with equal facility. It’s called the truth-table method of determining validity and invalidity.

Negation
To use this method, we have to think carefully about the conditions under which
statements are true, as well as when they are false. Let’s start with a simple statement:
The Chicago Bulls won the 1993 NBA championship. That statement happens to be true.

358

Chapter 18

359

Symbolic Sentential Logic

(Being a Cleveland Cavs fan, I’m not particularly pleased that it’s true; it is true, nonetheless.)
So let’s consider what happens when we apply negation to that statement. Symbolize
“The Chicago Bulls won the 1993 NBA championship” as B (for Bulls).
B
TRUE

~B
FALSE

Now consider a false statement: The Cleveland Cavs won the 1993 NBA championship.
(Call it C for Cavs.)
C

~C

FALSE

TRUE

Since it is not the case that the Cavs won the 1993 NBA championship, the negation of C is
true; and of course C—the Cavs won the 1993 NBA championship—is, sadly, false.
By combining these, we can give a truth-functional definition for negation, by means
of a truth table. Let D stand for any statement you like (“The Bulls won the championship,”
“The Cavs won the championship,” “Surf’s up,” “Bananas are high in potassium,” “Eating
spinach causes flat feet,” or whatever). The truth-functional definition for negation can
be given by:
D

~D

TRUE
FALSE

FALSE
TRUE

That is, if “the Bulls won” is true, then “it is not the case that the Bulls won” is false; and if “the
Bulls won” is false, then “it is not the case that the Bulls won” is true. Since any statement
must be true or false, that covers all the possibilities and provides a full truth-functional
definition for negation (for ~).
As noted in Chapter 14, the same thing applies if we negate a negation. Suppose
that you greet me with a cheery smile and announce that it is a beautiful morning. Since
I am not a morning person, I shall certainly deny your claim: “It is not a beautiful
morning,” I will respond. (If your statement is true, and it is indeed a beautiful morning,
then my negation of your statement is false; if you lied to me, and it is in fact false that it
is a beautiful morning, then my statement—the negation of your false statement—is
true.) If you are really adamant, you may continue to insist: “It is not the case that it is not
a beautiful morning.” And that, of course, is the logical equivalent of saying that it is a
beautiful morning; that is, ~~B is logically equivalent to B. And we could go on with the
argument. I might answer, “It is not the case that it is not the case that it is not a beautiful
morning.” (~~~B is logically equivalent to ~B.) And you might respond (again with the
logical equivalent of “It is a beautiful morning”) by asserting that “It is not the case that it
is not the case that it is not the case that it is not a beautiful morning.” But by this time the
conversation has lost all interest for anyone other than logicians and Oscar the Grouch.

Disjunction
Once you have the hang of truth-functional definitions—and how they are defined by
truth tables, like the one above for negation—it’s easy to learn truth-functional definitions
for other logical connectives. Consider the disjunction, which functions in either–or
statements. The statement “Either Joan is at the party or Bill is at the party” is a disjunction.
As we shall use it, it will always mean “either–or, and maybe both.” That is, we shall interpret

360

Chapter 18

Symbolic Sentential Logic

it as an inclusive disjunction. Sometimes, of course, in ordinary language, we use either–or
as an exclusive disjunction, meaning “either–or, but not both.” For example, if Joan and Bill
have recently been feuding, then when we say, “Either Joan is at the party or Bill is at the
party,” that may be understood as meaning one of them—but certainly not both—is
present. But the more ordinary usage of either–or is inclusive: At least one is at the party,
and possibly both. And that is how we’ll use disjunction: as inclusive, not exclusive. The
symbol we shall use is ∨: Thus D ∨ G means: “Either D or G, and maybe both.” While the
whole statement is called a disjunction, each part is called—not very originally—a disjunct.
“Either Joan is at the party or Bill is at the party” is a disjunction; “Joan is at the party” is one
disjunct of that disjunction; “Bill is at the party” is also a disjunct.
The truth-functional definition of disjunction is thus:
D

G

D∨G

TRUE
TRUE
FALSE
FALSE

TRUE
FALSE
TRUE
FALSE

TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
FALSE

That is, if both disjuncts are true, then the entire disjunction is true; if one disjunct is true
and the other is false, the disjunction is still true; in fact, the only way the disjunction can
be false is if all the disjuncts (in this case, both of the disjuncts) are false. Or another way of
putting it: If at least one disjunct is true, then the disjunction is true.

Conjunction
With disjunction in hand, conjunction is simple. A conjunction is a “both–and” statement:
Both Mars and Jupiter are planets in our solar system. For that to be true, it must be the
case both that Mars is a planet in our solar system and that Jupiter is a planet in our solar
system. (If Jupiter decided to leave our solar system, then the conjunction would become
false.) Since we called the parts of a disjunction disjuncts, it does not require psychic powers to guess that the parts of a conjunction will be called conjuncts. Thus “Mars is a planet
in our solar system” and “Jupiter is a planet in our solar system” are both conjuncts of that
conjunction. And all the conjuncts must be true in order for the entire conjunction to be
true. The symbol for conjunction that we shall use is &. Thus the truth table for conjunction—the truth-functional definition of conjunction—looks like this:
D

G

D &G

TRUE
TRUE
FALSE
FALSE

TRUE
FALSE
TRUE
FALSE

TRUE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE

Just as in the truth-functional definitions of negation and disjunction, the truth-functional
definition of conjunction covers all the possibilities: D may be true while G is true, D may
be true while G is false, D may be false while G is true, and both D and G may be false. Those
are all the possible truth-value assignments, and the truth-functional definition tells what
the truth value of the conjunction is for each and every one of those possible truth-value
assignments.

Conditional
There’s just one more truth-functional definition to examine (actually, there are more,
but this is the last one we’ll use), and I’ve saved the best for last. Consider the conditional.

Chapter 18

361

Symbolic Sentential Logic

If A then B. If Drew Brees has a good game, then the Saints will win. If I ace this exam,
I’ll pass the course. If more people smoke, cancer deaths will increase. If Batman is
captured, then evil will triumph. If wishes were horses, then beggars would ride. It’s a type
of statement with which you are already quite familiar; and from your extensive study of
necessary and sufficient conditions, you are on especially intimate terms with conditional
statements. So you already know that in the statement “If the sun shines, then we’ll go on
a picnic,” the antecedent is “the sun shines” and the consequent is “we’ll go on a picnic.” So
developing a truth-functional definition—by means of a truth table—for the conditional
is a simple matter:
D

G

D →G

TRUE
TRUE
FALSE
FALSE

TRUE
FALSE
TRUE
FALSE

TRUE
FALSE
TRUE
TRUE

Some of this may seem a bit strange, so let’s go through each truth-value assignment.
When the antecedent and the consequent are both true, then the conditional statement
is true. That’s obvious enough, right? The sun shines, and we do go on the picnic; the
statement is true. But suppose the antecedent is true and the consequent is false: the sun
shines, but no picnic. In that case, I lied to you. I promised that “If the sun shines, then
we’ll go on a picnic”; the sun is shining, no picnic is forthcoming, the conditional
statement is false. In fact, that is the only way the conditional statement can be false: true
antecedent, false consequent. Now suppose that the antecedent is false: that is, it is not the
case that the sun shines. Well, then, all bets are off; there’s no way I can be accused of
deceiving you. What I said was strictly about what would happen if the sun shines; I made
no promises about what would happen if the sun did not shine. So if the antecedent is
false, and the consequent is true—the sun doesn’t shine, but so what, we go on a picnic
anyway—then I certainly haven’t broken any promises, right? My statement is not false, so
it must be true. And of course if the sun does not shine (the antecedent is false) and
we do not go on a picnic (the consequent is also false), then that’s rather sad, but again
I certainly can’t be accused of deceiving you; again, the truth value of the conditional will
have to be true. (If you can run a mile in under 3 minutes, then you’ll win an Olympic
gold medal; that’s true, even though you can’t run a mile in under 3 minutes and you will
not win an Olympic gold medal.) It seems simple, doesn’t it?
Maybe it’s not that simple. There’s a problem. Consider this statement: “If I play
LeBron James one-on-one in basketball, then I’ll beat him.” Now that is a perfectly
ridiculous statement. LeBron James could be suffering from the worst game of his career,
and I could be playing wildly over my head, and LeBron would still beat me without
raising a sweat: LeBron can soar, and I can barely get off the court; LeBron is a fabulous
ball-handler, and I have trouble getting the ball to midcourt in your average pick-up game
at the gymn. You get the picture. Still, that conditional statement is true. For while the
consequent is certainly false, so is the antecedent: It is not the case that I play LeBron
James one-on-one in basketball; LeBron prefers to play against more worthy opponents.
Yet—according to the truth-table definition given above—that statement must be true.
But if our truth table assigns true to a statement that is obviously and absurdly false, then
something is wrong.

Material Implication
Actually it’s not as bad as all that. Conditionals with false antecedents can be bothersome,
but they rarely cause a lot of difficulty. But because of the problems with false antecedents,
it’s not quite accurate to say we are developing a truth-functional definition for our ordinary

362

Chapter 18

Symbolic Sentential Logic

notion of conditional, because as the above example shows, we are not. So instead of a truthfunctional definition for conditional, we shall substitute material implication. That is a relation
that is very similar to the conditional, but without any claims of real connection between the
antecedent and the consequent. Thus while the conditional “If I play LeBron James, I will
win” is false, as a material implication it will count as true. That’s because the material implication doesn’t imply any real connection between the antecedent and the consequent; it
implies only that when the antecedent is true the consequent must be true: that the consequent will not be false when the antecedent is true. And since that is the case here (the
antecedent will not be true and the consequent false, simply because the antecedent will not
be true—I’m not playing LeBron James) the material implication is true.
So what we shall actually do is translate conditional statements as statements of
material implication; and the truth-functional definition given above for conditional is
not really for conditional statements; rather, it is for material implication:
D

G

D→G

TRUE
TRUE
FALSE
FALSE

TRUE
FALSE
TRUE
FALSE

TRUE
FALSE
TRUE
TRUE

So in sum, we shall treat conditionals as if they were statements of material implication,
and we shall use the truth-functional definition of material implication when checking
the truth value of conditionals. Since we are primarily interested in testing validity, that
should not cause much difficulty, because treating conditionals as if they were statements
of material implication will generally not affect the validity or invalidity of the arguments
we shall be examining. So while I shall continue to call if–then statements conditionals,
those who insist on being logically scrupulous will remember that they are really statements of material implication.

Exercise 18-1
First diagram the following statements; then, using the truth tables for negation, disjunction,
conjunction, and conditional (material implication truth table), tell whether each one is true or
false. (You will have to use knowledge of the real world as well as your knowledge of the truth tables.)
Examples:
a. Either Barack Obama was elected president of the United States in 2008 or the chickadee is the
national bird of the United States.
B ∨ C; B is true, C is false; thus (by the second line of the truth-functional definition of disjunction)
the statement is true.
b. If Venus is the largest planet in the solar system, then there is intelligent life elsewhere in our universe.

∨ → I (I stands for: there is intelligent life elsewhere in our universe). The antecedent is false
(Jupiter is largest). Is the consequent true, or is it false? Who knows? But for our purposes,
who cares? We don’t need to know, since we already know that the conditional statement must be
true: Since the antecedent is false, the statement will be true no matter what the truth value of
the consequent.
1.
2.
3.
4.

Orange juice contains vitamin C and baseball is played with a round ball.
If some apples are red, then the Earth is flat.
Either the Earth is flat or Barcelona is in Spain.
If the Earth is flat, then all apples are orange.

Chapter 18

363

Symbolic Sentential Logic

Either Jupiter is the largest planet in our solar system or Paris is in France.
If Republicans support universal health coverage, then Oprah Winfrey is the Queen of England.
Iraq had weapons of mass destruction and George Bush won the Nobel Prize for physics.
The Earth orbits around the Sun, and Mars orbits around Jupiter.
If a basketball is square, then Jupiter is the largest planet in our solar system.
Either it is not the case that Jupiter is the largest planet in our solar system or Egypt is in South America.
Jupiter is the largest planet in our solar system, and it is not the case that Egypt is in South America.
If Jupiter is the largest planet in our solar system, then it is not the case that the Danube River flows
through Africa.
13. Either Jupiter is the largest planet in our solar system or Plato’s maternal grandfather was an only child.
14. If it is not the case that Jupiter is the largest planet in our solar system, then Plato’s maternal grandfather
was an only child.

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

TESTING FOR VALIDITY AND INVALIDITY
Once you’ve learned to use truth tables to determine the truth value of statements, it’s an
easy step to apply that knowledge to the testing of deductive arguments for validity or
invalidity. Think back to the definition of a valid argument: In a valid argument, if all its
premises are true then its conclusion must be true; or alternatively, in a valid argument, it
is impossible for all its premises to be true and its conclusion false. So let’s examine a
couple of arguments—our old friends modus ponens and affirming the consequent—using
the truth-table definitions to test validity.
Modus ponens, as you vividly recall, has this form:
A→B
A
∴B
In this argument, there are two variables, A and B, and they can vary in truth value: Each
may be either true or false. That gives us a total of four possibilities:
A

B

TRUE
TRUE
FALSE
FALSE

TRUE
FALSE
TRUE
FALSE

Now all we have to do is try out each of those four possibilities. Validity requires that in
every case in which all the premises are true, the conclusion is also true. That is, we shall be
checking to be sure that it is impossible for all the premises to be true and the conclusion
false: Under every possible truth-value assignment that makes all the premises true, the
conclusion must also be true.
So, let’s try it out (using T for true and F for false). We’ll number the lines to make
it a bit easier.

1.
2.
3.
4.

A

B

A →B/

A/∴B

T
T
F
F

T
F
T
F

T
T
F
F

T
T
F
F

T
F
T
T

T
F
T
F

T
F
T
F

364

Chapter 18

Symbolic Sentential Logic

Let’s take a careful look at this diagram, since we’ll be using a lot of them. The first
two columns (with A and B at the top) represent all the possible truth values of the
variables. A may be true while B is also true (the first line); A may be true while B is false
(second line); A may be false while B is true (third line); and finally, both A and B might
be false. That covers all the possibilities. Then in the rest of the diagram, we work through
each of those truth-value assignments. For example, in the third line A is false. That
makes the antecedent of the first premise false (A is the antecedent of the conditional
A → B, which is the first premise). Since B is true in this line, the consequent of the
first premise (which is B) is true. Thus in the third line the first premise (A →B) is true,
because when a conditional statement has a false antecedent and a true consequent, the
conditional is true. Look next at the second premise: it is A, and since A is false in this
line, that premise obviously is false. The conclusion is just as simple: it is true, since the
conclusion is B, and B is assigned true in the third line.
Now we can examine the diagram in more depth to determine whether the diagrammed argument is valid or invalid. The diagram represents all the possible truth-value
assignments, and we shall go through each one to see if there is a case—a truth-value
assignment—in which all the premises are true and the conclusion is false. If we find even
one, then the argument is invalid, and we need look no further; if there is not even one,
then—since we have gone through all the possible truth-value assignments—we shall
know that the argument is valid.
What about the first line? The premises are both true under that truth-value assignment; but so is the conclusion. In the second line, the conclusion is false; but so is the first
premise. In the third line, the second premise is false, and, besides, the conclusion is true:
That is obviously not a truth-value assignment that makes all the premises true and the
conclusion false. The fourth line has a false conclusion, and the first premise is true; but the
second premise is false. So we have gone through all the possibilities and have discovered
that no possible truth-value assignment makes all the premises true and the conclusion false.
It is impossible for an argument of this form to have a false conclusion while all its premises
are true; therefore, modus ponens is a valid argument form.
Now let’s look at affirming the consequent. (We already know it’s invalid; but let’s
pretend we don’t.) As you recall, it looks a lot like modus ponens, only with the second
premise and the conclusion switched:
A→B
B
∴A
We’ll set it up just as we did the modus ponens argument; and again, we are checking to see
if there is any truth-value assignment that will make all the premises true and the conclusion false. If such a truth-value assignment exists, the argument is invalid; if it is impossible to
make all the premises true and the conclusion false, the argument is valid. As in the modus
ponens case, there are only two variables, so again there are only four possibilities:
A

B

A →B/B/

∴A

1.

T

T

T T T T

T

2.
3.
4.

T
F
F

F
T
F

T F F F
F T T T
F T F F

T
F
F

In line 1, the premises are both true, but so is the conclusion. Line 2 certainly will not
show that affirming the consequent is invalid: Both the premises are false, and the conclusion is true; to show that the argument is invalid, we need all true premises and a

Chapter 18

365

Symbolic Sentential Logic

false conclusion. But look at line 3: The first premise is true, since the antecedent is
false and the consequent is true; the second premise is also true under that truthvalue assignment; but the conclusion is false. That does it; our quest is ended, our
quandary is settled: Affirming the consequent is invalid, because—as line 3 clearly
demonstrates—it is possible to have a truth-value assignment that makes all its premises
true and its conclusion false. In the fourth line we also find a false conclusion, but there
one of the premises is false; so that line doesn’t prove anything about the validity or the
invalidity of the argument. But it doesn’t matter; the invalidity of the argument has
already been established by examining line 3; we don’t even have to bother with the
other lines.
Throwing in a negation doesn’t change anything. Suppose you were considering an
argument that looked like this:
A → ~B
A
∴~B
Of course that’s just modus ponens, embellished a bit with a negation of one of the
variables. The negation doesn’t change the form, as long as it is applied throughout the
argument. But let’s suppose we didn’t know that, and we wanted to test to see whether this
argument is valid. We do it the same way:

1.
2.
3.
4.

A

B

A → ~B/A/

T
T
F
F

T
F
T
F

T
T
F
F

F
T
T
T

FT
TF
FT
TF

T
T
F
F

∴~B
FT
TF
FT
TF

In this case, the conclusion is the negation of B; so when B is assigned true (as in the first
line) the conclusion is false; and when B is assigned false (as in line 2) the conclusion is true.
And the same applies to the consequent in the first premise: The consequent is the
negation of B; so when B is assigned true (as in the first line) the consequent is false, and
since in that line the antecedent is assigned true, the conditional statement (the first
premise) is false; and when B is assigned false (as in line 2) the consequent is true, making
the conditional true.
Now we simply examine each line to see if we can find a case in which all the premises
are true and the conclusion is false. The first line obviously will not give us such a case,
since the first premise is false. The second line has all true premises, but also a true conclusion. The third line has a false conclusion, but the second premise is false. And the fourth
line has neither all true premises nor a false conclusion. So there is no truth-value assignment that will make all the premises true and the conclusion false, and this argument—
surprise, surprise—is valid.

Exercise 18-2
Now it’s your turn. Use the method of examining all possible truth-value assignments to determine
the validity or invalidity of the following argument forms.

1.

P →Q
~Q
∴~P

366

Chapter 18

2.

P→Q
~P
∴~Q

3.

P ∨Q
~P
∴Q

4.

P ∨Q
P
∴~Q

5.

P&Q
∴Q

Symbolic Sentential Logic

PUNCTUATION
So now you are running swiftly and surely through proofs of validity and invalidity; but
you may wish to apply this method to arguments that are more complex. To do that, we
must deal with punctuation. How can we arrange compound statements so that we can
tell what the logical operators cover? There’s nothing really new or strange about doing
this. Suppose I ask, “What is the total of 2 plus 3 times 4?” One person might answer 20;
another, 14. Both answers would have to be accepted, because the question is ambiguous:
It might be asking for the product of 5 (the sum of 2 plus 3) times 4, which would give an
answer of 20, or for the sum of 2 plus 12 (the product of 3 times 4), for an answer of 14.
Or consider the phone call you get from the Beautiful Beachfront Florida Condominium
Sales Office. YOU have won a WONDERFUL prize! Of course you must claim your prize in
person. You simply stop by their office, watch a BRIEF presentation on the advantages and
joys of owning a custom-made Beautiful Beachfront Florida Condominium, and then you
can claim your FREE PRIZE: YOU have won a PORSCHE and $10,000 or dinner at Joe’s. Well,
that’s not so bad, right? I’ve won a Porsche, and maybe $10,000 besides. So you find a pair
of clean socks and hustle to the sales office to claim your prize. But of course there’s been
a small misunderstanding. It was NOT: You won a Porsche, and also either $10,000 or
dinner at Joe’s. Rather, EITHER you won both a Porsche and $10,000, OR you won dinner
at Joe’s. And you happen to be one of the hundred thousand lucky winners of dinner at
Joe’s. (But while you’re here, why don’t we talk some more about that easy payment plan
on your very own Beautiful Beachfront Florida Condominium.)
So punctuation is important. In conversation, we punctuate with pauses and inflections
and emphasis; in written communication, through commas and colons and parentheses. In
logic, we’ll use parentheses—()—and brackets—[]—and braces—{}; and if we need more,
we’ll start over with more parentheses, and so forth. So instead of the ambiguous compound
statement:
Porsche & $10,000 ∨ Dinner at Joe’s
we have the much clearer statement:
(Porsche & $10,000) ∨ Dinner at Joe’s
With the statement in that form—(P & T) ∨ D—its real form is quite clear: It is a disjunction.
The second disjunct is D ; the first disjunct is a conjunction: P & T. Your mistake—when you

Chapter 18

Symbolic Sentential Logic

367

rushed down to pick up the keys to your new Porsche—was to interpret the statement as a
conjunction: P & (T ∨ D).
With punctuation, plus disjunction, conjunction, conditional, and negation, there
is no end to the statements and arguments we can symbolize. Consider this statement:
If Jupiter is the largest planet and Saturn has rings, then either there is intelligent life on
Earth or the moon is made of green cheese.

It could be symbolized like this:
( J & S ) → (I ∨ M )
That statement is a conditional (or if you insist, a statement of material implication): Its
antecedent is a conjunction and its consequent is a disjunction. And you would have
little trouble determining the truth value of that statement. The antecedent is true,
because both conjuncts of the conjunction that forms the antecedent are true; and the
consequent (the disjunction) is also true, since the first disjunct (there is intelligent life
on Earth) is true, and that makes the entire disjunction true (even though I have it on
good authority that the moon is not made of green cheese, and so the second disjunct is
false). And a conditional statement with true antecedent and true consequent is true.
Suppose we added one more twist to that silly conditional statement:
It is not the case that if Jupiter is the largest planet and Saturn has rings, then either there is
intelligent life on Earth or the moon is made of green cheese.

In that case, the statement becomes a negation, and it is symbolized thus:
~[( J & S ) → (I ∨ M )]
Since without the negation the conditional statement was true, the statement—as a negation—is false. That is, since it is true that “If Jupiter is the largest planet and Saturn has
rings, then either there is intelligent life on Earth or the moon is made of green cheese,”
it must be false that “It is not the case that if Jupiter is the largest planet and Saturn has rings,
then either there is intelligent life on Earth or the moon is made of green cheese.”
Notice that the brackets must go around the entire conditional: The negation is of the
entire conditional; it is not a negation of the antecedent. It would thus be wrong to
symbolize the statement as:
~( J & S ) → (I ∨ M )
Try another example:
If it is not the case that both the Earth contains water and Jupiter is not the largest planet,
then Saturn does not have rings.

That one should test your symbolizing mettle. Try it yourself, being careful of the
negations and of exactly where the parentheses should go.
What’s the shape of that statement? In the first place, it does of course contain
negations; but the statement itself is not a negation. To be a negation, it would have to be
something like this: “It is not the case that if . . .” But instead, it started: “If it is not the case
that both . . .” So what we have is a conditional rather than a negation. The antecedent of
that conditional is a negation: the negation of a conjunction. And the consequent is simply a negation: Saturn does not have rings; that is, it is not the case that Saturn has rings.
So put all together, the statement is symbolized thus:
~(E & ~J ) → ~S

368

Chapter 18

Symbolic Sentential Logic

Notice exactly what that first negation covers: It does not apply to the entire statement,
nor does it apply just to E; it applies to the conjunction E & ~J.
What’s the truth value of that conditional? It may be easier to see if we set it up step
by step. First, fill in the truth values of E, J, and S.
~(E & ~J ) → ~S
T

T

T

That’s easy, right? The Earth does have water, Jupiter is the largest planet, and Saturn
does have rings. So now let’s add the negations of the simple statements J and S:
~(E & ~J ) → ~S
T

FT

FT

Since J is true (it’s true that Jupiter is the largest planet), ~J (it is not the case that
Jupiter is the largest planet) is false; same thing for S and ~S. So now we have a
conjunction (E & ~J) in which one conjunct (~J) is false; and that makes the whole
conjunction false:
~(E & ~J ) → ~S
TF FT

FT

But the antecedent is not the conjunction; rather, it is the negation of the conjunction.
Since the conjunction is false, the antecedent (the negation of the conjunction) is
true:
~(E & ~J ) → ~S
T TF FT

FT

That gives us a conditional statement with a true antecedent and a false consequent; and
under that truth-value assignment, the conditional is false:
~(E & ~J ) → ~S
T TF FTF

FT

Now that’s the sort of fun you can have for hours, without gaining weight, spending
money, or risking infection.
There are a couple of perils. Look back at the negation of that conjunction. You
remember that the negation applies to the conjunction, and not to each of the conjuncts.
That’s important to note, because it is tempting to suppose that ~(A & B) simply
means ~A and ~B; tempting, but like temptations are supposed to be, terribly, grievously, horrendously wrong. For consider this perfectly true statement: It is not the case
that both Jupiter is the largest planet in the solar system and cobras make good pets.
That would be symbolized as ~(J & C), and it is true, as we can easily see by assigning
truth values. Since it is true that Jupiter is the largest planet, J is true; since it is false that
cobras make good pets, C is false:
~( J & C)
T F

Chapter 18

Symbolic Sentential Logic

369

So we have a conjunction with a false conjunct; and that—as you remember vividly from
the truth-functional definition of conjunction—makes the conjunction false:
~( J & C)
TF F
But since the conjunction is false, the negation of the conjunction is true:
~( J & C)
T TF F
Actually, we don’t even need to go through all that, do we? You already knew—even
though you probably haven’t thought about it all that much—that it is true that it is not the
case that both Jupiter is the largest planet and cobras make good pets. But look at what
happens if we—mistakenly—apply the negation of the conjunction to each of the conjuncts. We get this result: Jupiter is not the largest planet and cobras do not make good
pets. And that is a very different claim indeed; in fact, it is false. For Jupiter is the largest
planet, and so one conjunct of the conjunction is false, making the entire conjunction
false. So the moral of the story is just this: The negation of a conjunction applies to the
whole conjunction and not to the conjuncts.
An analogous rule applies to the negation of disjunctions. Consider this statement:
It is not the case that either Jupiter is the largest planet or cobras make good pets. That is
a false statement: Jupiter is the largest planet, so the first disjunct is true, and that makes
the disjunction true—and so the negation of the disjunction is false. But if we apply the
negation directly to both of the disjuncts, we get this: Either Jupiter is not the largest
planet or cobras do not make good pets. That disjunction (unlike the original negation
of the disjunction) is true, since one disjunct is true: Cobras do not make good pets. So, if
you try to apply the negation of a disjunction directly to the disjuncts, you get a very different claim. Just as with the negation of a conjunction, the negation of a disjunction
applies to the entire disjunction, not to the individual disjuncts.
You cannot apply the negation of a conjunction directly to the conjuncts, nor can you
apply the negation of a disjunction directly to the disjuncts. However, if you think carefully
about what the negation of a conjunction and the negation of a disjunction actually mean,
there is a way to remove the parentheses and apply the negation to the conjuncts and disjuncts. Think about exactly what you mean when you say: “It is not the case both that the butler lied and the gardener is guilty.” Well, obviously you do not mean—as we noted above—
that both the butler did not lie and the gardener is not guilty. What you mean, instead, is that
at least one of those is not the case. That is, you mean that either it is not the case that the butler lied or it is not the case that the gardener is guilty. Which is to say that ~(B & G) is the
same as (is the logical equivalent of) ~B ∨ ~G. Notice that it is a disjunction and not a conjunction. In short, ~(A & B) is the same as ~A ∨ ~B; but it is not the same as ~A & ~B.
Something similar can be done with the negation of disjunctions. If I say that it is not
the case that I attended Harvard or Yale, I do not mean that either I did not attend Harvard
or I did not attend Yale. Saying either I did not attend Harvard or I did not attend
Yale is compatible with having attended one of those universities; what I said, instead, is that
I attended neither. So saying that it is not the case that I attended either Harvard or Yale
means that I did not attend Harvard and I did not attend Yale. That is, ~(H ∨ Y) is logically
equivalent to ~H & ~Y. Notice that it is a conjunction, in which both of the conjuncts are
negated. So now we have a couple of rules—called “DeMorgan’s Theorems”—for dealing
with the negations of conjunctions and disjunctions. The rules are these:
~(P &Q) is logically equivalent to ~P ∨ ~Q.
~(P ∨ Q) is logically equivalent to ~P & ~Q.

370

Chapter 18

Symbolic Sentential Logic

(Of course, if you had something like ~(~P & Q), that would be logically equivalent
to ~~P ∨ ~Q, which—as you recall—is the same as P ∨ ~Q.)
Now you know a tremendous amount about punctuation and about determining
the truth value of rather complicated statements. So try analyzing some statements on
your own; or perhaps with a few friends.

Exercise 18-3
First symbolize the following statements and then tell whether the statements are true or false.
Example:
If London is in England, then either New York is in Argentina or Toronto is in Canada.
L → (Ν ∨ Τ)
TT F T T
The antecedent is true, and the consequent (which is a disjunction) is true (because one disjunct is
true), and so the entire conditional statement is true.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

9.
10.

It is not the case both that Jupiter is the largest planet and the Sun is a planet.
Either the Sun is a planet, or, if Earth is a planet then there is intelligent life on Mars.
If frogs can hop and cheetahs can run, then penguins can fly.
If Barcelona is in Spain, then, if Paris is not in Portugal then Boston is in Canada.
If either Ottawa is in Canada or Paris is in Portugal, then Los Angeles is not in the United States.
If sharks can swim and eagles can fly, then it is not the case that either lobsters can play basketball
or penguins can program computers.
It is not the case that if penguins pay taxes then either walruses love Mozart or giraffes play tennis.
Either rhinoceroses love classical ballet or both whales can swim and swallows can fly.
You can determine the truth value of the following statements, but it may require a bit of
thought (it will not require you to look up anything in your encyclopedia).
If jabberwockies have sharp teeth, then either Aristotle had brown eyes or eagles can fly.
Either slimey toves have scales, or, if tigers do not have stripes then Socrates was an only child.

THE TRUTH-TABLE METHOD OF TESTING FOR VALIDITY
Now that you’ve mastered punctuation and determining the truth value of statements,
we’re ready for the fun stuff. As you recall, we’ve already done some simple cases of
proving arguments valid or invalid by means of truth-value assignments; now we’re
ready for slightly more complicated cases. But remember, when we are determining
the validity or invalidity of an argument, we are not worried about whether any of the
statements—the premises and conclusion—of the argument are actually true; what
we want to know is this: If the premises are true (whether they are or not) would the
conclusion have to be true? If it is possible for all the premises to be true while the conclusion is false, then the argument is invalid; if instead there is no consistent truth-value
assignment that will make all the premises true and the conclusion false, then the
argument is valid. (That doesn’t mean that the argument is sound; the soundness of an
argument is a different matter.)

Chapter 18

371

Symbolic Sentential Logic

Consider this argument:
If the butler was polishing silver and the cook was making scones, then the Major murdered
Lord Twinkletoes. The cook was not making scones. Therefore, the Major did not murder
Lord Twinkletoes.

I’m sure you’ve been longing to be able to prove that sort of argument either valid or
invalid; and now you can. It’s a simple matter of making truth-value assignments. Let B
stand for the butler was polishing the silver, C stand for the cook was making scones, and
M for the Major murdered Lord Twinkletoes. That means we have three variables B, C,
and M; and with three variables, there are eight possible truth-value assignments, thus:
B

C

M

T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F

T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F

T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F

That covers all the possibilities; and now all we have to do is try each of those truth-value
assignments in the argument, to see if it is possible to find a truth-value assignment that
makes all the premises true and the conclusion false. If that is possible, then we know that
the argument is invalid; if we try all the possible truth-value assignments, and none of them
make all the premises true and the conclusion false, then we know it is not possible for the
premises to be true and the conclusion false, and we’ll know that this is a valid argument.
The argument, you recall, goes like this:
If the butler was polishing silver and the cook was making scones, then the Major murdered
Lord Twinkletoes. The cook was not making scones. Therefore, the Major did not murder
Lord Twinkletoes.

With B for butler, C for cook, and M for Major, the argument can be represented thus:
(B &C ) → M
~C
∴~M
When we assign truth values, we get this:
B

C

M

T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F

T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F

T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F

(B &C ) →M/~C/∴~M
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F

T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F

T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F

T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F

T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F

372

Chapter 18

Symbolic Sentential Logic

For the next step, let’s determine the truth values of the negations. That’s easy enough:
Wherever C is assigned true, ~C will be false; and wherever C is assigned false, ~C will be
true; and the same applies for M.
B

C

M

T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F

T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F

T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F

(B &C ) →M/~C/∴~M
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F

T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F

T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F

FT
FT
TF
TF
FT
FT
TF
TF

FT
TF
FT
TF
FT
TF
FT
TF

Now consider the first premise. It’s a conditional, with a conjunction as the antecedent. So next we must determine the truth values of the conjunction under every
truth-value assignment. As you remember, the conjunction is true when both of its conjuncts are true; all other truth-value assignments make the conjunction false. So in
the first two lines of the truth table the conjunction is true; in the remaining lines, it
is false.
B

C

M

T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F

T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F

T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F

(B &C ) →M/~C/∴~M
TTT
TTT
TFF
TF F
FFT
FFT
FFF
FFF

T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F

FT
FT
TF
TF
FT
FT
TF
TF

FT
TF
FT
TF
FT
TF
FT
TF

Now all that remains is the truth value of the conditional (the first premise). As is
burned into your memory, the only way a conditional (a statement of material implication) can be false is when the antecedent is true and the consequent is false; all other
truth-value assignments make the conditional true. (Remember, in the premise we
are examining, the antecedent is a conjunction.) There are only two lines in which the
antecedent is true: the first two lines. In the first line, the antecedent is true and
the consequent is true, so the conditional statement is true; but in the second line, the
antecedent (the conjunction) is true and the consequent is false; so the second line
is the only line in which the truth-value assignment makes the conditional statement
false.
B

C

M

T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F

T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F

T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F

(B &C ) →M/~C/∴~M
TTT
TTT
TF F
TF F
FF T
FF T
FFF
FFF

T
F
T
T
T
T
T
T

T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F

FT
FT
TF
TF
FT
FT
TF
TF

F T
TF
F T
TF
F T
TF
F T
TF

Chapter 18

Symbolic Sentential Logic

373

Now we’ve done all the hard work; all that’s left is to look down the lines of truth-value assignments to see if there is one that makes all the premises true and the conclusion false
(if there is one, then the argument is invalid; if there is no possible truth-value assignment
that makes all the premises true and the conclusion false, then the argument is valid). In
the first line, the first premise is true but the second premise is false; but we are looking
for a line in which all the premises are true (and the conclusion is false), so that line won’t
help. In the second line, both premises are false, so we can eliminate that line also. Skip
down to the fourth line. (We’ll return to the third line in a moment.) The first premise is
true; and the second premise is also true. So in the fourth line, all the premises are true;
however, the conclusion is also true. Since we are seeking a line in which all the premises
are true and the conclusion is false, we must continue our quest. Look at the line we
skipped, the third line. Both premises are true, and the conclusion is false. On that truthvalue assignment, we get all the premises true and the conclusion false. That proves that
it is possible for all premises to be true and the conclusion false; and that proves that this
is an invalid argument. We need look no further; it doesn’t matter about the other lines
of the truth table; once we have found one truth-value assignment that makes all the
premises true and the conclusion false, we know that the argument is invalid. (It turns out
that the truth-value assignments in the seventh line also make all the premises true and
the conclusion false. But, having found one line that makes the premises true and the
conclusion false, we already know that the argument is invalid.)

Exercise 18-4
Use the truth-table method of determining the validity or invalidity of the following argument
forms.

1.

~P → ~Q

Q
∴P
2.

P → ~Q
~P

∴Q
3.

~P ∨ (P & Q)
~Q
∴~P

4.

P ∨ (Q → R)
~R & ~P
∴~Q

5.

(P & ~R) → Q
~P ∨ R
∴~Q

6.

R ∨ (Q & ~R)
~Q
~P → ~R
∴P

7.

Q → ~(P → R)
R
P → ~Q

∴P

374

Chapter 18

8.

~R
Q → ~(P & ~R)
P
∴~Q

9.

~[P & ~(Q ∨ R)]
P→Q

Symbolic Sentential Logic

R
∴~Q
10.

~[P & (Q ∨~R)]
P→R

Q
∴~R

THE SHORT-CUT METHOD FOR DETERMINING VALIDITY OR INVALIDITY
The truth-table method is great, so long as we are dealing with only two or three variables.
If we have arguments with P, Q, and R, it’s not much bother to do eight lines of truth-value
assignments. But if we have arguments with more variables, things can get out of hand.
Consider this argument:
If it is not the case that either the butler lied or the cook has an alibi, then either Lord
Horsefeathers is the murderer or Lady Sweatsuit is an adulterer. If the cook has an alibi, then it
is not the case that both the gardener is guilty and the nanny is an impostor. Lord
Horsefeathers is not the murderer. Either Lady Sweatsuit is not an adulterer or the duke drinks
too much. If the duke drinks too much then Margery gets huffy. Margery does not get huffy.
The butler did not lie, and the nanny is an impostor. Therefore, the gardener is not guilty.

The diagram of that argument looks like this:
~(B ∨C ) → (H ∨S)
C → ~(G &N)
~H
~S ∨D
D→M
~M
~B &N
∴~G
Now—to use the standard truth-value assignment method—all we have to do is go through
every possible truth-value assignment and see if there is a truth-value assignment that will
make all the premises true and the conclusion false. If there is, the argument is invalid;
if there is not, it is valid. So how many truth-value assignments will that require?
Well, how many variables are there? B, C, H, S, G, N, D, and M. That’s a total of eight variables. If there were only two variables, we would need four lines of truth-value assignments:
X

Y

TRUE
TRUE
FALSE
FALSE

TRUE
FALSE
TRUE
FALSE

Chapter 18

375

Symbolic Sentential Logic

With three variables (as we saw in the argument about the Major not murdering Lord
Twinkletoes), eight lines are required. And it doubles with each additional variable.
Four variables yield 16 different possible truth-value assignments; five variables, 32; six
variables, 64 different truth-value assignments; seven variables, 128; and for our eight
variables, we would need to examine 256 different and distinct truth-value assignments to
determine if there is one that will make all the premises true and the conclusion false.
While working through 256 lines of truth-value assignments is a wonderful diversion for
a winter’s evening, it may be a bit time consuming for the hustle of contemporary life.
Fortunately, we don’t have to go through all those truth-value assignments (though of
course you may do so if you wish); there’s a shorter, quicker, and to my taste more elegant
method of determining the validity or invalidity of an argument.
In order to understand the shorter method of determining validity or invalidity, you
must keep in mind exactly what we are trying to do when we check truth-value assignments: We are going through all the possible truth-value assignments to see if there is one
that makes all the premises true and the conclusion false. If we find one, then we know
that the argument is invalid; if we cover all the possible truth-value assignments, and not
one will make all the premises true and the conclusion false—it is impossible to make all
the premises true and the conclusion false—then we know that the argument is valid. If
we keep in mind exactly what we’re seeking, finding it will be much easier.
Consider a short argument:
A→B
B
∴A
How can we test this argument for validity? We can of course do the old truth-value
assignments:
A B

A →B/B/∴A

T
T
F
F

T
T
F
F

T
F
T
F

TT
FF
T T
TF

T
F
T
F

T
T
F
F

And now we check all the possible truth-value assignments, and lo, there in the third line
is what we’re after: true premises and a false conclusion; so this is an invalid argument.
But by focusing on exactly what we’re after—a truth-value assignment that yields true
premises and a false conclusion—we can move a lot faster. We don’t need to check every
truth-value assignment, only the truth-value assignments that have a chance of giving us all
true premises and a false conclusion. That means, in the first place, we don’t have to
check any truth-value assignments that make A true (as in the first two lines); for A is the
conclusion, and when A is assigned true, the conclusion is automatically true, and what
we are seeking is a truth-value assignment that will make the conclusion false and the
premises true. Truth-value assignments that make A true are sending us down a dead end,
and we can eliminate them. In like manner, we aren’t interested in truth-value assignments that make B false: the second premise is just B, and when B is assigned false, that
premise is false; and we are in search of all true premises and a false conclusion. So that
last line of truth-value assignments can be eliminated. And that leaves just the one truthvalue assignment: the third line, the one that proves the argument invalid.
So the shorter (and sweeter) truth-value assignment method looks like this:
A → B/B∴A
F

376

Chapter 18

Symbolic Sentential Logic

Start by assigning the conclusion false. Now at this point, of course, we don’t know
whether we’ll be able to make all the premises true and the conclusion false; but we do
know that if there is any possibility of making all the premises true and the conclusion
false, then it will have to be when A (the conclusion) is assigned the truth value of false.
Since A has been assigned false in the conclusion, we next must assign A false wherever it
appears in the argument:
A → B/B/∴A
F

F

Now we turn to the premises. What truth-value assignment will make the premises
true? Well, the first premise is a conditional, with a false antecedent. What truth value
should we assign in order to make that conditional statement true? It doesn’t matter.
Since the antecedent is false, the conditional will be true no matter what truth value we
assign the consequent. So we don’t know what truth value to assign the consequent.
Don’t assign it any truth value; instead, look for a place at which you have no choice
about what truth value to assign, and that place is not far to seek: the second premise, B.
What truth-value assignment will make B true? That’s sort of like asking who is
buried in Grant’s tomb. Obviously to make the second premise (B) true, we must assign
B true.
A → B/B/∴A
F

T

F

And again, we must assign the same truth value to B wherever it occurs in the argument:
A → B/B/∴A
F

T T

F

But as already noted, the first premise will be true no matter what we assign B:
A → B/B/∴A
FTTT

F

And there we have it: All the premises are true and the conclusion is false, and the result
is quick, neat, and easy proof that the argument is invalid. And it’s just as easy to prove an
argument valid. Consider this argument:
A → B/A/∴B
Again, start by making the conclusion (B) false:
A → B/A/∴B
F
And as before, we do not yet know whether we will be able to make all the premises true
and the conclusion false; but we know that if there is any possibility of that, it must be
when B (the conclusion) has the truth-value assignment false.
Now make B false wherever it occurs in the argument:
A → B/A/∴B
F

F

Next we turn to the premises, and we attempt to find a truth-value assignment that
will make them all true. The first premise is a conditional, with a false consequent; in

Chapter 18

377

Symbolic Sentential Logic

order to make the conditional true, we must make the antecedent false (because a true
antecedent and a false consequent would make the conditional statement false):
A → B/A/∴B
F TF

F

But now we must make A false wherever it occurs in the argument; and that means that
we are forced to make the second premise (which is A) false; thus it is impossible to make all
the premises true and the conclusion false. The only way to make both the conclusion
false and the first premise true resulted in the second premise being false. Therefore, this
is a valid argument.
Notice that we could reach the same result by a slightly different route. Instead of
making the first premise true, we might have skipped to the second premise and made it
true by assigning A true:
A → B/A/∴B
F

T

F

That would make the conclusion false and the second premise true, but it would make
the first premise false (with a true antecedent and a false consequent); again, the result is
that it is impossible for all the premises to be true and the conclusion false, which is as it
should be, since this is a valid argument.
Incidentally, there is yet another way to assign truth values to prove the argument
valid. We could start with the premises, and start by making the second premise true:
A → B/A/∴B
T
Then we assign A true throughout the argument:
A → B/A/∴B
T

T

And thus in order to make the first premise (A → B) true, we must assign B true (since the
antecedent is true, the consequent must be true in order for the entire conditional
statement to be true).
A → B/A/∴B
T

T T

That truth-value assignment is the only way of making all the premises true; so in order to
make all the premises true, we were compelled to assign B true. But of course B is also the
conclusion. Thus if the premises are true, then the conclusion must be true; and that’s
precisely our definition of a valid argument.
When we turn back to our longer argument, nothing really changes; there are just
more steps. In case you don’t remember every line in that argument, it goes like this:
~(B ∨C) →(H ∨S)
C → ~(G &N )
~H
~S ∨D
D→M
~M
~B &N
∴~G

378

Chapter 18

Symbolic Sentential Logic

Writing it in a form that will make it easy to apply the short-cut method of truth-value
assignment validity testing, we start with the argument in this form:
~(B ∨ C)→(H ∨ S)/C → ~(G & N )/~H/~S ∨ D/D → M/~M/~B & N/∴ ~G
Now we just go through the same steps we did with the shorter argument; the only
difference is that there are more steps. Keep in mind what we’re after: a truth-value
assignment that will make the conclusion false and all the premises true. If we find just
one such assignment, then we know that the argument is invalid; if we find instead that it
is impossible to make all the premises true and the conclusion false, then we know that the
argument is valid. Let’s start by trying to make the conclusion false. The conclusion is ~G;
assign it false, being sure to place the F under the ~: we are not G making false; rather, we
are making the conclusion, which is ~G, false.
~(B ∨ C)→(H ∨ S)/C → ~(G & N )/~H/~S ∨ D/D → M/~M/~B & N/∴ ~G
F
Next, in order for ~G to be false, G must be true, right? So we assign G true.
~(B ∨ C) → (H ∨ S)/C → ~(G & N )/~H/~S ∨ D/D → M/~M/~B & N/∴ ~G
FT
And now we assign G the truth value true wherever it appears in the argument (being sure
to assign true to G, not to the conjunction in which it occurs).
~(B ∨ C) → (H ∨ S)/C → ~(G & N )/~H/~S ∨ D/D → M/~M/~B & N/∴ ~G
T

FT

OK, where are we now? We’ve made the conclusion false, and the truth-value assignment
we used (assigning G true) is the only possible way of making the conclusion false. Will we
be able to make all the premises true and the conclusion false? I have no idea. But I do
know that if that is possible, it will have to be done by assigning G true. (If G is assigned
false, that will make the conclusion true, and our quest for a truth-value assignment that
will make all the premises true and the conclusion false won’t even get started.) So now
the conclusion is false. In the next step, we try to find a truth-value assignment that will
make all the premises true. So what truth-value assignments should we make next?
We could start with the first premise: What should we assign B, C, H, and S in order
to make that conditional statement true? There are lots of truth-value assignments that
would do the job: If we make H true, then the disjunction (H ∨ S) is automatically true;
and since that disjunction is the consequent of a conditional, that would make the entire
conditional automatically true (since the only way a conditional can be false is when the
antecedent is true and the consequent is false). We could get the same result by making S
true (and then we could assign H false). Or we could make both H and S false (making
the disjunction (H ∨ S) false), but then make the antecedent ~(B ∨ C) false: A false
antecedent and a false consequent would make the conditional true. So in short, there
are many different truth-value assignments that would make the first premise true; how
do we choose among them?
We don’t. Instead, look for a premise where there is only one truth-value assignment
that will make it true. And there are three premises of that sort: ~H, ~M, and the last
premise, ~B & N. Which one should we do? It doesn’t matter. Once we have found a place
where we are forced to make a single truth-value assignment—it’s our only chance of getting all true premises and a false conclusion—we can go ahead and make the assignment.

Chapter 18

379

Symbolic Sentential Logic

If instead we assigned truth values to the first premise (the conditional) in order to
make that premise true, that wouldn’t really be wrong: There are lots of different truth-value
assignments that will make that premise true, but if we happen to be lucky and get a truthvalue assignment that makes all the premises true and the conclusion false, then we know
that the argument is invalid. The problems occur if the truth-value assignment we use to
make that conditional statement true does not result in all true premises and a false conclusion; then we would have to go back and try all the other possible truth-value assignments that
would make that premise true, to see if any of them would yield all true premises and a false
conclusion (because to be sure that an argument is valid, we must be sure that there is no possible truth-value assignment that would make all the premises true and the conclusion false).
And if we have to go through all those possible truth-value assignments, then our short-cut
method for determining validity becomes much less of a shortcut. So, whenever possible,
make truth-value assignments where you have no choice about what truth-value assignment to
make. (If you should reach a point at which there is no forced truth-value assignment—a very
rare occurrence, but not impossible—then go ahead and make one of the truth-value assignments that will work at that point, and if it leads to all true premises and a false conclusion,
then you know that the argument is invalid, and you can rest from your labors; but if it is
impossible on that truth-value assignment to get all true premises and a false conclusion, then
you must remember to go back and check all the other possible truth-value assignments to
see if one of those other options would have led to all true premises and a false conclusion;
of course, if none of them do, you know the argument is valid.)
Let’s get back to where we were. In the argument we are testing, there are several
premises where we have no choice about what truth-value assignments to make in order to
make those premises true. As noted, those premises are: ~H, ~M, and the last premise,
~B & N. (The only way that ~H can be true is to assign H false, and so on.) And as we noted,
so long as we have found a place where we have no choice about what truth-value assignments to make (in order to keep open the possibility of getting all true premises and a false
conclusion) we can go ahead and make the truth-value assignment. It doesn’t matter
which one we do: ~H, ~M, or ~B & N. So let’s do the first one: ~H. We have to make ~H
true, in order to have any chance of making all the premises true and the conclusion false.
~(B ∨ C)→(H ∨ S)/C → ~(G & N )/~H/~S ∨ D/D → M/~M/~B & N/∴~G
T

T

FT

And as noted before, in order for ~H to be true, we must assign H the truth value false.
~(B ∨ C)→(H ∨ S)/C → ~(G & N )/~H/~S ∨ D/D → M/~M/~B & N/∴~G
T

TF

FT

And now we simply assign H false wherever it occurs in the argument:
~(B ∨ C)→(H ∨ S)/C → ~(G & N )/~H/~S ∨ D/D → M/~M/~B & N/∴~G
F

T

TF

FT

Now we look for another place at which we are forced into a single truth-value assignment;
and we don’t have far to look. There’s the premise ~M; and to make that premise true, we
must assign M false. Combining those steps, now our short-cut truth-value assignment
looks like this:
~(B ∨ C)→(H ∨ S)/C → ~(G & N )/~H/~S ∨ D/D → M/~M/~B & N/∴~G
F

T

TF

TF

FT

380

Chapter 18

Symbolic Sentential Logic

And again, we make M false wherever we find it:
~(B ∨ C)→(H ∨ S)/C → ~(G & N )/~H/~S ∨ D/D → M/~M/~B & N/∴~G
F

T

TF

F

TF

FT

Now what? We’re still trying to make all the premises true and the conclusion
false; and we still don’t know whether that will be possible, but we do know that if it’s
possible, this is the only truth-value assignment that has a chance of working (so if this
truth-value assignment doesn’t make all the premises true and the conclusion false,
then it’s not possible to do so, and the argument is valid). We get another choice
about what truth-value assignments to make: There’s still the last premise, ~B & N;
to make that conjunction true, we must make both conjuncts true (we would have to
then assign N true and B false). Or we could turn our attention to D → M: Since M (the
consequent) has been assigned false, we must assign the antecedent (D) false, in order
to make the conditional true. Again, since in both cases the choices of truth-value
assignment are forced, it doesn’t matter which one we do. Let’s do the conditional
(there’s no reason for choosing that over the conjunction; I’m just more in the mood
for a conditional). In order to make that conditional (with its false consequent) true,
we must make the antecedent false; and that’s easy: The antecedent is D, so we assign D
false:
~(B ∨ C)→(H ∨ S)/C → ~(G & N )/~H/~S ∨ D/D → M/~M/~B & N/∴~G
F

T

TF

F T F TF

FT

And next we assign all Ds everywhere the truth value false:
~(B ∨ C)→(H ∨ S)/C → ~(G & N )/~H/~S ∨ D/D → M/~M/~B & N/∴~G
F

T

TF

FF

T F TF

FT

Suddenly we recognize that in the fourth premise—the disjunction, ~S ∨ D—there is a
forced truth-value assignment. Having made D (the second disjunct) false, we must make
the remaining disjunct, ~S, true in order to make that premise true. So to make ~S true,
we must assign S the truth value of false; and that truth-value assignment makes the
premise true.
~(B ∨ C)→(H ∨ S)/C → ~(G & N )/~H/~S ∨ D/D → M/~M/~B & N/∴~G
F

T

TF TF T F F

T F TF

FT

And then we assign S false wherever it occurs (namely, in the first premise):
~(B ∨ C)→(H ∨ S)/C → ~(G & N )/~H/~S ∨ D/D → M/~M/~B & N/∴~G
F

F

T

TF TF T F F T F TF

FT

So where do we go next? Well, there now remains only one place where we are forced to
make a specific truth-value assignment: the last premise, ~B & N. Since we are trying to
make all the premises true (and the conclusion false), and since for a conjunction to be
true both of its conjuncts must be true, it follows that we must assign truth values that will
make both conjuncts true. Obviously, to make the second conjunct, N, true, we must
assign N the truth value true:
~(B ∨ C)→(H ∨ S)/C → ~(G & N )/~H/~S ∨ D/D → M/~M/~B & N/∴~G
F

F

T

TF TF TF F

T F TF

T

FT

Chapter 18

381

Symbolic Sentential Logic

And almost as obviously, in order to make the first conjunct (~B) true, we must assign B
false:
~(B ∨ C)→(H ∨ S)/C → ~(G & N )/~H/~S ∨ D/D → M/~M/~B & N/∴~G
F

F

T

TF

TFT F F T F TF TF T T

FT

And again, we assign N true wherever it occurs, and B false wherever it occurs:
~(B ∨ C)→(H ∨ S)/C → ~(G & N )/~H/~S ∨ D/D → M/~M/~B & N/∴~G
F

F

F

T T

TF

TFT F F T F TF TF T T

FT

Having done that, we again look over the premises to see if there is now any place where
we are forced to assign truth values in order to make all the premises true; and our attention falls on the second premise, C → ~(G & N). As G and N have both been assigned true,
that makes the conjunction in which they occur true:
~C → ~(G & N )

T

T
T

But then the negation of that conjunction will be false.
C → ~(G & N )

T

T
T

F
The entire statement is a conditional, and its consequent is false; thus in order to make
that premise true, we must assign the antecedent—C—false. When we put this into the
truth table, the truth-value assignments now look like this:
~(B ∨ C)→(H ∨ S)/C → ~(G & N )/~H/~S ∨ D/D → M/~M/~B & N/∴~G
F

F

F FTF

TTT

TF

TFT F F T F TF TF T T

FT

And once again, we assign false to C wherever it occurs in the argument:
~(B ∨ C)→(H ∨ S)/C → ~(G & N )/~H/~S ∨ D/D → M/~M/~B & N/∴ ~G
F

F

F

F

FT F TT T

TF TFTF F T F TF TF T T

FT

At last we arrive at the last premise (actually, the first premise). All the other premises have
been assigned truth values that made them true and also made the conclusion false. We
still don’t know whether this argument is valid or invalid; but we know that if there is any
possible truth-value assignment that will make all the premises true and the conclusion
false, then this is the one: If we cannot make all the premises true and the conclusion false
on this truth-value assignment, then it cannot be done, and the argument is valid. Actually,
at this point there are no more truth-value assignments to be made: Now it’s just a matter
of checking the first premise to see if the only possible truth-value assignment that makes
all the other premises true and the conclusion false will also make the first premise true.
The first premise—with its assigned truth values—looks like this:
~(B ∨ C)→(H ∨ S)
F

F

F

F

382

Chapter 18

Symbolic Sentential Logic

It’s a conditional, with the antecedent being the negation of a disjunction, and the consequent being a disjunction. Obviously, both of the disjunctions are false (since both
disjuncts are false in both disjunctions):
~(B ∨ C)→(H ∨ S)
FFF

FFF

In the antecedent, the negation of the false disjunction is true:
~(B ∨ C) → (H ∨ S)
TFFF

FFF

But that leaves us with a true antecedent and a false consequent; and thus the conditional
statement—the first premise—is false under that truth-value assignment.
We were unable to find a truth-value assignment that made all the premises true and
the conclusion false; but you can’t say we didn’t try. In fact, we tried every possible truthvalue assignment that had a chance of making all the premises true and the conclusion
false. Every truth-value assignment we made was the only one that could possibly work to
make all the premises true and the conclusion false; and in the end, the only possible
truth-value assignment that could make all the other premises true and the conclusion
false yielded a false premise; therefore, we now know that it is impossible to find a truthvalue assignment that will make all the premises true and the conclusion false; and thus
we now know, and have proved, that that argument is valid.
I’ve gone through a rather lengthy example to show how the short-cut method of
determining validity works, how it can be applied to arguments with many premises and
a multitude of variables, and how much fun it is. There’s nothing difficult about doing
long arguments; it involves the same steps you follow with shorter arguments, but you do
more of those steps. Having done this argument, you should have no trouble doing the
shorter exercises.
Let’s look at one more example—a short one—of how the short-cut method of
determining validity or invalidity works:
Either Anthony is a liar or Bert is a thief. If Anthony is not a liar, then Carol is the brains of
the outfit. Carol is not the brains of the outfit. Therefore, Bert is not a thief.

The argument could be represented thus:
A∨B
~A → C
~C
∴~B
And when written across the page, in a form that makes it easier to apply the short-cut
method of testing validity, it looks like this:
A ∨ B/~A → C/~C/∴ ~B
As always, we shall try to find a truth-value assignment that makes all the premises true
and the conclusion false, thus proving the argument invalid. If we find such a truth-value
assignment to be impossible, then we know that the argument is valid. Suppose we start
by making the conclusion false. (We could also start by making the third premise true;
but the conclusion is usually a nice starting point. Of course if the conclusion were a

Chapter 18

383

Symbolic Sentential Logic

conjunction, then it would not be a good idea to start with the conclusion: Too many
truth-value assignment options would make the conjunction false.) There is only one way
to make the conclusion false: B must be assigned true, so that ~B can be false.
A ∨ B/~A → C/~C/∴ ~B
FT
Next we assign the other occurrences of B true:
A ∨ B/~A → C/~C/∴ ~B
T

FT

Now we look for a place where we are forced to make a truth-value assignment, and the
only such place is the third premise. (There are several different truth-value assignments
that would make the second premise true; and in the first premise, since one disjunct is
already true, the disjunction will be true no matter what truth value is assigned to A, so we
certainly are not forced to make a specific truth-value assignment there.) The third
premise is ~C; and of course there is only one way for ~C to be true: C must be assigned
false.
A ∨B/~A → C/~C/∴~B
T

TF

FT

And then to maintain consistency we must assign C false in the second premise:
A ∨ B/~A → C/~C/∴~B
T

F TF

FT

But now we have—as the second premise—a conditional with a false consequent; and in
order to make that premise true, we will have to make the antecedent (~A) false, which
means that A will have to be true:
A ∨ B/~A → C/~C/∴~B
T FT T F TF

FT

So we must assign A true in the first premise also:
A ∨ B/~A → C/~C/∴~B
T

T FTT F TF FT

That truth-value assignment makes the disjunction (the first premise) true:
A ∨ B/~A → C/~C/∴~B
T T T F T T F TF

FT

So on this truth-value assignment, all the premises are true, and the conclusion is false;
and that proves that the argument is invalid.

384

Chapter 18

Symbolic Sentential Logic

When using the short-cut method of proving an argument valid or invalid, you
should start by trying to find a truth-value assignment that makes all the premises true
and the conclusion false. Thus—as in the examples we examined—you should always try
to make truth-value assignments where you have no real choice about what truth-value
assignments to make; that is, if the conclusion is A, then you should assign A false. And if
the conclusion is A & B, then you should probably not start with the conclusion (there are
too many ways to make that conjunction false: make A true and B false, B true and A false,
or make both false); instead, look at the premises, and see if there is some truth-value
assignment that is forced: a place where you must assign a specific truth value if you are to
have any chance of making all the premises true. But what if you come to a point at which
there is no forced truth-value assignment in either the premises or the conclusion? In that
case, you simply assign a truth value arbitrarily, and see if it works; that is, assign one of the
variables true (or false), and see if that assignment will lead you to a result in which all the
premises are true and the conclusion false. If it does, then you know that the argument is
invalid, and you are done. But if it does not—if that truth-value assignment does not result
in all true premises and a false conclusion—then you must go back to the point at which
you made the arbitrary truth-value assignment, and try the other truth value (if you initially
assigned a truth value of true, now try assigning false); because before you can declare an
argument valid, you must be certain that there is no possible truth-value assignment that will
make all the premises true and the conclusion false.

Exercise 18-5
Use the short-cut truth-value assignment method to prove the following arguments valid or invalid.

1.

2.

~Q ∨ R
~Q
∴~R

P → ~Q
~P

∴Q
3

~Q → ~R
R
∴Q

4.

P ∨ (Q → R)
~R & ~P
∴~Q

5.

R ∨(Q & ~R)
~Q
~P → ~R
∴P

6.

~(~P & Q)
~P → R
~R
∴Q

7.

~R
~(P & ~R)
∴P → ~Q

Chapter 18

Symbolic Sentential Logic

8.

Q → ~(P → R)
R
P → ~Q
∴P

9.

~[P & (Q ∨~R)]
P→R

385

Q
∴ ~R
10.

~[P & ~(Q ∨R)]
P→Q
R
∴~Q

11.

~(P νQ ) → ~R)
SνR
~S & ~Q

∴P
12.

R → (~S → ~P)
S → ~Q
Q&R
∴P ∨ ~Q

13.

~[P → (Q & R)]
Q → ~S
~S ∨ ~P
∴~R

14.

S → ~P
Q∨R
~[Q & (P → ~R)]

∴R

Exercise 18-6
Now it’s time to put it all together. We’ll start with some arguments, which you must write in symbolic
form. You will have to think carefully about punctuation (parentheses and brackets). Notice that—
as occurs in many real-life arguments—the conclusion will not always be the last statement; it may be
first, last, or in the middle; it might even be combined with a premise, which will require that the conclusion and that premise be separated. [Included in brackets are the suggested symbols; notice that
these symbols do not include negations, which you must supply on your own.] You know how to do
these; but let’s start with an example anyway, to be sure everyone is on the same wavelength.
Examples:
Penguins do not write bad checks [P]. For if penguins write bad checks, then either seals will lose their
credit cards [S] or walruses will not be able to obtain credit [W]. But walruses will certainly be able to
obtain credit, and if walruses will be able to obtain credit, then seals will not lose their credit cards.

When you analyze the structure of arguments, it is always a good idea to start by determining the
conclusion. In this argument, the conclusion is stated first in the argument: Penguins do not write
bad checks. (Notice that it is a negation, and should be represented as ~P.) So we start with that:

∴~P

386

Chapter 18

Symbolic Sentential Logic

The first premise (in abbreviated form) is: If penguins, then either seals or not walruses. And that
is represented as: P →(S ∨ ~W). When that premise is added, the argument looks like this:
P →(S ∨ ~W )

∴~P
The final premise is a conjunction: Walruses, and if walruses then not seals. That is: W & (W → ~S).
When we stick that in as the second premise, the diagrammed argument looks like this:
P →(S ∨ ~W )
W &(W → ~S )
∴~P
Now you do a few:
1. Either studying logic improves your love life [I], or studying logic is a waste of time [W]. If you
graduate [G], then your mother will be proud of you [M] and you will become rich [R]. If studying
logic improves your love life, then you will graduate. Your mother will be proud of you, but [and]
you will not become rich. Therefore, studying logic is a waste of time.
2. If cats enjoy Stravinsky [C], then dogs like progressive jazz [D]. It is not the case that if
anteaters prefer to tango [A], then penguins favor polkas [P]. Therefore, anteaters do prefer
to tango; because either cats enjoy Stravinsky or penguins favor polkas, and dogs do not like
progressive jazz.
3. If sausage is good for you, [S], then pizza is a health food [P]. If cholesterol is bad for the heart
[C], then sausage is not good for you. If cholesterol is not bad for the heart, then either medical
researchers have lied [M] or doctors are very confused [D]. It follows, then, that pizza is not a
health food; because it is not the case that either medical researchers have lied or doctors are very
confused.
4. Either the judge will be lenient [J], or the sentence will be severe [S] and the case will be appealed
[A]. If the case is appealed, then the defense lawyers will withdraw from the case [W] and the bar
association will investigate [B]. The defense lawyers will not withdraw from the case, but the bar
association will investigate. Therefore, the judge will be lenient.
5. If the defendant is not guilty [G], then either the alibi witness told the truth [A] or both the police
accepted a bribe [P] and the jury was duped [J]. Either the jury was duped or the criminal
justice system is corrupt [C]. The defendant is guilty and the criminal justice system is not corrupt.
Therefore, the police did accept a bribe, and the alibi witness lied.
6. The jury must have been prejudiced against the defendant [P]. For if the jury returned a verdict
of guilty [G], then either they were prejudiced against the defendant or they were confused about
the law [C]. If the judge explained the law carefully [E], then it is not the case both that the jury
members were intelligent [I] and that the jury members were confused about the law. The judge
did explain the law carefully and the jury members were intelligent, and the jury returned a verdict of guilty.

Exercise 18-7
For questions 1–6 in Exercise 18-6, use the short-cut truth-value assignment method to determine
the validity or invalidity of the arguments; then do the same for the following arguments:
7.

~E → (A ∨ ~B )
G ∨ ~E
~(G & ~A) → ~H
H

∴~B

Chapter 18

387

Symbolic Sentential Logic

(M ∨N ) → ~(P & Q )
R ∨(P & ~M )
~R & (~M → Q )

8.

∴~N
~E ∨ G
E → (A ∨ B)
(G ∨ A) → ~H

9.

∴H → ~B
B → [D → (E ∨ ~G)]
H → [~(B ∨ E) & G]
H

10.

∴~D
B →E

11.

~(~A & ~B) ∨ D
~(E ∨ D)
∴~A

Study and Review on mythinkinglab.com

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.
2.
3.
4.

Give the truth-functional definition for disjunction and for conjunction.
Give the truth-functional definition for conditional (or more precisely, for material implication).
What sort of truth-value assignent must you find in order to prove that an argument is invalid?
Why is it that simply finding a truth-value assignment that makes all the premises true and the
conclusion also true is not enough to prove that an argument is valid? What is actually
required to prove an argument valid?

Read the Document on mythinkinglab.com
For much more detail on the material covered in this
chapter, see Chapters 3, 4, and 5 of Virginia Klenk,

Understanding Symbolic Logic, 5th Ed. (Upper Saddle River,
NJ: Prentice Hall, 2008.

19

❖❖❖

Arguments about Classes

Listen to the Chapter Audio on mythinkinglab.com
Truth tables and the short-cut truth-value assignment method enable us to determine the
validity or invalidity of a variety of complex arguments. But for one species of argument
those methods won’t work. That species of argument is not a rare or exotic one; it
includes such workaday, run-of-the-mill arguments as this:
All lions are mammals. All mammals are friendly. Therefore, all lions are friendly.

And also this:
No penguin is fond of walruses. Some penguins are psychics. Therefore, some psychics are
not fond of walruses.

And again:
All rock stars are wealthy. No logicians are wealthy. Therefore, no logicians are rock stars.

Of course we don’t want to just ignore such arguments; sometimes it may be quite important to determine whether they are valid or invalid—and their validity or invalidity may
not be intuitively obvious. Indeed, it is notoriously true that such arguments may often
sound valid when they are invalid. For example:
All dogs have fur. All cats have fur. Therefore, all dogs are cats.

That somehow sounds right, even though we know it can’t be (its premises may be true,
but its conclusion is certainly false). And at times, the invalidity of such arguments may be
even less obvious:
All projects that are really valuable require sacrifices. Fighting this war certainly requires
sacrifices. So fighting this war must be really valuable.

388

Chapter 19

Arguments about Classes

389

That argument is invalid, of course; but it sounds valid and may well pass for valid—
especially in the U.S. Senate. In any case, it is not immediately obvious why it is invalid.
So how are we to prove that such arguments are invalid and that valid arguments—such
as the following—really are valid?
All lions are mammals. All mammals are friendly. Therefore, all lions are friendly.

Certainly not by means of truth-value assignments. For we would have to diagram it thus:
L (for “All lions are mammals”)
M (for “All mammals are friendly”)
‹ P (for “All lions are friendly”)

And that argument obviously would be invalid: It is a simple matter to assign P false,
L true, and M true, resulting in all true premises and a false conclusion. But the argument
is valid, not invalid. So that representation of the argument leaves a lot out. In this chapter, we work on a way to analyze what was omitted.
Arguments like the examples above deal with classes, with categories. “All lions are
mammals”: That means that the class of lions is contained in the class of mammals; everything that is a member of the lions class is also a member of the mammals class. We call
such statements categorical propositions. We call them that because that is what they are:
propositions that make claims about categories and the members of categories.
In order to facilitate our discussion of categorical logic, it will be convenient to have
some common terminology. First, we need terms for the parts of a categorical proposition. When we have a statement such as “All lions are mammals,” we want to be able to
refer to the lions part of the statement and to distinguish it from the mammals part. In
that statement, “lions” is the subject term; “mammals” is the predicate term. And it is important not to mix them up. It’s one thing to say that all lions are mammals; it’s something
quite different to claim that all mammals are lions.

TYPES OF CATEGORICAL PROPOSITIONS
It will also be useful to divide categorical propositions into four sorts. The first is the
universal affirmative (UA): All lions are mammals, all college students are wealthy, all
men are pigs, all the children in Lake Wobegon are above average, all lovers are starcrossed, all bridges in Idaho are structurally sound. These are universal because the
subject term deals with all members of its class: all lions, all college students, all the
children in Lake Wobegon, all bridges in Idaho. Notice that the class may be rather
narrowly defined. The last proposition does not say something about all bridges; rather,
it makes a claim about a narrower class: bridges-in-Idaho. The class might be narrower
still: railroad-bridges-in-Idaho, or railroad-bridges-in-Idaho-constructed-since-1970.
The proposition is still universal if it makes a claim about all members of the class
(however small or limited that class might be): “All U.S. Presidents named Barack like
basketball” is a universal proposition, though the subject class has only one member. In
fact, the subject class of a universal proposition may be empty: “All students over 12 feet
tall are psychology majors.” It is universal affirmative, simply because it is an affirmative
rather than a negative statement. All college students are wealthy. A universal affirmative proposition states that all members of the subject class are also members of
the predicate class: All members of the class of college students are also members of the
class of wealthy persons.
The second type of categorical proposition is the universal negative (UN): No college
students are wealthy. It is a universal, because it makes a claim about all members of the
subject class: In the entire class of college students, not one—not a single member of that

390

Chapter 19

Arguments about Classes

whole class—is wealthy. And of course it is negative because it claims that no (rather than all)
college students are wealthy.
The third type of categorical statement is the particular affirmative (PA): Some (particular) college students are (affirmative) wealthy. Perhaps all college students are wealthy,
or perhaps not; the particular affirmative asserts only that at least some college students
are wealthy (actually, at least one). And you have probably already guessed that the fourth
type of categorical proposition is the particular negative (PN): Some college students are not
wealthy (perhaps none of them are; this particular negative statement asserts only that at
least one college student is not wealthy).

Exercise 19-1
For each of the following categorical propositions, first specify—exactly—both the subject and the
predicate terms; and then tell what form the proposition is.
Example:
No real cowboy eats brussel sprouts.

The subject is: real cowboys. The predicate is: eats brussel sprouts (or persons-who-eat-brussel-sprouts,
since that actually defines the class). And of course it is a universal negative (UN) proposition.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Some penguins wear red bow ties.
No tomatoes are purple.
Some Olympic athletes are quite wealthy.
No painting is more beautiful than a flower.
Some defendants are not guilty.
All children in Lake Wobegon are above average.

RELATIONS AMONG CATEGORICAL PROPOSITIONS
With the four types of categorical propositions in mind, we can begin to think about the relations among them. If a universal affirmative (UA) statement is true, what does that imply?
Suppose that it’s true that all college students are wealthy. Then the corresponding particular
negative (PN) statement—some college students are not wealthy—must be false. And going
in the other direction, if the PN statement is true (some college students are not wealthy), then
the corresponding UA (all college students are wealthy) statement must be false. That is, UA
and PN are contradictories: If one is true, the other must be false; if one is false, the other must
be true. The same relation holds between universal negative (UN) statements and particular
affirmative (PA) statements: They are contradictories. If it is true that no college students are
wealthy, then it must be false that some college students are wealthy. If it is true that some
college students are wealthy, then it must be false that no college students are wealthy.
What about some other relations among UA, UN, PA, and PN propositions? Well, it
would seem that if (UA) all college students are wealthy, then it must also be true that
(PA) some college students are wealthy; and that if (UN) no college students are wealthy,
then (PN) some college students are not wealthy. Do those implications hold? That is a
vexed question. Its answer depends on what sort of existential presupposition we ascribe to
universal statements. By “existential presupposition,” we do not mean that universal statements are experiencing bad faith or are worried about their essences or their place in the
cosmos. Rather, the question concerns whether a universal statement implies actual existence of members of the subject class. That is, if we say “All college students are wealthy,”
does that imply that any college students really exist (i.e., does it imply that there exist

Chapter 19

391

Arguments about Classes

some members of the subject class)? And if we say “No college students are wealthy,” does
that imply that there are some college students?
That question gets a trifle thorny. Universal statements usually—in ordinary conversation—do seem to carry existential presuppositions. Suppose, for example, I played baseball
yesterday, and you are inquiring about my performance: “Did you have a good day at bat?”
I reply, with zest: “All my hits were home runs!” Very impressive, right? But when you inquire
further about how many hits I had, you discover that in fact I had no hits at all. You might
suggest that I had been a bit deceitful: Saying that all my hits were home runs would seem to
suggest the presence of at least one hit. On the other hand, some of our universal statements
do not seem to carry existential presuppositions. At the beginning of a baseball game, the
announcer warns: All persons throwing objects onto the playing field will be immediately
ejected. But that does not imply that there are such persons; in fact, it is hoped that there are
not. And (to borrow an excellent example from I. M. Copi) when a physicist asserts Newton’s
law that “all bodies not acted upon by external forces persevere in their state of rest or of
uniform motion in a straight line,” certainly the physicist is not suggesting that there actually
exist any bodies-not-acted-upon-by-external-forces; indeed, they would claim that there are
no such bodies. (Incidentally, that statement is a universal affirmative: The subject is bodiesnot-acted-upon-by-external-forces. The subject class is defined by a negative characteristic;
but the statement makes an affirmative statement about all members of the class so defined.)
So contemporary logicians have usually found it easier to say that universal propositions do
not carry an existential presupposition. Particular propositions do imply existence of members of the subject class; universal propositions do not. As noted above, that is not always
exactly consistent with ordinary usage; but on the whole, for logical analysis, it is better not
to assume that universal propositions have existential presuppositions. (After all, if we want
to assert an existence claim along with a universal proposition, we can always add the
appropriate particular proposition: “All ducks have feathers, and some ducks have feathers.”)

VENN DIAGRAMS
Now let’s get to the fun part: Venn diagrams, developed by John Venn, an English mathematician. By using them, we can not only visualize the implications of categorical propositions, but also determine the validity or invalidity of many arguments using categorical
propositions, and we can have a lot of fun doing so.

Diagramming Statements
Let’s start with a universal affirmative proposition: All seals are pessimists. What does that
really mean? It means that the class of seals is fully contained within the class of pessimists.
That’s a mouthful. But using Venn diagrams, we can illustrate it clearly and elegantly:
Venn’s pictures may not be worth a thousand words, but they are worth at least a few dozen.
To start with, let’s represent the class of seals, as shown in Figure 19-1. That’s
easy enough, right? Everything in the circle is a seal, and all seals are in the circle; and

Figure 19-1 The class of seals and its
complement, non-seals.

392

Chapter 19

Arguments about Classes

anything that is not in the circle is not in the class of seals: it is non-seal. Another way
of describing the class of non-seals is to say that it is the complement of the class of seals.
Every class has a complement; the complement of class A is simply the class of all
things that are not members of class A. (Incidentally, the complement of class A—the
class of non-A—also has a complement: the class of everything that is not non-A, in
other words, A. That is, the complement of the complement of class A is simply class
A.) We’ll use a special symbol to represent class complements: a bar over the symbol
used for the class. Thus the complement of A is “A bar” (Ā). (Walruses, volcanoes,
skateboards, and U.N. ambassadors all fall into the realm
of non-seal; they are
_
members of the complement of S; they are members of S .) Within the circle, there
may still be a lot of variety: pessimistic seals and optimistic seals, friendly seals and
haughty seals, clever seals and dull seals. But what all members of the class have in
common is that they are seals.
So we’ve got the subject term represented, now for the predicate. The predicate
deals with the class of things that are pessimistic: pessimistic seals, pessimistic football
coaches, pessimistic taxpayers; pessimistic pine trees, if there are such. And we represent
the predicate class just as we did the subject (see Figure 19-2). Everything within the
circle is a pessimist; everything outside the circle is a non-pessimist. (Notice that everything outside the circle need not be an optimist; many people and seals—and almost
all rocks, turnips, volcanoes, and radioactive isotopes—are neither pessimistic nor
optimistic; but they are still non-pessimists.)
So now we have a circle representing the class of seals and another representing the
class of pessimists. How do we put them together?
There are several possibilities. We could just draw two circles as shown in Figure 19-3.
That may be esthetically appealing, but it has some problems: the two classes are completely separate, and that makes it impossible for any seals to be pessimists. We need
some way for the classes to overlap. So we could try another arrangement (Figure 19-4).
Now we have the opposite problem: With these concentric circles, the class of seals is
wholly contained within the class of pessimists, and we may want to represent the claim
that some seals are not pessimists. The solution is a Venn diagram to overlap the circles

Figure 19-2 The class of pessimists
and its complement, non-pessimists.

Figure 19-3 No seals
are pessimists.

Chapter 19

393

Arguments about Classes

Figure 19-4

All seals are pessimists.

Figure 19-5

(see Figure 19-5). With this arrangement, we can represent all manner of wonderful class
relationships.
First, it is essential to understand what each part of this picture represents. With all
the labels applied, the diagram looks like Figure 19-6. What does all that mean? We
already know that everything in the circle on the left is a seal, and everything in the circle
on the right is a pessimist. But those circles overlap; and so now we must discuss the
intersection of the two circles. That intersection, or product, represents everything that is a
member of both classes; that is, the intersection represents pessimistic seals, or the class of
pessimistic seals: things that are both seals and pessimistic, and it is written as simply SP.
The part of the S circle that does not intersect P represents all members of the class that
are not members of P: that is, all seals that are not pessimistic. That part of the circle
represents the product (the intersection) of S and the
complement of P: the product of the
–
classes seal and non-pessimist. And it is written as SP. The pattern is repeated in the other
circle. The part of the P circle that does not intersect the S circle represents all pessimists
that are not seals: all members of the
_ class P that are not members of S. That is, it represents the product of P and non-S: S P. Finally, there is that part of the diagram that falls
outside both circles; and indeed, I imagine that’s where most of us fall, since we are

Figure 19-6

394

Chapter 19

Figure 19-7

Arguments about Classes

All seals are pessimists.

neither seals nor pessimists. That represents everything that is non-seal and non-pessimist:
the product or intersection of the complements of S and of P, which is S̄P¯.
With that in mind, we can represent just about anything we might wish to say about
the relationships between the class of seals and the class of pessimists. We can, for example, represent the claim that: All seals are pessimists. Exactly what does that claim assert?
Simply this: that there is nothing belonging to the class of seals that does not also belong
to the class of pessimists; or more positively, all members of the seal class are also
members of the pessimist class. Or one more way of stating the same thing: There are no
members of the intersection of SP¯; nothing exists in that section of circle S.
So how do we represent that universal affirmative proposition? Easy; we just shade out
that part of the diagram, to show that nothing is there (Figure 19-7). Notice exactly what
that means. There are no seals that are non-pessimists; all seals are members of the class of
pessimists. But it does not imply that there really exist any pessimistic seals (any members
of SP), or that there exist any pessimists who are not seals (S̄P), or that anything exists that is
a non-pessimistic non-seal (S̄P¯). It says only that any seals that do exist (if there should be
any) are all pessimists. (As you recall, universal propositions do not carry existential presuppositions. Remember the signs your high school coach put up on the walls of the locker room?
Things like “All quitters are losers.” But coach certainly was not suggesting that any quitters
really exist—at least not in his locker room.) So this diagram implies only that there is nothing
in SP¯; it doesn’t make any claims about what might or might not exist anywhere else.
What about a universal negative proposition, such as: No seals are pessimists. “No
seals are pessimists” simply means that there is nothing that is both a seal and a pessimist;
no members of the class of seals are also members of the class of pessimists; nothing exists
in the intersection of those two classes; SP is empty. And so we just shade out that section
of the diagram (Figure 19-8). Again, just as with the universal affirmative proposition, this
says nothing about what actually exists or does not exist anywhere else in the diagram; it says
only that there is nothing in SP.
Suppose we now want to represent a particular affirmative proposition: Some seals are
pessimists. That statement asserts that there really does exist something that is both a seal
and a pessimist: There exists something that is a member of the class of seals and also a
member of the class of pessimists; something exists in the intersection of the class of seals

Figure 19-8

No seals are pessimists.

Chapter 19

395

Arguments about Classes

Figure 19-9

Figure 19-10

Some seals are pessimists.

Some seals are not pessimists.

and the class of pessimists. How do we represent that? We can simply place an X in that
SP section of the diagram, as shown in Figure 19-9. That means there is at least one seal
that is also pessimistic; at least one member of the class of seals is also a member of the
class of pessimists. Maybe there are lots of pessimistic seals, maybe just one, but there is at
least one really existing individual occupying the intersection of the seal and pessimist
classes. Are there some seals that are non-pessimists? Are there some pessimists that are
non-seals? Maybe, maybe not; no claim is made about any other part of the diagram.
That leaves only negative particular statements, such as: Some seals are not
pessimistic. That means that something really exists that is a seal and is non-pessimistic;
there is at least one member of the intersection of the class of seals and the complement of
the class of pessimists; something is SP¯. And that is represented by placing an X in the
appropriate section of the diagram (Figure 19-10). Again, this statement makes no claims

Another Way of Representing Categorical Propositions
There’s another useful way of representing categorical
propositions: in terms of their existence claims. For
example, we might say, There are no passenger pigeons.
Unfortunately, passenger pigeons are now extinct: That
class has no members; the class is empty. That fact could be
represented (using P to stand for passenger pigeons)
thusly: P = 0. If we should be so fortunate as to discover
that in some remote area there remains a small population
of passenger pigeons, we would then say, There are some
passenger pigeons; that would mean that the class of passenger pigeons is not empty, which would be represented
as: P Z 0. Taking this process a step further, we can represent standard-form categorical propositions—all seals are
pessimists, no seals are pessimists, some seals are pessimists,
some seals are not pessimists—using this technique. The
universal affirmative proposition—all seals are pessimists—

implies (as shown in Figure 19-7) that the intersection of
SP̄ is empty; that is, SP̄ = 0. The universal negative proposition—no seals are pessimists—implies that the intersection of S and P is empty: SP = 0. The particular propositions
are just as simple. The particular affirmative proposition—
some seals are pessimists—means that there does exist
something that is a seal and is also a pessimist: The intersection of the class of seals and the class of pessimists is not
empty. Thus the particular affirmative is represented as:
SP Z 0. And finally, a particular negative proposition
(some seals are not pessimists) means that there does exist
something that is a member of the class of seals and is not
a member of the class of pessimists: The intersection,
or product, of the class of seals and the complement of
the class of pessimists is not empty. That is represented
as SP̄ Z 0.

396

Chapter 19

Arguments about Classes

about whether there are or are not any pessimistic seals or any non-seal pessimists; it says
only that there exists at least one seal non-pessimist: The intersection of the class of seals
and the class of non-pessimists is occupied.

Diagramming Arguments
So we now have ways of representing categorical propositions, but a single categorical
proposition does not an argument make. We need a way to represent arguments using
categorical propositions and a way of determining whether those arguments are valid or
invalid. Fortunately, a simple extension of the diagrams used to represent categorical
propositions will speed us on our way to diagramming and testing such arguments. It may
not be handy for diagramming and testing very long and complex categorical arguments,
but we can use it on the most popular sort of categorical argument: the famous categorical
syllogism. Categorical syllogisms consist of two propositions as premises, a third as conclusion, and three terms or categories or classes (such as seals or pessimists), each of which
occurs twice in the argument.
Consider an example of a categorical syllogism: one that we shall now be able to
diagram and analyze with amazing alacrity.
All seals are pessimists.
All pessimists cheat at cribbage.
Therefore, all seals cheat at cribbage.

Here we have three categorical propositions, each of which we can represent with a
two-circle diagram, thusly:
All seals are pessimists (Figure 19-11).
All pessimists cheat at cribbage (i.e., All pessimists are cribbage-cheaters) (Figure 19-12).
All seals are cribbage-cheaters (Figure 19-13).

Figure 19-11
pessimists.

All seals are

Figure 19-12 All pessimists are
cribbage-cheaters.

Chapter 19

397

Arguments about Classes

Figure 19-13 All seals are
cribbage-cheaters.

Figure 19-14

Seals, pessimists, and cribbage-cheaters.

Now how do we represent and analyze the argument? Simply by putting the circles
together. We are discussing the classes of seals, pessimists, and cribbage-cheaters, so we
require three overlapping circles rather than two. But the basic principles remain the
same. Let’s start with three overlapping circles, S, P, and C, representing the classes of
seals, pessimists, and cribbage-cheaters (Figure 19-14). What does each section of
those circles actually represent? Well, the area outside of all the circles represents the
intersection of the complements of S, P, and C. (Anything outside all three circles is non-S,
non-P, and non-C: It is a non-seal, non-pessimist, non-cribbage-cheater. And I trust that
most of us—with perhaps a few unsavory exceptions—fall into that category.) That is,
it represents S¯P¯C̄. In contrast, there is the area where all three circles overlap, and that
area represents the intersection or product of the three classes. That little area where
all three circles overlap is home to (and only to) all pessimistic seals who cheat at cribbage. And that intersection is labeled SPC. So let’s add SPC and S¯P¯C̄ to the picture, as
shown in Figure 19-15. Where is the area of residence for the seals who are pessimists
but who do not cheat at cribbage (SPC̄, for short)? Obviously it must fall within the
seal class, and, also, it must fall within the pessimist class. And finally, it must fall
outside the class of cribbage-cheaters. There is only one spot that fits those criteria
(Figure 19-16).
Now what about the cribbage-cheaters who are non-seals and non-pessimists (indeed,
there may be some in our midst; they are known as S̄P¯C to their friends). They must fall

398

Chapter 19

Arguments about Classes

Figure 19-15

Figure 19-16 SPC̄, where there are
pessimistic seals who do not cheat at
cribbage (if any exist).

Figure 19-17 S̄P̄C, cribbage-cheaters
who are non-seal and non-pessimist.

within the cribbage-cheater circle, but outside the seal circle and outside the pessimist
circle, as shown in Figure 19-17.
You get the idea, right? So let’s fill in all the blanks, and you can study Figure 19-18
a bit until you are comfortable with all those intersections of classes and complements of
classes and where they fit.

Chapter 19

399

Arguments about Classes

Figure 19-18

All the areas are identified.

With all of that done, mapping out the categorical syllogism is easy. Lest you have
forgotten, the argument we were examining was this:
All seals are pessimists.
All pessimists cheat at cribbage.
Therefore, all seals cheat at cribbage.

Consider the first premise: All seals are pessimists. How shall we diagram that in the threecircle diagram? The proposition asserts that all members of the class of seals are
contained in the class of pessimists; that is, no seals fall outside the pessimist class. So we
shall have to shade out all parts of the seal circle that fall outside the pessimist circle, as
shown in Figure 19-19.
That was easy, right? Just be sure that you get all the parts shaded; you’ve got to
cover both SP¯C̄ and SP¯C (and try to stay within the lines with your shading; those skills you
honed in kindergarten should serve you well).
Now we add the second premise to the diagram: All pessimists cheat at cribbage.
That means that all members of the pessimist class are also members of the cribbagecheaters class: There are no pessimists outside the cribbage-cheaters circle. So next
we shade out all parts of the pessimist circle that fall outside the cribbage-cheaters
circle (notice that again there are two sections to shade: SPC̄ and S¯PC̄; that shouldn’t

Figure 19-19

All seals are pessimists.

400

Chapter 19

Arguments about Classes

Figure 19-20 All seals are pessimists,
and all pessimists cheat at cribbage.

give you any trouble; just focus on shading out all of P that is outside C), as shown in
Figure 19-20.
Now we’ve diagrammed all (both) the premises, and this may be a good moment to
pause from our labors and reflect on exactly what we are doing, and why. What we want
to know is whether the argument is valid; that is, we want to know if the truth of the
premises would guarantee the truth of the conclusion: If the premises are true, will
the conclusion have to be true? If it is in any way possible for all the premises to be true and
the conclusion false, then the argument is invalid; if that is not possible, then the argument is valid. We are trying to determine whether this argument is valid; if it is valid, then,
if its premises are true, its conclusion must be true. We have the premises diagrammed
into the Venn diagram; now all we have to do is scrutinize that diagram to see if according
to that diagram the conclusion must be true.
The conclusion is, All seals are cribbage-cheaters. That is, the conclusion asserts
that all members of the class of seals are also members of the class of cribbagecheaters. Of course if any section of our diagram is shaded out, that means that there
is nothing in that section. The question, then, is this: Are all nonshaded parts of the
seal circle completely contained within the cribbage-cheaters circle? If they are, then
that means that all possible seals must be cribbage-cheaters; that would make the
argument valid. But if there is any unshaded section of the seals circle that is not
contained in the cribbage-cheaters circle, then there might possibly be a seal lurking
there who does not cheat at cribbage; that possibility would be enough to make the
argument invalid.
Look back at the diagram in Figure 19-20: Is there any unshaded part of circle S that
does not fall within circle C? No! The only unshaded part of circle S is SPC; and SPC falls
within circle C. So there is no place for a seal that does not cheat at cribbage; if there are
any seals (and remember, universal propositions do not carry an existence presupposition), then they must be cribbage-cheaters. Therefore, the argument is valid: The truth of
the premises makes it impossible for the conclusion to be false.
Now you try one. Diagram the premises of this argument onto a Venn diagram,
and then examine your diagram to determine the validity or invalidity of the
argument:
All seals are pessimists.
All cribbage-cheaters are pessimists.
Therefore, all seals cheat at cribbage.

Chapter 19

401

Arguments about Classes

Figure 19-21

All seals are pessimists.

I’m going to try to work this one out also; but do it yourself before you peek further down
the page.
What’s your answer? Invalid, right? First you diagrammed the first premise, “All seals
are pessimists”; the resulting diagram looked like Figure 19-21.
Then you added the second premise: All cribbage-cheaters are pessimists. That
premise required you to shade all parts of circle C that are not contained in circle P; so
you shaded out section S¯P¯C. You would have shaded section SP¯C, but it was already
shaded by the first premise, so you didn’t have to shade it again. (Of course, some of
you are so compulsive that you could not resist reshading section SP¯C, so now that part
of your diagram is double-shaded; that’s OK: compulsive people make great logicians.)
Your final diagram looked like Figure 19-22. Then you looked at that diagram to see
if there was any way that the conclusion could still be false (after the premises are
diagrammed in). The conclusion is, All seals are cribbage-cheaters. Does that follow?
Or is it instead possible that the conclusion is false: that there might possibly be some seals
who are not cribbage-cheaters? When we examine the diagram, we see that there is
such a possibility: Section SPC̄ is not shaded, so there might be some seals there; since
that section of the seal circle falls outside the cribbage-cheater circle, it is possible
for there to be some seals that are not cribbage-cheaters. So when the premises of
the argument are true, it is still possible for the conclusion to be false; therefore, this
argument is invalid.

Figure 19-22 All cribbage-cheaters are
pessimists is added to the diagram.

402

Chapter 19

Arguments about Classes

Figure 19-23 All seals are cribbage-cheaters.

Now we need to do some arguments with particular propositions. Consider this
argument:
Some seals are pessimists.
All seals are cheaters-at-cribbage.
Therefore, some pessimists are cheaters-at-cribbage.

We do this in basically the same fashion as we did the other categorical syllogisms. Let’s
start with the universal affirmative: the second premise. It states that all members of the
seal class fall within the cribbage-cheaters class; to represent that proposition in our Venn
diagram, we shade out all parts of the seal circle that fall outside the cribbage-cheaters circle, as shown in Figure 19-23. Next we add the first premise: It is a particular proposition,
and so it asserts that something actually exists. Specifically, it asserts that there exist some
(at least one) pessimistic seals. That is, there is something in the intersection of the classes
of seals and pessimists. To represent that premise in our Venn diagram, we place an X at
the appropriate place in the diagram. But exactly where? There are two sections of the
Venn diagram where seal-pessimists might dwell: SPC̄ and SPC. But we already know—
from the second premise—that there is nothing in the SPC̄ section (that is why that section
is shaded out); so the seal-pessimists—whose existence is affirmed by the first premise—
must be lodged in the only section that remains open to seal-pessimists: SPC. And it is
there that we place an X, as shown in Figure 19-24. Now we simply look at the completed

Figure 19-24 Some seals are pessimists
is added to the diagram.

Chapter 19

403

Arguments about Classes

Figure 19-25
pessimists.

Some seals are

Venn diagram to see if the argument is valid: That is, when all the premises are drawn in,
must the conclusion be true? The conclusion is that some pessimists are cribbagecheaters; that is certainly guaranteed by our Venn diagram, since there is an X squarely
within the intersection of P and C, signifying that there is something that is both a
pessimist and a cribbage-cheater. When all the premises are true, it is impossible for the
conclusion to be false. So this argument is valid.
In diagramming that argument, we started with the universal rather than the particular premise, and there’s a good reason for doing so. Look what would have happened
had we started with the particular premise: Some seals are pessimists. To represent that in
our Venn diagram, we must place an X within the intersection of the class of seals and the
class of pessimists. But that intersection is made up of two sections: SPC̄ and SPC. In which
of those sections do our pessimistic seals belong? The premise doesn’t tell us, and we
must be very careful not to put any information in the diagram that is not contained in the
premises. If we placed the X in SPC̄, that would assert that there are some seals that are
pessimists and are not cribbage-cheaters. But the premise doesn’t say that: It says only that
some seals are pessimists; it says nothing about whether those seal-pessimists do or do not
cheat at cribbage. So obviously we can’t just place our X in the SPC section, either: It is
one thing to say (as the premise does) that some seals are pessimists; it is quite another
thing to say—and that premise does not say—that those seal-pessimists are cribbagecheaters. So where do we place the X? Look at Figure 19-25.
The X is on the fence, in the middle, right on the line between sections SPC̄ and
SPC. And that fence-sitting X indicates that there is something in at least one of those
sections (possibly both), but we do not know which. That is, there is at least one pessimistic seal; but we do not know whether it cheats at cribbage.
Suppose, then, that we had started our Venn diagram by diagramming the first
premise: the particular proposition “Some seals are pessimists.” Our Venn diagram would
now look like Figure 19-25, with its fence-sitting X. Next we turn to the second premise—
all seals are cribbage-cheaters—and insert it into the diagram; to do so, we shade out all
parts of S that are not contained in C, and the resulting diagram looks like Figure 19-26.
But when we do that, our X gets jolted off the fence. Section SPC̄ is closed. Since we have
an X that must be lodged in either SPC̄ or SPC, we now know that that X belongs to SPC
(we don’t have to change it on the diagram; we just have to think about it and realize where
it must fall). And so the final Venn diagram looks just like the one we got when we started
by diagramming the universal premise; of course, that’s precisely as it should be. The
moral of this story is this: If you start with the particular premise (rather than the universal
premise) you can still get the right answer; it’s just a bit easier if you start with the universal
premise. You may do as you wish, but I prefer the easiest way of doing Venn diagrams.

404

Chapter 19

Arguments about Classes

Figure 19-26 All seals are cribbage-cheaters
is added to the diagram.

Now you do one. Represent this argument by means of a Venn diagram, and tell
whether it is valid or invalid.
Some pessimists are seals.
All cribbage-cheaters are seals.
Therefore, some cribbage-cheaters are pessimists.

Now that you’ve finished the problem, let’s see if we got the same answer. You
started, I hope, with the universal proposition (if some of you started instead with the particular premise, then you’ll have to trudge along on your own: I’m taking the easy way).
To diagram “All cribbage-cheaters are seals,” we simply shade out all the parts of the cribbage-cheaters circle that fall outside the seal circle, as shown in Figure 19-27. Next we toss
the first premise—some pessimists are seals—into the diagram. To do that, we have to
place an X somewhere in the pessimist–seal intersection, made up of sections SPC̄ and SPC;
but exactly where, and in which section? Are the pessimistic seals cribbage-cheaters or
non-cribbage-cheaters? We don’t know, and we can’t say. So we must put the X on the line
dividing section SPC̄ from section SPC to indicate that there is something in at least one of
those sections, but we do not know which one. (Notice, in Figure 19-28, that the X falls
completely within the intersection of S and P. It is completely within both circle S and circle P.

Figure 19-27 All cribbage-cheaters are seals.

Chapter 19

Arguments about Classes

405

Figure 19-28 Some pessimists are seals is
added to the diagram.

That is as it should be, since the premise asserts that there are pessimistic seals; what we
don’t know is whether those pessimistic seals are cribbage-cheaters.) Now we examine our
diagram of the premises to see if the diagram makes it impossible for the conclusion to be
false (if so, the argument is valid; if it is possible for the conclusion to be false, then the
argument is invalid). The conclusion is: Some cribbage-cheaters are pessimists. Does our
diagram of the premises show that there must be some cribbage-cheaters that are pessimists? It shows that it is possible that some cribbage-cheaters are pessimists, but it does not
show that to be necessary, for—according to our Venn diagram of the premises—there
certainly are some pessimists (there is an X squarely within the P circle); but we can not
tell whether any cribbage-cheaters are pessimists (because the X in the P circle is on the
line of the cribbage-cheaters circle, and not inside the circle; so we don’t know which way
it falls). So this argument is invalid.
Let’s do one more, together, and this one is about as hard as these get, which, as you
will quickly gather, is not very hard at all.
Some seals are not pessimists.
Some pessimists are not cribbage-cheaters.
Therefore, some seals are not cribbage-cheaters.

In diagramming this argument, we don’t have a universal proposition to do first; so let’s just
start with the first premise: a particular negative proposition, “some seals are not pessimists,” like all the propositions in this argument. That means that there is something in
the seal class that is not a member of the pessimist class; so we have to place our X completely
inside the seal circle and completely outside the pessimist circle. But we don’t know whether
our non-pessimistic seals are cribbage-cheaters; so the X must fall on the line of the
cribbage-cheaters circle (and inside S, and outside P), as in Figure 19-29. Now we turn to the
second premise: Some pessimists are not cribbage-cheaters. To diagram this premise,
we must put the X completely inside the pessimist circle and completely outside the cribbagecheaters circle; since we do not know whether our pessimistic cribbage-cheaters are seals or
not, the X must straddle the line dividing seals from non-seals, as in Figure 19-30.
Now we examine the diagram, to see if those premises make it impossible for the
conclusion—some seals are not cribbage-cheaters—to be false. Must it be the case that
some seals are not cribbage-cheaters? Well, no. It’s possible that some seals are not cribbage-cheaters; but it is also possible that there are no seals that are not cribbage-cheaters.
To see that, look closely at both Xs. One X shows that there are seals, but we don’t know if
those seals are cribbage-cheaters or not (for that falls on the line of the cribbage-cheater
circle). The seals represented by that X might not be cribbage-cheaters, but then again,

406

Chapter 19

Figure 19-29

Arguments about Classes

Some seals are not pessimists.

Figure 19-30 Some pessimists are not
cribbage-cheaters is added to the diagram.

they might be. The other X definitely represents non-cribbage-cheaters, since it falls
completely outside the C circle. The problem is, we don’t know whether those noncribbage-cheaters are seals or not, since the X straddles the line of the seals circle. Thus if
all the premises are true, the conclusion may still be false; so this is an invalid argument.

Exercise 19-2
For these exercises, use Venn diagrams to determine the validity or invalidity of the arguments.
1. All seals are pessimists.
No pessimist is a cribbage-cheater.
Therefore, no seal is a cribbage-cheater.
2. All seals are pessimists.
No pessimist is a cribbage-cheater.
Therefore, some seals are not cribbage-cheaters.
(Don’t let this argument give you trouble. Remember, universal propositions do not carry any
existential presupposition.)
In the remainder of the exercises, we shall stray from this unseemly obsession with pessimistic seals
that cheat at cribbage. So you will probably wish to label the circles as something other than S, P,
and C. In each of the following arguments, I have capitalized the letter that I think would be most

Chapter 19

Arguments about Classes

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

407

convenient as a circle label (e.g., Superhero, Villain, and Leap in the next argument). Also, you’ll
have to line up the premises and conclusion for yourself (there might even be an argument in
which the conclusion is not stated last).
No Superhero is a Villain. Some Villains are able to Leap tall buildings. Therefore, some who are
able to Leap tall buildings are not Superheroes.
No Bridges are made out of Pasta. Nothing made out of Pasta Tastes good with champagne. So all
Bridges Taste good with champagne.
No Ninja warriors are good Psychiatrists, because all Ninja warriors Scream “cowabunga,” and nothing that Screams “cowabunga” is a good Psychiatrist.
Some Penguins are great Lovers. All Penguins Hate walruses. So some great Lovers Hate walruses.
All Cajuns eat Jambalaya. All Jambalaya-eaters Wrestle alligators. Therefore, all Cajuns Wrestle
alligators.
Some Ninja warriors do not eat Ice cream, and some Ice cream–eaters do not play the Accordion;
therefore, some Ninja warriors are not Accordion players.
All Stamp collectors Howl at the moon. No Tyrannosaurus is a Stamp collector. So no Tyrannosaurus Howls at the moon.
All Extraterrestrials are Shifty-eyed. Some Politicians are Shifty-eyed. Therefore, some Politicians
are Extraterrestrials.
Some Students are not Beer drinkers. All Students are Cheerful. Therefore, some Cheerful people
do not drink Beer.

TRANSLATING ORDINARY-LANGUAGE STATEMENTS
INTO STANDARD-FORM CATEGORICAL PROPOSITIONS
OK, you are now about as good at working Venn diagrams as anyone should ever wish
to be. But in order to use them effectively—and to get maximum enjoyment out of your
Venn diagramming—you must be able to translate ordinary language into a form that
makes it possible to apply Venn diagrams. You’ve already been doing that, of course, in
the exercises in this chapter. But some ordinary language propositions can be a trifle
tricky. For example: Only high school graduates are eligible. How would you write that
in such a way that you could easily place it in a Venn diagram? That is, how would you
translate that into a standard-form categorical proposition, such as All A are B?
First, you must think about exactly what that statement means. It cannot be translated
as: All high school graduates are eligible. After all, the proposition states that you must be a
high school graduate to be eligible; it doesn’t say that you are automatically eligible if you
are a high school graduate: Being a high school graduate is a minimum requirement for
eligibility. There’s another reason that “All high school graduates are eligible” will not work:
It leaves open the possibility of non–high school graduates also being eligible. So what
should we do with “Only high school graduates are eligible”? What does it really mean?
It means that: All eligible persons are high school graduates. (That is, the class of
eligible persons is contained within—is a subset of—the class of high school graduates.
That doesn’t imply that all members of the class of high school graduates are eligible;
it does imply that the only eligible persons are members of the class of high school
graduates.) A simple two-circle diagram of that statement might make it a bit more
obvious: As the diagram in Figure 19-31 shows, all members of the class of eligible
persons (E) fall within the class of high school graduates (G) (but of course not all
graduates need be eligible); that is, the only members of the class of eligible persons
are in the intersection of E and G.
There are many common expressions that we easily understand but that may be a
bit puzzling when we try to convert them into standard-form categorical propositions that
can fit snugly within the confines of a Venn diagram. Consider this sentence: “There are
no rich philosophers.” That sounds simple, but how should it be represented? Simply as:
“No philosophers are rich.” (No members of the philosopher class are members of the

408

Chapter 19

Arguments about Classes

Figure 19-31 All eligible persons
are high school graduates.

rich class.) “There are some tigers who change their stripes” would be: “Some tigers are
stripe-changers.” “The poor deserve our help” means, “All poor persons are persons
deserving of our help.” When working on these types of statements, you must think about
exactly what they mean. For example, it may be tempting to write “Not all defendants are
guilty” as “No defendants are guilty.” But a moment’s reflection shows the error. When we
say that not all defendants are guilty, we do not mean that none of them are guilty; we
mean instead that some defendants are not guilty. “Not all clouds have a silver lining”
means that “Some clouds are not in the class of things having silver linings.” (That
seemed to lose something in translation.)
Another tricky sort of proposition is the exclusive proposition, such as, “Only those
who study hard will pass,” or “No one except registered students is allowed to attend.”
The first is just: “All who pass are hard-studiers”; the second, “All who are allowed to
attend are registered students.” So in general, when you are translating ordinary
sentences into standard-form categorical propositions, stop and think carefully about
exactly what the sentence means, and be sure that your translation does not imply more
than what is stated in that sentence.

Exercise 19-3
Translate the following sentences into standard-form categorical propositions that can be diagrammed
within a Venn diagram.
Examples:
a. There are some pessimistic walruses.
Some walruses are pessimistic.
b. Only those over age 65 are eligible.
All eligible people (all in the class of eligible) are over age 65 (are in the class of over age 65).
c. Philosophers are ineligible for sainthood.
No philosopher is eligible for sainthood.
1. There are some innocent prisoners.
2. There are no atheists in foxholes.
3. Smokers are not great marathoners.
4. Not everyone with a weak chin is a criminal.
5. No one except employees is allowed to enter the kitchen.
6. There really are extraterrestrials who visit Earth.
7. Not all dolphins are friendly.
8. Only hard workers can be on the team.
9. There are innocent defendants who appear nervous.
10. You must be good at critical thinking to find happiness.

Chapter 19

Arguments about Classes

409

Reducing the Number of Terms
One other problem may arise when there appear to be too many terms. Sometimes there
really are too many terms, and the argument cannot be conveniently represented by
means of a single Venn diagram (and somewhat heavier logical artillery must be brought
to bear). But sometimes arguments appear to have more than three terms, when in fact
the number of terms can be reduced. For example:
No philosophers are very wealthy. All industrialists are rich. Therefore, no philosophers are
industrialists.

At first glance, this argument seems to involve four classes: philosophers, the very wealthy,
industrialists, and the rich. But “very wealthy” and “rich” designate the same class-defining
characteristic; so the number of terms is reduced to three, and the argument takes this form:
No philosophers are rich.
All industrialists are rich.
Therefore, no philosophers are industrialists.

Exercise 19-4
The following arguments may require a bit of mental dexterity in order to represent them in standard-form categorical propositions; use all your wiles—and all you have learned concerning categorical propositions and Venn diagrams—to turn the following arguments into standard-form
categorical propositions, and then determine their validity or invalidity by means of Venn diagrams.
Examples:
a. A thing of beauty is a joy forever. So Michael Jordan’s jump shots are an eternal joy, since Jordan’s
jumpers are beautiful.
The conclusion is at the beginning of the second sentence (indicated by “so Michael Jordan’s
jump shots”). The first premise (A thing of beauty is a joy forever) sounds as if it is talking about
a single thing of beauty and a joy forever; but of course what it means is that All things of beauty
are joys forever: It is a universal affirmative proposition. Likewise, we aren’t talking about a
particular jump shot made by Michael Jordan; rather, we are discussing the entire class of
Michael Jordan jump shots: All Jordan’s jump shots are beautiful. And then we have to reduce
the number of terms: “Jordan’s jumpers” is the same as “Michael Jordan’s jump shots”; “a joy
forever” is “an eternal joy”; and the class designated as beautiful is simply all those things that are
things of beauty. So the argument goes:
All things of beauty are joys forever.
All Michael Jordan jump shots are things of beauty.
Therefore, all Michael Jordan jump shots are joys forever.
You can do the diagramming yourself to determine that the argument is valid (incidentally, it’s
also sound, as everyone knows who has seen Jordan shoot a jump shot).
b. No criminals are honest. Some lawyers are honest people. Therefore, there are some attorneys who
are not criminals.
We’re dealing with criminals, lawyers, honest people, and attorneys. But lawyers are the same as
attorneys; so we can reduce that to three classes: criminals, honest people, and lawyers. The
argument is:
No criminals are honest.
Some lawyers are honest.
Therefore, some lawyers are not criminals.
And it’s easy to use a Venn diagram to show that that argument is valid.

410

Chapter 19

Arguments about Classes

1. Only royalty are permitted to wear the crown jewels.
No penguin is allowed to wear the crown jewels.
Therefore, no penguin is a member of the royal family.
2. No student dislikes parties.
Penguins do not like parties.
Therefore, no penguins are students.
3. Sick people are morose.
Some firefighters are suffering from illness.
Therefore, some members of the fire department are gloomy.

Exercise 19-5
The following arguments require all your accumulated knowledge of categorical propositions. You
will have to translate the sentences into standard-form categorical propositions, reducing the
number of terms in some cases, and thinking carefully to translate ordinary language expressions
such as “not all” and “only.” Write these arguments as standard-form categorical propositions, and
then determine their validity or invalidity by means of Venn diagrams.
1. Only cribbage-cheaters eat liver.
Some liver-eaters are drinkers.
Therefore, some dishonest cribbage players are not teetotalers.
2. Anyone who is guilty of burglary must have intended to steal.
No one who is demented could really intend to steal anything.
So everyone guilty of burglary is sane.
3. All accused persons are entitled to the presumption of innocence.
Some defendants are unpopular.
Therefore, some people who are not popular are entitled to the presumption of innocence.
4. Some jewels aren’t worth much; so some jewels aren’t beautiful, since everything that is beautiful is
valuable.
5. Anything that is the result of coercion is worthless as evidence.
Some confessions have no evidentiary value.
Therefore, some confessions are forced.

Study and Review on mythinkinglab.com

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.
2.
3.
4.

Give an example of a universal affirmative categorical proposition.
Give an example of a particular negative categorical proposition.
Which sorts of categorical propositions have existential import? Which sorts do not?
In a Venn diagram, if a section is not shaded and also does not contain an X, what should you
conclude about whether or not it contains any members?

ADDITIONAL READING
For more details and exercises on the material covered in
this chapter, see Chapter 12 of Virginia Klenk, Understanding

Symbolic Logic, 5th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
Hall, 2008).

Consider Your Verdict:
Comprehensive Critical
Thinking in the Jury Room
Listen to the Chapter Audio on mythinkinglab.com
The following is a fictional case. Consider whether you would vote guilty or not guilty, and
why. Effective critical consideration of this case will require all the skills you have
developed in your study of critical thinking, from how to determine the conclusion and
operate with necessary and sufficient conditions to placing the burden of proof and
detecting fallacies and weighing evidence.

STATE V. RANSOM
Prosecution Witnesses: Dr. Arthur Hamilton
Robert Andrews, forensics expert
Lester Liggin, eyewitness
Allen Arnold, friend of the defendant
Detective Ross Reynolds, Lincoln County Sheriff’s Department
Scott Guyonovich, bartender
Defense Witnesses: Alice Lawrence
Judge: Jennifer Schwebel
District Attorney: Wendell Warren
Defense Attorney: Lisa West
JUDGE: Is the State ready?
DISTRICT ATTORNEY: Yes, Your Honor.
JUDGE: Is the Defense ready?
DEFENSE ATTORNEY: We are, Your Honor.
JUDGE: Does the State wish to make any opening

remarks?

Opening Statement, DISTRICT ATTORNEY: Thank you, Your Honor. Ladies and Gentlemen
of the Jury, just after midnight, in the early hours of last September 10, Jim Larkin was
brutally murdered in a drive-by shooting. As is often the case in brutal murders, no one
actually saw the gunman: Murderers typically do their foul deeds under cover of darkness
or in some other way hide their murderous designs from public observation. But that

411

412

Consider Your Verdict: Comprehensive Critical Thinking in the Jury Room

does not mean that they can always escape justice, for sometimes there is conclusive
evidence—often a web of compelling facts—that points to the murderer just as certainly
as an eyewitness standing and pointing a finger. And this is just such a case. The facts that
we will bring before you will show, beyond even a shadow of doubt, that Robert Ransom
brutally murdered Jim Larkin; and the vile nature of this crime, together with your
certainty of its perpetrator, will lead you to one inescapable conclusion: Robert Ransom is
guilty of murder, and must be found guilty of murder, and must pay for his crime.
JUDGE:

Does the Defense have opening remarks?

Opening statement, DEFENSE ATTORNEY: Yes, thank you, Your Honor. Ladies and Gentlemen, my learned friend just described for you a web of evidence. That is an accurate
description: The web that the prosecution will weave is as flimsy and thin as the gossamer
strands of the spider’s web. But don’t you be caught in it. Stick to the facts, and you will
avoid its entanglements. The fact is that a terrible murder has been committed, a murder
that does indeed cry out for justice. But convicting the wrong person will not bring
justice; it will only compound the injustice. And so we must be very sure before we find
anyone guilty of this terrible crime: sure beyond a reasonable doubt. The flimsy web spun
by the prosecution cannot support such weight. A terrible murder was committed, yes;
but if you find an innocent person guilty of that murder, then injustice will be piled upon
injustice, and the actual murderer will escape justice. And as you fairly and critically
examine the case against Robert Ransom, I think you must conclude that there is no good
reason to think that he committed this terrible crime. Thus you must return a verdict of
not guilty and send the District Attorney and the police out to find the real killer; only in
that way can justice be served.
JUDGE: The State can call
DISTRICT ATTORNEY WARREN:

its first witness.
The State calls Dr. Arthur Hamilton.

Dr. Hamilton enters the witness box and is sworn in.
WARREN: Dr.
HAMILTON: I

Hamilton, could you tell us your position and your qualifications?
am Chief Coroner for Lincoln County; I have an MD degree from Duke
University Medical School, and I have done training in forensic medicine at several
universities.
WARREN: Your Honor, I ask that Dr. Hamilton be qualified as an expert witness.
WEST: The defense has no objection, Your Honor; we certainly respect the expertise of
Dr. Hamilton.
JUDGE: Without objection, so ruled.
WARREN: Dr. Hamilton, did you perform an autopsy on Jim Larkin?
HAMILTON: I did.
WARREN: Could you describe your findings?
HAMILTON: The deceased had been struck by three bullets from a .38 caliber
handgun; one had struck him in the left thigh, another had passed through
his body, penetrating his heart; another had entered his skull and lodged in
his brain. Either of the last two wounds would have been sufficient to cause
immediate death.
WARREN: So it is your conclusion that Jim Larkin was killed by shots fired from a handgun?
HAMILTON: That is correct.
WARREN: Thank you, no further questions.
JUDGE: The defense may cross-examine.
JUDGE: The defense has no questions of this witness, Your Honor.
JUDGE: Thank you, Dr. Hamilton; you may step down. The State may call its next witness.
WARREN: The State calls Robert Andrews.

Consider Your Verdict: Comprehensive Critical Thinking in the Jury Room

413

Robert Andrews takes the stand and is sworn in.
WARREN:

Mr. Andrews, could you describe your position and your qualifications for the
court?
ANDREWS: I am the director of the forensics laboratory for the Lincoln County Sheriff’s
Office; I studied forensic science at Ohio State University, where I received my
Master’s degree in forensic science; I have since completed a number of in-service
training institutes in forensic science.
WARREN: Your Honor, the State asks that Mr. Andrews be qualified as an expert witness.
JUDGE: Does the defense have any objections?
WEST: The defense has no hesitation in recognizing the expertise of Mr. Andrews.
JUDGE: Without objection, Mr. Andrews is qualified as expert.
WARREN: Mr. Andrews, did you examine the bullets taken from the body of Jim Larkin?
ANDREWS: I did.
WARREN: And could you tell the jury what you concluded?
ANDREWS: The bullets had been fired from a .38 caliber pistol.
WARREN: Are you sure of that?
ANDREWS: Positive. The markings on the bullets were quite clear; and those, when combined with the size and weight of the slugs, were all consistent with their being
from only one type of weapon: a .38 caliber handgun. Furthermore, because of the
distinctive markings of the slugs, it is clear that they were all fired from the same
weapon.
WARREN: So it is your expert conclusion that all three bullets that struck the murder
victim were fired from the same .38 caliber pistol?
ANDREWS: That’s right.
WARREN: No further questions.
JUDGE: Ms. West?
WEST: Thank you, Your Honor. Mr. Andrews, you have no hesitation in saying that the
bullets were fired from a .38 caliber handgun, right?
ANDREWS: Right.
WEST: And that conclusion is based on your excellent training and the number of years
you have spent making such investigations?
ANDREWS: Yes.
WEST: How many years have you worked at the county forensics lab?
ANDREWS: Fourteen years.
WEST: I guess you’ve examined a lot of bullets over the course of those years.
ANDREWS: A lot of bullets, yes.
WEST: And a lot of bullets from .38 caliber handguns, right?
ANDREWS: Yes.
WEST: In fact, that’s a pretty common handgun, isn’t it? Don’t the county deputies carry
.38 caliber revolvers?
ANDREWS: Yes, that is the standard issue sidearm.
WEST: In fact, that’s a very popular weapon, in Lincoln County and elsewhere, right?
WARREN: Your Honor, these questions are taking us off the track. The number of handguns in Lincoln County is not the issue, and besides, Mr. Andrews is an expert in
forensics, not an expert in how many handguns there are in the area.
WEST: Your Honor, the fact that .38 caliber pistols are widely owned and easily available
in Lincoln County has obvious relevance to this case; and Mr. Andrews, through the
experiences of his office, is uniquely qualified to testify on that issue.
JUDGE: I’m going to allow this question, but I think this will just about reach the limit of
the questions that can be put to Mr. Andrews on this issue of the number of .38 caliber
weapons in the area. If the defense wishes to pursue this line beyond this question,
you will have to call an expert more directly related to the issue.

414

Consider Your Verdict: Comprehensive Critical Thinking in the Jury Room
WEST:

Thank you, Your Honor. Now, Mr. Andrews, would you say, on the basis of your
long experience in the Lincoln County forensics laboratory, that .38 caliber handguns are fairly common in this area?
ANDREWS: There do seem to be a number of .38 caliber pistols, that’s correct.
WEST: A number of them, thank you. And would you say that a number of those weapons
are owned by people who are active in selling and distributing illegal drugs?
WARREN: Your Honor, I object to that question. It falls completely outside the expertise
of this witness, and calls for speculation.
JUDGE: That question is out of order. Ms. West, you have reached the limits of this line of
questioning with this witness.
WEST: Yes, thank you, Your Honor. And thank you, Mr. Andrews. We have no further
questions.
JUDGE: Mr. District Attorney, do you wish to redirect?
WARREN: We have no further questions, Your Honor.
JUDGE: Thank you, Mr. Andrews; you may step down. The State may call its next witness.
WARREN: Your Honor, if it please the court, at this time the State wishes to enter
People’s Exhibit 1. It is a copy of the vehicle registration for a car owned by
Robert Ransom.
JUDGE: Does the Defense have any objections?
WEST: No objections, Your Honor.
JUDGE: Without objection, enter People’s Exhibit 1.
The bailiff marks the exhibit.
WARREN:

Ladies and Gentlemen of the Jury, I am handing you a copy of the registration
papers issued to Robert Ransom. As you will note, they are for the New Virginia
registration of a Jaguar automobile, 2008 model, white in color.

The jury passes the registration among themselves.
WARREN:

The State calls Lester Liggin.

Lester Liggin enters the witness box, and is sworn in.
WARREN:
LIGGIN:
WARREN:

Would you state your full name and address?
Lester Howard Liggin, 788 Fairlawn Drive, Silverton.
Mr. Liggin, could you tell the jury where you were at just after midnight in the
early morning of September 10?
LIGGIN: I was on the corner, at 12th and Church; I had just left the Sideways Lounge, and was
lighting a cigarette, and was walking toward where my car was parked on 12th Street.
WARREN: Was there anyone else on the corner near you?
LIGGIN: Jim Larkin was walking about 50 yards from me, on the sidewalk going up
Church Street.
WARREN: Did you recognize him?
LIGGIN: Yes, I recognized him. I had seen him before at the Sideways, and he had walked
out just ahead of me. I didn’t know who he was then, but I recognized him.
WARREN: Could you describe for us what happened?
LIGGIN: Well, while I was lighting my cigarette, I heard this car come roaring up the
street. I don’t know where it came from, but it had its lights off, and the engine was
revved up high. When it got even with Jim Larkin, it hit the brakes, and then there
were four or five shots from the car, and Jim fell over, and I ducked down, and the
car roared off.
WARREN: Did you get a good look at the car?
LIGGIN: Yes, I did.
WARREN: Could you describe it for us?
LIGGIN: It was a white, late-model Jaguar; a convertible, with the top up.

Consider Your Verdict: Comprehensive Critical Thinking in the Jury Room
WARREN:
LIGGIN:

415

You’re sure it was a Jaguar?
Yes, I recognize a Jaguar; I was thinking about buying one a couple of years ago,
so I looked at a lot of them. I can tell a Jaguar when I see one.
WARREN: How far would you say the car was from Jim Larkin when the shots were fired?
LIGGIN: Oh, maybe 20 feet; not more than 30 feet.
WARREN: Thank you, no further questions.
WEST: Mr. Liggin, you thought it was unusual that the car didn’t have its lights on, is that right?
LIGGIN: Yes, I did.
WEST: Why was that?
LIGGIN: Why? Well, it was the middle of the night; it was dark; cars usually have their
lights on when it’s dark.
WEST: So it was quite dark on the street there?
LIGGIN: Well, there’s a streetlight, but it is dark.
WEST: You say you were leaving the Sideways just after midnight, is that correct?
LIGGIN: Yes.
WEST: That’s sort of a favorite hangout, right? A lot of your friends stop by the Sideways to
have a couple of drinks, talk about football, maybe play a game of darts, is that right?
LIGGIN: Yeah, that’s about it.
WEST: So you sometimes go there after work, see your friends there?
LIGGIN: Yes.
WEST: On the evening of September 9, do you remember what time you arrived at the
Sideways?
LIGGIN: I think I went over after work; I get off at 8:00, I probably got to the Sideways
about 9:00.
WEST: Saw your friends there?
LIGGIN: Yeah.
WEST: Had a couple of drinks with some friends?
LIGGIN: Couple of beers.
WEST: Well, let’s see, you were there about 3 hours, maybe a little more, right? Maybe
more than a couple of beers?
LIGGIN: Maybe.
WEST: Maybe substantially more than a couple?
LIGGIN: I wasn’t drunk.
WEST: But you had had a good deal to drink, right? You had been sitting in the tavern for
3 hours drinking, isn’t that right?
LIGGIN: I drank some beer, but I wasn’t drunk.
WEST: In fact, you don’t have any idea what sort of car you saw, do you? You were standing on the corner trying to get your balance and bearings, and a car roars by, and
shots ring out, and you’re ducking behind a car, and you really don’t know what sort
of car you saw, isn’t that right?
LIGGIN: I saw a white Jaguar, I know that.
WARREN: Your Honor, the Defense is badgering the witness.
WEST: I have no further questions of this witness, Your Honor.
JUDGE: Mr. Warren, you may reexamine the witness if you wish.
WARREN: Mr. Liggin, it was dark there; but in the light from the streetlight, do you have
any doubt whatsoever that the car you saw was a white Jaguar?
LIGGIN: No, I’m sure; it was a white Jaguar, alright.
WARREN: Thank you, no further questions.
JUDGE: You may step down. Call your next witness.
WARREN: The State calls Allen Arnold.
Allen Arnold takes the witness stand and is sworn in.
WARREN:
ARNOLD:

Would you please state your full name?
Allen Barron Arnold.

416

Consider Your Verdict: Comprehensive Critical Thinking in the Jury Room
WARREN:
ARNOLD:
WARREN:
ARNOLD:

Mr. Arnold, are you acquainted with the defendant, Robert Ransom?
I know Robert, yes.
Have you ever had occasion to go target shooting with the defendant?
Yeah, a couple of times Bob and I have driven out to my grandfather’s farm and
shot at bottles and cans.
WARREN: On those occasions, did the defendant bring a weapon with him?
ARNOLD: Yes.
WARREN: Would you describe the weapon.
ARNOLD: It was a .38 revolver; silver barrel, I think the grip was some sort of brown or tan
wood.
WARREN: On those occasions, did the defendant fire the .38 revolver?
ARNOLD: Yes, he did.
WARREN: Was the defendant a good shot?
ARNOLD: Yeah, he was pretty good.
WARREN: Could you be a bit more specific? Was he able to consistently hit a target, what
sort of target, what distance?
ARNOLD: Well, shooting at, say, a beer can, from maybe 50 or 60 feet, he would hit it
maybe one time in three, maybe a little better.
WARREN: Did you ever see the pistol other than on those occasions when you went target
shooting?
ARNOLD: Once I was riding with Bob, and I opened the glove compartment to get a tape,
and it was in there; and I’ve seen it at his apartment a couple of times.
WARREN: When was the last time you saw the pistol?
ARNOLD: I guess maybe about 3 months ago, at his apartment.
WARREN: Thank you, Mr. Arnold; no further questions.
WEST: Mr. Arnold, you say you and Robert went target shooting on a couple of
occasions.
ARNOLD: Right.
WEST: How would you describe Robert’s handling of the pistol? Was he careful? Reckless?
Or what?
ARNOLD: He was very careful; he wasn’t waving it around and shooting wildly or anything.
WEST: Did he ever fire the pistol while you were anywhere near the target?
ARNOLD: No, he always made real sure that no one was anywhere near the target before
he fired.
WEST: Did he ever point the pistol at you?
ARNOLD: No, of course not.
WEST: Did you ever see him point a pistol at anyone?
ARNOLD: No.
WEST: Did you ever hear him threaten anyone with a pistol, or threaten to shoot
anyone?
ARNOLD: Never.
WEST: So in all your experiences with Robert Ransom, you found that he used his pistol
in a safe, cautious manner, purely for target shooting, and never threatened anyone
with it or brandished it about or aimed it at anyone, is that right?
ARNOLD: That’s right.
WEST: Thank you, no further questions.
WARREN: No further questions, Your Honor.
JUDGE: You may step down. Mr. Warren, you may call your next witness.
WARREN: The State calls Detective Ross Reynolds.
Ross Reynolds takes the stand and is sworn in.
WARREN: Would you state your full name and your position?
REYNOLDS: Ross Reynolds, detective with the Lincoln County

Sheriff’s Office.

Consider Your Verdict: Comprehensive Critical Thinking in the Jury Room

417

WARREN:

Detective Reynolds, were you involved in the investigation of the Jim Larkin
homicide?
REYNOLDS: Yes.
WARREN: In the course of your investigation, did you have occasion to search the apartment and car of the defendant?
REYNOLDS: Yes.
WARREN: Was this an extensive search?
REYNOLDS: Yes, very thorough and extensive.
WARREN: In the course of your search, did you find any type of firearm?
REYNOLDS: No, I did not.
WARREN: Thank you, no further questions.
JUDGE: Ms. West, your witness.
WEST: Thank you, Your Honor. Detective Reynolds, prior to your homicide investigation,
had you had occasion to visit the Westgate Apartment complex in the course of your
work as a detective?
WARREN: Your Honor, I object to this question; it’s obviously irrelevant to this case.
JUDGE: Approach the Bench.
The following is a sidebar conference, out of hearing of the jury.
WARREN:

Your Honor, earlier investigations by Detective Reynolds cannot be relevant to
this homicide case.
WEST: Your Honor, the prosecution is obviously suggesting through this witness that my
client purposefully disposed of his pistol in order to eliminate incriminating
evidence; I believe we have a right to bring up other possibilities, such as the possibility of the pistol being stolen; Detective Reynolds’s investigation of burglaries at
Westgate Apartments is thus certainly relevant.
JUDGE: I’ll allow the questions. Step back.
WEST: Detective Reynolds, had you conducted any earlier investigations at Westgate Apartments, within the period of 2 years prior to your visit in connection with this case?
REYNOLDS: Yes, I had.
WEST: For what purpose did you previously visit Westgate Apartments?
REYNOLDS: To investigate a burglary.
WEST: Was that the burglary of a single apartment?
REYNOLDS: No, there had been two apartments burglarized during one weekend, when
their occupants had been away.
WEST: Among the items stolen during those burglaries, were there any firearms?
REYNOLDS: Yes; a 12 gauge shotgun and a .22 caliber pistol were reported missing from
one apartment.
WEST: Thank you, Detective Reynolds, no further questions.
WARREN: Did you ever investigate a burglary at the apartment of the defendant, Robert
Ransom?
REYNOLDS: No, I did not.
WARREN: To your knowledge, did Robert Ransom ever report a burglary or any other
theft from his apartment?
REYNOLDS: Not to my knowledge.
WARREN: Thank you, no further questions.
JUDGE: Thank you, Detective, you may step down. Mr. Warren, you may call your next
witness.
WARREN: The State calls Scott Guyonovich.
Scott Guyonovich enters the witness box and is sworn in.
WARREN: State your full name.
GUYONOVICH: Scott Garrison Guyonovich.

418

Consider Your Verdict: Comprehensive Critical Thinking in the Jury Room
WARREN: Mr. Guyonovich, where do you work?
GUYONOVICH: I tend bar at the Wayward Inn.
WARREN: Do you know the defendant, Robert Ransom?
GUYONOVICH: I’m acquainted with him; he would sometimes

come to the Inn when I was
working, have a few drinks. We’d talk about baseball, that sort of stuff. I knew his
first name, knew that he usually drank vodka tonics, that’s about it.
WARREN: But you knew him, and would have no doubt about identifying him?
GUYONOVICH: Oh, I could recognize him, certainly.
WARREN: Did you see the defendant on the night of July 4?
GUYONOVICH: Yes, I did.
WARREN: Would you tell us what you observed?
GUYONOVICH: Well, Bob was in the Wayward, had been there most of the evening; he was
with a woman named Laura, she was usually with him when he came there. He had
been drinking some, and while he was in the men’s room, this guy—I didn’t know
him—came over to where Laura was standing at the bar, and asked to buy her a
drink. I guess Laura was flirting a little, and she said OK. So I mixed drinks for both
of them, and this guy picked up his drink, and raised it, and said something like “To
your beautiful eyes.” About that time Bob came back to the bar, and sort of grabbed
the guy by the arm, and said “Who are you?” or maybe “Who the hell are you?” And
this guy said, “I’m the guy who is buying this lady a drink. Who the hell are you?”
And then Bob said something like “I’m the guy who’s going to kick your butt,” and
he took a swing at this guy, and knocked his drink out of his hand.
WARREN: What happened next?
GUYONOVICH: Well, Joe—he clears tables, and sort of keeps order in the place—grabbed
Bob, and I got a hand on the other guy; and Joe—he’s a huge man, very powerful—
got between them, and made it clear to both of them that there wasn’t going to be
any fighting there. Then Laura was sort of embarrassed about the whole thing, and
she got Bob out of there; anyway, they left.
WARREN: As he was leaving, did the defendant say anything to the fellow at the bar?
GUYONOVICH: Oh, the usual sort of barroom stuff.
WARREN: Answer my question, please, as specifically as you can: What, if anything, did the
defendant say to the man at the bar?
GUYONOVICH: He was just sort of blowing off steam, you know.
WARREN: Your Honor, would you please instruct the witness to answer my question?
JUDGE: Mr. Guyonovich, the District Attorney has asked you a clear, specific question. He
did not ask for your speculation about what the defendant may or may not have
intended; he asked specifically what the defendant said. You must answer that
question, as directly and accurately as you can.
GUYONOVICH: He said “I’ll get you, I’ll blow your head off.”
WARREN: “I’ll get you, I’ll blow your head off.” That’s what he said?
WEST: Objection, Your Honor; asked and answered.
JUDGE: Sustained.
WARREN: Mr. Guyonovich, did you know the deceased, Jim Larkin?
GUYONOVICH: Yes, he stopped by the Inn maybe a couple of times a week.
WARREN: Do you know a woman by the name of Laura Larue?
GUYONOVICH: Yeah; as I said, she used to come in with Bob; she was with him on the night
we were just talking about.
WARREN: Did you ever see Jim Larkin and Laura Larue together?
GUYONOVICH: Yes, I don’t remember the dates, but I think twice, in late August, they
came in to the Wayward together.
WARREN: They had a drink together?
GUYONOVICH: Yes.
WARREN: Did they leave together?
GUYONOVICH: Yes.

Consider Your Verdict: Comprehensive Critical Thinking in the Jury Room
WARREN: Mr. Guyonovich, where were you on the night of September 9?
GUYONOVICH: I was at work, at the Wayward Inn.
WARREN: Did you have occasion to see Robert Ransom?
GUYONOVICH: Yes, he came in about 9:00 P.M.
WARREN: What, if anything, did he say to you?
GUYONOVICH: He asked if I had seen Laura that night, and he asked if I

419

had ever seen
Laura with Jim Larkin; and then he wanted to know if I had seen Jim that
evening.
WARREN: What did you tell him?
GUYONOVICH: I told him I had not seen Laura, and that I hadn’t seen Jim that evening;
and, well, you know, a bartender has to keep secrets, right? So I told him I hadn’t
seen Laura with Jim.
WARREN: What did Robert say after that?
GUYONOVICH: He sort of sneered, said something like, uh, “Yeah, right”; then he left.
WARREN: No further questions.
JUDGE: Your witness, Ms. West.
WEST: Thank you, Your Honor. Mr. Guyonovich, how long have you tended bar?
GUYONOVICH: About 4 years.
WEST: During that time, have you seen any fights at the bar?
GUYONOVICH: A few.
WEST: Maybe more than a few?
GUYONOVICH: Several, I guess.
WEST: In these fights, usually someone’s had a bit too much to drink, there’s a punch or
two thrown, it’s broken up, and then there’s a lot of wild talk and threats, is that the
way it usually goes?
WARREN: Your Honor, I must object; Counsel for the Defense is asking questions about
the folkways and patterns of bar fighting and arguing, and this man is surely not
qualified as an expert in that area; if she wishes to pursue this line of reasoning, she
should bring in a tavern anthropologist to testify.
JUDGE: Given the earlier testimony by this witness, I will allow him to answer the
question. You may answer, Mr. Guyonovich.
GUYONOVICH: Yes, that’s about it. They throw a punch or two, and then threaten to kill
each other, and smash faces, and so forth; usually they’re back drinking together the
next night.
WEST: So you don’t take these drunken threats very seriously?
WARREN: Your Honor . . .
JUDGE: Objection sustained; that’s about as far as that line of questioning can go.
WEST: Mr. Guyonovich, you said that you knew Jim Larkin, that he came into the tavern
perhaps twice a week, is that correct?
GUYONOVICH: Right.
WEST: During that period, did you ever have any trouble with him? Did he ever cause any
trouble at the tavern?
GUYONOVICH: No, not really.
WEST: Didn’t you have to ask him to leave the tavern on at least one occasion?
GUYONOVICH: Yes.
WEST: Had he been drinking too much?
GUYONOVICH: No; he, uh, was sitting in the back, in a booth in the back; and I saw him
put his hand in his jacket pocket, and then put his hand to his nose and sniff, and I
thought he might be using cocaine, and so I asked him to leave; actually, I told Joe
to tell him to leave.
WEST: What happened?
GUYONOVICH: He left.
WEST: He didn’t protest, didn’t deny he was using cocaine, he just left.
GUYONOVICH: That’s right.

420

Consider Your Verdict: Comprehensive Critical Thinking in the Jury Room
WEST:

While he was in the tavern, sitting in the back booth, did you ever see him
pass anything to anyone, anything that might have been a packet of cocaine, for
instance?
WARREN: Your Honor, that question is completely out of line. There is no evidence
whatsoever that the deceased ever passed illegal drugs, and the defense is using a
leading question in a most improper manner to suggest something that is without
any foundation, and is in any case totally irrelevant to this case.
WEST: Your Honor, the witness has just testified that Jim Larkin used cocaine in the
tavern; it is perfectly legitimate to inquire as to whether he might have also dealt
the stuff he used; that is certainly relevant, since this sort of activity might have
motivated his murder.
JUDGE: I will allow the question, but I will caution the jury: Ladies and Gentlemen of the
Jury, the mere fact that a question is allowed and asked should not be construed as
suggesting anything whatsoever as to the subject of the question; allowing Ms. West
to ask this question does not imply that Jim Larkin did deal drugs, nor does it imply
that there is evidence that he did deal drugs. This is simply a question, nothing
more: It is not an assertion, nor even a suggestion, of fact. Ms. West, you may ask
your question.
WEST: Mr. Guyonovich, while Jim Larkin was sitting in his booth at the back of the tavern,
did you see him pass anything to anyone that might have been cocaine or some
other illegal drug?
GUYONOVICH: No, I did not.
WEST: You never saw him pass cocaine; no further questions.
JUDGE: Does the State have any more witnesses?
WARREN: No, Your Honor; that concludes the case for the State.
JUDGE: The Defense may call its first witness.
WEST: The Defense calls Mrs. Alice Lawrence.
Mrs. Lawrence enters the witness box and is sworn in.
WEST: Mrs. Lawrence, would you state your full name and tell us where you live.
LAWRENCE: My name is Alice Ellen Winslow Lawrence. I live at the Westgate Apartments

in Silverton, Apartment 7-B.
WEST: Do you live alone?
LAWRENCE: Yes, since my husband died 12 years ago.
WEST: You certainly appear to be in excellent health; how are your vision and your hearing?
LAWRENCE: Well, I’m in real good health, can still look after myself, my hearing is

excellent, and with my bifocals I can see real well.
describe the location of your apartment in the complex?
on the second floor, a corner apartment, near the entrance of the
apartment complex, overlooking the apartment drive.
WEST: So you can see the driveway from your living room window?
LAWRENCE: Yes.
WEST: And you can hear cars pass in and out of the complex?
LAWRENCE: That’s right.
WEST: Do you know the defendant, Robert Ransom?
LAWRENCE: Well, I recognize him. I just know him to say hello. I know he lives in the next
building, because I’ve seen him when I take my walk in the morning, and I’ve seen
him coming in and going out in his car.
WEST: So you recognize his car?
LAWRENCE: Certainly; it’s white, a real sporty little thing; he drives it with the top down in
the summertime.
WEST: Mrs. Lawrence, from where you sit in your living room to watch television, can you
see the driveway into and out of the apartment complex?
WEST: Could you
LAWRENCE: I live

Consider Your Verdict: Comprehensive Critical Thinking in the Jury Room
LAWRENCE: Well, I have to stretch my neck a little bit, but I can see it.
WEST: And you can hear cars pass from there?
LAWRENCE: Sure can; sometimes in the summer it gets a little noisy.
WEST: And is that the only driveway entering or leaving the apartment complex?
LAWRENCE: That’s right.
WEST: Now Mrs. Lawrence, on the night of September 9, were you at home?
LAWRENCE: Yes, I was; I remember because I watched My Fair Lady on television,

421

and
I had been looking forward to seeing it; it’s one of my favorite movies, and I hadn’t
seen it in years.
WEST: Do you remember what time that was?
LAWRENCE: Well, I believe the movie started at 10:00, and it was after midnight before it
ended, because of all the commercials; that’s a little later than I usually go to bed.
WEST: Did you see or hear Mr. Ransom’s car at any time during that evening?
LAWRENCE: Yes, about the time the movie was starting, I remember I heard his car
coming into the driveway—it makes kind of a special fast roar, that sports car—and
I looked over and saw his car.
WEST: You’re sure about that?
LAWRENCE: Yes, I’m certain. I couldn’t really see him, because the streetlight wasn’t that
bright; but it was his car, alright. I remember thinking that he was going a little too
fast for that driveway.
WEST: So you saw him coming into the apartment complex about 10:00 P.M., right?
LAWRENCE: That’s right; at least, I saw his car coming in, and so I guess he must have
been the one driving it.
WEST: You’re sure his car came in. Now Mrs. Lawrence, was that the only time you saw his
car that evening?
LAWRENCE: Yes, it was.
WEST: During the whole time you watched your movie, from 10:00 P.M. until after midnight, you never saw the defendant’s white sports car go out again?
LAWRENCE: That’s right, I didn’t.
WEST: And from where you were sitting watching the movie, you would have seen it if it
had gone out, wouldn’t you?
WARREN: Objection; that question calls for speculation on the part of the witness.
WEST: No speculation is involved, Your Honor; I’m simply asking whether the witness was
in a position to see a car if it had gone out of the driveway.
JUDGE: The witness has already testified that she could see cars in the driveway from
where she was sitting; that is all she can testify to: She can’t say whether she would
have seen a car, in some hypothetical circumstances. Objection sustained.
LAWRENCE: Yes, I would have seen it.
WARREN: Your Honor . . .
JUDGE: Mrs. Lawrence, I have ruled against that question; you are not allowed to answer
it. Members of the jury, please disregard anything that the witness might have said
in answer to that question. Continue, Ms. West.
WEST: So during the time from 10:00 P.M. until after midnight, while you were sitting
overlooking the driveway and watching the movie, you did not see the defendant’s
car leave?
WARREN: Objection, Your Honor; that question has been asked and answered.
WEST: No further questions.
JUDGE: The State may examine the witness.
WARREN: Mrs. Lawrence, My Fair Lady is one of my favorites also. Do you watch many
movies?
LAWRENCE: Yes, I do, especially musicals.
WARREN: Now I imagine that like most folks, when you watch a movie, you don’t make it
a point to watch all the commercials, do you?
LAWRENCE: I certainly don’t.

422

Consider Your Verdict: Comprehensive Critical Thinking in the Jury Room
WARREN: And I believe you said that this particular movie had a lot of commercials?
LAWRENCE: They all do; sometimes it just takes forever to watch a movie because of

all
those commercials, and they just go on and on with them.
WARREN: There are a lot of commercials, aren’t there? And like most folks, you probably
take advantage of the commercials to get up, stretch your legs, maybe pop some
popcorn, or get a drink, or refresh yourself in the powder room, or even tidy up the
dinner dishes, is that right? You don’t sit there glued to the television set during
those long commercial breaks, do you?
LAWRENCE: No, I sometimes get up, get a glass of milk, freshen up; I might get a treat for
my cat, Whiskers.
WARREN: Now your kitchen and pantry and bathroom, they aren’t right by the window,
are they? They are over on the other side of your apartment, away from the driveway?
LAWRENCE: That’s right.
WARREN: And Mrs. Lawrence, you’re certainly not a nosy neighbor, are you? You don’t
keep your nose out the window all the time, looking for who is going in and coming
out, right? Of course you can’t avoid seeing and hearing cars pass when you are
sitting by the window; but you wouldn’t run from the kitchen to make sure that a car
doesn’t pass without your seeing it, would you?
WEST: Your Honor, the District Attorney is leading the witness.
JUDGE: Mr. Warren, I will grant some latitude during cross-examination; but your last
question overstepped the bounds. Do not lead the witness.
WARREN: I’ll rephrase the question. Mrs. Lawrence, do you exert yourself to make sure
you see every car that enters or leaves the apartment complex?
LAWRENCE: Certainly not; I can’t help seeing most of the cars that come and go, but
I certainly don’t make any special effort to do so.
WARREN: Thank you, Mrs. Lawrence; no further questions.
WEST: Mrs. Lawrence, are you a member of the Citizen’s Watch group at your apartment
complex?
LAWRENCE: Yes, I am.
WEST: And so as a member of that group, do you consider it your responsibility to keep
your eyes and ears open for cars that don’t belong in the apartment complex, that
might belong to burglars?
WARREN: Objection; leading question.
JUDGE: Sustained.
WEST: Does being a member of your Citizen’s Watch group carry any special obligations
for you?
LAWRENCE: Well, it makes me more aware of the need to watch carefully about any
strange cars that might be coming into the apartment complex, in case they belong
to burglars.
WEST: Burglary has been a problem there, hasn’t it?
LAWRENCE: We did have some break-ins, yes, made me real nervous.
WEST: Thank you, Mrs. Lawrence; no further questions.
JUDGE: You may step down. Ms. West, do you have any other witnesses?
WEST: No, Your Honor.
JUDGE: The State may make its closing argument.
Closing statement, DISTRICT ATTORNEY WARREN: Ladies and Gentlemen of the Jury, we
said at the outset of this case that we would show you strands of proof that would weave
together to form a powerful and inescapable web of proof: proof that the defendant is the
person who stalked Jim Larkin, drove a white Jaguar past the victim, and killed him with
several shots from a .38 revolver. These are the ropes of that proof. First, consider who
had a motive for killing Jim Larkin: who else but Robert Ransom? The lovely Laura Larue,
who had been Robert’s girlfriend, was slipping into the same taverns where she had gone
with Robert. But now she was on the arm of Jim Larkin, sipping drinks beside him, laughing

Consider Your Verdict: Comprehensive Critical Thinking in the Jury Room

423

at his jokes: and at the very same places where she once had gone with Robert! Not only
would Robert be jealous of Laura’s new romantic interest, he would also be humiliated by
having the two of them seen by his friends. And Robert Ransom has the potential: He is
not a man to suffer jealousy patiently. When a man bought Laura one drink, he
challenged the man to a fight, and then threatened to kill him. That’s the sort of reaction
that jealousy provokes in Robert Ransom: “I’ll get you.” And the very night of Jim Larkin’s
murder, Robert Ransom was looking for Jim, and for Jim with Laura; Robert Ransom was
looking for Jim Larkin just 3 hours before Jim was murdered. Robert had the motive;
Robert had the violent personality; did Robert have the means to get Jim Larkin?
Certainly. He had the means of carrying out a murder, for he had a .38 revolver and he
knew how to use it. And Jim Larkin was murdered by slugs accurately fired from a .38
revolver. Now Robert Ransom’s .38 revolver is missing. Not in his house, not in his car,
nowhere to be found. And finally, Robert had the means of transportation to track down
his victim: a white Jaguar. And it was a white Jaguar that was used in the killing. So wrap
these cords together: Robert Ransom had the motive, the violent temper, a .38 revolver
like the one used to fire the fatal shots, and a white Jaguar like the one used to hunt down
Jim Larkin, drive by him, and murder him. Wrap those cords together, and they bind
Robert Ransom to the murder of Jim Larkin. They bind his guilt with a certainty that
eliminates any possibility of reasonable doubt. And they demand a verdict of guilty. The
evidence points conclusively to Robert Ransom as the murderer of Jim Larkin; and that
same evidence convicts him of first-degree murder: You cannot find him guilty of less. For
when someone stalks his victim, waits for him in the night, drives into close firing range,
and methodically pumps bullets from a .38 caliber pistol into his victim’s heart and brain,
then there can be no doubt that this was a coldly calculated premeditated murder. The
State asks that you weigh the evidence carefully, follow the law conscientiously, and return
a verdict of guilty: guilty of murder in the first degree. Thank you.
JUDGE:

Is the Defense ready to present its closing arguments?

Closing statement, DEFENSE ATTORNEY: Yes, thank you, Your Honor; and thank you,
Ladies and Gentlemen of the Jury, for your careful attention throughout this entire case.
The defendant has a right to your fair, careful consideration of all the evidence and all the
arguments; and that is all we ask. For when you scrutinize the case offered against Robert
Ransom, its flimsiness is readily apparent. What is the case against Robert Ransom? That
he is jealous when his girlfriend goes out with another man; well, if that is the charge,
then he is guilty. But then, who is innocent? Of course he becomes jealous, as any of us
would. But that is no grounds for thinking Robert guilty of murder: you know it, I know it,
and the prosecution knows it, and that is why they try to prop it up with all these other
things. What other things? Well, that Robert Ransom once took a swing at a guy in a bar.
True enough: Robert was celebrating our national holiday, had perhaps a bit too much to
drink, was provoked when his girlfriend teased him a bit with another man, and took a
wild swing. And from that flimsy episode, the prosecution hopes to persuade intelligent
jurors that Robert Ransom has the sort of violent, vindictive personality that would turn
him into a cool, calculating, stalking killer. It just doesn’t add up; it’s too big a jump, from
one small tavern altercation to cool, methodical murder. So what evidence does the prosecution have to offer you? Jim Larkin was killed with a .38 pistol; Robert Ransom owns a
.38 pistol. So what? What does that prove? There are .38 caliber pistols all over this city!
Walk in any gun shop, and ask to see a .38 caliber pistol: They’ll bring out whole cases of
them. Go to any target-shooting range, and count the number of people taking target
practice with a .38 caliber pistol. Check the holsters of the policemen in this very courtroom! If owning a .38 caliber handgun is proof of guilt, then there are lots and lots of
guilty people in this city! The prosecution wants to make something of the fact that
Robert’s pistol is missing. But Robert lives in an apartment complex where things go
missing not infrequently, where dear old ladies like Mrs. Lawrence join crime watchers to

424

Consider Your Verdict: Comprehensive Critical Thinking in the Jury Room

struggle against theft and burglary. And of course, as we all know, what is one of the
favorite theft targets? Firearms, and particularly pistols. So what remains of this powerful
prosecution case against Robert? Well, there’s the white Jaguar: The murderer drove a
white Jaguar—or perhaps, in the darkness of the street, some other model of sportscar, or
a Jaguar of a different shade, or a different sort of car altogether; it’s hard to be sure. And
Robert owns a white Jaguar. But what sort of evidence is that? Even if the murderer did
drive a white Jaguar, there are plenty of white Jaguars—and lots of cars that closely resemble white Jaguars, especially on a city street at a bleary-eyed midnight after a few drinks.
And Robert’s white Jaguar was safe at home, parked next to its owner’s apartment, from
approximately 10:00 P.M.—when, according to Mrs. Lawrence, Robert drove it home—
until well after midnight. Now the prosecutor wants you to believe that maybe that loud
sportscar slipped past under Mrs. Lawrence’s window without her noticing, but I don’t
think so. In fact, God bless her, I don’t think you could slip a skateboard past
Mrs. Lawrence’s window without her noticing. I doubt that a single sparrow falls in the
Westgate Apartment complex without Mrs. Lawrence taking note of it. So even if the
murderer did drive a white Jaguar, there’s no reason to think that it was Robert’s; and
there is excellent reason—the good, honest testimony of Mrs. Lawrence—to believe that
it was not.
So who did kill Jim Larkin? I don’t know, and Robert doesn’t know; and unfortunately, the police don’t know: They simply charged the person who was easiest to find.
We can guess about who might have done so. Was Jim perhaps involved in cocaine to the
point that he sold some to support his habit? If so, he was entering into a very hazardous
occupation, with a low life expectancy, especially if he started to edge into another
dealer’s market. That is one of the frustrating things about being wrongly accused: You
don’t know what happened, you can’t tell who committed the crime. But then, that is also
one of the glories of our system of justice: The defendant does not have to prove someone else did it, because the burden of proving who killed Jim Larkin is on the prosecution.
We have no idea who murdered Jim Larkin, or why. But one thing is perfectly clear: The
prosecution has certainly failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Robert Ransom
is guilty; in fact, the whole case against Robert is a tragic tissue of happenstance. Robert
should never have been charged with this terrible crime; but I am confident, that as you
consider the facts carefully and impartially, you will end his awful nightmare with a verdict
of not guilty.

Judge Schwebel’s Summation and Charge to the Jury
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN OF THE JURY:

Soon you will retire to the jury room to consider your verdict. All the evidence has
been presented. It is now your duty to decide from the evidence what the facts are. You must
then apply the law to those facts. It is essential that you understand and apply the law as it
is, and not as you think it is, and not as you might like it to be. This is important, because
justice requires that everyone tried for the same crime be tried under the same law.
The defendant has entered a plea of “not guilty.” The fact that he has been indicted
is no evidence of guilt. Under our system of justice, when a defendant pleads “not guilty,”
he is not required to prove his innocence; he is presumed to be innocent. The State must
prove to you that the defendant is guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
The defendant in this case has not testified. The law of New Virginia gives him this
privilege. This same law also assures him that his decision not to testify creates no
presumption against him. Therefore, his silence is not to influence your decision in any way.
The defendant is charged with first-degree murder in the death of Jim Larkin. It is
alleged that the defendant fatally shot Jim Larkin in the early morning hours of
September 10. Under the law of New Virginia, a person is guilty of first-degree murder if
he purposely or knowingly causes the death of another human being. If you find—
beyond a reasonable doubt—that the defendant, Robert Ransom, did purposely or

Consider Your Verdict: Comprehensive Critical Thinking in the Jury Room

425

knowingly cause the death of Jim Larkin, then you must return a verdict of guilty of firstdegree murder. If, however, you have a reasonable doubt that Robert Ransom purposely
or knowingly caused the death of Jim Larkin, then you must return a verdict of not guilty.
It is your exclusive province to find the true facts of the case and to render a verdict
reflecting the truth as you find it.
I instruct you that a verdict is not a verdict until all 12 jurors agree unanimously as
to what your decision shall be. You may not render a verdict by majority vote.
Now, members of the jury, you may retire to your deliberations and consider your
verdict.1

NOTE
1
Some parts of the judge’s instructions to the jury were drawn (in edited form) from the North Carolina
Conference of Superior Court Judges and North Carolina Bar Association Foundation, North Carolina Pattern
Instructions—Criminal.

INTERNET RESOURCES
Professor David Linder has put together a fascinating site containing details of many
famous trials, from the trial of Socrates in ancient Athens to the trial of O. J. Simpson. It
can be found at http://law2.umkc.edu/faculty/projects/ftrials/ftrials.htm.

ADDITIONAL READING
If you enjoyed thinking about these courtroom exercises, you might also enjoy a book by Judge Norbert
Ehrenfreund and Lawrence Treat, You’re the Jury
(New York: Henry Holt, 1992). As it says on the

cover of the book, “Solve Twelve Real-Life Court
Cases Along with the Juries Who Decided Them,” it
presents a variety of authentic cases, edited into
readable and interesting form.

This page intentionally left blank

Key Terms

Ad hominem. “Ad hominem” literally means “to the person.” An ad hominem argument is an argument that focuses on a person (or group of people), typically attacking the person. For example, “Joe is a liar,” “Sandra is a hypocrite,” “Republicans are
cold-hearted.” Ad hominem arguments are fallacious only when they attack the
source of an argument in order to discredit the argument; for example, “Joe’s argument against drinking and driving doesn’t carry much weight, because Joe himself
is a lush.” When not attacking the source of an argument, ad hominem arguments do
not commit the ad hominem fallacy, and can often be valuable and legitimate arguments. For example, an ad hominem attack on someone giving testimony (“Don’t
believe Sally’s testimony, she’s a notorious liar”) is relevant, and not an ad hominem
fallacy; likewise, it is a legitimate use of ad hominem argument (not an ad hominem
fallacy) if you are attacking a job applicant (“Don’t hire Bruce, he’s a crook”), a
politician (“Don’t vote for Sandra, she’s in the pocket of the tobacco industry”), and
in many other circumstances (“Don’t go out with Bill, he’s a cheat and a creep”).
Affirming the consequent. Always fallacious, it is any argument of this form:
P:Q
Q
‹ P
It is fallacious because it treats a necessary condition (the consequent) as if it were
a sufficient condition.
Ambiguity. The fallacious use of two different word meanings in premises and conclusion. For example, if we argue (premise) that the witness was “testifying truthfully”
(in the sense of testifying honestly), therefore (conclusion) the testimony of the
witness was the truth (in the sense of being accurate), then “truth” is being used
ambiguously, and that argument commits the fallacy of ambiguity.
Analogical literalism fallacy. The fallacy of treating an analogy too literally; attacking
the analogy on a point of irrelevant difference between the two cases.
Analogy. A comparison between two different cases. See Deductive analogy, Figurative analogy,
Inductive analogy.

427

428

Key Terms

Antecedent. The part of a conditional statement that sets the condition for something
else. In “If you study hard, you will pass,” “you study hard” is the antecedent. When a
conditional statement is represented symbolically, as in P → Q, P is the antecedent.
Appeal to authority. Any attempt to establish a claim by appealing to an expert or to
someone who supposedly has special expertise. If the authority to whom the appeal
is made is a genuine expert or authority in the relevant area, and there is consensus
among authorities, then appeal to authority is legitimate; otherwise, it is fallacious.
Appeal to ignorance. A fallacious argument that attempts to shift the burden of proof
from the person making the claim or assertion, by asserting that a claim should be
believed because no one has been able to prove it false.
Appeal to popularity fallacy. A special form of appeal to authority fallacy that appeals to
the false authority of popular opinion or popular acceptance.
Appeal to tradition fallacy. A special form of appeal to authority fallacy that appeals to
the false authority of traditional practice or long-standing belief.
Average. Usually designates the mean, which is the number derived by adding together
all the numeric members in a set, and dividing the total by the number of members
in the set. However, “average” is sometimes used to refer to the median, or the middle
value; and sometimes refers to the mode, or number that occurs most frequently.
For example, in the set of numbers 1, 2, 2, 3, 5, 6, and 9, the mean is 4, the median is
3, and the mode is 2.
Begging the question fallacy. The fallacy of using the conclusion of an argument as a
premise.
Camel’s nose is in the tent argument. See Slippery slope argument.
Cogent argument. An inductive argument that is strong and has all true premises. If an
inductive argument is not strong, or it has a false premise, then it is uncogent.
Complex question fallacy. A question that contains a controversial assumption, for
example, “Why are philosophy majors so smart?” Sometimes called a loaded question.
Conclusion. What an argument aims at proving; the statement that is supposedly proved
by the premises of an argument.
Conditional statement. A statement asserting that if one condition is met, then something else will follow; for example, “If you study hard, you will pass.” It is represented
symbolically using an arrow, as in P → Q.
Consequent. The part of a conditional statement that states what will follow if a condition is met. In “If you study hard you will pass,” “you will pass” is the consequent.
When a conditional statement is represented symbolically, as in P → Q, Q is the
consequent.
Convergent argument. An argument in which each premise supports the conclusion
independently of the other premises; if one premise fails, the other premises may
still offer significant reasons for accepting the conclusion.
Deductive argument. An argument that draws its conclusion from the premises by
logical operations; it extracts from the premises a conclusion that is logically
implied by the premises, or already contained in the premises (in contrast to an
inductive argument).
Denying the antecedent. Always fallacious, it is any argument of this form:
P:Q
P
‹ Q

⬃

⬃

It is fallacious because it treats a sufficient condition (the antecedent) as if it were a
necessary condition.
Dilemma arguments. Any argument that contains a premise asserting that there are a
limited number of options (usually two) that we must choose from. If there are

429

Key Terms

actually more options than are named in the dilemma, then it is a false dilemma
fallacy. If the dilemma poses the only genuine alternatives, then it is a genuine or
legitimate dilemma.
Enthymeme. An argument in which a premise (or sometimes the conclusion) is regarded
as so obvious that it is left unstated.
Fallacy. An argument error; usually a standard or common argument error.
False dilemma. See Dilemma.
Golden mean fallacy. An argument that presents its conclusion as the moderate or
middle-of-the-road or compromise position, and claims that because the conclusion
is moderate, that is a good reason for accepting the conclusion. (It is not a fallacy to
advocate a moderate position; rather, it is fallacious to claim that one’s position is
right because it is moderate.)
Half-truth. A claim that is literally true, but which leaves out important information that
would alter the significance of the claim.
Inductive argument. An argument that uses the premises to draw a conclusion that goes
beyond the premises; an inductive argument may make its conclusion highly probable, but since the conclusion is not logically extracted from the premises (as in a
deductive argument), the conclusion is not established with logical certainty.
Inverse ad hominem. This is the mirror image of ad hominem arguments. Ad hominem
arguments are arguments to the person, that is, they attack the person. Inverse ad
hominem arguments praise the person. Inverse ad hominem arguments are legitimate whenever ad hominem arguments would be legitimate, and are fallacious
whenever ad hominem arguments would be fallacious. The inverse ad hominem fallacy is committed only when someone praises or commends the source of an
argument, and maintains that because the argument source is good or courageous or
self-sacrificing (or whatever virtue you like), that person’s argument must be a good
argument. But there are also many circumstances in which inverse ad hominem arguments are legitimate and not fallacious. For example, if Joan is giving testimony, it is
certainly relevant that she is unbiased, objective, and a person of deep integrity. If
Arthur is applying for graduate school, it is perfectly legitimate for the author of his
letter of reference to make the inverse ad hominem assertion that Arthur is a brilliant,
dedicated, creative, and hard-working student. And if Sabrina is running for
Congress, it is certainly relevant and nonfallacious to assert that Sabrina is a
dedicated public servant who is not motivated by greed.
Irrelevant reason fallacy. An argument that uses premises that have no bearing on the
conclusion, but only distract from the real issue. Also known as the red herring fallacy.
Linked argument. An argument in which the premises link together in such a way that
if one premise fails, the entire argument fails.
Loaded question fallacy. See Complex question fallacy.
Mean. See Average.
Median. See Average.
Mode. See Average.
Modus ponens. Always valid, it is any argument of this form:
P:Q
P
‹ Q
Modus tollens.
P:Q

⬃Q
‹ ⬃P

Always valid, it is any argument of this form:

430

Key Terms

Necessary condition. An essential condition for some event or circumstance. For example, oxygen is a necessary condition of human life; passing logic is a necessary condition
for a degree in philosophy. In a conditional statement, the consequent is always a
necessary condition of the antecedent.
No true Scotsman fallacy. See Self-sealing fallacy.
Parade of horribles argument. See Slippery slope argument.
Post hoc, ergo propter hoc. See Questionable cause fallacy.
Premise. In an argument, a premise is a statement that supports or provides justification
for the conclusion.
Prospective studies. Scientific studies in which the control group (which does not receive
the drug, procedure, or product being tested) is matched as closely as possible with
the experimental group (which does receive the test product). For example, in a test of
the health effects of smoking, it would be unethical to use a randomized experimental design, since that would involve assigning test subjects to a smoking group, when
we already have reason to believe that smoking is a severe hazard to health. So we
might use a prospective design, in which we start with an experimental group who
are already habitual smokers, and compare them with a control group that we match
as closely as possible with the characteristics of the smokers (in diet, exercise habits,
work environment, etc.) except that the control group are nonsmokers. Though
not quite as reliable as a randomized control experiment, the prospective study
gives us good grounds for concluding that any difference in health outcomes
between the two groups is caused by smoking.
Questionable cause fallacy. The fallacy of supposing that because event A is followed by
event B, or because there is a correlation between two phenomena, the second is
caused by the first; sometimes called the post hoc fallacy, or the fallacy of post hoc ergo
propter hoc.
Randomized controlled experiment. An experiment in which the experimental subjects
are randomly divided into two groups: the experimental group, who actually receive
whatever is being tested (such as a drug, or some therapy process); and the control
group, who are similar in every way to the experimental group except that they do
not receive the experimental treatment (but otherwise are treated exactly as the
experimental group is treated). Any difference in outcome between the two groups
can be attributed to the effect of the experimental product or process.
Red herring fallacy. See Irrelevant reason fallacy.
Representative sample. A sample that accurately reflects the character of the population
being sampled.
Self-sealing fallacy. The fallacy of modifying a claim in such a way that it is made empty
of real content—transforming an empirical claim into a claim that is true by definition, or vacuously true. Sometimes called the no true Scotsman fallacy.
Slippery slope argument. An argument claiming that a proposed act or policy that looks
harmless may lead to very undesirable consequences. If adequate reasons are given
to support the claim of risk, then it is a legitimate slippery slope argument; if the
argument merely suggests a future peril, or merely notes steps that could lead to
that bad result without giving reasons to suppose those steps would occur, then it is
a slippery slope fallacy. Also known as the wedge argument, the domino argument, the
camel’s nose is in the tent argument (particularly among politicians), and the parade of
horribles argument (by lawyers).
Slippery slope fallacy. See Slippery slope argument.
Sound argument. A deductive argument that is both valid and has all true premises.
Strawman fallacy. The fallacy of distorting, exaggerating, or misrepresenting an opponent’s position in order to make it easier to attack.
Strong argument. An inductive argument the premises of which (if they were true)
would make the conclusion very probably true. (An inductive argument may be

Key Terms

431
strong even though its premises are false; if it is strong and its premises are actually
true, then the inductive argument is cogent.)
Sufficient condition. A condition the existence of which guarantees an outcome. For
example, if passing the final exam is a sufficient condition for passing the course, then
all who pass the final exam pass the course, no matter what else they have or have
not done in the course. In a conditional statement, the antecedent is always a
sufficient condition of the consequent.
Target population. In a survey, the population that the survey is supposed to represent.
Truth table. A table that represents all the possible truth values for a statement or
argument.
Uncogent argument. See Cogent argument.
Unsound argument. See Sound argument.
Valid argument. A deductive argument in which the truth of the premises guarantees
the truth of the conclusion; in a valid argument, if the premises are true, then the
conclusion must be true.
Venn diagram. A set of interlocking circles used to determine validity or invalidity of
arguments containing universal and/or particular statements.
Voir dire. The process of questioning potential jurors in order to select a jury.
Weak inductive argument. See Strong inductive argument.
Wedge argument. See Slippery slope argument.

This page intentionally left blank

Answers to Selected Exercises

Chapter 2

22. Argument; federal disaster relief was not well-organized.
25. Argument; you should vote.

Exercise 2-1
1.
4.
7.
10.
13.
16.
19.
22.

25.
28.
31.
34.
37.
40.
43.
46.

No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes (a statement about one’s feelings may be difficult
to verify, but it certainly makes a claim that can be
either true or false).
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

Exercise 2-2
1. Argument; there are mice on the moon.
4. Argument; Wheaties is a nutritious cereal.
7. Argument; the New York Mets will win the World
Series.
10. Argument; my critical thinking professor owns a
private jet.
13. No.
16. Argument; gasoline prices will increase in July.
19. Argument; Brenda must hate the Steelers.

Exercise 2-3
1. Deductive argument; Ralph is not a licensed physician
in the United States.
4. Not an argument.
7. Inductive argument; the team with the best pitching
will win the World Series.
10. Deductive argument; Smith was lying.
13. Inductive argument; Mighty Casey will almost certainly
strike out.
16. Inductive argument; the Toronto Blue Jays will probably win the World Series.
19. Inductive argument; if you attend every class, you will
pass the course.
22. Inductive argument; Bruce will be late for class
tomorrow.
Exercise 2-4
1.
4.
7.
10.
13.
16.

c
b
e
a
c
e

Exercise 2-5
1. b
4. c

433

434
7. c
10. a
13. c

Chapter 3
Exercise 3-1
1. Fallacy.
4. Legitimate (even if we decide that Bill is giving argument, it is clear that some of the key premises of Bill’s
argument depend on his testimony, and that makes
him a legitimate ad hominem target).
7. Legitimate (Webster is not giving argument, but
being considered for a position).
How Do You Rule?
This is a legitimate question; the witness (Mr. Candor)
is giving testimony, and it is legitimate to question the
motivation of the witness.
Exercise 3-2
1. Legitimate ad hominem.
4. Inverse ad hominem, fallacious.
7. Neither ad hominem nor inverse ad hominem: simply
an attack on the argument, which is legitimate.
10. Ad hominem fallacy.
13. Legitimate ad hominem.
16. Ad hominem fallacy.
19. Legitimate ad hominem.
22. Ad hominem fallacy.
25. Legitimate inverse ad hominem.

Chapter 4
Exercise 4-1
1. While there are a few people who would like to
compel everyone in the United States to practice
Christianity, that is certainly a much more extreme
position than the position taken by most of those who
advocate school prayer, who want at most a “generic”
prayer fitting almost any conception of God, or more
likely a “moment of silence” in which one could pray
or not.
4. Almost no one wants a total ban on the private
ownership of guns; rather, the goal is typically much
stricter regulation and registration and the ban of
weapons such as assault rifles, and at most a ban on
handguns.

Answers to Selected Exercises

Chapter 5
Exercise 5-1
The verdict of not guilty is not based on the jury’s
judgment that the defendant did not commit the crime,
but instead on the judgment that the defendant’s guilt
was not proved beyond a reasonable doubt. The jury may
well believe that there is strong evidence and substantial
probability that the accused politician is guilty, but that
the evidence does not establish guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
Exercise 5-2
1. God exists.
4. We should develop solar power.
7. There should not be laws restricting abortion.

Chapter 6
Consider the Verdict exercise
2. Relevant. I think it is false—Reid did have the capacity to know that he possessed a firearm—but the
question is not whether the claim is true, but whether
it matters whether it is true or false; and it certainly
matters, for if it were true, then Reid would not be
guilty under the law.
4. Irrelevant.
Exercise 6-1
1.
4.
7.
10.
13.

Irrelevant.
Relevant.
Irrelevant.
Irrelevant.
Irrelevant. The question is not whether they get back
more than they pay in taxes, but whether they have
any voice or representation in the setting of tax policy.
Even if they get back one hundred times more in
services than they pay in taxes, it would still be taxation without representation.

Chapter 7
Exercise 7-1
1. You are suffering from the Wyoming Gollywobbles
virus; linked argument.
4. The United States should reduce its stockpile of nuclear
weapons; convergent.
7. The defendant is guilty of murder; convergent.

435

Answers to Selected Exercises

10. Elaine Slevert is guilty of fraud; linked argument
(with linked subarguments).
13. We should require unanimous verdicts; convergent
argument.
16. Gwendolyn stole the collected works; linked argument.
19. Bruce is guilty of the robbery; a convergent argument,
but each of the converging subarguments are linked
arguments.
22. Bart is guilty: overall a convergent argument, but the
first converging subargument is an extensive linked
argument.
Exercise 7-4
1. There is an unstated assumption that when there is
reasonable doubt of guilt the jury should find the
defendant not guilty.

Chapter 8
Exercise 8-1
1. The burden of proof is on the manufacturer (by
offering the mouthwash for sale, the manufacturer is
making an implied claim that the product is safe for
use as directed).
4. The burden of proof was on the Copernicans, who were
proposing a theory that contradicts our commonsense
beliefs and observations (the Sun certainly looks as if it is
moving, and it certainly feels as if we are on a stationary
Earth).
7. The burden of proof was on the U.S. government,
which was making the claim that Iraq possessed
such weapons (obviously it would be impossible for
anyone to prove that he or she does not possess such
weapons, for there is always some other place they
could be hidden).

Chapter 9
Exercise 9-1
The testimony of the witness is truthful, but truthful is
ambiguous, and the prosecutor is switching between the
different meanings of “truthful.” The witness is telling
the truth in the sense of being honest (she is not lying) but
it does not follow that she is telling the truth in the sense
of being accurate. She may be honestly mistaken about the
identification of the person she saw (eyewitnesses are
often honestly mistaken); so she is truthful in the sense of
being honest (no one disputes that), but the real
question is whether she is being truthful in the sense of
making an accurate identification.

Exercise 9-2
1. Ambiguity. “Theory” is being used in two ways. When
we speak of the Darwinian theory, we mean a system of
scientific hypotheses (that system may be very well
established, such as the Copernican theory or the
germ theory of disease); the second sense of “theory”
means “idle speculation, without proof,” as in “I have
a theory about that, but it’s really only a guess.”
4. Amphiboly. The 100% can modify only the corn oil in
the bottle, or it can apply to the total contents of the
bottle.
7. Ambiguity. “Democracy” can mean either the form of
government we actually live under (which we call a
democracy, even though in practice it is obvious that
not everyone has equal influence or voice in government) or the ideal of democracy, in which each
citizen has an equal voice.
10. Ambiguity. The fact that this issue is irrelevant to a
specific argument or issue (in this case, whether the
defendant committed the crime) does not mean it is
irrelevant in the larger sense of having no importance,
of being trivial.

Chapter 10
Exercise 10-1
1a.
1d.
1g.
3.

Fallacious.
Legitimate.
Fallacious.
Even if one counts Aristotle as an authority on ethics,
there is certainly no agreement among those who could
be considered authorities on ethics (thus this cannot be
a legitimate appeal to authority). And arguing that
because many people have believed it for a long time it
must be correct combines the fallacies of appeal to
tradition and appeal to popularity. (Of course if we are
examining Aristotle’s arguments about ethics—rather
than appealing to him as an authority—then the arguments have to stand or fall on their own merits.)
6. A legitimate line of questioning (it raises questions
concerning a possible bias of someone giving expert
testimony).

Cumulative Exercises One
1.
4.
7.
10.
13.

Irrelevant reason fallacy.
Inverse ad hominem, legitimate.
Appeal to tradition, fallacy.
Ad hominem, legitimate.
Irrelevant reason, fallacy.

436
16.
19.
22.
25.
28.
31.
34.
37.
40.
43.
46.
49.
52.
55.
58.

Straw man, fallacy.
Ad hominem, legitimate.
Inverse ad hominem, fallacy.
Irrelevant reason, fallacy.
Appeal to authority, legitimate.
Irrelevant reason, fallacy.
Appeal to ignorance, fallacy.
Appeal to ignorance, fallacy.
Appeal to ignorance, fallacy.
Ad hominem, fallacy.
Ad hominem, legitimate.
Appeal to authority, fallacy.
Appeal to authority, legitimate.
Appeal to authority, legitimate.
Appeal to authority, legitimate.

Chapter 11
Exercise 11-1
1. Attacking the principle, one would say, I disagree, I
believe we should require people to exercise. Attacking
the analogy, one would argue that requiring people to
wear seatbelts is not like requiring people to exercise
(they do not fit under the same principle); for example, I believe that we should require people to do
things for their own good so long as it is not
intrusive on their privacy: requiring people to wear
seatbelts on public highways is not an intrusive measure, but checking to make sure that they exercise
regularly would be intrusive. (You may believe the
analogy is a good one; the point here is only that
this is what would be required in order to attack
the analogy, even if you think that attack fails.)
4. To attack the principle: I believe season ticket holders
should be required to attend every game. There are several ways to attack the analogy; for example, attending
class is part of getting a certificate (a diploma) certifying that one has completed various educational
requirements; attending a sporting event does not
certify any special level of accomplishment.
7. To attack the principle, one would have to assert that
no measures should be taken to prevent death. To
attack the analogy, one must argue that there is a
difference between interfering in nature to prevent
death and interfering to hasten death (e.g., the
former is a natural survival instinct—we naturally
attempt to avoid death, as when we spontaneously
jump out of the way of a speeding car—but hastening
death is not a natural process).
10. To attack the principle, one would deny that anyone
should have the right to place a nativity scene on
private property. To attack the analogy, one would
argue that placing restrictions on what one can do on

Answers to Selected Exercises

one’s own private property is very different from placing restrictions on the use of public shared property.
Exercise 11-2
1. Figurative analogy; there may be room for disagreement, but it seems legitimate to me.
4. Figurative analogy, though you could read it as a
deductive argument by analogy; a good analogy, by
my lights.
7. Deductive analogy; legitimate.
10. Figurative analogy; I would count it as legitimate.
Exercise 11-4
1. Deductive argument by analogy. The principle is that
mildly addictive “intoxicating” drugs (comparable to
alcohol in dangers and effects) should not be
banned. In arguing against that analogy, one could
reject the principle: Perhaps marijuana is similar to
alcohol, but I believe both alcohol and marijuana
should be prohibited. Second, one could attack the
analogy (claiming that marijuana is much more
harmful or addictive than alcohol).
4. Faulty deductive argument by analogy.
7. Inductive argument by analogy.
10. A deductive argument by analogy, and I would judge
it a good argument.
Exercise 11-5
1. Figurative analogy; legitimate.
4. Could read this as either a figurative analogy or a deductive argument by analogy; it seems to me legitimate.
7. A figurative analogy; there can be debate over whether
it is legitimate or faulty.
10. Figurative analogy; legitimate.
13. Deductive analogy; legitimate (though it could be
disputed).
16. Figurative analogy; legitimate.
19. Figurative analogy; whether legitimate or faulty will
be controversial.
22. Can be read as either figurative or deductive; legitimate, in either case.
25. Faulty figurative analogy.
28. Good figurative analogy.
31. Inductive analogy; fairly strong (though it could be
stronger), and I would count it as legitimate.
Exercise 11-6
1. The defense will interpret the principle broadly: The
principle might be that giving a warning of any known
hazards on your property is an adequate safeguard.
The plaintiff will interpret the Whittle v. Cox principle

437

Answers to Selected Exercises

narrowly: A posted sign is a required warning for a
vicious dog (but that says nothing about verbal warnings, nor does it imply that the warning is a sufficient
safeguard).
2. The city attorney (interpreting the piano lesson
precedent narrowly) can argue that the principle is
that home businesses are permitted so long as they
do not produce any material product for sale (or,
perhaps, home businesses are permitted so long as
they are exclusively educational in nature). The
plaintiff might argue that the precedent implies that
businesses are permitted so long as they operate out
of the primary residence.
3. When the Torelli precedent is added, the city attorney must narrow the precedent still further: the principle is that home businesses are permitted so long as
they do not produce and sell any material product.

Chapter 12
Exercise 12-1
1.
4.
7.
10.
13.

Fallacy.
Fallacy.
Fallacy.
Legitimate.
Legitimate.

Exercise 12-2
1. Straw man.
4. Straw man.
Exercise 12-3
1. False dilemma; it might not cause cancer, but might
cause damage to the heart, lungs, or nervous system.
4. Genuine dilemma.
7. False dilemma; some good upright Scots might be
honestly mistaken.
10. Genuine dilemma.
13. False dilemma; she might be indifferent to him.
16. False dilemma; it could be a case of self-defense.
19. False dilemma; we could raise taxes, or make cuts
elsewhere.
Exercise 12-4
1a. Smoking in public restaurants should be banned. It
would be a mistake to try to enact a total prohibition
against smoking. On the other hand, we shouldn’t
just allow people to smoke anywhere, with no consideration of others. Therefore, there should be no
smoking in any situation where it is likely to bother
others, such as in restaurants or airplanes or offices.

b. Smoking in public restaurants should not be banned.
It would be wrong to allow smoking in areas where it
poses a major threat or annoyance, such as in hospitals or in elevators. On the other hand, we shouldn’t
take the extreme stance of banning all smoking in
public places, such as restaurants.
2a. Passive euthanasia should be permitted. Obviously
we should not go to the extreme of allowing the
purposeful causing of death by active euthanasia; but
on the other hand, it would be wrong to require that
treatment continue even when the dying patient
does not want it. Therefore, allowing passive euthanasia is a good and reasonable policy.
b. Passive euthanasia should not be permitted. That is not
to suggest that we go to the extreme of requiring all
possible treatment—even experimental and burdensome treatments—for every patient; but we should not
go to the other extreme and allow standard treatments
to be stopped for terminally ill patients. So the good,
moderate position is this: We do not always require
extraordinary treatment measures, but we should also
never allow passive euthanasia.

Chapter 13
Exercise 13-1
1.
4.
7.
10.
14.

Begging the question.
Complex question.
Begging the question.
Does not beg the question.
Self-sealing.

Exercise 13-2
1. The assumption is that women think less analytically
than men.
4. Assumes the existence of such a plan.
7. Assumes that the mind does cause the body to do
things; and more basically, assumes that the mind
and the body are distinct (assumes that materialism is
false, that the mind is something different from the
brain).
10. Did he, or did Leif Ericson? More to the point, how
could he “discover” a continent on which people
were already living? If an Iroquois sailor had landed
in London, would we say that he “discovered
Europe”?

Cumulative Exercises Two
1. Irrelevant reason, fallacy.
4. False dilemma, fallacy.
7. Appeal to authority, legitimate.

438
10. Ambiguity, fallacy (“good argument” is being used
in two different senses; one, in the sense that it
worked—it sold a lot of cereal—and the other in the
sense of actually giving good reasons in support of
the conclusion).
13. Golden mean, fallacy.
16. Ad hominem, legitimate.
19. Inverse ad hominem, fallacy.
22. Begging the question, fallacy.
25. Appeal to ignorance, fallacy.
28. Ad hominem, fallacy; followed by straw man, fallacy.
31. Appeal to tradition, fallacy.
34. False dilemma, fallacy.
37. Begging the question, fallacy.
40. Ad hominem, legitimate.
43. Golden mean, fallacy.
46. Complex question, fallacy.
49. Ad hominem, fallacy.
52. Irrelevant reason, fallacy.
55. Inverse ad hominem, fallacy.
58. Genuine dilemma, legitimate.
61. Appeal to popularity, fallacy.
64. Slippery slope, fallacy.
67. Appeal to tradition, fallacy.
70. Appeal to authority, fallacy.
73. Slippery slope, legitimate.
76. Begging the question, fallacy.
79. Straw man, fallacy.
82. Self-sealing, fallacy.
85. Ambiguity (“made with real fruit” implies that they
are primarily fruit, when it is likely that they are
primarily sugar with a tiny amount of fruit flavoring).
88. Ad hominem, legitimate.
91. Appeal to authority, fallacy.
94. False dilemma, fallacy.
97. Self-sealing, fallacy.
100. False dilemma, fallacy (could have been a case of
self-defense).
103. Ad hominem, legitimate.
106. Slippery slope, fallacy.
109. False dilemma, fallacy.
112. Ambiguity (something can be “desirable” in the sense
of actually being desired without being “desirable” in
the sense of being worthy of desire).
115. Faulty analogy, fallacy.
118. Straw man, fallacy (in the response by Annas).

Chapter 14

Answers to Selected Exercises

Exercise 14-2
1. a
4. a
Exercise 14-4
1.
4.
7.
10.
13.
16.
19.
22.
25.
28.
31.
34.

a
b
b
b
a
a
c
c
c
b
b
a

Exercise 14-5
1. No permission is a necessary condition of Joe’s guilt.
Joe’s guilt is a sufficient condition of no permission.
G→ P

⬃

4. Mighty Casey striking out is a sufficient condition for
no joy.
No joy is a necessary condition of Mighty Casey
striking out.
SO → J

⬃

7. Playing is a necessary condition of winning.
Winning is a sufficient condition of playing.
W →P
10. Answering correctly is a necessary condition of passing.
Passing is a sufficient condition of answering correctly.
P → AC
13. Seeing is a sufficient condition for believing.
Believing is a necessary condition for seeing.
S →B
Exercise 14-6
1. Affirming the consequent.
4. Modus ponens.
7. Denying the antecedent.

Exercise 14-1
Exercise 14-7
1. Against. He may be guilty of some other crime, but if
he had permission to be there, he cannot be guilty of
breaking or entering (not having permission is a
necessary condition of guilt).

1. Modus tollens, valid.
4. Affirming the consequent, invalid.
7. Denying the antecedent, invalid.

439

Answers to Selected Exercises

10.
13.
16.
19.
22.
25.
28.
31.
34.

Affirming the consequent, invalid.
Modus tollens, valid.
Modus tollens, valid.
Modus tollens, valid.
Modus tollens, valid.
Affirming the consequent, invalid.
Modus tollens, valid.
Modus ponens, valid.
Denying the antecedent, invalid.

Chapter 15
Exercise 15-1
1. One, if an elderly person can afford a pet, that
person is more likely to be able to afford medications
and better health care; two, it’s likely that the cause is
coming from the other direction: healthier people
are more likely to be able to take care of pets, so it’s
being healthy that causes them to keep a pet, rather
than the pet causing them to be healthy; and finally,
the results in this study might have occurred by
chance.
4. One, people have to be fairly healthy in order to go
gambling, so it is probably being healthy that increases
the likelihood of gambling, rather than gambling
causing good health; two, if one can afford to gamble,
one can also afford other health-enhancing benefits
such as healthy food and better living conditions.
And finally, this result might have occurred by chance
in this study, and another study might give different
results.
Exercise 15-2
1. Another difference is that the team has an additional
year of experience; and there is always the possibility
that the other teams in the league have become
much worse. Hard to tell, but this is probably just a
chance result: the added player was just a coincidence, having nothing to do with the changed
record.
4. In this case, it is not the stopping smoking that causes
death; rather, it runs in reverse: being very sick and
close to death finally causes people to stop smoking.
7. There are too many other factors: the closeness of
the community, with the social pressures and social
management that brings, is probably the decisive
factor.
10. In this case, there is probably a decisive factor that is
associated with playing Mozart for babies; namely, parents who are eager to seize every possibility of pushing
their children ahead academically (that’s why they
play Mozart for them as babies) also are more likely to
encourage their children to do homework, get them

tutoring when they need help, enroll them in special
summer academic camps, and so on.
13. It’s not the size of the stadium, but something associated with stadium size: the top football programs,
that spend the most on their athletic programs and
hire the best coaches, are also the programs with the
huge stadiums.
Exercise 15-3
1. It may be that sicker patients (who need longer to
recover) are placed in interior rooms, with no
windows (e.g., the intensive care unit often is in the
center of the hospital, and has no windows). Also, the
patients who have windowed rooms may be paying
more for those rooms, and thus have significantly
better health insurance and more money, and thus
have access to the top medical care from the most
expensive specialists (access that poorer patients do
not have).

Chapter 16
Exercise 16-1
1a. Someone who is supportive of the rally may—in his
or her enthusiasm—draw an exaggerated impression
of the size of the rally.
d. If this is someone who recently bought the car, it is
very likely that the owner will be pleased; after all,
that person picked out the car, and would not have
chosen it if he or she had not liked it; and if the car is
quite new, then it is unlikely that it has had serious
mechanical problems.
g. Is this a person who already disliked the defendant?
Is this a person who stands to gain by his or her testimony against the defendant?
Exercise 16-2
1. Do any apple juices contain added sugar? (None that
I know of, since apple juice is naturally quite sweet,
and adding sugar would make it undrinkable.)
4. How close to impossible is “all but”? And might
dangerous levels of radiation escape elsewhere (into
the water table, for example)?
7. Perhaps most of the people who receive tax cuts will
be middle class (not surprising, since there are more
middle-class people than rich people); but will most
of the tax cuts go to the middle class? That is, will lots
of middle-class people receive very small tax cuts,
while a few rich people receive enormous tax cuts? In
the U.S. presidential campaign of 1996, the Republicans noted that most of the people who would
receive tax cuts from their proposed reduction of the

440
capital gains tax would be middle class. That was true.
However, most of the tax cut dollars were destined
for the wealthy, with the bulk of the tax cut money
going to the extremely wealthy.
9. The number of deaths from cancer is declining; but
the number of cancer cases is increasing. The decline
in cancer deaths is due to better cancer treatment
methods, not because the cancer rate is decreasing.
So the continuing increase in cancer rates—the
important half of the truth that the article omits—
raises legitimate concerns about increasing carcinogenic hazards in our environment.

Cumulative Exercises Three
1. Ad hominem, fallacy.
4. Deductive argument by analogy; whether it is a good
analogy or a faulty analogy would be a matter of
dispute.
7. Ad hominem, legitimate (Art Sinn may be giving an
argument, but at least part of that argument seems
to depend on his own testimony).
10. Analogical literalism, fallacy.
13. Faulty analogy, fallacy.
16. Appeal to tradition, fallacy.
19. Fallacy of denying the antecedent.
22. Ad hominem, legitimate.
25. Slippery slope, fallacy.
28. Ambiguity, fallacy.
31. Modus tollens, legitimate.
34. Inverse ad hominem, fallacy.
37. Questionable cause, fallacy.
40. Modus tollens, legitimate.
43. Ad hominem, legitimate.
46. False dilemma, fallacy.
49. Slippery slope, fallacy.
52. Questionable cause, fallacy.
55. Denying the antecedent, fallacy.
58. Golden mean, fallacy.
61. False dilemma, fallacy.
64. Begging the question (or possibly self-sealing), fallacy.
67. Begging the question, fallacy.
70. Ad hominem, fallacy.
73. Genuine dilemma, legitimate.
76. Ad hominem, legitimate.
79. Straw man, fallacy.
82. Analogical literalism, fallacy (and it starts with a
figurative analogy).
85. Faulty analogy, fallacy.
88. Analogical literalism, fallacy.
91. Questionable cause, fallacy.
94. Begging the question, fallacy.
97. Ad hominem, legitimate.
100. Ad hominem, legitimate.

Answers to Selected Exercises

103.
106.
109.
112.
115.
118.
121.
124.

127.
130.
133.

136.
139.
142.

145.
148.
151.
154.
157.
160.
163.
166.
169.

172.
175.
178.
181.
184.
187.

Golden mean, fallacy.
Questionable cause, fallacy.
Appeal to ignorance, fallacy.
Appeal to popularity, fallacy.
Complex question, fallacy.
Analogy (could be read as either figurative or
deductive), legitimate.
Deductive argument by analogy (might be read as
figurative), legitimate.
Deductive argument by analogy; there could be
dispute over its legitimacy, but I would count it as
legitimate.
False dilemma, fallacy.
Appeal to tradition, fallacy.
Deductive argument by analogy; you will have to
judge whether it is legitimate or fallacious; either
way, it will be controversial.
Slippery slope, fallacy.
Begging the question, fallacy.
Appeal to authority, fallacy (Krugman is a genuine
authority, but there is no agreement among
authorities).
Appeal to popularity, fallacy.
Slippery slope, legitimate.
Irrelevant reason.
Ad hominem, legitimate.
Ad hominem, fallacy.
Begging the question, fallacy.
Questionable cause, fallacy.
Inverse ad hominem, legitimate.
Alice offers a legitimate deductive argument by
analogy, which is followed by an attack which
commits the fallacy of analogical literalism.
Straw man, fallacy.
Inverse ad hominem, legitimate.
Faulty analogy, fallacy.
Ad hominem, fallacy.
Irrelevant reason (red herring), fallacy.
Ad hominem, fallacy.

Chapter 17
Exercise 17-1
1. You need to know what sense of “average” is being
used; for example, if there have been tuition increases
of these percentages: 4, 4, 9, 11, 12, 15, and 18, then
the mode (one sense of “average”) is only 4 percent,
but that is not a very helpful measure in this case.
2. That sounds like important data; in fact, the claim is
outside of any context of reference. To make it meaningful, we need to know what percentage of the population as a whole (or what population of nonsmokers)
live past 70. Also, there is a comparison of apples and

441

Answers to Selected Exercises

oranges: Don’t compare smokers with the population
as a whole (for that includes all the people who died in
infancy or childhood); instead, compare those who
smoked with those who didn’t, starting with perhaps
age 16.
4. Obviously such a comparison shows nothing, since
there is no information concerning the number of
skydivers and the numbers of soccer players. If there
are 30,000 soccer players who play twice a week, and
1000 skydivers who jump twice a month, then
certainly skydiving will pose a greater risk than a
game of soccer.
7. This is a detached and meaningless statistic; first, it
does not tell you what is used in comparison (Cleaner
than using water alone? Cleaner than using a competing brand? Cleaner than using mud?). But the basic
problem is that it puts a number on something that is
not really quantifiable: one thing may be cleaner than
another, but it’s not clear that something can be 30%
clearer (rather than, say, 32% cleaner).
Exercise 17-2

Exercise 18-3
1. ~(J & S)
(T & F)
(T F F)
T F
Since one conjunct of the conjunction is false (it is
false that the sun is a planet), the conjunction is false;
so the negation of the conjunction is true.
2. S ∨ (E → M)
F
F
F

(T
(T

F)
F F)
F

False.
4. S → (~P → C)
T
T
T
TF

(~F
F)
(TF
F)
(TF F F)
(TF F F)

False.
1. C. is the best.

8. R ∨ (W & S)
F ∨ (T & T)
F∨
T
T

Chapter 18
Exercise 18-1
1.
4.
7.
10.
13.

C & B, true.
F →O, true.
W & B, false.
~J ∨ E, false.
J ∨ P, true. (Since J is true, the truth or falsity of the
second disjunct does not matter; one disjunct is true,
so the entire disjunction must be true.)

Exercise 18-2
1.
1.
2.
3.
4.

1.
2.
3.
4.

9. J →(A ∨ E)
? → (? ∨ T)
? →( T )
True.
(Since the consequent is true, the conditional will
be true no matter what the truth value of the
antecedent.)
Exercise 18-4

P

Q

P → Q/~Q/ ‹ ~P

T
T
F
F

T
F
T
F

T
T
F
F

T
F
T
T

T
F
T
F

FT
TF
FT
TF

FT
FT
TF
TF

Valid argument; there is no line in which all the
premises are true and the conclusion is false.
2.

True.

P

Q

P → Q/~Q/ ‹ ~P

T
T
F
F

T
F
T
F

T
T
F
F

T
F
T
T

T
F
T
F

FT
FT
TF
TF

FT
TF
FT
TF

Invalid argument; in the third line all the premises are
true and the conclusion is false.

1. P Q ~P →~Q/Q/ ‹ P
TTFT
TF FT
F T TF
F F TF

T
T
F
T

FT
TF
FT
TF

T
F
T
F

T
T
F
F

Valid argument, since there is no truth-value assignment
that makes all the premises true and the conclusion
false.
4. P Q R
TTT
TT F
T FT
TFF
FTT

P ∨ (Q → R)/~R & ~P/ ‹ ~Q
TT
TT
TT
TT
FT

(T T
(T F
(F T
(F T
(T T

T)
F)
T)
F)
T)

FT F FT
TF F FT
FT F FT
TF F FT
FT F TF

FT
FT
TF
TF
FT

442

Answers to Selected Exercises

FT F
F FT
FFF

F F (T F F)
F T (F T T)
F T (F T F)

TF T TF
FT F TF
TF T TF

FT
TF
TF

Valid.
9. P Q R
TTT
TT F
T FT
TFF
FTT
FT F
F FT
FFF

~[P & ~(Q ∨ R)]/P → Q/R/ ‹ ~ Q
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
T

TF
TF
TF
TT
FF
FF
FF
FF

F(T T T)
F(T T F)
F(F T T)
T(F F F)
F(T T T)
F(T T F)
F(F T T)
T(F F F)

T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F

TT T
TT F
F FT
F FF
TT T
TT F
T F T
T F F

FT
FT
TF
TF
FT
FT
TF
TF

Invalid, as shown by the first line (all the premises are
true and the conclusion false) and also by the fifth line.
Exercise 18-5
1. ~Q ∨R/~Q/ ‹ ~R
T
TT
T T TF

FT
FT
FT

Start with the conclusion false: In order for~R to be
false, R must be assigned true. That means that R
must be true in the first premise, and that automatically makes the first premise true (it’s a disjunction,
with one true disjunct). Now we simply assign a truth
value that makes the second premise true (make Q
false, so that ~Q is true), and the result is that both
premises are true and the conclusion is false; so the
argument is invalid.
2. P → ~Q/~P/ ‹ Q
T TF
T TF TF

F
F
F

We have found a truth-value assignment that makes
both premises true and the conclusion false; therefore, this argument is invalid.
3. ~Q →~R/R ‹ Q
TF
TF
T
TF
FT T
TF F FT T

F
F
F
F
F

We had to make Q false in order to make the conclusion
false. That made the antecedent of the first premise
true. Then we had to make R true in order to make the
second premise true. But that made the consequent of
the first premise (~R) false. But with a true antecedent
and a false consequent, the first premise was false. So it’s
impossible to make all the premises true and the
conclusion false; therefore, the argument is valid.

6. ~(~P & Q)/~P →R/~R/ ‹ Q
(
(
T(

F
F
F
F

F)
F F)
F F)

(Since the conjunction is false, the negation of the
conjunction is automatically true.)
T(
T(
T(

F F)
F F)
F F)

TF F
F TF F
FT T F TF F

The premises are all true, and the conclusion false;
the argument is invalid.
9. ~[P & (Q ∨ ~R)]/P → R/Q/ ‹ ~R
[
[
[
[
[
T[F F

(
(
(
(
(T T
(T T

)]/
FT)]/
FT)]/
FT)]/
FT)]/
FT)]/

T
T
T
T

/ /
T/ /
T/ /
T/T/
T/T/
T/T/

FT
FT
FT
FT
FT
FT

(In order for the first premise—which is a negation of
a conjunction—to be true, the conjunction must be
false. The second conjunct—a disjunction—is true;
therefore, the other conjunct—P—must be assigned
false.) That makes all the premises true, and the conclusion false; the argument is proved to be invalid.
13. Invalid. (Start with R true, in order to make the
conclusion false. Then turn to the first premise: for
that negation to be true, the conditional must be
false; for the conditional to be false, the antecedent—
P—must be true and the consequent false. The
consequent is a conjunction—Q & R—and R has
already been assigned true, so Q must be assigned
false in order to make that conjunction false. Then
take it from there.)
Exercise 18-6
1. I ∨W
G →(M &R )
I →G
M & ~R
‹W
3. S →P
C →~S
~C →(M ∨D)
~(M ∨ D )
‹ ~P
5. ~G →[A ∨(P & J)]
J ∨C
G & ~C
‹ P & ~A
Notice that the conclusion is P & ~A; the alibi witness
lied: The alibi witness did not tell the truth.

443

Answers to Selected Exercises

Exercise 18-7
1. Valid (though obviously unsound, since the conclusion is false).
3. Invalid. The key is the fourth premise: to make that
negation true, you must make the disjunction false,
and that means that both disjuncts must be false.
5. Invalid. It is usually best to start by making the conclusion false, but not in this case. Since the conclusion is a
conjunction, there are too many different truth-value
assignments that would make it false. Start instead with
the third premise: There is only one way to make it true
(G must be assigned true, and C must be assigned
false). And then move to the second premise. Since C
is false, J (the other disjunct) must be assigned true in
order to make that premise true. Now look at the first
premise: since G is assigned true, ~G is false; and that
makes the entire premise automatically true, since the
antecedent is false. So now you can assign any truth
value you wish to A, and also to P: All the premises will
still be true. Drop down to the conclusion and make it
false (you can make one conjunct true and the other
false or make both false: whatever you prefer).
7. Invalid.
~E →(A∨~B)/G ∨ ~E/~(G & ~ A) →~H/H ‹ ~B
(
(
(
(
(

)
FT)
FT)
FT)
FT)

(
(
(
(
F(

)
)
)
T
) FT T
) FT T

FT
FT
FT
FT
FT

Since the consequent of the third premise is false,
the antecedent—the negation of the conjunction—
must be false in order for the conditional statement
to be true.
(
(
(F
(F F

FT)
FT)
FT) T
FT) T T

F( T )
F(T T TF)
F(T T TF)
F(T T TF) T

FT
FT
FT
FT

T
T
T
T

FT
FT
FT
FT

At this point we have a truth-value assignment that
makes the conclusion false and the second, third,
and fourth premises true. The consequent of the first
premise is false, so we have to try to make the
antecedent false in order to make the first premise
true. That’s easy: We just assign E true in order to
make ~E false. And that completes the truth-value
assignment: All the premises are true and the conclusion is false, and so the argument is proved invalid.
FT T (T F FT) T T FT F(T T TF) T FT T FT
9. Invalid. Notice that there is only one truth-value
assignment that will make the conclusion false. Since
the conclusion is a conditional, the only way it can
be false is for the antecedent to be true and the consequent false. So H must be assigned true, and B
must also be true (in order to make ~B false).

11. Valid. A must be false to make the conclusion false.
Then in order for the third premise to be true, both
E and D must be assigned false. With E false, however,
B must be false in order to make the first premise
true. But then it’s impossible to make the second
premise true: The second disjunct (D) has already
been assigned false, but the first disjunct (the negation of a conjunction) is also false.

Chapter 19
Exercise 19-1
1. Subject term: Penguins (not some penguins).
Predicate term: Wear red bow ties (or wearers of
red bow ties).
Form: PA (particular affirmative).
3. Subject term: Olympic athletes.
Predicate term: Quite wealthy (or people who are
quite wealthy).
Form: PA (particular affirmative).
5. Subject term: Defendants.
Predicate term: Guilty (The predicate is guilty,
rather than not guilty).
Form: PN.
Exercise 19-2
1. Valid.
2. Invalid. If there are any seals, they are not cribbagecheats; but since there is no X in SPC, we can’t be sure
that any seals really exist. So the argument is invalid.
5. Valid. (Note that the conclusion is: “No Ninja warriors
are good psychiatrists.”)
8. Invalid.
Exercise 19-3
1. Some prisoners are innocent people (or, Some innocent people are prisoners).
4. Some weak-chinned persons are not criminals.
6. Some extraterrestrials are Earth visitors. (This does
not suggest that all extraterrestrials visit Earth; Earth
may be a hot vacation spot for extraterrestrials, but it is
not a mandatory stop on the extraterrestrial itinerary.)
8. All people-who-can-be-on-the-team are hardworkers.
Exercise 19-4
1. “Royalty” is “a member of the royal family.” So the
argument goes:
Only royalty are permitted to wear the crown jewels.
That is: All permitted to wear the crown jewels are
royalty.
No penguin is permitted to wear the crown jewels.
Therefore, no penguin is royalty.
And a simple Venn diagram shows that to be invalid.

444

Answers to Selected Exercises

3.

Or you could write it like this:
All accused are entitled.
Some accused are not popular.
Therefore, some entitled are not popular.

All sick-people are morose.
Some firefighters are sick people.
Therefore, some firefighters are morose.
Valid.

Either way, it’s valid.
5.

Exercise 9-5
1. All liver-eaters are cribbage-cheaters.
Some liver-eaters are drinkers.
Therefore, some cribbage-cheaters are drinkers.
Valid.
3.
All accused are entitled.
Some accused are unpopular.
Therefore, some unpopular are entitled.

All results-of-coercion are worthless.
Some confessions are worthless.
Therefore, some confessions are results-of-coercion.
Invalid. (The X in your Venn diagram is inside the
Confessions circle, but it is on the line of the Resultsof-Force class; so we cannot conclude that there must
be confessions that are the results-of-force.)

Index

Note: Page numbers followed by n.refer note numbers.

A
Abramovsky, Abraham, 121
Abel, David, 202
Abramson, Jeffrey, 12, 114n., 183–184, 202n.
Ad hominem, 28–55, 56, 141, 145–147
circumstantial, 55n.
fallacy, 28–29, 41–48, 56
inverse. See Inverse ad hominem
nonfallacious, 29–33
and testimony, 31–39, 42, 141, 145–147
types of, 41–48
bias, 41–44
inconsistency (hypocrisy), 44–47
psychological, 47–48
Adams, Randall, 312, 316n.
Adler, Stephen J., 12
Adversarial system, 5–10, 56–57, 179, 294–295
Affirming the consequent, fallacy of, 270–271
Alampay, D. A., 315n.
Alberta Department of Justice, 43
Albrecht, Brian E., 202n.
Aldrich, Gary, 161
Alexander, Lamar, 312
Allen v. United States, 149
Ambiguity, fallacy of, 132–136, 345
of “average,” 345
American Law Institute, 75n., 91n., 202n.
Amphiboly, 136
Anacin, advertisement, 111–112, 136, 311
Analogical literalism, fallacy of, 180–181
Analogy, 164–186
deductive argument by, 165–168
faulty analogy, fallacy of, 170–171
figurative, 164–165

inductive argument by, 184–186
illustrative. See Figurative
slippery slope and, 182–183
Angell, Marcia, 298
Annas, George, 252
Answer Book for Jury Service, 13
Antecedent, 258–259
Appeal to authority, 140–147
fallacious forms, 141–143
legitimate use of, 141–142
testimony and, 141, 145–147
Appeal to ignorance fallacy, 115–117, 123
Appeal to popularity fallacy. See Popularity
Appeal to tradition fallacy. See Traditional wisdom
Aquinas, Thomas, 330
Argument, 14, 16, 18–25, 92–104, 143. See also Deductive
argument; Inductive argument; Testimony
structure of, 92–104
convergent, 92–94
linked, 95–96
subarguments, 16, 96–104
Aristotle, 224n
Aronson, Harvey, 55n., 201
Assumptions, 109–113, 290
background, 290
Atlanta Constitution, 311
Authority. See Appeal to authority
Average, 343–345
Averbuch, Bernard, 55n.

B
BBC, 277
Bacall, Lauren, 34
Bacchetti, Peter, 356n.

445

446
Background assumptions, 290
Bailey, F. Lee, 43, 55n., 201
Baird, Davis, 27
Baldus, David C., 201n.
Bastion Law Corporation, 13
Baucus, Max, 296
Beckenback, Jerome E., 202n.
Begging the question, fallacy of, 226–235
circular, 229–231
false charges of, 231
generalization, 228–229
synonymous, 227–228
Bergman, Daryl A., 114
Bergman, Paul, 55
Berrigan, Philip, 2
Bero, Lisa, 356n.
Best, Joel, 354, 357
Blackmun, Justice Harry A., 62, 199
Borchard, Edwin M., 317
Bower, G., 316n.
Bowers v. Hardwick, 62, 66, 66n.
Bray, Robert M., 317
Brennan, Justice William, 209
Brodsky, Stanley, 118
Brooks v. Mississippi, 167
Brown, Marshall, 91n.
Brown, Tom, Jr., 155
Browne, Dik, 213
Brumvand, Jan Harold, 316n.
Bruner, Jerome, 301, 315n.
Buckley, William F., Jr., 58, 173
Bugelski, B. R., 315n.
Burden of proof, 115–122
in criminal cases, 117–122
Burt, Sir Cyril, 140
Buse, John, 296
Bush, George W., 311, 344

C
“Camel’s nose is in the tent” argument. See Slippery
slope arguments
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms,
118, 121
Cantril, Hadley, 302, 315n.
Capron, Alexander Morgan, 154n.
Carroll, Lewis, 131, 227, 238n.
Casteneda v. Partida, 74, 128, 357
Categorical propositions, 389–391, 407–408
nonstandard forms, 407
translating ordinary language into, 407–408
types of, 389–391
Causation, 278–284
distinguished from correlation, 279–284
questionable cause, fallacy of, 283–284

Index

Cerf, Christopher, 224n.
Challenger spacecraft, 116
Cheney, Richard, 57
Cherry-picking, 350
Chesen, Jeff, 154
Citizens United v. Federal Elections Commission, 168
Clark, Marcia, 38, 187
Classes, 389–391
Cleveland Plain Dealer, 83, 91n., 163, 224n., 242
Clinton, Henry Lauren, 55n., 222, 224n., 315n.
Coady, C. A. J., 54, 154
Cogent/uncogent, 24–25
Coleman, Brenda, 160
Complements of classes, 392
Complex question, fallacy of, 233–235
Conclusion, 8, 14, 16, 67–70, 76–82
importance of determining, 8, 67–70, 76–82
Conditional statement, 215–216, 258–260, 360
dilemmas as conditionals, 215–216
material implication and, 361–362
truth-functional definition of, 361
Confirmation bias, 293–294, 350
Confounding factors, 280, 282
Conjunction, 359
Consequent, 259–260
Consumer Reports, 65, 69, 75n., 114n., 134, 139n., 316n., 317
Contradictories, 390
Cook, Beano, 191
Cooperative critical thinking, 7–10, 56–57, 179, 294
Copi, I. M., 391
Corona, Juan, trial of, 236–237
Craig, Mr. Justice (British Columbia Court
of Appeal), 199–200
Criminal Evidence Act of 1898, 119
Criminal Justice and Public Order Act, 121
Critical Thinking Web, 238
Crossen, Cynthia, 298
Crowe, Robert, 43–44
Cruzan, Nancy, 125–126
Cunningham, Emma Augusta, trial of, 45

D
Darrow, Clarence, 43–44
Darwin, Charles, 112
Dawes, Robyn M., 357
Data-dredging, 350
Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 154n., 155
Deductive argument, 19–23, 164–168
by analogy, 165–168
distinguished from inductive, 19–20
Definitions, 129–131
controversial, 131
ostensive, 129–130
stipulative, 130–131

447

Index

DeMorgan’s Theorems, 369
Denying the antecedent, fallacy of, 269–270
Diderot, Denis, 202
Dilemma arguments, 211–217
conditional form of, 215–216
false dilemma, fallacy of, 212–217
with strawman, 216
genuine dilemma, 212
DiNicola, Ralph, 242
DiPerna, Paula, 12, 13n.
Dirck, Joe, 163
Disjunction, 359
Dispositive facts, 171
Dixon, Jeane, 291
Donohue, Brian, 13n.
Double-blind experiments, 286, 294, 350
Doublespeak, 132, 139
Dowden, Bradley, 55
Drosnin, Michael, 281
Du Cann, Richard, 55n.
Duhem, Pierre, 114
Dunagin, Ralph, 280
Dworkin, Ronald, 126, 128n., 168
Dwyer, Jim, 317
Dwyer, William L., 12

E
Eckardt, Robert, 189
Eddleman, David, trial of, 34
Epidemiological study, 288
Ehrenfreund, Norbert, 224n., 225, 425
Enthymemes, 111
Euphemism, 132
Evidence-driven deliberation, 9
Ewen, Stuart, 317
Expert witnesses. See Testimony, expert
Eyewitnesses. See Testimony, eyewitness
Ezzell, Carol, 225

F
Factcheck.org, 316
False dilemma. See Dilemma, false
Faulty analogy, 170–171
Fenton, Andrew, 155
Filling-in memories, 307
Fischer, John Martin, 177–178, 201n.
Fleming, Peggy, 34
Flew, Antony, 231, 238n.
Folger Coffee Company, 134
Fontes, Norman E., 316n.
Forer, Lois G., 297n.
Foster, Kenneth R., 154
Frank, Barney, 64
Frazier, Kendrick, 297n., 315n.

Frankfurter, Felix, 128n.
French Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the
Citizen, 118
Frontline, 91n., 316
Frye v. United States, 154n.
Fuller, Lon L., 192, 202n.

G
Gaskins, Richard H., 128, 128n.
Gates, Bill, 187
Gay-Williams, J., 209, 224n.
Giago, Tim, 191, 202n.
Gideon, Clarence Earl, trial of,
61–62
Giere, Ronald N., 298
Giles, F. T., 55n.
Ginsburg, Justice Ruth Bader, 167
GlaxoSmithKline, 351
Glenmullen, Joseph, 351
Golden mean fallacy, 220–223
and jury deliberations, 222–223
Golding, Martin P., 114, 202
Goodman, Nelson, 357
Grassley, Charles, 296
Greeley, Andrew M., 331
Greensboro Daily News, 50, 55n., 86, 139n., 201n., 202n.,
229, 285
Greider, William, 317
Griffin v. Illinois, 202
Groopman, Jerome, 298
Gross, Samuel R., 6, 13n.
Guilt not proven, 119
Gupta, Anil, 139

H
“Hagar the Horrible,” 213
Half-truths, 311
Halley, Edmond, 289
Hans, Valerie, 9, 12, 13n., 297n.
Hardin, Garrett, 225
Harris, Carlyle, trial of, 230
Harrisburg Seven, 2
Hart, Betsy, 251
Hart, H. L. A., 298
Hart, Johnny, 234, 277
Hastorf, Albert, 302, 315n.
Hightower, Jim, 222
Hill, Betty, 51
Hinckley, John Jr., trial of, 144
Hocking, John E., 316n.
Hoffer, Marilyn Mona, 316n.
Hoffer, William, 316n.
Holland, Barbara, 13n.
Holland v. Illinois, 66, 74, 225

448

Index

Honoré, Tony, 298
Huber, Peter W., 154n., 154
Huckabee, Mike, 208
Hudson v. McMillian, 198–199
Huff, Darrell, 297n., 357
Hume, David, 298
Hunt, Morton, 13n.
Hutcheon, Mr. Justice (British Columbia Court of
Appeal), 200

Klenk, Virginia, 277, 387, 410
Kloosterhuis, Harm, 202
Kohlberg, Lawrence, 11
Koop, C. Everett, 147
Krimsky, Sheldon, 298
Krugman, Paul, 312
Kuhn, Thomas, 114
Kunstler, William M., 121, 128n.
Kurtz, Howard, 154n.

I

L

Impartiality, 4
Indian Country Today, 191, 202n.
Inductive argument, 19–20, 23–25, 164, 184–186
by analogy, 184–18
Innocence Project, 13, 316
Inquiry Regarding Thomas Sophonow, 317
Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 27, 55
Intersection of classes, 392
Invalid. See Valid
Inverse ad hominem, 48–49
fallacy of, 48–49
and testimony, 48–49
Irons, Peter, 12, 128n.
Irrelevant reason fallacy, 30, 81–82, 104

LaFleur v. Cleveland Board of Education, 116
Lamb’s Chapel v. Center Moriches Union Free School
District, 181–182
LaMond, Grant, 202
Landers, Ann, 86, 91n., 353, 356n.
Lavoisier, Antoine, 112
“Law and Order,” 172
Law, Steven, 337
Lay, Kenneth, 311
Lee, Henry, 188
Lee, Kirby, 356n.
Leslie, John, 298
Levi, Edward H., 114
Levy, Eugene H., 202
Lewis, Anthony, 66n.
Lewontin, R. C., 252
Limbaugh, Rush, 51, 189
Linder, David, 425
Linder, Douglas O., 13
Lineups, problems with, 305–307
Lithwick, Dahlia, 225
Loaded questions, 234
Loeb, Jerod M., 43
Loeb-Leopold case, 43–44
Loftus, Elizabeth, 301, 303–305, 315n., 316, 317
Loftus, G. R., 305
Lungren, Dan, 337
Lustgarten, Edgar, 113n.
Lutz, William, 139, 139n.

J
Jack and Chalie v. The Queen, 203
Jaffee, A. J., 356n., 357
Jaffee v. Redmond, 79
Jailhouse informants, 43, 54–55
Janik, Allan, 114
Jarvik, Robert, 142
Jofre, Shelley, 356n.
Johnson, Samuel, 49, 55
Jury, 2–4, 9–11, 13, 78–79
ideal, 11
presumption of innocence in, 120
role of, 78–79
selection, 2–4
Jury Rights Project, 13

M
K
Kassin, Saul M., 12
Katz, Leo, 305, 315n.
Kaufman Commission, 54–55, 91, 139, 298, 317
Keillor, Garrison, 297n.
Kelvin, Lord, 142
Kerr, Norman L., 317
Ketcham, Katherine, 315n., 317
Kinsley, Michael, 341
Kipnis, Kenneth, 181
Kitmna, Jamie Lincoln, 154
Klass, Philip J., 315n.

M. L. B., Petitioner v. S. L. J., 203
Manitoba Justice Department, 54
Matrixx Initiatives v. James Siracusano, 298, 357
Mauro, John, 357
McCabe, Sarah, 128n.
McCleskey v. Kemp, 183–184
McCormick, Mark, 12
McDonald, Country Joe, 174, 201n.
McGarity, Thomas O., 298
McKanze, F. Aurelius, 145
McKay, Brenda, 281
McKay, Thomas J., 202

449

Index

McMahon, Jack, 2, 13n.
McMillan v. Pennsylvania, 128
Mean, 343–344
Median, 343–344
Meese, Edwin,, 208, 224n.
Menkel-Meadow, Carrie, 7
“The Middletons,” 280
Mill, John Stuart, 298
Miller, Gerald R., 316n.
Millikan, Robert Andrews, 142
Minogue, Brendan, 128, 201n.
Mississippi Supreme Court, 4
Mobil Oil, advertisement, 59–61
Mode, 343–344
Modus ponens, 267–268
Modus tollens, 268–269
Moore, Timothy E., 154, 154n.
Morin, Guy Paul, wrongful conviction of, 54–55
Morrison, Steinie, trial of, 94
Mortimer, John, 85, 91n., 205, 224n.
Mullis, Kary B., 148
Munson, Ronald, 224n.
Munsterburg, Hugo, 300, 315n., 317
Musschenga, Albert W., 202
Myth, ambiguity of, 133

N
National Center for State Courts, 13
National Coalition Against Pornography,
80–81, 91n.
National Council of Teachers of English, 139
National Criminal Justice Reference Service, 13
National Geographic, 174, 201n.
Navasky, Victor, 224n.
Necessary conditions, 253–261, 267–274
Necessary and sufficient conditions, 261
Negation, 273, 358–359
truth-functional definition of, 358–359
Neuborne, Bert, 3
Neufeld, Peter, 317
Newton, Isaac, 140, 289, 294
Noble, John Wesley, 55n.
North Carolina Independent, 55n.
North Carolina Pattern Instructions, 75n., 277n.
Nostradamus, 291

O
Obama, Barack, 59
O’Connor, Justice Sandra, 198–199
Occam’s razor, 292–293
Olivieri, Nancy, 296
Olson, Ken, 142
Oostvogel, Fieke, 356n.
Oyez.org, 13

P
Pagano, Father Bernard, 300
Parade of horribles argument, 204
Park, Robert L., 297n.
Paulos, John Allen, 193, 297n., 357
Penrod, Steven D., 12, 317
Perka v. Regina, 202n.
Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association, 82, 328
Photo-bias, 306–307
Pitts, Leaonard, Jr., 139
Placebo effect, 283
Plea bargaining, 180–181
Popper, Karl, 5
Popularity, fallacy of appeal to, 148–149
Portney, Paul, 315
Post hoc, ergo propter hoc, 283
Postman, Leo, 301, 315n.
Powell, Justice Lewis, 173
Prediction, 288–291
importance in science, 288–291
vague, 291
Premise, 14, 16
Presumption of innocence, 117–122
Principle of charity, 58
Product of classes. See Intersection of classes
Prospective study, 288
Public Agenda Online, 356
Pulaski, Charles A., Jr., 201n.
Punctuation in symbolic logic, 366–370

Q
Question-Begging arguments. See Begging the question
Questionable cause, fallacy of, 283–284
Quinion, Michael, 91

R
Rampton, Sheldon, 65, 147, 154, 154n., 316n., 317
Rand, Tamara, 292
Randi, James, 297n., 316
Randomized experimental design, 287–288
Raymo, Chet, 297n.
Reasonable doubt, 2
Red herring fallacy, 81–83. See also Irrelevant reason
Rehnquist, Chief Justice William,
126, 128n.
Reuben, David, 206
Rieke, Richard, 114
Right to remain silent, 121
Robertson, John A., 328
Robertson, Pat, 58, 115–116
Robbins, William W., 133
Rosenberger v. University of Virginia, 181
Rumpole of the Bailey, 85–86
Rumsfeld, Donald, 124

450
Russell, Bertrand, 23, 118
Russell, Francis, 120, 128n.

S
Sacco and Vanzetti, 120
St. John of Chrysostom, 209
St. Paul Pioneer Press, 52
San Jose State University Critical Thinking Web Page, 27
Scalia, Justice Antonin, 79, 199
Schauer, Frederick, 225
Scheck, Barry, 317
Schick, Theodore, 317
Schmitz, Anthony, 298
Schulman, Jay, 3
Science, method of, 286–295
Scottish verdict, 119
Scriven, Michael, 114
Selby-Bigge, L. A., 298
Self-sealing fallacy, 231–233
Semmelweis, Ignaz, 287
Shafer, Jack, 139
Shaw, David, 315
Shermer, Michael, 281, 297n.
Shevrin, Howard, 144
Short-cut method for determining validity, 374–384
Simpson, O.J., trial of, 6, 38, 105, 113n., 148, 187
Singer, J. L., 316n.
Singh, Gurkipal, 296
Skenazy, Lenore, 55n.
Skeptical Inquirer, 55n., 316
Skyrms, Bryan, 357
Slippery slope arguments, 182–183, 204–208
alternative names for, 204
and analogy, 182–183
fallacy of, 206
genuine slippery slopes, 206–207
Smallwood, Irwin, 174, 189, 201n., 202n.
Sophonow, Thomas, wrongful conviction of, 54
Sound argument, 23
distinguished from unsound, 23
Spence, Gerry, 13
Spio, Mary, 282
Spirer, Herbert F., 356n., 357
Spirer, Louise, 357
Starr v. Hale, 12
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 139
Statement, 14–15
State of North Carolina v. Rich, 277
Statistics, 343–355
base comparisons, 346–347
context of, 345
empty, 345
faulty comparisons, 347
half-truths, 348

Index

Stauber, John, 65, 147, 154, 154n., 316n., 317
Stewart, James R., 315n.
Stone, Irving, 55n.
Strawman, fallacy of, 56–66, 205–206, 212
with false dilemma, 212
slippery slope, distinguished from, 205–206
Strong/weak, 24–25
Sufficient conditions, 254–261, 267–274
Summers, Dana, 280
Sunstein, Cass R., 202
Suppressed evidence, 310–312
Surveys, 352–355
push polls, 355
representative sample, 353
sample size, 353
target population, 353

T
Tannen, Deborah, 12, 13, 66
Teepen, Tom, 8, 191
Testimony, 31–39, 42, 140–147, 299–309
distinguished from argument, 31–39
expert, 141–143
eyewitness, 42m 299–309
Texans for Public Justice, 311
Texas v. Johnson, 224n.
Thomas, Cal, 59
Thomas, Justice Clarence, 167, 199
Thompson, Clive, 317
Thomson, Donald M., 307
Thomson, Judith Jarvis, 174–175, 201n.
Toulmin, Stephen, 114
Tradition, fallacy of appeal to, 148–150
Treat, Lawrence, 224n., 225, 425
Truth-functional definitions, 358–362
Truth-table, 358
Truth-table method for determining validity, 363–365,
370–373
Turner, Kathleen, 34
Twelve Angry Men, 9

U
Ulm, Brian, 160
Unsound. See Sound argument
Urban myths, 313

V
Valid/invalid, 21–23
van der Steen, Wim J., 202
Vandevelde, Kenneth J., 114, 202
Van Koppen, Peter J., 12
Van Natta, Don, Jr., 337
Vaughn, Lewis, 317
Venn diagrams, 391–406

451

Index

Venn, John, 391
Ventura, Jesse, 52
Verdict-driven deliberation, 9
Victor v. Nebraska, 128
Victorian Charter of Human Rights and
Responsibilities, 118
Vidmar, Neil, 9, 12, 13n., 297n.
Villasenor, Victor, 238n.
Voir dire, 2–3
Volokh, Eugene, 225
Von Daniken, Erich, 291

W
Wagner, Wendy E., 298
Waldholtz, Enid, 188
Wall, Patrick M., 316n.
Waller, Bruce N., 27, 54, 66, 91, 128, 202, 238
Walton, Douglas, 12, 54, 55, 91, 114, 128, 154, 224n.,
225, 238
Warren, Mary Anne, 114, 277
Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York v. Village
of Stratton, 114
Watt, James, 224n.
Watterson, Bill, 178

Waxman, Henry, 30
Weasel-words, 139
Wedge arguments. See Slippery slope arguments
Weeks v. Angelone, 139, 277
Wellman, Francis L., 238n.
Westmoreland, William C., 142
Wheeler, Michael, 357
Whitehead, Barbara Defoe, 225
Wijsbek, Henri, 202
Wilhoite, Lynn, 221
Williams, Bernard, 225
Winkler, John, 317
Wishman, Seymour, 13n., 235, 238n.
“Wizard of Id,” 234, 277
Woodruff, Judy, 91
Woods, Tiger, 146
Woodworth, George, 201n.
Wrightsman, Lawrence S., 12

X
XKCD, 310

Z
Zuckerman, A. A. S., 128

