3
                                          Table  of  Contents

 
Title Page
CoSyright Page
Dedication
 
Chapter 1 - Scratch ’n’ Sniff
Chapter 2 - Icy Silence
Chapter 3 - The Wanderer
Chapter 4 - Drivel
Chapter 5 - Abandon Starbucks!
Chapter  - Soap Dodgers
Chapter 7 - A Bucket in the Corner
Chapter 8 - Maybe It’s the Drains
Chapter 9 - A Little Bit of Drool
Chapter 10 - Slightly Chewed
Chapter 11 - Hair Pulling
Chapter 12 - Pongy Pong
Chapter 13 - Shut Your Face!
Chapter 14 - Lady and the Tramp
Chapter 15 - Bath time
Chapter 1 - Rule Britannia
Chapter 17 - Collapsed Bouffant
Chapter 18 - Rabbit Droppings
Chapter 19 - Supertramp
Chapter 20 - Grubby Toilet Roll
Chapter 21 - Wet Wipe
Chapter 22 - Long Lion Days
Chapter 23 - Plastic Snowman
Chapter 24 - Yuckety Yuck Yuck
Chapter 25 - Black Leather Mistletoe
Chapter 2 - Little Star
 

4
Acknowledgements

10
                                                                          Mr.  Stink
 
                                                                       RA=ORBILL
 
                                                       Published by  the Penguin Group 
                                                        Penguin Young  Readers Group 
                                    345 Hudson Street, New York,  New York  10014, U.S.A. 
             Penguin Group (USA)  Inc.,  375 Hudson Street, New York,  New York  10014, U.S.A. 
                Penguin Group  (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue  East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario, 
                               Canada M4P 2Y3 (a division  of  Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.) 
                                Penguin Books Ltd,  80 Strand, London WC2R  0RL,  England 
      Penguin  Ireland, 25 St Stephen’s Green, Dublin  2, Ireland (a division  of  Penguin Books Ltd) 
                 Penguin Group  (Australia),  250 Camberwell  Road, Camberwell, Victoria  3124, 
                                   Australia  (a division  of Pearson Australia Group  Pty Ltd) 
             Penguin Books  India Pvt Ltd,  11 Community  Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi—
                                                                      110 017, India 
             Penguin Group (N=),  7 Apollo  Drive,  Mairangi  Bay, Auckland  1311, New =ealand 
                                                (a division  of  Pearson New =ealand Ltd) 
           Penguin  Books (South Africa)  (Pty)  Ltd,  24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg 
                                                                  219, South Africa
 
                Penguin Books Ltd,  Registered Offices:  80 Strand, London WC2R  0RL,  England
 
 
                                                                                  
                                                      Copyright  © 2010 David  Walliams
                                                     Illustrations   © Quentin Blake  2010
 
                                                           eISBN  : 978-1-101-4778-1
 
                                                                   All  rights reserved
 
                              Library  of  Congress Cataloging-in-Publication  Data is available
 
 
The scanning, uploading  and distribution  of this  book via the Internet  or via any other means without
    the permission of  the publisher is illegal  and punishable by law.  Please purchase only authorized
electronic  editions, and do not  participate in or  encourage electronic piracy of  copyrighted materials.
                                          Your support of  the author’s rights is  appreciated.
 
  The  publisher does not have any control over  and does not assume any responsibility for author or
                                                    third-party   websites or their content.

11
http:us.penguingroup.com

12
For my mum Kathleen, the kindest Serson
                   I  have ever met.

13
                                                         1



                                           Scratch   ’n’   Sniff



Mr. Stink stank. He also stunk. And if it is correct English to say he stinked,
then he stinked as well. He was the stinkiest stinky stinker who ever lived.
   A  stink is the worst type of  smell. A  stink is worse than a stench. And a
stench is worse than a pong. And a pong is worse than a whiff. And a whiff
can be enough to make your nose wrinkle.
   It  wasn’t  Mr. Stink’s  fault  that he stank. He  was a tramp, after all.  He
didn’t have a home and so he never had the  opportunity to have a proper
wash like you  and me. After  a while  the smell just  got worse and worse.
Here is a picture of Mr. Stink.

14
He is quite a snappy dresser in his bow tie and tweed jacket, isn’t he? But
don’t be fooled. The illustration doesn’t do justice to the smell. This could be
a scratch ’ n’ sniff  book, but the smell would be so bad you would have to
put it in the bin. And then bury the bin. Very deep underground.
   That’s his little  black dog with him, the Duchess. The Duchess wasn’t any
particular breed of dog, she was just a dog. She smelled too, but not as bad
as Mr. Stink. Nothing in the world  really smelled as bad as him. Except his
beard. His beard was full of old bits of egg and sausage and cheese that had
fallen out of his mouth years before. It had never, ever been shampooed so it
had its own special stink, even worse than his main one.
   One  morning,  Mr.   Stink  simply  appeared in   the town   and took   up
residence on an old wooden bench. No one knew where he had come from,

15
or where he might be going. The town folk  were mostly nice to him.  They
sometimes dropped a few coins at his feet, before rushing off with their eyes
watering. But no one was really friendly toward him.  No one stopped for a
chat.
   At  least, not till the day that a little  girl finally  plucked up the courage to
speak to him—and that’s where our story begins.
   “Hello,”  said the girl, her voice trembling a little with nerves. The girl was
named Chloe. She was only twelve  and she had never spoken to a tramp
before. Her mother had forbidden her to speak to “such creatures.” Mother
even disapproved of  her  daughter talking  to  kids  from  the local  public
housing project.  But  Chloe  didn’t  think  Mr.   Stink  was a  creature. She
thought he was a man who looked like he had a very interesting story to tell
—and if there was one thing Chloe loved, it was stories.
   Every day she would pass him and his dog in her parents’ car on the way
to her posh private  school. Whether in  sunshine or snow, he was  always
sitting on the same bench with his dog by his feet. As she luxuriated on the
leather of  the backseat with  her  poisonous little  sister Annabelle,  Chloe
would look out of the window at him and wonder.
   Millions   of thoughts and questions would swim  through her head. Who
was he? Why did he live on the streets? Had he ever had a home? What did
his dog eat? Did he have any friends or family? If so, did they know he was
homeless?
   Where did he go at Christmas? If you  wanted to write him a letter, what
address would you put on the envelope? “The bench, you know the one—
round the corner from  the bus stop”? When  was the last time  he’d had a
bath? And could his name really be Mr. Stink?
   Chloe was the kind of girl who loved being alone with her thoughts. Often
she would sit on her bed and make up stories about Mr. Stink. Sitting on her
own in  her room,  she would  come up with  all  kinds  of  fantastical tales.
Maybe Mr. Stink was a heroic old sailor who had won dozens of medals for
bravery, but had found it impossible to adapt to life on dry land? Or perhaps
he was a world-famous opera singer who one night, upon hitting the top note
in an aria  at the Royal  Opera House in London,  lost his voice  and could
never sing again? Or maybe he was really a Russian secret agent who had
put on an elaborate tramp disguise to spy on the people of the town?
   Chloe didn’t  know anything about Mr. Stink.  But what she did know, on
that day when  she stopped to talk  to him  for  the  first  time, was that  he

16
looked like he needed the five-pound note she was holding much more than
she did.
   He  seemed lonely too, not just alone, but lonely  in his  soul. That made
Chloe sad. She knew full well  what it was like  to feel lonely.  Chloe didn’t
like school very much. Mother had insisted on sending her to a posh all-girls
secondary school, and she hadn’t made any friends there. Chloe didn’t like
being at home much either. Wherever she was, she had the feeling that she
didn’t quite fit in.
   What’s  more,  it   was Chloe’s  least  favorite  time  of   year. Christmas.
Everyone is  supposed to love  Christmas, especially children.  But  Chloe
hated it. She hated the tinsel, she hated the crackers, she hated the carols, she
hated having to watch the Queen’s Speech, she hated the mince pies, she
hated that it never really snowed like it’s suppose to, she hated sitting down
with her family  to  a long, long dinner, and most of  all, she hated how she
had to pretend to be happy just because it was December 25.
   “What  can  I  do for  you,  young lady?”  said  Mr.  Stink. His  voice  was
unexpectedly posh. As no one had ever stopped to talk  to him  before, he
stared slightly suspiciously at this plump little girl. Chloe was suddenly a bit
frightened. Maybe it wasn’t such a good idea to talk  to the old tramp after
all. She had been working up to this moment for weeks, months even. This
wasn’t how it had all played out in her head.
   To make matters worse, Chloe had to stop breathing through her nose. The
smell was starting to get to her. It was like a living thing, creeping its way up
her nostrils and burning the back of her throat.
   “Erm,  well, sorry to bother you . . .”
   “Yes?”  said Mr. Stink,  a little  impatiently. Chloe was taken aback. Why
was he in  such a  hurry? He  always sat  on his  bench. It  wasn’t  like  he
suddenly needed to go somewhere else.
   At  that moment the Duchess started barking at her. Chloe felt even more
scared. Sensing this, Mr. Stink pulled the Duchess’s leash, which was really
just a bit of old rope, to encourage her to be quiet.
   “Well,”   Chloe went on nervously, “my auntie sent me five pounds to buy
myself a Christmas present. But I don’t really need anything so I thought I
would give it to you.”
   Mr.  Stink smiled. Chloe smiled too. For a moment it looked as if  he was
going to accept Chloe’s offer, then he looked down at the pavement.

17
   “Thank you,”  he said. “Unimaginable kindness, but I can’t take it, sorry.”
   Chloe was confused. “Why ever not?” she asked.
   “You  are but a child. Five pounds? It’s too, too generous.”
   “I  just thought—”
   “It’s  really kind of  you, but I’m afraid I  can’t accept. Tell me, how old are
you, young lady? Ten?”
   “TWELVE!”    said Chloe loudly.  She was a little   short for  her age, but
liked to think she was grown-up in lots of other ways. “I’m twelve. Thirteen
on January the ninth!”
   “Sorry,  you’re twelve. Nearly thirteen. Go and buy yourself  one of those
new musical stereo discs. Don’t you worry about an old vagabond like me.”
He smiled. There was a real twinkle in his eye when he smiled.
   “If  it’s  not too rude,” said Chloe, “can I ask you a question?”
   “Yes, of course you can.”
   “Well,  I  would love  to know:  Why do you  live on a  bench and not in a
house like me?”
   Mr.  Stink  shuffled  slightly  and looked  anxious. “It’s   a long  story, my
dear,” he said. “Maybe I will tell you another day.”
   Chloe was disappointed. She wasn’t sure there would be another day. If
her mother found out that she was even talking to this man, let alone offering
him money, she would go stark raving mad.

18
   “Well,  sorry for  bothering you,” said Chloe. “Have a lovely  day.” As the
words came out, she cringed. What  a stupid thing  to  say! How  could he
possibly have a lovely  day? He was a smelly  old tramp, and the sky  was
growing gloomy  with   black clouds.  She took  a few  steps up  the street,
feeling embarrassed.
   “What’s  that on your back, child?” called out Mr. Stink.
   “What’s  what on my back?” asked Chloe, trying to look over her shoulder.
She reached round and tore a piece of paper from her blazer. She peered at it.
   Written on the piece of paper, in thick black letters, was a single word.



                                                  LOSER!


Chloe felt her stomach twist with humiliation. Rosamund must have Scotch-
taped it to her when she left  school. Rosamund was the leader of the cool
gang. She was always bullying Chloe, picking  on her for  eating too many
sweets, or for being poorer than the other girls at school, or for being the girl
neither team ever wanted on their side in hockey matches. As Chloe had left
school today, Rosamund patted her on the back several times, saying “Merry
Christmas,” while  all the  other girls  laughed. Now Chloe  knew why.  Mr.
Stink rose creakily from his bench and took the paper from Chloe’s hands.

19
   “I    can’t  believe  I’ve   been  going  round  with   that  on  my   back  all
afternoon,” said Chloe.  Embarrassed to feel tears welling  up, she looked
away, blinking into the sunlight.
   “What  is it, child?” asked Mr. Stink, kindly.
   Chloe sniffed. “Well,”  she said, “it’s true, isn’t it? I really am a loser.”
   Mr.  Stink bent down to look at her. “No,” he said, authoritatively. “You’re
not a loser. The real loser is the person who stuck it to you in the first place.”

20
   Chloe tried  to believe him,  but couldn’t  quite. For  as long as she could
remember she had felt like  a loser. Maybe Rosamund and all  those other
girls in her gang were right.
   “There’s only  one place for this,” said Mr. Stink. He screwed up the piece
of paper and, like  a professional cricketer, expertly  tossed it into  the bin.
Chloe clocked this  and her imagination instantly  started whirring;  had he
once been captain of the England cricket team?

21
   Mr.  Stink brushed his hands together. “Good riddance to bad rubbish,” he
said.
   “Thanks,”  murmured Chloe.
   “Not  at all,” said Mr. Stink. “You mustn’t let bullies get you down.”
   “I’ll   try,”  said Chloe. “Nice  to  meet you Mr  . . .  . um .  . . ”  she began.
Everyone called him Mr. Stink, but  she didn’t know if  he knew that. It  felt
rude to say it to his face.
   “Stink,”  he said. “They call me Mr. Stink.”
   “Oh.  Nice to meet you, Mr. Stink. I’m Chloe.”
   “Hello,  Chloe,” said Mr. Stink.
   “You  know, Mr.  Stink,”  said Chloe, “I  still  might  go shopping. Do  you
need anything? Like a bar of soap or something?”
   “Thank  you, my dear,” he replied. “But I have no use for soap. You see, I
had a bath only last year. But I would love some sausages. I do adore a nice

22
meaty sausage. . . .”

23
                                                         2



                                                Icy   Silence



“Mother?”  said Annabelle.
   Mother  finished chewing her food completely, then swallowed it,  before
finally replying.
   “Yes, my darling child?”
   “Chloe   just took  one  of  her sausages off her  plate  and hid  it  in  her
napkin.”
   It  was Saturday evening, and the Crumb  family  sat at the dining  room
table, missing Strictly  Come Dancing and  The X-Factor  as they ate their
dinner. Mother had banned watching television and eating at the same time.
She had decided that it was “awfully common.” Instead the family had to sit
in icy silence and eat their dinner staring at the walls. Or sometimes Mother
would choose a subject for discussion, normally what she would do  if she
ran the  country.  That  was her  absolute favorite.  Mother   had given  up
running a beauty salon to run for office, and had no doubt in her mind that
one day she would be Prime Minister.
   Mother   had named the  white  Persian family   cat  Elizabeth, after  the
Queen. She  was  obsessed with  Being  Posh.  There  was  a  downstairs
bathroom that was kept locked for “very important guests,” as if a member
of the royal family was going to swing by for  a whiz. There was a china tea
set in the cupboard that was “for company,” and had never once been used.
Mother even sprayed air freshener in the  garden. Mother would  never go
out, and not even answer the door, unless immaculately groomed, with her
beloved pearls around her neck and her hair  made stiff  with  enough hair
spray to create its own hole in the ozone layer. She was so used to turning
up her nose at everybody and everything, it  was in danger of staying  that
way. Here’s a picture of her.

24
   My  word, she looks Sosh, doesn’t she? Unsurprisingly Father, or Dad as
he preferred to be called when Mother wasn’t around, opted for a quiet life
and usually didn’t speak unless spoken to. He was a big powerful man, but
his wife made him feel small inside. Dad was only forty, but he was already
going bald and starting to stoop. He worked long hours at a car factory on
the edge of the town.
   “Did  you hide a sausage in your napkin, Chloe?” demanded Mother.
   “You  are always trying to get me into trouble!” snapped Chloe.
   This  was true. Annabelle was two years younger than Chloe, and one of
those children adults think are perfect, but other children don’t like because
they are  snotty little   goodygoodies. Annabelle  loved  getting Chloe  into
trouble. She would lie  on her bed in her bright  pinkroom upstairs and roll
around crying, shouting “CHLOE,  GET  OFF ME!  YOU  ARE  HURTING
ME!”  even though Chloe was quietly writing  away in  her room next door.

25
You could say that Annabelle was evil. She was certainly evil  to her older
sister.
   “Oh,  sorry, Mother, it  just slipped into  my lap,”  said Chloe guiltily.  Her
plan had been to  smuggle the  sausage out for  Mr.  Stink.  She had been
thinking about  him all  evening, imagining  him  shivering out  there in  the
cold dark December night as they sat in the warm dining room, eating away.
   “Well,  then,  Chloe, unroll  it from  your  napkin and put it  back on  your
plate,” ordered Mother. “I am so ashamed that we are even eating sausages
for dinner. I  gave your father  strict instructions to  dispatch himself to  the
supermarket and purchase four wild sea-bass fillets. And  he comes home
with a packet of sausages. If anyone called around and saw us eating food
like  this,  it   would  be  hideously  embarrassing. They’d   think  we  were
savages!”
   “I  am sorry, my darling wife,”  protested Dad. “They were all out of  wild
sea-bass fillets.” He gave Chloe the tiniest wink as he said this, confirming
her suspicion that  he had deliberately  disobeyed Mother’s  orders. Chloe
smiled at him discreetly. She and her dad both loved  sausages and lots of
other food  that Mother  didn’t  approve of,  like  burgers, fish  sticks, fizzy
drinks, and especially Mr. Whippy ice  cream (“the devil’s spume,” Mother
called it).  “I  have never eaten anything from  a van,”  she would say. “I’d
rather die.”
   “Right  now,  all hands on deck as we clear up,”  said Mother when  they
had finished eating.  “Annabelle,  my  precious angel, you  clear the table,
Chloe, you can wash up, and Husband, you can dry.”  When she said “all
hands on deck,” what she really meant was everybody’s hands except hers.
As the rest of the family all  went about their duties, Mother reclined on the
sofa and  started unwrapping  a  wafer-thin  chocolate mint.   She allowed
herself one chocolate mint a day. She nibbled so infuriatingly   slowly, she
made each one last an hour.
   “One  of my  Bendicks luxury  chocolate mints has gone walking again!”
she called out.
   Annabelle  shot Chloe  an accusing look  before returning  to the  dining
room to collect some more plates. “I bet it was you, fatty!” she hissed.
   “Be  nice, Annabelle,” chided Dad.
   Chloe  felt guilty,  even though it  wasn’t  her who had been scoffing  her
mother’s chocolates. She and Dad assumed their familiar  positions at the
sink.

26
   “Chloe,  why were you trying to hide one of your sausages?” he asked. “If
you didn’t like it,  you could have just said.”
   “I  wasn’t trying to hide it, Dad.”
   “Then  what were you doing with it?”
   Suddenly Annabelle appeared with another stack of dirty  plates and the
pair fell silent. They waited a moment until she had gone.
   “Well,   Dad, you  know that  tramp who  always sits on  the same bench
every—”
   “Mr.  Stink?”
   “Yes. Well,  I thought his dog looked hungry  and I wanted to bring her a
sausage or two.”
   It  was a lie, but not a big one.
   “Well,   I  suppose there isn’t any  harm in  giving  his poor  dog a  bit  of
food,” said Dad. “Just this once, though, you understand?”
   “But—”
   “Just this once, Chloe. Or Mr. Stink will  expect you to feed his dog every
day. Now,  I  hid   another packet of   sausages behind the crème  fraîche,
whatever that is.  I’ll   cook them  up for  you  before your  mother  gets up
tomorrow morning and you can give them—”
   “WHAT   ARE YOU  TWO  CONSPIRING ABOUT?”   demanded Mother
from the sitting room.
   “Oh,  erm, we were just debating which  of the Queen’s four children we
most admire,”  said Dad.  “I  am putting  forward  Anne  for  her equestrian
skills, though  Chloe is  making  a strong case for  Prince Charles  and his
unrivaled range of organic biscuits.”
   “Very  good. Carry on!” boomed the voice from next door.
   Dad smiled at Chloe cheekily.

27
                                                         3



                                             The  Wanderer



Mr. Stink ate the sausages in an unexpectedly elegant manner. First, he took
out a  little  linen  napkin and  tucked it  under  his chin.  Next,  he took  an
antique silver knife and fork out of his breast pocket. Finally, he produced a
dirty gold-rimmed  china plate, which he gave to the Duchess to lick  clean
before he set down the sausages neatly upon it.
   Chloe stared at his cutlery and plate. This seemed like another clue to his
past. Had he perhaps been a gentleman thief who crept into country houses
at midnight and made off with the family silver?
   “Do  you have any more sausages?” asked Mr. Stink, his mouth still full
of sausage.
   “No,  just those eight I’m afraid,” replied Chloe.
   She stood at a safe distance from the tramp so that her eyes wouldn’t start
weeping at the smell.  The Duchess looked up  at Mr.  Stink  as he ate the
sausages, with a heartbreaking longing that suggested that all love and all
beauty was contained in those tubes of meat.
   “There  you go, Duchess,” said Mr. Stink, slowly lowering  half a sausage
into his  dog’s mouth. The Duchess was so hungry she didn’t  even chew;
instead she swallowed  it   in  half  a  millisecond  before  returning  to  her
expression of sausage-longing. Had any man or beast ever eaten a sausage
so quickly? Chloe  was half-expecting a gentleman in  a blazer and slacks
with a  clipboard and stopwatch to appear and declare that the little  black
dog had set a new sausage-eating international world record!
   “So,  young Chloe, is everything fine at home?” asked Mr. Stink, as he let
the Duchess lick his fingers clean of any remnants of sausage juice.
   “I’m   sorry?” replied a befuddled Chloe.
   “I  asked if  everything was fine at home. If things were tickety-boo  I am
not sure you would be spending your Saturday talking to an old  vagabond
like me.”
   “Vagabond?”

28
   “I   don’t  like  the  word  ‘tramp.’   It  makes you  think  of  someone who
smells.”
   Chloe tried to conceal her surprise. Even the Duchess looked puzzled and
she didn’t speak English, only Dog.
   “I  prefer vagabond, or wanderer,” continued Mr. Stink.
   The  way he put  it, thought  Chloe, it  sounded almost poetic. Especially
“wanderer.” She would love to be a wanderer. She would wander all around
the world  if  she could. Not  stay in  this boring  little  town  where nothing
happened that hadn’t happened the day before.
   “There’s   nothing  wrong   at  home.  Everything   is   fine,”   said  Chloe
adamantly.
   “Are  you  sure?” inquired Mr. Stink,  with the wisdom  some people have
that cuts right through you like a knife through butter.
   Things  were, in  fact, not  at all  fine  at home for  Chloe. She was often
ignored. Her mother doted on Annabelle—probably  because her youngest
daughter was like a miniature version of her. Every inch of every wall in the
house was covered with celebrations of Annabelle’s infinite achievements.
Photographs of  her  standing smugly   on  winner’s  podiums,  certificates
bearing her name emblazoned in  italic  gold,  trophies  and statuettes and
medals engraved with “winner,”  “first  place,” or “little   creep.” (I  made up
that last one.)

29
   The  more Annabelle  achieved, the more Chloe  felt  like  a failure.  Her
parents spent  most   of  their   lives   providing   a  chauffeur   service  for
Annabelle’s-out-of school activities.  Her schedule was exhausting even to
look at.



                                                   Monday

30
5 a.m. Swimming  training
 a.m. Clarinet lesson
7 a.m. Dance lesson: tap and contemporary  jazz
8 a.m. Dance lesson, ballet
9 a.m. to 4 p.m.  School
4 p.m. Drama  lesson: improvisation   and movement
5 p.m. Piano lesson
 p.m. Brownies
7 p.m. Girls’   Brigade
8 p.m. Javelin  practice




                                                   Tuesday


4 a.m. Violin  lesson
5 a.m. Stilt-walking   practice
 a.m. Chess Society
7 a.m. Learning  Japanese
8 a.m. Flower-arranging   class
9 a.m. to 4 p.m.  School
4 p.m. Creative-writing   workshop
5 p.m. Porcelain-frog-painting    class
 p.m. Harp practice
7 p.m. Watercolor-painting   class
8 p.m. Dance class, ballroom




                                               Wednesday


3 a.m. Choir  practice
4 a.m. Long-jump   training
5 a.m. High-jump   training
 a.m. Long-jump  training  again
7 a.m. Trombone  lesson

31
   8 a.m. Scuba diving
   9 a.m. to 4 p.m. School
   4 p.m. Chef training
   5 p.m. Mountain climbing
    p.m. Tennis
   7 p.m. Drama workshop: Shakespeare and his contemporaries
   8 p.m. Show jumping



                                                 Thursday


   2 a.m. Learning Arabic
   3 a.m. Dance lesson: break-dance, hip-hop, and krumping
   4 a.m. Oboe lesson
   5 a.m. Tour de France cycle training
    a.m. Bible studies
   7 a.m. Gymnastics training
   8 a.m. Calligraphy class
   9 a.m. to 4 p.m. School
   4 p.m. Work experience shadowing a brain surgeon
   5 p.m. Opera-singing lesson
    p.m. NASA space exploration workshop
   7 p.m. Cake-baking class (level 5)
   8 p.m. Attend lecture on “A History  of Victorian Mustaches”



                                                    Friday


   1 a.m. Triangle lesson, grade 5
   2 a.m. Badminton
   3 a.m. Archery
   4 a.m. Fly to Switzerland for ski-jump practice. Learn about eggs from an
expert on eggs on outbound flight.

32
     a.m. Do   quick  ski  jump  and  then  board  inbound  flight.   Take  pottery
class on flight.
    8 a.m. Thai  kickboxing  (remember  to take  skis off  before class).
    9 a.m. to 4 p.m.  School
    4 p.m. Channel-swimming   training
    5 p.m. Motorbike   maintenance workshop
     p.m. Candle making
    7 p.m. Otter-rearing  class
    8 p.m. Television   viewing.  A  choice  between either  a documentary  about
carpet manufacturing  in  Belgium  or a Polish  cartoon from  the 1920s about  a
depressed owl.
 
And that  was just the  weekdays. The  weekends were when  things really  got
busy for Annabelle.   No wonder  Chloe felt  ignored.
    “Well,  I  suppose things  at home  are . .  . are .  . .”  stammered  Chloe.  She
wanted to talk  to him  about it  all, but  she wasn’t sure how.
    Bong! Bong!  Bong!  Bong!
    No,  I  haven’t  lost  my  mind,   readers. That  was  meant  to be  the  church
clock striking   four.

33
   Chloe  gasped and looked at her watch. Four o’clock!  Mother  made her
do her homework from four until six  every day, even in the school holidays
when she didn’t have any to do.
   “Sorry,  Mr.  Stink, I  have to go,”  she said. Secretly Chloe was relieved.
No one had ever asked her how she felt before, and she was beginning to
panic. . . .
   “Really,  child?” said the old man, looking disappointed.
   “Yes, yes, I need to get home. Mother will be furious if I don’t get at least
a C in math next term. She assigns me extra tests during the holidays.”
   “That  doesn’t sound much like a holiday to me,” said Mr. Stink.
   Chloe shrugged. “Mother  doesn’t believe in  holidays.” She stood up. “I
hope you liked the sausages,” she said.
   “They   were scrumptious,”  said Mr.  Stink.  “Thank  you.  Unimaginable
kindness.”

34
   Chloe nodded and turned to run off toward home. If  she took a shortcut,
she’d be back before Mother.
   “Farewell!”  Mr.  Stink called after her softly.

35
                                                         4



                                                     Drivel



Terrified of being late for homework hour, Chloe began to quicken her pace.
She didn’t want her mother to ask questions about where she’d been or who
she’d been talking   to.  Mrs.  Crumb  would  be  horrified  to  find  out  her
daughter had been sitting on a bench with someone she would describe as a
“soap dodger.” Grown-ups always have a way of ruining everything.
   Chloe stopped hurrying, though, when she saw that she was about to pass
Raj’s shop. Just one chocolate bar, she thought.
   Chloe’s love  of chocolate made her one of Raj’s best customers. Raj ran
the local newsagent shop. He was a bigjolly  jelly  of  a man, as sweet and
colorful as his slightly overpriced confectionery. Today, though, what Chloe
really needed was some advice.
   And maybe some chocolate. Just one bar, of course. Maybe two.
   “Ah,  Miss  Chloe!” said Raj, as she entered the shop. “What can I tempt
you with today?”
   “Hello,  Raj,”  said Chloe smiling. She always smiled when she saw Raj. It
was partly because he was such a lovely man, and partly because he sold
sweets.
   “I  have some Rolos on special offer!”  announced Raj. “They have gone
out of date and hardened. You may lose a tooth as you chew into one, but at
ten pence off you can’t really argue!”
   “Mmm,   let   me think,”   said  Chloe,  scouring  the racks  and  racks of
confectionery.

36
   “I  had half a Lion bar earlier, you are welcome to make me an offer on the
other half. I’ll take anything upwards of fifteen pence.”
   “I  think I’ll  just take a Crunchie, thanks, Raj.”
   “Buy   seven Crunchie bars, you  get an  eighth Crunchie bar  absolutely
free!”

37
   “No   thanks, Raj.  I  only  want one.”  She put  the  money down  on  the
counter: thirty-five pence. Money well spent considering the nice feeling the
chocolate would give her as it slipped down her throat and into her tummy.
   “But  Chloe, don’t  you understand? This is a unique opportunity to enjoy
the popular chocolate-covered honeycomb bar at a dramatic saving!”
   “I  don’t need eight Crunchie bars, Raj,” said Chloe. “I need some advice.”
   “I  don’t  think I  am really responsible enough to give out advice,” replied
Raj without a hint of irony. “But I’ll  try.”
   Chloe loved talking to Raj. He wasn’t a parent or a teacher, and whatever
you said to  him, he  would never judge  you. However, Chloe  still  gulped
slightly, because she was about to attempt another little lie.  “Well,  there’s
this girl I know at school . . .” she began.
   “Yes? A girl  at school. Not you?”
   “No,  somebody else.”
   “Right,”  said Raj.
   Chloe gulped again and looked down, unable to meet his gaze. “Well, this
friend of mine, she’s started to talk to this tramp, and she really likes talking
to him, but  her mother would  blow a fuse if  she knew, so I—I  mean, my
friend—doesn’t know what to do.”
   Raj  looked  at  Chloe expectantly. “Yes?”  he  said. “And   what  is  your
question exactly?”
   “Well,  Raj,” said Chloe. “Do you think it’s wrong to talk to tramps?”
   “Well,  it’s not good to talk to strangers,” said Raj. “And you should never
let anyone give you a lift in a car!”
   “Right,”  said Chloe, disappointed.
   “But   a tramp  is just  somebody without  a home,”  continued Raj. “Too
many people walk on by and pretend they’re not there.”
   “Yes!”  said Chloe. “That’s what I think too.”
   Raj smiled. “Any  of us could become homeless one day. I can see nothing
wrong with talking to a tramp, just like you would anyone else.”
   “Thanks, Raj, I will  . . . I mean, I’ll tell  her. This girl at school, I mean.”
   “What’s  this girl’s name?”
   “Umm  .  . .  Stephen! I  mean Susan . . . no,  Sarah. Her name is Sarah,
definitely Sarah.”
   “It’s  you, isn’t it?”  said Raj smiling.
   “Yes,”  admitted Chloe after a millisecond.

38
   “You  are a very sweet girl, Chloe. It’s lovely that you would take the time
to talk to a tramp. There but for the grace of God go you and I.”
   “Thanks, Raj.” Chloe went a little red, embarrassed by his compliment.
   “Now  what can you buy your homeless friend for Christmas?” said Raj as
he scoured around his disorganized shop. “I   have a box  full  of  Teenage
Mutant Ninja Turtles stationery sets I can’t seem to shift. Yours for only 3.99
pounds. In fact, buy one set, get ten free.”
   “I’m   not sure a  tramp really has any  need for a Teenage Mutant Ninja
Turtles stationery set, thanks anyway, Raj.”
   “We all  have use of a Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles stationery set, Chloe.
You have your Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles pencil, your Teenage Mutant
Ninja Turtles eraser, your Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles ruler, your Teenage
Mutant Ninja Turtles pencil case, your Teenage Mutant—”
   “I  get the idea, thanks, Raj, but I’m sorry, I’m  not going to buy one. I’ve
got to  go,”   said Chloe,  edging  out  of  the  shop as  she unwrapped her
Crunchie.
   “I  haven’t finished, Chloe. Please, I haven’t sold one! You also have your
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles pencil sharpener, your Teenage Mutant Ninja
Turtles notepad, your Teenage Mutant . . . oh, she’s gone.”
 
“And what’s this, young lady?” demanded Mother. She was standing waiting
in Chloe’s room. Between her thumb and index finger  was one of Chloe’s
exercise books from school. Mother held it as if it were an exhibit in a court
case.
   “It’s  just  my math book, Mother,”  said Chloe, gulping as she edged into
the room.

39
   You might think that Chloe was worried because her math work wasn’t up
to scratch. But that  wasn’t quite it.  The problem  was, Chloe’s math book
didn’t  have any math in  it!  The  book was supposed to be  full  of  boring
numbers and equations,  but  instead it  was  positively  overflowing   with
colorful  words  and  pictures. Spending so  much  time  alone  had turned
Chloe’s imagination into a deep dark forest. It was a magical place to escape
to, and so much more thrilling   than real life.  Chloe had used the exercise
book to write a story about a girl  who is sent to a school (loosely based on
her own) where all  the teachers are secretly vampires. She thought it was
much more exciting than boring equations, but Mother clearly didn’t agree.
   “If   it is your mathematics book, why does it contain this repulsive horror
story?” said Mother. This  was one of those questions to which  you aren’t
supposed to give   an answer.  “No  wonder  you  did  so  poorly   on  your

40
mathematics exam. I imagine you have spent the time in class writing this . .
. this drivel. I am so disappointed in you, Chloe.”
   Chloe felt  her cheeks smarting with shame and hung her head. She didn’t
think her story was drivel. But she couldn’t imagine telling her mother that.
   “Don’t  you have anything to say for yourself?” shouted Mother.
   Chloe shook her head. For the second time in one day she wanted to just
disappear.
   “Well,  this is what I think of your story,” said Mother, as she started trying
to rip up the exercise book.
   “P-p-please . . . don’t . . .” stammered Chloe.
   “No,  no, no! I’m  not paying your  school fees for you to waste your time
on this rubbish! It’s going in the bin!”
   The book  was obviously harder to rip  than Mother had expected, and it
took a  few attempts to  make the first  tear. However,  soon the book was
nothing more than confetti. Chloe bowed her head, tears welling up in  her
eyes, as her mother dropped all the pieces in the bin.
   “Do  you want to end up like your father? Working in a car factory? If you
concentrate on your math and don’t get distracted by silly stories, you have a
chance of making a better life for yourself! Otherwise you’ll end up wasting
your life, like your father. Is that what you want?”
   “Well,  I—”
   “How  dare you interrupt me!” shouted Mother. Chloe hadn’t realized this
was another one of  those questions you’re not  actually meant to  answer.
“You’d better buck your ideas up, young lady!”
   Chloe wasn’t  quite sure what that meant, but it didn’t  seem like the best
time to ask. Mother  left the room,  dramatically slamming the door behind
her. Chloe slowly sat down on the edge of her bed. As she buried her face in
her hands, she thought of  Mr.  Stink,  sitting  on  his bench with   only  the
Duchess for company. She wasn’t homeless like him, but she felt homeless
in her heart.

41
                                                         5



                                       Abandon    Starbucks!



Monday morning.  The first  proper day  of the  Christmas holidays. A  day
Chloe had been dreading. She didn’t have any friends she could text or email
or SMS or Facebook or Twitter  or whatever, but there was one person she
wanted to see . . . .
   By  the time Chloe got to the bench, it was raining heavily, and she wished
she’d at least paused to pick up an umbrella.
   “The  Duchess and I weren’t expecting to see you again, Chloe,” said Mr.
Stink. His eyes twinkled at the surprise, despite the rain.
   “I  am sorry I ran off like that,” said Chloe,
   “Don’t  worry, you are forgiven,” he chuckled.
   Chloe  sat down next  to him.  She gave the Duchess a stroke, and then
noticed that the palm of her hand was black. She surreptitiously wiped it on
her trousers. Then she shivered, as a raindrop ran down the back of her neck.
   “Oh,  no, you’re cold!” said Mr. Stink. “Shall  we take shelter from the rain
in a coffee shop establishment?”
   “Err  . . .  yes, good idea,” said Chloe, not sure if taking someone quite so
stinky into an enclosed space really was a good idea. As they walked into the
town center, the rain felt icy, almost becoming hail.
   When they arrived at the coffee shop, Chloe peered through the steamed-
up glass window. “I   don’t  think  there’s anywhere to sit  down,”  she said.
Unfortunately, the coffee shop was full to bursting with Christmas shoppers,
trying to avoid the cruel British weather.
   “We  can but try,” said Mr.  Stink, picking up the Duchess and attempting
to conceal her under his tweed jacket.
   The tramp opened the door for Chloe and she squeezed herself inside. As
Mr. Stink entered, the pleasing aroma of freshly-brewed coffee keeled over
and died. His own special smell replaced it. There was silence for a moment.
Then panic.

42
   People  started running  toward  the  door,  clutching  serviettes to  their
mouths as makeshift gas masks.
   “Abandon Starbucks!” screamed a member of the staff, and his colleagues
immediately stopped making coffees or bagging muffins  and ran for  their
lives.
   “It  seems to be thinning out a little,” announced Mr. Stink.
   Soon they were the only  ones left in  the shop. Maybe smelling this bad
has its advantages, thought Chloe. If Mr. Stink’s super-smell could empty a
coffee shop, what else could it do? Maybe he could clear the local ice rink of
skaters so she could have it all to herself? Or they could go to Alton Towers
together and not have to wait in line for a single ride? Better still, she could
take him and his smell into school one day, and if he was particularly stinky,
the headmistress would have to send everyone home and she could have the
day off!
   “You  take a seat here, child,” said Mr. Stink. “Now, what would you like
to drink?”

43
   “Er  . . . a cappuccino, please,” replied Chloe, trying to sound grown-up.
   “I   think  I’ll   have one too.”  Mr.  Stink  shuffled behind the  counter and
started opening tins. “Righty-ho, two cappuccinos coming right up.”
   The  machines hissed and spat for a  few moments, and then  Mr. Stink
pottered back over  to the  table with  two  mugs  of a  dark, unidentifiable
liquid. On closer inspection, it appeared to be some kind of black slime, but
Chloe was too well brought up to complain and pretended to sip whatever it
was that he had concocted for her. She even managed an almost convincing,
“Mmm . . . lovely!”
   Mr.  Stink stirred his solid liquid with  a dainty little silver spoon he pulled
out from  his breast pocket. Chloe  stole a glance at  it  and noticed it  was
monogrammed, with three little  letters delicately  engraved on the handle.
She tried to get a better look, but he put it away before she could see what
the letters were. What could they mean? Or was this simply another item Mr.
Stink had purloined during his career as a gentleman thief?
   “So,  Miss Chloe,” said Mr.  Stink, breaking her train of thought. “It’s  the
Christmas holidays, isn’t it?” He took a sip from his coffee, holding his mug
elegantly between his fingers. “Why aren’t you at home decorating the tree
with your family or wrapping presents?”
   “Well,  I  don’t know  how to explain. . .  .” No  one in Chloe’s family  was
good at expressing their feelings. To her  mother, feelings were at best an
embarrassment, at worst a sign of weakness.
   “Just take your time, young lady.”
   Chloe took a deep breath and it all came flooding out. What started off as
a stream soon became a rushing river of  emotion. She told  him  how her
parents argued most of the time and how once she was sitting on the stairs
when she heard her Mother shout, I’m only staying with you for the sake of
the girls!”
   How  her little sister made her life a misery. How nothing she did was ever
good enough. How if  she brought home some little bowl  she had made in
pottery class, her mother would put it at the back of a cupboard, never to be
seen again. However, if her little sister brought any piece of artwork home,
however awful, it was put in  pride of place behind bulletproof glass as if it
was the Mona Lisa.
   Chloe told  Mr.  Stink how  her mother was always trying  to force her to
lose weight. Up until  recently, Mother had described her as having “puppy

44
fat.”  But  once she turned twelve,  Mother rather  cruelly  started calling it
“flab”  or even worse “blubber,” as if she was some species of whale.





















   Perhaps Mother was trying  to shame her into losing  weight. In  truth, it
only made Chloe more miserable, and being miserable only  made her eat
more. Filling herself up with chocolate, chips, and cake felt like being given
a much-needed hug.
   She told Mr. Stink  how she wished her dad would stand up to her mother
sometimes. How she didn’t find it easy to make friends, as she was so shy.
How she only  really  liked  making up  stories, but it  made her mother  so
angry. And how Rosamund ensured that every day at school was an absolute
misery.
   It  was a long, long  list, but Mr.  Stink listened intently  to everything she
said as jolly Christmas songs played incongruously in the background. For
someone who spent every day with only a little black dog for  company, he
was surprisingly full of wisdom. In  fact, he seemed to relish the opportunity
to listen and talk and help. People didn’t really stop to talk to Mr. Stink—and
he seemed pleased to be having a proper conversation for once.
   He told  Chloe, “Tell  your Mother how you feel,  I am sure she loves you
and would hate for you to  be unhappy.” And, “.  . . try  and find something

45
fun you can do with your sister.” And,  “. . .  why not talk to your  dad about
how you feel?”
   Finally,  Chloe told Mr.  Stink about how  Mother had ripped her vampire
story to shreds. She had to try very hard not to cry.
   “That’s terrible, child,”  said Mr. Stink. “You must have been devastated.”
   “I  hate her,” said Chloe. “I hate my mother.”
   “You  shouldn’t say that,” said Mr. Stink.
   “But  I do.”
   “You  are very angry with  her, of  course, but she loves you, even if she
finds it hard to show it.”
   “Maybe.”   Chloe shrugged, unconvinced. But  having  talked everything
through, she felt a little  calmer now. “Thank  you so much  for listening  to
me,” she said.
   “I  just  hate to see a young girl like  you looking  sad,” said Mr. Stink.  “I
may be old, but I can remember what it was like to be young. I  just hope I
helped a little.”
   “You  helped a lot.”
   Mr.  Stink smiled, before letting the last sludge of his volcanic gloop  slip
down his throat. “Delicious!   Now, we’d  better leave some money for  our
beverages.” He searched around in   his  pockets for  some  change. “Oh,
bother, I can’t read the board without my spectacles. I’ll leave sixpence. That
should be enough. And a tuppence tip. They will be pleased with that. They
can treat themselves to one  of  those newfangled videocassettes. Right, I
think you’d better be heading home now, young lady.”
   The rain had stopped when they left the coffee shop. They sauntered down
the road as cars hummed past.
   “Let’s  swap places,” said Mr. Stink.
   “Why?”
   “Because a lady should always walk on the inside of the pavement and a
gentleman on the outside.”
   “Really?”  said Chloe. “Why?”
   “Well,”   replied Mr. Stink,  “the outside is more dangerous because that’s
where the cars are. But I believe it was originally because in the olden days
people used to throw the contents of their chamber pots out of their windows
and into  the  gutter. The  person on  the  outside was  more likely   to  get
splattered!”
   “What’s  a chamber pot?” said Chloe.

46
   “Well,  I don’t wish to be crude, but it’s a kind of portable toilet.”
   “Ugh!  That’s gross. Did people do that when you were a boy?”
   Mr.  Stink  chuckled. “No,  that was a little  before my  time, child.  In the
sixteenth century, in  fact! Now,  Miss  Chloe, etiquette demands we swap
places.”
   His  old-world  gallantry was so charming it  made Chloe smile, and they
changed places. They strolled side by side,  passing high-street shop after
high-street shop, all trying to herald the approach of Christmas louder than
the next. After a few  moments Chloe saw Rosamund walking toward them
with a small flotilla of shopping bags.

47
   “Can we cross the road, please? Quickly,” whispered Chloe anxiously.
   “Why,  child? Whatever is the matter?”
   “It’s  that girl from school I just told you about, Rosamund.”
   “The one who stuck that sign to your back?”
   “Yes, that’s her.”
   “You  need to stand up to her,” pronounced Mr. Stink. “Let her be the one
to cross the road!”
   “No  . . . please don’t say anything,” pleaded Chloe.

48
   “Who  is this? Your new boyfriend?”  laughed Rosamund. It wasn’t a real
laugh, like  people  do when  they  find  something funny.  That’s  a lovely
sound. This was a cruel laugh. An ugly sound.
   Chloe didn’t say anything, just looked down.
   “My   daddy just gave me five hundred pounds to buy myself  whatever I
wanted for Christmas,” said Rosamund. “I blew the lot  at Topshop. Shame
you’re too fat to get into any of their clothes.”
   Chloe merely sighed. She was used to being hounded by Rosamund.
   “Why  are you letting her talk to you like that, Chloe?” said Mr. Stink.
   “What’s   it   to  you,  Grandad?”  said  Rosamund mockingly.  “Hanging
around with smelly old  tramps now, are you, Chloe? You are tragic!  How
long did it take you to find that sign on your back then?”
   “She didn’t  find it,”  said Mr. Stink, slowly  and deliberately. “I did. And I
didn’t find it amusing.”
   “Didn’t  you?” said Rosamund. “All the other girls found it really funny!”
   “Well,  then they are as vile as you,” said Mr. Stink.
   “What?”  said Rosamund. She wasn’t used to being talked to like that.
   “I  said ‘then they are as vile as you,’” he repeated, even louder this time.
“You  are a  nasty  little   bully.”   Chloe  looked  on  anxiously.  She  hated
confrontation.
   To make matters worse, Rosamund took a pace forward and stood eye to
eye with Mr. Stink. “Say that to my face, you old stinker!”
   For a moment Mr. Stink fell  silent. Then he opened his mouth and let out
the deepest darkest dirtiest burp.
 
   “BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB                             BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB
BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB                                       BBBBBBUUUUUUUU
UUUUUUUUUUUUUU                                          UUUUUUUUUUUUUU
UUUUUUUUURRRRRR                                      RRRRRRRRRRRRRRRR
RRRRRRRRRRRRRRRR                                   RRRRRRRRRRRRRRRR
RRRRRRRPPPPPPPPPP PPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPP PPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPP
PPPPPPPPPPPPP!!!!!!!!! !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!         !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!”
   Rosamund’s face turned green. It was as if a putrid tornado had engulfed
her. It was the smell of coffee and sausages and rotten vegetables recovered
from bins all  rolled into  one. Rosamund turned and ran, hurtling down the
high street in such a panic that she dropped her TopShop bags on the way.

49
   “That  was so funny!” laughed Chloe.
   “I  didn’t  mean to belch. Most impolite. It was just that coffee repeating on
me. Dear me! Now next time I  want to see you stand up for yourself, Miss
Chloe. A bully can only make you feel bad about yourself if you let them.”
   “OK  . . . I’ll  try,” said Chloe. “So . . . see you tomorrow?”
   “If  you really want to,” he replied.
   “I  would love to.”
   “And  I  would love  to too!”  he said, his eyes twinkling  and twinkling  as
the last golden glow of the sunlight splintered through the sky.
   At  that  moment a 4x4 thundered past. Its  giant tires sloshed through a
huge puddle by the bus stop, sending up a wave that soaked Mr. Stink from
dirty head to dirty foot.
   Water dripping from  his glasses, he gave Chloe a little bow. “And  that,”
he said, “is why a gentleman always walks on the outside.”
   “At  least it wasn’t a chamber pot!” chuckled Chloe.

50
                                                         6



                                              Soap Dodgers



The next morning Chloe pulled open her curtains. Why was there a giant O
and a giant V stuck to her window? She went outside in her dressing gown
to investigate.
   VOTE  CRUMB!   was spelled out in giant letters across the windows of
the house. Elizabeth the cat pattered out with a rosette emblazoned with the
words Crumb for Parliament attached to her jewel-encrusted collar.
   Then  Annabelle  came skipping  out of   the house with  an  air  of  self-
congratulatory joy that was instantly annoying.
   “Where are you going?” asked Chloe.
   “As    her   favorite    daughter,  Mother    has  entrusted   me   with   the
responsibility  of  putting  these leaflets through  every  door in  the  street.
She’s running for Member of Parliament, remember?”
   “Let  me  see that,” said Chloe, reaching out to  grab one of  the leaflets.
The two warring sisters had long since dispensed with “please” and “thank
you.”

51
   Annabelle snatched it back. “I am not wasting one on you!” she snarled.
   “Let   me see!” Chloe  pulled the  leaflet out  of Annabelle’s  hand. There
were some advantages to being the older sister; sometimes you could use
brute force. Annabelle huffed off with the rest of the leaflets. Chloe walked
back into  the  house studying  it,  her  slippers moistening  with   the dew.
Mother was always going on and on about how she should run the country,
but Chloe found the whole subject so dreary and dull  that her imagination
would float away into la-la land whenever the subject came up.
   On the front of  the leaflet was a photograph of Mother looking incredibly
serious, with her finest pearls around her neck, her hair so waxy with spray
that it would become a fireball if you put a lit  match to it. Inside was a long
list of her policies.
1.) A  curfew  to be  introduced to ensure all  children under  thirty  are not
allowed out after 8 p.m. and are preferably in bed with lights out by 9 p.m.
 

52
2.) The police to be given new powers to arrest people for talking too loudly
in public.
 
3.) Litterbugs to be deported.
 
4.) The  wearing of  leggings to  be outlawed  in  public  areas, as they are
“extremely common.”
 
5.) The national anthem to be played in the town square every hour on the
hour. Everyone must be standing upright for this. Being in  a wheelchair is
no excuse for not paying your respects to Her Majesty.
 
.) All dogs to be kept on leashes at all times. Even indoors.
 
7.) Verruca socks to  be worn  by everyone attending the  local swimming
pool whether they have a verruca or not. This should cut down the chance
of verruca infection to less than zero.
 
8.) The  Christmas  pantomime to  be  discontinued due  to the  consistent
lewdness of the humor (jokes about bottoms, for example. There is nothing
funny about a bottom. We all have a bottom and we all know full well what
comes out of  a  bottom and  what sound  a bottom  can make of  its  own
accord).
 
9.) Churchgoing on Sunday morning to be compulsory. And  when you do
go, you  have to  sing the  hymns properly,  not  just open  and close your
mouth when the organ plays.
 
10.) Mobile telephonic devices to have only classical music ringtones from
now on, like Mozart and Beethoven and one of the other ones, not the latest
pop songs from the hit parade.
 
11.) Unemployed  people not to  be  allowed to  claim  benefits any  more.
Welfare scum only have themselves to blame and are just plain idle. Why
should we pay for them to sit at home all day watching or appearing on The
Jeremy Kyle Show?

53
 
12.) Giant  bronze statues of royals  Prince Edward  and his fragrant  wife
Sophie, Countess of Wessex, to be erected in the local park.
 
13.) Tattoos on anyone but  visiting  sailors  to be banned. Tattoos can be
dropped off anonymously at police stations without prosecution.
 
14.) Fast-food  burger  restaurants to introduce  plates, cutlery,  and  table
service. And  stop serving  burgers. And  French fries.  And  nuggets. And
those apple pies that are always too hot in the middle.
 
15.) The local library to stock only  the works of Beatrix Potter. Apart from
The Tale of Mr. Jeremy Fisher, as the sequence when the frog, Mr. Fisher, is
swallowed by a trout is far too violent even for adults.
 
1.) Football games in the local  park  are a nuisance. From now  on only
imaginary balls to be used.
 
17.) Only nice films  to be offered for  rental in Blockbuster. That is  to say,
films about posh people from the olden days who are too shy even to hold
hands.
 
18.) To combat the growing problem of “hoodies,”  all hooded tops to have
the hoods cut off.
 
19.) Video games rot the brain.  Any  video games (or computer games or
console games or whatever the stupid things are called) to be played only
between 4:00 p.m. and 4:01 p.m. daily.
 
20.) Finally, all homeless people, or “soap dodgers,” are to be banned from
our streets They are a menace to society. And, more importantly, they smell.
Chloe slumped down on the sofa when she read these last sentences. There
was a loud squeak as she did  so. Mother had insisted  on keeping on the
plastic covers the  sofa and armchair  had arrived in,  so  as to keep  them
immaculate. They were indeed still immaculate, but it meant your bum got
really hot and sweaty.

54
   What  about my new  friend Mr.  Stink? Chloe  thought. What’s going  to
haSSen to him? And what  about the  Duchess? If he  is banned from  the
streets, where on earth is he going to go?
   And  then, a  moment later, Wow, my bum is  getting incredibly  hot  and
sweaty.
   She chaffed her way sadly back up the stairs to her room. Sitting on her
bed, she stared out of  the  window.  Because she was shy and awkward,
Chloe didn’t  make friends  easily. Now  her  newest friend Mr.  Stink  was
going to have to leave the town. Maybe forever. She stared out through the
glass at the deep blue endless air. Then, just before her eyes lost focus in the
infinite sky  of nothing, she looked down. The answer was at the end of the
garden staring back at her.
   The shed.

55
                                                         7



                                     A  Bucket   in the  Corner



This operation had to  be top secret. Chloe waited until  darkness fell, and
then led Mr. Stink and the Duchess silently down her street, before slipping
through the side gate to her garden.
   “It’s   just a shed . . .”  said Chloe apologetically as they entered his new
abode. “I’m sorry there’s no en suite bathroom, but there is a bucket in the
corner there just behind the lawn mower. You can use that if you need to go
in the night. . . .”
   “Well,  this is unimaginably kind, young Miss Chloe, thank you,” said Mr.
Stink, smiling broadly. Even the Duchess seemed to bark “thank you,” or at
least “cheers.” “Now,”  continued Mr. Stink, “are you sure your mother and
father don’t mind me being here? I would hate to be an unwelcome guest.”
   Chloe  gulped, nervous about the lie  that was about to come out  of her
mouth. “No .  . . no . . . they  don’t mind at all.  They’re just both very  busy
people and they apologize that they  weren’t able to  be here right  now to
meet you in person.”
   Chloe had carefully picked the right time to settle Mr. Stink in. She knew
Mother  was  out  campaigning  for   election,  and  Dad   was  picking  up
Annabelle from her sumo-wrestling class.
   “Well,  I  would  love to  meet them both,” said Mr.  Stink, “and  see what
people turned out  such a wonderfully   generous and thoughtful daughter.
This will be so much warmer than my bench.”
   Chloe  smiled  shyly  at the  compliment. “Sorry   there are all  these old
cardboard boxes in here,” she said.  She started to move them  out of  the
way, to give him room to lie down.  Mr. Stink gave her a hand, lifting some
of the boxes on top of each other. When she got to the bottom box, Chloe
paused. Poking out of the top was a charred electric guitar. She examined it
for a moment, puzzled, then rummaged through the box and found a pile of
old CDs. They were all the same, stacks and stacks of an album titled Hell
For Leather, by The Serpents of Doom.

56
“Have you ever heard of this band?” she asked.
“I don’t really  know any music past 1958, I’m afraid.”

57
   Chloe  studied the picture on the cover for  a moment. Super-imposed in
front of a drawing  of a giant snake stood four long-haired, leather-jacketed
types. Chloe’s eyes fixed on the guitar player, who looked an awful lot like
her dad, only with a mess of curly black hair.
   “I  don’t believe it!”  said Chloe. “That’s my dad.”
   She hadn’t had any idea her dad had ever had a perm, let alone that he’d
been in a rock band! She didn’t know which  was more shocking—the idea
of him not being bald, or the idea of him playing electric guitar.
   “Really?”  said Mr. Stink.
   “I   think  so,”   said Chloe.  “It   looks  like  him  anyway.”  She  was still
studying  the  album   cover  with   a  curious   combination  of   pride  and
embarrassment.
   “Well,  we all have secrets, Miss Chloe. Now what should I do if I require
a pot of tea or  a round of sausage sandwiches on white bread please with
brown sauce on the side? Is there a bell I should ring?”
   Chloe looked at him, a little  surprised. She hadn’t realized she was going
to have to feed him as well as shelter him.
   “No,   there’s no bell,”   she said. “Erm,  you  see that window  up  there?
That’s my bedroom.”
   “Ah  yes?”
   “Well,  if  you need something, why don’t you  flash this old bicycle  light
up at my window? Then I can come down and . . . erm . . . take your order.”
   “Perfection!”  exclaimed Mr. Stink.
   Being  in the confined space of the shed with Mr. Stink was beginning to
make it difficult  for Chloe to breathe. The smell was especially bad today. It
was stinky even by Mr. Stink’s stinky standards. “Would you like to have a
bath before  my  family   get  back?”  Chloe  said hopefully.  The  Duchess
looked up at her master with a look of desperate hope in her blinking eyes.
It was the stink that made her blink.
   “Let  me think. . . .”
   Chloe smiled at him expectantly.
   “Actually,  I’ll  leave it for  this month, thank you.”
   “Oh,”   said Chloe, disappointed. “Is there is anything I can get you right
now?”
   “Is  there an afternoon tea menu perhaps?” asked Mr. Stink. “A choice of
scones, cakes, and French pastries?”

58
   “Erm   . .  .  no,”  said Chloe.  “But  I  could  bring  you  a cup  of tea  and
biscuits. And  we  should have  some cat food  that  I  could  bring  for  the
Duchess.”
   “I  am pretty sure the Duchess is a dog, not a cat,” pronounced Mr. Stink.
   “I  know, but we only have a cat, so we’ve only got cat food.”
   “Well,   maybe you  could  pop  into  Raj’s  shop tomorrow  and  buy  the
Duchess some tins of dog food. Raj knows the brand she likes.” Mr. Stink
rummaged in  his pockets. “Here’s  a  ten-pence piece. You  can keep the
change.”
   Chloe  looked in  her  hand. Mr.  Stink had  actually placed an  old brass
button there.
   “Thank   you so  much,  young lady,”  he  continued. “And   please don’t
forget to  knock  when you  return in  case I  am  getting changed into  my
pajamas.”
   What have I  done? thought Chloe, as she made her way across the lawn
back to the house. Her head was buzzing with more imaginary life  stories
for  her  new  friend,  but  none of   them seemed quite  right.   Was he  an
astronaut who had fallen to  earth and, in the shock, lost  his memory? Or
perhaps he was a convict who had escaped from prison after serving thirty
years for a crime  he didn’t  commit? Or, even better, a modern-day pirate
who had been forced by his comrades to walk the plank into shark-infested
waters, but against all the odds had swum to safety?
   One  thing she knew  for sure was  that he did  really whiff.   Indeed, she
could still smell him as she reached the back door. The plants and flowers in
the garden seemed to have wilted with the smell. They were all now leaning
away from the shed as if  they were trying  to avert their  stamens. At least
he’s safe, thought Chloe. And warm, and dry, if only for tonight.
   When she got up to her room and looked out of the window, the light was
flashing already. “All-butter  highland shortbread biscuits if you have them,
please!” called up Mr. Stink. “Thank you so much!”

59
                                                         8



                                      Maybe   It’s   the  Drains



“What’s that smell?”  demanded Mother as she entered the kitchen. She had
been out all  day campaigning and looked stiffly   immaculate as ever in  a
royal blue twinset—except for her nose, which was twitching uncontrollably
in disgust.
   “What  smell?” said Chloe, with a short delay as she gulped.
   “You  must be able to smell it too, Chloe. That smell of . . . Well, I’m  not
going to say what it reminds me of, that would be impolite and unbecoming
of a woman of my class and distinction, but it’s a bad smell.”  She breathed
in  and the  smell  seemed to  take  her  by  surprise all   over  again. “My
goodness, it’s a very bad smell.”
   Like  a malevolent cloud of darkest brown, the smell had seeped through
the timber of the shed, no doubt peeling off the creosote as it traveled. Then
it had crept its way across the lawn, before opening the cat flap and starting
its aggressive occupation of the kitchen. Have you  ever wondered what a
bad smell looks like? It looks like this. . . .

62
   Oh, that’s a nasty one. If you put your nose right up against the page, you
can almost smell it.
   “Maybe  it’s the drains?” offered Chloe.
   “Yes, it must be the drains leaking again. Even more reason why I need to
be elected to Parliament. Now, I have a journalist from the Times coming to
interview  me during  breakfast tomorrow.  So you  must  be on  your  best
behavior. I want him to see what a nice normal family we are.”
   Normal?! thought Chloe.
   “Voters like to see that one has a happy home life. I just pray that this foul
stench will be gone by then.”
   “Yes . . .”  said Chloe. “I’m sure it will.  Mother, was Dad—I mean, Father
—ever in a rock band?”
   Mother  stared at her. “What on earth are you talking about, young lady?
Where would you get such a ridiculous idea?”
   Chloe  swallowed. “It’s   just I  saw  this picture  of  this band  called The
Serpents of Doom and one of them looked a lot like—”
   Mother  went a little pale. “Preposterous!” she said. “I don’t know  what’s
got into you!”  She fiddled with  her bouffant, almost as if she was nervous.
“Your father, in  a rock  band of all  things!  First that exercise book full  of
outrageous stories, and now this!”
   “But—”
   “No   buts, young  lady.  Honestly, I   don’t  know  what  to  do  with  you
anymore.”
   Mother  looked really furious now. Chloe couldn’t  understand what she’d
done wrong. “Well, pardon me for asking,” she sulked.
   “That’s it!”   shouted Mother. “Go to bed, right now!”
   “It’s  twenty past six!” Chloe protested.
   “I  don’t care! Bed!”
   Chloe found it hard to get to sleep. Not only because she had been sent to
bed so ridiculously  early, but also and more  importantly because she had
moved a tramp into the shed. She noticed the light of the flashlight bouncing
off her  bedroom window and looked  at her alarm clock.  It  was 2:11 a.m.
What on earth could he want at this time of night?
   Mr.  Stink had made the shed quite homely. He had fashioned a bed out of
some piles of old newspapers. An old piece of tarpaulin was his duvet, with
a grow  bag for  a pillow.  It  looked  almost comfy. An  old  hose had been
arranged in the shape of a dog basket for the Duchess. A plant pot full  of

63
water sat  beside for   a  bowl.  In  chalk  he’d  expertly   drawn some  old-
fashioned portraits on the dark wooden creosoted walls, like  the ones you
see in museums or old country houses, depicting people from  history. On
one side he’d even drawn a window, complete with curtains and a sea view.


































   “You  seem to be settling in then,” said Chloe.
   “Oh,  yes, I  can’t thank you  enough, child. I  love it.  I  feel like  I finally
have a home again.”
   “I’m  so pleased.”
   “Now,”   said Mr. Stink.  “Miss  Chloe, I  called you  down here because I
can’t sleep. I would like you to read me a story.”

64
   “A  story? What kind of story?”
   “You  choose, my dear. But I implore you, nothing too girly please . . . .”
 
Chloe tiptoed up the stairs back to her room. Sometimes she liked to move
around the house without making a sound, and so could remember where all
the creaks were on the stairs. If she put her foot right in  the middle of this
step, or the left side of this one, she knew she wouldn’t be heard. If she woke
Annabelle up, she knew her little  sister would relish the  chance of getting
her into deep deep trouble. And this  wouldn’t  be normal everyday trouble
like  not eating your  cabbage or “forgetting”   to do  your  homework. This
would be “inviting  a tramp to live  in the shed” trouble. It  would be off  the
scale. As this simple graph shows:

65
   Alternatively,  if you look  at this simple Venn diagram, you can see that if
figure A is “trouble”  and figure B is “serious trouble,” then this shaded area
here, representing inviting a  tramp to live  in  the shed, is  a subsection of
figure B.
   I  hope that makes things clear.
   Chloe  looked on  her  bookshelf, behind the  little  ornamental owls  she
collected even if she wasn’t sure why. (Did she even like owls? Some distant
aunt buys you  a porcelain owl  one day, some other aunt  assumes you’re
collecting them, and by the end of  your childhood you’ve  got hundreds of
the stupid things. Owls, not aunts.)
   Chloe studied the spines of her books. They were quite girly. Lots of pink-
colored books that matched her stupid pink-colored room that she hated. She
hadn’t chosen the color of her walls. Hadn’t even been asked. Why couldn’t
her room  be painted  black? Now  that  would  be cool.  Her  mother  only
bought her  books about ponies,  princesses, ballet schools, and brainless
bleach-blonde teenagers in America whose only worry was what to wear to
the prom. Chloe wasn’t the least bit interested in any of them, and she was
pretty sure Mr. Stink wouldn’t  be either. The one story she had written had
been torn to shreds by her mother. This wasn’t going to be easy.
   Chloe tiptoed back down  the stairs and shut the kitchen door behind her
incredibly slowly  so it wouldn’t  make a noise, and then knocked gently on
the shed door.

66
   “Who  is it?” came a suspicious voice.
   “It’s  me, Chloe, of course.”
   “I  was fast asleep! What do you want?”
   “You  asked me to read you a story.”
   “Oh  well, now you’ve woken me up, you better come in . . . .”
   Chloe took a last deep breath of the fresh night air and entered his den.
   “Goody!”  said Mr. Stink. “I  used to love a bedtime story.”
   “Well,  actually I’m  sorry, but I couldn’t really find  anything,” said Chloe.
“All  my books are horribly girly. Most of them are pink, in fact.”
   “Oh  dear,” said Mr. Stink. He looked disappointed for a moment, then he
smiled at a thought. “But what about one of your stories?”
   “My  stories?”
   “Yes. You told me you like to make them up.”
   “But  I  couldn’t  just . .  . I  mean . . .  what if  you don’t  like  it?”  Chloe’s
stomach fizzed with a peculiar mix of excitement and fear. No one had ever
asked to hear one of her stories before.
   “I’m   sure I’ll  love  it,”  said Mr. Stink.  “And  anyhow, you’ll  never know
until you try.”
   “That’s  true,” said Chloe, nodding. She hesitated for a moment, then took
a deep breath. “Do you like vampires?” she asked.
   “Well,  I don’t know any socially.”
   “No,  I  mean, would you like  to hear a story  about vampires? These are
vampires who are teachers in a school. Who suck the blood out of their poor
unsuspecting pupils . . .”
   “Is  this the story your mother tore up?”
   “Erm  . . . yes,” replied Chloe sadly. “But  I think  I can remember most of
it.”
   “Well,  I would love to hear it!”
   “Really?”
   “Of  course!”
   “All   right,” said Chloe. “Please can you pass me the flashlight?”
   Mr.  Stink passed it to her and she turned it on and put it under her face to
look scary.
   “Once upon a time . . .” she began, before losing her nerve.
   “Yes?”
   “Once upon a time . . . no, I can’t do it! Sorry.”

67
   Chloe hated reading out loud in class. She was so shy she would even try
and hide under her desk to avoid it.  This was even more terrifying.  These
were her words. It was much more private, more personal, and she suddenly
felt like she wasn’t ready to share it with anyone.
   “Please, Miss Chloe,” said Mr. Stink encouragingly. “I really want to hear
your story. It sounds top banana! Now you were saying, once upon a time . .
.”
   She took a deep breath. “Once upon a time, there was a little girl  called
Lily  who hated going to school. It wasn’t because the lessons were hard, it
was because all her teachers were vampires . . . .”
   “Wonderful  opening!”
   Chloe  smiled, and  continued. Soon she was really  getting  into  it,  and
putting on voices  for her  heroine Lily,  Lily’s  best friend  Justin, who  was
bitten by the music teacher in a piano lesson and became a bloodsucker too,
and Mrs. Murk, the evil headmistress, who was in fact empress of vampires.
   The tale unraveled all night. Chloe finished the story just before dawn as
Lily finally  drove her hockey stick through the headmistress’s heart.

68
   “.   .  .  Mrs.   Murk’s  blood  spurted  out  of  her  like   newly  struck  oil,
redecorating the sports hall a dark shade of crimson. The end.”
   Chloe turned off  the flashlight, her voice hoarse and her eyes barely still
open.
   “What  an absolutely gripping yarn,” announced Mr. Stink. “I can’t wait to
find out what happens in book two.”
   “Book  two?”
   “Yes,”   said Mr.   Stink.  “Surely  after  killing   the headmistress, Lily   is
moved to another school. And  all the teachers there could be flesh-eating
zombies!”
   That, thought Chloe, is a very good idea.

69
                                                         9



                                        A  Little   Bit   of Drool



Chloe looked at her alarm-clock  radio when she finally  dropped into bed.
:44 a.m. She had never been to bed that late, ever. Adults didn’t even go to
bed that late. Maybe very naughty rock-star ones, but not many. She closed
her eyes for a second.
   “Chloe?  Chloeee? Wake up! Chloeeeee?” shouted Mother from outside
the door. She knocked on the door three times. Then paused and knocked
one more time, which  was especially annoying, as Chloe hadn’t expected
her to. She looked at the alarm-clock-radio thing again. :45 a.m. She had
either been asleep for a whole day or a whole minute. As she couldn’t open
her eyes, Chloe guessed it must have been a minute.
   “Whaaaat  . . .  ?” she said, and was shocked by how deep and gravelly
she sounded. Telling stories all night had turned Chloe’s voice into that of a
sixty-year-old ex-coal miner who smoked a hundred cigarettes a day.
   “Don’t   ‘what’  me, young lady! It’s time  you stopped lazing in bed. Your
sister has already completed a triathlon this morning.  Now get up.  I need
your help today on the campaign trail!”
   Chloe was so tired she felt  like she had grown into  her bed. In fact, she
wasn’t sure where her body  ended and the bed began. She slid out  from
under her duvet and crawled to the bathroom. Blinking in the mirror, Chloe
thought for a moment that she was looking at her own nana. Then, sighing,
she made her way downstairs and to the kitchen table.
   “We   are going   campaigning today,”  said  Mother   as she  sipped her
grapefruit juice  and swallowed  the traffic   jam of  vitamin  pills  and  food
supplements she had lined up neatly on the table.
   “It   sounds booorrrring,”  said Chloe.  She made the word boring  sound
even more boring  by  making  it  longer  than it   really  needed to be.  On
Sunday mornings, Mother would allow  the television to be switched on so
she could watch programs about politics. Chloe liked  watching television.
In  a  house where  viewing  was  rationed,  even an  advertisement for   a

70
Stannah stair lift was a treat. However, these political  discussion shows—
which for  no apparent reason were broadcast on Sunday mornings—were
bum-numbingly boring. They made Chloe think that she wanted to be a kid
forever if this was what the grown-up world was like.
   Chloe always suspected that her mother had another motive for watching:
She had a crush on the Prime Minister. Chloe couldn’t see it herself, but lots
of women her mother’s age seemed to find him dishy. To Dad’s amusement,
Mother would  always  stop whatever  she was doing  to watch  the Prime
Minister if he came on the news. Once, Chloe had even spotted a little bit of
drool ooze out of her mother’s mouth when there was some footage of the
Prime Minister in denim shorts playing Frisbee on a beach.
   Of   course, even the  sight  of  her mother  drooling  didn’t   make those
politics shows any less boring. But Chloe would have watched a hundred of
them if  it  meant not  having to  spend the day campaigning with  Mother.
That was how boring it was going to be.
   “Well,  you are coming whether you like it or not,” said Mother. “And  put
on that frilly   yellow  dress that I  bought you  for  your birthday. You  look
almost pretty in that.”
   Chloe did  not look anywhere near pretty in it.  She looked like a Quality
Street candy.  If   that  wasn’t  bad  enough, she  looked  like   one  of  the
unpopular flavors that get left  in the tin  until  way into the New  Year. The
only color she really liked  wearing was black. She thought black was cool,
and even better it made her look less chubby. Chloe desperately wanted to
be a goth, but she didn’t know where to start. You couldn’t buy goth clothes
at Marks &  Spencer. And anyway, you also needed the white makeup and
the black hair dye, and most importantly the skill  of  looking down at your
shoes at all times.
   How  would  she go  about becoming a  goth? Was there an  application
form  to  fill   out?  A  committee  of  super-goths who  would  vet  you  for
gothness, or was it gothnicity? Chloe had once seen a real-life goth hanging
around by a garbage bin in the high  street and become incredibly excited.
She really wanted to  go over  and ask her how  to get  started in the goth
world, but she was too shy. Which  was ironic, since shyness is something
you need if you want to be a successful goth.
   In  the unlikely  event  of Elizabeth  the cat becoming a goth,  she would
look like this.

71
   Let’s get back to the story. . . .
   “It’s  cold  outside, Chloe,” said Mother, when Chloe came downstairs in
the horrible  Quality   Street dress. “You’ll   need  a coat.  How  about  that
tangerine-colored coat your grandmother made you last Christmas?”
   Chloe reached into the room under the stairs. This was where everyone in
the family   kept their  coats and  rubber boots.  She heard a  rustle in  the
darkness. Had Elizabeth the cat got shut in there by  mistake? Or had Mr.
Stink moved indoors? She switched on the light. Peeking out from  behind
the bottom of an old fur coat was a frightened face.
   “Dad?”
   “Shush!”
   “What  are you hiding in  here for?” Chloe whispered. “You are supposed
to be at work.”
   “No,  I’m  not. I lost my job at the factory,” said Dad sorrowfully.
   “What?”
   “A   whole  load of  us  got  made redundant two  weeks ago. No  one is
buying new cars right now. It’s the recession, I suppose.”
   “Yes, but why are you hiding?”
   “I’m   too frightened to tell your mother. She’ll divorce me if she finds out.
Please, I beg you, don’t tell her.”
   “I’m   not sure she’d div—”
   “Please, Chloe. I’ll  sort all this out soon. It’s not going to be easy, but I’ll
get another job if I can.”

72
   He  leaned forward so that the hem of  the fur  coat was draped over his
head, the thick fur looking like a mess of curly hair.
   “So  that’s what you look like with hair!”  Chloe whispered.
   “What?”
   It  was definitely  Dad on that  CD cover. With  the fur  over his  head, he
looked just like he did in the photo, with that astonishing perm!
   “If   you need a job, you could always go back to playing guitar with The
Serpents of Doom,” said Chloe.
   Dad looked startled. “Who told you I was in a band?”
   “I  saw your CD and I asked Mother, but she—”
   “Shh!”  said Dad. “Keep it down. Wait . . . where did you see this CD?”
   “Er  . . . I was . . . um . . . looking for my old hamster cage in the shed and
it was in a box with a load of old junk. There was a burnt guitar with it.”
   Dad opened his mouth to say something, but just at that moment, a door
slammed upstairs.
   “Come along, Chloe!”  boomed Mother.
   “Promise  you won’t  say anything  about me losing  my job,”  whispered
Dad.
   “I  promise.”
   Chloe  shut the door, leaving her dad on  all fours  in the darkness. Now
she had two fully   grown men hiding  around the house. What’s next? she
thought. Am I going to find Grandad in the dryer?!

73
                                                        10



                                           Slightly    Chewed



Being  on  the  political  campaign  trail   meant Chloe  knocking  on   what
seemed like everybody’s front door in the town and Mother asking people if
she could “rely on their vote.”  Those who said they were going to vote for
Mother were instantly rewarded with a big smile and an even bigger sticker
to put  in  their  window  proclaiming   Vote Crumb!  Those who  said  they
weren’t voting  for  her were going  to miss  an awful  lot  of  daytime telly.
Mother was the kind of person who wouldn’t give up without a fight.
   They  passed the newsstand. “I   wonder  if  Raj  would  put  one  of  my
posters up in  his window,”   said Mother,  as she strode toward  the store.
Chloe clomped behind in her uncomfortable Sunday-best shoes, struggling
to keep up. Her  mind had been elsewhere all day. Now  she was carrying
around two hot-air-balloon-sized secrets in her head—Mr. Stink  hiding  in
the garden shed and her dad hiding in the cupboard under the stairs!
   “Ah,   my  two  favorite  customers!” exclaimed  Raj  as they entered the
shop. “The beautiful Mrs. Crumb and her charming daughter, Chloe!”
   “It’s  Croooome!” corrected Mother. “So, Raj, can I rely on your vote?”
   “Are  you  on The X-Factor?!”  said Raj excitedly.  “Yes, yes, of course I
will vote for  you. What are you singing on Saturday?”

74
   “No,  she’s not doing The X-Factor, Raj,” interjected Chloe, trying  not to
laugh at the thought.
   “Britain’s   Got Talent perhaps? You are maybe doing a ventriloquist act
with a naughty otter puppet named Jeremy? That would be most amusing!”
   “No,  she’s not doing Britain’s Got Talent either.” Chloe smirked.
   “How  do you solve any dream will I’d do anything or whatever it’s called
with Graham thingy?”
   “It’s    the  election,  Raj,”   interrupted  Mother.   “You   know,  the  local
election? I am running to be our local Member of Parliament.”
   “And  when is this election thing happening then?”
   “Next   Friday.  I   can’t  believe  you’ve   missed it!   It’s   all   over  these
newspapers, Raj!” Mother gestured at the piles and piles of newspapers in
the shop.
   “Oh,  I only read Nuts and Zoo,” said Raj. “I get all  the news I need from
them.”
   Mother  looked at him  disapprovingly, even though Chloe suspected she
wasn’t sure what either Nuts or  Zoo was. Chloe had once seen a copy of
Nuts that one of the older  boys had brought into school,  and knew it  was
rude.

75
   “What  do you think  are the important issues facing Britain  today, Raj?”
asked Mother, delighted with the cleverocity and intelligentness of her own
question.
   Raj  pondered for a moment, then shouted over at some boys who were
loitering by the pick ’n’  mix.  “Don’t  put the liquorice in  your mouth unless
you are  going  to  buy it,   young man!  Oh  dear, I  will   have  to  put that
liquorice on sale now!”
   Raj grabbed a pen and an index card. He wrote slightly chewed, and put it
on the liquorice box. “Sorry, what was the question again?”
   Note to self, thought Chloe. Never buy liTuorice from this shoS again.
   “Erm  . . . Now  where was I?” said Mother to Raj. “Ah  yes, what do you
think are the most—?”
   “—important  issues affecting Britain  today, Raj?” chimed in Raj. “Oh,  I
didn’t need to say ‘Raj.’ I am Raj. Well, I  think it would  be a great advance
if  Cadbury’s Crème  Eggs were available  not  just  at Easter but  all  year
round. They are one of my most popular items. I also strongly believe that
Quavers should diversify from cheese flavors to incorporate Asian Chicken
and Lamb Rogan Josh varieties. And most importantly, and I know this may
be controversial, but I  think  that coffee Revels should  be banned as they
spoil an  otherwise wonderfully  enjoyable confectionery.  There, I’ve  said
it!”
   “Right,”  said Mother.
   “And   if  you promise to  change the government policy on those issues,
you can rely on my vote, Mrs. Crumb!”
   Mother  had had a  mixed response to her campaigning so far,  and was
eager to secure this potentially crucial vote.
   “Yes, I will  certainly try, Raj!”  she said.
   “Thank  you so much,” said Raj. “Please help yourself to something from
the shop.”
   “No,  I couldn’t possibly, Raj!”
   “Please, Mrs.  Crumb. Have a nice box of  Terry’s All  Gold,  I have only
taken out  the  caramel squares. Mmm,  they  are delicious.  And  perhaps
Chloe would like this Finger of Fudge? It’s a bit squashed as my wife sat on
it, but it’s perfectly fine to eat.”
   “We couldn’t  possibly accept these kind gifts, Raj,” said Mother.
   “Well,   why  not  buy  them  then? One  box  of  Terry’s  All   Gold,  4.29
pounds, and a Finger of Fudge, twenty pence. That’s 4.49 pounds. Let’s call

76
it 4.50 pounds. Easier if I just take five pounds. Thank you so much.”
   Chloe  and Mother  exited the shop holding  their  confectionery. Mother
held her partially eaten box of chocolates with barely disguised disdain.
   “Now,  don’t forget, Raj. The election is next Friday!”  said Mother as she
opened the door.
   “Oh,  I  can’t  do next  Friday, Mrs.  Crumb. I  have to  stay here as I  am
expecting a large shipment of Smarties! But good luck to you!”
   “Ah  . . . Thank you,” replied Mother, looking crestfallen.
   “Mrs.   Crumb,”  said Raj.  “May  I  interest  you in  something incredibly
special that will   certainly become something of  a  family  heirloom  to be
passed down through the generations? Something your grandchildren will
one day take proudly to have valued on The AntiTues Road Show?”
   “Yes?” said Mother expectantly.
   “It’s  a Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles stationery set. . . .”

77
                                                        11



                                               Hair   Pulling



“What are you hiding in the shed?” said Annabelle with accusatory glee.
   It  was  midnight  and Chloe  was once again  tiptoeing  past her sister’s
room, this  time to  tell  Mr.  Stink about  Lily’s  newest adventure with  her
flesh-eating zombie teachers. Annabelle stood in her doorway in  her pink
pony pajamas. Her hair was in bunches. And in case of fire she slept in lip
gloss. She looked sickeningly cute.
   “Nothing,”   said Chloe, gulping.
   “I  know when you’re lying,  Chloe.”
   “How?”
   “You  gulp when you tell a lie.”
   “No  I don’t!”  said Chloe, trying very hard not to gulp. She gulped.
   “You  just did! What’s in  there anyway? Have you got a boyfriend hiding
in there or something?”
   “No,  I haven’t got a boyfriend, Annabelle.”
   “No,  of course not. You would need to lose some weight first.”
   “Just go back to bed,” said Chloe.
   “I   am not going to  bed until  you tell  me what you’ve  got in  the shed,”
announced Annabelle.
   “Keep  your voice down. You are going to wake everyone up!”
   “No  I  won’t  keep my voice down!  In  fact, it  is going to  get louder and
louder. La la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la!
   “Shush!”   hissed Chloe.
   “La  la la la la la la la la la  la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la  la
la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la
la la . . . !”
   Chloe  pulled  her  little  sister’s  hair sharply.  There was  a pause for  a
moment, as Annabelle  stared at  Chloe  in  shock.  Then she  opened her
mouth.

78
   “AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA                    AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA                        AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA                     AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
AHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH    HHHHH!”
   “Girls!   What on earth is all this noise?” said Mother as she sailed out of
her bedroom in her silk nightgown.
   Annabelle tried to speak, but hyperventilated through her tears.
   “Ugh  eh . . . ah . . . eh . . . ah . . . ughhhh . . . ah . . . eh . . . ugh . . .”

79
   “What  on earth have you done to her, Chloe?” demanded Mother.
   “She’s  exaggerating!  I  didn’t   pull  her  stupid  hair  that  hard!”  Chloe
protested.

80
   “You  pulled her hair? Annabelle is down to the last thousand for a model
casting tomorrow for George at Asda and she has to look perfect!”
   “Ugh  . . . ah . . .  eh . . . ah. She’s ah eh got ugh ugh ugh hiding ugh ugh
something eh ah ugh  in the  ugh ugh  ughu shed,” said  Annabelle as she
squeezed out some more tears.
   “Father,”  ordered Mother. “Come out here this instant!”
   “I’m   asleep!” came the muffled cry from their bedroom.
   “THIS  INSTANT!”
   Chloe looked down at the carpet so Mother couldn’t read her face. There
was a pause. The three ladies of the house listened as Dad got out of bed.
Next they  heard the sound of  someone passing water into  a toilet  bowl.
Mother’s face turned red with fury.
   “I  SAID  THIS INSTANT!”
   The sound abruptly stopped and Dad scurried out of the bedroom in  his
Arsenal FC pajamas.
   “Annabelle  said Chloe is hiding  something in the shed. Chocolate, most
likely. I need you to go down there and take a look.”
   “Me?”  protested Dad.
   “Yes you!”
   “Can’t  it wait until  the morning?”
   “No  it can’t.”
   “There’s nothing down there,” pleaded Chloe.
   “SILENCE!”   demanded Mother.
   “I’ll   just get a flashlight,” sighed Dad.
   He  made his way slowly downstairs, and Mother, Chloe, and Annabelle
rushed to the window of the master bedroom to watch him walk to the end
of the garden. The moon was full, and it bathed the garden in an eerie glow.
The flashlight  danced around  the  trees and shrubs as  he walked.  They
looked on breathlessly as Dad slowly opened the shed door. It creaked like
a muffled scream.
   Chloe could hear her heart beating. Was this the moment that would seal
her doom forever? Would she be made to eat only cabbage for every meal
from now on? Or get sent to bed before she’d even got up? Or be grounded
for  the rest  of  her life?  Chloe  gulped louder  than  she had ever  gulped
before. Mother heard this and shot her a look of dark, burning suspicion.
   The  silence was like  thunder. A  few  seconds passed, or was it  a  few
hours or even years? Then Dad emerged slowly from the shed. He looked

81
up at the window and shouted, “There’s nothing here!”

82
                                                        12



                                               Pongy   Pong



Did I  dream the whole thing? thought Chloe as she lay in bed. She was in
that place  between asleep  and awake.  That  place where  you  can  still
remember dreaming. It was 4:48 a.m., and now she was beginning to wonder
if Mr. Stink even really existed.
   At  dawn her curiosity got the better of her. Chloe edged down the stairs,
and tiptoed across the cold wet grass to the shed door. She lingered outside
for a moment, before opening it.
   “Ah,   there you are!”  said  Mr.  Stink. “I   am very  hungry this  morning.
Poached eggs please, if it’s  not too  much trouble.  Runny in  the  middle.
Sausages. Mushrooms. Grilled tomatoes. Sausages. Baked beans. Sausages.
Bread and  butter. Brown  sauce on  the  side. Don’t  forget  the  sausages.
English breakfast tea. And a glass of orange juice. Thank you so much.”
   Chloe obviously  hadn’t dreamed the whole thing, but she was beginning
to wish she had. It was all thrillingly, terrifyingly real.
   “Freshly    squeezed orange  juice    to   your   liking,    sir?”   she  asked
sarcastically.
   “Actually,  have you got any that’s very slightly off? I prefer that. Perhaps
that was squeezed a month or so ago?”
   Just then, Chloe spotted an old dog-eared black-and-white photograph that
Mr. Stink had placed on a shelf. It showed a beautiful young couple standing
proudly next to an immaculate and perfectly rounded Rolls-Royce, parked in
the driveway of a magnificent stately home.
   “Who’s  that?” she asked, pointing to the photo.

83
   “Oh,  nobody, n-n-n-nothing . .  .”  he stammered. “Just a sentimental old
photograph, Miss Chloe.”
   “Can I  see?”
   “No,  no, no, it’s just  a foolish picture. Please, pay it no mind.” Mr. Stink
was becoming increasingly flustered. He snatched the photograph from the
shelf,  and put   it  in   his  pajama  pocket.  Chloe  was disappointed.  The
photograph had seemed like another clue to Mr. Stink’s past, like his little
silver spoon, or the way he’d tossed that piece of paper into the bin. This one
had seemed like the best clue yet. But now Mr. Stink was shooing her out of
the shed. “Don’t forget the sausages!” he said.
   How on earth  did Dad miss him? thought Chloe, as she went back to the
house. Even if he hadn’t  seen Mr. Stink in  the shed, he surely must have
smelled him.
   Chloe  tiptoed into the  kitchen and opened the fridge door  as quietly as
possible. She stared into  the fridge,  and began carefully  moving  jars  of

84
mustard and pickle so they wouldn’t clink.  She hoped to find some out-of-
date orange juice that might appeal to Mr. Stink’s tainted palate.
   “What  are you doing?” said a voice.
   Chloe startled. It  was only Dad, but  she wasn’t expecting to see him up
this early. She gathered herself for a moment.
   “Nothing,  Dad. I’m just hungry that’s all.”
   “I  know who’s in the shed, Chloe,” he said.
   Chloe looked at him, panicked, unable to think, let alone speak.
   “I  opened the shed door last night to see an old tramp snoring next to my
lawn mower,” Dad went on. “The  pong was . . . well  . . .  pongy. It was an
extremely pongy pong . . .”
   “I  wanted to tell you, honestly I did,” said Chloe. “He needs a home, Dad.
Mother wants all homeless people driven off the streets!”
   “I  know, I  know, but I’m sorry, Chloe, he can’t stay. Your mother will go
nuts if she finds out.”
   “Dad, I’m  sorry.”
   “It’s  OK, love. I am not going to say anything to your mother. You’ve kept
your promise not to tell anyone about me losing my job, haven’t you?”
   “Yes, of course.”
   “Good girl,”  said Dad.
   “So,”  said Chloe, glad to have Dad to herself for a while. “How  did your
guitar get all burned?”
   “Your  mother put it on the bonfire.”
   “No!”
   “Yes,”  said Dad sorrowfully.  “She wanted me to move on  with my  life.
She was doing me a favor, I suppose.”
   “A  favor?”
   “Well,  The Serpents of Doom were never going to make it. I got the job at
the car factory and that was that.”
   “But  you had an album! You must have been dead famous,” chirped Chloe
excitedly.
   “No,   we weren’t  at all!”   chuckled  Dad. “The  album only  sold  twelve
copies.”
   “Twelve?” said Chloe.
   “Yes,  and your  grandma bought most  of  those. We were  pretty good,
though. And one of our singles got into the charts.”
   “What,  the top forty?”

85
   “No,  we peaked at ninety-eight.”
   “Wow,”  said Chloe. “Top one hundred! That’s pretty good, isn’t it?”
   “No,  it isn’t,”  said Dad. “But  you’re very sweet to say so.” He kissed her
on the forehead and opened his arms to give her a hug.
   “There’s no time for  cuddles!” said Mother as she strode into the kitchen.
“The man from the Times will be here soon. Father, you make the scrambled
eggs. Chloe, you can set the table.”
   “Yes, of course, Mother,” said Chloe, with at least half her brain worrying
about when Mr. Stink was going to get his breakfast.
 
“So how important is your  family to  you, Mrs. Crumb?” asked the serious-
looking  journalist.  He  wore thick   glasses and was old.  In  fact,  he  had
probably been born an old man. Plopped out of his mother, wearing glasses
and a three-piece suit. He was called Mr. Stern, which  Chloe thought was
pretty fitting. He didn’t look like  he smiled a lot. Or indeed ever.
   “Actually,  it’s pronounced Croombe,” corrected Mother.
   “No,  it’s not,”  said Dad before his wife shot him a look of utter fury. The
Crumb family was sitting around the dining table and not enjoying their posh
breakfast. It was  all  such a lie.  They  didn’t  normally  eat their  breakfast
sitting round the dining  room  table, eating smoked salmon and scrambled
eggs. They would be round the kitchen table eating Rice Krispies or Marmite
on toast.

86
“Very important, Mr. Stern,” said Mother.

87
“The most important thing in my life. I  don’t know what I would do without
my husband, Mr. Crooome, my darling  daughter, Annabelle, and the other
one . . . whatshername? Chloe.”
   “Well,  then  I ask you  this Mrs.  . .  . Croooooome. Is your  family  more
important to you than the future of this country?”
   That was a toughie. There was a pause during which a civilization could
rise and fall.
   “Well,  Mr. Stern . . .” Mother said.
   “Yes, Mrs. Croooooooooome . . . ?”
   “Well,  Mr. Stern . . .”
   “Yes, Mrs. Croooooooooooooooooooooooo oooome . . . ?”

88
   At  that moment there was a little  rat-tat-tat on the window. “Excuse me
for interrupting,”  said Mr. Stink  with a smile,  “but please could I have my
breakfast now?”

89
                                                        13



                                           Shut   Your  Face!



“Who  on earth is he?” inquired Mr. Stern as Mr. Stink trudged around in his
filthy striped pajamas to the back door.
   There  was silence  for  a  moment. Mother’s   eyes bulged  out of   their
sockets and Annabelle looked like she was about to shriek or vomit or both.
   “Oh,  he’s the tramp who lives in our shed,” said Chloe.
   “The  tramp who lives  in our shed?” repeated Mother incredulously. She
looked at her husband with black fire in her eyes.
   He gulped.
   “I   told  you  she  was hiding   something in  there,  Mother!”   exclaimed
Annabelle.
   “He   wasn’t   there  when  I  looked!”   protested  Dad.  “He   must  have
concealed himself behind a shovel!”
   “What  a wonderful woman you are, Mrs. Croooooooooooome,” said Mr.
Stern. “I read about your policies on the homeless. About driving them off
the streets. I had no idea you meant we should drive them into our  homes
and let them come and live with us.”
   “Well,  I . . .”  spluttered Mother, lost for words.
   “I  can assure you I am going to write an absolutely glowing  piece about
you now.  This  will   make the  front  page. You could  be  the next  Prime
Minister of the country!”
   “My  sausages?” said Mr. Stink, as he entered the dining room.
   “Excuse  me?” said Mother,  before putting  her hand over her mouth  in
horror at the smell.
   “Forgive  me,” said Mr.  Stink. “It’s  just that I asked your daughter Chloe
for some sausages two hours ago,  and my  sincerest apologies, but I  am
getting rather peckish!”
   “You  say I could be the next Prime Minister  of  the country, Mr. Stern?”
said Mother, thoughtfully.

90
   “Yes. It’s  so kind of  you. Allowing  a dirty  old smelly  tramp like this—I
mean, no offense—”
   “None  taken,” replied Mr. Stink without hesitation.
   “—to   come and live with  you.  How you  could you  not be elected as a
Member of Parliament now?”
   Mother  smiled. “In that case,” she said, turning to Mr. Stink, “how  many
sausages would you like, my  very good friend  who lives  in  my shed and
hardly stinks at all?”
   “No  more than nine, please,” replied Mr. Stink.
   “Nine  sausages coming right up!”
   “With   poached eggs, bacon,  mushrooms, grilled  tomatoes, bread and
butter, and brown sauce on the side, please.”
   “Certainly,  my extremely close and beloved friend!” came the voice from
the kitchen.
   “You  smell so rank I think I’m going to die,” said Annabelle.
   “That’s   not nice,  Annabelle,”  said  Mother  breezily  from  the  kitchen.
“Now come and help me in here, darling, there’s a good girl!”
   Annabelle  ran to the sanctuary of the kitchen.  “It  stinks in here now  as
well!”  she screamed.
   “Shut your  face!” snapped Mother.
   “So,  tell  me  . .  . tramp,”  said  Mr.  Stern, leaning in  toward  Mr.  Stink
before the smell got to him and he leaned back. “Is it just you living  in the
shed?”
   “Yes, just me. And of course my dog, the Duchess . . .”
   “HE’S  GOT A  DOG?” cried Mother anxiously from next door.
   “And  how do you find living  here?” continued Mr. Stern.
   “Nice,”   said Mr. Stink. “But  I  warn you, the service is painfully  slow . .
.”

91
                                                        14



                                       Lady   and  the  Tramp



LADY  AND THE  TRAMP was the headline.
   Mr.  Stern had been true to his word and the story had made the front page
of the Times. A large photograph of Mother and Mr. Stink accompanied the
piece. Mr. Stink was smiling  broadly, showing his blackened teeth. Mother
was trying to  smile, but  because of the smell she had to  keep her mouth
firmly  closed. As soon as the paperboy put the paper through the letter box,
the Crumbs  pounced upon it   and devoured it   in  a  frenzy. Mother  was
famous! She read the article out loud with pride.
Mrs. Crumb may not  look like  a Solitical  revolutionary  in her  smart blue
suits and Searls, but she could well change the way we live our lives. She is
running for  Member  of  Parliament in  her  local  town  and, although  her
Solicies read as  very hard  line,  she has taken  the extraordinary  steS of
inviting a tramS to live with her family.
   “It       was     all     my     idea,”      said     Mrs.     Crumb     (Sronounced
“Crooooooooooooome”). “At  first  my family was dead against it, but I Must
had to  give  this  Soor filthy   flea-ridden dirt-encrusted  stomach-turningly
smelly beggar man and his abhorrent hound a home. I love them both dearly.
They’re Sart of the family now. I couldn’t imagine life  without them. If only
other SeoSle were as beautifully kindhearted as  me. A modern-day saint,
some SeoSle are saying. If every family in this country was to let a tramS live
with them, it could solve the Sroblem of homelessness forever. Oh, and don’t
forget to vote for me in the forthcoming election.”
   It’s a  genius idea, and could Sut Mrs. Crumb in line to be the next Prime
Minister.
   The tramS, known only  as “Mr.  Stink”  had this  to say. “Please could  I
trouble you for another sausage?”
 
“It wasn’t your idea, Mother,” snapped Chloe, too angry to merely sulk.
   “Not  strictly speaking, dearest, no . . .”

92
   Chloe glared at her, but at that moment the telephone tinkled.
   “Get that will  you, someone? It’s probably for me,” said Mother, grandly.
   Annabelle dutifully   picked up the phone. “Crooombe residence. Who is
speaking please?” she asked, just as her mother had instructed her to. Mother
even had a special telephone voice, a note posher than her usual one.
   “Who  is it, dear?” said Mother.
   “It’s   the Prime Minister,”   replied Annabelle, putting  her hand over  the
mouthpiece.
   “The Prime Minister?”  squealed Mother.
   She hurled herself toward the telephone.
   “Mrs.  Croooombe speaking!”  said Mother in  a truly  ridiculous  voice, a
good note posher than even her usual telephone one. “Yes, thank you, Prime
Minister. It was a super piece in the newspaper, Prime Minister.”
   Mother was drooling again. Dad rolled his eyes.
   “I   would  be delighted  to be  a guest on  Question Time tonight,  Prime
Minister,” said Mother.
   Then she went quiet. Chloe could hear a murmur from the other end of the
line, followed by silence.
   Mother’s jaw dropped open.
   “What?”  she growled into the phone, losing her poise and dignity for  an
instant.
   Chloe looked at Dad questioningly and he shrugged.
   “What  do you mean, you want the tramp to go on as well?” said Mother,
incredulous.
   Dad  grinned. Question Time was a serious political  discussion program
hosted by a Sir.  It  was Mother’s  big  chance to shine, and she obviously
didn’t want it ruined by a malodorous old tramp.
   “Well,  yes,” went on Mother, “I  know it  makes a good story, but does he
really have to be on too? He reeks!”
   There was  another pause while the  Prime Minister  spoke, the murmur
getting a little  bit louder. Chloe was impressed with the man. Anyone who
could get Mother to stop talking for a moment deserved to run the country.
   “Yes, yes, well, if that’s what you really want, Prime Minister, then yes, of
course I will  bring Mr. Stink  along. Thank you so much for calling. By  the
way, I make a very moist lemon drizzle cake. If you are ever passing by on
your battle bus, I would be delighted to offer you  a slice or two. No? Well,

93
goodbye . .  . Goodbye  . . .  Goodbye .  . .”  She checked one last  time that  he
had definitely  gone. “Goodbye.”
    Chloe  rushed  into  the  garden  to  tell   Mr.  Stink   the  news.  She heard  a
“Grrrrrr”    and  assumed it  must  be  the  Duchess.  However,  it  was  actually
Elizabeth  the cat who  was  growling.   She was looking   up at  the roof  of  the
shed, where   a  trembling   Duchess  was  hiding.   The  little    black  dog  was
yelping  softly.   Chloe   chased Elizabeth   away,  and  eventually   coaxed  the
Duchess down. She patted her.
    “There, there,”  she said. “That  nasty puss has gone now.”
    Elizabeth  flew  out of  the bushes and through  the air like  a kung-fu  kitten.
A terrified   Duchess rocketed  up  the apple  tree to  safety. Elizabeth  prowled
around the trunk, hissing  malevolently.
    Chloe knocked  on the shed door. “Hello?”
    “Is that  you, Duchess?” came Mr.  Stink’s  voice from  inside.
    “No,  it’s Chloe,”  said Chloe.  He’s nuts! she thought.
    “Oh, lovely   Chloe! Do  come in, dear heart.”
    Mr.  Stink   upturned  a  bucket.  “Please,  please  take  a seat.  So  did  your
mother and I make the newspaper?”
    “You’re  on the front  page. Look!”
    She held up the paper and he let out a little  chuckle.  “Fame at last!”

94
   “And  that’s not all. We just had a call from the Prime Minister.”
   “Winston  Churchill?”
   “No,  we’ve  got a new one now, and he wants you and Mother to  go on
this program called Question Time tonight.”
   “On  the televisual box?”
   “The  TV? Yes. And I was thinking, before you go on . . .” Chloe looked at
Mr. Stink hopefully. “It might be a good idea if you had a . . .”
   “Yes, child?”
   “Well  a . . .”
   “Yes . . .?”
   “A  . . .” She finally plucked up the courage to say it, “. . . bath?”
   Mr. Stink looked at her suspiciously for a few seconds.
   “Chloe?”  he asked at last.
   “Yes, Mr. Stink?”
   “I  don’t smell, do I?”
   How  could she answer that? She didn’t want to hurt Mr. Stink’s feelings,
but then  again  it  would  be  much  easier to  be around  him  if   he were
introduced to Mr. Soap and his charming wife, Mrs. Water. . . .

95
   “No,  no, no, of  course you don’t smell,”  said Chloe, gulping the biggest
gulp that had ever been gulped.
   “Thank  you, my dear,” said Mr. Stink, seeming almost convinced. “Then
why do people call me Mr. Stink?”
   In  her head, Chloe heard the intensely dramatic music from Who Wants to
Be a Millionaire?  This could in  fact have been the million-pound question.
But Chloe had no “fifty-fifty,”   no “ask the audience” and not even a “phone
a friend”   at her  disposal. After  a  long pause, in  which  you  could  have
watched all  three  Lord  of   the  Rings  films  in   their  specially  extended
director’s cuts, words started to form in Chloe’s mouth.
   “It’s  a joke,” she heard herself saying.
   “A  joke?” asked Mr. Stink.
   “Yes,  because you actually smell really  nice so everyone calls you Mr.
Stink as a joke.”
   “Really?”  His suspicion seemed to be thawing a little.
   “Yes,  like  calling  a really  small  man ‘Mr.   Big’  or  a  very thin  person
‘Fatso.’”
   “Oh,  yes, I understand, most amusing!” chuckled Mr. Stink.
   The Duchess looked at Chloe with a look that said, You had the chance to
tell him, but you chose to carry on the lie.
   How  do I  know  that the Duchess’s look  said this? Because there is an
excellent book in my local  library titled  One Thousand Doggy ExSressions
ExSlained, by Professor L. Stone.
   I  digress.
   “But,”  said Chloe, “you might like to have a bath, well, just for fun . . .”

96
                                                        15



                                                 Bath   time



This was no  ordinary bath  time. Chloe realized this  had to  be run like  a
military operation.
   Hot water? Check.
   Towels? Check.
   Bubble bath? Check.
   Rubber duck or similar animal-based bath toy? Check.
   Soap? Was there enough soap in the house? Or in the town? Or indeed in
the whole of Europe, to make Mr. Stink clean? He hadn’t had a bath since—
well, he claimed  last year, but it  might as well  have been since dinosaurs
ruled the earth.
   Chloe turned on the taps, running them both together so the temperature
would be just right. If it  was too hot or too cold, it might scare Mr. Stink off
baths forever. She poured in some bubble bath, and gave it a swirl. Then she
laid  out  some  neatly  folded  towels,  pleasingly  warm   from  the  airing
cupboard, on a little stool by the bath. In the cabinet she found a multi-pack
of soaps. It was all going perfectly according to plan, until . . .
   “He’s  escaped!” said Dad, poking his head around the bathroom door.
   “What  do you mean, ‘escaped’?” said Chloe.
   “He’s  not  in the  shed, he’s not in  the house, I couldn’t  see him  in the
garden. I don’t know where he is.”
   “Start the car!” said Chloe.
   They sped off out of their street. This was exciting. Dad was driving faster
than usual, although still  one mile per hour  less than the speed limit, and
Chloe sat in the front seat, which she hardly ever did. All they needed were
some doughnuts and coffee to go, and they could be two mismatched cops in
a Hollywood   action  movie.  Chloe  had  a hunch  that  if   Mr.  Stink  was
anywhere, he would be back sat on his bench where she had first talked to
him.
   “Stop the car!” she said, as they passed the bench.

97
   “But  it’s a double yellow line,” pleaded Dad.
   “I  said, stop the car!”
   Dad stamped on the brake. The tires screeched as the car stopped. They
were both propelled forward a little in their seats. They smiled at each other
at the excitement of it all—it  was as if they had just ridden a roller coaster.
Chloe sprang out of the car and slammed the door shut, something she would
never dare do if her mother were around.
   But  the bench was empty. Mr. Stink  wasn’t there. Chloe sniffed the air.
There was a faint  whiff  of  him,  but she couldn’t  really  tell  if  this was  a
recent one or a lingering odor from a week or so ago.
   Dad drove around the town for another hour. Chloe checked all the places
she thought her tramp friend might  be—under bridges, in the park,  in the
coffee shop, even behind garbage bins. But it seemed as though he really had
disappeared. Chloe felt like crying. Maybe he had left the town—he was a
wanderer, after all.
   “We’d  better head home now, darling,” said Dad softly.
   “Yep,”  said Chloe, trying to be brave.
   “I’ll   put the kettle on,” said Dad as they walked indoors.
   In Britain,  a cup of tea is the answer to every problem.
   Fallen off your bicycle? Nice cup of tea.
   Your  house has been destroyed by a meteorite? Nice cup  of tea  and a
biscuit.
   Your  entire  family   has been  eaten by  a  Tyrannosaurus rex  that  has
traveled through a space-time portal? Nice cup of tea and a piece of cake.
Possibly a savory option would be welcome here too, for example a Scotch
egg or a sausage roll.
   Chloe picked up the kettle and went to the sink to fill it. She looked out of
the window.
   Just then, Mr. Stink’s head popped up from the pond. He gave her a little
wave. Chloe screamed.
   When they’d  got over their shock, Chloe and Dad walked slowly toward
the pond. Mr. Stink was humming the song “Row, Row, Row Your Boat” to
himself. As  he  sang, he rubbed  algae into  himself  with  a water  lily.  A
number of goldfish floated upside down on the water’s surface.

98
   “Good  afternoon,  Miss  Chloe, good  afternoon, Mr.  Crumb,”  said  Mr.
Stink brightly.  “I  won’t   be too long.  I  don’t  want to  get too  wrinkled  in
here!”
   “What  . . . what . . . what are you doing?” asked Dad.
   “The   Duchess and  I  are  having  a  bath  of  course,  as young  Chloe
suggested.”
   At  that moment the Duchess appeared out of the murky depths, covered in
weeds. As if it wasn’t enough that he was having a bath in a pond, Mr. Stink
had to share it with his dog too. After a few moments the Duchess clambered
out of  the pond, leaving  behind a large  black scum layer  floating on  the

99
water. She shook herself dry  and Chloe stared at her in  surprise. It  turned out
she wasn’t a little  black dog  after all, but  a little  white one.
    “Mr.  Crumb,  sir?”  said Mr.  Stink.  “Would   you mind  passing me  a towel?
Thank you so much.  Ah!  I am as clean as a whistle now!”

100
                                                        16



                                             Rule  Britannia



Mother sniffed. And sniffed again. Her nose wrinkled with disgust.
   “Are  you sure you had a bath, Mr. Stink?” she inquired, as Dad drove all
the family and Mr. Stink to the television studio.
   “Yes, I did, madam.”
   “Well,  there is a funny  smell of pond in  this car. And  dog,” pronounced
Mother from the front seat.
   “I  think I’m  going to puke,” pronounced Annabelle from the backseat.
   “I’ve   told   you  before, darling.  We  don’t  say  ‘puke’   in  this  family,”
corrected Mother. “We say we are feeling very slightly nauseous.”
   Chloe opened the window discreetly, so as not to hurt Mr. Stink’s feelings.
   “Do  you mind  if we keep the window  closed?” asked Mr. Stink. “I am a
little chilly.”
   The window went up again.
   “Thank you so much,” said Mr. Stink. “Such unimaginable kindness.”
   They stopped at some traffic lights  and Dad reached for one of his hard
rock CDs. Mother slapped his hand, and he put it back on the steering wheel.
She then put her favorite CD on the car stereo, and the old couple in the next
car looked at the Crumb family strangely as “Rule Britannia, Britannia rules
the waves” came blaring out of their car.
 
“Mmm,  no no  no, that  won’t  do at all  .  . .”  said  the TV  producer as he
studied Mr. Stink. “Can we  put some dirt on him? He doesn’t look  trampy
enough. Makeup? Where’s makeup?”
   A  lady  with far  too much makeup on appeared from around a corridor,
scoffing a croissant and holding a powder puff.
   “Darling,  have you got any grime?” asked the producer.
   “Come this way, Mr. . . . ?” said the makeup lady.
   “Stink,”  said Mr. Stink proudly. “Mr.  Stink. And I  am going to star on the
television tonight.”

101
   Mother scowled.
   Chloe, Annabelle, and Dad were led to a little room with a television, half
a bottle of warm white wine, and some stale chips, to watch the show being
broadcast live.
   The  thunderous title music  started, there was polite  applause from the
audience, and the pompous-looking presenter, Sir David Squirt, addressed
the camera. “Tonight on  Question Time it’s  an election  special. We have
representatives from all the major  political  parties, and also a tramp  who
goes by the name of Mr. Stink. Welcome to the program, everyone.”
   Everyone around the table nodded, apart from Mr. Stink, who proclaimed
loudly, “May I say what a delight it is for me to be on your show tonight?”
   “Thank you,”  said the presenter uncertainly.
   “Being  homeless I have never seen it,”  said Mr.  Stink. “In   fact, I  have
absolutely no idea who you are. But I am sure you are wildly famous. Please
continue, Sir Donald.”
   The   audience  laughed  uncertainly.  Mother   looked   displeased. The
presenter coughed nervously and tried to continue.
   “So the first question tonight . . .”

102
   “Are  you wearing makeup, Sir Declan?” inquired Mr. Stink innocently.
   “A  little,  yes. For the lights of course.”
   “Of  course,” agreed Mr. Stink. “Foundation?”
   “Yes.”
   “Eyeliner?”
   “A  little.”




























   “Lip  gloss?”
   “A  smidge.”
   “Looks  nice. I wish I’d had some now. Blush?”
   The  audience chuckled throughout this exchange. Sir David  moved  on
rapidly. “I   should explain  that Mr.  Stink  is  here tonight  as he  has been
invited to live with Mrs. Crumb . . . .”
   “Crooommmbe,” corrected Mother.
   “Oh,”  said Sir David. “I  do apologize. We checked the pronunciation with
your husband, and he said it was Crumb.”

103
   Mother went red with  embarrassment. Sir David turned his attention back
to his notes. “Later on in the program,” he said, “we  will  be discussing the
difficult topic of  homelessness.”
   Mr. Stink put his hand up.
   “Yes, Mr. Stink?” asked the presenter.
   “May  I just pop to the lavatory, Sir Duncan?”
   The audience laughed louder this time.
   “I  should have gone before we started, but I asked the makeup lady to do
my hair  and it  took  forever. Don’t  get me  wrong, I  am  thrilled  with  the
results; she gave me a wash and blow-dry. They even put something called
gel in it, but I didn’t get a chance to go to the little boys’ room.”
   “Of  course, if you need to go, go . . . .”
   “Thank  you so, so much,” said Mr. Stink. He rose to his feet and started to
mosey off the set. “I shouldn’t be too long, I think it’s just a number one.”
   The audience howled again with laughter. In the little room with the stale
chips and the television Chloe and Dad were laughing too. Chloe looked at
Annabelle. She was trying not to laugh, but a smile was definitely creeping
up her face.
   “My  apologies!”  exclaimed Mr. Stink as he crossed the stage again in the
opposite direction. “I am told the lavatory is this way . . . !”

104
                                                        17



                                        Collapsed    Bouffant



“And  that’s why  I  feel that there should be a  curfew on  all people under
thirty.”  Mother  was in  full   flow  now,  and she smiled  as she received a
smattering of applause for this comment from the people over thirty in  the
audience. “They should all be in bed by eight o’clock at the latest. . . .”
   “Sorry  I  was a while,” said Mr.  Stink as he ambled back onto the set. “I
thought it was just a number one, but while I was standing there, I suddenly
got the urge to  have a number two.”  The  audience erupted into laughter,
some even applauding in  delight  as this  serious show  descended into a
discussion of an old tramp’s toilet habits. “I mean, I usually do my  number
twos in the  mornings, between 9:07 and 9:08, but I  had an egg sandwich
backstage before I came on the show tonight. I don’t know if you made the
sandwiches, Sir Derek?”
   “No,   I don’t  make the  sandwiches, Mr. Stink.  Now  please can we get
back to the question of curfews for young—”
   “Well,  it  was a delicious sandwich, don’t get me wrong,” said Mr. Stink.
“But egg can sometimes make me want to go. And I  don’t always get that
much of a warning, especially at my  age. Do you ever have that problem,
Sir Doris? Or do you have the bum of a much younger man?”
   Another  massive wave of  laughter crashed onto the stage. In  the stale
chips room even Annabelle was laughing now.
   “We   are here  to  discuss  the serious  topics  of  the  day,  Mr.  Stink,”
continued Sir David. His face was redder than red with anger as his serious
political program, a program he had presented for forty tedious years, was
rapidly turning into a comedy show starring an old tramp. The audience was
enjoying it  immensely, though, and booed Sir David a  little  as he tried to
steer the show back to politics. He shot them a steely stare before turning to
the new star of the show. “And my name is Sir David. Not Sir Derek, or Sir
Doris. Sir David. Now,  let’s move on to the question of  homelessness, Mr.
Stink. I have a statistic here that says that there are over 100,000 homeless

105
people in the UK today. Why do you think so many people are living on the
streets?”
   Mr.  Stink cleared his throat a little.  “Well,  if  I  may be so bold, I  would
venture that part of  the problem  stems from the  fact that we  are seen as
statistics rather than people.” The audience applauded and Sir David leaned
forward with interest. Perhaps Mr. Stink wasn’t the clown he had taken him
for.
   “We  all have different reasons for being homeless,” continued Mr. Stink.
“Each homeless person has a different story to tell. Perhaps if people in the
audience tonight, or  out  there watching  at home,  stopped to talk  to  the
homeless people in their town, they would realize that.”
   The  audience was applauding even louder now, but Mrs. Crumb leaped
in. “That’s what  I did!”  she exclaimed. “I just  stopped to talk to this tramp
one day and then asked him to come and live with my family.  I’ve  always
put others before myself. I  suppose that’s always been my downfall,”  she
said, tilting her head to the side and smiling at the audience as if she were
an angel sent down from heaven.
   “Well,  that’s not really true, is it, Mrs. Crumb?” said Mr. Stink.
   There  was silence. Mother stared at  Mr. Stink  in  horror. The audience
shifted  excitedly  in  their  seats. Dad,  Annabelle,  and  Chloe  all  leaned
forward closer  to  the television.  Even Sir  David’s  mustache twitched in
anticipation.
   “I  don’t  know what you mean, my very close friend. . . .”  squirmed Mrs.
Crumb.
   “I  think  you do,”  said Mr. Stink.  “The fact is,  it wasn’t you who  invited
me in, was it?”
   Sir  David’s  eyes gleamed. “Then  who did  invite  you  to stay  with  the
Crumb family, Mr. Stink?” he inquired, back in his stride now.
   “Mrs.    Crumb’s  daughter,  Chloe.   She’s  only   twelve,  but   she’s  an
absolutely fantastic girl.  One of  the sweetest, kindest people I  have ever
met.”
   These words fell on  Chloe like an enormous YES. Then everyone in the
stale  chips   room   looked   toward    her   and  she   was   overcome  by
embarrassment. She hid  her  face in   her  hands. Dad  stroked her  back
proudly. Annabelle  pretended not to  be interested, and helped herself  to
another stale chip.
   “She should really come out here and take a bow,” announced Mr. Stink.

106
   “No,  no, no,” snapped Mother.
   “No,   Mrs. Crumb,”  said Sir  David.  “I  think  we’d  all  like  to meet this
extraordinary little girl.”
   The audience applauded his suggestion. But Chloe felt glued to her seat.
She couldn’t even speak out loud in front of the class. She didn’t want to be
on television in front of millions of  people!
   What  would she say? What would  she do? She didn’t know  any tricks.
This was going to be the most embarrassing moment of her life, even worse
than when she threw up  her macaroni cheese all over  Miss Spratt in  the
language lab.   But  the   applause was  getting   louder  and  louder,   and
eventually Dad took her hand and gently pulled her to her feet.

107
   “You’re  feeling shy, aren’t you?” whispered Dad.
   Chloe nodded.
   “Well,   you shouldn’t.  You’re  a fantastic  girl.  You  should be proud  of
what you’ve done. Now come on. Enjoy your moment in the limelight!”
   Hand  in hand, they raced down the  corridor toward  the set. Just out of
sight of the  cameras Dad let her hand go, and smiled supportively  as she
stepped out  into  the  light.   The  audience applauded  wildly.   Mr.  Stink
beamed over at her, and she tried to beam back. Mother was the only person
not applauding, so Chloe’s eyes were drawn toward her. Chloe tried to meet
her gaze, but Mother turned her head sharply to  look the  other way. This
made Chloe even more  uncomfortable, and she  tried to  do  a curtsy  but
didn’t really know how to, and then ran off the stage, back into the safety of
the stale chips room.
   “What  a charming child,”  said Sir  David. He  turned to Mother. “Now  I
have to ask you, Mrs.  Crumb. Why  did  you lie?  Was it purely  to further
your own political ambitions?”
   The  other guests from rival  political  parties looked at  Mrs. Crumb  and
tutted. As if they would  ever dream of doing anything so immoral! Mother
started to perspire. Her  hair  lacquer began to  melt  and her  makeup ran
slowly  down  her face. Dad,  Chloe,  and Annabelle  sat and watched  her
squirm, unable to help.
   “Well,   as if   anyone would  want  that  old  tramp  in  their  house,”  she
shouted finally. “Look   at him!  You lot  watching this  at home can’t smell
him, but take it from me, he stinks! He stinks of dirt and sweat and poo and
pond and dog. I wish that great stinky stinker would just stink off out of my
home forever!”
   There was shocked silence for a moment. Then the boos started, getting
louder and louder. Mother looked at the audience in panic. At that moment
her bouffant collapsed.

109
                                                        18



                                          Rabbit   Droppings



“WE  WANT STINK!  WE WANT  STINK!”
   Chloe peeked through a gap in the curtains. There was a huge crowd of
people outside their  house. News reporters, camera crews, and hundreds
and hundreds of local people waving large pieces of cardboard emblazoned
with slogans.



















   Mr.  Stink’s  appearance on television the previous  night had  obviously
had an enormous effect on people. Overnight he had gone from  being an
unknown smelly tramp to a hugely famous smelly tramp.
   Chloe put on her dressing gown and raced down to the shed.
   “Is  it  time  for Lily   to meet the flesh-eating zombie teachers?” inquired
Mr. Stink as she entered.
   “No,  no, no, Mr. Stink! Can’t you hear the crowds outside?!”

110
   “I’m   sorry,  I  can’t  hear you  properly,”  he said.  “I  found  these rabbit
droppings in the garden. They make excellent earplugs.” He popped out the
two  little  brown  pellets  as Chloe  looked  on with   a curious  mixture  of
disgust and admiration at  his ingenuity.  For  those of you  who  may find
yourself out in the wild  and in need of earplugs, just follow  this easy step-
by-step guide.













                                      First find a friendly rabbit.








                Wait patiently for it to deposit some droppings for you.










     Insert one in each ear . Larger ears will require bigger droppings and
                                    possibly even a bigger rabbit.

111
 Enjoy a great night’s sleep only slightly marred by the smell of rabbit poo.
   The Duchess sniffed at the droppings in the vain hope that they might be
a couple of  rogue Maltesers or at  the very worst  some of  Raj’s despised
coffee Revels, but quickly turned up her nose when she realized they were
poo, and went back to her makeshift basket.
   “That’s  better,” said Mr. Stink. “You know, I  had the strangest dream last
night, Miss Chloe. I was on television discussing all the important issues of
the day! Your mother was there too! It was hilarious!”
   “That  was no dream, Mr. Stink. That really happened.”
   “Oh,  dear,” said the tramp. “Maybe it wasn’t so funny after all.”
   “It   was hilarious,  Mr.  Stink. You  were the star  of the  show. And now
there’s hundreds of people camped outside the house.”
   “What  on earth do they want, child?”
   “You!”   said  Chloe.  “They  want  to  interview  you  I  think.  And  some
people want you to be the Prime Minister!”
   The crowd was getting louder and louder now. “WE WANT STINK!  WE
WANT STINK!  WE WANT  STINK!”
   “Oh  my  word, yes, I  can hear them. They  want me as Prime Minister,
you say? Ha  ha!  I  must  remember to appear on  television  more often!
Maybe I can be king next too!”
   “You’d  better get up, Mr. Stink. Now!”
   “Yes, of course, Miss Chloe. Right, I want to look smart for my fans.”
   He  bumbled around the shed sniffing his clothes and grimacing. If  even
he thinks they’re smelly, thought Chloe, they must be really bad.
   “I  could put  some clothes on a quick wash and dry for you,” she offered
hopefully.
   “No,  thank you,  my dear. I don’t  think  washing machines are hygienic.
I’ll  just get the Duchess to chew some of the particularly nasty stains out.”
   He dug through a pile of his clothes and pulled out a pair of spectacularly
dirt-encrusted brown trousers. Whether  they had  been brown when  they

112
started their life was now anybody’s guess. He passed them to the Duchess,
who began her task of a reluctant dry cleaner and started munching on the
stains.
   Chloe cleared her throat. “Um  . .  . Mr. Stink.  You said on the TV  show
how every homeless person has a different story to tell. Well, can you  tell
me your story? I mean, why did you end up on the streets?”
   “Why  do you think, my dear?”
   “I  don’t  know. I’ve got  millions of  theories. Maybe you were abandoned
in a forest as a baby and raised by a pack of wolves?”
   “No!”   he chuckled.
   “Or  I  reckon you  were a world-famous  rock  star who faked  your own
death as you couldn’t handle all the adulation.”
   “I  wish I was!”
   “All   right then, you were a top scientist who invented the most powerful
bomb in the world and then, realizing its dangers, went on the run from the
military.”
   “Well,  those are all very imaginative  guesses,” he said. “But I am sorry,
none of them are right. You’re not even close, I’m afraid.”
   “I  thought not.”
   “I  will  tell you when the time is right, Chloe.”
   “Promise?”
   “I  promise. Now please give me a few minutes, my dear. I must get ready
to greet my public!”

113
                                                    19



                                            Supertramp



“I AM  NOT APOLOGI=ING TO HIM!”
   “YOU HAVE TO!”
   Mr. Stink sat at the head of the kitchen table reading all about himself in
the newspapers as Chloe stood at the stove frying some sausages for him.
Her parents were arguing again in the next room. It wasn’t a conversation
that their houseguest was meant to hear, but they were so angry their voices
were becoming louder and louder.
   “BUT HE DOES SMELL!”
   “I  KNOW  HE SMELLS BUT  YOU DIDN’T  NEED TO SAY  IT ON
THE TELEVISION.”
   Chloe smiled over  at Mr.  Stink. He  looked so engrossed in all  the
headlines, SUPERTRAMP!, STINKY SUPERSTAR STEALS SHOW!,
HOMELESS MAN SAVES BORING ELECTION, that he appeared not to
be listening. Or maybe he’d put his rabbit dropping earplugs back in.
   “OBVIOUSLY   NOT!”   shouted  Mother.  “LAST   NIGHT   I   HAD
ANOTHER CALL   FROM THE  PRIME  MINISTER TELLING   ME  I
HAVE  EMBARRASSED THE   PARTY AND   HE   WANTS ME   TO
WITHDRAW AS A CANDIDATE!”
   “GOOD!”
   “WHAT DO YOU MEAN ‘GOOD’?!”
   “THIS  WHOLE THING HAS  TURNED YOU INTO  A MONSTER!”
shouted Dad.
   “WHAT?! I AM NOT A MONSTER!”
   “YES, YOU ARE! MONSTER! MONSTER! MONSTER!”
   “HOW DARE YOU?!” screamed Mother.
   “GO AND APOLOGI=E TO HIM!”
   “NO!”
   “APOLOGI=E!”

114
   For a moment all you could hear was the sizzle of sausage fat and lard in
the frying pan. Then, slowly, the door opened and Mother oozed like slime
into the room.  Her bouffant was still  not  what it  was. She hesitated for a
moment. Her husband appeared in the doorway and gave her a stern look.
She did a little theatrical cough.
   “Her-hum.  Mr. Stink?” she ventured.
   “Yes, Mrs. Crumb?”  replied Mr. Stink without looking  up, still engrossed
in the papers.
   “I  would like  to say . . . sorry.”
   “What  on earth for?” he inquired.
   “For   what I   said about  you on  Question Time  last night.  About  you
smelling of all those things. It was impolite.”
   “Thank  you so much, Mrs. . . .”
   “Call  me Janet.”
   “Thank   you so  much, Mrs.  Janet. It  was  rather hurtful  as I   do pride
myself on my personal hygiene. Indeed, I had a bath just before I went on
the show.”
   “Well,  you didn’t really  have a bath, did you? You had a Sond.”
   “Yes, I  suppose you’re right. I did have a pond. And if you so wish, I will
have another ‘pond’ next year, so I remain perfectly clean.”
   “But  you’re not clean, you sti—” began Mother.
   “Be  nice!” interrupted Dad forcibly.
   “You  don’t  know this,”  said Mother to Mr.  Stink. “But  after what I  said
on Question Time last night, I have been asked by the Prime Minister to pull
out of the election.”
   “Yes,  I do  know actually. I  heard you and your  husband arguing just a
moment ago in the living room.”
   “Oh,”  said Mother, uncharacteristically lost for words.
   “Sausages are ready!” said Chloe, trying to save her mother from further
humiliation.
   “I’d   better be off to work now, love,” said Dad. “I don’t want to be late.”
   “Yes,  yes,”  said Mother  waving  him  away  distractedly. He  discreetly
picked up a couple of slices of bread and slipped them in his pocket on the
way out. Chloe  heard the front  door loudly  open and close, and then the
door to the room under the stairs very quietly do the same.
   “Just seven sausages today please, Miss Chloe,” said Mr. Stink. “I don’t
want to put on weight. I have to think of my fan base.”

115
   “Fan base?!” said Mother in a barely disguised jealous rage.
   The telephone, which had been crouching on the table doing  very little,
suddenly sang its little song.
   Chloe picked it  up. “Crooombe residence. Who is speaking please . . . ?
It’s the Prime Minister!”






























   Mother’s  face lit up with  hope, and even her bouffant seemed to perk up
a bit. “Ah yes! I knew my darling Dave would change his mind!”
   “He   wants to  talk  to  Mr.  Stink,  actually,”  continued Chloe.  Mother’s
smile turned upside down.
   Mr.  Stink  picked up the  receiver with  a nonchalance that suggested he
often received calls from world leaders. “Stink here. Yes? Yes? Oh yes . . .
?”

116
   Mother  and Chloe studied his  face like  a map, trying  to  read from his
reactions what the Prime Minister was saying.
   “Yes, yes, yes. Well, yes, thank you, Prime Minister.”
   Mr.  Stink put  the receiver down and sat back at the table to resume his
now daily task of reading about himself in the newspapers.
   “Well?”  asked Chloe.
   “Yes, well?”  chimed in Mother.
   “The   Prime  Minister   has invited   me to   go  for  tea  at  Number  Ten
Downing Street today,”  said Mr.  Stink  matter-of-factly. “He  wants me  to
take over from you, Mrs.  Crumb, as the local candidate. May I have those
sausages now please, Chloe?”

117
                                                        20



                                         Grubby    Toilet  Roll



“Hoooorrraaaayyyyy!”  There was a huge cheer as Mr. Stink appeared at the
upstairs window. All he had to do was stand and wave for the crowd to roar
their approval.  The cameras all  zoomed in   and the  microphones leaned
forward. One lady even held her baby up so the infant could catch sight of
this new star. Chloe stood a  few paces behind Mr.  Stink, watching like  a
proud parent. She hadn’t  enjoyed being on  the television  that much  and
preferred to let Mr. Stink take center stage. He gestured for everyone to be
quiet. And there was quiet.

119
   “I   have written a  short speech,” he announced, before unrolling a very
long, grubby toilet roll and reading from it.
   “First  of all, may I say how very honored I am that you have all turned out
to see me today.”
   The crowd cheered again.
   “I  am but a humble wanderer. A vagrant maybe, certainly a vagabond, a
street dreamer if you will . . . .”
   “Oh,  get on with it!” hissed Mother from behind Chloe.
   “Shussshh!” shushed Chloe.
   “As  such, I  had no idea that simply  appearing on the electric televisual
apparatus would have quite such an astonishing effect. All I can say at this
time is that I  am meeting with the Prime Minister  today at Number Ten to
discuss my political future.”
   The crowd went wild.
   “Thank  you all for your incredible kindness,” he concluded, before rolling
his toilet roll back up and disappearing from view.
   “Miss  Chloe?” he said.

120
   “Yes?” she answered.
   “If  I  am meeting the Prime Minister, I think I need a makeover.”
   Chloe wasn’t sure exactly what a “makeover”  was. She knew there were
lots of  shows on TV  that  did makeovers, but Mother  didn’t  allow  her to
watch them. Feeling like the ugly duckling of the family, she didn’t own any
makeup either, so she tentatively knocked on her little sister’s door to see if
she could borrow some. Annabelle had drawers full of makeup. She always
asked for it for her birthday and Christmas, as she liked nothing better than
painting it all  on and performing her own little  beauty pageants in front of
her bedroom mirror.
   “Has he gone yet?” asked Annabelle.
   “No,  he hasn’t. Maybe if you bothered to talk to him, you would see how
nice he is.”
   “He  smells.”
   “So do you,” said Chloe. “Now, I need to borrow some of your makeup.”
   “Why?  You don’t wear makeup. You’re not pretty, so there’s no point.”
   For  a moment Chloe entertained a number of  fantasies where her little
sister met horrific ends. Plunged into a pool of piranhas perhaps? Abandoned
in the Arctic   wastes in her underwear? Force-fed marshmallows until she
exploded?
   “It’s  for  Mr.  Stink,” she said, filing  away all  those fantasies in her brain
for a later date.
   “No  way.”
   “I’ll   tell Mother  you’re the one who’s been secretly scoffing her Bendicks
chocolate mints.”
   “What  do you need?” replied Annabelle in a heartbeat.
 
Later, Mr. Stink  sat on an upturned plant  pot in  the shed as the two girls
fussed around him.
   “It’s  not too much, is it?” he inquired.
   Unexpectedly enjoying herself, Annabelle had gone a little  over the top.
Did Mr. Stink really  need pink glittery blusher, electric-blue eyeliner, purple
eye shadow, and orange nail varnish to go and meet the Prime Minister?

121
   “Erm  . . .” said Chloe.
   “No,   you  look  great,  Mr.  Stink!”   said  Annabelle,  as she  attached a
butterfly hair clip  to his head. “This is so much fun! It’s  the best Christmas
Eve ever!”
   “Aren’t  you supposed to be singing carols in church or something?” asked
Chloe knowingly.
   “Yes,  but I  hate  it.  It’s  so boring. This  is  way  more cool.”  Annabelle
looked thoughtful.  “You  know, it’s  so  tedious sometimes doing all  those
stupid hobbies and sports and stuff.”
   “Why  do them then?” inquired Chloe.
   “Yes, why do them, dear?” chimed in Mr. Stink.
   Annabelle  looked  confused. “I  don’t   know  really. I  suppose to  make
Mother happy,” she said.
   “Your  mother won’t  be truly  happy if   you aren’t. You  need to find  the
things that make you happy,” said Mr. Stink  with  authority. It was hard to

122
take him seriously, though, what with his multi-colored eye makeup.
   “Well  . . . this afternoon has made me happy,” said Annabelle. She smiled
at Chloe for  the first  time  in years. “Hanging  out with  you has made me
happy.”
   Chloe  smiled  back, and  they  nervously held  each other’s  gaze for  a
moment.
   “What  about me?” demanded Mr. Stink.
   “You  too  of course!”  laughed Annabelle. “You  actually get used to  the
smell after a while,” she whispered to Chloe, who shushed her and smiled.
   All   of a sudden the shed shook violently. Chloe rushed to the  door and
opened it to see a helicopter hovering overhead. Engine whirring, it slowly
came down to land in their garden.
   “Ah,   yes. The Prime Minister  said he would be sending that to  pick us
up,” announced Mr. Stink.
   “Us?”  said Chloe.
   “You  don’t think I was going to go without you, do you?”

123
                                                        21



                                                 Wet  Wipe



“Why   don’t   you   come  too?”  shouted  Chloe   to  Annabelle   over  the
thunderous noise of the blades.
   “No,  this  is your day, Chloe,”  her little  sister hollered back. “This is  all
because of you. And besides, that helicopter’s tiny. It’ll  absolutely whiff in
there. . . .”
   Chloe  grinned and  waved goodbye as the  helicopter slowly  ascended,
flattening most of the plants and flowers in the garden as it did so. Mother’s
bouffant danced around her head like cotton candy on a windy  day at the
seafront as she attempted to  hold  it  down.  Elizabeth the  cat got  blown
across the lawn. She tried desperately to cling onto the grass with her claws.
But, despite her meowing for mercy, the wind from the blades was just too
strong and she shot across the garden like a furry cannonball and into the
pond.
   PloS!
   The Duchess looked down from the helicopter window, smirking.
   As they glided up and up and up Chloe saw her house, and her street, and
her town  get smaller  and smaller. Soon the  postal districts  were packed
below her like  squares on a chessboard. It was indescribably thrilling. For
the first time in  her life,  Chloe felt like  she was at the center of the world.
She looked over at Mr.  Stink.  He was getting re-acquainted with  a toffee
bonbon that, from the looks of  it,  had been in his trouser pocket since the
late 1950s. Apart  from  his jaw  working  desperately to chew  the ancient
confectionery, he looked perfectly relaxed, as if taking  a helicopter ride to
see the Prime Minister was something he did most days.
   Chloe smiled over at him, and he smiled back with that special twinkle in
his eye that almost made you forget how bad he smelled.
   Mr.  Stink  tapped on the pilot’s  shoulder. “Are  you going to  be coming
round with meal service at any point?” he asked.
   “It’s  just a short flight, sir.”

124
   “Any  chance of a cup of tea and a bun then?”
   “I  am very sorry, sir,” replied the pilot with  a firmness that suggested this
conversation was about to be over.
   “Very   disappointing,”  said  Mr.  Stink.   Chloe  recognized the  door  of
Number  Ten Downing   Street, because it   was always  on  those  boring
political shows she was allowed to watch on  Sunday mornings. It was big
and black and always had a policeman standing outside. She thought, If I
Moined the Solice, I would want to be chasing baddies all day, not standing
outside a door thinking about whether or not I should have sSaghetti hooSs
for  my  tea.  However,  she  wisely  kept  that  thought  to   herself  as the
policeman opened the door for them with a smile.
 
“Please take a seat,” said  an immaculately  dressed butler haughtily. The
staff were used to playing host to royalty and world leaders at 10 Downing
Street, not  a  little  girl,   a  transvestite tramp,  and his  dog.  “The  Prime
Minister will  be with you shortly.”
   They  were  standing in  a big  oak-paneled room  with  dozens of  gold-
framed oil paintings of serious-looking old men staring out at you from the
walls. The tinsel  round the frames did little   to counter their severe looks.
Suddenly, the   double  doors  flew   open  and  a  herd  of   men  in   suits
approached them.
   “Good  afternoon, Mr. Stinky!”  said the Prime Minister. You could tell he
was in charge as he was walking at the front of the herd.
   “It’s  just Stink, Prime Minister,”  corrected one of his advisers.
   “How  are you doing, mate?” said the Prime Minister, trying to downplay
his poshness. He offered out his perfectly manicured and moisturized little
hand for Mr.  Stink to  shake. The tramp offered his own  big dirty  gnarled
hand and, looking at it, the Prime Minister quickly withdrew  his, preferring
to  give  his  new  best friend   a  mock  punch  on  the  shoulder. He  then
examined his knuckles and noticed they had some grime on them.
   “Wet  wipe!” he demanded. “Now!”
   A  man at the back of the herd hurriedly produced a wet wipe and it was
passed forward to the Prime Minister.  He quickly   wiped his hand with  it
before passing it back to the man at the back.

125
   “A  pleasure to meet you too, Mr. Prime Minister,” said Mr. Stink without
conviction.
   “Call   me Dave,”  said the Prime  Minister. “Gosh,  he does smell  like  a
toilet,” he whispered to one of his advisers.
   Mr.  Stink  looked  at Chloe, hurt,  but  the Prime Minister   didn’t  notice.
“So, you  made quite  a splash on  Question Time,  my homeless pal,”  he
continued. “Ruddy hilarious. Ha ha ha!”  He wiped away a nonexistent tear
of laughter from his eye. “I think we could use you.”
   “Use him?”  asked Chloe suspiciously.

126
   “Yeah,  yeah. It’s no secret it’s  not looking  good for  me in the election.
My approval rating with the public right now is . . . ”
   One of the herd hastily opened a folder and there was a long pause as he
flicked through pages and pages of information.
   “Bad.”
   “Bad.  Right. Thanks, Perkins,” said the Prime Minister, sarcastically.
   “It’s  Brownlow.”
   “Whatever.”  The Prime Minister turned back to Mr.  Stink. “I  think if  we
had you, a real-life tramp, take over from Mrs. Crumb as candidate, it could
be brilliant. It’s  far too  late to rope anyone else in now, and you would be
the ideal last-minute replacement. You’re just so funny. I mean, to laugh at,
not really with.”
   “Excuse me?” said Chloe, feeling very protective of her friend now.
   The Prime Minister ignored her. “It’s genius! It really  is. If you joined the
party, it would  fool the public  into thinking  we cared about the homeless!
Maybe one day I could even make you Minister for Soap Dodgers.”
   “Soap Dodgers?” said Mr. Stink.
   “Yeah, you know, the homeless.”
   “Right,”   said Mr. Stink.  “And  as Minister for  the Homeless, I would be
able to help other homeless people?”
   “Well,   no,”  said the  Prime Minister.  “It   wouldn’t  mean anything,  just
make me look like a fantastic tramp-loving  guy. Well, wadda you say, Mr.
Stinky-poo?”
   Mr.  Stink looked very ill at ease. “I don’t . . . I mean . . . I’m not sure—”
   “Are   you kidding  me?”  laughed the Prime  Minister.  “You’re  a tramp!
You can’t have anything better to do!”
   The  suited herd  laughed too.  Suddenly Chloe  had a  flashback to  her
school. The Prime Minister  and  his aides were behaving exactly  like  the
gang of mean girls in her year. Still stumbling  for words, Mr.  Stink looked
over to her for help.
   “Prime  Minister . . . ?” said Chloe.
   “Yes?” he answered with an expectant smile.
   “Why  don’t you stick it  up your fat bum!”
   “You  took the words right  out of my mouth,  child!”  chuckled Mr. Stink.
“Goodbye, Prime Minister, and merry Christmas to you all!”

127
                                                        22



                                            Long  Lion   Days



Chloe and Mr. Stink weren’t invited  to take the helicopter home. They had
to get the bus.
   As  it was Christmas Eve, the bus was chock-full of people, most of them
barely visible  under their mountains of  shopping bags. As Chloe and Mr.
Stink sat side by  side on the top  deck, bare branches dragged against the
grimy windows.
   “Did  you see the look on his face when you told him to stick it up his . . .
?” exclaimed Mr. Stink.
   “I  can’t believe I did that!”  said Chloe.
   “I’m   so glad you did,”  said Mr. Stink.  “Thank you so much for  sticking
up for me.”
   “Well,  you stuck up for me with that awful Rosamund!”
   “‘Stick    it   up  your  bum!’    So  naughty!  Though  I   might   have said
something far ruder! Ha ha!”
   They  laughed together. Mr. Stink reached into his trouser pocket to pull
out a  dirty   old  handkerchief to  dry  his  tears  of  joy.  As  he  raised the
handkerchief to his face, Chloe spotted that a label had been sewn on to it.
Peering closer, she saw that the label was made of  silk,  and a name was
embroidered delicately on it. . . .
   “Lord  . . . Darlington?” she read.
   There was silence for a moment.
   “Is  that you?” said Chloe. “Are you a lord?”
   “No  . . . no . .  . ” said Mr. Stink.  “I’m  just a humble vagabond. I got this
handkerchief . . . from a garage sale.”
   “May  I see your silver spoon then?” said Chloe, gently.

128
   Mr.  Stink  gave a resigned smile. He reached into his jacket pocket and
slowly withdrew  the spoon, then handed it to  her. Chloe turned it  over in
her hands. Looking at it close up, she realized she’d been wrong. It wasn’t
three letters engraved on it. It  was a single letter on a  crest, held on each
side by a lion.
   A  single, capital letter D.
   “You  are Lord Darlington,”  said Chloe. “Let  me see that old photograph
again.”
   Mr.  Stink carefully pulled out his old black-and-white photograph.
   Chloe studied it for  a few seconds. It was just as she’d remembered. The
beautiful young couple, the Rolls-Royce, the stately home. Only now, when
she looked at it, she could see the resemblance between the young man in
the photo and the old tramp beside her. “And that’s you in the picture.”
   Chloe   held  the   photograph  delicately,  knowing   she  was   handling
something very   precious.  Mr.  Stink   looked  much  younger,  especially
without his beard and dirt. But the eyes were sparkling. It was unmistakably
him.
   “The  game’s up,” said Mr. Stink. “That is me, Chloe. A lifetime ago.”
   “And  who’s this lady with you?”
   “My  wife.”
   “Your  wife? I didn’t  know you were married.”
   “You  didn’t know I  was a lord, either,” said Mr. Stink.

129
   “And   that  must  be  your  house then,  Lord   Darlington,”   said Chloe,
indicating the stately home standing behind the couple in  the photograph.
Mr. Stink nodded. “Well, then, how come you’re homeless now?”
   “It’s  a long story, my dear,” said Mr. Stink, evasively.
   “But  I want to  hear it,” said Chloe. “Please? I’ve told you so much about
my life. And I’ve  always wanted to know your story, Mr. Stink, ever since I
first saw you. I always knew you must have a fascinating tale to tell.”
   Mr.  Stink  took  a breath. “Well,  I  had it  all,  child.  More money  than I
could ever spend, a beautiful house with its own lake. My  life  was like an
endless summer. Croquet, tea on the lawn,  long  lion  days spent playing
cricket. And  to  make things even  more perfect, I  married  this beautiful,
clever, funny, adorable woman, my childhood sweetheart. Violet.”
   “She is beautiful.”
   “Yes,  yes, she is. She was. Unutterably so. We were deliriously  happy,
you know.”
   It  was  all  so obvious now  to  Chloe. The  way  Mr. Stink  had  expertly
tossed the screwed-up piece of paper into the bin, his silver monogrammed
cutlery and his impeccable table manners, his insistence on walking on the
outside of the pavement, the way he had decorated the shed. It was all true.
He was suSer-posh.
   “Soon   after   that  photograph  was  taken,  Violet   became  pregnant,”
continued Mr.  Stink. “I   couldn’t  have been more thrilled.  But  one night,
when my  wife   was eight  months  pregnant, my  chauffeur  drove  me to
London  to  have  dinner  with   a  group  of  my   old  school  friends  at  a
gentlemen’s club. It was just  before Christmas, actually. I stayed late into
the night, selfishly drinking and talking and smoking cigars. . . .”
   “What  do you mean, selfishly?” said Chloe.
   “Because I should never have gone. We were caught in a blizzard on the
way home. I didn’t get back until just before dawn, and found that the house
was ablaze. . . .”
   “Oh  no!”  cried  Chloe, not sure if  she could bear to hear the rest of the
story.
   “A   piece of coal  must have fallen out  of the  fireplace in  our bedroom,
and set the carpet on fire  as she slept. I  ran  out of  the Rolls  and waded
through the deep snow. Desperately I tried to fight my way into  the house,
but the fire brigade wouldn’t let me in. It took five of them to hold me back.

130
They tried their best to save her, but it was too late. The roof fell in. Violet
didn’t stand a chance.”
   “Oh  my God!” Chloe gasped.
   Tears filled  the old tramp’s eyes. Chloe didn’t know what to do. Dealing
with emotions was a new thing  to her, but tentatively  she reached out her
hand to comfort him. Time  seemed to slow down as her hand reached his.
This made the tears really flow, and he shook with half a century of pain.
   “If   only  I hadn’t  been at the club  that night,  I could  have saved her. I
could have held her all night,  made her feel safe and warm. She wouldn’t
have needed the fire. My darling, darling Violet.”  Chloe squeezed his dirty
hand tight.
   “You  can’t blame yourself for the fire.”
   “I  should have been there for her. I should have been there. . . .”
   “It  was an accident,” said Chloe. “You have to forgive yourself.”
   “I  can’t. I never can.”
   “You  are a good man, Mr. Stink. What happened was a terrible accident.
You must believe that.”
   “Thank  you,  child. I  shouldn’t  really cry.  Not on  public transport.”  He
sniffed, and gathered himself together a little.
   “So,”  said Chloe, “how you did you end up living on the streets?”
   “Well,   I  was heartbroken. Utterly  inconsolable.  I  had lost  my  unborn
child and the woman I loved. After the funeral I tried to return to the house.
Lived alone in a wing that hadn’t been so badly damaged by the blaze. But
the house carried so many painful memories, I couldn’t  sleep. Being there
gave me terrible nightmares. I kept seeing her face in the flames. I  had to
get away. So one day I started walking and I never came back.”
   “I  am so sorry,” said Chloe. “If people only knew that . . .”
   “Like   I  said on  the televisual  apparatus, every homeless person has a
story to tell,” said Mr. Stink. “That’s  mine. I am sorry it didn’t involve  spies
or pirates or what have you. Real life isn’t like that, I’m afraid. And I  didn’t
mean to upset you.”
   “Christmas must be the hardest time for you,” said Chloe.
   “Yes, yes, of  course. Christmas is an emblem of perfect happiness I find
very hard to  bear. It’s a time  when families  come together. For me it’s  a
reminder of who’s not there.”
   The bus reached their stop, and Chloe’s arm found a home in Mr. Stink’s
as they walked toward the family house. She was relieved to see that all the

131
reporters and camera crews had moved on. The funny old  tramp must be
old news by now.
   “I  just wish I could make everything right,” said Chloe.
   “But  you are making everything right,  Miss Chloe. Ever since you came
and talked to me. You’ve made me smile again. You’ve been so kind to me.
You know,  if  my  child  had ended up like  you,  I  would  have been very
proud.”
   Chloe  was so touched she could hardly  think  what to  say. “Well,”  she
said, “I know you would have made a great dad.”
   “Thank  you, child. Unimaginable kindness.”
   Nearing the house, Chloe looked at it and realized something. She didn’t
want to go home. She didn’t want to live with her awful mother and have to
go to  that  horrible  posh school anymore.  They  walked in  silence  for  a
moment, then Chloe took a deep breath and turned to Mr. Stink.
   “I  don’t  want to go  back there,” she said. “I want  to go wandering with
you.”

132
                                                        23



                                           Plastic  Snowman



“I’m   sorry, Miss Chloe,  but you  can’t possibly  come with  me,” said Mr.
Stink as they stood in the driveway.
   “Why  not?” protested Chloe.
   “For  a million different  reasons!”
   “Name one!”
   “It’s  too cold.”
   “I  don’t mind the cold.”
   “Well,”   said Mr.  Stink, “living   on the streets is far  too dangerous for a
young girl like you.”
   “I’m   nearly thirteen!”
   “It’s  very important you don’t miss school.”
   “I   hate school,”  said Chloe.  “Please please please, Mr. Stink.  Let  me
come with you and the Duchess. I want to be a wanderer like you.”
   “You  must think about this properly for a moment, child,” said Mr. Stink.
“What on earth is your mother going to say?”
   “I  don’t care,” snapped Chloe. “I hate her anyway.”
   “I’ve  told  you before, you mustn’t say that.”
   “But  it’s true.”
   Mr.  Stink sighed. “Your mind is made up, is it?”
   “One hundred percent!”
   “Well,  in that case, I’d better go and talk to your mother for you.”
   Chloe  grinned. This  was suSerbrilliantamazing!  It  was really  going to
happen. She was going to be free at last! No more being sent to bed early.
No more math homework. No more wearing yellow frilly  dresses that made
her look like  candy come to life. Chloe was a hundred times more excited
than she had ever been in her life. She and Mr. Stink were going to wander
the world together, eating sausages for breakfast, lunch, and dinner, having
baths in ponds, and emptying Starbucks wherever they went. . . .

133
   “Thanks  so much, Mr. Stink,” she said, as she put her key in the lock for
the last time.
 
As  Chloe  raced  excitedly  around  her  room  throwing   clothes and  the
chocolate bars she had hidden under her bed into her bag, she could hear
faint voices in  the kitchen downstairs. Mother  won’t care,  thought Chloe.
She’ll  hardly   miss  me anyway!   The  only  Serson  she cares  about  is
Annabelle.
   Chloe looked  around her little  pink room. Strangely, she felt a tingle  of
fondness for it now that she was leaving. And she was going to miss Dad,
and of course Annabelle,  and even Elizabeth the cat,  but a new  life  was
calling her. A  life of  mystery and adventure. A life  of  making up bedtime
stories about vampires  and zombies.  A  life   of  burping  in  the  faces of
bullies!
   Just then, there was a gentle knock on the door. “I’m coming, Mr. Stink!”
Chloe called out, as she threw the last ornamental owl into her bag.
   The door opened slowly. Chloe turned around and gasped.
   It  wasn’t Mr. Stink.
   It  was Mother. She stood in the corridor, her eyes red from crying. A tear
was  running  down   her  cheek  and  a   little   plastic  snowman  dangled
incongruously above her head.
   “My   darling Chloe,”  she spluttered. “Mr. Stink just  told me you wanted
to leave home. Please. I beg you, don’t go.”
   Chloe had never seen Mother looking so sad.

134
   Suddenly, she felt a little  guilty. “I,  er, just thought you wouldn’t  mind,”
she said.
   “Mind?  I  couldn’t  bear it if  you left.”  Mother started sobbing now. This
was so unlike her. It was as if Chloe was looking at another person entirely.
   “What  did Mr. Stink say to you?” she asked.

135
   “The   old  man gave  me  a good  talking-to,”   said Mother.  “Said   how
unhappy you’ve been at home. How I had to work at being a better mother.
He told  me how  he’d lost  his own  family,  and if  I  wasn’t careful,  I was
going to lose you. I felt so ashamed. I know we haven’t always seen eye to
eye on things, Chloe, but I do love you. I really do.”
   Chloe was horrified. She’d thought Mr. Stink  was just going to ask if she
could go with him, but instead he’d made Mother cry. She was furious with
him. This wasn’t the plan at all!
   And  just then, Mr.  Stink appeared solemnly in the doorway. He stood a
foot behind Mother.
   “I’m   sorry, Chloe,” he ventured. “I hope you can forgive me.”
   “Why  did  you say what you did?” she asked angrily. “I thought we were
going to wander the world together.”
   Mr.  Stink  smiled kindly.  “Maybe  one  day you’ll   wander the world  on
your own,”  he said. “But for  now, trust me, you need your family. I  would
give anything to have mine back. Anything.”
   Mother’s  legs looked like they were going to give way, and she stumbled
toward Chloe’s bed. She sat there and wept, hiding her face in shame at her
tears. Chloe looked at Mr.  Stink silently  for  a long time.  Deep down, she
knew he was right.
   “Of  course I forgive you,” she said to him finally, and he smiled that eye-
twinkling smile of  his.
   Then she softly sat down next to her mother and put an arm around her.
   “And  I love you too, Mother. Very much.”

136
                                                        24



                                        Yuckety    Yuck  Yuck



It  was well into  the night  on Christmas Eve now, and down  in the living
room, Dad  waved a large  festive assortment tin  under Mr.  Stink’s  nose.
“Would you like a biscuit?” he asked.
   Dad  had already scoffed  quite a  few, having  been hiding in  the  room
under the stairs again all day with  only  a couple of slices of  dry  bread to
keep him going. Mr. Stink eyed the contents of the tin with disgust.
   “Have  you any stale ones?” he asked. “Maybe with just a hint of mold?”
   “I  don’t think  so, sorry,” replied Dad.
   “No,  thank you,  then,” said Mr. Stink.  He patted the Duchess, who was
sitting on his lap, trading  evil looks across the coffee table with Elizabeth.
The  family   cat  was  bundled up   in  a  towel   on  Annabelle’s  lap,  still
recovering from her “swim.”
   “Never  mind about the biscuits,”  said Annabelle. “I  want to  know what
you said to the Prime Minister’s offer?”
   “Chloe  told him to stick it up his—”
   “We  told him he wasn’t interested,” interjected Chloe hastily. “So maybe
you can still run for Parliament, Mother.”
   “Oh  no, I don’t  want to,” said Mother. “Not  after I  humiliated myself on
television.”
   “But   now you’ve  met  Mr.  Stink and  seen how other people live  their
lives, you could try to make things better for people,” suggested Chloe.
   “Well,  perhaps I  could try  and run again during  the next election,”said
Mother. “Though  I  will   have to  change my  policies. Especially  the one
about the homeless. I am sorry I got it so wrong.”
   “And  the one about the unemployed, eh, Dad?” said Chloe.
   “What’s  this?” said Mother.
   “Thank  you, Chloe,”  said Dad sarcastically. “Well,  I  didn’t  want to tell
you, but the car factory looks like  it’s going  to close soon and it had to let
most of us go.”

137
   “So  you are . . . ?” asked Mother, incredulous.
   “Unemployed,  yes. Or ‘welfare scum’ as you might say. I was too scared
to tell  you,  so I’ve  been hiding  in  the room under  the stairs for  the last
month.”
   “What  do you  mean, you were too scared to tell  me? I love  you, and I
always will, whether you’ve got a job at the stupid car factory or not.”
   Dad put his arm around her and she nuzzled up her head to meet his lips
with hers. Their kiss lingered  for a few  moments, as Chloe and Annabelle
looked on with a mixture of pride and embarrassment. Your parents kissing.
Nice but somehow yuck. Them cuddling is even worse. Yuckety yuck yuck.
   “I  would  go back to being in  a rock band, but you put my  guitar on the
bonfire!” said Dad with a chuckle.
   “Don’t!”   said Mother. “I  still  feel  so bad about that. I fell for  you like  a
ton of  bricks  when I  first  saw you  onstage with  the band. That’s  why I
married you. But  when the  album didn’t  sell, I  could  see how upset you
were, and I couldn’t bear it. I thought I was trying to help you move on with
your life, but now I  realize all I did was crush your dreams. And that’s why
I don’t want to make the same mistake twice.”
   She got up  and started searching in the bottom drawer of the sideboard
where she kept her secret stash of Bendicks chocolate mints. “I am so sorry
I tore up your story, Chloe.” Mother pulled out Chloe’s math exercise book
that she had ripped to pieces. She had painstakingly Scotch-taped the whole
thing back together, and with her eyes still shining with tears, she handed it
back to Chloe. “After Question Time, I had a lot of time to think,”  she said.
“I  fished this  out of  the garbage bin and I  read it  to  the end, Chloe. It’s
brilliant.”
   Chloe  took back the book with  a smile. “I   promise to try harder on my
math lessons from now on, Mother.”
   “Thank  you, Chloe. And I have something for you too, my darling,”  said
Mother to Dad.  From under the tree she pulled out  a beautifully  wrapped
present that was exactly the shape of an electric guitar.

138
                                                        25



                                    Black   Leather   Mistletoe



                      “I’ve   got some black leather mistletoe this Christmas,
                      I’m  gonna kiss you and give you a bad shaving rash. . . .”
Dad had plugged his shiny new electric guitar into its amp and was strutting
up and down  the living   room exuberantly  singing one of  his  old  band’s
songs. He was clearly having the time of his life. It was almost as if his perm
had grown back too. Mother, Chloe, Annabelle, and Mr. Stink sat on the sofa
and clapped along. Even Elizabeth and the Duchess were curled up together
nodding their heads in time with the music. The heavy rock wasn’t quite to
Mr. Stink’s taste, and to combat the noise he had discreetly re-inserted his
rabbit-dropping earplugs.

139
                      “Yeah baby, I’m gonna feast on your mince Sies,
                      And give you a real good yuletide surSrise . . . !”
The song ended with a huge flourish on Dad’s guitar, and his tiny stadium of
fans cheered and clapped for him excitedly.
   “Thank  you,  Wembley. Thank you  so much. That  was, of  course, The
Serpents of Doom’s  Christmas  single, ‘Black   Leather Mistletoe,’   which
rocketed to number ninety-eight in the charts. Now for my next song . . .”
   “I  think  that’s enough heavy rock music just for now, dear,” said Mother,
as if she might already be regretting giving him  that present. She turned to
Chloe and said, “You don’t want to leave anymore, do you?”

140
   “No,  Mother, not in a million years. This is the best Christmas ever.”
   “Oh,  wonderful!”  said Mother. “It’s  super that we are all together having
fun like this.”
   “But  . . .” said Chloe. “There is one thing I would like.”
   “Name it,”  said Mother.
   “I  would like Mr.  Stink to move in properly.”
   “What?”  asked Mother with a gasp.
   “That’s  a great idea,” said Dad. “We’ve all loved having you around, Mr.
Stink.”
   “Yes, you feel like part of the family now,” said Annabelle.
   “Well,  I  suppose he could stay for a little  while longer in  the shed . . .”
said Mother reluctantly.
   “I  didn’t mean in the shed. I meant in our house,” said Chloe.
   “Of  course,” said Dad.
   “That  would be great!” chimed in Annabelle.
   “Well,  erm, oh, um . . .” Mother looked increasingly flustered. “I do really
appreciate what Mr. Stink had done for us, but I’m not sure he would feel at
home here. I don’t imagine he has ever lived in a house as nice as this. . . .”
   “Actually,   Mr.  Stink  used to  live  in  a stately  home,” corrected Chloe
gleefully.
   “What? As a servant?” said Mother.
   “No,  it was his stately home. Mr. Stink is really a lord.”
   “A  lord? Is this true, Mr. Stink?”
   “Yes, Mrs. Crooooooombe.”
   “A   stately  hobo!  Well,  that  changes everything!”  announced Mother,
beaming with pride  that she finally  had someone truly posh in  the house.
“Husband, take the plastic covers off the  sofa. Annabelle, get out the best
china! And  if  you would  like  to  use the downstairs lavatory at any  time,
Lord Stink, I have the key right here.”
   “Thank  you, but I don’t need to go right now. Oh, hang on a moment . . .
.”
   They all looked at Mr. Stink expectantly. Chloe, Annabelle, and Dad were
just curious to finally see what the downstairs bathroom actually looked like
from the inside, since none of them had ever been allowed in there.
   “No  . . . no, false alarm.”
   Mother  continued babbling breathlessly. “And . . .  and . . .  and you can
have our  bedroom, your  lordship!  I  can sleep  on the  sofa bed  and my

141
husband would be more than happy to move into the shed.”
   “What  the—?” said Dad.
   “Please . . . please . . . please stay here with us,” interjected Chloe.
   Mr.  Stink sat in  silence for a  moment. The cup and saucer in his hands
started rattling, then a little tear formed in his eye. It  traveled slowly down
his cheek, creating a little streak of  white on his grimy  face. The Duchess
looked up at him and tenderly licked it  off  her master’s face. Chloe’s hand
tiptoed its way across the sofa to comfort him.
   He held it tight. He held it so tight that she knew this was goodbye.
   “Such  unimaginable  kindness. Thank  you.  Thank  you   all,  so  much.
However, I am going to have to say no.”
   “Stay  with   us for  Christmas  Day  and Boxing  Day  at  least,”  pleaded
Annabelle. “Please . . . ?” said Chloe.
   “Thank you,”  said Mr. Stink. “But I am afraid I have to refuse.”
   “But  why?” demanded Chloe.
   “My   work here is done. And I’m  a wanderer,” said Mr.  Stink. “It’s  time
for me to wander on.”
   “But  we want  you to be safe and warm here with us,” said Chloe. Tears
were rolling down her cheeks now. Annabelle wiped away her sister’s tears
with her sleeve.
   “I  am sorry, Miss Chloe. I have to go. No tears please. No fuss. Farewell
to you all and thank you for all your  kindness.” Mr. Stink put down his cup
and saucer, and headed for the door. “Come on, Duchess,” he said. “It’s time
to go.”

142
                                                        26



                                                 Little   Star



He walked off into  the moonlight. The moon was full and bright that night,
and it  looked so perfect that  it  couldn’t  be real. It  was as if   it  had been
painted, and hung there on a hook,  it  was so impossibly  beautiful. There
wasn’t any snow, there never is at Christmas these days, except on the cards.
Instead the streets were damp from a storm, and the moon was reflected in
hundreds of little puddles. Most of the houses were adorned with Christmas
decorations of one sort or another, with  fairy-lit  trees glinting  through the
double glazing. The decorations looked almost beautiful too, competing with
the moon and the stars in their own feeble way. All you could hear was the
rhythmic scuff  of  Mr.  Stink’s battered oxford  shoes as he walked slowly
along the road,  the Duchess following  dutifully   a pace behind,  her head
bowed.
   Chloe watched him  unseen from an upstairs window. Her hand touched
the cold glass, trying to reach out to him. She watched him disappear out of
sight, before descending back to her room.
   Then, sitting  there on her bed, she remembered a reason to see him one
last time.
   “Lily   and the  Flesh-Eating Zombie Teachers!” she shouted, as she ran
down the street.
   “Miss  Chloe?” said Mr. Stink, turning round.
   “I  have been thinking and thinking about Lily’s second adventure. I would
love to tell it to you now!”
   “Write  it down for me, child.”
   “Write  it down?” asked Chloe.
   “Yes,”  said Mr. Stink. “One  day I want to  walk into  a bookshop and see
your name on one of the covers. You have a talent for telling stories, Chloe.”
   “Do  I?” Chloe had never felt she had a talent for anything.
   “Yes.  All  that time spent alone in  your room will   pay off  one day. You
have an extraordinary imagination, young lady. A real gift. You should share

143
it with the world.”
   “Thank you, Mr. Stink,”  said Chloe shyly.
   “I’m   glad  you came running after  me, though,”  said Mr.  Stink. “I   just
remembered I have something for you.”
   “For  me?”
   “Yes, I saved up all my loose change and bought you a Christmas present.
I think it’s something rather special.”
   Mr.  Stink  rummaged in  his bag  and pulled  out a  package wrapped in
brown paper and tied up with string. He handed it Chloe, who unwrapped it
excitedly. Inside was a Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles stationery set.
   “It  is a Teenybopper Mucus Karate Tortoise thing. I thought you’d like it.
Mr. Raj told me it was the very last one he had in his shop.”
   “Did  he now?”  Chloe smiled. “This is  the best present I have ever had.”
She wasn’t lying.  That Mr.  Stink had saved up all  his pennies to buy  her
something meant the whole  world  to  her. “I  will   treasure this  forever, I
promise.”
   “Thank you,”  said Mr. Stink.
   “And  you’ve just given my  whole family the best Christmas present ever.
You brought us together.”
   “Well,  I’m  not sure I  can take all the credit for  that!”  He smiled. “Now,
you should really go home, young Chloe. It’s cold, and it feels like it’s going
to rain.”
   “I  don’t like  the thought of you sleeping outside,” she said. “Especially on
a cold damp night like this.”
   Mr.  Stink smiled. “I  like being outside, you know. On our wedding night
my darling Violet showed me the brightest star in the sky. Do you see? That
one there?”
   He pointed it out. It twinkled brightly  like his eyes.
   “I  see it,” said Chloe.
   “Well,  that night we stood on the balcony of our bedroom and she said she
would love me for as long as that star kept shining. So every night, before I
go to sleep, I like to gaze at that star and think about her, and the great love
we shared. I see the star, and it’s her I see.”
   “That’s beautiful,”  said Chloe, trembling and trying hard not to cry.
   “My   wife  isn’t gone. Every night  she meets me in my dreams. Now go
home. And don’t worry  about me, Miss Chloe. I have the Duchess and my
star.”

144
   “But  I’ll  miss you,” said Chloe.
   Mr.  Stink smiled, then pointed up at the sky. “Do you  see Violet’s star?”
he asked.
   Chloe nodded.
   “Do  you see how there’s another little star just under it?”
   “Yes,”   said Chloe.  Up in   the night  sky,  Violet’s  star burned brightly.
Below it a smaller star twinkled in the blackness.
   “Well,  you  are a very special young lady,” said Mr.  Stink. “And  when I
look at that star, I am going to think about you.”
   Chloe felt  overwhelmed. “Thank you,”  she said. “And I’ll   look at it  and
think about you.”

146
    She gave him  a big hug  and didn’t  want  to  let go. He  stood still  and  held
her for  a  moment  before rocking   a little   to  set himself   free. “I   have to  go
now. My  soul is restless and I need to wander. Goodbye,  Miss Chloe.”
    “Goodbye,  Mr. Stink.”
    The wanderer  wandered off  down  the road as night  slinked  like  a panther
down the sky. She watched  him disappear out  of sight,  until  all  that could be
heard was silence echoing around the streets.
    Later that  night,  Chloe sat alone on  her bed. Mr.  Stink  was gone. Perhaps
forever.  But  she could  still   smell  him.  She would   always  be able  to smell
him.
    She opened her math  exercise book  and began to  write  the first  words  of
her new story.
    Mr. Stink stank . . .  .

149
                                               Thank-yous:



Once again  Quentin  Blake  has  honored  my  writing   with   his  sublime
illustrations, and to him I am enormously grateful. I still  can’t quite believe
I have collaborated with him, as he is such a legend. I would  like to thank
my British publishers Mario  Santos and Ann-Janine Murtagh, for believing
in me again. Nick Lake, my editor, deserves a big thank you for making me
work so  hard and buying  me tea and cakes. Finally,  I’m  grateful  to Ben
Schrank, Gillian Levinson, and the whole team at Razorbill for bringing my
books to the USA.
 
Finally I would also like to thank all the people who wrote to me to say they
enjoyed my first book, The Boy in the Dress, particularly the children. It  is
very touching when  someone takes the time to write  a letter,  and greatly
encouraged me when working on Mr. Stink. I hope it doesn’t disappoint.

