2
For	Scott,	who	always	believes

3
                                             CHAPTER	        1

Now	that	I’ve	found	the	way	to	fly,	which	direction	should	I	go	into	the	night?
My	wings	aren’t	white	or	feathered;	they’re	green,	made	of	green	silk,	which
shudders	in	the	wind	and	bends	when	I	move—first	in	a	circle,	then	in	a	line,
finally	in	a	shape	of	my	own	invention.	The	black	behind	me	doesn’t	worry	me;
neither	do	the	stars	ahead.

I	smile	at	myself,	at	the	foolishness	of	my	imagination.	People	cannot	fly,
though	before	the	Society,	there	were	myths	about	those	who	could.	I	saw	a
painting	of	them	once.	White	wings,	blue	sky,	gold	circles	above	their	heads,
eyes	turned	up	in	surprise	as	though	they	couldn’t	believe	what	the	artist	had
painted	them	doing,	couldn’t	believe	that	their	feet	didn’t	touch	the	ground.

Those	stories	weren’t	true.	I	know	that.	But	tonight,	it’s	easy	to	forget.	The	air
train	glides	through	the	starry	night	so	smoothly	and	my	heart	pounds	so	quickly
that	it	feels	as	though	I	could	soar	into	the	sky	at	any	moment.

“What	are	you	smiling	about?”	Xander	wonders	as	I	smooth	the	folds	of	my
green	silk	dress	down	neat.

“Everything,”	I	tell	him,	and	it’s	true.	I’ve	waited	so	long	for	this:	for	my	Match
Banquet.	Where	I’ll	see,	for	the	first	time,	the	face	of	the	boy	who	will	be	my
Match.	It	will	be	the	first	time	I	hear	his	name.

I	can’t	wait.	As	quickly	as	the	air	train	moves,	it	still	isn’t	fast	enough.	It	hushes
through	the	night,	its	sound	a	background	for	the	low	rain	of	our	parents’	voices,
the	lightning-quick	beats	of	my	heart.

Perhaps	Xander	can	hear	my	heart	pounding,	too,	because	he	asks,	“Are	you
nervous?”	In	the	seat	next	to	him,	Xander’s	older	brother	begins	to	tell	my
mother	the	story	of	his	Match	Banquet.	It	won’t	be	long	now	until	Xander	and	I
have	our	own	stories	to	tell.

“No,”	I	say.	But	Xander’s	my	best	friend.	He	knows	me	too	well.

“You	lie,”	he	teases.	“You	are	nervous.”

“Aren’t	you?”

4
“Aren’t	you?”

“Not	me.	I’m	ready.”	He	says	it	without	hesitation,	and	I	believe	him.	Xander	is
the	kind	of	person	who	is	sure	about	what	he	wants.

“It	doesn’t	matter	if	you’re	nervous,	Cassia,”	he	says,	gentle	now.	“Almost
ninety-three	percent	of	those	attending	their	Match	Banquet	exhibit	some	signs
of	nervousness.”

“Did	you	memorize	all	of	the	official	Matching	material?”

“Almost,”	Xander	says,	grinning.	He	holds	his	hands	out	as	if	to	say,	What	did
you	expect?

The	gesture	makes	me	laugh,	and	besides,	I	memorized	all	of	the	material,	too.
It’s	easy	to	do	when	you	read	it	so	many	times,	when	the	decision	is	so
important.	“So	you’re	in	the	minority,”	I	say.	“The	seven	percent	who	don’t
show	any	nerves	at	all.”

“Of	course,”	he	agrees.

“How	could	you	tell	I	was	nervous?”

“Because	you	keep	opening	and	closing	that.”	Xander	points	to	the	golden
object	in	my	hands.	“I	didn’t	know	you	had	an	artifact.”	A	few	treasures	from
the	past	float	around	among	us.	Though	citizens	of	the	Society	are	allowed	one
artifact	each,	they	are	hard	to	come	by.	Unless	you	had	ancestors	who	took	care
to	pass	things	along	through	the	years.

“I	didn’t,	until	a	few	hours	ago,”	I	tell	him.	“Grandfather	gave	it	to	me	for	my
birthday.	It	belonged	to	his	mother.”

“What’s	it	called?”	Xander	asks.

“A	compact,”	I	say.	I	like	the	name	very	much.	Compact	means	small.	I	am
small.	I	also	like	the	way	it	sounds	when	you	say	it:	com-pact.	Saying	the	word
makes	a	sound	like	the	one	the	artifact	itself	makes	when	it	snaps	shut.

“What	do	the	initials	and	numbers	mean?”

“I’m	not	sure.”	I	run	my	finger	across	the	letters	ACM	and	the	numbers	1940

5
carved	across	the	golden	surface.	“But	look,”	I	 tell	him,	popping	 the	compact
open	to	show	him	the	inside:	a	little	mirror,	 made	of	real	glass,	and	a	small
hollow	where	the	original	 owner	once	stored	powder	for	her	face,	according	to
Grandfather.	Now,	I	use	it	to	hold	 the	three	emergency	tablets	that	everyone
carries—one	green,	one	blue,	one	red.

“That’s	convenient,”	 Xander	says.	He	stretches	out	his	arms	in	front	of	him	and	I
notice	that	he	has	an	artifact,	too—a	pair	of	shiny	platinum	 cuff	links.	 “My
father	lent	me	these,	but	you	can’t	put	anything	in	them.	They’re	 completely
useless.”

“They	look	 nice,	though.”	My	 gaze	travels	up	to	Xander’s	face,	to	his	bright	 blue
eyes	and	blond	hair	above	his	dark	suit	and	white	shirt.	He’s	always	been
handsome,	even	when	we	were	little,	but	I’ve	never	seen	him	dressed	up	like
this.	Boys	don’t	have	as	much	leeway	in	choosing	clothes	as	girls	do.	One	suit
looks	much	like	another.	Still,	 they	get	to	select	the	color	of	their	shirts	and
cravats,	and	the	quality	of	the	material	is	much	finer	than	the	material	used	for
plainclothes.	“You	look	 nice.”	The	girl	 who	finds	 out	that	he’s	her	Match	will	 be
thrilled.

“Nice?”	 Xander	says,	lifting	 his	eyebrows.	“That’s	all?”

“Xander,”	 his	mother	says	next	to	him,	amusement	mingled	with	reproach	in	her
voice.

“You	look	beautiful,”	 Xander	 tells	me,	and	I	flush	a	little	 even	though	I’ve
known	Xander	all	my	 life.	I	 feel	beautiful,	in	 this	dress:	ice	green,	floating,	full-
skirted.	The	unaccustomed	smoothness	of	silk	against	my	skin	makes	me	feel
lithe	and	graceful.

Next	to	me,	my	mother	and	father	each	draw	a	breath	as	City	Hall	comes	into
view,	lit	 up	white	and	blue	and	sparkling	with	 the	special	occasion	lights	that
indicate	a	celebration	is	taking	place.	I	can’t	see	the	marble	stairs	in	front	of	 the
Hall	yet,	but	I	 know	that	they	will	 be	polished	and	shining.	All	 my	 life	I	 have
waited	to	walk	up	those	clean	marble	steps	and	through	the	doors	of	the	Hall,	a
building	I	 have	seen	from	a	distance	but	never	entered.

I	want	to	open	the	compact	and	check	in	the	mirror	to	make	sure	I	look	my	 best.
But	I	don’t	 want	to	seem	vain,	so	I	sneak	a	glance	at	my	face	in	its	surface
instead.

6
The	rounded	lid	of	the	compact	distorts	my	features	a	little,	 but	it’s	still	 me.	My
green	eyes.	My	coppery-brown	hair,	which	 looks	more	golden	in	the	compact
than	it	does	in	real	life.	My	 straight	small	nose.	My	 chin	with	a	trace	of	a	dimple
like	my	grandfather’s.	 All	 the	outward	characteristics	that	make	me	Cassia	Maria
Reyes,	seventeen	years	old	exactly.

I	turn	the	compact	over	in	my	hands,	looking	 at	how	perfectly	the	two	 sides	fit
together.	My	Match	is	 already	coming	together	just	as	neatly,	beginning	with	the
fact	that	I	am	here	tonight.	Since	my	birthday	 falls	on	the	fifteenth,	 the	day	the
Banquet	is	held	each	month,	I’d	always	hoped	that	I	might	 be	Matched	on	my
actual	birthday—but	I	 knew	it	might	 not	happen.	You	can	be	called	up	for	your
Banquet	anytime	during	the	year	after	you	turn	seventeen.	When	the	notification
came	across	the	port	two	weeks	ago	that	I	would,	indeed,	be	Matched	on	the	day
of	my	birthday,	 I	could	almost	hear	the	clean	snap	of	the	pieces	fitting	into
place,	exactly	as	I’ve	dreamed	for	so	long.

Because	although	I	haven’t	even	had	to	wait	a	full	day	for	 my	Match,	in	 some
ways	I	have	waited	all	my	life.

“Cassia,”	my	mother	says,	smiling	 at	me.	I	blink	and	look	 up,	startled.	My
parents	stand	up,	ready	to	disembark.	Xander	stands,	too,	and	straightens	his
sleeves.	I	hear	him	take	a	deep	breath,	and	I	smile	to	myself.	Maybe	he	is	a	little
nervous	after	all.

“Here	we	go,”	 he	says	to	me.	His	smile	is	so	kind	and	good;	I’m	glad	we	were
called	up	the	same	month.	We’ve	shared	so	much	of	childhood,	it	seems	we
should	share	the	end	of	it,	too.

I	smile	back	at	him	and	give	him	 the	best	greeting	we	have	in	the	Society.	“I
wish	you	optimal	 results,”	I	tell	 Xander.

“You	 too,	Cassia,”	he	says.

As	we	step	off	the	air	train	and	walk	 toward	City	 Hall,	my	 parents	each	link	an
arm	through	mine.	I	am	surrounded,	as	I	always	have	been,	by	their	love.

It	is	only	the	three	of	us	tonight.	 My	brother,	Bram,	 can’t	come	to	the	Match
Banquet	because	he	is	under	seventeen,	too	young	to	attend.	The	first	one	you
attend	is	always	your	own.	I,	however,	will	  be	able	to	attend	Bram’s	banquet
because	I	am	the	older	sibling.	I	smile	to	myself,	wondering	 what	Bram’s	 Match
will	 be	like.	In	seven	years	I	will	 find	 out.

7
will	 be	like.	In	seven	years	I	will	 find	 out.

But	tonight	is	my	night.

It	is	easy	to	identify	 those	of	us	being	Matched;	not	only	are	we	younger	than	all
of	the	others,	but	we	also	float	along	in	beautiful	 dresses	and	tailored	suits	while
our	parents	and	older	siblings	walk	around	in	plainclothes,	a	background	against
which	we	bloom.	The	City	 Officials	 smile	proudly	 at	us,	and	my	heart	swells	as
we	enter	the	Rotunda.

In	addition	to	Xander,	who	 waves	good-bye	to	me	as	he	crosses	the	room	to	his
seating	area,	I	see	another	girl	I	know	named	Lea.	She	picked	the	bright	red
dress.	It	is	a	good	choice	for	her,	because	she	is	beautiful	enough	that	standing
out	works	in	her	favor.	 She	looks	worried,	however,	and	she	keeps	twisting	her
artifact,	a	jeweled	red	bracelet.	I	am	a	little	surprised	to	see	Lea	there.	I	would
have	picked	her	for	a	Single.

“Look	 at	this	china,”	my	 father	says	as	we	find	our	place	at	the	Banquet	tables.
“It	reminds	 me	of	the	Wedgwood	pieces	we	found	last	year	…”

My	mother	looks	 at	me	and	rolls	her	eyes	in	amusement.	Even	at	the	Match
Banquet,	my	father	can’t	stop	himself	from	 noticing	 these	things.	My	father
spends	months	working	in	old	neighborhoods	that	are	being	restored	and	turned
into	new	Boroughs	for	public	 use.	He	sifts	through	the	relics	of	a	society	that	is
not	as	far	in	the	past	as	it	seems.	Right	now,	for	example,	he	is	working	on	a
particularly	interesting	 Restoration	project:	an	old	library.	 He	sorts	out	the	things
the	Society	has	marked	as	valuable	from	the	things	that	are	not.

But	then	I	have	to	laugh	because	my	mother	can’t	help	but	comment	on	the
flowers,	since	they	fall	 in	her	area	of	expertise	as	an	Arboretum	worker.	“Oh,
Cassia!	Look	at	the	centerpieces.	Lilies.”	She	squeezes	my	hand.

“Please	be	seated,”	an	Official	tells	us	from	the	podium.	 “Dinner	 is	about	to	be
served.”

It’s	almost	comical	 how	quickly	 we	all	take	our	seats.	Because	we	might	admire
the	china	and	the	flowers,	and	we	might	be	here	for	our	Matches,	but	we	also
can’t	wait	to	taste	the	food.

“They	say	this	dinner	is	always	wasted	on	the	Matchees,”	a	jovial-looking	  man
sitting	across	from	us	says,	smiling	around	our	table.	“So	excited	they	can’t	 eat	a

8
sitting	across	from	us	says,	smiling	around	our	table.	“So	excited	they	can’t	 eat	a
bite.”	And	 it’s	true;	one	of	 the	girls	sitting	farther	 down	the	table,	wearing	a	pink
dress,	stares	at	her	plate,	touching	nothing.

I	don’t	seem	to	have	this	problem,	however.	Though	I	 don’t	gorge	myself,	 I	can
eat	some	of	everything—the	roasted	vegetables,	the	savory	meat,	the	crisp
greens,	and	creamy	cheese.	The	warm	light	bread.	The	meal	seems	like	a	dance,
as	though	this	is	a	ball	as	well	as	a	banquet.	The	waiters	slide	the	plates	in	front
of	us	with	graceful	hands;	the	food,	wearing	herbs	and	garnishes,	is	as	dressed
up	as	we	are.	We	lift	the	white	napkins,	the	silver	forks,	 the	shining	crystal
goblets	as	if	in	time	to	music.

My	father	smiles	happily	 as	a	server	sets	a	piece	of	chocolate	cake	with	fresh
cream	before	him	at	the	end	of	the	meal.	“Wonderful,”	  he	whispers,	so	softly
that	only	my	mother	and	I	can	hear	him.

My	mother	laughs	a	little	 at	him,	teasing	him,	and	he	reaches	for	her	hand.

I	understand	his	enthusiasm	when	I	take	a	bite	of	the	cake,	which	is	rich	but	not
overwhelming,	deep	and	dark	and	flavorful.	 It	is	the	best	thing	I	have	eaten	since
the	traditional	dinner	at	Winter	 Holiday,	 months	ago.	I	wish	Bram	could	have
some	cake,	and	for	a	minute	I	think	about	saving	some	of	mine	for	him.	 But
there	is	no	way	to	take	it	back	to	him.	It	 wouldn’t	 fit	 in	my	compact.	It	 would	be
bad	form	to	hide	it	away	in	 my	mother’s	purse	even	if	she	would	agree,	and	she
won’t.	My	 mother	doesn’t	break	the	rules.

I	can’t	save	it	for	 later.	It	is	now,	or	never.

I	have	just	popped	the	last	bite	in	my	mouth	when	the	announcer	says,	“We	are
ready	to	announce	the	Matches.”

I	swallow	 in	surprise,	and	for	a	second,	I	feel	an	unexpected	surge	of	anger:	I
didn’t	get	to	savor	my	last	bite	 of	cake.

“Lea	Abbey.”

Lea	twists	her	bracelet	furiously	as	she	stands,	waiting	to	see	the	face	flash	on
the	screen.	She	is	careful	to	hold	her	hands	low,	though,	so	that	the	boy	seeing
her	in	another	City	Hall	 somewhere	will	only	 see	the	beautiful	blond	girl	 and	not
her	worried	hands,	twisting	and	turning	 that	bracelet.

9
It	is	strange	how	we	hold	on	to	the	pieces	of	the	past	while	we	wait	for	 our
futures.

There	is	a	system,	of	course,	to	the	Matching.	In	City	Halls	 across	the	country,
all	filled	 with	 people,	the	Matches	are	announced	in	alphabetical	order	according
to	the	girls’	last	names.	I	feel	slightly	 sorry	for	 the	boys,	who	have	no	idea	when
their	names	will	be	called,	when	they	must	stand	for	girls	 in	other	City	 Halls	to
receive	them	as	Matches.	Since	my	last	name	is	Reyes,	I	will	be	somewhere	at
the	end	of	the	middle.	The	beginning	of	the	end.

The	screen	flashes	with	the	face	of	a	boy,	blond	and	handsome.	He	smiles	as	he
sees	Lea’s	face	on	the	screen	where	he	is,	and	she	smiles,	too.	“Joseph
Peterson,”	the	announcer	says.	“Lea	Abbey,	you	have	been	matched	with	Joseph
Peterson.”

The	hostess	presiding	over	the	Banquet	brings	Lea	a	small	silver	box;	the	same
thing	happens	to	Joseph	Peterson	on	the	screen.	When	Lea	sits	down,	she	looks
at	the	silver	box	longingly,	 as	though	she	wishes	she	could	open	it	right	away.	I
don’t	blame	her.	Inside	the	box	is	a	microcard	with	 background	information
about	her	Match.	We	all	receive	them.	Later,	the	boxes	will	 be	used	to	hold	the
rings	for	the	Marriage	Contract.

The	screen	flashes	back	to	the	default	picture:	a	boy	and	a	girl,	smiling	at	each
other,	with	glimmering	 lights	 and	a	white-coated	Official	 in	the	background.
Although	the	Society	times	the	Matching	 to	be	as	efficient	as	possible,	there	are
still	moments	when	the	screen	goes	back	to	this	picture,	which	means	that	we	all
wait	while	 something	happens	somewhere	else.	It’s	so	complicated—the
Matching—and	I	 am	again	reminded	of	the	intricate	steps	of	the	dances	they
used	to	do	long	ago.	This	dance,	however,	is	one	that	the	Society	alone	can
choreograph	now.

The	picture	shimmers	away.

The	announcer	calls	another	name;	another	girl	stands	up.

Soon,	more	and	more	people	at	the	Banquet	have	little	silver	boxes.	Some
people	set	them	on	the	white	tablecloths	in	front	of	them,	but	most	hold	 the
boxes	carefully,	unwilling	 to	 let	their	futures	out	of	their	 hands	so	soon	after
receiving	them.

I	don’t	see	any	other	girls	wearing	the	green	dress.	I	don’t	mind.	 I	like	the	idea

10
I	don’t	see	any	other	girls	wearing	the	green	dress.	I	don’t	mind.	I	like	the	idea
that,	for	one	night,	I	don’t	look	like	everyone	else.

I	wait,	holding	my	compact	in	one	hand	and	my	mother’s	hand	in	the	other.	Her
palm	feels	sweaty.	For	the	first	time,	I	realize	that	she	and	my	father	are	nervous,
too.

“Cassia	Maria	Reyes.”

It	is	my	turn.

I	stand	up,	letting	go	of	my	mother’s	hand,	and	turn	toward	the	screen.	I	feel	my
heart	pounding	and	I	am	tempted	to	twist	my	hands	the	way	Lea	did,	but	I	hold
perfectly	still	with	my	chin	up	and	my	eyes	on	the	screen.	I	watch	and	wait,
determined	that	the	girl	my	Match	will	see	on	the	screen	in	his	City	Hall
somewhere	out	there	in	Society	will	be	poised	and	calm	and	lovely,	the	very	best
image	of	Cassia	Maria	Reyes	that	I	can	present.

But	nothing	happens.

I	stand	and	look	at	the	screen,	and,	as	the	seconds	go	by,	it	is	all	I	can	do	to	stay
still,	all	I	can	do	to	keep	smiling.	Whispers	start	around	me.	Out	of	the	corner	of
my	eye,	I	see	my	mother	move	her	hand	as	if	to	take	mine	again,	but	then	she
pulls	it	back.

A	girl	in	a	green	dress	stands	waiting,	her	heart	pounding.	Me.

The	screen	is	dark,	and	it	stays	dark.

That	can	only	mean	one	thing.

11
                                             CHAPTER	        2

The	whispers	rise	soft	around	me	like	birds	beating	their	wings	under	the	dome
of	City	Hall.	“Your	Match	is	here	this	evening,”	the	hostess	says,	smiling.	The
people	around	me	smile	as	well,	and	their	murmurs	become	louder.	Our	Society
is	so	vast,	our	Cities	so	many,	that	the	odds	of	your	perfect	Match	being
someone	in	your	own	City	are	minuscule.	It’s	been	many	years	since	such	a
thing	happened	here.

These	thoughts	tumble	in	my	mind,	and	I	close	my	eyes	briefly	as	I	realize	what
this	means,	not	in	abstract,	but	for	me,	the	girl	in	the	green	dress.	I	might	know
my	Match.	He	might	be	someone	who	goes	to	the	same	Second	School	that	I	do,
someone	I	see	every	day,	someone—

“Xander	Thomas	Carrow.”

At	his	table,	Xander	stands	up.	A	sea	of	watching	faces	and	white	tablecloths,	of
glinting	crystal	glasses	and	shining	silver	boxes	stretches	between	us.

I	can’t	believe	it.

This	is	a	dream.	People	turn	their	eyes	on	me	and	on	the	handsome	boy	in	the
dark	suit	and	blue	cravat.	It	doesn’t	feel	real	until	Xander	smiles	at	me.	I	think,	I
know	that	smile,	and	suddenly	I’m	smiling,	too,	and	the	rush	of	applause	and
smell	of	the	lilies	fully	convince	me	that	this	is	actually	happening.	Dreams
don’t	smell	or	sound	as	strong	as	this.	I	break	protocol	a	bit	to	give	Xander	a	tiny
wave,	and	his	smile	widens.

The	hostess	says,	“You	may	take	your	seats.”	She	sounds	glad	that	we	are	so
happy;	of	course,	we	should	be.	We	are	each	other’s	best	Match,	after	all.

When	she	brings	me	the	silver	box,	I	hold	it	carefully.	But	I	already	know	much
of	what	is	inside.	Not	only	do	Xander	and	I	go	to	the	same	school,	we	also	live
on	the	same	street;	we’ve	been	best	friends	for	as	long	as	I	can	remember.	I
don’t	need	the	microcard	to	show	me	pictures	of	Xander	as	a	child	because	I
have	plenty	of	them	in	my	mind.	I	don’t	need	to	download	a	list	of	favorites	to
memorize	because	I	already	know	them.	Favorite	color:	green.	Favorite	leisure
activity:	swimming.	Favorite	recreation	activity:	games.

12
“Congratulations,	 Cassia,”	 my	 father	whispers	to	me,	his	expression	relieved.
My	mother	says	nothing,	but	she	beams	with	delight	and	embraces	me	tightly.
Behind	her,	another	girl	stands	up,	watching	the	screen.

The	man	sitting	next	to	my	father	whispers,	“What	 a	piece	of	luck	 for	your
family.	You	 don’t	 have	to	trust	her	future	to	someone	you	know	nothing	about.”

I’m	surprised	by	the	unhappy	edge	to	his	tone;	the	way	his	comment	seems	to	be
right	on	the	verge	of	insubordination.	 His	daughter,	the	nervous	one	wearing	the
pink	dress,	hears	it,	too;	she	looks	uncomfortable	and	shifts	slightly	in	 her	seat.	I
don’t	recognize	her.	She	must	go	to	one	of	the	other	Second	Schools	in	our	City.

I	sneak	another	glance	at	Xander,	but	there	are	too	many	people	in	my	way	and	I
can’t	see	him.	Other	girls	take	their	turns	standing	up.	The	screen	lights	up	for
each	of	them.	No	one	else	has	a	dark	screen.	I	am	the	only	one.

Before	we	leave,	the	hostess	of	the	Match	Banquet	asks	Xander	and	me	and	our
families	to	step	aside	and	speak	with	her.	“This	is	an	unusual	situation,”	 she
says,	but	she	corrects	herself	immediately.	“Not	unusual.	Excuse	me.	It	is	merely
uncommon.”	She	smiles	at	both	of	us.	“Since	you	already	know	 each	other,
things	will	 proceed	differently	 for	you.	You	 will	 know	much	of	 the	initial
information	 about	each	other.”	She	gestures	at	our	silver	boxes.	“There	are	a	few
new	courtship	guidelines	included	on	your	 microcards,	so	you	should	familiarize
yourselves	with	those	when	you	have	an	opportunity.”

“We’ll	 read	them	tonight,”	 Xander	promises	sincerely.	I	try	 to	keep	from	rolling
my	eyes	in	amusement	because	he	sounds	exactly	the	way	he	does	when	a
teacher	gives	him	a	learning	assignment.	He’ll	read	the	new	guidelines	and
memorize	them,	as	he	read	and	memorized	the	official	Matching	material.	And
then	I	flush	again,	as	a	paragraph	from	that	material	flashes	across	my	mind:

If	you	choose	to	be	Matched,	your	Marriage	 Contract	will	 take	place	when	you
are	twenty-one.	Studies	have	shown	that	the	fertility	of	both	men	and	women
peaks	at	the	age	of	twenty-four.	The	Matching	System	has	been	constructed	to
allow	those	who	Match	to	have	their	 children	near	this	age—providing	 for	the
highest	likelihood	of	healthy	 offspring.

Xander	and	I	will	 share	a	Marriage	Contract.	We	will	have	children	 together.

I	don’t	have	to	spend	the	next	few	years	learning	everything	about	him	 because	I
already	know	him,	almost	as	well	as	I	know	 myself.

13
already	know	him,	almost	as	well	as	I	know	 myself.

The	tiny	feeling	 of	loss	deep	within	my	heart	surprises	me.	My	peers	will	 spend
the	next	few	days	swooning	over	pictures	of	their	Matches,	bragging	 about	them
during	meal	hour	at	school,	waiting	 for	more	and	more	bits	of	information	 to	be
revealed.	Anticipating	their	 first	meeting,	their	 second	meeting,	and	so	on.	That
mystery	does	not	exist	for	Xander	and	me.	I	won’t	 wonder	what	he	is	like	 or
daydream	about	our	first	meeting.

But	then	Xander	looks	at	me	and	asks,	“What	are	you	thinking	 about?”	and	I
answer,	“That	we	are	very	lucky,”	 and	I	mean	it.	There	is	still	 much	to	discover.
Until	now,	 I	have	only	known	 Xander	as	a	friend.	Now	he	is	my	Match.

The	hostess	corrects	me	gently.	“Not	lucky,	Cassia.	There	is	no	luck	in	the
Society.”

I	nod.	Of	course.	I	should	know	 better	than	to	use	such	an	archaic,	inaccurate
term.	There’s	only	probability	 now.	 How	likely	 something	is	to	occur,	or	how
unlikely.

The	hostess	speaks	again.	“It	has	been	a	busy	evening,	and	it’s	getting	late.	You
can	read	the	courtship	guidelines	later,	another	day.	There’s	plenty	of	time.”

She’s	right.	That’s	what	the	Society	has	given	us:	time.	We	live	 longer	and	better
than	any	other	citizens	in	the	history	of	the	world.	 And	it’s	 thanks	in	large	part	to
the	Matching	System,	which	produces	physically	 and	emotionally	healthy
offspring.

And	I’m	 a	part	of	it	all.

My	parents	and	the	Carrows	can’t	stop	exclaiming	over	how	 wonderful	this	 all
is,	and	as	we	walk	down	the	steps	of	City	Hall	 together,	Xander	leans	over	and
says,	“You’d	 think	they’d	 arranged	everything	themselves.”

“I	can’t	 believe	it,”	 I	say,	and	I	feel	opulent	and	a	little	 giddy.	I	can’t	 believe	that
this	is	me,	wearing	a	beautiful	green	dress,	holding	gold	in	one	hand	and	silver
in	the	other,	walking	next	 to	my	best	friend.	My	 Match.

“I	can,”	 Xander	says,	teasing	me.	“In	fact,	I	knew	all	 along.	That’s	why	 I	wasn’t
nervous.”

14
I	tease	him	back.	“I	knew,	too.	That’s	 why	I	 was.”

We’re	laughing	so	much	that	when	the	air	train	 pulls	up	neither	of	us	notice	for	 a
moment,	and	then	there	is	a	brief	moment	of	awkwardness	as	Xander	holds	out
his	hand	to	help	me	climb	aboard.	“Here,”	 he	says,	his	voice	serious.	For	a
moment,	I	don’t	know	 what	to	do.	There	is	something	new	in	touching	 each
other	now,	and	my	hands	are	full.

Then	Xander	wraps	his	hand	around	mine,	pulling	me	onto	the	train	with	 him.

“Thank	you,”	 I	say	as	the	doors	close	behind	us.

“Any	 time,”	 he	says.	He	does	not	let	go	of	my	hand;	the	little	silver	box	I	 hold
creates	a	barrier	between	us	even	as	another	one	breaks.	We	have	not	held	hands
like	this	since	we	were	children.	In	 doing	that	tonight,	we	 move	across	the
invisible	divide	 that	separates	friendship	from	something	more.	I	feel	a	tingle
along	my	arm;	to	be	touched,	by	my	Match,	is	a	luxury	 that	the	other	Matchees
at	Banquets	tonight	do	not	share.

The	air	train	carries	us	away	from	the	sparkling,	icy-white	 lights	 of	City	 Hall
toward	the	softer	yellow	 porch	lights	and	streetlights	of	the	Boroughs.	As	the
streets	flash	past	on	our	way	home	to	Mapletree	Borough,	I	glance	over	at
Xander.	The	gold	of	the	lights	 outside	is	similar	to	the	color	of	 his	hair,	and	his
face	is	handsome	and	confident	and	good.	And	familiar,	for	 the	most	part.	If
you’ve	always	known	 how	to	look	 at	someone,	it’s	strange	when	that	directive
changes.	Xander	has	always	been	someone	I	could	not	have,	and	I	have	been	the
same	for	him.

Now	everything	is	 different.

My	ten-year-old	 brother,	Bram,	waits	for	us	on	the	front	 porch.	When	we	tell
him	about	the	Banquet,	he	can’t	believe	the	news.	“You’re	 Matched	with
Xander?	I	already	know	the	person	you’re	going	to	 marry?	That’s	so	strange.”

“You’re	 the	one	who’s	strange.”	I	tease	him,	and	he	dodges	me	as	I	pretend	to
grab	him.	“Who	 knows.	Maybe	your	Match	 lives	right	 on	this	street,	too.	Maybe
it’s—”

Bram	covers	his	ears.	“Don’t	say	it.	 Don’t	say	it—”

“Serena,”	I	say,	and	he	turns	away,	pretending	that	he	didn’t	hear	me.	Serena

15
“Serena,”	I	say,	and	he	turns	away,	pretending	that	he	didn’t	hear	me.	Serena
lives	next	door.	She	and	Bram	torment	each	other	incessantly.

“Cassia,”	my	mother	says	disapprovingly,	 glancing	around	to	make	sure	that	no
one	heard.	We	are	not	supposed	to	disparage	other	members	of	our	street	and	our
community.	Mapletree	Borough	 is	known	for	 being	tight-knit	 and	exemplary	in
this	way.	No	thanks	to	Bram,	I	think	 to	myself.

“I’m	 teasing,	Mama.”	I	 know	she	can’t	stay	mad	at	me.	Not	on	the	night	of	my
Match	Banquet,	when	she	has	been	reminded	of	how	quickly	I	am	growing	 up.

“Come	inside,”	 my	father	says.	“It’s	 almost	curfew.	We	can	talk	about
everything	tomorrow.”

“Was	there	cake?”	Bram	asks	as	my	father	opens	the	door.	They	all	look	back	at
me,	waiting.

I	don’t	move.	I	 don’t	want	 to	go	inside	yet.

If	I	do,	that	means	that	this	night	is	coming	 to	an	end,	and	I	don’t	want	that.	I
don’t	want	to	take	off	 the	dress	and	go	back	to	my	plainclothes;	I	don’t	want	 to
return	to	the	usual	days,	which	are	good,	but	nothing	special	like	this.	“I’ll	  come
in	soon.	Just	a	few	minutes	more.”

“Don’t	 be	long,”	 my	father	says	gently.	He	doesn’t	want	me	to	break	curfew.	It
is	the	City’s	curfew,	 not	his,	and	I	understand.

“I	won’t,”	  I	promise.

I	sit	down	on	the	steps	of	my	house,	careful,	of	course,	of	my	borrowed	 dress.	I
glance	down	at	the	folds	of	the	beautiful	material.	 It	does	not	belong	to	me,	but
this	evening	does,	this	time	that	is	dark	and	bright	and	full	 of	both	the
unexpected	and	the	familiar.	I	look	out	 into	the	new	spring	night	and	turn	my
face	to	the	stars.

I	don’t	linger	 outside	for	long	 because	tomorrow,	Saturday,	is	a	busy	day.	I’ll
need	to	report	to	my	trial	work	 position	at	the	sorting	center	early	in	the
morning.	After	 that	I’ll	 have	my	Saturday	night	free-rec	hours,	one	of	the	few
times	I	get	to	spend	with	my	friends	 outside	of	Second	School.

And	Xander	will	 be	there.

16
Back	in	my	bedroom,	I	shake	the	tablets	out	of	the	little	hollow	in	the	base	of	the
compact.	Then	I	count—one,	two,	three;	blue,	green,	red—as	I	slide	the	tablets
back	into	their	usual	metal	cylinder.

I	know	what	the	blue	and	green	tablets	do.	I	don’t	know	anyone	who	knows	for
certain	what	the	red	tablet	does.	There	have	been	rumors	about	it	for	years.

I	climb	into	bed	and	push	away	thoughts	of	the	red	tablet.	For	the	first	time	in
my	life,	I’m	allowed	to	dream	of	Xander.

17
                                             CHAPTER	        3

I‘ve	always	wondered	what	my	dreams	look	like	on	paper,	in	numbers.	Someone
out	there	knows,	but	it	isn’t	me.	I	pull	the	sleep	tags	from	my	skin,	taking	care
not	to	tug	too	hard	on	the	one	behind	my	ear.	The	skin	is	fragile	there	and	it
always	hurts	to	peel	the	disk	away,	especially	if	a	strand	or	two	of	hair	gets
caught	under	the	adhesive	on	the	tag.	Glad	that	my	turn	is	over,	I	put	the
equipment	back	in	its	box.	It’s	Bram’s	turn	to	be	tagged	tonight.

I	did	not	dream	of	Xander.	I	don’t	know	why.

But	I	did	sleep	late,	and	I’m	going	to	be	late	for	work	if	I	don’t	hurry.	As	I	walk
into	the	kitchen,	carrying	my	dress	from	the	night	before,	I	see	that	my	mother
has	already	set	out	the	breakfast	food	delivery.	Oatmeal,	gray-brown	and
expected.	We	eat	for	health	and	performance,	not	for	taste.	Holidays	and
celebrations	are	exceptions.	Since	our	calories	had	been	moderated	all	week
long,	last	night	at	the	Banquet	we	could	eat	everything	in	front	of	us	without
significant	impact.

Bram	grins	mischievously	at	me,	still	wearing	his	sleepclothes.	“So,”	he	says,
shoving	one	last	spoonful	of	oatmeal	into	his	mouth,	“did	you	sleep	late	because
you	were	dreaming	about	Xander?”

I	don’t	want	him	to	know	how	close	he	is	to	the	truth;	that	even	though	I	didn’t
dream	of	Xander,	I	wanted	to.	“No,”	I	say,	“and	shouldn’t	you	be	worrying
about	being	on	time	for	school?”	Bram’s	young	enough	that	he	still	has	school
instead	of	work	on	Saturdays,	and	if	he	doesn’t	get	going,	he’ll	be	late.	Again.	I
hope	he	doesn’t	get	cited.

“Bram,”	my	mother	says,	“go	get	your	plainclothes	on,	please.”	She’ll	breathe	a
huge	sigh	of	relief	when	he	moves	on	to	Second	School,	where	the	start	time	is
half	an	hour	later.

As	Bram	slouches	out	of	the	room,	my	mother	reaches	for	my	dress	and	holds	it
up.	“You	looked	so	beautiful	last	night.	I	hate	to	take	this	back.”	We	both	look	at
the	gown	for	a	moment.	I	admire	the	way	the	fabric	catches	the	light	and	plays	it
back,	almost	like	the	light	and	the	cloth	are	both	living	things.

We	both	sigh	at	exactly	the	same	time	and	my	mother	laughs.	She	gives	me	a

18
We	both	sigh	at	exactly	the	same	time	and	my	mother	laughs.	She	gives	me	a
kiss	on	the	cheek.	“They’ll	 send	you	a	little	piece	of	the	fabric,	 remember?”	she
says,	and	I	nod.	Each	gown	is	designed	with	an	interior	panel	that	can	be	cut	into
pieces,	one	for	each	girl	who	wears	the	dress.	The	scrap,	along	with	the	silver
box	that	held	my	microcard,	will	  be	the	mementos	of	my	Matching.

But	still.	 I	will	 never	see	this	dress,	my	green	dress,	again.

I	knew	the	moment	I	saw	it	that	it	 was	the	one	I	wanted.	When	I	made	my
selection,	the	woman	at	the	clothing	distribution	 center	smiled	after	she	punched
the	number—seventy-three—into	the	computer.	“That’s	 the	one	you	were	most
likely	 to	pick,”	 she	said.	“Your	personal	data	indicated	it,	and	so	did	general
psychology.	You’ve	 picked	things	outside	of	the	majority	 in	the	past,	and	girls
like	their	dresses	to	bring	out	their	eyes.”

I	smiled	and	watched	as	she	sent	her	assistant	into	the	back	to	retrieve	the	dress.
When	I	tried	it	 on,	I	saw	that	she	was	right.	The	dress	was	meant	for	me.	The
hemline	fell	perfectly;	 the	waist	curved	in	exactly	 the	right	amount.	I	turned	in
front	of	the	mirror,	 admiring	 myself.

The	woman	told	me,	“So	far,	you	 are	the	only	girl	wearing	 this	dress	at	the
Match	Banquet	this	month.	The	most	popular	gown	is	one	of	 the	pink	gowns,
number	twenty-two.”

“Good,”	 I	told	her.	I	 don’t	mind	 standing	out	a	little.

Bram	reappears	in	the	doorway,	plainclothes	wrinkled,	 hair	askew.	I	can	almost
see	the	wheels	turning	in	my	mother’s	mind:	Is	 it	better	to	comb	his	hair	and
make	him	late,	or	send	him	as	he	is?

Bram	makes	the	decision	for	her.	“See	you	tonight,”	 he	says,	sprinting	out	the
door.

“He’s	not	going	 to	be	fast	enough.”	My	 mother	looks	out	the	window	 toward	the
air-train	stop,	where	the	tracks	light	up	to	indicate	 the	approaching	train.

“He	might,”	 I	say,	watching	 Bram	as	he	breaks	another	rule,	the	one	about
running	in	public.	 I	can	almost	hear	his	footsteps	pounding	on	the	sidewalk	as	he
runs	down	the	street,	his	head	lowered,	his	school	pack	bumping	against	his
skinny	back.

19
Right	when	he	gets	to	the	stop,	he	slows	down.	He	pats	his	hair	into	place	and
walks	casually	up	the	steps	toward	the	train.	Hopefully,	 no	one	else	has	seen	him
run.	A	moment	later,	the	air	train	 pulls	away	with	 Bram	safely	inside.

“That	boy	is	going	 to	be	the	end	of	me.”	My	 mother	sighs.	“I	should	have	gotten
him	up	earlier.	We	all	 overslept.	It	was	a	big	night	last	night.”

“It	was,”	 I	agree.

“I	have	to	catch	the	next	City	 air	train.”	 My	mother	pulls	 her	satchel	over	her
shoulder.	“What	are	you	doing	for	 your	free-rec	hours	tonight?”

“I’m	 sure	Xander	and	everyone	will	 want	to	play	games	at	the	youth	center,”	I
say.	“We’ve	seen	all	the	showings,	and	the	music	…”	 I	shrug.

My	mother	laughs,	completing	 my	sentence.	“Is	for	old	people	like	 me.”

“And	 I’m	using	 the	last	hour	to	visit	Grandfather.”	 The	Officials	 don’t	often
allow	a	deviation	from	 the	usual	free-rec	options;	but	on	the	eve	of	someone’s
Final	Banquet,	visiting	 is	encouraged	and	permitted.

My	mother’s	 eyes	soften.	“He’ll	 love	that.”

“Did	 Papa	tell	Grandfather	about	my	Match?”

My	mother	smiles.	“He	 planned	to	stop	by	on	his	way	to	work.”

“Good,”	 I	say,	because	I	want	Grandfather	to	know	as	soon	as	possible.	I	know
he	has	been	thinking	as	much	about	me	and	my	Banquet	as	I’ve	been	thinking
about	him	and	his.

After	I	 hurry	and	eat	my	breakfast,	I	make	my	train	with	 seconds	to	spare	and	sit
back.	I	may	not	have	dreamed	about	Xander	while	I	slept,	but	I	can	daydream
about	him	now.	Looking	 out	the	window	 and	thinking	about	how	he	looked	last
night	in	his	suit,	I	 watch	the	Boroughs	slide	by	on	my	way	 into	the	City.	The
green	has	not	yet	given	way	to	stone	and	concrete	when	I	notice	white	flakes
drifting	 through	the	sky.

Everyone	else	notices	them,	too.

20
“Snow?	In	June?”	 the	woman	next	to	me	asks.

“It	can’t	 be,”	a	man	across	the	aisle	mutters.

“But	look	 at	it,”	 she	says.

“It	can’t	 be,”	the	man	says	again.	People	twist,	turn	to	the	windows,	looking
agitated.	Can	something	wrong	be	true?

Sure	enough,	little	white	puffs	 drift	past	on	their	way	 to	the	ground.	There	is
something	strange	about	this	snow,	but	I’m	not	exactly	sure	what.	I	 find	myself
holding	in	a	smile	as	I	look	 at	all	the	worried	faces	around	me.	Should	I	be
worried,	too?	Perhaps.	But	it’s	so	pretty,	so	unexpected,	and,	for	the	moment,	so
unexplainable.

The	air	train	comes	to	a	stop.	The	doors	open	and	a	few	pieces	drift	inside.	I
catch	one	on	my	hand,	but	it	does	not	melt.	The	mystery	of	it	does,	however,
when	I	see	the	little	brown	seed	at	the	center	of	the	snow.

“It’s	 a	cottonwood	seed,”	I	tell	 everyone	confidently.	“It’s	  not	snow.”

“Of	course,”	 the	man	says,	sounding	glad	to	have	an	explanation.	Snow	in	June
would	be	atypical.	Cottonwood	 seeds	are	not.

“But	why	 are	there	so	many?”	another	woman	asks,	still	worried.

In	a	moment,	we	have	our	answer.	One	of	the	new	passengers	sitting	down
brushes	white	from	his	hair	and	plainclothes.	“We’re	 tearing	out	the	cottonwood
grove	along	the	river,”	 he	explains.	“The	Society	wants	to	plant	some	better	trees
there.”

Everyone	else	takes	his	word	for	it;	they	know	 nothing	about	trees.	They	mutter
about	being	glad	it	isn’t	 a	sign	of	another	Warming;	thank	goodness	the	Society
has	things	under	control	as	usual.	But	thanks	to	my	mother,	who	can’t	help
talking	about	her	work	as	a	caretaker	at	the	Arboretum,	I	know	 that	his
explanation	does	make	sense.	You	can’t	use	cottonwood	trees	for	fruit	or	fuel.
And	their	seeds	are	a	nuisance.	They	fly	far,	catch	on	anything,	try	to	grow
everywhere.	Weed	trees,	my	mother	says.	Still,	she	harbors	a	particular	affinity
for	them	because	of	the	seeds,	which	are	small	and	brown	but	cloaked	in	beauty,
in	these	thin	white	tendrils	of	 cotton.	Little	 cloudy	parachutes	to	slow	their	fall,

21
to	help	them	fly,	to	 catch	the	wind	and	glide	them	somewhere	they	might	grow.

I	look	at	the	seed	resting	in	the	palm	of	my	hand.	There	is	still	 mystery	in	it	 after
all,	in	that	little	 brown	core.	I’m	 not	sure	what	to	do	with	 it,	so	I	tuck	 it	into	my
pocket	next	to	my	tablet	container.

The	almost-snow	reminds	me	of	a	line	from	 a	poem	we	studied	this	year	in
Language	and	Literacy:	“Stopping	by	 Woods	on	a	Snowy	Evening.”	 It	is	one	of
my	favorites	of	all	 the	Hundred	Poems,	the	ones	our	Society	chose	to	keep,	back
when	they	decided	our	culture	was	too	cluttered.	They	created	commissions	to
choose	the	hundred	best	of	everything:	Hundred	Songs,	Hundred	Paintings,
Hundred	Stories,	Hundred	Poems.	The	rest	were	eliminated.	Gone	forever.	For
the	best,	the	Society	said,	and	everyone	believed	because	it	made	sense.	How
can	we	appreciate	anything	fully	 when	overwhelmed	with	too	much?

My	own	great-grandmother	was	one	of	the	cultural	 historians	who	helped	select
the	Hundred	Poems	almost	seventy	years	ago.	Grandfather	has	told	me	the	story
a	thousand	times,	how	his	mother	had	to	help	decide	which	poems	to	keep	and
which	to	lose	forever.	She	used	to	sing	him	parts	of	the	poems	as	lullabies.	She
whispered,	sang	them,	he	said,	and	I	tried	to	remember	them	after	she	had	gone.

After	she	had	gone.	Tomorrow,	my	grandfather	will	 go,	too.

As	we	leave	the	last	of	the	cottonwood	seeds	behind,	I	think	about	that	poem	and
how	much	I	like	 it.	I	like	 the	words	deep	and	sleep	and	the	way	they	rhyme	and
repeat;	I	think	to	myself	 that	this	poem	would	be	a	good	lullaby	if	 you	listened	to
the	rhythm	instead	of	the	words.	Because	if	you	listened	to	the	words	you
wouldn’t	 feel	rested:	Miles	to	go	before	I	sleep.

“It’s	 a	numbers	sort	today,”	my	supervisor,	Norah,	tells	 me.

I	sigh	a	little	 but	Norah	doesn’t	respond.	She	scans	my	card	and	hands	it	back.
She	doesn’t	ask	about	the	Match	Banquet,	even	though	she	has	to	know	from	my
information	 update	that	it	happened	last	night.	But	that’s	nothing	new.	Norah
barely	interacts	with	me	because	I’m	one	of	the	best	sorters.	In	fact,	it’s	been
almost	three	months	since	my	last	error,	which	was	the	last	time	the	two	of	us
had	a	real	conversation.

“Wait,”	 Norah	says	as	I	turn	toward	my	station.	“Your	  scancard	indicates	that
it’s	almost	time	for	 your	formal	 sorting	test.”

22
I	nod.	I’ve	 been	thinking	about	this	for	months;	not	 as	much	as	I	thought	about
my	Match	Banquet,	but	often.	Even	though	some	of	these	number	sorts	are
boring,	sorting	itself	 can	lead	to	much	more	interesting	work	positions.	Perhaps	I
could	be	a	Restoration	supervisor,	like	my	father.	When	he	was	my	age,	his
work	activity	 was	information	 sorting,	too.	And	 so	was	Grandfather’s,	and	of
course	there	is	my	great-grandmother,	the	one	who	participated	in	one	of	the
greatest	sortings	of	all	when	she	was	on	the	Hundred	Committee.

The	people	who	oversee	the	Matching	also	get	their	start	in	sorting,	but	I’m	 not
interested	in	that.	I	like	my	 stories	and	information	one	step	removed;	I	don’t
want	to	be	in	charge	of	sorting	real	people.

“Make	sure	you’re	 ready,”	Norah	says,	but	both	she	and	I	know	that	I	already
am.

Yellow	 light	slants	through	the	windows	 near	our	stations	in	the	sorting	center.	I
cast	a	shadow	across	the	other	workers’	stations	as	I	pass	by.	No	one	looks	up.

I	slip	into	 my	tiny	station,	which	 is	just	wide	 enough	for	a	table	and	a	chair	and	a
sorting	screen.	The	thin	gray	walls	rise	up	on	either	side	of	me	and	I	can’t	see
anyone	else.	We	are	like	the	microcards	in	the	research	library	at	Second	School
—each	of	us	neatly	tucked	into	a	slot.	The	government	has	computers	that	can
do	sorts	much	faster	than	we	can,	of	course,	but	we’re	still	important.	You	 never
know	when	technology	might	 fail.

That’s	what	happened	to	the	society	before	ours.	Everyone	had	technology,	too
much	of	it,	and	the	consequences	were	disastrous.	Now,	we	have	the	basic
technology	we	need—ports,	readers,	scribes—and	our	information	intake	is
much	more	specific.	Nutrition	 specialists	don’t	need	to	know	 how	to	program	air
trains,	for	example,	and	programmers,	in	turn,	don’t	 need	to	know	how	to
prepare	food.	Such	specialization	keeps	people	from	becoming	overwhelmed.
We	don’t	need	to	understand	everything.	And,	as	the	Society	reminds	us,	there’s
a	difference	between	knowledge	and	technology.	Knowledge	doesn’t	fail	 us.

I	slide	my	scancard	and	the	sort	begins.	Even	though	I	like	word	association	or
picture	or	sentence	sorts	the	best,	I’m	good	at	the	number	ones,	too.	The	screen
tells	me	what	patterns	I’m	supposed	to	find	and	the	numbers	begin	to	scroll	up
on	the	screen,	like	little	white	 soldiers	on	a	black	field	waiting	 for	me	to	mow
them	down.	I	touch	each	one	and	begin	to	sort	them	out,	pulling	them	aside	into
different	boxes.	The	tapping	of	my	 fingers	makes	a	low,	soft	sound,	almost	as

23
different	boxes.	The	tapping	of	my	 fingers	makes	a	low,	soft	sound,	almost	as
silent	as	snow	falling.

And	I	create	a	storm.	The	numbers	fly	into	 their	spots	like	flakes	driven	by	 the
wind.

Halfway	through,	 the	pattern	we	are	looking	for	changes.	The	system	tracks	how
soon	we	notice	the	changes	and	how	quickly	we	adapt	our	sorts.	You	never
know	when	a	change	will	happen.	Two	minutes	later,	the	pattern	changes	again,
and	once	more	I	catch	it	on	the	very	first	line	 of	numbers.	I	don’t	 know	how,	but
I	always	anticipate	the	shift	in	 pattern	before	it	happens.

When	I	sort,	there	is	only	time	to	 think	about	what	I	see	in	front	 of	me.	So	there
in	my	little	 gray	space,	I	don’t	think	 about	Xander.	I	don’t	 wish	for	the	feel	of
the	green	dress	against	my	skin	or	the	taste	of	chocolate	cake	on	my	tongue.	I
don’t	think	 of	my	grandfather	eating	his	last	meal	tomorrow	 night	at	the	Final
Banquet.	I	don’t	think	 of	snow	in	June	or	other	things	that	cannot	be,	yet
somehow	are.	I	don’t	picture	the	sun	dazzling	me	or	the	moon	cooling	 me	or	the
maple	tree	in	our	yard	turning	gold,	green,	red.	I	will	 think	 of	all	 of	those	things
and	more	later.	But	not	when	I	sort.

I	sort	and	sort	and	sort	until	there	is	no	data	left	for	me.	Everything	 is	clear	on
my	screen.	I	am	the	one	who	makes	it	go	blank.

When	I	ride	the	air	train	back	to	Mapletree	 Borough,	the	cottonwood	seeds	are
gone.	I	want	to	tell	my	 mother	about	them,	but	when	I	get	home	she	and	my
father	and	Bram	have	already	left	for	their	leisure	hours.	A	 message	for	me
blinks	on	the	port:	We’re	 sorry	to	have	missed	you,	Cassia,	it	flashes.	Have	a
good	night.

A	beep	sounds	in	the	kitchen;	my	meal	has	arrived.	The	foilware	container	slides
through	the	food	delivery	 slot.	I	pick	it	 up	quickly,	 in	time	to	hear	the	sound	of
the	nutrition	vehicle	 trundling	along	its	 track	behind	the	houses	in	the	Borough.

My	dinner	steams	as	I	open	it	up.	We	must	have	a	new	nutrition	personnel
director.	Before,	the	food	was	always	lukewarm	 when	it	arrived.	Now	 it’s	 piping
hot.	I	eat	in	a	hurry,	burning	my	 mouth	a	little,	 because	I	know	what	I	want	to	do
with	this	rare	empty	time	 in	this	almost-vacant	house.	I’m	never	really	 alone;	the
port	hums	in	the	background,	keeping	track,	keeping	watch.	But	that’s	 all	right.	I
need	it	for	what	I’m	 going	to	do.	I	 want	to	look	at	the	microcard	without	 my
parents	or	Bram	glancing	over	my	shoulder.	I	want	to	 read	more	about	Xander

24
parents	or	Bram	glancing	over	my	shoulder.	I	want	to	 read	more	about	Xander
before	I	see	him	tonight.

When	I	insert	the	microcard,	the	humming	 takes	on	a	more	purposeful	sound.
The	portscreen	brightens	and	my	heart	beats	faster	in	anticipation,	even	though	I
know	Xander	so	well.	What	 has	the	Society	decided	I	should	know	about	him,
the	person	I’ll	spend	most	of	my	life	 with?

Do	I	know	 everything	about	him	as	I	think	 I	do,	or	is	there	something	I’ve
missed?

“Cassia	Reyes,	the	Society	is	pleased	to	present	you	with	your	Match.”

I	smile	as	Xander’s	face	appears	on	the	portscreen	immediately	following	 the
recorded	message.	It’s	a	good	picture	of	him.	As	always,	his	smile	looks	bright
and	real,	his	blue	eyes	kind.	I	study	his	face	closely,	pretending	that	I’ve	 never
seen	this	picture	before;	that	I	have	only	had	a	glimpse	of	him	once,	last	night	at
the	Banquet.	I	study	the	planes	of	his	face,	the	look	of	his	lips.	He	is	handsome.
I’d	never	dared	think	that	he	might	 be	my	Match,	of	course,	but	now	that	it’s
happened	I	am	interested.	Intrigued.	A	little	 scared	about	how	this	might	change
our	friendship,	but	mostly	 just	happy.

I	reach	up	to	touch	the	words	Courtship	Guidelines	on	the	screen	but	before	I	do
Xander’s	face	darkens	and	then	disappears.	The	portscreen	beeps	and	the	voice
says	again,	“Cassia	Reyes,	the	Society	is	pleased	to	present	you	with	your
Match.”

My	heart	stops,	and	I	can’t	believe	what	I	 see.	A	face	comes	back	into	view	on
the	port	in	front	of	 me.

It	is	not	Xander.

25
                                             CHAPTER	        4

What?”	Completely	startled,	I	touch	the	screen	and	the	face	dissolves	under	my
fingertips,	pixelating	into	specks	that	look	like	dust.	Words	appear,	but	before	I
can	read	them	the	screen	goes	completely	blank.	Again.

“What’s	going	on?”	I	say	out	loud.

The	portscreen	stays	blank.	I	feel	blank,	too.	This	is	a	thousand	times	worse	than
the	empty	screen	last	night.	I	knew	what	it	meant	then.	I	have	no	idea	what	it
means	now.	I’ve	never	heard	of	this	happening.

I	don’t	understand.	The	Society	doesn’t	make	mistakes.

But	what	else	could	this	be?	No	one	has	two	Matches.

“Cassia?”	Xander	calls	to	me	through	the	door.

“I’m	coming,”	I	call	out,	tearing	the	microcard	from	the	port	and	shoving	it	into
my	pocket.	I	take	one	deep	breath,	and	then	I	open	the	door.

“So,	I	learned	from	your	microcard	that	you	like	cycling,”	Xander	says	formally
as	I	close	the	door	behind	me,	making	me	laugh	a	little	in	spite	of	what	just
happened.	I	hate	cycling	the	most	out	of	all	the	exercise	options,	and	he	knows
it.	We	argue	about	it	all	the	time;	I	think	it’s	stupid	to	go	riding	on	something
that	doesn’t	move,	spinning	your	wheels	endlessly.	He	points	out	that	I	like	to
run	on	the	tracker,	which	is	almost	the	same	thing.	“It’s	different,”	I	tell	him,	but
I	can’t	explain	why.

“Did	you	spend	all	day	staring	at	my	face	on	the	portscreen?”	he	asks.	He’s	still
joking,	but	suddenly	I	can’t	catch	my	breath.	He	viewed	his	microcard,	too.	Was
my	face	the	one	he	saw?	It	feels	so	strange	to	be	hiding	something,	especially
from	Xander.

“Of	course	not,”	I	say,	trying	to	tease	back.	“It’s	Saturday,	remember?	I	had
work	to	do.”

“I	did,	too,	but	that	didn’t	stop	me.	I	read	all	your	stats	and	reviewed	all	the
courtship	guidelines.”

26
courtship	guidelines.”

He	unknowingly	 throws	me	a	lifeline	 with	those	words.	I	am	not	drowning	 in
worry	anymore.	I	am	neck	deep	and	it	still	 washes	over	me	in	cold	waves,	but
now	I	can	breathe.	Xander	still	thinks	 we	are	Matched.	Nothing	strange
happened	to	him	when	he	viewed	his	microcard.	That’s	something,	at	least.

“You	 read	all	the	guidelines?”

“Of	course.	Didn’t	 you?”

“Not	yet.”	 I	feel	 stupid	admitting	this,	 but	Xander	laughs	again.

“They’re	 not	very	interesting,”	 he	says.	“Except	for	one.”	He	winks	 at	me
significantly.

“Oh?”	I	 say,	distracted.	I	see	other	youth	our	age	mingling	and	gathering	on	our
street,	walking	to	the	game	center	like	us.	They’re	waving,	 calling,	wearing	 the
same	clothes	we	wear.	But	there’s	a	difference	tonight.	Some	are	watching.
Some	are	watched:	me,	and	Xander.

The	others’	eyes	glance	at	us,	hold,	flicker	away,	look	back.

I’m	not	 used	to	it.	Xander	and	I	are	normal,	healthy	citizens,	part	of	this	group.
Not	outsiders.

But	I	feel	separated	now,	as	though	a	clear	thin	wall	rises	up	distinctly	 between
myself	and	those	staring	at	me.	We	can	see	each	other,	but	we	can’t	cross	over.

“Are	you	 all	right?”	 Xander	asks.

Too	late,	I	realize	that	I	should	have	responded	to	Xander’s	comment	and	asked
him	which	guideline	 he	found	interesting.	If	 I	can’t	pull	 myself	together	soon,
he’ll	know	 something’s	wrong.	We	 know	each	other	too	well.

Xander	reaches	for	my	elbow	as	we	turn	the	corner	and	leave	Mapletree
Borough.	When	we’ve	walked	 a	few	steps	more,	he	slides	his	hand	down	my
arm	and	interlaces	his	fingers	with	mine.	He	leans	closer	to	my	ear.	“One	of	 the
guidelines	said	that	we	are	allowed	to	express	physical	affection.	If	we	 want.”

And	I	do	want.	Even	with	 all	the	stress	I	feel,	the	touch	of	his	hand	against	mine

27
with	nothing	 to	separate	us	is	still	welcome	and	new.	I’m	surprised	that	Xander
is	so	natural	at	this.	And	as	we	walk,	I	recognize	the	emotion	that	I	 see	on	some
of	the	faces	of	the	girls	staring	at	us.	It’s	jealousy,	pure	and	simple.	I	 relax	a
little,	because	I	can	understand	why.	None	of	us	ever	thought	we	could	have
golden,	charismatic,	clever	Xander.	We	always	knew	he	would	 be	Matched	with
another	girl	in	another	City,	 another	Province.

But	he’s	not.	He’s	Matched	with	 me.

I	keep	my	fingers	locked	in	 his	as	we	walk	toward	the	game	center.	Maybe,	if	I
don’t	let	go,	it	 will	 prove	that	we	are	meant	to	be	Matched.	That	the	other	face
on	the	screen	means	nothing;	that	it	was	simply	a	momentary	malfunction	of	the
microcard.

Except.	The	face	I	saw,	the	face	that	was	not	Xander:	I	knew	him,	too.

28
                                             CHAPTER	        5

There’s	an	opening	over	here,”	Xander	says,	stopping	at	a	game	table	in	the
middle	of	the	room.	Apparently	the	other	youth	in	our	Borough	feel	the	same
way	we	do	about	this	Saturday’s	recreation	options,	because	the	game	center	is
crowded	with	people,	including	most	of	our	friends.	“Do	you	want	to	go	in,
Cassia?”

“No	thanks,”	I	say.	“I’ll	watch	this	round.”

“What	about	you?”	he	asks	Em,	my	best	girlfriend.

“You	go	ahead,”	she	tells	him,	and	then	we	both	laugh	as	he	grins	and	spins
around	to	give	his	scancard	to	the	Official	monitoring	the	game.	Xander’s
always	been	this	way	about	the	games—completely	alive	with	energy	and
anticipation.	I	remember	playing	with	him	when	we	were	little,	how	we	both
played	hard	and	didn’t	let	the	other	win.

I	wonder	when	I	stopped	liking	the	games.	It’s	hard	to	remember.

Now,	Xander	settles	himself	at	the	table,	saying	something	that	makes	everyone
else	laugh.	I	smile	to	myself.	It	really	is	more	fun	to	watch	him	than	to	play
yourself.	And	this	game,	Check,	is	one	of	his	favorites.	It’s	a	game	of	skill,	the
kind	he	likes	best.

“So,”	Em	says	softly,	the	sounds	of	laughter	and	talking	covering	her	words
from	everyone	but	me,	“What	is	it	like?	Knowing	your	Match?”

I	knew	she	would	ask	me	this;	I	know	it’s	what	everyone	would	like	to	know.
And	I	answer	the	only	way	I	can.	I	tell	her	the	truth.	“It’s	Xander,”	I	say.	“It’s
wonderful.”

Em	nods	in	understanding.	“All	this	time	none	of	us	thought	we	could	ever	end
up	with	one	another,”	she	says.	“And	then	it	happens.”

“I	know,”	I	say.

“And	Xander,”	she	says.	“He’s	the	best	of	us	all.”	Someone	calls	her	name	and

29
she	drifts	toward	another	table.

As	I	watch,	Xander	picks	up	the	gray	pieces	and	puts	them	out	on	the	gray	and
black	squares	of	the	board.	Most	of	the	colors	inside	the	game	center	are	drab:
gray	walls,	brown	plainclothes	 for	the	students,	dark	blue	plainclothes	for	those
who	have	already	received	their	permanent	work	positions.	Any	 brightness	in	the
room	comes	from	us:	from	the	shades	of	our	hair,	from	our	laughter.	When
Xander	sets	down	his	last	piece,	he	looks	across	the	board	at	me	and	says,	right
in	front	of	 his	opponents,	“I’m	 going	to	win	 this	one	for	my	Match.”	 Everyone
turns	to	stare	at	me	and	he	grins	mischievously.

I	roll	 my	eyes	at	him,	but	I’m	 still	blushing	 a	few	moments	later	when	someone
taps	me	on	the	shoulder.	I	turn	around.

An	Official	 waits	 behind	me.	“Cassia	Reyes?”	she	asks.

“Yes,”	 I	answer,	glancing	over	at	Xander.	He’s	engrossed	in	making	his	move
and	doesn’t	see	what’s	happening.

“Could	you	 come	outside	with	me	for	a	moment?	It	won’t	 take	long,	and	it’s
nothing	to	worry	 about.	Merely	procedural.”

Does	the	Official	know	what	happened	when	I	tried	 to	view	the	microcard?

“Of	course,”	 I	say,	because	there’s	no	other	answer	when	an	Official	asks	you
for	something.	I	look	 back	at	my	friends.	Their	 eyes	are	on	the	game	in	front	of
them	and	on	the	players	moving	the	pieces.	No	one	notices	when	I	leave.	Not
even	Xander.	The	crowd	swallows	me	up	and	I	follow	 the	Official’s	  white
uniform	out	of	 the	room.

“Let	me	reassure	you	that	you	have	nothing	to	worry	about,”	 the	Official	 tells
me,	smiling.	Her	voice	 sounds	kind.	She	leads	me	to	the	small	greenspace
outside	the	center.	Even	though	being	with	an	Official	 adds	to	my	nervousness,
the	open	air	feels	good	after	the	crowd	inside.

We	walk	across	the	neatly	cut	grass	toward	a	metal	bench	that	sits	directly
underneath	a	street	lamp.	There’s	not	another	person	in	sight.	“You	don’t	even
have	to	tell	me	what	happened,”	the	Official	 says.	“I	know.	 The	face	on	the
microcard	wasn’t	the	right	 one,	was	it?”

30
She	is	kind:	she	didn’t	make	me	say	the	words.	I	nod.

“You	 must	be	very	worried.	Have	you	told	 anyone	what	happened?”

“No,”	 I	say.	She	gestures	for	me	to	sit	down	on	the	bench	and	so	I	do.

“Excellent.	 Let	me	set	your	mind	at	ease.”	She	looks	directly	into	my	 eyes.
“Cassia,	absolutely	nothing	has	changed.	You	are	still	Matched	with	 Xander
Carrow.”

“Thank	you,”	 I	say,	and	I’m	 so	grateful	that	saying	it	once	isn’t	 enough.	“Thank
you.”	The	confusion	 leaves	me	and	I	finally,	finally,	 finally	  can	relax.	I	sigh	and
she	laughs.

“And	 may	I	congratulate	you	on	your	Match?	It’s	 caused	quite	a	stir.	People	are
talking	about	it	all	 over	the	Province.	Perhaps	even	all	through	the	Society.	It
hasn’t	happened	in	many	years.”	She	pauses	briefly	and	then	continues.	“I	don’t
suppose	you	brought	your	microcard	with	you	 tonight?”

“Actually,	 I	 did.”	I	 pull	it	 out	of	my	pocket.	“I	 was	worried—I	 didn’t	 want
anyone	else	to	see	…”

She	holds	out	her	hand,	and	I	drop	the	microcard	into	her	outstretched	palm.
“Perfect.	I’ll	 take	care	of	this.”	 She	places	it	inside	her	small	Official’s	 case.	I
catch	a	glimpse	of	her	tablet	container	and	notice	that	it	is	larger	than	standard
issue.	She	sees	my	glance.	“Higher-level	Officials	carry	 extra,”	she	says.	“In
case	of	an	emergency.”	I	nod,	and	she	continues.	“But	that’s	not	something	you
need	to	worry	about.	Now,	this	is	for	 you.”	 She	takes	another	microcard	from	a
side	pocket	inside	the	case.	“I’ve	checked	it	myself.	Everything	 is	in	order.”

“Thank	you.”

Neither	of	us	says	anything	for	a	few	moments	after	I	slip	 the	new	microcard
into	my	pocket.	At	 first,	I	 look	around	at	the	grass	and	the	metal	benches	and	the
small	concrete	fountain	in	the	center	of	the	greenspace,	which	sends	up	silvery
wet	showers	of	water	every	few	seconds.	Then	I	peek	over	at	the	woman	next	to
me,	trying	to	catch	a	glimpse	of	the	insignia	 on	her	shirt	pocket.	I	know	she	is	an
Official,	 because	she	wears	white	clothing,	but	I	am	not	sure	which	Department
of	Society	she	represents.

“I’m	 part	of	the	Matching	 Department,	authorized	to	deal	with	information

31
“I’m	 part	of	the	Matching	 Department,	authorized	to	deal	with	information
malfunctions,”	 the	Official	 says,	noticing	my	glance.	“Fortunately,	 we	don’t
have	much	work	to	do.	Since	the	Matching	is	so	important	 to	the	Society,	it’s
very	well	regulated.”

Her	words	remind	me	of	a	paragraph	in	the	official	 Matching	 material:	The	goal
of	Matching	is	twofold:	 to	provide	 the	healthiest	possible	future	citizens	for	our
Society	and	to	provide	the	best	chances	for	interested	citizens	to	experience
successful	Family	Life.	It	is	of	 the	utmost	importance	to	the	Society	that	the
Matches	be	as	optimal	as	possible.

“I’ve	 never	heard	of	a	mistake	like	this	before.”

“I’m	 afraid	it	 does	happen	now	and	then.	Not	often.”	She	is	silent	for	a	moment,
and	then	she	asks	the	question	that	I	do	not	want	to	hear:	“Did	you	recognize	the
other	person	whose	face	you	saw?”

Suddenly	and	irrationally	 I	am	tempted	to	lie.	I	want	 to	say	that	I	have	no	idea,
that	I	have	never	seen	that	face	before.	I	look	over	at	the	fountain	again	and	as	I
watch	the	rise	and	fall	of	the	water	I	know	 that	my	pause	gives	me	away.	So	I
answer.

“Yes.”

“Can	you	tell	 me	his	name?”

She	already	knows	all	of	this,	of	course,	so	there	is	nothing	to	do	but	tell	 the
truth.	“Yes.	Ky	 Markham.	 That’s	what	was	so	strange	about	the	whole	thing.
The	odds	of	a	mistake	being	made,	and	of	a	mistake	being	made	with	someone
else	I	know—”

“Are	virtually	  nonexistent,”	she	agrees.	“That’s	true.	It	makes	us	wonder	if	the
error	was	intentional,	some	kind	of	joke.	 If	we	find	 the	person,	we	will	 punish
them	severely.	It	was	a	cruel	thing	to	do.	Not	only	 because	it	was	upsetting	and
confusing	for	you,	but	 also	because	of	Ky.”

“Does	he	know?”

“No.	He	has	no	idea.	The	reason	I	said	it	was	cruel	to	use	him	as	part	of	this
prank	is	because	of	what	he	is.”

32
“What	he	is?”	Ky	 Markham	 moved	to	our	Borough	back	when	we	were	ten.	He
is	good-looking	and	quiet.	He’s	 very	still.	 He	is	not	a	troublemaker.	I	don’t	 see
him	as	much	as	I	once	did;	last	year,	he	received	his	work	position	early	and	he
no	longer	goes	to	Second	School	with	the	rest	of	the	youth	in	our	Borough.

The	Official	 nods	and	leans	a	little	closer,	even	though	there	is	no	one	around	to
hear	us.	The	light	from	the	street	lamp	above	shines	down,	hot,	and	I	shift	a
little.	“This	 is	confidential	 information,	 but	Ky	 Markham	could	 never	be	your
Match.	He	will	 never	be	anyone’s	Match.”

“He’s	chosen	to	be	a	Single,	then.”	I’m	 not	sure	why	this	information	 is
confidential.	Lots	 of	people	in	our	school	have	chosen	to	be	single.	There’s	even
a	paragraph	about	it	in	the	official	Matching	 material:	 Please	consider	carefully
whether	you	are	a	good	candidate	to	be	Matched.	Remember,	Singles	are
equally	important	 in	the	Society.	As	you	are	aware,	the	current	Leader	of	the
Society	is	a	Single.	Both	Matched	and	Single	citizens	experience	full	and
satisfying	lives.	However,	children	 are	only	allowed	to	 be	born	to	those	who
choose	to	be	Matched.

She	leans	closer	to	me.	“No.	He’s	not	a	Single.	Ky	Markham	 is	an	Aberration.”

Ky	Markham	is	an	Aberration?

Aberrations	live	among	us;	they’re	 not	dangerous	like	Anomalies,	who	have	to
be	separated	from	Society.	Though	Aberrations	usually	acquire	their	status	due
to	an	Infraction,	they	are	protected;	their	identities	 aren’t	usually	common
knowledge.	Only	the	Officials	 in	 the	Societal	Classification	Department	and
other	related	fields	have	access	to	such	information.

I	don’t	ask	my	question	out	loud,	 but	she	knows	what	I	am	thinking.	 “I’m	 afraid
so.	It’s	through	no	fault	 of	his	own.	But	 his	father	committed	an	Infraction.	 The
Society	couldn’t	 overlook	a	factor	like	 that,	even	when	they	allowed	the
Markhams	to	adopt	Ky.	He	had	to	retain	his	classification	 as	an	Aberration,	and,
as	such,	was	ineligible	to	be	entered	in	the	Matching	pool.”	 She	sighs.	“We	don’t
make	the	microcards	until	a	few	hours	before	the	Banquet.	It’s	likely	 the	error
occurred	then.	We’re	already	checking	to	see	who	had	access	to	your	microcard,
who	could	have	added	Ky’s	picture	before	the	Banquet.”

“I	hope	you	find	 out	who	did	 it,”	 I	say.	“You’re	 right.	 It’s	cruel.”

“We’ll	 find	 out,”	 she	says,	smiling	at	me.	“I	can	promise	you	that.”	Then	she

33
“We’ll	find	 out,”	she	says,	smiling	at	me.	“I	can	promise	you	that.”	Then	she
looks	down,	glances	at	her	watch.	“I	have	to	leave	now.	I	hope	that	I’ve	been
able	to	eliminate	your	concern.”

“Yes,	thank	you.”	I	try	to	pull	my	thoughts	from	the	boy	who	is	an	Aberration.	I
should	be	thinking	about	how	wonderful	it	is	that	everything	is	back	in	order.
But	instead	I	think	about	Ky—how	sorry	I	feel	for	him,	how	I	wish	I	didn’t	have
to	know	this	about	him	and	could	have	gone	on	thinking	he	had	chosen	to	be	a
Single.

“I	don’t	need	to	remind	you	to	keep	the	information	about	Ky	Markham
confidential,	do	I?”	she	asks	mildly,	but	I	hear	the	iron	in	her	voice.	“The	only
reason	I	shared	it	with	you	was	so	that	you	could	know	without	a	doubt	that	he
was	never	intended	to	be	your	Match.”

“Of	course.	I	won’t	say	anything	to	anyone.”

“Good.	It’s	probably	best	that	you	keep	this	to	yourself.	Of	course,	we	could	call
a	meeting	if	you	would	like.	I	could	explain	to	your	parents	and	Xander	and	his
parents	what	happened—”

“No!”	I	 say	forcefully.	“No.	I	don’t	want	anyone	to	know,	except—”

“Except	who?”

I	don’t	answer,	and	suddenly	her	hand	is	on	my	arm.	She	does	not	grip	me
roughly,	but	I	can	tell	that	she	will	wait	out	the	answer	to	her	brief	question:
“Who?”

“My	grandfather,”	I	admit.	“He’s	almost	eighty.”

She	lets	go	of	my	arm.	“When	is	his	birthday?”

“Tomorrow.”

She	thinks	for	a	moment,	then	nods.	“If	you	feel	that	you	need	to	talk	to
someone	about	what	happened,	he	would	be	the	optimal	one.	Still.	That	is	the
only	person?”

“Yes,”	I	say.	“I	don’t	want	anyone	else	to	know.	I	don’t	mind	Grandfather
knowing	because	…”	I	leave	the	sentence	unfinished.	She	knows	why.	At	least

34
knowing	because	…”	I	 leave	the	sentence	unfinished.	She	knows	why.	At	least
one	of	the	reasons	why,	anyway.

“I’m	 glad	you	feel	that	way,”	 the	Official	 says,	nodding.	“I	 have	to	admit	that	it
makes	things	easier	for	me.	Obviously,	when	you	talk	to	your	 grandfather,	you
will	 tell	him	 that	he	will	be	cited	if	 he	mentions	this	to	anyone	else.	And	that’s
certainly	not	something	he	wants	now.	He	could	lose	his	preservation
privileges.”

“I	understand.”

The	Official	 smiles,	stands	up.	“Is	there	anything	else	I	can	help	you	with
tonight?”

I	am	glad	the	interview	is	 over.	Now	that	all	is	 right	again	with	 my	world,	 I	want
to	take	my	place	back	inside	that	room	full	 of	people.	It	suddenly	feels	very
lonely	out	here.

“No,	thank	you.”

She	gestures	at	the	path	leading	back	to	the	center.	“Best	wishes	to	you,	Cassia.
I’m	glad	 I	could	help.”

I	thank	her	one	last	time	and	walk	away.	She	stays	behind,	watching	me	go.
Even	though	I	know	it’s	 nonsense,	I	feel	as	if	she	watches	me	all	the	way	to	the
door,	all	the	way	down	the	halls	and	back	into	the	room	and	over	to	the	table
where	Xander	still	plays	the	game.	He	looks	up	and	holds	my	gaze.	He	noticed
that	I	was	gone.	Everything	all	right?	 his	eyes	ask	me,	and	I	nod.	It	is	now.

Everything	is	back	to	normal.	 Better	than	normal—now	I	 can	again	enjoy	the
fact	that	I’ve	been	Matched	with	 Xander.

Still,	I	 wish	she	hadn’t	told	me	about	Ky.	 I	won’t	 be	able	to	look	at	him	the	same
way	again,	now	that	I	know	 too	much	about	him.

There	are	so	many	of	us	inside	the	game	center.	It	is	hot	and	humid	in	the	room,
reminding	me	of	the	tropical	 ocean	simulation	we	had	in	Science	once,	the	one
about	the	coral	reefs	that	teemed	with	fish	before	the	Warming	killed	 them	all.	I
taste	sweat	and	breathe	water.

Someone	bumps	into	me	as	an	Official	makes	an	announcement	over	the	main
speaker.	The	crowd	goes	quiet	to	listen:

35
speaker.	The	crowd	goes	quiet	to	listen:

“Someone	has	dropped	their	tablet	container.	 Please,	stand	completely	still	and
do	not	speak	until	we	locate	it.”

Everyone	stops	immediately.	I	hear	the	clatter	of	dice	and	a	soft	thud	as
someone,	perhaps	Xander,	puts	down	a	game	piece.	Then	all	is	quiet.	No	one
moves.	A	lost	container	is	a	serious	matter.	I	look	at	a	girl	 near	me,	and	she
stares	back	at	me,	wide-eyed,	openmouthed,	frozen	in	place.	I	think	again	of	that
ocean	simulation,	how	the	instructor	paused	it	in	the	middle	to	 explain
something,	and	the	fish	projected	around	the	room	stared	back	at	us,	unblinking,
until	she	switched	the	simulation	back	on.

We	all	wait	for	 the	switch	to	be	thrown,	for	 the	instructor	to	tell	 us	what	comes
next.	My	mind	 begins	to	wander,	to	escape	this	place	where	we	all	hold	still.	Are
there	other	unknown	Aberrations	standing	here	in	this	room,	swimming	 in	this
water?	Water.	I	recall	another	memory	of	water,	real	this	 time,	a	day	when
Xander	and	I	were	ten.

Back	then,	we	had	more	free-recreation	time,	and	in	the	summers	we	almost
always	spent	it	at	the	swimming	pool.	Xander	 liked	to	swim	 in	the	blue-
chlorinated	water;	I	liked	 to	sit	on	the	pockmarked	cement	side	of	the	pool	and
swish	my	feet	back	and	forth	before	I	went	in.	 That’s	what	I	 was	doing	when
Xander	appeared	next	to	me,	a	worried	look	on	his	face.

“I’ve	 lost	my	tablet	container,”	 he	told	me	quietly.

I	glanced	down	to	make	sure	that	mine	was	still	hooked	to	my	swimwear.	 It	was;
its	metal	clip	snapped	securely	to	the	strap	over	my	left	shoulder.	We’d	 had	our
tablet	containers	for	a	few	weeks,	and	at	that	point	they	contained	one	tablet.	The
first	one.	The	blue	one.	The	one	that	can	save	us;	the	one	with	enough	nutrients
to	keep	us	going	for	several	days	if	we	have	water,	too.

There	was	plenty	of	water	in	the	pool.	That	was	the	problem.	How	 was	Xander
ever	going	to	find	the	container?

“It’s	 probably	underwater,”	 I	said.	“Let’s	 get	the	lifeguard	to	clear	the	pool.”

“No,”	 Xander	said,	his	jaw	set.	“Don’t	 tell	 them.	They’ll	 cite	me	for	 losing	it.
Don’t	say	anything.	I’ll	  find	 it.”	Carrying	 our	own	tablets	is	an	important	 step
toward	our	own	independence;	losing	them	is	the	same	as	admitting	we	aren’t

36
toward	our	own	independence;	losing	them	is	the	same	as	admitting	we	aren’t
ready	for	the	responsibility.	 Our	parents	carry	our	tablets	for	us	until	we	are	old
enough	to	take	them	over,	one	by	one.	First	the	blue,	when	we	are	ten.	Then,
when	we	turn	thirteen,	the	green	one.	The	one	that	calms	us	if	we	need	calming.

And	when	we’re	sixteen,	the	red	one,	the	one	we	can	only	take	when	a	high-
level	Official	 tells	us	to	do	so.

At	first,	 I	tried	to	help	Xander,	 but	the	chlorine	always	hurt	my	 eyes.	I	dove	and
dove	and	then,	when	my	eyes	burned	so	much	I	could	barely	see,	I	climbed	back
onto	the	cement	next	to	the	pool	and	tried	to	look	beneath	the	sun-bright	surface
of	the	water.

None	of	us	ever	wears	a	watch	when	we	are	small;	time	is	kept	for	us.	But	I	still
knew.	I	knew	that	he	had	been	under	the	water	much	longer	than	he	should.	I
had	measured	it	out	in	heartbeats	and	in	the	slap	of	the	waves	against	the	side	of
the	pool	as	one	person,	then	another,	then	another,	dove	in.

Did	he	drown?	For	a	moment,	I	was	blinded	by	 sunlight	slanting	off	 the	water,
white,	and	paralyzed	by	my	fear,	which	 felt	white,	 too.	But	then	I	stood	up	and
drew	a	deep	breath	into	my	lungs	to	scream	to	the	world	Xander	is	under	the
water,	save	him,	save	him!	Before	my	scream	was	born,	a	voice	I	did	not	know
asked,	“Is	he	drowning?”

“I	can’t	 tell,”	 I	said,	tearing	my	eyes	away	from	the	water.	A	 boy	stood	next	to
me;	tanned	skin,	dark	hair.	A	new	boy.	That	was	all	 I	had	time	to	notice	before
he	vanished,	slipping	under	the	surface	in	one	quick	motion.

A	pause,	a	few	more	slaps	of	the	waves	against	the	cement,	and	Xander’s	head
popped	up	above	the	water.	He	grinned	triumphantly	at	me,	holding	the
waterproof	case.	“Got	it,”	 he	said.

“Xander,”	 I	said,	relieved.	“Are	 you	all	 right?”

“Of	course,”	 he	said,	the	confident	light	back	in	his	eyes.	“Why	 would	 you	think
I	wouldn’t	 be?”

“You	 were	under	so	long	that	I	thought	you	were	drowning,”	 I	admitted.	 “And
so	did	that	boy—”	 Suddenly	I	panicked.	Where	did	the	other	boy	go?	He	had	not
come	up	for	air.

“What	boy?”	 Xander	asked,	puzzled.

37
“What	boy?”	 Xander	asked,	puzzled.

“He	went	searching	for	you.”	 And	 then	I	saw	him,	below	the	blue,	a	shadow
under	the	water.	“He’s	right	 there.	Is	he	drowning?”

Just	then	the	boy	broke	the	surface	of	the	water,	coughing,	his	hair	glistening.	A
red	scrape,	almost	healed	but	still	noticeable,	ran	along	his	cheek.	I	did	my	best
not	to	stare.	Not	just	because	injuries	are	uncommon	in	a	place	where	we	are	all
so	healthy	and	safe,	but	because	he	was	unknown	to	me.	A	stranger.

It	took	the	boy	a	few	moments	to	catch	his	breath	again.	When	he	did,	he	looked
at	me	but	spoke	to	Xander,	saying,	“You	didn’t	 drown.”

“No,”	 agreed	Xander.	“You	almost	did,	though.”

“I	know,”	 the	boy	said.	“I	 meant	to	save	you.”	He	corrected	himself.	 “I	mean,	to
help	you.”

“Don’t	 you	know	 how	to	swim?”	 I	asked	him.

“I	thought	 I	did,”	 the	boy	said,	which	made	both	Xander	and	me	laugh.	The	boy
looked	into	my	eyes	and	smiled.	The	smile	seemed	to	surprise	him;	it	surprised
me,	too,	the	warmth	of	it.

The	boy	looked	back	at	Xander.	“She	looked	worried	 when	you	didn’t	 come
back	up.”

“I’m	 not	worried	 anymore,”	I	 said,	relieved	that	everyone	was	safe.	“Are	you
visiting	someone?”	I	asked	the	boy,	hoping	he	was	staying	for	a	long	visit.	 I
already	liked	him	because	he	had	wanted	to	help	Xander.

“No,”	 said	the	boy,	and	though	he	still	smiled,	his	voice	 sounded	quiet	and	still
like	the	water	had	become	around	us.	He	looked	right	at	me.	“I	belong	here.”

Now,	my	eyes	fixed	on	the	crowd	 in	front	of	 me,	I	feel	that	same	feeling	of	relief
and	release	as	I	see	a	familiar	face,	someone	who,	until	now,	I	had	been
desperately	worried	about.	Someone	I	must	have	thought	had	drowned	or	slipped
or	been	pulled	under	and	might	never	be	seen	again.

Ky	Markham	 is	here	and	he	looks	right	at	me.

38
Without	thinking,	 I	 take	a	step	toward	him.	That’s	when	I	feel	something	burst
beneath	my	foot.	The	lost	tablet	container	has	broken	open,	and	everything	it	is
supposed	to	protect	has	spilled	out	on	the	floor	and	been	crushed	under	my	foot.
Bluegreenred.

I	stop	in	my	tracks	but	the	movement	has	been	noted.	Officials	swarm	toward
me	and	the	people	near	me	draw	breath	and	call	out,	“Over	here!	It’s	broken!”

I	have	to	turn	away	when	an	Official	 takes	my	elbow	and	asks	me	what
happened.	When	I	look	back	at	where	Ky	stood,	he	has	disappeared.	Just	like	he
did	that	day	into	the	pool.	Just	like	his	face	did	 earlier	on	the	port	at	my	house.

39
                                             CHAPTER	        6

There	was	a	new	boy	at	the	pool	today,”	I	told	my	parents	that	long-ago	night,
after	the	incident	while	Xander	and	I	were	swimming.	I	was	careful	to	leave	out
any	mention	of	Xander	losing	his	tablet	container.	I	didn’t	want	him	to	get	in
trouble.	The	omission	felt	like	the	tablet	itself	stuck	in	my	throat.	Every	time	I
swallowed,	I	felt	it	catch	there,	threatening	to	choke	me.

But	still,	I	didn’t	tell.

My	parents	exchanged	glances.	“A	new	boy?	Are	you	sure?”	my	father	asked.

“I’m	sure,”	I	said.	“His	name	is	Ky	Markham.	Xander	and	I	swam	with	him.”

“He’s	staying	with	the	Markhams,	then,”	my	father	said.

“They’ve	adopted	him,”	I	told	my	parents.	“He	calls	Aida	his	mother	and	Patrick
his	father.	I	heard	him.”

My	parents	exchanged	glances.	Adoptions	were	and	are	virtually	unheard	of	in
our	Province	of	Oria.

We	heard	a	knock	on	the	door.	“Stay	here,	Cassia,”	my	father	said.	“Let	us	see
who	it	is.”

I	waited	back	in	the	kitchen,	but	I	heard	Xander’s	father,	Mr.	Carrow,	at	the
door,	his	deep	loud	voice	booming	through	the	foyer.	We	aren’t	allowed	to	go
into	one	another’s	residences,	but	I	could	imagine	him	standing	there	on	the
steps,	looking	like	an	older	version	of	Xander.	Same	blond	hair.	Same	laughing
blue	eyes.

“I	talked	with	Patrick	and	Aida	Markham,”	he	said.	“I	thought	you’d	want	to
know.	The	boy	is	an	orphan.	He’s	from	the	Outer	Provinces.”

“He	is?”	My	mother’s	voice	held	a	note	of	concern.	The	Outer	Provinces	are	on
the	geographic	fringe	of	the	Society	where	life	is	harder	and	wilder.	Sometimes
people	refer	to	them	as	the	Lesser	Provinces,	or	the	Backward	Provinces,
because	they	have	so	little	order	and	knowledge	there.	There’s	a	higher
concentration	of	Aberrations	there	than	in	the	general	populace.	And	even

40
concentration	of	Aberrations	there	than	in	the	general	populace.	And	even
Anomalies,	some	say.	Though	no	one	knows	for	certain	where	the	Anomalies
are.	They	used	to	be	kept	in	safe	houses,	but	many	of	those	stand	empty	these
days.

“He’s	here	with	 full	 Society	approval,”	Mr.	 Carrow	 said.	“Patrick	showed	me
the	paperwork	himself.	He	told	 me	to	tell	anyone	else	who	might	be	concerned.	I
knew	you’d	be	worried,	 Molly,	 and	you,	too,	Abran.”

“Well,	 then,”	my	 mother	said,	“it	sounds	all	right.”	 I	 edged	around	the	corner	to
look	into	the	foyer,	 where	my	parents’	backs	were	to	me	and	Xander’s	father
stood	on	the	steps	with	the	night	behind	him.

Then	Xander’s	father	dropped	his	voice,	and	I	had	to	listen	closely	 to	hear	what
he	said	over	the	low	hum	of	the	port	in	the	foyer.

“Molly,	 you	 should	have	seen	Aida.	And	Patrick.	They	seemed	alive	again.	The
boy	is	Aida’s	 nephew.	Her	sister’s	son.”

My	mother’s	 hand	went	up	to	her	hair,	a	gesture	she	always	made	when	she	was
uncomfortable.	Because	we	all	remembered	vividly	 what	had	happened	to	the
Markhams.

It	was	a	rare	case	of	government	failure.	A	Class	One	Anomaly	should	never
have	been	unidentified,	let	alone	allowed	to	roam	the	streets,	to	sneak	into	the
government	offices	where	Patrick	worked	 and	where	his	son	was	visiting	him
that	day.	We	all	kept	quiet	about	it,	but	we	 all	knew.	Because	the	Markham	boy
was	gone,	murdered	while	he	waited	for	his	father	to	come	back	from	a	meeting
elsewhere	in	the	building.	Because	Patrick	Markham	himself	 had	to	spend	time
being	healed,	since	the	Anomaly	waited	in	the	office,	 quiet,	and	attacked	Patrick,
too.

“Her	nephew,”	 my	mother	said,	her	voice	filled	 with	 empathy.	“Of	course	Aida
would	want	to	raise	him.”

“And	 the	government	might	feel	like	 they	owed	it	to	Patrick	 to	make	an
exception	for	him,”	 my	father	said.

“Abran,”	 my	mother	said	reproachfully.

But	Xander’s	father	agreed.	“It’s	 logical.	 An	exception	as	recompense	for	the
accident.	A	son	to	replace	the	one	that	they	shouldn’t	have	had	to	lose.	That’s

41
accident.	A	son	to	replace	the	one	that	they	shouldn’t	have	had	to	lose.	That’s
how	the	Officials	 see	it.”

Later,	my	mother	came	to	my	room	to	tuck	 me	in.	With	 her	voice	soft	like	the
blankets	she	settled	around	me,	she	asked,	“Did	you	hear	us	talking?”

“Yes,”	 I	said.

“The	Markhams’	 nephew—son—starts	school	tomorrow.”

“Ky,”	 I	 said.	“That’s	his	name.”

“Yes,”	 she	said.	She	bent	down	and	her	long	blond	hair	swung	over	her	shoulder
and	her	freckles	looked	like	stars	scattered	across	her	skin.	She	smiled	at	me.
“You’ll	  be	nice	to	him,	won’t	 you?”	she	asked.	“And	help	him	 fit	 in?	It	might	 be
hard	to	be	new	when	everyone	else	belongs.”

“I	will,”	  I	promised.

As	it	turned	out,	her	advice	was	unnecessary.	The	next	day	at	Second	School,	Ky
said	hello	and	introduced	himself	to	everyone.	Quiet	and	quick,	 he	moved
through	the	halls;	he	told	everyone	who	he	was	so	that	no	one	had	to	ask.	When
the	bell	rang,	he	disappeared	into	the	groups	of	students.	It	was	shocking	how
quickly	he	vanished.	He	was	there	one	minute—separate	and	distinct	and	new—
and	then	he	became	part	of	the	crowd,	as	though	he	had	done	it	all	of	his	life.	As
if	he	had	never	lived	anywhere	but	here.

And	that	is	how	it’s	 always	been	with	Ky,	 I	realize	now,	looking	 back.	We	have
always	seen	him	swimming	along	the	surface.	Only	that	first	 day	did	we	see	him
dive	deep.

“I	have	something	to	tell	 you,”	I	 say	to	Grandfather	as	I	pull	up	a	chair	next	to
him.	The	Officials	 didn’t	 keep	me	too	long	at	the	game	center	after	I	stepped	on
the	tablets;	I	still	have	enough	time	for	 a	visit.	I’m	 grateful,	because	this	is	the
second-to-last	time	that	I	will	 visit	 him.	The	thought	makes	me	feel	hollow.

“Ah,”	 Grandfather	says.	“Something	good?”	 He	sits	by	the	window,	as	he	often
does	at	night.	He	watches	the	sun	out	of	the	world	and	the	stars	into	it	and
sometimes	I	wonder	if	he	watches	the	sun	come	up	again.	Is	it	hard	to	sleep
when	you	know	you	are	almost	at	the	end?	Do	you	not	want	to	miss	a	moment,
even	those	that	would	otherwise	seem	dull	and	unremarkable?

42
even	those	that	would	otherwise	seem	dull	and	unremarkable?

In	the	night,	the	colors	wash	away;	gray	and	black	take	over.	Now	and	then	a
bright	pinprick	 of	light	 flashes	as	a	street	lamp	lights	up.	The	air-train	tracks,
dull	in	the	daylight,	 look	like	 beautiful	glowing	 paths	above	the	ground	now	that
their	evening	lights	have	been	turned	on.	As	I	watch,	an	air	train	rushes	past,
carrying	people	along	in	its	white	 and	lighted	space.

“Something	strange,”	I	 say,	and	Grandfather	puts	down	his	fork.	He	is	eating	a
piece	of	something	called	pie,	which	I	 have	actually	never	tasted,	but	it	looks
delicious.	I	wish	 that	it	weren’t	against	the	rules	for	him	 to	share	his	food	with
me.

“Everything’s	 fine.	I’m	 still	 Matched	to	Xander,”	 I	say.	I’ve	 learned	from	the
Society	that	this	is	the	way	to	give	news;	reassurance	first,	all	else	after.	“But
there	was	an	error	with	my	microcard.	When	I	 went	to	view	it,	 Xander’s	face
vanished.	And	I	saw	someone	else.”

“You	 saw	someone	else?”

I	nod,	trying	 not	to	look	too	hard	at	the	food	on	his	dish.	The	flakiness	of	 the
sugared	crust,	which	reminds	me	of	crystals	on	an	edge	of	snow.	The	red-stained
berries	smeared	across	the	plate,	ripe	and	surely	full	of	taste.	The	words	I’ve	said
cling	to	my	mind	 like	the	pastry	does	to	the	heavy	silver	fork.	 I	saw	someone
else.

“What	did	 you	feel,	when	you	saw	that	other	boy’s	face	come	up	on	the	screen?”
Grandfather	asks	kindly,	putting	his	 hand	on	mine.	“Were	you	worried?”

“A	 little,”	 I	say.	“I	 was	confused.	Because	I	know	the	second	boy,	too.”

Grandfather’s	eyebrows	curve	in	surprise.	“You	 do?”

“It’s	 Ky	Markham,”	  I	tell	him.	 “Patrick	 and	Aida’s	son.	He	lives	in	 Mapletree
Borough,	down	the	street	from	me.”

“What	explanation	did	 the	Official	 give	you	for	 the	mistake?”

“It	wasn’t	 a	mistake	by	the	Society,”	I	 say.	“The	Society	doesn’t	make
mistakes.”

“Of	course	not,”	 Grandfather	says,	his	tone	measured	and	even.	“People	do,

43
“Of	course	not,”	 Grandfather	says,	his	tone	measured	and	even.	“People	do,
though.”

“That’s	what	 the	Official	 thinks	must	have	happened.	She	thinks	someone	must
have	altered	my	microcard	and	put	Ky’s	face	on	there.”

“Why?”	 Grandfather	wonders.

“She	thinks	it	was	some	kind	of	 cruel	joke.	Because,”	I	lower	 my	voice	even
further,	“of	 Ky’s	 status.	He’s	an	Aberration.”

Grandfather	pushes	out	of	his	chair,	knocking	his	tray	to	the	ground.	I’m
surprised	to	see	how	thin	he’s	grown,	but	he	stands	straight	as	a	tree.	“There	was
a	picture	of	an	Aberration	as	your	Match?”

“Just	for	a	moment,”	I	 say,	trying	to	reassure	him.	“But	 it	was	an	error.	Xander’s
my	Match.	This	other	boy	 wasn’t	even	in	the	Matching	 pool	at	all.”

Grandfather	doesn’t	sit	down,	even	though	I	remain	in	 my	chair	hoping	to	calm
him,	to	make	him	see	that	this	is	all	right.

“Did	 they	say	why	he	was	classified	that	way?”

“His	father	did	 something,”	I	 say.	“It	isn’t	 Ky’s	 fault.”	 And	 it	isn’t.	 I	know	it,
and	Grandfather	knows	it.	The	Officials	 never	would	have	allowed	 the	adoption
if	Ky	 himself	had	been	a	threat.

Grandfather	looks	at	the	plate	where	it	clattered	from	the	tray	onto	the	floor.	 I
move	to	pick	it	 up,	but	he	stops	me.	“No,”	he	says,	his	voice	sharp,	and	then	he
bends	creakily.	As	if	he	were	made	of	old	wood,	 an	old	tree,	stiff	wooden	joints.
He	pushes	the	last	pieces	of	food	back	onto	the	plate	and	then	he	looks	at	me
with	his	clear	eyes.	Nothing	stiff	 about	them;	they	are	alive,	full	 of	movement.	“I
don’t	like	 it,”	 he	says.	“Why	would	 someone	change	your	microcard?”

“Grandfather,”	 I	say.	“Please,	sit	down.	It’s	 a	prank,	and	they’ll	find	 out	who	did
it	and	take	care	of	everything.	An	Official	  from	the	Matching	 Department	said	so
herself.”	I	wish	 I	hadn’t	told	 him.	Why	 did	I	think	 there	would	be	comfort	 in	the
telling?

But	now	there	is.	“That	 poor	boy,”	Grandfather	says,	his	voice	sad.	“He’s	 been
marked	through	no	fault	of	his	own.	 Do	you	know	 him	well?”

44
“We’re	friendly,	but	we’re	not	close.	I	see	him	sometimes	during	free-rec	hours
on	Saturdays,”	I	explain.	“He	received	his	permanent	work	position	a	year	ago
and	so	I	don’t	see	him	much	anymore.”

“And	what	is	his	work	position?”

I	hesitate	to	tell	Grandfather	because	it	is	such	a	dismal	one.	We	were	all
surprised	when	Ky	received	such	a	lowly	assignment,	since	Patrick	and	Aida	are
well	respected.	“He	works	at	the	nutrition	disposal	center.”

Grandfather	makes	a	grimace.	“That’s	hard,	unfulfilling	work.”

“I	know,”	I	say.	I’ve	noticed	that,	in	spite	of	the	gloves	the	workers	wear,	Ky’s
hands	are	permanently	red	from	the	heat	of	the	water,	the	machines.	But	he	does
not	complain.

“And	the	Official	let	you	tell	me	this?”	Grandfather	asks.

“Yes,”	I	say.	“I	asked	her	if	I	could	tell	one	person.	You.”

Grandfather’s	eyes	gleam	mischievously.	“Because	the	dead	can’t	talk?”

“No,”	 I	say.	I	love	Grandfather’s	jokes,	but	I	can’t	joke	back,	not	about	this.	It’s
coming	too	quickly.	I	will	miss	him	too	much.	“I	wanted	to	tell	you	because	I
knew	you	would	understand.”

“Ah,”	Grandfather	says,	raising	his	eyebrows	in	a	wry	expression.	“And	did	I?”

Now	I	am	laughing,	a	little.	“Not	as	well	as	I’d	hoped.	You	acted	like	my	parents
would	have,	if	I’d	told	them.”

“Of	course	I	did,”	he	says.	“I	want	to	protect	you.”

Not	always,	I	think,	raising	my	eyebrows	back	at	him.	Grandfather	is	the	one
who	finally	made	me	stop	sitting	at	the	edge	of	the	pool.

He	joined	us	there	one	summer	day	and	asked,	“What	is	she	doing?”

“That’s	what	she	always	does,”	Xander	said.

“Can’t	she	swim?”	Grandfather	asked,	and	I	glared	at	him	because	I	could	speak
for	myself.	He	knew	that.

45
for	myself.	He	knew	 that.

“She	can,”	Xander	said.	“She	just	doesn’t	like	 to	do	it.”

“I	don’t	 like	 the	jumping-in	 part,”	I	informed	 Grandfather.

“I	see,”	he	said.	“What	 about	the	diving	board?”

“Especially	not	 that.”

“All	 right,”	 he	told	me.	He	sat	next	to	me	on	the	edge.	Even	back	then,	when	he
was	younger	and	stronger,	I	remember	thinking	how	old	he	looked	compared	to
my	friends’	 grandparents.	My	grandparents	were	one	of	the	last	couples	who
chose	to	be	Matched	later	in	life.	They	were	thirty-five	  when	they	Matched.	My
father,	their	one	child,	wasn’t	 born	until	four	 years	later.	Now,	no	one	is	allowed
to	have	a	child	after	they	turn	thirty-one.

The	sun	shone	right	through	his	silver	hair	and	made	me	see	each	strand	even
when	I	wasn’t	looking	 for	such	detail.	It	 made	me	sad,	even	though	he	made	me
angry.	“This	is	exciting,”	 he	said,	kicking	 his	feet	in	the	water.	“I	 can	see	how
you’d	never	want	to	do	anything	 but	sit.”	I	 heard	the	teasing	in	his	voice	and
turned	away.

Then	he	stood	up	and	walked	toward	the	diving	board.	“Sir,”	 said	the	waterguard
in	charge	of	the	pool.	“Sir?”

“I	have	a	recreational	pass,”	Grandfather	told	her,	not	stopping.	“I’m	  in	excellent
health.”	Then	he	climbed	up	the	ladder	to	the	diving	 board,	looking	stronger	and
stronger	the	higher	he	climbed.

He	didn’t	look	 over	at	me	before	he	jumped;	he	went	right	in,	and	before	he
broke	through	the	surface	of	the	water	I	was	on	my	feet,	walking	 across	the	hot
wet	cement	to	the	high-dive	ladder,	the	soles	of	my	feet	and	my	pride	both	on
fire.

And	I	jumped.

“You’re	 thinking	 of	the	pool,	aren’t	 you?”	he	asks	me	now.

“Yes,”	 I	say,	laughing	a	little.	 “You	 didn’t	 keep	me	safe	then.	You	practically
dared	me	to	leap	to	my	death,”	and	then	I	cringe,	because	I	didn’t	mean	to	say

46
dared	me	to	leap	to	my	death,”	and	then	I	cringe,	because	I	didn’t	mean	to	say
that	word.	I	don’t	know	why	I’m	afraid	of	it.	Grandfather	isn’t.	The	Society
isn’t.	I	shouldn’t	be.

Grandfather	doesn’t	seem	to	notice.	“You	were	ready	to	jump,”	he	says.	“You
just	weren’t	sure	of	it	yet.”

We	both	fall	silent,	remembering.	I	try	not	to	look	at	the	timepiece	on	the	wall.	I
have	to	leave	soon	so	I	can	make	curfew,	but	I	don’t	want	Grandfather	to	think
that	I	am	marking	the	minutes.	Marking	time	until	our	visit	is	over.	Marking
time	until	his	life	is	over.	Although,	if	you	think	about	it,	I	am	marking	time	for
my	own	life,	too.	Every	minute	you	spend	with	someone	gives	them	a	part	of
your	life	and	takes	part	of	theirs.

Grandfather	senses	my	distraction	and	asks	me	what	is	on	my	mind.	I	tell	him,
because	I	won’t	have	many	more	chances	to	do	so,	and	he	reaches	out	and	grips
my	hand.	“I’m	glad	to	give	you	part	of	my	life,”	he	says,	and	it	is	such	a	nice
thing	to	say	and	he	says	it	so	kindly	that	I	say	it	back.	Even	though	he	is	almost
eighty,	even	though	his	body	seemed	frail	earlier,	his	grip	feels	strong,	and	again
I	feel	sad.

“There’s	something	else	I	wanted	to	tell	you,”	I	say	to	Grandfather.	“I	signed	up
for	hiking	as	my	summer	leisure	activity.”

He	looks	pleased.	“They’ve	brought	that	back?”	Grandfather	used	to	hike	as	one
of	his	leisure	activities	years	ago,	and	he’s	talked	about	it	ever	since.

“It’s	new	this	summer.	I’ve	never	seen	it	offered	before.”

“I	wonder	who	the	instructor	is,”	he	says,	thoughtfully.	Then	he	looks	out	the
window.	“I	wonder	where	they’ll	take	you	to	hike.”	I	follow	his	gaze	again.
There	isn’t	much	wildness	out	there,	though	we	have	plenty	of	greenspace—
parks	and	recreation	fields.	“Maybe	to	one	of	the	larger	recreation	areas,”	I	say.

“Maybe	to	the	Hill,”	he	says,	the	light	returning	to	his	eyes.

The	Hill	is	the	last	place	in	the	City	that	has	been	left	forested	and	wild.	I	can	see
it	now,	its	prickly	green	back	rising	out	of	the	Arboretum	where	my	mother
works.	It	was	once	mostly	used	for	Army	training,	but	since	most	of	the	Army
has	been	moved	to	the	Outer	Provinces,	there	isn’t	as	much	need	for	it	anymore.

“Do	you	think	so?”	I	ask,	excited.	“I’ve	never	been	there	before.	I	mean,	I’ve

47
“Do	you	think	so?”	I	ask,	excited.	“I’ve	never	been	there	before.	I	mean,	I’ve
been	to	the	Arboretum	lots	of	times,	of	course,	but	I’ve	never	had	permission	to
go	on	the	Hill.”

“You’ll	 love	it	if	they	let	you	hike	the	Hill,”	Grandfather	says,	his	face	animated.
“There’s	something	about	climbing	to	the	highest	point	you	can	see,	and	there’s
no	one	clearing	a	path	for	you,	no	simulator.	Everything’s	real—”

“Do	you	really	think	they’ll	let	us	hike	there?”	I	ask.	His	enthusiasm	is
contagious.

“I	hope	so.”	Grandfather	gazes	out	the	window	in	the	direction	of	the
Arboretum,	and	I	wonder	if	the	reason	he	spends	so	much	time	looking	out	lately
is	because	he	likes	to	remember	what	he	carries	within.

It	is	as	though	he	can	read	my	mind.	“I’m	nothing	but	an	old	man	sitting	here
thinking	about	his	memories,	aren’t	I?”

I	smile.	“There’s	nothing	wrong	with	doing	that.”	In	fact,	at	the	end	of	a	life,	it’s
encouraged.

“That’s	not	exactly	what	I’m	doing,”	Grandfather	said.

“Oh?”

“I’m	thinking.”	Again,	he	knows	my	thoughts.	“It’s	not	the	same	as
remembering.	Remembering	is	part	of	thinking,	but	not	all	of	it.”

“What	are	you	thinking	about?”

“Many	things.	A	poem.	An	idea.	Your	grandmother.”	My	grandmother	died
early	of	one	of	the	last	kinds	of	cancer	when	she	was	sixty-two.	I	never	knew
her.	The	compact	was	hers	before	it	was	mine—a	gift	from	her	mother-in-law,
Grandfather’s	mother.

“What	do	you	think	she	would	say	about	my	Match?”	I	ask	him.	“About	what
happened	today?”

He’s	quiet,	and	I	wait.	“I	think,”	he	says	finally,	“she	would	ask	you	if	you
wondered.”

I	want	to	ask	him	what	he	means,	but	I	hear	the	bell	ringing,	announcing	that	the

48
I	want	to	ask	him	what	he	means,	but	I	hear	the	bell	ringing,	announcing	that	the
final	air	train	for	the	Boroughs	will	be	coming	through	soon.	I	have	to	go.

“Cassia?”	Grandfather	says	as	I	stand	up.	“You	still	have	the	compact	I	gave
you,	don’t	you?”

“Yes,”	I	say,	surprised	that	he	would	ask.	It’s	the	most	valuable	thing	I	own.	The
most	valuable	thing	I	will	ever	own.

“Will	 you	bring	it	to	my	Final	Banquet	tomorrow?”	he	asks.

Tears	well	in	my	eyes.	He	must	want	to	see	it	again	to	remember	my
grandmother,	and	his	mother.	“Of	course	I	will,	Grandfather.”

“Thank	you.”

My	tears	threaten	to	spill	over	onto	his	cheek	as	I	bend	down	to	kiss	him.	I	hold
them	back;	I	don’t	cry.	I	wonder	when	I	can.	It	won’t	be	tomorrow	night	at	the
Final	Banquet.	People	will	be	watching	then.	To	see	how	Grandfather	handles
leaving,	and	to	see	how	we	manage	being	left.

As	I	walk	down	the	hall,	I	hear	other	residents	talking	to	themselves	or	to
visitors	behind	their	closed	doors,	and	the	sound	of	ports	turned	up	loud	because
many	of	the	elderly	cannot	hear	well.	Some	rooms	are	silent.	Perhaps	some	are
like	Grandfather,	sitting	in	front	of	open	windows	and	thinking	about	people
who	are	no	longer	here.

She	would	ask	you	if	you	wondered.

I	step	into	the	elevator	and	push	the	button,	feeling	sad	and	strange	and
confused.	What	did	he	mean?

I	know	Grandfather’s	time	is	running	out.	I	have	known	this	for	a	long	time.	But
why,	as	the	elevator	doors	slide	shut,	do	I	suddenly	feel	that	mine	is	running	out
as	well?

My	grandmother	would	want	to	know	if	I	wondered	if	it	wasn’t	a	mistake	after
all.	If	Ky	were	meant	to	be	my	Match.

For	a	moment,	I	did.	When	I	saw	Ky’s	face	flash	in	front	of	me	so	quick	I

49
couldn’t	even	see	the	color	of	his	eyes,	only	the	dark	of	them	as	they	looked
back	at	me,	I	wondered,	Is	it	you?

50
                                             CHAPTER	        7

Today	is	Sunday.	It	is	Grandfather’s	eightieth	birthday,	so	tonight	he	will	die.

People	used	to	wake	up	and	wonder,	“Will	today	be	the	end?”	or	lie	down	to
sleep,	not	knowing	if	they	would	come	back	out	of	the	dark.	Now,	we	know
which	day	will	be	the	end	of	the	light	and	which	night	will	be	the	long,	last	one.
The	Final	Banquet	is	a	luxury.	A	triumph	of	planning,	of	the	Society,	of	human
life	and	the	quality	of	it.

All	the	studies	show	that	the	best	age	to	die	is	eighty.	It’s	long	enough	that	we
can	have	a	complete	life	experience,	but	not	so	long	that	we	feel	useless.	That’s
one	of	the	worst	feelings	the	elderly	can	have.	In	societies	before	ours,	they
could	get	terrible	diseases,	like	depression,	because	they	didn’t	feel	needed
anymore.	And	there	is	a	limit	to	what	the	Society	can	do,	too.	We	can’t	hold	off
all	the	indignities	of	aging	much	past	eighty.	Matching	for	healthy	genes	can
only	take	us	so	far.

Things	didn’t	used	to	be	this	fair.	In	the	old	days,	not	everyone	died	at	the	same
age	and	there	were	all	kinds	of	problems	and	uncertainty.	You	could	die
anywhere—on	the	street,	in	a	medical	center	as	my	grandmother	did,	even	on	an
air	train.	You	could	die	alone.

No	one	should	die	alone.

The	hour	is	very	early,	faint	blue	and	pale	pink,	as	we	arrive	on	the	almost-
empty	air	train	and	walk	along	the	cement	pathway	toward	the	door	of
Grandfather’s	building.	I	want	to	step	off	the	path	and	take	off	my	shoes	and
walk	with	my	bare	feet	on	the	cool,	sharp	grass,	but	today	is	not	a	day	to	deviate
from	what	is	planned.	My	parents	and	Bram	and	I	are	all	quiet,	thinking.	None	of
us	have	work	or	leisure	hours.	Today	is	for	Grandfather.	Tomorrow,	things	go
back	to	normal	again	and	we	will	move	on	and	he	will	be	gone.

It’s	expected.	It’s	fair.	I	remind	myself	of	this	as	we	climb	into	the	elevator	to	go
to	his	apartment.	“You	can	push	the	button,”	I	tell	Bram,	trying	to	joke	with	him.
Bram	and	I	used	to	fight	over	who	got	to	push	the	buttons	when	we	came	to
visit.	Bram	smiles	and	presses	the	10.	For	the	last	time,	I	think	to	myself.	After
today,	there	will	be	no	Grandfather	to	visit.	We	will	have	no	reason	to	come

51
back.

Most	people	don’t	know	 their	grandparents	this	well.	The	kind	 of	relationship	I
have	with	my	other	grandparents	in	the	Farmlands	is	much	more	common.	We
communicate	via	port	every	few	months	and	visit	 every	few	years.	Many
grandchildren	watch	the	Final	Banquet	on	the	portscreens,	too,	one	step	removed
from	what’s	happening.	I	 have	never	envied	those	other	children;	I’ve	pitied
them.	Even	today,	I	feel	that	way.

“How	 long	do	we	have	before	the	Committee	shows	up?”	Bram	asks	my	father.

“About	 half	an	hour,”	my	 father	answers.	“Does	everyone	have	their	gifts?”

We	nod.	Each	of	us	has	brought	something	to	give	Grandfather.	I’m	not	 sure
what	my	parents	chose	for	him,	but	I	know	 Bram	went	to	the	Arboretum	 to	get	a
rock	from	a	spot	as	near	to	the	Hill	as	possible.

Bram	catches	me	looking	at	him,	and	he	opens	his	palm	to	show	me	the	rock
again.	It	is	round	and	brown	and	still	 a	bit	dirty.	It	 looks	a	little	 like	an	egg,	and
when	he	brought	it	back	yesterday,	he	told	me	that	he’d	found	it	under	a	tree	in	a
pile	of	soft	green	pine	needles	that	looked	like	a	nest.

“He’s	going	 to	love	it,”	 I	say	to	Bram.

“He’ll	 love	 your	gift,	 too.”	Bram	closes	his	fist	 around	the	rock	again.	The	doors
slide	open	and	we	step	out	into	the	hall.

I’ve	made	Grandfather	a	letter	for	my	 gift.	I	 got	up	early	this	morning	 and	spent
time	cutting	and	pasting	and	copying	sentiments	on	the	letter-making	program
on	the	port.	Before	I	printed	the	letter,	I	 found	a	poem	from	the	decade	in	which
he	was	born	and	included	it	as	well.	Not	many	people	care	about	poetry	after
they	finish	school,	but	Grandfather	always	has.	He’s	read	all	of	 the	Hundred
Poems	many	times.

One	of	the	doors	along	the	hall	opens	and	an	old	woman	peeks	her	head	out.
“You’re	 going	to	the	Banquet	for	Mr.	 Reyes?”	she	asks,	and	she	doesn’t	even
wait	for	us	to	answer.	“It’s	 private,	isn’t	 it?”

“It	is,”	 my	father	says,	stopping	politely	 to	speak	with	her,	even	though	I	know
he	is	eager	to	see	his	father.	He	can’t	keep	himself	from	glancing	down	the	hall
at	Grandfather’s	closed	door.

52
at	Grandfather’s	closed	door.

The	woman	grumbles	a	little.	“I	 wish	 it	were	public.	I’d	 like	 to	go	so	I	can	get
ideas.	Mine’s	in	less	than	two	months.	You	can	bet	it’s	 going	to	be	public.”	 She
laughs	a	little,	a	short,	harsh	sound,	and	then	she	asks,	“Can	you	come	and	tell
me	about	it	afterward?”

My	mother	comes	to	the	rescue,	as	she	and	my	father	always	do	for	each	other.
“Perhaps,”	Mama	says,	smiling,	and	she	takes	my	father’s	hand	and	turns	her
back	on	the	woman.

We	hear	a	disappointed	sigh	and	then	a	click	behind	us	as	the	woman	closes	her
door.	The	nameplate	on	her	door	says	Mrs.	Nash,	and	I	remember	that	Grandpa
has	talked	about	her	before.	Nosy,	he	said.

“Can’t	 she	wait	for	her	own	turn	to	come,	instead	of	talking	 about	it	on
Grandfather’s	day?”	Bram	mutters,	pushing	open	the	door	to	Grandfather’s
residence.

It	already	feels	like	a	different	 place.	More	hushed.	A	little	 lonelier.	I	 think	that
is	because	Grandfather	is	not	sitting	at	the	window	anymore.	Today,	he	rests	in	a
bed	in	the	living	room	 as	his	body	shuts	down.	Right	on	time.

“Could	you	 move	me	over	to	the	window?”	 Grandfather	asks,	after	saying	hello
to	all	of	us.

“Certainly.”	 My	 father	reaches	for	the	edge	of	the	bed	and	pulls	it	smoothly
toward	the	early	morning	light.	 “Remember	when	you	did	 this	for	me?	When	I
had	all	those	inoculations	as	a	child?”

Grandfather	smiles.	“That	was	a	different	house.”

“And	 a	different	view,”	 my	father	agrees.	“All	 I	 could	see	from	that	window	 was
the	neighbor’s	yard	and	an	air-train	track	if	 I	looked	high	 enough.”

“But	beyond	that	there	was	sky,”	 Grandfather	says	softly.	“You	 can	almost
always	see	the	sky.	And	what’s	beyond	that,	I	wonder?	And	after	this?”

Bram	and	I	exchange	glances.	Grandfather	must	be	wandering	a	little	today,
which	is	to	be	expected.	On	the	day	the	elderly	turn	eighty,	the	decline	always
accelerates.	Not	everyone	dies	at	exactly	the	same	time,	but	it	is	always	before
midnight.

53
midnight.

“I’ve	 invited	 my	friends	to	come	immediately	 after	the	Committee	visits,”
Grandfather	says.	“And	then	after	they	leave	I’d	 like	to	spend	some	one-on-one
time	with	each	of	you.	Starting	 with	you,	Abran.”

My	father	nods.	“Of	 course.”

The	Committee	does	not	take	long.	They	arrive,	three	men	and	three	women	in
their	long	white	 lab	coats,	and	they	bring	things	with	them,	too.	The	Banquet
clothes	that	Grandfather	will	 wear.	Equipment	for	tissue	preservation.	A
microcard	with	 a	history	of	his	life	 so	he	can	watch	it	on	the	port.

With	the	exception	of	 maybe	the	microcard,	I	think	Grandfather	 will	 like	our
gifts	better.

After	a	few	moments,	Grandfather	reappears	wearing	his	Banquet	clothes.	They
are	basically	plainclothes,	simple	pants	and	a	shirt	and	socks,	but	they	are	made
of	fine-quality	 material,	and	he	has	been	able	to	select	the	color.

I	feel	something	catch	in	my	throat	when	I	 see	that	the	color	he	has	chosen	for
his	clothing	is	a	light	 green.	We	are	so	much	alike.	And	I	wonder	if	 he	realized
when	I	was	born	that	the	days	of	our	Banquets	would	be	so	close	together,	since
our	birthdays	are	only	a	few	days	apart.

We	all	sit	politely,	 Grandfather	in	his	 bed	and	the	rest	of	us	on	chairs,	while	the
Committee	completes	their	part	of	the	celebration.

“Mr.	 Reyes,	we	present	to	you	the	microcard	with	images	and	records	from	your
life,”	 they	say.	“It	 has	been	compiled	by	one	of	our	best	historians	in	your
honor.”

“Thank	you,”	 Grandfather	says,	reaching	out	his	hand.

The	box	containing	the	microcard	is	like	 the	silver	one	we	receive	when	we	are
Matched,	except	for	the	color:	gold.	The	microcard	 inside	has	pictures	of
Grandfather	as	a	small	boy,	a	teenager,	a	man.	He	hasn’t	seen	some	of	these
images	in	years,	and	I	imagine	that	he	is	excited	to	view	them	today.	The
microcard	also	includes	a	summary	of	his	life	 in	words,	read	by	one	of	the
historians.	Grandfather	turns	the	golden	box	over	in	his	hands	as	I	did	with	my
silver	box	not	long	ago	at	the	Match	Banquet.	His	 life	cupped	in	his	palms,	as

54
silver	box	not	long	ago	at	the	Match	Banquet.	His	 life	cupped	in	his	palms,	as
mine	was.

One	of	the	women	speaks	next.	She	seems	gentler	than	the	others,	but	maybe
that	is	because	she	is	smaller	and	younger	than	the	rest.	“Mr.	Reyes,	have	you
chosen	the	person	to	take	possession	of	your	microcard	when	today	is	over?”

“My	 son,	Abran,”	Grandfather	says.

She	holds	out	the	device	for	the	tissue	collection,	which,	as	a	final	courtesy	to
the	elderly,	the	Society	allows	to	take	place	privately,	 among	family.	 “And	 we
are	pleased	to	formally	announce	that	your	data	indicates	you	have	qualified	for
preservation.	Not	everyone	qualifies,	as	you	know,	and	it	is	another	honor	that
you	can	add	to	your	already	long	list	of	 achievements.”

Grandfather	takes	the	device	from	her	and	thanks	her	again.	Before	she	can	ask
him	who	he’s	trusted	with	 the	delivery	of	 the	sample,	he	volunteers	the
information.	 “My	 son,	Abran,	will	 take	care	of	this	as	well.”

She	nods	her	head.	“Simply	swab	your	cheek	and	put	the	sample	in	here,”	she
says,	demonstrating.	“Then	seal	it	up.	You	need	to	bring	the	sample	to	the
Biological	 Preservation	Department	within	twenty-four	 hours	of	 collection.
Otherwise	we	cannot	guarantee	that	preservation	will	be	effective.”

I’m	glad	 that	Grandfather	has	qualified	to	have	a	tissue	sample	frozen.	Now,	for
him,	death	may	not	necessarily	be	the	end.	Someday,	the	Society	might	figure
out	a	way	to	bring	us	back.	They	don’t	 promise	anything,	but	I	think	 we	all	know
that	it	will	 happen	eventually.	When	has	the	Society	ever	failed	in	reaching	a
goal?

The	man	next	to	her	speaks.	“The	food	for	your	guests	and	your	own	final	 meal
should	arrive	within	 the	hour.”	He	leans	over	to	hand	Grandfather	a	printed
menu	card.	“Are	there	any	last-minute	modifications	 you	would	 like	to	make?”

Grandfather	looks	at	the	card	and	shakes	his	head.	“Everything	looks	in	order.”

“Enjoy	 your	Final	Banquet,	then,”	 the	man	says,	pocketing	the	card.

“Thank	you.”	 There	is	a	wry	twist	 to	Grandfather’s	mouth	as	he	says	this,	as
though	he	knows	something	they	don’t.

55
As	the	Committee	leaves,	they	all	shake	Grandfather’s	hand	and	say,
“Congratulations.”	 And	I	 swear	that	I	can	read	Grandfather’s	mind	as	he	meets
their	gaze	with	his	sharp	eyes.	Are	you	congratulating	me	on	my	life,	or	 on	my
death?

“Let’s	 get	this	over	with,”	 Grandfather	says	with	a	spark	in	his	eye,	looking	 at
the	tissue	collection	device,	and	we	all	laugh	at	his	tone.	Grandfather	swabs	his
own	cheek,	puts	the	sample	in	the	clear	glass	tube,	and	seals	it	shut.	Some	of	the
solemnity	leaves	the	room	now	that	the	Committee	has	gone.

“Everything’s	 going	very	 well,”	 Grandfather	says,	handing	the	tube	to	my	father.
“I	am	having	a	perfect	death	so	far.”

My	father	winces,	an	expression	of	pain	crossing	his	face.	I	know	 he,	like	me,
would	prefer	that	Grandfather	not	use	that	word,	but	neither	of	 us	would	think	of
correcting	Grandfather	today.	The	pain	on	my	father’s	 face	makes	him	look
younger,	almost	like	a	child	for	 a	moment.	Perhaps	he	remembers	his	mother’s
death—so	unusual,	so	difficult	compared	to	a	Final	Banquet	like	 this.

After	today,	he	will	 be	no	one’s	child.

Even	though	I	don’t	want	 to,	I	think	 of	the	murdered	Markham	boy.	No
celebration.	No	tissue	preparation,	no	good-byes.	That	hardly	ever	occurs,	I
remind	myself.	The	odds	of	that	happening	are	almost	a	million	 to	one.

“We	have	some	gifts	for	you,”	 Bram	says	to	Grandfather.	“Can	we	give	 them	to
you	now?”

“Bram,”	 my	father	says	reproachfully.	 “Perhaps	he	wants	to	get	the	microcard
ready	for	viewing.	 He	has	guests	on	the	way.”

“I	do	want	 to	do	that,”	Grandfather	says.	“I’m	 looking	 forward	 to	seeing	my	life
pass	before	my	eyes.	And	I’m	looking	 forward	to	the	food.”

“What	did	 you	choose?”	Bram	asks,	eager.	The	selections	for	Grandfather	and
his	guests	are	the	same,	but	it	is	an	actual	law	that	we	must	eat	the	food	from	the
trays	and	he	must	eat	the	food	on	his	plate.	We’re	not	allowed	to	share.

“All	 desserts,”	Grandfather	says	with	a	grin.	“Cake.	Pudding.	 Cookies.	And
something	else.	But	let	me	see	your	gift	before	we	do	any	of	that,	Bram.”

56
Bram	beams.	“Close	your	eyes.”

Grandfather	obeys	and	holds	out	his	hand.	Bram	places	the	rock	gently	into
Grandfather’s	palm.	A	few	 particles	of	earth	fall	 on	the	blanket	covering
Grandfather,	and	my	mother	reaches	to	brush	them	away.	But	at	the	last	second,
she	pulls	her	hand	back	and	smiles.	Grandfather	won’t	mind	the	dirt.

“A	 rock,”	Grandfather	says,	opening	his	eyes	and	looking	down.	He	smiles	at
Bram.	“I	 have	a	feeling	I	know	where	you	found	 it.”

Bram	grins	and	ducks	his	head.	My	grandfather	holds	on	tight	to	the	rock.
“Who’s	 next,	then?”	he	asks,	almost	merrily.

“I’d	 like	to	 give	my	gift	 later,	during	the	good-byes,”	 my	father	says	quietly.

“That	won’t	 leave	me	very	much	time	to	enjoy	 it,”	 Grandfather	teases.

Suddenly	self-conscious	about	my	letter—I	 don’t	want	him	 to	read	it	in	front	 of
everyone—I	say,	“Me	 too.”

There	is	a	knock	on	the	door:	some	of	Grandfather’s	friends.	A	 few	minutes	after
we	let	them	in,	more	arrive.	And	 more.	And	then	the	nutrition	 personnel,	with	all
of	Grandfather’s	desserts—his	last	meal—and	the	separate	trays	for	his	guests.

Grandfather	lifts	the	cover	from	 his	plate	and	a	heavenly,	warm-fruit	 smell	fills
the	room.

“I	thought	 you	might	like	 some	pie,”	Grandfather	says,	looking	at	me.	He	saw
me,	then,	the	other	day,	and	I	smile	at	him.	At	his	signal,	I	 lift	 the	covers	from
the	guest	trays	and	we	all	gather	around	to	eat.	I	serve	everyone	else	first	and
then	I	pick	up	my	piece	of	 pie,	flaky	and	warm	and	fruit-filled,	  and	lift	 a	forkful
of	the	pastry	to	my	mouth.

I	wonder	if	 death	will	always	taste	this	good.




After	all	 the	guests	have	put	down	their	forks	and	sighed	in	satiation,	they	talk
with	Grandfather,	who	leans	back	on	a	pile	of	thick	 white	pillows.	 Bram	 eats	on,
stuffing	himself	 with	 bites	of	everything.	Grandfather	smiles	at	him	from	 across
the	room,	amused.

57
the	room,	amused.

“It’s	 so	good,”	Bram	says	around	a	mouthful	of	 pie,	and	Grandfather	laughs
outright,	a	sound	so	warm	and	familiar	that	I	 smile,	too,	and	put	my	hand	down.
I	was	about	to	touch	Bram’s	arm,	tell	 him	to	quit	feasting.	But	 if	Grandfather
doesn’t	mind,	why	should	I?

My	father	doesn’t	eat	anything.	He	puts	a	piece	of	pie	on	a	round,	white	 plate
and	then	holds	it	in	his	hands,	juice	seeping	out	onto	the	china	without	him
noticing.	A	 little	 drop	of	it	falls	 to	the	floor	when	 he	stands	up	to	say	good-bye	to
Grandfather’s	guests	after	the	viewing	of	the	microcard.	“Thank	 you	for
coming,”	Papa	says,	and	my	mother	bends	down	behind	him	to	dab	up	the	drop
with	her	napkin.	Someone	else	will	 move	in	after	Grandfather	leaves,	and	they
won’t	want	 to	see	the	signs	of	another	person’s	Banquet.	But	that’s	not	why	my
mother	did	it,	I	 realize.	She	wanted	to	spare	my	father	any	worry,	any	tiny	bit	 at
all.

She	takes	the	plate	from	my	father	as	the	door	shuts	behind	the	last	guest.
“Family	 time	now,”	 she	says,	and	my	grandfather	nods.

“Thank	goodness,”	he	says.	“I	have	things	to	say	to	each	of	you.”

So	far,	except	for	that	one	moment	when	he	talked	about	what	might	come	next,
Grandfather	has	been	behaving	as	usual.	I’ve	heard	that	some	of	the	elderly	have
surprised	everyone	at	the	end,	by	choosing	not	to	die	with	dignity.	 They	cry	and
get	upset	and	go	crazy.	All	it	does	is	make	their	families	 sad.	There	is	nothing
they	can	do	about	it.	It’s	the	way	things	are.

By	some	unspoken	agreement,	my	mother	and	Bram	and	I	go	into	the	kitchen	to
let	my	father	speak	with	Grandfather	first.	 Bram,	drowsy	and	stuffed	with	 food,
puts	his	head	down	on	the	table	and	falls	asleep,	snoring	gently.	My	mother
smoothes	his	curly	brown	hair	with	 her	hand,	and	I	imagine	that	Bram	dreams	of
more	desserts,	a	plate	heaped	with	them.	My	eyes	feel	heavy,	too,	but	I	don’t
want	to	miss	any	part	of	Grandfather’s	last	day.

After	my	 father,	Bram	has	a	turn,	and	then	my	mother	goes	in	to	speak	with
Grandfather.	The	gift	she	has	for	him	is	a	leaf	from	 his	favorite	tree	at	the
Arboretum.	She	picked	it	yesterday,	so	the	edges	have	curled	and	become
brown,	but	there	is	still	 green	in	the	middle.	She	told	me,	while	we	waited	 and
Bram	slept,	that	Grandfather	had	asked	if	he	could	have	his	final	celebration	at
the	Arboretum,	out	in	the	blue-sky	 air.	Of	course,	his	request	was	denied.

58
the	Arboretum,	out	in	the	blue-sky	 air.	Of	course,	his	request	was	denied.

My	turn	at	last.	As	I	 go	into	the	room	I	 notice	that	the	windows	are	open.	It	is
not	a	cool	afternoon,	and	the	breeze	feels	urgent	and	hot	as	it	blows	through	the
apartment.	Soon,	though,	it	will	 be	night	and	things	will	 be	cooler.

“I	wanted	to	feel	 the	air	moving,”	 Grandfather	says	to	me	as	I	sit	in	the	chair
next	to	his	bed.

I	hand	him	the	gift.	 He	thanks	me	and	reads	through	it.	“These	are	lovely
words,”	Grandfather	says.	“Fine	sentiments.”

I	should	feel	pleased,	but	I	can	tell	there	is	something	more	coming.

“But	none	of	these	words	are	your	own,	Cassia,”	Grandfather	says	gently.

Tears	sting	my	eyes	and	I	look	down	at	my	hands.	My	hands	that,	like	almost
everyone	else	in	our	Society,	cannot	write,	that	merely	know	 how	to	use	the
words	of	others.	Words	that	have	disappointed	my	grandfather.	I	wish	I	 had
brought	a	rock	like	Bram.	 Or	nothing	at	all.	Even	coming	 here	empty-handed
would	be	better	than	disappointing	Grandfather.

“You	 have	words	of	your	own,	Cassia,”	Grandfather	says	to	me.	“I	 have	heard
some	of	them,	and	they	are	beautiful.	And	you	have	already	given	me	a	gift	by
visiting	so	often.	I	 still	love	 this	letter	because	it	is	from	you.	I	 don’t	want	to	hurt
your	feelings.	I	want	you	 to	trust	your	own	words.	 Do	you	understand?”

I	look	up	and	meet	his	eyes,	and	nod,	because	I	know	that’s	what	he’ll	want	me
to	do,	and	I	can	give	that	gift	to	him	 even	if	my	letter	 is	a	failure.	And	then	I
think	of	something	else.	Since	that	day	on	the	air	train,	I’ve	 kept	the	cottonwood
seed	in	the	pocket	of	my	plainclothes.	I	pull	 it	out	now	and	give	it	 to	him.

“Ah,”	 he	says,	lifting	 it	up	to	look	 at	it	more	closely.	“Thank	 you,	my	dear.
Look.	It’s	 trailing	 clouds	of	glory.”

Now	I	wonder	 if	Grandfather	is	starting	to	slip	 away	already.	I	don’t	 know	what
he	means.	I	glance	at	the	door,	wondering	if	I	should	get	one	of	my	parents.

“I’m	 an	old	hypocrite,	 too,”	he	says,	his	eyes	mischievous	again.	“I	told	you	to
use	your	own	words,	and	now	I’m	 going	to	ask	you	for	someone	else’s.	Let	me
see	your	compact.”

59
Surprised,	I	hold	it	out	to	 him.	He	takes	it	and	taps	it	sharply	against	his	palm,
twists	something.	The	base	of	the	compact	opens	up	and	I	gasp	in	shock	as	a
paper	falls	out.	I	can	see	right	away	that	it	is	old—heavy	 and	thick	and	creamy,
not	slick	and	white	like	 the	curls	of	paper	that	come	out	of	the	ports	or	the
scribes.

Grandfather	unfolds	the	paper	carefully,	gently.	I	 try	not	to	look	 too	closely,	in
case	he	does	not	want	me	to	see,	but	with	a	glance	I	can	tell	that	the	words	are
old,	too.	The	type	is	not	one	in	use	anymore;	the	letters	are	small	and	black	and
cramped	together.

His	fingers	tremble;	whether	it	 is	from	the	end	of	his	life	 drawing	 close	or
because	of	what	he	holds	in	his	hand,	I	do	not	know.	I	want	to	help	him,	 but	I
can	tell	that	this	is	something	he	must	do	himself.

It	doesn’t	take	long	for	 him	to	read	the	paper,	and	when	he’s	finished,	he	closes
his	eyes.	An	emotion	crosses	his	face	that	I	cannot	read.	Something	deep.

Then	he	opens	his	bright,	beautiful	eyes	and	looks	straight	at	me	while	he	folds
the	paper	back	up.	“Cassia.	This	is	for	you.	It’s	 even	more	precious	than	the
compact.”

“But	it’s	 so—”	 I	stop	before	I	can	say	the	word	dangerous.

There	is	no	time.	I	hear	my	father	and	mother	and	brother	speaking	in	the	hall.

Grandfather	looks	at	me	with	love	in	 his	eyes,	and	holds	the	paper	out	to	me.	A
challenge,	an	offering,	a	gift.	After	 a	moment,	I	reach	for	it.	 My	 fingers	close
around	the	paper	and	he	lets	go.

He	gives	me	back	the	compact,	too;	the	paper	fits	neatly	inside.	As	I	snap	the
artifact	shut,	Grandfather	leans	toward	me.

“Cassia,”	he	whispers.	“I	 am	giving	you	something	you	 won’t	 understand,	yet.
But	I	think	 you	will	 someday.	You,	more	than	the	rest.	And,	remember.	It’s	all
right	to	wonder.”

He	holds	on	for	a	long	time.	It	 is	an	hour	before	midnight	in	 a	deep	blue	night
when	Grandfather	looks	at	us	and	says	the	best	words	of	all	with	which	to	end	a
life.	“I	 love	you.	 I	love	you.	I	 love	you.	I	love	 you.”

60
We	all	say	it	back	to	him.	 Each	of	us	means	it	and	he	smiles.	He	leans	back	on
his	pillows	and	closes	his	eyes.

Everything	inside	him	 has	worked	perfectly.	He	has	lived	a	good	life.	 It	ends	as
it	is	supposed	to	end,	at	exactly	the	right	time.	I	am	holding	 his	hand	when	he
dies.

61
                                             CHAPTER	        8

None	of	the	showings	are	new,”	our	friend	Sera	complains.	“They’ve	been	the
same	for	the	past	two	months.”	Saturday	night	again;	the	same	conversation	as
the	week	before.

“It’s	better	than	the	other	two	choices,”	Em	says.	“Isn’t	it?”	She	glances	over	at
me,	waiting	for	my	opinion.	I	nod.	The	choices	are	the	same	as	usual:	game
center,	showing,	music.	It’s	been	less	than	a	week	since	Grandfather’s	death,	and
I	feel	strange.	He	is	gone,	and	now	I	know	that	there	are	stolen	words	inside	my
compact.	It	feels	strange	to	know	something	others	don’t	and	to	have	something
I	shouldn’t.

“So	another	vote	from	Cassia	for	the	showing,”	Em	says,	keeping	track.	She
winds	a	strand	of	black	hair	around	her	finger,	looks	at	Xander.	“What	about
you?”

I’m	sure	Xander	wants	to	go	back	to	the	game	center,	but	I	don’t.	Our	last
excursion	there	didn’t	end	so	well,	what	with	my	stepping	on	the	tablets	and
having	to	meet	with	an	Official.

Xander	knows	what	I’m	thinking.	“It	wasn’t	your	fault,”	he	says.	“You	weren’t
the	one	who	dropped	them.	It’s	not	as	though	they	cited	you	or	anything.”

“I	know.	But	still.”

We	don’t	really	discuss	the	music.	Most	youth	aren’t	crazy	about	sitting	with	a
few	other	people	in	the	hall	and	listening	to	the	Hundred	Songs	piped	in	from
some	other	place—or	maybe	even	some	other	time.	I	don’t	think	I’ve	ever	heard
of	any	work	positions	related	to	music.	Maybe	that	makes	sense.	Maybe	songs
only	need	to	be	sung	once,	recorded,	and	passed	along.

“No,	let’s	do	the	showing,”	Xander	says.	“You	know,	that	one	about	the
Society?	With	all	the	aerial	views?”

“I	haven’t	seen	that	one	yet,”	Ky	Markham	says	behind	me.

Ky.	I	turn	to	look	at	him,	our	eyes	meeting	for	the	first	time	since	the	night	I

62
stepped	on	the	tablets.	I	haven’t	seen	him	since	then.	I	should	say	I	haven’t	seen
him	in	person;	all	 week	long,	his	face	has	appeared	in	my	mind	the	way	it
appeared	on	the	screen,	surprising	me	with	its	clarity	and	then	disappearing
suddenly.	Leaving	me	wondering	what	it	 means.	Why	I	keep	thinking	 of	him
instead	of	moving	on.

Perhaps	it’s	because	of	what	Grandfather	said,	at	the	end.	By	telling	me	it	was
all	right	to	wonder.	 Somehow,	though,	I	don’t	 think	he	meant	Ky.	I	 think	it
might	be	something	bigger.	Something	to	do	with	 the	poetry.

“That	settles	it,	then.	We’ll	 watch	that	one,”	 Sera	says.

“How	 could	you	miss	an	entire	showing?”	Piper’s	 question	is	a	good	one.	We
never	miss	showings	when	they’re	new.	This	one	has	been	around	for	several
months,	which	means	there	should	have	been	plenty	of	opportunities	for	Ky	 to
see	it.	“Didn’t	 you	go	with	 us	when	we	went?”

“No,”	 Ky	 says.	“I	worked	late	that	night,	 I	think.”	 His	tone	is	mild,	 but	there	is,
and	always	has	been,	something	a	little	deeper	and	more	resonant	about	his
voice.	It	has	a	slightly	different	 timbre	than	most	voices.	It’s	 the	kind	of	 thing
you	forget	until	 you	hear	it	again	and	remember	Oh	yes.	His	voice	has	music.

We	all	fall	 silent,	as	we	always	do	when	Ky	talks	about	his	work.	 We	don’t
know	what	to	say	to	him	when	he	mentions	it.	 I	know	now	 that	he	probably
wasn’t	surprised	with	his	assignment	at	the	nutrition	 disposal	center.	He’s
always	known	he	was	an	Aberration.	He’s	been	walking	 around	with	secrets	for
much	longer	than	I	have.

But	the	Society	wants	him	to	keep	his	secrets.	I	don’t	know	 what	they	would	do
if	they	found	out	 about	mine.

Ky	looks	away	from	 Piper	and	back	to	me,	and	it	occurs	to	me	that	I’ve	been
wrong	about	his	eyes.	I	thought	they	were	brown	but	I	 see	now	that	they	are	dark
blue,	brought	out	by	the	color	of	 his	plainclothes.	Blue	is	the	most	common	eye
color	in	Oria	Province,	 but	there	is	something	different	about	his	eyes	and	I’m
not	sure	what	it	is.	More	depth?	I	wonder	what	he	sees	when	he	looks	at	me.	If
he	seems	to	have	depth	to	me,	do	I	seem	shallow	and	transparent	to	him?

I	wish	I	had	a	microcard	 about	Ky,	I	 think.	Maybe,	since	I	didn’t	 really	 need	one
for	Xander,	I	could	 ask	for	another	one	instead.	The	thought	makes	me	smile.

63
Ky	still	 looks	at	me	and	I	wonder	for	 a	moment	if	he	is	going	to	ask	me	what	I
am	thinking	about.	But,	of	 course,	he	doesn’t.	He	doesn’t	learn	by	asking
questions.	He	is	an	Aberration	from	the	Outer	Provinces	and	yet	he	has	managed
to	blend	in	here.	He	learns	by	watching.

So	I	take	my	cue	from	him.	I	 ask	no	questions	and	I	keep	my	secrets.

When	we	sit	down	in	the	theater,	Piper	goes	in	first.	Then	Sera,	Em,	Xander,	me,
and	last	of	all,	Ky.	 The	bigscreen	hasn’t	rolled	down	and	the	lights	aren’t
dimmed	yet,	so	we	have	a	few	minutes	to	talk.	“Are	 you	all	right?”	 Xander	asks
me	quietly,	his	words	a	whisper	near	my	ear.	“It’s	 not	the	tablets,	is	it?	Is	it	 your
Grandfather?”

He	knows	me	so	well.	“Yes,”	 I	say,	and	he	reaches	for	my	hand,	gives	it	a
squeeze.	It’s	strange	to	me	how	our	old	childhood	gestures	come	back,	ones	that
dropped	away	as	we	stayed	friends	but	grew	older.	Holding	his	hand	still	 feels
like	friendship,	 like	something	I’ve	 known	for	 years—but	also	different,	now
that	it	means	more.	Now	that	it	means	a	Match.

Xander	waits,	to	see	if	I	have	more	to	say,	but	I	don’t.	 I	can’t	 tell	Xander	about
Ky	because	Ky’s	sitting	right	 here	next	to	me,	I	think,	and	I	can’t	 tell	Xander
about	the	paper	because	this	place	is	too	crowded.	These	are	the	reasons	I	give
myself	for	not	confiding	 in	 Xander	as	I	usually	do.

They	do	not	feel	as	true	as	they	should.

Em	says	something	to	Xander	and	he	turns	to	answer.	I	stare	straight	ahead	for	a
moment,	thinking	about	how	 strange	it	is	that	I	have	started	keeping	secrets	from
Xander	just	as	we	have	been	Matched.

“It’s	 been	a	few	weeks	since	I’ve	been	able	to	spend	Saturday	night	with	all	of
you,”	Ky	 says.	I	glance	over	at	him	as	the	lights	begin	to	dim,	softening	his	face
and,	somehow,	lessening	the	space	between	us.	His	next	words	hold	a	trace	of
bitterness—only	a	trace,	but	more	than	I’ve	ever	heard	from	him.	 “Having	 my
vocation	keeps	me	busy.	I’m	glad	you	all	 don’t	seem	to	mind.”

“It’s	 no	trouble,”	 I	say.	“We’re	 your	friends.”	 But	even	as	I	say	it,	I	wonder	if	 we
are.	I	don’t	know	 him	the	way	I	know	 the	others.

“Friends.”	 Ky	says	the	word	softly,	 and	I	wonder	if	he	is	thinking	 of	the	friends
he	must	have	had	in	the	Outer	Provinces.

64
he	must	have	had	in	the	Outer	Provinces.

The	theater	goes	dark.	I	know	without	looking	 that	Ky	 isn’t	turned	toward	 me
anymore	and	that	Xander	is.	I	look	forward,	 straight	into	the	black.

I	always	enjoy	these	few	seconds	in	the	theater	before	a	showing,	when	all	is
dark	and	I	am	waiting.	I	 always	feel	a	drop	in	my	stomach—wondering	 if,	when
the	lights	of	the	showing	come	on,	I	might	 find	 myself	completely	alone.	Or
wondering	if	 the	lights	won’t	 come	up	at	all.	I	feel	like	 I	can’t	 be	sure;	not	in	that
first	moment.	I	don’t	 know	 why	I	like	 it.

But	of	course	the	lights	come	on	the	screen	and	the	showing	begins	and	I	am	not
alone.	Xander	sits	on	one	side	of	me,	Ky	on	the	other,	and	in	front	of	me	the
screen	shows	the	beginnings	of	the	Society.

The	cinematography	is	excellent;	swooping	low	 across	the	blue	ocean,	the	green
of	the	coast,	over	snow-crowned	mountains,	and	on	into	the	golden	fields	of	the
Farmlands,	over	the	white	dome	of	our	very	own	 City	Hall	 (the	audience	cheers
when	it	comes	into	view).	 Across	more	rolling	 green	and	gold	toward	another
City,	and	another,	and	another.	In	each	Province	of	the	Society,	people	are	likely
cheering	as	they	see	their	City—even	if	they	have	seen	this	showing	before.
When	you	see	our	Society	like	this,	it’s	 hard	not	to	feel	proud.	Which,	 of	course,
is	the	point.

Ky	takes	a	deep	breath	and	I	glance	over	at	him.	What	I	see	surprises	me.	His
eyes	are	wide	and	he	has	forgotten	to	keep	his	face	still	and	calm.	Instead,	it	is
alight	with	 wonder.	He	seems	to	think	that	he	is	really	flying.	 He	doesn’t	even
notice	me	watching.

After	that	soaring	beginning,	 however,	the	showing	is	basic.	We	go	through	how
things	used	to	be	before	the	Society	came	into	being	and	before	everything
worked	according	to	statistics	and	predictions.	Ky’s	 face	settles	back	into	its
usual	smooth	expression;	I	keep	sneaking	glances	over	during	different	parts	of
the	showing	to	see	if	he	is	reacting	again.	But	he’s	not.

When	they	get	to	the	part	about	the	implementation	of	Matching,	 Xander	turns	to
look	at	me.	In	the	pale	light	from	 the	screen,	I	see	his	smile	and	I	smile	back.
Xander’s	hand	tightens	on	mine	and	I	forget	about	Ky.

Until	the	end.

65
At	the	end,	the	showing	takes	us	back	to	how	things	were	before	the	Society.
How	things	would	 be	again	if	the	Society	fell.	 I	don’t	 know	what	set	they	used
for	this,	but	it	 is	almost	laughable.	They	have	gone	over	the	top	with	the
dramatic,	barren	redlands;	the	shabby	little	houses;	the	few	sullen,	hard,	sad-
looking	actors	walking	 around	the	dangerous,	almost-empty	streets.	Then,	as	if
out	of	nowhere,	sinister	black	aircraft	 appear	in	the	sky	and	the	people	run
screaming	away.	The	Anthem	of	the	Society	plays	in	the	background,	ornate
higher	notes	crying	across	a	strong	bass	line	that	pounds	the	feelings	home.

The	scene	is	overdone.	It’s	ludicrous,	especially	after	the	quiet	scene	at
Grandfather’s	that	I	witnessed	on	Sunday.	This	isn’t	 what	death	looks	like.	One
of	the	actors	falls	to	the	ground	dramatically.	 Garish	red	bloodstains	cover	his
clothing.	I	hear	Xander	give	a	little	 snort	of	laughter	next	 to	me,	and	I	know	that
he	feels	the	same	way	I	do.	Feeling	bad	that	I’ve	ignored	Ky	for	 so	long,	I	turn	to
him	to	share	the	joke.

He	is	crying.	Without	 a	sound.

A	tear	slips	down	his	cheek	and	he	brushes	it	away	so	quickly	I	almost	don’t
know	if	 it	was	there,	but	it	was.	It	was.	And	 now	another	tear,	gone	as	quickly	as
the	first.	His	eyes	are	so	full	that	I	wonder	 how	he	can	see.	But	he	does	not	look
away	from	the	screen.

I	am	not	used	to	seeing	someone	suffer.	I	turn	away.

When	the	movie	ends,	reprising	the	sweeping	travelogue	from	the	beginning,	Ky
takes	a	deep	breath.	I	can	tell	that	it	aches.	I	don’t	glance	over	at	him	again	until
the	lights	go	back	up	in	the	theater.	When	they	do,	he	is	calm	and	composed	and
back	to	the	Ky	I	know.	 Or	the	one	I	thought	I	knew.

No	one	else	has	noticed.	Ky	does	not	know	that	I	have	seen	him.

I	say	nothing.	I	ask	no	questions.	I	turn	away.	This	is	who	 I	am.	But	not	who
Grandfather	thought	you	could	 be.	The	thought	comes	into	my	mind	like	 a
sideways	glance,	like	a	flash	of	blue	next	to	me.	Ky.	 Is	he	watching	me?	Waiting
for	me	to	meet	his	gaze?

I	wait	one	moment	too	long	before	I	 turn	back.	When	I	do,	Ky	 is	not	looking	 at
me	anymore.	If	he	ever	was.

66
                                             CHAPTER	        9

Two	days	later,	I	stand	with	a	group	of	other	students	in	front	of	the	main
building	of	the	Arboretum.	An	early	morning	mist	lifts	around	us,	shapes	of
people	and	trees	appearing,	it	seems,	out	of	nowhere.

“Have	you	ever	done	this	before?”	the	girl	next	to	me	asks.	I	don’t	know	her	at
all,	so	she	must	be	from	another	Borough,	a	different	Second	School.

“Not	really,”	I	say,	distracted	by	the	fact	that	one	of	the	figures	appearing	out	of
the	mist	has	the	shape	of	Ky	Markham.	He	moves	quiet	and	strong.	Careful.
When	he	sees	me,	he	lifts	his	hand	to	wave.	Apparently	he	has	signed	up	for
hiking	as	his	summer	leisure	activity,	too.	After	a	second’s	pause,	during	which	I
smile	and	wave	back	at	Ky,	I	add,	“No.	I’ve	been	walking.	Never	hiking.”

“No	one	has	done	this	before,”	says	Lon,	an	annoying	boy	that	I	know	from
Second	School.	“It	hasn’t	been	offered	in	years.”

“My	grandfather	knew	how,”	I	say.

Lon	won’t	shut	up.	“Knew?	As	in	past	tense?	Is	he	dead?”

Before	I	can	answer,	an	Officer	in	Army	green	clears	his	throat	as	he	comes	to
stand	in	front	of	us.	He’s	older	with	crisp-short	white	hair	and	olive	skin.	His
coloring	and	bearing	remind	me	of	Grandfather.

“Welcome,”	the	Officer	says	in	a	voice	as	clipped	and	sharp	as	his	hair.	He	does
not	sound	welcoming,	and	I	realize	that	the	similarities	to	Grandfather	do	not	go
far.	I	have	to	stop	looking	for	Grandfather.	He	won’t	materialize	from	the	trees,
no	matter	how	much	I	wish	it	could	happen.	“I’m	your	instructor.	You	will
address	me	as	Sir.”

Lon	can’t	stop	himself.	“Do	we	get	to	go	on	the	Hill?”

The	Officer	fixes	him	with	a	gaze	and	Lon	wilts.

“No	one,”	the	Officer	says,	“speaks	without	my	permission.	Is	that	understood?”

We	all	nod.

67
“We’re	 not	going	to	waste	any	time.	Let’s	 get	started.”

He	points	behind	him	to	one	of	the	thickly	 forested	Arboretum	 hills.	Not	 the
Hill,	 not	the	big	one,	but	one	of	the	smaller	foothills	 that	are	usually	off-limits
unless	you’re	an	Arboretum	employee.	These	small	hills	are	not	that	high,	but
my	mother	tells	me	that	they	are	still	a	good	climb	 through	underbrush	and
growth.

“Get	to	the	top	of	it,”	 he	says,	turning	on	his	heel.	“I’ll	  be	waiting.”

Is	he	serious?	No	tips?	No	training	before	we	start?

The	Officer	disappears	into	the	undergrowth.

Apparently	he	is	serious.	I	feel	a	small	smile	lifting	  the	corners	of	my	mouth,
and	I	shake	my	head	to	get	rid	of	it.	I	am	the	first	 to	follow	 the	Officer	 into	the
trees.	They	are	thick	summer	green	and	when	I	push	my	way	through	them,	they
smell	like	Grandfather.	Perhaps	he	is	in	the	trees	after	all.	And	I	think,	 If	I	 ever
dared	to	open	that	paper,	this	would	be	the	place.

I	hear	other	people	moving	through	the	trees	around	me	and	behind	me.	The
forest,	even	this	type	of	semicultivated	forest,	is	a	noisy	place,	especially	with	 all
of	us	tromping	through	it.	 Bushes	smack,	sticks	crunch,	and	someone	swears
nearby.	Probably	Lon.	I	move	faster.	I	have	to	fight	 against	some	of	the	bushes,
but	I	make	good	progress.

My	sorting	 mind	wishes	I	could	identify	 the	birdcalls	 around	me	and	name	the
plants	and	flowers	I	see.	My	mother	likely	 knows	most	of	 them,	but	I	won’t	 ever
have	that	kind	of	specialized	knowledge	unless	working	 in	the	Arboretum
becomes	my	vocation.

The	climb	gets	harder	and	steeper	but	not	impossible.	The	little	hill	 is	still	 part	of
the	Arboretum	proper,	so	it	isn’t	 truly	 wild.	My	 shoes	become	dirty,	the	soles
covered	in	pine	needles	and	leaves.	I	stop	for	a	moment	and	look	for	a	place	to
scrape	off	some	of	the	mud	so	I	can	move	faster.	But,	here	in	the	Arboretum,	the
fallen	trees	and	branches	are	all	removed	immediately	after	they	fall.	I	have	to
settle	for	scraping	my	feet,	one	at	a	time,	along	the	bark-bumped	side	of	a	tree.

My	feet	feel	lighter	 when	I	start	walking	 again	and	I	pick	up	speed.	I	see	a
smooth,	round	rock	that	looks	like	 a	polished	egg,	like	the	gift	Bram	 gave	to
Grandfather.	I	leave	it	there,	small	and	brown	in	the	grass,	and	I	move	even

68
Grandfather.	I	leave	it	there,	small	and	brown	in	the	grass,	and	I	move	even
faster,	pushing	the	branches	out	of	my	way	and	ignoring	the	scratches	on	my
hands.	Even	when	a	pine	branch	snaps	back	and	I	feel	the	sharp	slap	of	needles
and	sinewy	branch	on	my	face,	I	don’t	stop.

I’m	going	 to	be	the	first	one	to	the	top	of	this	hill	 and	I’m	 glad.	There	is	a
lightness	to	the	trees	ahead	of	me,	and	I	know	it	is	because	there	is	sky	and	sun
behind	them	instead	of	more	forest.	I’m	almost	 there.	Look	at	me,	Grandfather,	I
think	to	myself,	 but	of	course	he	can’t	hear	me.

Look	at	me.

I	veer	suddenly	and	duck	into	the	bushes.	I	fight	my	way	 through	until	 I	crouch
alone	in	the	middle	of	a	thick	 patch	of	tangled	leaves	where	I	hope	I	will	 be	well
concealed.	Dark	brown	plainclothes	make	good	camouflage.

My	hands	shake	as	I	pull	out	the	paper.	Was	this	what	I	planned	all	along	when	I
tucked	the	compact	inside	the	pocket	of	my	plainclothes	this	morning?	 Did	I
know	somehow	that	I’d	 find	the	right	 moment	here	in	the	woods?

I	don’t	know	 where	else	to	read	it.	If	I	 read	it	at	home	someone	might	find	me.
The	same	is	true	of	the	air	train	and	school	and	work.	It’s	not	quiet	 in	this	forest,
crowded	with	vegetation	and	thick,	 muggy	morning	air	 wet	against	my	skin.
Bugs	hum	and	birds	sing.	My	arm	brushes	against	a	leaf	and	a	drop	of	dew	falls
onto	the	paper	with	a	sound	like	ripe	fruit	 dropping	to	the	ground.

What	did	Grandfather	 give	me?

I	hold	the	weight	of	 this	secret	in	my	palm	and	then	I	open	it.

I	was	right;	the	words	are	old.	 But	even	though	I	don’t	 recognize	the	type,	I
recognize	the	format.

Grandfather	gave	me	poetry.

Of	course.	My	great-grandmother.	The	Hundred	Poems.	I	know	without	 having
to	check	on	the	school	ports	that	this	poem	is	not	one	of	them.	She	took	a	great
risk	hiding	this	 paper,	and	my	grandfather	and	grandmother	took	a	great	risk
keeping	it.	What	poems	could	be	worth	losing	 everything	for?

The	very	first	line	 stops	me	in	my	tracks	and	brings	tears	to	my	eyes	and	I	don’t

69
The	very	first	line	 stops	me	in	my	tracks	and	brings	tears	to	my	eyes	and	I	don’t
know	why	except	that	this	one	line	speaks	to	me	as	nothing	else	ever	has.

Do	not	go	gentle	into	that	good	night.

I	read	on,	through	words	I	do	not	understand	and	ones	that	I	do.

I	know	why	 it	spoke	to	Grandfather:

Do	not	go	gentle	into	that	good	night,

Old	age	should	burn	and	rave	at	close	of	day;

Rage,	rage,	against	the	dying	of	the	light.

And	as	I	read	on,	I	know	why	 it	speaks	to	me:

Though	wise	men	at	their	end	know	dark	is	right,

Because	their	words	had	forked	no	lightning	 they

Do	not	go	gentle	into	that	good	night.

My	words	have	forked	no	lightning.	 Grandfather	even	told	 me	this,	before	he
died,	when	I	gave	him	that	letter	that	I	didn’t	 truly	 write.	 Nothing	I	 have	written
or	done	has	made	any	difference	in	this	world,	and	suddenly	I	know	what	 it
means	to	rage,	and	to	crave.

I	read	the	whole	poem	and	eat	it	up,	drink	it	up.	I	 read	about	meteors	and	a	green
bay	and	fierce	tears	and	even	though	I	don’t	understand	all	of	it—the	language	is
too	old—I	 understand	enough.	I	understand	why	my	grandfather	loved	this	poem
because	I	love	it	too.	All	 of	it.	The	rage	and	the	light.

The	line	under	the	title	of	the	poem	says	Dylan	Thomas,	1914-1953.

There	is	another	poem	on	the	other	side	of	the	paper.	It’s	called	“Crossing	the
Bar,”	and	it	was	written	 by	someone	who	lived	even	further	in	 the	past	than
Dylan	Thomas—Lord	 Alfred	Tennyson.	1809-1892.

So	long	ago,	I	think.	So	long	ago	they	lived	 and	died.

And	they,	like	 Grandfather,	will	 never	come	back.

70
Greedy,	I	read	the	second	poem,	too.	I	read	the	words	of	both	poems	over	again
several	times,	until	I	hear	the	sharp	snap	of	a	stick	near	me.	Quickly,	I	fold	 up
the	paper	and	put	it	away.	I	have	lingered	too	long.	I	have	to	go;	to	make	up	the
time	I’ve	 lost.

I	have	to	run.

I	don’t	hold	 back;	this	isn’t	 the	tracker,	so	I	can	push	myself	hard,	through	the
branches	and	up	the	hill.	The	words	of	the	Thomas	poem	are	so	wild	and
beautiful	that	I	keep	repeating	them	silently	 to	myself	as	I	run.	Over	and	over	I
think	do	not	go	gentle,	do	not	go	gentle,	do	not	go	gentle.	It	isn’t	 until	 I’m
almost	at	the	top	of	the	hill	that	realization	 hits	me:	There’s	a	reason	they	didn’t
keep	this	poem.

This	poem	tells	you	to	fight.

One	more	branch	stings	my	face	as	I	break	through	the	clearing,	but	I	don’t	stop
—I	push	out	into	the	open.	I	look	 around	for	the	Officer.	 He’s	not	there,	but
someone	else	is	already	at	the	top.	Ky	Markham.

To	my	surprise,	we	are	alone	on	top	of	the	hill.	No	 Officer.	 No	other	hikers.

Ky’s	more	relaxed	than	I	 have	ever	seen	him,	leaning	back	on	his	elbows	with
his	face	tipped	toward	the	sun	and	his	eyes	closed.	He	looks	different	and
unguarded.	Looking	at	him,	I	 realize	that	his	eyes	are	where	I	notice	most	the
distance	he	keeps.	Because	when	he	hears	me,	he	opens	them	and	looks	at	me,
and	it	almost	happens.	I	almost	catch	a	glimpse	of	something	real	before	I	see
again	what	he	wants	me	to	see.

The	Officer	appears	out	of	the	trees	next	to	me.	He	moves	quietly,	and	I	wonder
what	he’s	observed	in	the	woods.	Did	he	see	me?	He	looks	down	at	the	datapod
in	his	hand	and	then	back	up	at	me.	“Cassia	Reyes?”	he	asks.	Apparently	I	was
predicted	to	finish	second.	My	stop	must	not	have	been	as	long	as	I	thought.

“Yes.”

“Sit	there	and	wait,”	 the	Officer	 says,	pointing	toward	the	grassy	clearing	at	the
top	of	the	hill.	 “Enjoy	 the	view.	According	 to	this,	it’s	 going	to	be	a	few	minutes
before	anyone	else	gets	up	here.”	He	gestures	to	the	datapod	and	then	disappears
back	into	the	trees.

71
I	pause	for	a	moment	before	I	walk	toward	Ky,	trying	to	calm	down.	My	heart
pounds,	fast,	from	the	running.	And	from	the	sound	in	the	trees.

“Hello,”	Ky	 says,	when	I	get	closer.

“Hello.”	I	sit	on	the	grass	next	to	him.	“I	didn’t	know	you	were	doing	hiking,
too.”

“My	mother	thought	it	would	be	a	good	choice.”	I	notice	how	easily	he	uses	the
word	“mother”	to	describe	his	aunt	Aida.	I	think	about	how	he	has	slipped	into
his	life	here,	how	he	became	who	everyone	expected	him	to	be	in	Mapletree
Borough.	Despite	being	new	and	different,	he	did	not	stand	out	for	long.

In	fact,	I’ve	never	seen	him	finish	first	in	anything	before,	and	I	speak	before	I
think.	“You	beat	us	all	today,”	I	say,	as	if	that	fact	weren’t	obvious.

“Yes,”	he	says,	looking	at	me.	“Exactly	as	predicted.	I	grew	up	in	the	Outer
Provinces	and	have	had	the	most	experience	with	activities	like	this.”	He	speaks
formally,	as	if	reciting	data,	but	I	notice	a	sheen	of	sweat	across	his	face;	and	the
way	he’s	stretching	his	legs	out	in	front	of	him	looks	familiar.	Ky’s	been
running,	too,	and	he	must	be	fast.	Do	they	have	trackers	in	the	Outer	Provinces?
If	not,	what	did	he	run	to	out	there?	Were	there	also	things	he	had	to	run	from?

Before	I	can	stop	myself,	I	ask	Ky	something	that	I	should	not	ask:	“What
happened	to	your	mother?”

His	eyes	flash	to	me,	surprised.	He	knows	I	don’t	mean	Aida,	and	I	know	that	no
one	else	has	ever	asked	him	that	question.	I	don’t	know	what	made	me	do	it
now;	perhaps	Grandfather’s	death	and	what	I’ve	read	in	the	woods	have	left	me
on	edge	and	vulnerable.	Perhaps	I	don’t	want	to	dwell	on	who	might	have	seen
me	back	in	the	trees.

I	should	apologize.	But	I	don’t	and	it’s	not	because	I	feel	like	being	mean.	It’s
because	I	think	he	might	want	to	tell	me.

But	I	am	mistaken.	“You	shouldn’t	ask	me	that	question,”	he	says.	He	doesn’t
look	at	me,	so	all	I	can	see	is	one	side	of	him.	His	profile,	his	dark	hair	wet	with
the	mist	and	the	water	that	fell	from	the	trees	as	he	passed	through	them.	He
smells	like	forest,	and	I	lift	my	hands	to	my	face	to	smell	them—to	see	if	I	do,
too.	It	might	be	my	imagination,	but	it	seems	to	me	that	my	fingers	smell	like	ink
and	paper.

72
and	paper.

Ky’s	right.	 I	know	 better	than	to	ask	a	question	like	that.	But	then	he	asks	me
something	that	he	shouldn’t	ask.	“Who	did	 you	lose?”

“What	do	you	mean?”

“I	can	tell,”	 he	says	simply.	He’s	looking	 at	me	now.	His	eyes	are	still	blue.

The	sun	feels	hot	on	the	back	of	my	neck	and	the	top	of	my	hair.	I	close	my	eyes
the	way	Ky	did	 earlier	and	tip	my	head	back	so	that	I	can	feel	the	heat	on	my
eyelids	and	across	the	bridge	of	my	nose.

Neither	of	us	says	anything.	I	don’t	 keep	my	eyes	closed	for	long,	but	when	I
open	them	the	sunlight	still	blinds	 me	for	a	moment.	In	that	moment,	I	know	 I
want	to	tell	Ky.	 “My	 grandfather	died	last	week.”

“Was	it	unexpected?”

“No,”	 I	say,	but	really,	in	 some	ways,	it	was.	I	did	not	expect	Grandfather	to	say
the	things	he	said.	But	I	did	expect	his	death.	“No,”	 I	say	again.	“It	 was	his
eightieth	birthday.”

“That’s	right,”	  Ky	says	thoughtfully,	 almost	to	himself.	 “People	here	die	on	their
eightieth	birthday.”

“Yes.	Isn’t	 it	like	 that	where	you	came	from?”	I’m	 surprised	that	the	words
escaped	my	mouth—not	two	seconds	ago	he	reminded	me	not	to	ask	about	his
past.	This	time,	though,	he	answers	me.

“Eighty	 is	.	.	.	harder	to	achieve,”	he	says.

I	hope	that	the	surprise	doesn’t	show	on	my	face.	Are	there	different	death	ages
in	different	 places?

People	call	and	feet	crunch	from	the	edge	of	the	forest.	The	Officer	steps	out	of
the	bushes	again	and	asks	people	their	names	as	they	break	into	the	clearing.

I	shift	my	 position	to	stand	up	and	I	swear	I	hear	the	compact	in	my	pocket	chink
against	my	tablet	container.	Ky	turns	to	look	 at	me	and	I	hold	my	breath.	I
wonder	if	he	can	tell	that	there	are	words	in	my	head,	words	I	am	struggling	 to
remember	and	memorize.	Because	I	know	that	I	can	never	open	the	paper	again.

73
remember	and	memorize.	Because	I	know	that	I	can	never	open	the	paper	again.
I	have	to	get	rid	of	it.	Sitting	here	next	to	Ky,	drinking	in	the	sun	with	my	skin,
my	mind	is	clear—	and	I	let	myself	realize	what	that	sound	in	the	woods	meant
earlier.	That	sharp,	stick-snapping	sound.

Someone	saw	me.

Ky	takes	a	breath,	leans	in	closer.	“I	saw	you,”	he	says,	his	voice	soft	and	deep
like	water	falling	in	the	distance.	He	is	careful	with	his	words,	speaking	them	so
they	can’t	be	overheard.	“In	the	woods.”

Then.	For	the	first	time	I	can	remember,	he	touches	me.	His	hand	on	my	arm,
fast	and	hot	and	gone	before	I	know	it.	“You	have	to	be	careful.	Something	like
that—”

“I	know.”	I	want	to	touch	him	back,	to	put	my	hand	on	his	arm	too,	but	I	don’t.
“I’m	going	to	destroy	it.”

His	face	stays	calm	but	I	hear	the	urgency	in	his	tone.	“Can	you	do	it	without
getting	caught?”

“I	think	so.”

“I	could	help	you.”	He	glances	over	at	the	Officer	as	he	says	this,	casually,	and	I
realize	something	that	I	haven’t	noticed	until	now	because	he’s	so	good	at	hiding
it.	Ky	always	acts	as	though	someone	watches	him.	And,	apparently,	he	watches
back.

“How	did	you	beat	me	to	the	top?”	I	ask	suddenly.	“If	you	saw	me	in	the
woods?”

Ky	looks	surprised	by	the	question.	“I	ran.”

“I	ran	too,”	I	say.

“I	must	be	faster,”	he	says,	and	for	a	moment	I	see	a	hint	of	teasing,	almost	a
smile.	Then	it’s	gone,	and	he’s	serious	again,	urgent.	“Do	you	want	me	to	help
you?”

“No.	No,	I	can	do	it.”	Then,	because	I	don’t	want	him	to	think	I’m	an	idiot,	a
risk-taker	for	the	sake	of	risk-taking,	I	say	more	than	I	should.	“My	grandfather

74
risk-taker	for	the	sake	of	risk-taking,	 I	say	more	than	I	should.	“My	 grandfather
gave	it	to	me.	I	shouldn’t	 have	kept	it	as	long	as	I	did.	But	.	.	.	the	words	are	so
beautiful.”

“Can	you	remember	them	without	 it?”

“For	now.”	 I	have	the	mind	of	 a	sorter,	after	all.	“But	 I	know	I	 won’t	 be	able	to
keep	them	forever.”

“And	 you	want	to?”

He	thinks	I’m	 stupid.	“They	 are	so	beautiful,”	I	 repeat	lamely.

The	Officer	calls	out;	 more	people	come	through	the	trees;	someone	calls	to	Ky,
someone	calls	to	me.	We	separate,	say	good-bye,	walk	to	different	places	on	the
top	of	the	little	 hill.

Everyone	looks	out	into	the	distance	at	something.	Ky	and	his	friends	face	the
dome	of	City	Hall,	 talking	 about	something;	the	Officer	looks	 out	at	the	Hill.
The	group	I	stand	with	gazes	off	toward	the	Arboretum’s	 meal	hall	and	chatters
about	our	lunch,	about	getting	back	to	Second	School,	whether	or	not	the	air
trains	will	 be	on	time.	Someone	laughs,	because	the	air	trains	are	always	on
time.

A	line	from	 the	poem	comes	to	my	mind:	there	on	the	sad	height.

I	tilt	 my	head	back	again	and	look	at	the	sun	through	my	closed	eyelids.	It	is
stronger	than	I	am;	it	burns	red	against	the	black.

The	questions	in	my	mind	seem	to	make	a	humming	sound,	like	that	of	the	bugs
in	the	woods	earlier.	What	happened	to	you	in	the	Outer	Provinces?	What
Infraction	 did	your	father	 commit	that	made	you	an	Aberration?	Do	 you	think
I’m	crazy	for	 wanting	to	keep	the	poems?	What	is	it	about	your	voice	that	makes
me	want	to	hear	you	speak?

Are	you	supposed	to	be	my	Match?

Later,	I	realize	that	the	one	question	that	didn’t	even	cross	my	mind	was	the
most	urgent	one	of	all:	Will	 you	keep	my	secret?

75
                                            CHAPTER	        10

The	pattern	in	my	neighborhood	has	shifted	this	evening;	something	is	wrong.
People	wait	at	the	air-train	stop	with	faces	closed,	not	talking	to	each	other.	They
climb	on	without	the	usual	greetings	to	those	of	us	climbing	off.	A	small	white
air	car,	an	Official	vehicle,	sits	sidled	up	next	to	a	blue-shuttered	house	on	our
street.	My	house.

Hurrying	down	the	metal	stairs	from	the	air-train	stop,	I	look	for	more	shifts	in
the	pattern	as	I	walk.	The	sidewalks	tell	me	nothing.	They	are	clean	and	white	as
always.	The	houses	near	mine,	shut	tight,	tell	me	a	little	more—if	this	is	a	storm,
it	will	be	waited	out	behind	closed	doors.

The	air-car’s	landing	gear	is	delicately	splayed	out,	resting	on	the	grass.	Behind
the	plain	white	curtains	in	the	window,	I	see	figures	move.	I	hurry	up	the	steps
and	hesitate	at	the	door.	Should	I	knock?

I	tell	myself	to	stay	calm,	stay	clear.	For	some	reason	I	picture	the	blue	of	Ky’s
eyes	and	I	can	think	better,	realizing	that	reading	the	situation	correctly	is	part	of
getting	through	it	safely.	This	could	be	anything.	They	could	be	checking	the
food	distribution	system,	house	to	house.	That	happened	once,	in	a	Borough
near	here.	I	heard	about	it.

This	might	have	nothing	to	do	with	me.

Are	they	telling	my	parents	about	Ky’s	face	on	the	microcard?	Do	they	know
what	Grandfather	gave	me?	I	haven’t	had	a	chance	to	destroy	the	poems	yet.	The
paper	is	still	in	my	pocket.	Did	someone	besides	Ky	see	me	reading	it	in	the
woods?	Was	it	the	Officer’s	shoe	that	snapped	the	stick?

This	might	have	everything	to	do	with	me.

I	don’t	know	what	happens	when	people	break	the	rules,	because	people	here	in
the	Borough	don’t	break	them.	There	are	minor	citations	issued	from	time	to
time,	like	when	Bram	is	late.	But	those	are	small	things,	small	errors.	Not	large
errors,	or	errors	committed	with	purpose.	Infractions.

I’m	not	going	to	knock.	This	is	my	house.	Taking	a	deep	breath,	I	twist	the	knob
and	open	the	door.

76
and	open	the	door.

Someone	waits	for	me	inside.

“You’re	 back,”	Bram	 says,	relief	in	his	tone.

My	fingers	tighten	 around	the	piece	of	paper	in	my	pocket,	and	I	glance	in	the
direction	of	the	kitchen.	 Maybe	I	can	make	it	to	the	incineration	 tube	and	stuff
the	poems	down	into	the	fire	below.	The	tube	will	 register	a	foreign	 substance;
the	thick	paper	is	completely	different	 from	the	paper	goods—napkins,	port
printings,	delivery	 envelopes—that	we	are	allowed	to	dispose	of	in	our
residences.	But	that	might	still	be	safer	than	keeping	it.	They	can’t	 reconstruct
the	words	themselves	after	I’ve	burned	them.

I	catch	a	glimpse	of	a	Biomedical	Official	  in	a	long	white	 lab	coat	moving
through	the	hall	into	the	kitchen.	I	 let	go	of	the	poems,	take	my	hand	out	of	my
pocket.	Empty.

“What’s	 wrong?”	I	 ask	Bram.	“Where	are	Papa	and	Mama?”

“They’re	 here,”	Bram	says,	voice	shaking.	“In	 their	room.	The	Officials	 are
searching	Papa.”

“Why?”	 My	 father	doesn’t	have	the	poems.	He	never	even	knew	about	them.
But	does	that	matter?	Ky’s	classification	 is	because	of	his	father’s	Infraction.
Will	 my	mistake	change	my	whole	family?

Perhaps	the	compact	is	the	safest	place	for	the	poems	after	all.	My	grandparents
kept	it	hidden	there	for	years.	“I’ll	  be	right	back,”	 I	say	to	Bram,	and	I	slip	into
my	room,	slide	the	compact	out	of	my	 closet.	Twist.	I	open	the	base,	put	the
paper	in.

“Did	 someone	come	in?”	an	Official	 in	the	hall	asks	Bram.

“My	 sister,”	Bram	says,	sounding	terrified.

“Where	did	she	go?”

Twist,	again.	The	compact	doesn’t	close	right.	A	 corner	of	the	paper	sticks	out.

“She’s	in	her	room,	changing	clothes.	She	got	all	dirty	 from	hiking.”	  Bram’s
voice	sounds	steadier	now.	He’s	covering	for	me,	without	 even	knowing	why.

77
voice	sounds	steadier	now.	He’s	covering	for	me,	without	 even	knowing	why.
And	he’s	doing	a	good	job	of	 it,	too.

I	hear	footsteps	in	the	hall	and	I	open	the	compact	back	up,	slide	the	corner	in.

I	twist,	a	muted	snap	takes	place.	At	last.	With	one	hand,	I	unzip	my
plainclothes;	with	 the	other,	I	put	the	compact	back	on	the	shelf.	I	turn	my	head
as	the	door	opens,	surprise	and	outrage	on	my	face.	“I’m	changing!”	I	 exclaim.

The	Official	 nods	at	me,	seeing	the	smudge	of	dirt	on	my	clothes.	“Please	come
into	the	foyer	when	you’re	 finished,”	 he	says.	“Quickly.”

My	hands	sweat	a	little	as	I	pull	off	 the	clothes	that	smell	of	forest	and	put	them
in	the	laundry	receptacle.	Then,	in	my	other	plainclothes,	stripped	of	 everything
that	might	look	or	 smell	like	poetry,	 I	leave	my	room.

“Papa	never	turned	in	Grandfather’s	tissue	sample,”	Bram	says	in	a	whisper
once	I	come	back	into	the	foyer.	“He	 lost	it.	That’s	why	 they’re	here.”	 For	a
moment,	curiosity	overrides	his	panic.	“Why’d	  you	have	to	change	your	clothes
so	fast?	You	weren’t	that	dirty.”

“I	was	dirty,”	 I	 whisper	back.	“Shh.	Listen.”	 I	 hear	murmurs	of	voices	in	my
parents’	room,	and	then	my	mother’s	voice,	raised.	And	I	 can’t	believe	what
Bram	told	me.	My	 father	lost	Grandfather’s	sample?

Sorrow	cuts	through	the	fear	inside	me.	This	is	bad,	very	bad,	that	my	father	has
made	such	an	enormous	mistake.	But	not	only	because	it	might	mean	trouble	for
him,	and	for	us.	Because	it	means	that	Grandfather	is	really	gone.	They	can’t
bring	him	back	without	 the	sample.

Suddenly	I	hope	the	Officials	 find	something	in	 our	house	after	all.

“Wait	 here,”	I	tell	 Bram,	and	I	go	into	the	kitchen.	 A	Biomedical	 Official	 stands
near	the	waste	receptacle	waving	a	device	up	and	down,	back	and	forth,	over	and
over.	He	takes	a	step	and	begins	the	motions	again	in	a	new	spot	in	the	kitchen.	I
see	the	words	printed	along	the	side	of	the	object	he	holds.	Biological	Detection
Instrument.

I	relax	slightly.	 Of	course.	They	have	something	to	detect	the	bar	code	engraved
on	the	tube	Grandfather	used.	They	don’t	need	to	tear	the	house	apart.	Perhaps

78
they	won’t	find	 the	paper	after	all.	And	perhaps	they	will	 find	 the	sample.

How	could	Papa	lose	something	so	important?	How	could	 he	lose	his	own
father?

In	spite	of	my	instructions,	 Bram	follows	 me	into	the	kitchen.	He	touches	my
arm	and	we	turn	back	toward	the	hallway.	“Mama’s	 still	 arguing	in	there,”	 he
says,	gesturing	to	our	parents’	room.	I	grab	Bram’s	hand	and	hold	it	tight.	 The
Officials	 don’t	need	to	search	my	father;	they	have	the	Detection	Instruments	to
tell	them	where	to	look.	But	 I	guess	they	have	to	make	their	point:	My	 father
should	have	been	more	careful	with	something	so	important.

“Are	they	searching	Mama,	too?”	 I	ask	Bram.	Are	we	all	 going	to	share	in	our
father’s	humiliation?

“I	don’t	 think	 so,”	Bram	says.	“She	just	wanted	to	be	in	there	with	Papa.”

The	bedroom	door	opens	and	Bram	and	I	jump	back	out	of	the	way	of	the
Officials.	 Their	white	 lab	coats	make	them	seem	tall	and	pure.	One	of	them	can
tell	we	are	frightened,	and	he	gives	us	a	small	smile	intended	to	reassure.	It
doesn’t	work.	He	can’t	 give	back	the	lost	sample	or	my	father’s	dignity.	 The
damage	is	done.

My	father	walks	 behind	the	Officials,	 pale	and	unhappy.	In	contrast,	my	mother
looks	flushed	and	angry.	She	follows	my	father	 and	the	Officials	into	 the	front
room,	and	Bram	and	I	stand	in	the	doorway	to	watch	what	happens.

They	didn’t	 find	the	sample.	My	heart	sinks.	My	 father	stands	in	the	middle	of
the	room	while	the	Biomedical	 Team	berates	him.	“How	could	 you	do	this?”

He	shakes	his	head.	“I	don’t	know.	It’s	 inexcusable.”	His	 words	sound	flat,	as	if
he	has	repeated	them	so	many	times	that	he	has	given	up	any	hope	of	the
Officials	 believing	him.	 He	stands	up	straight,	the	way	he	always	does,	but	his
face	looks	tired	and	old.

“You	 recognize	that	there	is	no	way	to	bring	him	back	now,”	 they	say.

My	father	nods,	his	face	full	 of	misery.	Even	though	I	 am	angry	with	him	 for
losing	the	sample,	I	can	tell	that	he	feels	awful.	Of	 course	he	does.	This	is
Grandfather.	In	 spite	of	my	anger,	I	wish	I	 could	take	Papa’s	hand	but	there	are

79
too	many	Officials	 around	him.

And	I’m	 full	 of	hypocrisy.	 I	did	something	against	the	rules	today,	too,	and	what
I	did	was	intentional.

“This	may	result	in	 some	sanctions	for	you	at	work,”	 one	of	the	Officials	 says	to
my	father,	in	a	tone	so	mean	I	wonder	if	she	will	 get	cited	herself.	No	one	is
supposed	to	speak	this	way.	Even	when	an	error	occurs,	things	aren’t	supposed
to	get	personal.	“How	can	they	expect	you	to	handle	the	restoration	and	disposal
of	artifacts	if	 you	can’t	even	keep	track	of	one	tissue	sample?	Especially
knowing	how	 important	it	was?”

One	of	the	other	Officials	 says	quietly,	“You	 ruined	the	sample	belonging	to
your	own	father.	And	 then	you	didn’t	 report	the	loss.”

My	father	passes	his	hand	over	his	eyes.	“I	was	afraid,”	he	says.	He	knows	the
seriousness	of	the	situation.	He	doesn’t	need	them	to	tell	him.	Cremation	occurs
within	hours	of	 death.	There’s	no	way	to	get	another	sample.	It’s	gone.	He’s
gone.	Grandfather	is	really	gone.

My	mother	presses	her	lips	tightly	together	and	her	eyes	flash,	but	her	anger	is
not	for	my	father.	She	is	mad	at	the	Officials	 for	making	 him	feel	worse	than	he
already	does.

Even	though	there	is	nothing	to	say,	the	Officials	 do	not	leave.	A	few	moments
of	cold	silence	pass	during	which	no	one	says	anything	and	we	all	think	about
how	nothing	can	save	Grandfather	now.

A	chime	sounds	in	the	kitchen;	our	dinner	has	arrived.	My	 mother	walks	out	of
the	room.	I	hear	the	sounds	of	her	taking	the	food	delivery	and	placing	it	 on	the
table.	When	she	walks	back	into	the	room,	her	shoes	make	stabbing,	serious
sounds	on	the	wood	floor.	She	means	business.

“It’s	 mealtime,”	 she	says,	looking	at	the	Officials.	“I’m	  afraid	they	haven’t	sent
any	extra	portions.”

The	Officials	 bristle	a	little.	 Is	she	trying	to	dismiss	them?	It’s	hard	to	tell.	 Her
face	seems	open,	her	tone	regretful	but	firm.	And	she’s	so	lovely,	blond	hair
winding	down	 her	back,	flushed	cheeks.	None	of	that	is	supposed	to	matter.	But
somehow,	it	does.

80
And	besides.	Even	the	Officials	don’t	 dare	disrupt	mealtime	too	much.	“We’ll
report	this,”	the	tallest	one	says.	“I’m	 sure	that	a	citation	of	the	highest	order	will
be	issued,	with	the	next	error	resulting	in	a	complete	Infraction.”

My	father	nods;	my	mother	 glances	back	at	the	kitchen,	to	remind	them	that	the
food	is	here	and	getting	cold,	possibly	losing	nutrients.	 The	Officials	 nod	curtly
at	us	and,	one	by	one,	they	leave,	walking	through	the	foyer,	past	the	port,	out
the	only	door	in	the	house.

After	they	depart	our	whole	 family	 sighs	with	relief.	 My	father	turns	to	us.	“I’m
sorry,”	he	says.	“I’m	 sorry.”	 He	looks	at	my	mother	and	waits	for	 her	to	speak.

“Don’t	 worry	 about	it,”	 she	says	bravely.	She	knows	that	my	father	now	has	a
mistake	logged	against	him	in	the	permanent	database.	She	knows	that	it	means
Grandfather	is	gone.	But	she	loves	my	father.	She	loves	him	too	much,	I
sometimes	think.	I	think	 it	now.	Because	if	she	isn’t	angry	with	 him,	 how	can	I
be?

When	we	sit	down	to	dinner	my	 mother	embraces	him	and	leans	her	head	on	his
shoulder	for	a	moment	before	she	hands	him	his	foilware.	He	reaches	up	to
touch	her	hair,	her	cheek.

Watching	them,	I	think	 to	myself	that	someday	something	like	this	 might	happen
to	me	and	to	Xander.	Our	lives	will	 be	so	intertwined	that	what	one	of	 us	does
will	 affect	the	other	down	to	the	ends,	like	the	tree	my	mother	transplanted	once
at	the	Arboretum.	She	showed	it	to	me	when	I	came	to	visit	her.	It	 was	a	little
thing,	a	baby	tree,	but	still	it	 tangled	with	things	around	it	 and	required	care	to
move.	And	when	she	finally	 pulled	it	out,	 its	roots	still	clung	 to	the	earth	from	its
old	home.

Did	Ky	 do	that,	when	he	came	here?	Did	he	bring	anything	with	him?	It	 would
have	been	difficult;	they	 would	have	searched	him	so	carefully,	he	had	to	adapt
so	quickly.	Still,	 I	don’t	 see	how	he	couldn’t	bring	 something.	Secret,	maybe,
inside,	intangible.	Something	to	nourish	him.	 Something	of	home.

Feet	pounding,	fists	clenched,	I	hit	the	tracker	running.

I	wish	I	could	 run	outside,	away	from	the	sadness	and	shame	in	my	house.	Sweat
trickles	down	the	front	 of	my	gymgear,	through	my	 hair,	across	my	face.	I	brush
it	away	and	glance	back	down	at	the	tracker	screen.

81
There’s	a	rise	in	the	curve	on	the	tracker	screen:	a	simulated	hill.	Good.	I’ve
reached	the	peak	of	the	workout,	the	most	difficult	 part,	the	fastest	part.	The
tracker	spins	below	me,	a	machine	named	for	the	circular	tracks	where	people
used	to	compete.	And	named	for	what	it	does—tracking	information	 about	the
person	running	on	it.	If	 you	run	too	far,	you	might	 be	a	masochist,	an	anorexic,
or	another	type,	and	you	will	 have	to	see	an	Official	of	Psychology	for	 diagnosis.
If	it’s	 determined	that	you	are	running	hard	because	you	genuinely	like	it	then
you	can	have	an	athletic	permit.	I	have	one.

My	legs	ache	a	little;	I	 look	straight	ahead	and	will	myself	 to	see	Grandfather’s
face	within	my	 mind,	to	hold	it	 there.	If	there’s	really	 no	chance	for	him	to	ever
come	back,	then	I	am	the	one	who	has	to	keep	him	alive.

The	incline	increases,	and	I	keep	pace,	wishing	for	the	feeling	of	climbing	 the
hill	earlier	 that	day	when	we	were	hiking.	Outside.	Branches	and	bushes	and
mud	and	sunlight	on	the	top	of	a	hill	 with	a	boy	who	 knows	more	than	he	will
say.

The	tracker	beeps.	Five	minutes	left	before	the	workout	ends,	before	I’ve	run	 the
distance	and	time	I	should	in	order	to	keep	up	my	optimal	heart	rate	and
maintain	my	optimal	 body	mass	index.	I	have	to	be	healthy.	It’s	part	of	what
makes	us	great,	what	keeps	our	life	span	long.

All	 of	the	things	that	were	shown	in	early	studies	to	be	good	for	longevity—
happy	marriages,	healthy	bodies—are	ours	to	have.	We	live	long,	good	lives.	We
die	on	our	eightieth	birthdays,	surrounded	by	our	families,	 before	dementia	sets
in.	Cancer,	heart	disease,	and	most	debilitating	illnesses	are	almost	entirely
eradicated.	This	is	as	close	to	perfect	as	any	society	has	ever	managed	to	get.

My	parents	talk	upstairs.	My	 brother	does	his	schoolwork	and	I	run	to	nowhere.
Everyone	in	this	house	does	what	he	or	she	is	supposed	to	do.	It’s	going	to	be	all
right.	My	 feet	hit	smack-slap	on	the	belt	of	the	tracker	and	I	pound	the	worry	 out
of	me	step	by	step.	Step	by	step	by	step	by	step	by	step.

I’m	tired,	 I	don’t	 know	if	 I	can	go	any	farther,	when	the	tracker	beeps	and	slows,
slows,	slows	to	a	stop.	Perfect	timing,	programmed	by	the	Society.	I	bend	my
head	down,	gasping	for	breath,	sucking	in	air.	There	is	nothing	to	see	at	the	top
of	this	hill.

Bram	sits	on	the	edge	of	my	bed,	waiting	for	 me.	He	holds	something.	At	first	 I

82
think	it	is	my	compact	and	I	take	a	step	forward,	worried—Has	he	found	the
poetry?—but	then	I	realize	that	it	is	Grandfather’s	watch.	Bram’s	artifact.

“I	sent	a	port	message	to	the	Officials	a	few	minutes	ago,”	Bram	says.	His	round
eyes	look	up	at	me,	tired	and	sad.

“Why	did	you	do	that?”	I	ask	in	shock.	Why	would	he	want	to	see	or	talk	to	an
Official	after	what	happened	today?

Bram	holds	up	the	watch.	“I	thought	that	maybe	they	could	get	enough	tissue
from	this.	Since	Grandfather	touched	it	so	many	times.”

Hope	shoots	through	my	veins	like	adrenaline.	I	pull	a	towel	from	the	hook	in
my	closet	and	wipe	it	across	my	face.	“What	did	they	say?	Did	they	respond?”

“They	sent	back	a	message	saying	it	wouldn’t	be	enough.	It	wouldn’t	work.”	He
rubs	the	shiny	surface	of	the	watch	with	his	sleeve	to	clean	away	the	smudges
where	his	fingers	were.	He	looks	at	the	face	of	the	clock	as	if	it	can	tell	him
something.

But	it	can’t.	Bram	doesn’t	even	know	how	to	tell	time	yet.	And	besides,
Grandfather’s	watch	hasn’t	worked	in	decades.	It’s	nothing	but	a	beautiful
artifact.	Heavy,	made	of	silver	and	glass.	Nothing	like	the	thin	plastic	strips	we
wear	now.

“Do	I	look	like	Grandfather?”	Bram	asks	hopefully.	He	slides	the	watch	onto	his
arm.	It	is	loose	around	his	thin	wrist.	Skinny,	brown-eyed,	straight-backed,	small
—he	does	look	a	little	like	Grandfather	in	that	moment.

“You	do.”	I	wonder	if	there	is	anything	of	Grandfather	to	see	in	me.	I	liked
hiking	today.	I	like	reading	the	Hundred	Poems.	Those	things	that	were	a	part	of
him	are	a	part	of	me.	I	think	about	the	other	grandparents	I	have,	out	in	the
Farmlands,	and	about	Ky	Markham	and	the	Outer	Provinces	and	about	all	the
things	I	do	not	know	and	places	I	will	never	see.

Bram	smiles	at	my	response	and	looks	down	proudly	at	the	watch.

“Bram,	you	can’t	take	that	to	school,	you	know.	You	could	get	in	trouble.”

“I	know.”

83
“You	saw	what	happened	to	Papa	when	the	Officials	got	after	him.	You	don’t
want	them	getting	mad	at	you	for	breaking	the	rules	about	artifacts.”

“I	won’t,”	 he	says.	“I	know	better	than	that.	I	don’t	want	to	lose	it.”	He	reaches
for	my	silver	box	from	the	Match	Banquet.	“Can	I	keep	it	in	here?	It	seems	like	a
good	place.	You	know,	special.”	He	shrugs	in	embarrassment.

“All	 right,”	I	say,	a	little	nervously.	I	watch	him	open	the	silver	box	and	put	the
artifact	carefully	inside	next	to	the	microcard.	He	doesn’t	even	glance	at	the
compact	sitting	on	the	shelf	and	for	that	I	am	grateful.

Later	that	night	when	it	is	dark	and	Bram	has	gone	to	bed,	I	open	the	compact
and	take	the	paper	out.	I	do	not	look	at	it;	instead,	I	slip	it	into	the	pocket	of	my
plainclothes	for	the	next	day.	Tomorrow,	I	will	try	to	find	a	trash	incinerator
away	from	home	to	drop	it	in.	I	don’t	want	anyone	to	catch	me	doing	it	here.	It’s
too	dangerous	now.

I	lie	down	and	look	up	at	the	ceiling,	trying	again	to	think	of	Grandfather’s	face.
I	can’t	bring	it	back.	Impatient,	I	roll	over,	and	something	hard	presses	into	my
side.	My	tablet	container.	I	must	have	dropped	it	when	I	changed	my
plainclothes	earlier.	It	isn’t	like	me	to	be	so	careless.

I	sit	up.	The	light	from	the	street	lamps	outside	comes	in	foggy	through	the
window,	enough	to	see	the	tablets	as	I	twist	open	the	container	and	spill	them
onto	the	bed.	For	a	moment,	as	my	eyes	adjust,	they	all	seem	to	be	the	same
color.	But	then	I	can	see	which	is	which.	The	mysterious	red	tablet.	The	blue	one
that	will	help	us	survive	in	case	of	an	emergency,	because	even	the	Society	can’t
control	nature	all	of	the	time.

And	the	green	one.

Most	people	I	know	take	the	green	tablet	now	and	then.	Before	a	big	test.	The
night	of	the	Match	Banquet.	Any	time	you	might	need	calming.	You	can	take	it
up	to	once	a	week	without	the	Officials	taking	special	note	of	it.

But	I’ve	never	taken	the	green	tablet.

Because	of	Grandfather.

I	was	so	proud	to	show	him	when	I	started	carrying	it.	“Look,”	I	told	him,

84
unscrewing	the	lid	of	the	silver	container.	“I’ve	got	blue	and	green	now.	All	I
need	is	the	red	one	and	I’ll	be	an	adult.”

“Ah,”	Grandfather	said,	looking	properly	impressed.	“You	are	growing	up,	that’s
for	certain.”	He	paused	for	a	moment.	We	were	walking	outside,	in	the
greenspace	near	his	apartment.	“Have	you	taken	the	green	one	yet?”

“Not	yet,”	I	said.	“But	I	have	to	give	a	presentation	on	one	of	the	Hundred
Paintings	in	my	Culture	class	next	week.	I	might	take	it	then.	I	don’t	like
speaking	in	front	of	everyone.”

“Which	painting?”	he	asked.

“Number	nineteen,”	I	tell	him,	and	he	looks	thoughtful,	trying	to	remember
which	one	that	is.	He	doesn’t—didn’t—know	the	Hundred	Paintings	as	well	as
the	Hundred	Poems.	But	still,	he	knew	it	after	enough	thought.	“The	one	by
Thomas	Moran,”	he	guesses,	and	I	nod.	“I	like	the	colors	in	that	one,”	he	said.

“I	like	the	sky,”	I	told	him.	“It’s	so	dramatic.	All	the	clouds	up	above,	and	in	the
canyon.”	The	painting	felt	a	little	dangerous—streaming	gray	clouds,	jagged	red
rocks—and	I	liked	that,	too.

“Yes,”	he	said.	“It’s	a	beautiful	painting.”

“Like	this,”	I	said,	even	though	the	greenspace	was	beautiful	in	an	entirely
different	way.	Flowers	bloomed	everywhere,	in	colors	we	were	not	allowed	to
wear:	pinks,	yellows,	reds,	almost	startling	in	their	boldness.	They	drew	the	eye;
they	scented	the	air.

“Greenspace,	green	tablet,”	Grandfather	said,	and	then	he	looked	at	me	and
smiled.	“Green	eyes	on	a	green	girl.”

“That	sounds	like	poetry,”	I	said,	and	he	laughed.

“Thank	you.”	He	paused	for	a	moment.	“I	wouldn’t	take	that	tablet,	Cassia.	Not
for	a	report.	And	perhaps	not	ever.	You	are	strong	enough	to	go	without	it.”

Now,	I	lie	down	on	my	side,	curl	my	hand	around	the	green	tablet.	I	don’t	think
I’ll	 take	it,	not	even	tonight.	Grandfather	thinks	I’m	strong	enough	to	go	without
it.	I	close	my	eyes	and	think	of	Grandfather’s	poetry.

85
Green	tablet.	Green	space.	Green	eyes.	Green	girl.

When	I	fall	 asleep,	I	dream	that	Grandfather	has	given	me	a	bouquet	of	roses.
“Take	these	instead	of	the	tablet,”	he	tells	me.	So	I	do.	I	pull	 the	petals	off	each
rose.	To	my	surprise	each	petal	has	a	word	written	on	it,	a	word	from	one	of	the
poems.	They’re	not	in	the	right	order,	and	this	puzzles	me,	but	I	put	them	in	 my
mouth	and	taste	them.	They	taste	bitter,	the	way	I	imagine	the	green	tablet	would
taste.	But	I	know	Grandfather	is	right;	 I	have	to	keep	the	words	inside	if	I	 want
to	keep	them	with	me.

When	I	wake	in	the	morning,	 the	green	tablet	is	still	in	my	 hand,	and	the	words
are	still	in	my	 mouth.

86
                                            CHAPTER	        11

Breakfast	sounds	from	the	kitchen	carry	down	the	hall	to	my	room.	The	chime,
announcing	the	arrival	of	the	food	delivery	sliding	through	its	slot.	A	crash—
Bram	knocking	something	over.	Chairs	scrape,	voices	murmur	as	my	mother	and
father	talk	with	Bram.	Soon,	the	smell	of	the	food	comes	in	underneath	my	door,
or	maybe	it	drifts	through	the	thin	walls	of	our	house,	permeating	everything.
The	smell	is	a	familiar	one,	a	smell	of	vitamins	and	something	metallic,	perhaps
the	foilware.

“Cassia?”	my	mother	says	outside	my	door.	“You’re	late	for	breakfast.”

I	know.	I	want	to	be	late	to	breakfast.	I	don’t	want	to	see	my	father	today.	I	don’t
want	to	talk	about	what	happened	yesterday,	but	I	don’t	want	to	not-talk	about	it
either,	to	sit	at	the	table	with	our	portions	of	food	and	pretend	that	Grandfather
isn’t	gone	for	good.

“I’m	coming,”	I	say,	and	I	pull	myself	out	of	bed.	Out	in	the	hall	I	hear	an
announcement	on	the	port,	and	I	think	I	catch	the	word	hiking.

When	I	walk	into	the	kitchen,	my	father	has	already	left	for	work.	Bram	pulls	on
his	raingear,	grinning	wildly.	How	can	he	forget	about	last	night	so	quickly?
“It’s	supposed	to	rain	today,”	he	informs	me.	“No	hiking	for	you.	They	said	so
on	the	port.”

My	mother	gives	Bram	his	hat	and	he	jams	it	onto	his	head.	“Good-bye!”	he
says,	and	he	heads	for	the	air	train,	early	for	once	because	he	likes	the	rain.

“So,”	my	mother	says.	“It	looks	like	you’ll	have	a	little	free	time.	What	do	you
think	you’ll	do?”

I	know	immediately.	Most	of	the	other	hikers	will	use	their	time	hanging	out	in
the	common	area	inside	the	school,	or	finishing	assignments	in	the	school’s
research	library.	I	have	something	else	in	mind,	a	visit	to	a	different	library.	“I
think	I	might	go	visit	Papa.”

My	mother’s	eyes	soften;	she	smiles.	“I’m	sure	he’d	like	that,	since	you	missed
him	this	morning.	He	won’t	be	able	to	stop	work	long,	though.”

87
“I	know.	I	just	want	to	say	hello.”	And	destroy	something	dangerous,	something
I’m	not	supposed	to	have.	Something	more	likely	to	be	found	at	an	old	library
than	anywhere	else,	if	they	truly	do	record	the	composition	of	everything	burned
in	the	incineration	tubes.

I	pick	up	one	of	the	dry	triangles	of	toast	tucked	inside	my	foilware,	thinking	of
the	way	the	two	poems	looked	on	the	paper.	I	remember	many	of	the	words,	but
not	all	of	them,	and	I	want	all	of	them.	Every	last	one.	Is	there	any	way	I	can
sneak	one	more	glance	before	I	destroy	the	paper?	Is	there	any	way	to	make	the
words	last?

If	only	we	still	knew	how	to	write	instead	of	just	type	things	into	our	scribes.
Then	I	could	write	them	down	again	someday.	Then	I	might	be	able	to	have
them	when	I	am	old.

Looking	out	the	window,	I	watch	Bram	waiting	at	the	air-train	stop.	It’s	not
raining	yet,	but	he	jumps	up	and	down	on	the	metal	steps	to	the	platform.	I	smile
to	myself	and	hope	no	one	tells	him	to	stop,	because	I	know	exactly	what	he’s
doing.	In	the	absence	of	real	thunder,	he’s	making	his	own.

Ky	is	the	only	one	walking	toward	the	air-train	platform	when	I	go	outside.	The
train	to	Second	School	has	left	and	this	next	one	goes	into	the	City.	He	must
have	to	report	to	work	when	his	leisure	activities	get	canceled;	no	free	hour	or
two	for	him.	Watching	Ky	walk,	his	shoulders	straight,	his	head	up,	it	strikes	me
how	lonely	he	must	be.	He’s	spent	so	long	blending	into	the	crowd,	and	now
they’ve	separated	him	out	again.

Ky	hears	me	coming	up	behind	him	and	turns	around.	“Cassia,”	he	says,
sounding	surprised.	“Did	you	miss	your	train?”

“No.”	I	stop	a	few	feet	away,	to	give	him	his	space	if	he	wants	it.	“I’m	taking
this	one.	I’m	going	to	visit	my	father.	You	know,	since	hiking	was	canceled.”

Ky	lives	in	our	Borough,	so	of	course	he	knows	the	Officials	visited	us	last
night.	He	won’t	say	anything,	though—no	one	will.	It’s	not	their	business	unless
the	Society	says	that	it	is.

I	take	another	step	toward	the	air-train	stop,	toward	Ky.	I	expect	him	to	move,	to
start	up	the	stairs	to	the	platform,	but	he	doesn’t.	In	fact,	he	takes	a	step	closer	to
me.	The	tree-spiked	Hill	of	the	Arboretum	rises	in	the	distance	behind	him,	and	I
wonder	if	we	will	ever	hike	there.	The	thunderstorm,	still	a	few	miles	away,	rolls

88
wonder	if	we	will	  ever	hike	there.	The	thunderstorm,	still	a	few	miles	 away,	rolls
and	rumbles	gray	and	heavy	across	the	sky.	Ky	looks	up.	“Rain,”	 he	says,	almost
under	his	breath,	and	then	he	looks	back	at	me.	“Are	you	going	to	his	office	 in
the	City?”

“No.	I’m	 going	 past	that.	He’s	working	on	a	site	out	at	the	edge	of	Brookway
Borough.”

“Can	you	make	it	out	there	and	back	in	time	for	 school?”

“I	think	 so.	I’ve	 done	it	before	when	he	was	working	out	that	way.”

Against	the	clouds,	Ky’s	 eyes	seem	lighter,	reflecting	the	gray	around	them,	and
I	have	an	unsettling	thought:	perhaps	his	eyes	have	no	color.	They	reflect	what
he	wears,	who	the	Officials	tell	 him	to	be.	When	he	wore	brown,	his	eyes	looked
brown.	Now	that	he	wears	blue,	they	look	blue.

“What	are	you	thinking	 about?”	he	asks	me.

I	tell	him	 the	truth.	“The	color	 of	your	eyes.”

My	answer	catches	Ky	off	 guard;	but	after	a	second	he	smiles.	I	love	his	smile;
in	it,	I	 see	a	hint	of	the	boy	he	was	that	day	at	the	pool.	Were	his	eyes	blue	then?
I	can’t	remember.	I	wish	 I’d	looked	 more	closely.

“What	are	you	thinking	 about?”	I	ask.	I	expect	the	shutters	to	close	in	as	they
always	do:	Ky	will	  give	me	some	expected	answer,	like	“I	was	thinking	 about
what	I	need	to	do	at	work	today”	 or	“The	activities	 for	free-rec	on	Saturday
night.”

But	he	doesn’t.	“Home,”	 he	says	simply,	still	 looking	at	me.

The	two	of	us	hold	each	other’s	gazes	for	a	long,	unembarrassed	moment	and	I
feel	that	Ky	knows.	 I’m	not	 sure	what	he	knows—whether	he	knows	me,	or	just
something	about	me.

Ky	says	nothing	more.	He	looks	at	me	with	 those	changeable	eyes,	those	eyes
that	I	thought	were	the	color	of	earth	but	instead	are	the	color	of	sky,	and	I	look
back.	I	think	we	have	done	more	seeing	the	last	two	days	than	in	all	the	years	we
have	known	each	other.

89
The	female	announcer’s	voice	cuts	through	the	silence:	“Air	 train	approaching.”

Neither	of	us	speaks	as	we	hurry	up	the	metal	steps	to	the	platform	together,
racing	the	clouds	in	the	distance.	For	now,	we	win,	reaching	the	top	as	the	air
train	slides	to	a	stop	in	front	of	 us.	Together	we	climb	on,	joining	 groups	of
others	in	dark	blue	plainclothes	and	a	few	Officials	 here	and	there.

There	aren’t	two	seats	together.	I	find	a	seat	first,	and	Ky	sits	across	from	me.
He	leans	forward,	resting	his	elbows	on	his	knees.	Someone,	another	worker,
calls	out	a	greeting	to	him	and	Ky	calls	back.	The	train	 is	crowded	and	people
pass	between	us,	but	I	can	watch	him	now	and	then	in	the	gaps	they	leave.	And	it
strikes	me	that	this	might	be	part	of	the	reason	I	am	going	to	see	my	father
today;	not	just	to	destroy	the	paper,	but	to	ride	on	this	train	with	 Ky.

We	reach	his	stop	first.	He	climbs	off	 without	 looking	back.

From	the	raised	air-train	platform,	 the	rubble	of	the	old	library	 appears	to	be
covered	in	enormous	black	spiders.	The	huge	black	incinerators	spread	their
leglike	tubes	out	across	the	bricks	and	over	the	edges	into	the	basement	of	the
library.	The	rest	of	the	building	 has	all	been	torn	away.

I	climb	down	 the	stairs	and	walk	toward	the	library.	 I’m	 out	of	place	at	this	work
site.	But	not	forbidden.	Still,	 it	 would	be	better	if	no	one	saw	me	yet.	I	edge
close	enough	to	see	down	into	the	hole.	The	workers,	most	dressed	in	blue
plainclothes,	suck	up	piles	of	papers	with	the	incineration	 tubes.	My	father	told
us	that	right	when	they	thought	they	had	gone	through	everything,	they	found
steel	boxes	of	books	buried	down	in	the	basement.	Almost	as	though	someone
tried	to	hide	and	preserve	the	books	against	the	future.	My	father	and	the	other
Restoration	specialists	have	been	through	the	boxes	and	they	haven’t	found
anything	special,	so	they	will	 incinerate	all	of	it.

One	figure	wears	white.	An	Official.	  My	 father.	All	 workers	have	protective
helmets,	so	I	can’t	see	his	face,	but	the	confidence	is	back	in	his	walk.	He	moves
purposefully,	in	 his	element,	giving	directions	and	pointing	 out	where	he	wants
the	tubes	to	go	next.

Sometimes	I	forget	that	my	father	is	an	Official.	 I	 rarely	see	him	on-duty,	in	his
uniform,	which	 he	changes	into	at	work.	The	sight	of	him	 in	his	uniform
simultaneously	comforts	me—they	didn’t	 take	away	his	ranking	 after	last	night,
at	least	not	yet—and	sets	me	on	edge.	It	is	strange	to	see	people	in	different
ways.

90
ways.

Another	thought	crosses	my	mind:	before	he	turned	seventy	and	was	required	to
quit	work,	Grandfather	 was	an	Official.	 But	it’s	 different	with	 Papa	and
Grandfather,	I	 tell	myself.	Neither	 of	them	are,	or	were,	high-level	 Officials	 in
places	like	the	Match	Department	or	the	Safety	Department.	Those	are	the	ones
that	do	most	of	the	Official-type	 things,	like	 implement	rules.	We’re	 thinkers,
not	enforcers:	learners,	not	doers.

Most	of	the	time.	My	 great-grandmother,	an	Official	 herself,	did	steal	that	poem.

My	father	glances	once	at	the	sky,	aware	of	the	impending	thunderstorm.	Speed
is	important,	but	they	have	to	be	methodical.	“We	 can’t	just	set	things	on	fire,”
he’s	told	me.	“The	tubes	are	like	the	incineration	 devices	at	home.	They	record
the	amount	and	type	of	the	matter	destroyed.”	There	are	a	few	piles	of	books	left
and,	as	I	watch,	the	workers	move	from	one	to	another,	following	 his	orders.	It’s
faster	to	incinerate	individual	 pages	instead	of	books,	so	they	slice	the	books
open,	gutting	them	along	the	spines,	preparing	them	for	the	tubes.

My	father	looks	 at	the	sky	again	and	gestures	in	a	“hurry	up”	motion	to	the	other
workers.	I	need	to	get	back	to	school,	but	I	keep	watching.

I’m	not	 the	only	one.	As	I	glance	up,	over	across	the	chasm	of	spiders	and
books,	I	see	another	figure	in	white.	An	Official.	  Watching,	too.	Checking	 on	my
father.

The	site	personnel	drag	the	incineration	tube	to	a	newly	readied	pile.	The	books’
backs	are	broken;	their	bones,	thin	and	delicate,	fall	out.	The	workers	shove
them	toward	the	incineration	tube;	they	step	on	them.	The	bones	crackle	under
their	boots	like	leaves.	It	reminds	me	of	fall,	 when	the	City	 brings	around	the
incineration	equipment	to	our	neighborhoods	and	we	shovel	the	fallen	maple
leaves	into	the	tubes.	My	mother	always	laments	the	waste,	since	decayed	leaves
can	be	good	fertilizer,	just	as	my	father	laments	the	waste	of	the	paper	that	could
be	recycled	when	he	has	to	incinerate	a	library.	But	the	higher	Officials	 say
some	things	are	not	worth	saving.	Sometimes	it’s	faster	and	more	efficient	to
destroy.

One	leaf	escapes.	Caught	on	a	swirl	of	wind	from	the	impending	thunderstorm,	it
rises	up,	almost	reaching	my	feet	as	I	stand	near	the	edge	of	this	small	canyon
that	was	once	a	library.	It	hovers	there,	so	close	I	can	almost	see	the	words
written	on	it,	 and	then	the	wind	dies	down	for	a	moment	and	it	falls	 back.

91
written	on	it,	 and	then	the	wind	dies	down	for	a	moment	and	it	falls	 back.

I	glance	up.	Neither	Official	 watches	me.	Not	my	father,	 not	the	other.	My	father
is	intent	on	the	books	he’s	destroying;	the	other	Official	 is	intent	on	my	 father.
It’s	time.

I	reach	into	my	pocket	and	pull	out	 the	paper	Grandfather	gave	me.	I	let	go	of	it.

It	dances	on	the	air	for	a	moment	before	it	falls,	too.	A	 fresh	gust	of	wind	 almost
saves	it,	but	a	worker	catches	sight	of	it	and	lifts	a	tube	up	to	suck	the	paper	from
the	air,	to	suck	the	words	from	the	sky.

I’m	sorry,	 Grandfather.

I	stand	and	watch	until	all	the	bones	are	shoved	into	the	incineration	tubes,	until
all	the	words	have	been	turned	into	ash	and	nothing.

I	lingered	too	long	at	the	library	 work	 site	and	I’m	almost	late	for	 class.	Xander
waits	for	me	near	the	main	doors	of	Second	School.

He	pushes	one	of	them	open,	holding	its	weight	with	his	shoulder.	“Is	 everything
all	right?”	 he	asks	quietly	as	I	stop	there	in	the	doorway.

“Hi,	 Xander,”	someone	calls	out	to	him.	He	nods	in	their	 direction,	but	doesn’t
look	away.

For	a	moment,	I	think	that	I	 should	tell	Xander	everything.	 Not	just	about	what
happened	last	night	with	the	Officials,	 which	is	what	has	him	worried,	 but
everything.	I	should	tell	 him	about	Ky’s	 face	on	the	screen.	I	should	tell	him
about	Ky	in	the	woods,	how	he	saw	the	poem.	I	should	tell	 Xander	about	the
poem	itself	and	the	way	it	felt	 to	let	it	go.	Instead,	I	shake	my	head.	I	don’t	 want
to	talk	right	now.

Xander	changes	the	subject,	his	eyes	lighting	up.	“I	almost	forgot.	 I	have
something	to	tell	you.	There’s	a	new	Saturday	activity	 coming	up.”

“Really?”	 I	ask,	grateful	to	him	 for	understanding,	for	not	pressing	further.	 “Is
there	a	new	showing?”

“No,	even	better.	We	can	replant	the	flower	beds	in	front	 of	First	School	and	eat
dinner	outside.	Like	a—what’s	 the	word?—like	 a	picnic.	There’s	going	 to	be	ice

92
dinner	outside.	Like	a—what’s	 the	word?—like	 a	picnic.	There’s	going	 to	be	ice
cream	afterward,	too.”

The	enthusiasm	in	Xander’s	voice	makes	me	smile	a	little.	“Xander,	 that’s
nothing	but	a	glorified	 work	project.	 They	want	some	free	labor	and	they’re
bribing	us	with	 ice	cream.”

He	grins	at	me.	“I	know,	 but	it’s	 good	to	have	a	break.	Keeps	me	fresh	for	the
games	the	next	time.	So	you	want	to	plant,	too,	right?	I	know	 the	spots	will	fill
up	fast,	so	I	signed	you	up	already	in	case	you	did.”

A	tiny	 bit	of	annoyance	that	he	did	this	without	 talking	to	me	first	 flashes
through	me,	but	it	vanishes	almost	instantly	when	I	notice	 that	his	smile	seems	a
little	awkward.	 He	knows	he’s	crossed	a	line—he	never	would	have	done
something	like	this	before	we	were	Matched—and	the	fact	that	he	worries	 about
it	makes	it	all	right.	 Besides,	even	though	it	is	a	glorified	work	 project,	I	 would
have	signed	up	in	a	heartbeat	myself.	Xander	knows	that.	He	knows	me	and	he
looks	out	for	me.

“That’s	fine,”	 I	 tell	Xander.	“Thanks.”	 He	lets	go	of	 the	door	and	we	walk	into
the	hall	together.	In	the	back	of	my	mind	 I	find	 myself	wondering	what	 Ky	will
do	that	night.	They	don’t	 tell	you	about	free-rec	options	at	work.	 By	the	time	he
gets	home	and	finds	out	about	it,	the	spots	will	likely	 be	full	 because	of	the
newness	of	the	activity	and	because	of	the	ice	cream.	We	could	sign	him	up,
though.	I	could	walk	 over	to	one	of	the	ports	here	at	the	school	and	.	.	.

Time’s	up.	The	chime	rings	over	 the	speakers	in	the	hall.

Xander	and	I	duck	through	the	classroom	door,	slide	into	our	desks	and	take	out
our	readers	and	scribes.	Piper	usually	sits	next	to	us	in	Applicable	Sciences,	but	I
don’t	see	her.	“Where’s	Piper?”

“I	meant	to	tell	 you.	She	got	her	final	work	 position	today.”

“She	did?	What	is	it?”

But	the	chime	rings	again	and	I	have	to	face	front	and	wait	to	find	 out	until	 after
class.	Piper	has	her	vocation!	A	few	people	get	them	early,	like	Ky,	 but	the	rest
of	us	receive	them	at	some	point	during	the	year	after	our	seventeenth	birthday.
One	by	one	we	get	picked	off	until	 everyone	is	gone	and	there’s	no	one	left	in
our	year	at	Second	School.

93
I	hope	Xander	and	Em	don’t	get	called	for	a	long	time.	It	wouldn’t	be	the	same
here	without	them,	especially	without	Xander.	I	glance	over	at	him.	He	gazes	at
the	instructor	as	though	this	is	all	he	wants	to	do	in	the	world.	His	fingers	tap	on
the	scribe;	he	jiggles	one	foot	impatiently,	always	ready	to	know	more.	It’s	hard
to	keep	up	with	him—he’s	so	smart,	he	learns	so	fast.	What	if	he	moves	on	soon
to	his	vocation	and	leaves	me	behind?

Things	are	happening	so	quickly.	Getting	to	my	seventeenth	birthday	felt	like
steps	taken	slowly	down	a	path	where	I	saw	each	pebble,	noticed	each	leaf,	and
felt	pleasantly	bored	and	anticipatory	at	the	same	time.	Now	it	feels	as	if	I	am
running	down	the	path,	flat	out	and	breathing	hard.	It	feels	like	I’ll	arrive	at	my
Contract	date	in	no	time	at	all.	Will	things	ever	slow	down	again?

I	look	away	from	Xander.	Even	if	Xander	gets	his	vocation	first,	we’re	still
Matched,	I	remind	myself.	He’s	not	going	to	leave	me	behind.	He	doesn’t	know
that	I	saw	Ky’s	face	that	day	on	the	screen.

If	I	told	Xander,	would	he	understand?	I	think	he	would.	I	don’t	think	it	would
jeopardize	our	Match,	or	our	friendship.	All	the	same,	those	are	two	things	I
don’t	want	to	risk	losing.

I	look	back	up	at	the	instructor.	The	window	behind	her	is	dark,	the	sky	filled
with	heavy	low	clouds.	I	wonder	what	they’d	look	like	from	the	top	of	the	big
Hill.	Can	you	climb	high	enough	to	get	above	the	clouds,	look	down	on	the	rain
from	a	place	in	the	sun?

Without	meaning	to,	I	envision	Ky	on	the	hill,	face	turned	to	the	warmth.	I	close
my	eyes	for	a	moment,	imagining	I	am	up	there	too.

The	thunderstorm	finally	hits	in	the	middle	of	class.	I	picture	the	rain	in	that
greenspace	where	I	met	with	the	Official,	making	the	fountain	overflow	and
pounding	the	bench	where	I	sat.	I	imagine	I	can	hear	the	drops	slap	as	they	hit
the	metal,	sigh	as	they	reach	the	grass	and	dirt.	It	is	dark	as	evening	outside.	The
water	beats	on	the	roof	and	streams	through	the	rain	gutters.	The	one	window	in
our	classroom	is	sheeted	and	shaded	in	rain	and	we	can’t	see	out	for	the	flood.

A	line	from	that	other	poem,	the	Tennyson	one,	comes	to	mind	suddenly:	The
flood	may	bear	me	far.

If	I	had	kept	the	poems	from	Grandfather,	I’d	be	riding	on	a	flood	that	I	couldn’t
stop.	I	did	what	I	had	to	do;	I	did	the	right	thing.	But	it	is	as	though	the	rain

94
stop.	I	did	what	I	had	to	do;	I	did	the	right	thing.	But	it	is	as	though	the	rain
outside	pours	on	me,	too,	eroding	my	relief	and	leaving	only	regret:	The	poems
are	gone,	and	I	can	never	get	them	back.

95
                                            CHAPTER	        12

At	work	that	evening,	we	have	an	interesting	sort	for	a	change.	Even	Norah
becomes	animated	as	she	describes	it	to	me	at	her	desk.	“We’re	looking	at
different	physical	traits	for	a	Matching	pool,”	she	says.	“Eye	color.	Hair	color.
Height	and	weight.”

“Is	the	Match	Department	going	to	use	our	sorts?”	I	ask.

She	laughs.	“Of	course	not.	It’s	for	practice.	This	is	to	see	if	you	pick	up	patterns
in	the	Matchees’	data	that	the	Officials	have	already	noticed.”

Of	course.

“There’s	something	else,”	Norah	adds.	She	lowers	her	voice,	not	because	this	is
a	secret	but	because	she	doesn’t	want	to	distract	the	others	from	their	work.	“The
Officials	told	me	that	they’re	going	to	administer	your	next	test	personally.”

This	is	a	good	sign.	This	means	that	they	want	to	see	for	themselves	if	I	can
work	under	pressure.	This	means	that	they	may	be	considering	me	for	one	of	the
more	interesting	sorting-related	vocations.

“Do	you	know	when?”

She	does,	I	can	see,	but	she’s	not	supposed	to	tell	me.	“Sometime	soon,”	she
says	again,	vaguely,	and	then	she	gives	me	one	of	her	rare	smiles.	She	turns	back
to	her	screen	and	I	go	to	my	station	to	get	started.

This	is	good,	I	think.	I	might	get	an	optimal	vocation	assignment	if	I	can	impress
the	Officials	enough.	Everything	is	going	well	again.	I	won’t	think	about
Grandfather	and	the	lost	sample	and	the	burned	poems	or	my	father	and	the
Officials	searching	him.	Or	that	Ky	won’t	ever	get	to	be	Matched	to	anyone	or
work	anywhere	besides	the	nutrition	disposal	center.	I	won’t	think	about	any	of
it.	It’s	time	to	clear	my	mind	and	sort.

It	is	actually	rather	startling	when	you	sort	eye	colors,	how	limited	the
possibilities	truly	are:	such	a	small,	finite	number	of	options.	Blue,	brown,	green,
gray,	hazel—these	are	all	of	the	options	for	eye	color,	even	with	many
ethnicities	represented	in	the	population.	Long	ago	there	were	genetic	mutations,

96
ethnicities	represented	in	the	population.	Long	ago	there	were	genetic	mutations,
like	albinos,	but	those	don’t	exist	 anymore.	Hair	color	is	similarly	  limited:	 black,
brown,	blond,	red.

So	few	options,	and	yet	an	infinite	number	of	 variations.	For	example,	plenty	of
boys	in	this	database	have	blue	eyes	and	dark	hair	like	Ky,	but	I	am	positive	that
not	one	of	them	looks	as	he	does.	And	even	if	someone	did,	if	one	of	those	boys
looked	exactly	like	 him	or	if	 he	had	a	twin	somehow,	no	one	else	could	have	the
combination	of	movement	and	restraint,	of	honesty	and	secrecy,	that	Ky	has.	His
face	keeps	appearing	in	my	mind,	but	I	know	that	it’s	 not	the	Society’s	mistake
anymore.	It’s	mine.	I’m	 the	one	who	keeps	thinking	of	 him	when	I	 should	be
thinking	of	 Xander.

The	tiny	printer	next	 to	me	beeps,	and	I	jump.

I	made	a	mistake	and	I	didn’t	notice	my	 error	within	 an	acceptable	time	frame.	A
little	slip	 of	paper	curls	out	onto	the	table	next	to	me	and	I	pick	it	 up.	“ERROR
AT	LINE	 3568.”	 I	hardly	 ever	make	errors,	so	this	will	cause	interest.	I	go	back
to	the	line	where	the	mistake	was	made	and	correct	it.	If	this	happens	next	week
while	the	Officials	 are	watching—

It	won’t	 happen.	I	won’t	 let	it	happen.	But	before	I	lose	myself	 in	the	sorting
again,	I	allow	myself	 one	brief	moment	to	think	 of	Ky’s	 eyes,	of	his	hand	on	my
arm.

“Someone	said	a	girl	your	age	came	to	the	work	site	today,”	my	 father	says.	He
came	to	meet	me	at	the	air-train	stop,	something	he	does	now	and	then	with
Bram	or	me	so	that	we	can	have	a	little	one-on-one	time	before	we	get	home.
“Was	it	you?”

I	nod.	“They	 canceled	hiking	because	of	the	rain,	so	I	thought	I’d	come	see	you
before	school.	Since	I	didn’t	 see	you	this	morning.	But	you	were	busy	and	I
didn’t	have	much	time.	I’m	 sorry	 I	couldn’t	 stay.”

“You	 should	come	again,	if	you	want	to,”	 he	says.	“I’m	 back	in	the	office	all
next	week.	That’s	a	much	shorter	ride.”

“I	know.	 Maybe	I	will.”	  My	 answers	sound	a	little	distant,	and	I	hope	he	can’t
tell	that	I’m	 still	 slightly	 angry	with	him	 for	losing	 the	sample.	I	know	it’s
irrational	and	that	he	feels	horrible,	but	I’m	 still	 upset.	I	miss	my	grandfather.	I
held	on	to	that	tube,	to	the	hope	that	he	might	come	back.

97
held	on	to	that	tube,	to	the	hope	that	he	might	come	back.

My	father	stops	and	looks	at	me.	“Cassia.	Did	you	have	something	you	wanted
to	ask	me?	Or	tell	me?	Is	that	why	you	came	to	the	site?”

His	kind	face,	so	like	Grandfather’s,	 looks	worried.	 I	have	to	tell	him.
“Grandfather	gave	me	a	paper,”	I	say,	and	my	father	turns	instantly	pale.	“It	 was
inside	my	compact.	There	were	old	words	on	it—”

“Shhh,”	 my	father	says.	“Wait.”

A	couple	walks	toward	 us.	We	smile	and	say	hello	and	separate	around	them	on
the	sidewalk.	When	they	are	far	enough	away	my	father	stops.	We	stand	in	front
of	our	house	now,	but	I	can	tell	that	he	doesn’t	want	to	continue	this
conversation	inside.	I	understand.	I	have	something	I	want	to	ask	him	and	I	want
the	answer	before	we	go	where	the	port	hums	and	waits	in	the	foyer.	I’m	worried
we	won’t	have	a	chance	to	talk	about	this	again.

“What	did	 you	do	with	it?”	 he	asks.

“I	destroyed	it.	Today,	 at	the	work	site.	It	seemed	like	the	safest	place.”

I	think	I	 see	a	flash	of	disappointment	cross	my	father’s	face	but	then	he	nods.
“Good.	It’s	 best	that	way.	Especially	right	 now.”

I	know	he’s	referring	 to	the	visit	from	 the	Officials,	 and	before	I	can	stop	myself
I	ask,	“How	 could	you	lose	the	sample?”

My	father	covers	his	face	with	 his	hands,	a	gesture	so	sudden	and	anguished	that
I	take	a	step	back.

“I	didn’t	 lose	it.”	 He	takes	a	deep	breath,	and	I	don’t	want	him	to	finish	 but	I
can’t	find	the	words	to	 stop	him.	“I	 destroyed	it.	That	day.	He	made	me	promise
that	I	would.	He	wanted	to	die	on	his	own	 terms.”

The	word	“die”	 makes	me	cringe,	but	my	father	isn’t	 finished.	“He	 didn’t	 want
them	to	be	able	to	bring	him	back.	He	wanted	to	choose	what	happened	to	him.”

“But	you	 had	a	choice,	too,”	I	whisper,	angry.	“You	 didn’t	 have	to	do	it.	And
now	he’s	gone.”

98
Gone.	Like	the	Thomas	poem.	I	was	right	to	destroy	the	poem.	What	did
Grandfather	think	I	could	 or	would	do	with	 it?	My	 family	 doesn’t	rebel.	He
didn’t,	aside	from	 the	small	act	of	keeping	the	poem.	And	there’s	no	reason	to
rebel.	Look	what	the	Society	gives	us.	Good	lives.	A	 chance	at	immortality.	 The
only	way	it	 can	be	ruined	is	if	we	ruin	it	 ourselves.	Like	my	father	 did,	because
my	grandfather	asked	him	to.

Even	as	I	turn	away	from	my	father	and	run	inside,	eyes	burning	with	 tears,	part
of	me	understands	him	and	why	he	chose	to	do	what	Grandfather	asked.	Isn’t
that	what	I’m	 doing,	too,	every	time	I	 think	the	words	of	the	poem	or	try	 to	be
strong	without	the	green	tablet?

It’s	hard	to	know	 which	ways	to	be	strong.	Was	it	weak	to	let	 go	of	the	paper,
watch	it	drift	 to	its	death	as	silent	and	white	and	full	of	 promise	as	a	cottonwood
seed?	Is	it	weak	to	feel	the	way	I	do	when	I	think	 of	Ky	 Markham?	To	know
exactly	the	spot	on	my	skin	where	he	touched	me?

Whatever	I’ve	been	feeling	for	 Ky	must	stop.	Now.	 I	am	Matched	with	 Xander.
It	does	not	matter	that	Ky	has	been	places	I’ve	never	been	or	that	he	wept	during
the	showing	when	he	thought	no	one	could	see.	It	does	not	matter	that	he	knows
about	the	beautiful	words	I	read	in	the	woods.	Following	 the	rules,	staying	safe.
Those	are	the	things	that	matter.	Those	are	the	ways	I	have	to	be	strong.

I	will	 try	to	 forget	that	Ky	said	“home”	 when	he	looked	into	 my	eyes.

99
                                            CHAPTER	        13

Cassia	Reyes,”	I	say,	holding	out	my	scancard.	The	worker	records	the	number
on	the	side	of	the	foilware	dinner	with	her	datapod	and	gives	the	meal	to	me.

The	datapod	beeps	again	as	Xander	takes	his	food	and	stands	beside	me.	“Do
you	see	Em	anywhere?	Or	Piper	or	Ky?”	he	asks.

Blankets	patchwork	the	play	yard	on	the	side	of	First	School.	It’s	a	real	picnic—
food	eaten	outdoors	on	the	grass.	The	workers	rush	around	the	yard,	trying	to	get
the	right	meals	into	the	right	hands.	It’s	a	bit	of	a	hassle	and	I	can	see	why	they
don’t	do	this	very	often.	It’s	much	easier	to	have	food	sent	to	people’s	homes,
schools,	workplaces.

“I	don’t	think	Piper	and	Ky	signed	up	in	time,”	I	say.	“Because	of	work.”

Someone	waves	at	us	from	a	blanket	in	the	middle	of	the	yard.	“There’s	Em,”	I
tell	Xander,	pointing,	and	together	we	weave	our	way	through	the	blankets	on
the	grass	and	say	hello	to	our	classmates	and	friends.	Everyone	is	in	a	good
mood,	giddy	with	the	novelty	of	the	whole	activity.	Looking	down,	trying	not	to
step	on	anyone’s	blanket	or	in	anyone’s	food,	I	walk	right	into	Xander,	who	has
stopped.	He	turns	to	grin	at	me	over	his	shoulder.	“You	almost	made	me	drop
my	dinner,”	he	says,	and	I	tease	him	back,	giving	him	a	little	shove.	He	flops
down	on	the	blanket	next	to	Em	and	leans	over	to	look	in	her	foilware	container.
“What	did	they	send	us?”

“Meat-and-veggie	casserole,”	Em	says,	making	a	face.

“Remember	the	ice	cream,”	I	say.

I’m	almost	finished	eating	when	someone	calls	out	to	Xander	from	across	the
grass.	“I’ll	be	right	back,”	he	tells	us	before	he	stands	up	and	makes	his	way
through	the	crowd.	I	can	track	his	progress	through	the	mass	of	people;	they	turn
to	watch	him	pass,	call	out	his	name.

Em	leans	over	and	says	to	me,	“I	think	something’s	wrong	with	me.	I	took	the
green	tablet	this	morning.	Already.	I	meant	to	save	it	for	later	this	week.	You
know.”

100
I	almost	ask	Em	what	she	means	and	then	I	feel	like	a	terrible	friend,	because
how	could	I	forget?	Her	Match	Banquet.	She	meant	to	save	the	tablet	for	that
night,	because	she’s	getting	nervous.

“Oh,	Em,”	I	say,	putting	my	arm	around	her,	hugging	her.	She	and	I	have	been
drifting	apart	lately,	but	not	by	choice.	This	happens,	as	you	get	closer	to	your
work	assignments	and	vocations.	But	I	miss	her.	Nights	like	this,	especially.
Summery	nights,	when	I	remember	how	it	was	to	be	younger	and	have	more
time.	When	Em	and	I	used	to	spend	so	many	of	our	free-rec	hours	together.	We
had	more	of	them,	then.

“It’ll	 be	a	wonderful	night,”	I	tell	her.	“I	promise.	Everything’s	so	beautiful.	It’s
exactly	like	they	tell	us	it	will	be.”

“Really?”	Em	asks.

“Of	course.	Which	dress	did	you	pick?”	They	redesign	the	dresses	every	three
years,	so	Em	has	the	same	pool	to	choose	from	that	I	did.

“One	of	the	yellow	ones.	Number	fourteen.	Do	you	remember	it?”

So	much	has	happened	since	I	stood	in	the	Matching	Office	and	picked	out	my
dress.	“I	don’t	think	I	do,”	I	say,	searching	my	mind.

Em’s	voice	becomes	animated	as	she	describes	the	dress.	“It’s	very	light	yellow
and	it’s	the	one	with	the	butterfly	sleeves	…”

I	remember	now.	“Oh,	Em,	I	loved	that	dress.	You’ll	be	beautiful.”	She	will,	too.
Yellow	is	the	perfect	color	for	Em;	it	will	look	lovely	against	her	creamy	skin,
her	black	hair,	and	dark	eyes.	It	will	make	her	look	like	sunshine,	the	spring
kind.

“I’m	so	nervous.”

“I	know.	It’s	hard	not	to	be.”

“Everything’s	different	now	that	you’ve	been	Matched	with	Xander,”	Em	tells
me.	“I’ve	been,	you	know,	wondering.”

“But	my	Match	with	Xander	doesn’t	make	it	any	more	likely—”

101
“I	know.	We	all	know	that.	But	now	we	can’t	help	but	wonder.”	Em	looks	into
her	foilware	container,	at	her	nearly	untouched	dinner.

A	chime	sounds	from	the	loudspeakers	and	we	all	automatically	begin	to	gather
our	things.	Time	to	work.	Em	sighs	and	stands	up.	Traces	of	worry	still	line	her
face,	and	I	remember	how	it	felt	when	I	waited	for	my	Match.

“Em,”	I	say	impulsively.	“I	have	a	compact	you	can	borrow,	if	you	want,	for
your	Banquet.	It’s	golden.	It	would	look	perfect	with	your	dress.	I’ll	bring	it	over
tomorrow	morning.”

Em’s	eyes	widen.	“You	have	an	artifact?	And	you’d	lend	it	to	me?”

“Of	course.	You’re	one	of	my	best	friends.”

Red-blossomed	newrose	plants	sit	in	black	plastic	tubs,	waiting	for	us	to	plant
them	into	the	ground	in	front	of	First	School.	First	School	always	looks	so
cheerful.	I	can	picture	the	inside	of	the	school	with	its	bright	yellow	walls,	green
tile	floors,	and	blue	classroom	doors.	It’s	easy	to	feel	safe	here.	I	always	did
when	I	was	young.	I	feel	safe	here	now,	I	tell	myself.	There’s	no	poem	left.
Papa’s	problems	are	over.	I’m	safe	here,	and	everywhere	else.

Except,	perhaps,	on	the	little	hill	where,	in	spite	of	my	decision	to	stay	safe,	I
often	find	myself	glancing	over	at	Ky,	wondering.	Wishing	we	could	talk	again,
but	not	daring	to	take	the	risk	of	saying	anything	to	him	besides	the	common
things,	the	things	we	always	say.

I	look	over	my	shoulder	for	Ky,	but	I	still	don’t	see	him.

“What	kind	of	flowers	are	these?”	Xander	asks	as	we	dig.	The	soil	is	thick	and
black.	It	comes	apart	in	clumps	as	we	lift	it.

“Newroses,”	I	tell	Xander.	“You	probably	have	some	growing	in	your	yard.	We
have	them	in	ours.”

I	don’t	tell	him	that	they’re	not	my	mother’s	favorite.	She	thinks	the	ones	we
have	in	the	City	in	all	the	gardens	and	public	spaces	are	too	hybridized,	too	far
from	their	original	selves.	The	oldroses	took	a	lot	of	care	to	grow;	each	blossom
was	a	triumph.	But	these	are	hardy,	showy,	bred	for	durability.	“We	don’t	have
newroses	in	the	Farmlands,”	my	mother	says.	“We	have	other	flowers,
wildflowers.”

102
wildflowers.”

When	I	was	little,	 she	used	to	tell	me	stories	about	those	different	flowers	that
grew	wild	 in	the	Farmlands.	The	stories	didn’t	have	a	plot;	they	weren’t	 even
really	stories	as	much	as	they	were	descriptions,	but	they	were	beautiful	and	they
lulled	me	to	sleep.	“Queen	Anne’s	lace,”	 my	mother	would	 say	in	a	slow,	soft
voice.	“Wild	 carrot.	You	 can	eat	the	root	when	it’s	young	enough.	The	flower	 is
white	and	lacy.	Lovely.	 Like	stars.”

“Who’s	 Queen	Anne?”	I’d	 ask,	drowsy.

“I	can’t	 remember.	I	think	she’s	in	the	Hundred	History	 Lessons	somewhere.	But
shhhh.	That’s	not	important.	What’s	 important	is	that	you	see	the	lace	in	front	of
you,	too	many	little	 flowers	to	count,	but	you	 try	anyway	…”

Xander	hands	me	a	newrose	plant	and	I	pull	it	from	its	small	 plastic	tub	and	put
it	in	the	ground.	The	strong,	stringy	 roots	have	grown	in	circles	around	the	inside
of	the	pot,	for	lack	of	 anywhere	else	to	go.	I	spread	them	out	as	I	put	the	newrose
plant	into	the	ground.	Looking	 at	the	soil	makes	me	think	of	the	dirt	 my	shoes
collect	while	 we	hike.	And	thinking	 of	 hiking	makes	me	think	of	 Ky.	Again.

I	wonder	where	he	is.	As	Xander	and	I	plant	the	flowers	 and	talk,	I	picture	Ky
working	while	 the	rest	of	us	play,	or	listening	 to	the	music	piped	into	the	almost-
empty	auditorium.	I	 imagine	him	walking	 through	the	crowds	at	the	recreation
building	and	taking	his	 turn	playing	a	game	that	he	will	 likely	 lose.	I	see	him
sitting	in	the	theater	watching	the	showing,	tears	in	his	eyes.	No.	I	banish	the
images	from	my	mind.	I	 won’t	 do	this	anymore.	The	choice	is	made.

I	never	had	a	choice	to	begin	with.

Xander	knows	I’m	 not	listening	to	him	 as	closely	as	I	should.	He	glances	to
make	sure	no	one	can	hear	us	and	then	he	says	softly,	“Cassia.	Are	you	still
worried	about	your	father?”

My	father.	“I	 don’t	 know,”	 I	say.	It’s	 the	truth.	I	don’t	 know	how	I	 feel	about
him	right	now.	 Already	the	anger	is	giving	 way—almost	against	my	will—to
more	understanding,	more	empathy.	If	Grandfather	had	looked	at	me	with	his
fiery	eyes	and	asked	me	to	do	him	one	last	favor,	would	I	have	been	able	to	tell
him	no?

The	evening	slides	in	slowly,	darkening	 the	sky	by	degrees.	There’s	a	trace	of

103
The	evening	slides	in	slowly,	darkening	 the	sky	by	degrees.	There’s	a	trace	of
light	left	 when	the	chime	rings	again	and	we	stand	up	to	survey	our	work.	A
small	breeze	drifts	across	the	grounds	and	the	flower	beds	ripple	red	in	the	dusk.

“I	wish	 we	could	do	this	every	Saturday,”	 I	say.	It	feels	like	we	 have	created
something	beautiful.	My	 hands	are	stained	red	from	some	of	the	crushed	petals;
and	they	smell	of	earth	and	newrose,	a	sharp-flower	smell	that	I	like	in	 spite	of
my	mother’s	comments	about	the	oldrose	perfume	being	more	subtle,	more
delicate.	What’s	wrong	with	 being	durable?	What’s	wrong	 being	something,
someone,	that	lasts?

Standing	there	looking	at	my	work,	 however,	I	realize	that	all	 my	family	 has
ever	done	is	sort.	Never	create.	My	father	sorts	old	artifacts	like	my	 grandfather
did;	my	great-grandmother	sorted	poems.	My	Farmlander	grandparents	plant
seeds	and	tend	crops,	but	everything	they	grow	has	been	assigned	by	the
Officials.	 Just	like	the	things	my	mother	grows	at	the	Arboretum.

Just	like	we	did	here.

So	I	didn’t	 create	anything	after	all.	I	did	what	 I	was	told	and	followed	 the	rules
and	something	beautiful	happened.	Exactly	as	the	Officials	have	promised.

“There’s	the	ice	cream,”	Xander	 says.	The	workers	wheel	the	freezer	carts	along
the	sidewalk	near	the	flower	beds.	Xander	grabs	me	by	one	hand	and	Em	by	the
other	and	pulls	us	into	the	nearest	line.

It	takes	the	workers	much	less	time	to	hand	out	our	foil	cups	of	ice	 cream	than	it
took	them	to	pass	out	dinner	because	the	ice	cream	is	all	the	same.	Our	meals
have	our	specialized	vitamins	and	enrichments	and	have	to	be	given	to	the	right
person.	The	ice	cream	is	a	nothing	food.

Someone	calls	out	to	Em	and	she	goes	over	to	sit	by	them.	Xander	and	I	find	a
place	a	little	apart	from	everyone	else.	We	lean	our	backs	against	the	sturdy
cement-block	walls	of	 the	school	and	stretch	out	our	legs.	Xander’s	are	long	and
his	shoes	are	worn.	He	must	be	due	for	some	new	ones	soon.

He	digs	his	spoon	into	the	single	white	scoop	and	sighs.	“I’d	 plant	acres	of
flowers	for	this.”

I	agree.	Cold	and	sweet	and	wonderful,	the	ice	cream	slides	across	my	tongue
and	down	my	throat	and	into	my	stomach,	where	I	swear	I	can	feel	it	 long	after	it
melts.	My	fingers	 smell	like	soil	 and	my	lips	taste	like	sugar	and	I’m	so	awake

104
melts.	My	fingers	 smell	like	soil	 and	my	lips	taste	like	sugar	and	I’m	so	awake
right	now	I	 wonder	if	I’ll	  be	able	to	sleep	tonight.

Xander	holds	out	his	last	spoonful	toward	me.

“No,	it’s	 yours,”	 I	say,	but	he	insists.	He	is	smiling	and	generous	and	it	seems
ungracious	to	push	his	hand	away,	so	I	don’t.

I	take	the	spoon	from	him	and	pop	the	last	bite	into	my	 mouth.	It’s	the	kind	 of
thing	you	could	never	do	at	a	real	meal—share	food—but	it’s	 acceptable	tonight.
The	Officials	 wandering	around	supervising	don’t	even	bat	an	eye.	“Thanks,”	 I
say,	and	then	Xander’s	act	of	kindness	inexplicably	makes	me	feel	a	little	like
crying,	so	I	have	to	joke	instead.	“We	 shared	a	spoon.	That’s	practically
kissing.”

Xander	rolls	his	eyes.	“If	 you	think	 that,	you’ve	never	been	kissed	before.”

“Of	course	I’ve	 been	kissed	before.”	We	are	teenagers,	after	all.	Until	we’re
Matched,	we	all	have	crushes	and	flirt	and	play	kissing	games.	But	that’s	all	 they
are—games—because	we	know	we’ll	be	Matched	someday.	Or	we’ll	 stay	Single
and	the	games	will	never	end.

“Was	there	anything	in	the	guidelines	about	kissing?	Anything	 I	 should
remember?”	I	ask,	teasing	Xander.

I	see	an	answering	look	of	mischief	in	his	eyes	as	he	leans	a	little	closer.	“There
are	no	rules	about	kissing,	Cassia.	We’re	Matched.”

I	have	looked	at	Xander’s	face	many	times,	but	never	like	this.	 Never	in	the
almost-dark,	never	with	a	feeling	in	 my	stomach	and	heart	that	is	two	parts
excitement	and	one	part	nervousness.	I	glance	around	but	no	one	looks	at	us,	and
even	if	they	did,	all	 they	would	see	is	two	shadowy	figures	sitting	 rather	close	as
the	evening	dims.

So	I	lean	closer,	too.

And	if	 I	needed	any	more	confirmation	that	the	Society	knows	what	they’re
doing,	that	this	is	the	Match	for	 me,	the	taste	of	Xander’s	kiss	would	convince
me.	It	feels	right,	sweeter	than	I	expected.

A	chime	rings	across	the	schoolyard	as	Xander	and	I	pull	back,	looking	 at	each

105
A	chime	rings	across	the	schoolyard	as	Xander	and	I	pull	back,	looking	 at	each
other.	“We	still	 have	an	hour	of	free-rec	time	left,”	 Xander	says,	glancing	down
at	his	watch,	his	face	open,	unembarrassed.

“I	wish	 we	could	stay,”	I	 say,	and	I	mean	it.	The	air	feels	so	warm	on	my	face
out	here.	It’s	real	air,	not	chilled	 or	warmed	for	my	 convenience.	And	Xander’s
kiss,	my	first	real	kiss,	makes	me	press	my	lips	together,	try	to	taste	it	again.

“They	won’t	 let	us,”	 he	says,	and	I	see	that	it’s	true.	They’re	already	gathering
the	cups,	telling	us	to	finish	up	our	free-rec	hours	someplace	else	because	the
light	is	leaving	 here.

Em	detaches	from	her	other	group	of	friends	and	walks	over	to	us,	graceful.
“They’re	 going	to	see	the	end	of	the	showing,”	she	says,	“but	I’m	 tired	of	that.
What	are	you	going	to	do?”	The	moment	she	asks	the	question,	her	eyes	widen	a
little,	remembering.	That	 Xander	and	I	are	Matched.	She	had	forgotten,	for	a
moment,	and	now	she	worries	she’ll	be	out	of	place.

But	Xander’s	voice	is	 warm,	easy,	friendly.	“Not	 enough	time	for	 a	game,”	he
says.	“There’s	a	music	hall	near	here,	one	stop	over.	Should	we	go	there?”

Em	looks	relieved,	glances	at	me	to	make	sure	it’s	all	right.	I	 smile	at	her.	Of
course	it	is.	She’s	still	our	friend.

As	we	walk	to	the	air-train	 stop,	I	think	 about	how	there	were	once	more	of	us.
Then	Ky	got	his	work	 assignment,	then	Piper.	I	don’t	know	 where	Sera	is
tonight.	Em	is	here,	but	there	will	 come	a	time	when	she	leaves,	too,	when	it’s
just	Xander	and	me.

It’s	been	a	long	time,	months	even,	since	I’ve	been	to	a	music	hall.	To	my
surprise,	this	one	is	filled	with	 blue-clothed	people.	With	 workers,	young	and
old,	who	have	finished	their	late	shift.	 I	suppose	this	happens	often;	with	only	a
little	time	 left,	where	else	do	they	have	to	go?	They	must	stop	here	on	their	way
back	out	from	the	City.	 Some	of	them	sleep,	I	see	to	my	surprise,	heads	tipped
back,	tired.	No	one	seems	to	mind.	Some	talk.

Ky’s	here.

I	find	him	 almost	immediately	 in	the	sea	of	blue,	almost	before	I	knew	I	was
looking.	Ky	 sees	us,	too.	He	waves	but	doesn’t	stand.

106
We	slide	into	the	nearest	seats,	Em,	Xander,	me.	Em	asks	Xander	about	his
experience	at	the	Match	Banquet,	searching	again	for	assurance,	and	he	starts
telling	her	a	funny	story	 about	not	knowing	how	 to	put	his	cuff	links	 on	that
night,	or	how	to	tie	 his	cravat.	I	try	to	keep	from	 noticing	Ky,	 but	somehow	I	still
see	when	he	stands	up	and	edges	his	way	toward	us.	I	smile	a	little	when	he
takes	the	seat	next	to	me.	“I	didn’t	know	 you	liked	music	so	much.”

“I	come	here	a	lot,”	 Ky	says.	“Most	 of	the	workers	do,	as	I’m	 sure	you’ve
noticed.”

“Doesn’t	it	 get	boring?”	The	high	 clear	voice	of	the	woman	who	sings	this	song
winds	above	us.	“We’ve	heard	the	Hundred	Songs	so	many	times.”

“They’re	 different,	sometimes,”	 Ky	says.

“Really?”

“They’re	 different	when	you’re	 different.”

I’m	not	 sure	what	he	means,	but	I’m	distracted	suddenly	by	Xander	pulling	 on
my	arm.	“Em,”	 he	whispers,	and	I	look	at	Em.	She’s	shaking,	breathing	fast.
Xander	stands	up	and	trades	seats	with	her,	guiding	her,	shielding	her	with	his
body	so	that	she’s	on	the	inside	of	our	group	instead	of	on	the	edge.

I	lean,	too,	instinctively	 helping	to	hide	 her,	and	soon	Ky	presses	next	to	me,
blocking	her,	too.	It’s	 the	second	time	we’ve	touched,	and	although	I’m	 worried
about	Em,	I	can’t	help	but	notice	it,	 can’t	help	but	want	to	 lean	into	him	a	little	 in
spite	of	the	fact	that	I	still	 feel	Xander’s	kiss	on	my	 lips.

We’ve	closed	around	Em	now,	hiding	 her.	Whatever’s	happening,	the	less
people	who	see	it,	the	better.	For	Em’s	sake.	For	ours.	I	glance	up.	The	Official
in	charge	of	the	music	hall	hasn’t	noticed	us	yet.	So	many	people	are	here,	and
most	of	them	workers,	requiring	 a	closer	eye	than	students.	We	have	a	little	time.

“Let’s	 get	your	green	tablet,”	Xander	says	to	Em	gently.	“It’s	 an	anxiety	 attack.
I’ve	seen	people	at	the	medical	center	who	have	them.	All	they	have	to	do	is	take
their	green	tablet,	but	they’re	so	scared	they	forget.”	Even	though	his	voice
sounds	confident,	he	bites	his	lip.	He	seems	worried	for	Em,	and	he’s	not
supposed	to	say	too	much	about	his	job	to	others	who	don’t	share	his	vocation.

107
“You	can’t,”	I	whisper.	“She	took	it	earlier	today.	She	hasn’t	had	time	to	get
another	one	yet.”	I	don’t	say	the	rest	of	it.	And	she’ll	get	in	trouble	for	taking
two	in	one	day.

Xander	and	Ky	exchange	glances.	I’ve	never	seen	Xander	hesitate	like	this—
can’t	he	do	something?	I	know	he	can.	Once,	a	child	on	our	street	fell	and	blood
was	everywhere.	Xander	knew	what	to	do—he	didn’t	even	flinch—until	the	full-
time	medics	arrived	and	took	the	boy	to	the	medical	center	to	fix	him	up.

Ky	doesn’t	move	either.	How	can	you?	I	think,	angry.	Help	her!

But	even	while	he	holds	still,	his	eyes	hold	Xander’s.	Ky’s	lips	move.	“Yours,”
he	whispers,	looking	at	Xander.

For	a	split	second,	Xander	doesn’t	understand;	and	then	at	the	same	moment	he
does,	I	do,	too.

But	here	is	the	difference	between	us.	Xander	doesn’t	hesitate	once	he	knows
what	Ky	means.	“Of	course,”	Xander	whispers,	and	he	reaches	for	his	tablet
container.	Now	that	he	knows	what	to	do,	he’s	fast,	he’s	smooth,	he’s	Xander.

He	puts	his	own	green	tablet	in	Em’s	mouth.	I	don’t	think	she	knows	what’s
happening;	she’s	shaking	so	much,	she’s	so	afraid.	She	swallows	reflexively;	I
doubt	she	tastes	anything	as	it	goes	down.

Almost	immediately,	her	body	relaxes.	“Thank	you,”	she	says	to	us,	closing	her
eyes.	“I’m	sorry.	I’ve	been	worrying	too	much	about	the	Banquet.	I’m	sorry.”

“It’s	fine,”	I	 whisper,	looking	at	Xander	and	then	at	Ky.

Between	the	two	of	them,	they’ve	pulled	it	off.	For	a	moment,	I	wonder	why	Ky
didn’t	give	Em	his	tablet,	but	then	I	remember.	He’s	an	Aberration.	And
Aberrations	aren’t	allowed	to	carry	tablets	of	their	own.

Does	Xander	know	now?	Did	Ky	just	give	himself	away?

But	I	don’t	think	Xander	guessed.	Why	would	he?	It	makes	as	much	sense	for
him	to	give	Em	the	tablet	as	it	would	for	Ky.	More,	even.	Xander	has	known	Em
longer.	He	settles	back	in	his	seat,	watching	Em	as	he	takes	her	pulse,	his	hand
around	her	delicate	wrist.	He	looks	up	at	Ky	and	me	and	nods.	“Everything’s
fine	now,”	he	says.	“She’s	going	to	be	fine.”

108
fine	now,”	 he	says.	“She’s	going	to	be	fine.”

I	put	my	arm	around	Em,	and	close	my	eyes,	too,	listening	to	the	music.	The
song	the	woman	was	singing	has	ended,	and	now	it’s	the	Anthem	of	the	Society,
bass	notes	rumbling,	choir	coming	in	for	 the	final	verse.	Their	voices	sound
triumphant;	they	sing	as	one.	Like	us.	We	closed	around	Em	in	a	circle	to	protect
her	from	the	eyes	of	the	Officials;	 and	none	of	us	will	tell	 about	the	green	tablet.

I	am	glad	that	all	is	well,	 glad	that	I	promised	to	let	Em	 borrow	the	compact	for
her	Banquet.	For	what	is	the	point	of	having	something	lovely	 if	 you	never	share
it?

It	would	be	like	 having	a	poem,	a	beautiful	wild	 poem	that	no	one	else	has,	and
burning	it.

After	a	moment,	I	open	my	eyes	and	glance	over	at	Ky.	He	doesn’t	look	 back,
but	I	know	he	knows	I’m	 watching.	 The	music	is	soft,	slow.	His	 chest	rises	and
falls.	His	lashes	are	black,	impossibly	long,	the	exact	color	 of	his	hair.

Ky	is	right.	 I	will	 never	hear	this	song	the	same	way	again.

109
                                            CHAPTER	        14

At	work	the	next	day,	we	all	notice	immediately	when	the	Officials	enter	the
room.	Like	dominos	falling	at	a	game	table,	head	after	head	turns	toward	the
door	of	the	sorting	center.	The	Officials	in	their	white	uniforms	are	here	for	me.
Everyone	knows	it	and	I	know	it,	so	I	don’t	wait	for	them.	I	push	my	chair	back
and	stand	up,	my	eyes	meeting	theirs	across	the	dividers	that	separate	our	slots.

It’s	time	for	my	test.	They	nod	for	me	to	follow.

So	I	do,	heart	pounding	but	head	held	high,	to	a	small	gray	room	with	a	single
chair	and	several	small	tables.

As	I	sit	down,	Norah	appears	in	the	doorway.	She	seems	slightly	anxious	but
gives	me	a	reassuring	smile	before	she	looks	at	the	Officials.	“Do	you	need
anything?”

“No,	thank	you,”	says	an	Official	with	gray	hair,	who	looks	significantly	older
than	the	other	two.	“We’ve	brought	everything	we	require.”

None	of	the	three	Officials	makes	small	talk	as	they	set	things	in	order.	The
Official	who	spoke	first	seems	to	be	in	charge.	The	others,	both	women,	are
efficient	and	smooth.	They	hook	up	a	datatag	behind	my	ear	and	one	inside	the
neck	of	my	shirt.	I	don’t	say	anything,	not	even	when	the	gel	they	use	stings	my
skin.

The	two	women	step	back	and	the	older	Official	slides	a	small	screen	across	the
table	toward	me.	“Are	you	ready?”

“Yes,”	I	say,	hoping	my	voice	sounds	level	and	clear.	I	straighten	my	shoulders
and	sit	up	a	little	taller.	If	I	act	as	though	I’m	not	afraid	maybe	they	will	believe
me.	Although	the	datatags	they’ve	attached	to	me	might	tell	a	different	story,
thanks	to	my	racing	pulse.

“Then	you	may	begin.”

The	first	sort	is	a	numbers	one,	a	simple	one,	a	warmup.	They	are	fair.	They
want	me	to	get	my	legs	under	me	before	they	move	into	the	hard	sorts.

110
As	I	sort	the	numbers	on	the	screen,	making	order	out	of	chaos	and	detecting
patterns,	my	heartbeat	evens	out.	I	stop	trying	to	hold	onto	so	many	other	things
—the	memory	of	Xander’s	 kiss,	what	my	father	has	done,	curiosity	about	Ky,
worry	about	Em	in	the	music	hall,	 confusion	about	myself	and	how	I	 am	meant
to	be	and	who	I	am	meant	to	love.	I	let	it	 all	go	like	a	child	 with	a	handful	 of
balloons	on	her	First	Day	at	First	School.	They	float	 away	from	me,	bright	 and
dancing	on	the	breeze,	but	I	don’t	look	up	and	I	don’t	 try	to	grab	them	back.
Only	when	I	hold	 onto	nothing	can	I	be	the	best,	only	then	can	I	be	what	they
expect	me	to	be.

“Excellent,”	 the	oldest	Official	 says	as	he	inputs	the	scores.	“Quite	excellent.
Thank	you,	Cassia.”

The	female	Officials	 remove	my	datatags.	They	meet	my	eyes	and	smile	at	me
because	now	they	can’t	be	accused	of	showing	any	partiality.	The	test	is
finished.	And	it	 seems	that	I	have	passed,	at	least.

“It’s	 been	a	pleasure,”	the	gray-haired	Official	says,	reaching	across	the	small
table	toward	me.	I	stand	up	and	shake	his	hand	and	then	the	hands	of	the	other
two	Officials.	 I	wonder	if	 they	can	feel	the	current	of	energy	that	runs	through
me:	The	blood	in	my	veins	is	made	of	adrenaline	and	relief.	“That	 was	an
exceptional	demonstration	of	sorting	ability.”

“Thank	you,	sir.”

On	their	way	out	the	door,	he	turns	back	to	me	one	last	time	and	says,	“We	have
our	eyes	on	you	now,	young	lady.”

He	shuts	the	metal	door	behind	him.	It	makes	a	thick,	solid	sound,	a	sound	of
finality.	 As	I	listen	 to	the	nothing	that	follows	 I	suddenly	realize	why	 Ky	likes	 to
blend	in.	It	is	a	strange	feeling,	knowing	 for	certain	that	the	Officials	 watch	me
more	closely.	It	is	as	though	I	stood	in	the	way	when	that	door	swung	shut	and	I
find	myself	 pinned	now	by	the	weight	of	 their	observation—a	concrete	thing,
real	and	heavy.

The	night	of	Em’s	 Match	Banquet	I	go	to	bed	early	and	fall	 asleep	quickly.	It	is
my	night	to	wear	the	datatags	and	I	hope	the	information	they	gather	from	my
dreams	shows	the	sleep	patterns	of	a	completely	normal	seventeen-year-old	girl.

But	in	my	dream	I’m	 sorting	for	 the	Officials	 again.	The	screen	comes	up	with
Em’s	picture	and	I’m	 supposed	to	sort	her	into	a	Matching	pool.	I	freeze.	My

111
Em’s	picture	and	I’m	 supposed	to	sort	her	into	a	Matching	pool.	I	freeze.	My
hands	stop.	My	brain	stops.

“Is	there	a	problem?”	the	gray-haired	Official	  asks.

“I	can’t	 tell	where	I	should	 sort	her,”	I	say.

He	looks	at	Em’s	face	on	the	screen	and	smiles.	“Ah.	That’s	not	a	problem.	She
has	your	compact,	doesn’t	she?”

“Yes.”

“She’ll	 carry	her	tablets	to	the	Banquet	in	it,	as	you	did.	Simply	 tell	her	to	take
the	red	one	and	everything	will	be	fine.”

Suddenly	I’m	at	the	Banquet,	pushing	through	girls	 in	dresses	and	boys	in	suits
and	parents	in	plainclothes.	I	turn	them,	shove	them,	do	whatever	I	have	to	do	to
see	their	faces,	because	everyone	here	wears	yellow	and	it	all	blurs	together,	I
can’t	sort,	I	can’t	 see.

I	spin	another	girl	around.

Not	Em.

I	accidentally	knock	 a	tray	full	of	 cake	out	of	a	waiter’s	hand,	trying	 to	catch	up
to	a	girl	with	 a	graceful	walk.	The	tray	falls	 on	the	floor	 and	the	cake	breaks
apart,	like	soil	falling	 from	 roots.

Not	Em.

The	crowd	thins,	and	a	girl	in	 a	yellow	dress	stands	alone	in	front	of	a	blank
screen.

Em.

She’s	about	to	cry.

“It’s	 all	right!”	  I	call	out	to	her,	pushing	my	 way	through	more	people.	“Take	the
tablet	and	everything	will	 be	fine!”

Em’s	eyes	brighten;	she	pulls	out	my	compact.	She	lifts	the	green	tablet	and	puts
it	in	her	mouth,	fast.

112
it	in	her	mouth,	fast.

“No!”	I	 cry	out,	too	late.	“The—”

She	puts	the	blue	tablet	in	her	mouth	next.

“—red	one!”	I	finish,	pushing	through	one	last	cluster	of	people	to	stand	in	front
of	her.

“I	don’t	have	one,”	she	says,	turning	around,	her	back	toward	the	screen	now.
She	shows	me	the	open	compact,	empty.	Her	eyes	are	sad.	“I	don’t	have	a	red
tablet.”

“You	can	have	mine,”	I	say,	eager	to	share	with	her,	eager	to	help	her	this	time.	I
won’t	sit	idly	by.	I	pull	out	my	container,	twist	the	top,	put	the	red	tablet	right
into	her	hand.

“Oh,	thank	you,	Cassia,”	she	says.	She	lifts	it	to	her	mouth.	I	see	her	swallow.

Everyone	in	the	room	has	stopped	milling	about.	They	all	look	at	us	now,	eyes
on	Em.	What	will	the	red	tablet	do?	None	of	us	knows,	except	me.	I	smile.	I
know	it	will	save	her.

Behind	Em	the	screen	flashes	on	with	her	Match—right	in	time	for	him	to	see
Em	fall	down,	dead.	Her	body	makes	a	heavy	sound	when	it	falls,	in	contrast	to
the	lightness	of	her	eyes	fluttering	shut,	of	her	dress	fluttering	in	folds	around
her,	of	her	hands	fluttering	open	like	the	wings	of	something	small.

I	wake	up	sweating	and	freezing	at	the	same	time,	and	it	takes	me	a	minute	to
calm	myself	down.	Even	though	the	Officials	have	laughed	at	the	notion	that	the
red	tablet	is	a	death	tablet,	the	rumors	still	persist.	That	explains	why	I	dreamed
about	it	killing	Em.

Just	because	I	dreamed	it	doesn’t	mean	it’s	true.

The	sleep	tags	feel	sticky	on	my	skin,	and	I	wish	I	didn’t	have	to	wear	them
tonight.	At	least	the	nightmare	isn’t	a	recurring	one,	so	I	can’t	be	accused	of
obsessing	over	something.	Besides,	I	don’t	think	they	can	tell	exactly	what	I
dreamed.	Just	that	I	did.	And	a	teenage	girl	having	an	occasional	nightmare	can’t
be	uncommon.	No	one	will	flag	that	particular	piece	of	data	when	it	loads	to	my

113
file.

But	the	gray-haired	Official	 said	that	they	had	their	eyes	on	me.

I	stare	up	into	the	dark	with	an	ache	in	my	chest	that	makes	it	hard	to	breathe.
But	not	hard	to	think.

Ever	since	the	day	of	Grandfather’s	Final	Banquet	last	month,	I’ve	 gone	back
and	forth	between	wishing	he	had	never	given	me	that	paper	and	being	glad	that
he	did.	Because	at	least	I	have	the	words	to	describe	what	I	feel	is	happening
inside	of	me:	the	dying	of	 the	light.

If	I	couldn’t	 name	it,	would	 I	even	know	what	 it	is?	Would	I	 even	feel	it	at	all?

I	pick	up	the	microcard	that	the	Official	  gave	me	in	the	greenspace	and	tiptoe
toward	the	port.	I	need	to	see	Xander’s	face;	I	need	reassurance	that	everything
is	in	order.

I	stop	short.	My	mother	stands	at	the	portscreen	talking	to	someone.	Who	would
contact	her	so	late	at	night?

My	father	sees	me	from	the	front	room,	where	he	sits	on	the	divan	waiting	 for
my	mother	to	finish.	 He	gestures	for	me	to	come	in	and	sit	next	to	him.	When	I
do,	he	glances	at	the	microcard	in	my	hands	and	smiles	and	teases	like	any	father
would.	“Seeing	Xander	at	school	isn’t	 enough?	You	want	to	catch	another
glimpse	of	him	before	you	 go	to	sleep?”

He	puts	his	arm	around	me	and	gives	me	a	hug.	“I	understand.	I	was	the	same
way	with	your	 mother.	That	was	back	when	they	let	us	print	out	a	picture	from
the	ports	right	away	instead	of	making	us	wait	until	 after	our	first	 meeting.”

“What	did	 your	parents	think	of	Mama	being	 a	Farmlander?”

My	father	pauses.	“Well,	 they	were	both	a	little	concerned,	to	be	honest.	They
never	thought	I’d	Match	 with	someone	who	didn’t	 live	 in	a	City.	But	 it	didn’t
take	them	long	to	decide	they	were	happy	about	it.”	He	gets	that	smile	on	his
face,	the	one	he	always	gets	when	he	talks	about	falling	in	love.	“It	 only	took
that	first	meeting	to	change	their	minds.	You	 should	have	seen	your	mother
then.”

“Why	 did	you	meet	in	the	City	 instead	of	in	the	Farmlands?”	I	ask.	Usually,	 it’s

114
“Why	 did	you	meet	in	the	City	 instead	of	in	the	Farmlands?”	I	ask.	Usually,	 it’s
customary	for	the	first	meeting	to	 be	held	close	to	the	girl’s	home.	There’s
always	an	Official	 from	the	Match	Department	present	to	make	sure	things	go
smoothly.

“She	insisted	on	coming	here	even	though	it	was	a	long	train	ride.	She	wanted	to
see	the	City	as	soon	as	possible.	My	parents	and	the	Official	and	I	all	went	to	the
station	to	meet	her.”

He	pauses	and	I	know	he	is	picturing	the	meeting	in	his	mind,	imagining	 my
mother	stepping	off	that	air	train.

“And?”	 I	know	 I	sound	impatient,	but	I	 have	to	remind	him	that	he’s	not	back	in
the	past.	He’s	here	in	the	present	and	I	need	to	know	everything	I	can	about	the
Match	that	made	me.

“When	she	stepped	off	the	train,	your	grandmother	said	to	me,	‘She	still	 has	the
sun	on	her	face.’”	My	 father	pauses	and	smiles.	“She	did,	too.	I’d	never	seen
anyone	look	so	warm	and	alive.	My	 parents	never	voiced	a	concern	about	her
again.	I	think	we	all	 fell	in	 love	with	 her	that	day.”

Neither	of	us	notice	my	mother	standing	in	 the	doorway	until	she	clears	her
throat.	“And	 I	with	 all	of	you.”	 She	seems	a	little	sad,	and	I	wonder	if	she’s
thinking	of	 Grandfather	or	Grandmother	or	both.	She	and	my	father	are	now	the
last	two	people	left	who	remember	that	day,	except	for	maybe	the	Official	 who
oversaw	their	meeting.

“Who	called	 so	late	on	the	port?”	I	ask.

“Someone	from	work,”	 my	mother	 says.	Looking	weary,	she	sits	down	next	to
my	father	and	leans	her	head	on	his	shoulder	as	he	puts	his	arm	around	her.	“I
have	to	leave	on	a	trip	tomorrow.”

“Why?”

My	mother	yawns,	her	blue	eyes	opening	wide.	Her	face	is	still	 sun-kissed	from
all	her	work	outdoors.	She	looks	a	little	 older	than	usual	and	for	the	first	time	 I
see	a	bit	of	gray	interwoven	in	her	thick	 blond	hair,	some	shadows	in	the
sunlight.	“It’s	 late,	Cassia.	You	should	be	asleep.	I	should	be	asleep.	I’ll	tell	 you
and	Bram	all	about	it	in	the	morning.”

115
I	don’t	protest.	I	close	my	hand	over	the	microcard	and	say,	“All	right.”	Before	I
leave	for	my	room	my	mother	leans	over	to	give	me	a	kiss	good	night.

Once	I’m	back	in	my	room	I	listen	through	the	walls	again.	Something	about	my
mother	leaving	right	now	alarms	me.	Why	now?	Where	is	she	going?	How	long
will	she	be	gone?	She	rarely	goes	on	trips	for	work.

“So?”	my	father	says	in	the	other	room.	He’s	trying	to	keep	his	voice	quiet.	“Is
everything	all	right?	I	can’t	think	of	the	last	time	we’ve	had	a	call	so	late	at
night.”

“I	can’t	tell.	Something	seems	to	be	going	on,	but	I	don’t	know	what	it	is.
They’re	pulling	a	few	of	us	from	other	Arboretums	to	come	look	at	a	crop	at	the
Arboretum	in	Grandia	Province.”	Her	voice	has	the	singsong	quality	that	it	gets
when	it’s	very	late	and	she’s	very	tired.	I	remember	it	from	the	nights	when	she
used	to	tell	me	those	flower	stories	and	I	feel	reassured.	If	she	doesn’t	think
something	is	wrong,	then	everything	must	be	fine.	My	mother	is	one	of	the
smartest	people	I	know.

“How	long	will	you	be	gone?”	my	father	asks.

“A	week	at	the	most.	Do	you	think	Cassia	and	Bram	will	be	all	right?	It’s	rather
a	long	trip.”

“They’ll	understand.”	There’s	a	pause.	“Cassia	still	seems	upset.	About	the
sample.”

“I	know.	I	worry	about	that.”	My	mother	sighs,	a	soft	sound	that	somehow	I	still
hear	through	the	wall.	“It	was	an	honest	mistake.	I	hope	she	sees	that	soon.”

Mistake?	It	wasn’t	a	mistake,	I	think.	And	then	I	realize:	She	doesn’t	know.	He
hasn’t	told	her.	My	father	has	a	secret	from	my	mother.

And	I	have	a	horrible	thought.

So	their	Match	isn’t	perfect	after	all.

The	moment	I	think	it,	I	wish	it	back.	If	their	Match	isn’t	perfect,	then	what	are
the	chances	that	mine	will	be?

116
The	next	morning,	another	thunderstorm	tumbles	the	leaves	on	the	maple	trees
and	showers	rain	on	the	newroses.	I’m	eating	my	breakfast,	oatmeal	again,
steaming	in	its	foilware	 dish	when	I	hear	the	port	announce:	Cassia	Reyes,	your
leisure	activity,	hiking,	 has	been	canceled	for	the	day	due	to	inclement	weather.
Please	report	to	Second	School	for	extra	study	hours	instead.

No	hiking.	 Which	means	no	Ky.

The	walk	to	the	air	train	is	 a	wet	one,	and	muggy.	The	rain	adds	to	the	water	in
the	air;	trapping	the	humidity.	 My	 coppery	hair	begins	to	tangle	and	curl,	as	it
does	sometimes	in	weather	like	this.	I	look	up	at	the	sky	but	only	 see	the	mass	of
clouds,	no	break	anywhere.

No	one	else	is	on	my	air	train,	not	Em,	not	Xander,	not	Ky.	 They	probably
caught	other	trains,	or	are	still	getting	ready,	but	I	have	a	sense	of	something
missed,	something	missing.	Someone	missing.

Maybe	it	is	me.

Once	I’m	at	school,	I	go	upstairs	to	the	research	library,	where	there	are	several
ports.	I	want	to	find	 out	about	Dylan	Thomas	and	Alfred	 Lord	Tennyson	and	if
they	have	any	poems	that	did	make	the	selection.	I	don’t	think	they	did,	 but	I
have	to	make	sure.

My	fingers	hover	 over	the	screen	on	the	port	as	I	hesitate.	The	fastest	way	to	find
out	would	be	to	type	in	their	 names,	but	then	there	would	be	a	record	of	someone
searching	for	them	and	the	search	could	be	traced	back	to	me.	It’s	much	safer	to
go	through	the	lists	of	poets	in	the	Hundred	Poems	database	instead.	If	I’m
looking	through	poet	after	poet	after	poet,	that	will	 seem	more	like	an
assignment	for	class	and	less	like	a	search	for	something	specific.

It	takes	a	long	time	to	go	through	each	name,	but	I	finally	 get	to	the	Ts.	I	find
one	poem	by	Tennyson	and	I	want	to	read	it	but	I	don’t	 have	time.	There	is	no
Thomas.	There	is	a	Thoreau.	I	touch	that	name;	one	poem	of	his,	The	Moon,	has
been	saved.	I	wonder	if	he	wrote	anything	else.	If	he	did,	it	 is	gone	now.

Why	did	Grandfather	give	me	those	poems?	Did	he	want	me	to	find	some
meaning	in	them?	Does	he	not	want	me	to	go	gentle?	What	does	that	even
mean?	Am	I	supposed	to	fight	against	authority?	I	might	 as	well	ask	if	he	wants
me	to	commit	suicide.	Because	that’s	what	it	would	 be.	I	wouldn’t	 actually	die,

117
but	if	I	tried	to	break	the	rules	they’d	take	away	everything	I	value.	A	Match.	A
family	of	my	own.	A	good	vocation.	I	would	have	nothing.	I	don’t	think
Grandfather	would	want	that	for	me.

I	can’t	figure	it	out.	I’ve	thought	and	thought	about	it	and	turned	the	words	over
in	my	head.	I	wish	I	could	see	the	words	again	on	paper	and	puzzle	it	out.	For
some	reason,	I	feel	like	everything	would	be	different	if	I	could	see	them	outside
of	myself,	not	only	in	my	mind.

I’ve	realized	one	thing,	though.	Even	though	I’ve	done	the	right	thing—burned
the	words	and	tried	to	forget	them—it	doesn’t	work.	These	words	won’t	go
away.

I’m	relieved	the	minute	I	see	Em	sitting	in	the	meal	hall.	She	practically	glows,
and	when	she	sees	me,	she	lifts	her	arm	to	wave.	The	Banquet	went	well,	then.
She	didn’t	panic.	She	made	it	through.	She	isn’t	dead.

I	hurry	through	the	line,	sliding	into	the	seat	next	to	her.	“So,”	I	ask,	even	though
I	already	know	the	answer,	“how	was	the	Banquet?”	Her	radiance	shines	on
everyone	in	the	room.	Everyone	at	our	table	smiles.

“It	was	perfect.”

“It’s	not	Lon,	then?”	I	say,	making	a	feeble	joke.	Lon	was	Matched	a	few
months	ago.

Em	laughs.	“No.	His	name	is	Dalen.	He’s	from	Acadia	Province.”	Acadia	is	one
of	the	more	heavily	forested	provinces	to	the	east,	miles	away	from	our	rolling
hills	and	rivered	valleys	here	in	Oria.	They	have	stone	in	Acadia,	and	sea.
Things	we	don’t	have	much	of	here.

“And	...”	I	lean	forward.	So	do	the	rest	of	our	friends	gathered	at	the	table,	all	of
us	eager	for	details	about	the	boy	Em	will	marry.

“When	he	stood	up,	I	thought,	‘He	can’t	be	for	me.’	He’s	tall	and	he	smiled	at
me	right	through	the	screen.	He	didn’t	even	look	a	little	bit	nervous.”

“So	he’s	handsome?”

“Of	course.”	Em	smiles.	“And	he	didn’t	seem	too	disappointed	in	me,	either,
thank	goodness.”

118
thank	goodness.”

“How	 could	he	be?”	Em	shines	so	radiantly	today	in	her	drab	brown	plainclothes
that	I	imagine	she	was	impossible	to	look	away	from	 last	night	in	her	yellow
dress.	“So,	he’s	handsome.	But	what	exactly	does	he	look	like?”	I’m
embarrassed	to	hear	a	hint	of	jealousy	in	my	voice,	plain	and	clear.	No	one
gathered	around	me	to	find	out	what	Xander	was	like.	There	was	no	mystery
because	they	already	knew.

Em	is	kind	enough	to	ignore	it.	 “Actually,	 a	little	 like	Xander	 …”	 she	begins,
and	then	she	breaks	off.

I	follow	 her	gaze	to	where	Xander	stands	a	few	feet	away	from	us,	holding	his
foilware	on	a	tray	and	looking	 stricken.	Did	 he	hear	the	jealousy	in	my	voice
when	Em	described	her	Match?

What	is	wrong	with	 me?

I	try	to	cover	it	 up.	“We’re	 talking	 about	Em’s	Match.	He	looks	like	 you.”

Xander	recovers	quickly.	“So	 he’s	unbelievably	handsome.”	He	sits	down	next
to	me	but	he	doesn’t	look	in	my	direction.	 I’m	 embarrassed.	He	definitely	heard
me.

“Of	course,”	 Em	laughs.	“I	don’t	 know	 why	I	was	so	worried!”	 She	blushes	a
little,	probably	 remembering	the	night	in	the	music	hall,	 and	looks	at	Xander.	“It
all	turned	out	perfectly—the	 way	you	said	it	would.”

“I	wish	 they	still	 let	you	print	out	 a	picture	right	away,”	 I	say.	“I	 want	to	see
what	he	looks	like.”

Em	describes	her	Match	and	tells	us	facts	about	Dalen	that	she	learned	from	her
microcard,	but	I’m	 too	distracted	to	hear	much.	I	worry	 that	I’ve	hurt	 Xander	and
I	want	him	to	look	 at	me	or	take	my	hand,	but	he	does	neither	of	those	things.

Em	grabs	my	arm	on	our	way	out	of	the	meal	hall.	“Thank	 you	so	much	for
letting	me	borrow	the	compact.	I	 think	it	 helped	to	have	something	to	hold	onto,
you	know?”

I	nod,	agreeing.

“Ky	 gave	it	back	to	you	this	morning,	 didn’t	 he?”

119
“Ky	gave	it	back	to	you	this	morning,	didn’t	he?”

“No.”	 My	heart	drops.	Where	is	my	compact?	Why	doesn’t	Em	have	it?

“He	didn’t?”	Em’s	face	pales.

“No,”	I	say.	“Why	does	he	have	it?”

“I	saw	him	on	the	air	train	after	the	Match	Banquet.	He	was	coming	home	late
from	work.	I	wanted	you	to	have	the	compact	back	as	soon	as	possible.”	Em
takes	a	deep	breath.	“I	knew	you’d	see	Ky	at	hiking	before	you’d	see	me	here,
and	I	couldn’t	bring	it	straight	back	to	your	house	because	I	was	worried	I’d	be
late	for	curfew.”

“Hiking	was	canceled	this	morning	because	of	the	weather.”

“It	was?”	Hiking	is	the	one	summer	leisure	activity	that	absolutely	can’t	be	done
in	inclement	weather.	Even	swimming	can	be	done	in	the	indoor	pool.	Em	looks
sick.	“I	should	have	realized	that.	But	why	didn’t	he	find	some	way	to	get	it	to
you?	He	knew	how	important	it	was.	I	made	sure	to	tell	him.”

Good	question.	But	I	don’t	want	this	to	ruin	Em’s	big	moment.	I	don’t	want	her
to	worry.	“I’m	sure	he	gave	it	to	Aida	to	give	to	my	mother	or	father,”	I	say,
trying	to	sound	lighthearted.	“Or	he’ll	give	it	to	me	tomorrow	at	hiking.”

“Don’t	worry,”	Xander	says,	looking	directly	at	me	now.	He	reaches	out	with	his
words	to	cross	the	small	divides	that	keep	coming	between	us.	“You	can	trust
Ky.”

120
                                            CHAPTER	        15

As	I	walk	to	the	air-train	stop	the	next	morning,	things	feel	crisp,	less	weighted.
The	cool	of	the	night	accomplished	what	the	rain	yesterday	did	not;	the	air	feels
fresh.	New.	The	sun	blinking	through	the	last	of	the	clouds	dares	the	birds	to
sing,	and	they	do.	It	dares	me	to	let	the	light	in,	and	I	do.	Who	wouldn’t	rage
against	the	death	of	something	so	beautiful?

I’m	not	the	only	one	who	feels	it.	At	hiking,	Ky	finds	me	standing	at	the	front	of
the	group,	just	as	the	Officer	begins	speaking.	Ky	presses	the	compact	into	my
hand.	I	feel	the	touch	of	his	fingers	and	I	think	he	leaves	them	there,	on	mine,	the
smallest	bit	longer	than	necessary.

I	put	the	compact	into	my	pocket.

Why	here?	I	wonder,	still	tingling.	Why	not	give	it	to	me	at	home?

I’m	glad	I	lent	it	to	Em,	but	I’m	glad	I	have	it	back,	too.	The	compact	is	the	one
link	that	I	have	left	to	my	grandparents	and	I	vow	never	to	let	it	out	of	my	hands
again.

I	think	maybe	Ky	will	wait	for	me	to	go	in	the	woods,	but	he	doesn’t.	When	the
Officer	blows	the	whistle,	Ky	takes	off	without	a	backward	glance,	and	all	at
once	my	new-bright	feeling	dissolves	a	little	bit.

You	have	your	compact	back,	I	remind	myself.	Something	returned.

Ky	disappears	completely	into	the	trees	ahead	of	me.

Something	lost.

Three	minutes	later,	alone	in	the	woods,	I	realize	that	Ky	didn’t	give	me	back
my	compact.	It’s	something	else—I	can	tell	the	moment	I	pull	it	out	of	my
pocket	to	make	sure	it	looks	all	right.	The	object	is	similar:	gold,	a	case	you	can
snap	open	and	shut,	but	it’s	definitely	not	my	artifact.

There	are	letters—N,E,S,W—and	an	arrow	on	the	inside.	It	spins	and	spins	and
keeps	pointing	back	to	me.

I	didn’t	think	that	Aberrations	could	have	access	to	artifacts,	but	Ky	obviously

121
I	didn’t	think	that	Aberrations	could	have	access	to	artifacts,	but	Ky	obviously
does.	Did	he	give	it	to	me	on	purpose?	By	accident?	Should	I	try	to	give	it	back
or	wait	until	he	says	something	to	me?

There	are	far	too	many	secrets	in	these	woods,	I	decide.	I	find	myself	smiling,
polished	bright	again,	ready	for	the	sun.

“Sir?	Sir?	Lon’s	fallen.	We	think	he’s	injured.”

The	Officer	swears	under	his	breath	and	looks	at	Ky	and	me,	who	are	the	only
two	up	on	the	top	of	the	hill	except	for	this	boy.	“You	two	stay	up	here	and	keep
track	of	who	comes	when,	all	right?”	The	Officer	gives	me	the	datapod	and,
before	I	can	say	anything,	he	disappears	back	into	the	forest	with	the	boy.

I	think	about	telling	Ky	that	we	need	to	exchange	artifacts,	but	before	I	say	the
words,	something	stops	me.	For	some	reason	I	want	to	hold	on	to	the	mysterious
spinning	arrow	in	its	gold	case.	Just	for	another	day	or	two.

“What	are	you	doing?”	I	ask	him	instead.	His	hand	moves,	making	shapes	and
curves	and	lines	in	the	grass	that	seem	familiar.

His	blue	eyes	flash	up	to	me.	“I’m	writing.”

Of	course.	That’s	why	the	marks	look	familiar.	He	is	writing	in	an	old-fashioned,
curved	kind	of	writing,	like	the	script	on	my	compact.	I’ve	seen	samples	of	it
before	but	I	don’t	know	how	to	do	it.	No	one	does.	All	we	can	do	is	type.	We
could	try	to	imitate	the	figures,	but	with	what?	We	don’t	have	any	of	the	old
tools.

But	I	realize	as	I	watch	Ky	that	you	can	make	your	own	tools.

“How	did	you	learn	to	do	this?”	I	don’t	dare	sit	down	next	to	him—someone
could	come	through	the	trees	at	any	moment	and	need	me	to	enter	them	in	the
datapod—so	I	stand	as	close	as	I	dare.	He	grimaces	and	I	realize	I	am	standing
right	in	the	middle	of	his	words.	I	take	a	step	back.

Ky	smiles	but	doesn’t	answer;	he	keeps	on	writing.

This	is	the	difference	between	us.	I	live	to	sort;	he	knows	how	to	create.	He	can
write	words	whenever	he	wants.	He	can	swirl	them	in	the	grass,	write	them	in
the	sand,	carve	them	in	a	tree.

122
the	sand,	carve	them	in	a	tree.

“No	one	knows	I	 can	do	this,”	Ky	 says.	“Now	I	 have	a	secret	of	yours	and	you
have	one	of	mine.”

“Just	one?”	I	say,	thinking	 of	the	spinning	arrow	in	 the	gold	case.

Ky	smiles	again.

Some	of	the	rain	from	last	night	pooled	in	 the	heavy,	drooping	petals	of	the
wildflowers	 here.	I	dip	my	finger	 in	the	water	and	try	to	write	 along	the	slick
green	surface	of	one	of	the	broad	leaves.	It	feels	difficult,	awkward.	 My	 hands
are	used	to	tapping	a	screen,	not	to	sweeping	and	swirling	in	controlled
movements.	I	haven’t	held	a	paintbrush	in	years,	not	since	my	days	in	First
School.	Because	the	water	is	clear,	I	can’t	really	see	my	letters	but	I	still	 know
that	they	aren’t	formed	correctly.

Ky	dips	his	finger	 into	another	droplet	and	writes	a	glistening	 C	on	the	leaf.	He
makes	the	curve	smoothly,	gracefully.

“Will	 you	 teach	me?”	I	ask.

“I’m	 not	supposed	to	do	that.”

“We’re	 not	supposed	to	be	doing	any	of	this,”	I	remind	 him.	Sounds	drift	up
from	the	tangled	trees	and	undergrowth	below	us.	Someone	is	coming.	I	feel
desperate	to	make	him	promise	to	teach	me	before	anyone	gets	here	and	this
moment	vanishes.	“We’re	not	supposed	to	know	poems	or	writing	 or	…”	 I	stop
myself.	I	ask	again.	“Will	  you	teach	me?”

Ky	doesn’t	answer.

We’re	not	alone	anymore.

Several	people	have	reached	the	top,	and	from	the	wails	I	can	hear	through	the
forest,	the	Officer	and	Lon’s	 group	are	not	far	behind.	I	have	to	enter	these
names	into	the	datapod,	so	I	step	away	from	Ky.	I	look	back	once	at	where	he
sits	with	his	arms	folded,	looking	 out	over	the	hills.

It	turns	out	that	Lon	will	  survive.	Once	the	Officer	cures	the	melodrama
accompanying	the	injury,	they	find	 that	all	Lon	 has	is	a	slightly	twisted	ankle.
Still,	the	Officer	 warns	us	to	take	it	slow	on	our	way	 back	to	the	bottom	of	the

123
Still,	the	Officer	warns	us	to	take	it	slow	on	our	way	back	to	the	bottom	of	the
hill.

I	want	to	walk	down	with	Ky,	but	he	attaches	himself	to	the	Officer	and	makes
himself	useful	in	getting	Lon	back	down	the	mountain.	I	wonder	why	the	Officer
bothered	hauling	Lon	to	the	top	at	all	until	I	hear	him	muttering	something	to	Ky
about	“making	quota	so	they	don’t	get	after	me.”	It	surprises	me,	even	though	I
know	Officers	must	report	to	people,	too.

I	walk	with	a	girl	named	Livy	who	is	getting	better	and	better	at	hiking	as	the
days	go	on	and	who	acts	enthusiastic	about	everything.	She	talks	and	talks,	and	I
imagine	Ky’s	hand	making	that	sweeping	curve	of	the	C	for	my	name	and	my
heart	beats	faster.

We’re	late	getting	back;	I	have	to	rush	to	the	train	bound	for	the	Borough,	and
Ky	has	to	rush	to	the	one	that	will	take	him	to	the	City	for	work.	I’ve	given	up
on	talking	to	him	again	today	when	I	feel	someone	brush	past	me.	At	the	same
time	I	hear	a	word	so	soft	and	quiet	I	wonder	if	he	said	it	up	on	the	hill	and	the
wind	has	just	now	carried	it	down	to	me.

The	word	is	yes.

124
                                            CHAPTER	        16

I‘m	getting	good	at	C.	When	I	arrive	at	hiking	I	practically	sprint	to	the	top	of
the	hill.	After	I	check	in	with	the	Officer,	I	hurry	to	my	spot	next	to	Ky.	Before
he	can	say	anything,	I	pick	up	a	stick	and	draw	a	C	right	there	in	the	mud	next	to
him.

“What’s	next?”	I	ask,	and	he	laughs	a	little.

“You	know,	you	don’t	need	me.	You	could	teach	yourself,”	he	says.	“You	could
look	at	the	letters	on	your	scribe	or	your	reader.”

“They’re	not	the	same,”	I	tell	him.	“They	don’t	connect	like	yours	do.	I’ve	seen
your	kind	of	writing	before,	but	I	don’t	know	what	it’s	called.”

“Cursive,”	he	says	softly.	“It’s	harder	to	read,	but	it’s	beautiful.	It’s	one	of	the
old	ways	of	writing.”

“That’s	what	I	want	to	learn.”	I	don’t	want	to	copy	the	blocky,	flat	symbols	of
the	letters	we	use	now.	I	like	the	curves	and	sweeps	of	the	ones	Ky	knows.

Ky	glances	over	at	the	Officer,	who	stares	fiercely	into	the	trees	as	though	daring
someone	else	to	fall	and	get	hurt	today.	We	don’t	have	long	before	the	others
arrive.

“What’s	next?”	I	ask	again.

“A,”	says	Ky,	showing	me	how	to	make	a	small	letter	a,	embraced	by	a	little
swoop	at	the	beginning	and	at	the	end,	to	attach	it	to	what	comes	before	and
after.	“Because	it’s	the	next	letter	in	your	name.”	He	reaches	and	takes	hold	of
the	stick	above	my	hand.

Up,	around,	down.

Guiding,	gentle,	his	hand	presses	against	mine	on	the	downward	strokes,	releases
a	little	on	the	upward	ones.	I	bite	my	lip	in	concentration;	or	maybe	it’s	that	I
don’t	dare	to	breathe	until	the	a	is	finished,	which	it	is,	all	too	soon.

The	letter	looks	perfect.	I	exhale,	a	little	shakily.	I	want	to	look	up	at	him,	but
instead	I	look	down	at	our	hands,	right	next	to	each	other.	In	this	light,	his	don’t

125
instead	I	look	down	at	our	hands,	right	next	to	each	other.	In	this	light,	 his	don’t
look	so	red.	They	look	brown,	 strong.	Purposeful.

Someone	is	coming	through	the	trees.	We	both	let	go	at	the	same	time.

Livy	 bursts	into	the	clearing.	She’s	never	been	third	before,	and	she’s	almost
beside	herself	with	excitement.	While	 she	chatters	at	the	Officer,	Ky	and	I	stand
up	and	casually	trample	what	we’ve	written	 into	oblivion.

“Why	 am	I	learning	to	write	 the	letters	in	my	name	first?”

“Because	even	if	that’s	all	you	learn	to	 write	you’ll	 still	 have	something,”	he
says,	bending	his	head	down	to	look	at	me,	making	sure	I	know	what	he’s
saying,	what	he’s	about	to	ask.	“Was	there	anything	else	you	wanted	to	learn	to
write	instead?”

I	nod	and	his	eyes	brighten	with	understanding.

“The	words	from	 that	paper,”	he	whispers,	his	eyes	moving	to	Livy	 and	the
Officer.

“Yes.”

“Do	you	 still	remember	them?”

I	nod	again.

“Tell	 me	a	little	every	day,”	 he	says,	“and	I’ll	 remember	it	for	you.	 Then	there
will	 be	two	of	us	who	know.”

Even	though	the	time	is	short	before	Livy	 or	the	Officer	 or	someone	else	comes
over	to	talk	to	us,	I	pause	for	a	moment.	If	I	 tell	Ky	 these	words,	I	step	into	an
even	more	dangerous	place	than	I	was	before.	It	will	put	Ky	 in	danger.	And	I
will	 have	to	trust	him.

Can	I	do	it?	I	look	 out	at	the	view	from	 the	top	of	the	hill.	 The	sky	does	not	have
an	answer	for	me.	The	dome	of	City	Hall	 in	the	distance	certainly	doesn’t.	I
remember	thinking	of	the	angels	from	the	stories	when	I	went	 to	my	Match
Banquet.	I	don’t	see	any	angels	and	they	don’t	fly	down	 on	their	cotton-soft
wings	to	whisper	in	my	 ear.	Can	I	trust	this	boy	who	writes	 in	the	earth?

126
Someplace	deep	within	me—Is	it	my	heart?	Or	perhaps	my	soul,	the	mythical
part	of	humans	that	the	angels	cared	about?—tells	me	that	I	can.

I	lean	closer	to	Ky.	Neither	 of	us	looks	at	the	other;	we	both	gaze	straight	ahead
to	make	sure	that	no	one	will	suspect	anything	if	they	glance	our	way.	That’s
when	I	whisper	the	words	to	him,	 my	heart	so	full	it’s	 about	to	burst	because	I’m
saying	them,	really	saying	them	out	loud	to	another	person:	“Do	 not	go	gentle
into	that	good	night.	Rage,	rage,	against	the	dying	of	the	light.”

Ky	closes	his	eyes.

When	he	opens	them	again	he	slips	something	rough	and	papery	into	my	hand.
“Look	 at	this	for	practice,”	 Ky	says.	“Destroy	 it	when	you’re	 done.”

I	can	hardly	wait	for	 Second	School	and	sorting	to	end	so	that	I	can	look	at	what
Ky	has	given	me.	I	wait	 until	I’m	 at	home	in	the	kitchen,	eating	my	 dinner	alone
because	my	work	hours	were	long	tonight.	I	hear	my	father	and	Bram	playing	 a
game	on	the	port	in	the	foyer	and	I	feel	safe	enough	to	reach	into	my	pocket	and
pull	out	Ky’s	 gift.

A	napkin.	My	 first	reaction	is	disappointment.	Why	 this?	It’s	 a	normal	napkin,
the	kind	we	get	from	the	meal	halls	at	Second	School	or	the	Arboretum	or
anywhere	else.	Brown	and	pulpy.	Smeared	and	used.	I	have	the	impulse	to
incinerate	it	right	 away.

But.

When	I	open	it	up	there	are	words	inside.	Gorgeous	words.	Cursive	words.	They
were	beautiful	up	on	the	green	hill	with	 the	sound	of	wind	in	 trees	and	they	are
beautiful	here	in	my	gray-and-blue	kitchen	 with	the	grumbling	 of	the	incinerator
in	the	background.	Dark,	curling,	 swirling	 words	curve	across	the	brown	paper.
Where	dampness	has	touched	them	the	words	are	slightly	blurred.

And	it’s	 not	just	words.	He’s	drawn	things,	 too.	The	surface	is	covered	with	lines
and	meaning.	Not	a	picture,	not	a	poem,	not	the	lyrics	to	a	song,	although	my
sorting	mind	notices	the	pattern	of	all	these	things.	But	I	 can’t	classify	them.
This	is	nothing	I	 have	seen	before.

I	realize	that	I	don’t	 even	know	what	you	would	 use	to	make	marks	like	this.	All
of	the	words	I	practice	are	written	in	 the	air	or	traced	in	the	dirt.	There	used	to	be
tools	for	writing	 but	I	 don’t	know	 what	they	were.	Even	our	paintbrushes	in

127
tools	for	writing	 but	I	 don’t	know	 what	they	were.	Even	our	paintbrushes	in
school	were	tethered	to	artscreens,	our	pictures	wiped	away	almost	immediately
after	we	finished	them.	Somehow,	Ky	 must	know	a	secret,	older	than
Grandfather	and	his	mother	and	people	before	them.	How	to	make.	Create.

Two	lives,	he’s	written.

Two	lives,	I	whisper	to	myself.	 The	words	hush	and	hang	in	the	room,	too	soft
for	the	port	to	hear	above	the	other	sounds	in	the	house.	Almost	too	soft	for	me
to	hear	above	my	heart	beating	fast.	Faster	than	it	ever	has	in	the	woods	or	on	the
tracker.

I	should	go	to	my	room,	to	 the	relative	privacy	of	 that	little	place	with	 my	bed,
my	window.	 My	closet	where	plainclothes	hang,	dead	and	still.	But	 I	can’t	stop
staring.	It’s	hard,	at	first,	 for	me	to	figure	 out	what	the	picture	is	meant	to	be;	but
then	I	realize	it’s	him.	 Ky.	Drawn	 twice,	once	on	each	side	of	the	fold	of	the
napkin.	The	line	of	his	jaw	 gives	it	away;	the	shape	of	his	eyes,	the	spareness
and	strength	of	his	body.	The	spaces	left	empty;	his	hands	and	the	nothing	they
hold,	though	they	are	cupped,	tipped	skyward,	in	both	pictures.

That’s	where	the	similarity	 between	the	pictures	ends.	In	the	first	picture,	he
looks	up	at	something	in	the	sky,	and	he	looks	younger,	his	face	is	open.	The
figure	there	seems	to	think	his	hands	might	still	be	filled.	 In	the	second,	he	is
older,	his	face	narrower,	and	he	looks	down	at	the	ground.

Along	the	bottom	he	has	written	Which	 one	is	the	true	one,	I	don’t	ask,	they
don’t	tell.

Two	lives.	I	think	 I	understand	this—his	life	 before	he	came	here,	and	his	life
after.	But	what	does	he	mean	by	the	line	of	song	or	poetry	or	plea	at	the	end?

“Cassia?”	my	father	calls	from	 the	doorway,	behind	me.	I	scoop	the	napkin	up
with	my	foilware	 from	 dinner	and	take	it	all	toward	 the	incinerator	and	the
recycling	bin.

“Yes?”

Even	if	he	sees	it,	it’s	a	napkin,	I	tell	 myself,	looking	 at	the	brown	square	on	my
tray.	We	incinerate	them	after	every	meal,	and	it’s	even	the	right	 kind	of	paper,
not	like	the	one	Grandfather	gave	me.	The	incineration	tube	won’t	 register	the

128
difference.	Ky	is	keeping	you	safe.	I	lift	my	eyes	to	my	father.

“It’s	a	message	for	you	on	the	port,”	my	father	says.	He	doesn’t	look	down	at
what	I	carry;	he’s	focused	on	my	face,	to	see	what	I’m	thinking.	Maybe	it’s	there
that	the	real	danger	lies.	I	smile,	try	to	look	unconcerned.

“Is	it	from	Em?”	I	slide	my	foilware	into	the	recycling	bin.	Only	the	napkin	left.

“No,”	my	father	says.	“An	Official	from	the	Match	Department.”

“Oh.”	Just	like	that,	I	push	the	napkin	down	the	incineration	tube.	“I’ll	be	right
there,”	I	say	to	my	father.	I	feel	the	faintest	hint	of	heat	from	the	fire	below	as
Ky’s	story	burns,	and	I	wonder	if	I	will	ever	have	the	strength	to	hold	onto
something.	Grandfather’s	poems.	Ky’s	story.	Or	if	I	will	always	be	someone
who	destroys.

Ky	told	you	to	destroy	it,	I	tell	myself.	The	man	who	wrote	the	poem	is	gone,	but
Ky	is	not.	We	have	to	keep	it	that	way.	Keep	him	safe.

I	follow	my	father	into	the	foyer.	Bram	glares	at	me	on	his	way	out	of	the	foyer
because	this	message	has	interrupted	his	game.	Hoping	to	hide	my	nervousness,
I	give	him	a	playful	shove	as	I	walk	toward	the	port.

The	Official	on	the	screen	is	not	one	I’ve	seen	before.	He’s	a	cheerful,	burly
looking	man,	not	at	all	the	cerebral,	ascetic	type	I	imagine	hovering	over
datascreens	in	the	Match	Department.	“Hello,	Cassia,”	he	says.	The	collar	of	his
white	uniform	seems	tight	around	his	neck,	and	he	has	laugh	lines	near	his	eyes.

“Hello.”	I	want	to	look	down	and	see	if	my	hands	are	stained	from	the	drawings,
the	words,	but	I	keep	my	eyes	on	the	Official.

“It’s	been	over	a	month	since	your	Match.”

“Yes,	sir.”

“Other	Matchees	are	arranging	their	first	port-to-port	communications	now.	I’ve
spent	the	day	putting	those	together	for	your	peers.	Of	course,	it	would	be	rather
ludicrous	for	you	and	Xander	to	have	a	formal	port-to-port	communication.”	The
Official	laughs	cheerfully.	“Don’t	you	think?”

“I	agree,	sir.”

129
“I	agree,	sir.”

“The	other	Officials	on	the	Matching	Committee	and	I	decided	it	makes	the	most
sense	for	the	two	of	you	to	have	an	outing	together	instead.	Supervised,	of
course,	by	an	Official,	as	are	communications	for	the	other	Matchees.”

“Of	course.”	Out	of	the	corner	of	my	eye	I	see	my	father	standing	in	the	door	of
his	room,	watching	me.	Watching	over	me.	I’m	glad	he’s	there.	Even	though	the
idea	of	spending	time	with	Xander	isn’t	at	all	new	or	scary,	the	idea	of	an
Official	at	our	meeting	feels	a	little	strange.

I	hope	it	isn’t	the	Official	from	the	greenspace,	I	think	suddenly.

“Excellent.	You’ll	be	eating	outside	of	your	home	tomorrow	night.	Xander	and
the	Official	assigned	to	your	Match	will	pick	you	up	at	your	regular	mealtime.”

“I’ll	 be	ready.”

The	Official	signs	off	and	the	port	beeps,	indicating	that	we	have	another	call
waiting.	“We’re	popular	this	evening,”	I	say	to	my	father,	glad	of	the	distraction
so	we	don’t	have	to	talk	about	my	outing	with	Xander.	My	father	already	looks
hopeful	and	hurries	to	stand	next	to	me.	It	is	my	mother.

“Cassia,	can	I	speak	with	your	father	alone	for	a	few	minutes?”	she	asks	me	after
we	exchange	hellos.	“I	don’t	have	much	time	to	talk	tonight.	I	have	some	things
I	need	to	tell	him.”	She	looks	tired,	and	she	still	wears	her	uniform	and	insignia
from	work.

“Of	course,”	I	say.

A	knock	sounds	at	the	door	and	I	go	to	answer	it.	It’s	Xander.	“We	still	have	a
few	minutes	before	curfew,”	he	says.	“Do	you	want	to	come	talk	on	the	steps
with	me?”

“Of	course.”	I	close	the	door	behind	me	and	go	outside.	The	porch	light	shines
bright	above	us	and	we	are	in	full	view	of	the	world—or	at	least	the	world	of
Mapletree	Borough—as	we	sit	down	on	the	cement	steps	side	by	side.	It	feels
good	to	be	with	Xander,	in	a	different	way	than	it	feels	good	to	be	with	Ky.

Still.	Being	with	Ky,	being	with	Xander—both	things	feel	like	standing	in	the
light.	Different	types	of	light,	but	neither	feels	dark.

130
“It	sounds	like	the	two	of	us	have	an	outing	tomorrow	night,”	Xander	says.

“The	three	of	us,”	I	say,	and	when	he	looks	puzzled,	I	add,	“Don’t	forget	the
Official.”

Xander	groans.	“Right.	How	could	I	forget?”

“I	wish	we	could	go	alone.”

“Me	too.”	Neither	of	us	says	anything	for	a	moment.	The	wind	sails	along	our
street,	ruffling	the	leaves	on	the	maple	trees.	In	the	evening	light	the	leaves	look
silver-gray;	their	colors	are	gone,	sucked	away	for	now	by	the	night.	I	think	of
the	night	I	sat	with	Grandfather	and	thought	the	same	thing;	I	think	of	the	old
disease	of	color	blindness,	eliminated	generations	ago,	and	how	the	world	might
have	looked	to	those	people.

“Do	you	ever	daydream?”	Xander	asks	me.

“All	 the	time.”

“Did	you	ever	daydream	about	your	Match?	Before	the	Banquet,	I	mean?”

“Sometimes,”	I	say.	I	stop	watching	the	play	of	the	wind	on	the	leaves	of	the
maple	tree	and	glance	at	Xander.

I	should	have	looked	at	Xander	before	I	answered.	It’s	too	late	now.	Now	I	can
tell	by	his	eyes	that	my	answer	wasn’t	what	he	hoped,	that	by	saying	what	I	did	I
closed	a	door	instead	of	opening	it.	Perhaps	Xander	dreamed	about	me	and
wanted	to	know	if	I	dreamed	about	him.	Perhaps	he	has	moments	of	uncertainty,
as	I	do,	and	needs	me	to	tell	him	that	I	feel	sure	about	the	Match.

This	is	the	problem	with	being	an	uncommon	Match.	We	know	each	other	too
well.	We	feel	the	uncertainties	in	our	touch,	see	them	in	each	other’s	eyes.	We
don’t	work	them	out	on	our	own	miles	away	from	each	other	the	way	the	other
Matches	do.	They	don’t	see	the	day-to-day.	We	do.

Still,	we	are	a	Match,	and	a	deep	understanding	runs	through	us	even	in	the
midst	of	a	misunderstanding.	Xander	reaches	for	my	hand	and	I	lace	my	fingers
through	his.	This	is	the	known.	This	is	good.	When	I	think	about	sitting	on	a
porch	with	him	on	other	nights	in	this	life	we’ve	been	given,	I	can	picture	it

131
easily	and	happily.

I	want	Xander	to	kiss	me	again.	It’s	 late	evening	and	there’s	even	a	newrose
smell	in	the	air	the	way	there	was	for	our	first	 kiss.	I	want	him	 to	kiss	me	again
so	that	I	know	that	what	I	feel	 for	him	is	real,	if	 it	is	 more	or	less	real	than	Ky’s
hand	brushing	mine	on	top	of	the	little	 hill.

Down	the	street,	the	last	air	train	from	the	City	 sighs	into	the	station.	A	few
moments	later	we	see	the	figures	of	late	workers	hurrying	down	the	sidewalks	to
get	back	to	their	houses	by	curfew.

Xander	stands	up.	“I’d	better	get	back.	See	you	tomorrow	at	school.”

“See	you	tomorrow,”	 I	say.	He	squeezes	my	hand	and	joins	the	others	on	the
sidewalk	walking	 toward	home.

I	don’t	go	inside.	 I	watch	the	figures	and	wave	to	a	few	of	them.	I	 know	who	I’m
waiting	for.	 Just	when	I	think	I	 won’t	see	him,	Ky	 pauses	in	front	of	my	house.
Almost	before	he’s	stopped,	I	walk	 down	the	steps	and	over	to	talk	to	him.

“I’ve	 been	meaning	to	do	this	for	the	last	few	days,”	Ky	 says.	At	first	 I	think
he’s	reaching	for	my	hand	and	my	heart	pauses,	but	then	I	see	that	he’s	holding
out	something.	One	of	the	brown	paper	envelopes	that	people	who	work	in
offices	sometimes	use.	He	must	have	gotten	it	from	his	father.	I	realize	right
away	that	my	compact	might	be	inside,	so	I	reach	to	take	the	envelope	from	him.
Our	hands	do	not	touch	and	I	find	myself	wishing	 that	they	had.

What	is	wrong	with	me?

“I	have	your	…”	 I	 pause	because	I	don’t	know	what	to	call	the	case	that	holds
the	spinning	arrow.

“I	know.”	 Ky	 smiles	at	me.	The	moon,	hanging	heavy	and	low	in	the	sky	near
the	horizon,	is	a	harvest-yellow	slice	like	 the	melon	we	get	to	eat	during	the
Autumn	Holiday.	 The	moon’s	light	 brightens	Ky’s	 face	a	little	but	 his	smile	does
even	more.

“It’s	 inside.”	I	 gesture	behind	me,	at	the	steps	and	the	lighted	porch.	“If	you	want
to	stay	here,	I	can	run	in	and	get	it.”

“That’s	all	 right,”	 Ky	 says.	“It	can	wait.	You	 can	give	it	to	me	later.”	 His	voice

132
“That’s	all	right,”	Ky	says.	“It	can	wait.	You	can	give	it	to	me	later.”	His	voice
sounds	quiet,	almost	shy.	“I	want	you	to	have	a	chance	to	look	at	it.”

I	wonder	what	color	his	eyes	are	right	now.	Do	they	reflect	the	black	of	the	night
or	the	light	of	the	moon?

I	move	closer	to	try	to	see,	but	as	I	do,	the	almost-curfew	bell	rings	down	the
street	and	we	both	jump.	“I’ll	see	you	tomorrow,”	Ky	says	as	he	turns	to	leave.

“See	you	then.”

I	have	five	more	minutes	before	I	have	to	be	inside,	so	I	stay	out	and	do	not
move.	I	watch	him	all	the	way	down	the	street	and	then	I	look	up	at	the	moon	in
the	sky	and	close	my	eyes.	In	my	mind,	I	see	the	words	I	read	earlier:

Two	lives.

Ever	since	the	day	of	the	mistake	with	my	Match,	I’ve	never	known	which	life	is
my	true	one.	Even	with	the	reassurances	of	the	Official	that	day	in	the
greenspace,	I	think	a	part	of	me	hasn’t	felt	at	peace.	It	was	as	though	I	saw	for
the	first	time	that	life	could	branch	into	different	paths,	take	different	directions.

Back	inside	the	house,	I	tip	my	compact	out	of	the	envelope	and	take	Ky’s
artifact	from	its	hiding	place	deep	in	the	pocket	of	one	of	my	extra	sets	of
plainclothes.	When	I	place	them	side	by	side,	it’s	easy	to	tell	the	difference
between	the	two	golden	circles.	The	surface	of	Ky’s	artifact	is	plain,	scratched.
The	compact	shines	brighter,	and	its	engraved	letters	catch	my	eye.

On	a	whim,	I	pick	up	my	artifact,	twist	the	base,	look	inside.	I	know	Ky	saw	me
reading	the	poems	in	the	forest.	Did	he	also	see	me	open	the	compact?

What	if	Ky	left	a	message	for	me?

Nothing.

I	put	the	compact	away	on	its	shelf.

I	decide	to	keep	the	envelope,	to	put	Ky’s	artifact	inside	before	I	put	it	back	in
the	pocket	of	my	extra	plainclothes	for	safekeeping.	But	before	I	do,	I	open	the
case	and	watch	the	spinning	arrow.	It	settles	on	a	point,	but	I	still	spin,
wondering	where	to	go.

133
                                            CHAPTER	        17

The	climb	is	almost	too	easy.

I	slap	branches	out	of	the	way,	leap	over	rocks	and	push	through	bushes.	My	feet
have	worn	a	path	on	this	hill	and	I	know	where	to	go	and	how	to	get	there.	I	wish
for	a	bigger	challenge	and	for	something	harder	to	scale.	I	wish	for	the	Hill	with
its	fallen	trees	and	ungroomed	forest.	Right	now,	I	think,	if	they	put	me	on	the
Hill	I	could	run	straight	up	it.	And	when	I	reached	the	top	there	would	be	a	new
view	and	maybe,	if	he	came	with	me	and	we	stood	there	together,	I	would	learn
even	more	about	Ky.

I	can’t	wait	to	see	him	and	ask	him	about	his	story.	Will	he	have	more	for	me?

I	burst	through	the	trees	and	grin	at	the	Officer.

“Got	some	competition	for	your	spot	today,”	he	says	as	he	records	my	climbing
time	on	the	datapod.

What	does	he	mean?	I	turn	to	see	Ky.	A	girl	sits	next	to	him,	bright	golden	hair
streaming	down	her	back.	Livy.

Ky	laughs	at	something	she	says.	He	makes	no	move,	no	gesture	to	indicate	that
he	wants	me	to	come	sit	by	him.	He	doesn’t	even	look	at	me.	Livy’s	taken	my
place.	I	take	a	step	forward	to	get	it	back.

Livy	holds	out	a	stick	to	Ky.	He	doesn’t	even	hesitate.	He	takes	hold	of	it	right
above	her	hand,	and	I	see	him	helping	her	make	swirling	motions	in	the	dirt.

Is	he	teaching	her	to	write?

My	one	step	forward	becomes	many	steps	back	as	I	turn	and	walk	away	from	it
all.	From	the	glint	of	sunlight	on	her	hair;	from	their	hands,	almost-touching,
writing	letters	in	the	dirt;	from	Ky’s	eyes	looking	away	from	me;	from	the	spot
in	the	sun	with	wind	and	whispered	words	that	are	supposed	to	be	mine.

How	can	I	talk	to	Ky	with	her	sitting	right	there?	How	can	I	learn	how	to	write?
How	can	I	get	more	of	his	words?

The	answer	is	simple:	I	can’t.

134
The	answer	is	simple:	I	can’t.

Back	down	at	the	bottom	of	the	hill	the	Officer	gives	us	a	speech.	“Tomorrow
will	be	different,”	he	tells	us.	“Stay	at	the	Arboretum	air-train	stop	when	you
arrive	and	wait	for	me	so	I	can	lead	you	to	the	new	site.	We’re	finished	with	this
hill.”

“Finally,”	Ky	 says	behind	me	in	a	voice	so	quiet	only	I	can	hear.	“I	was
beginning	to	feel	like	Sisyphus.”

I	don’t	know	who	Sisyphus	is.	I	want	to	turn	around	and	ask	Ky,	but	I	don’t.	He
taught	Livy	to	write.	Is	he	telling	her	his	story,	too?	Did	I	trick	myself	into
thinking	I	was	special	to	him?	Perhaps	many	girls	know	Ky’s	story	and	have
fallen	for	the	gift	of	writing	their	names.

Even	as	I	think	these	things	I	know	they	are	wrong,	but	I	can’t	clear	my	mind	of
the	sight	of	his	hand	guiding	hers.

The	Officer	blows	his	whistle	to	dismiss	us.	I	walk	away,	staying	slightly
separate	from	everyone	else.	I’ve	walked	a	few	steps	when	I	hear	Ky	behind	me.

“Anything	you	want	to	tell	me?”	he	asks	softly.	I	know	what	he’s	asking.	He
wants	to	hear	more	of	the	poem.

I	shake	my	head	no,	turn	my	face	away.	He	didn’t	have	any	words	for	me.	Why
should	I	give	him	any	of	mine?

I	wish	my	mother	weren’t	gone.	The	timing	of	this	trip	is	strange—summer	is
the	busiest	season	at	the	Arboretum,	so	many	plants	to	tend—and	I	miss	her	for
selfish	reasons,	too.	How	am	I	supposed	to	get	ready	for	my	first	official	outing
with	Xander	without	her?

I	put	on	a	clean	pair	of	plainclothes,	wishing	that	I	still	had	the	green	dress.	If	I
did,	I	would	wear	it	again	to	remind	both	Xander	and	me	of	what	everything	was
like	just	over	a	month	ago.

When	I	come	out	into	the	foyer,	my	father	and	my	brother	wait	for	me.	“You
look	beautiful,”	my	father	says.

“You	look	all	right,”	Bram	says.

135
“Thanks,”	I	tell	him,	rolling	my	eyes.	Bram	says	this	every	time	I	go	somewhere.
Even	on	the	night	of	the	Match	Banquet,	he	said	the	same	thing.	I	like	to	think
he	said	it	with	more	sincerity,	though.

“Your	mother’s	going	to	try	to	call	tonight.	She	wants	to	hear	all	about	the
evening,”	my	father	says.

“I	hope	she	can.”	The	idea	of	talking	with	my	mother	comforts	me.

The	dinner	chime	sounds	in	the	kitchen.	“Time	to	eat,”	my	father	says,	putting
his	arm	around	me.	“Would	you	rather	we	waited	here	with	you	or	got	out	of	the
way?”

Bram	is	already	halfway	to	the	kitchen.	I	smile	at	my	father.	“You	should	go	eat
with	Bram.	I’ll	be	fine.”

My	father	gives	me	a	kiss	on	the	cheek.	“I’ll	be	back	as	soon	as	the	doorbell
rings.”	He’s	a	little	wary	about	the	Official,	too.	I	imagine	my	father	coming	to
the	door	and	saying	politely,	“I’m	sorry,	sir.	Cassia	won’t	be	able	to	go	tonight.”
I	imagine	him	smiling	at	Xander	so	that	Xander	knows	he’s	not	the	one	my
father’s	worried	about.	And	then	I	picture	my	father	closing	the	door	gently	but
firmly	and	keeping	me	safe	inside	this	house.	Inside	these	walls	where	I	have
been	safe	for	so	long.

But	this	house	isn’t	safe	anymore,	I	remind	myself.	This	house	is	where	I	first
saw	Ky’s	face	on	a	microcard.	Where	they	searched	my	father.

Is	there	a	safe	place	anywhere	in	this	Borough?	In	this	City,	this	Province,	this
world?

I	resist	the	urge	to	repeat	the	words	of	Ky’s	story	to	myself	while	I	wait.	He	is
already	in	my	mind	far	too	much	and	I	don’t	want	him	coming	along	tonight.

The	doorbell	rings.	Xander.	And	the	Official.

I	don’t	think	I’m	ready	to	do	this	and	I	don’t	know	why.	Or	rather,	I	do	know
why,	but	I	can’t	look	at	it	too	closely	right	now	or	I	know	it	will	change
everything.	Everything.

Outside	the	door,	Xander	waits	for	me.	It	strikes	me	that	this	symbolizes	what	is
wrong	here.	No	one	can	ever	really	come	in,	and	when	it’s	time	to	let	them,	we

136
wrong	here.	No	one	can	ever	really	come	in,	and	when	it’s	time	to	 let	them,	we
don’t	know	 how.

I	take	a	deep	breath	and	open	the	door.

“Where	are	we	going?”	I	 ask	on	the	air	train.	The	three	of	us	sit	side	by	side—
me,	Xander,	and	our	bored-looking	Official,	 who	 is	youngish	and	wears	the	most
perfectly	ironed	uniform	 I’ve	 ever	seen.

The	Official	 answers.	“Your	meals	have	been	sent	to	a	private	dining	hall.	We’ll
eat	dinner	there	and	then	I’ll	escort	you	both	back	to	your	homes.”	 He	rarely
makes	eye	contact	with	us,	choosing	instead	to	look	past	us,	out	the	windows.	I
don’t	know	 whether	he	intends	to	make	us	feel	at	ease	or	uncomfortable.	So	far
he’s	doing	the	latter.

A	private	dining	 hall?	I	look	 over	at	Xander.	He	raises	his	eyebrows	at	me	and
mouths	the	words	“Why	 bother?”	and	gestures	to	the	Official.	I	 try	not	to	laugh.
Xander’s	right.	Why	 go	to	all	the	trouble	 of	eating	at	a	private	dining	hall	 when
this	outing	is	anything	but	 private?

I	start	to	feel	sorry	for	 all	the	Matchees	who	have	to	have	their	first
conversations	monitored	by	the	Officials	 over	the	ports.	At	least	Xander	and	I
have	had	thousands	of	conversations	before.

The	dining	hall	is	a	small	building	 one	air-train	 stop	over,	a	place	where	Singles
sometimes	go,	where	our	parents	can	arrange	to	have	meals	in	the	evening	now
and	then	if	they’d	like	 to	get	away.	“It	 looks	nice,”	 I	say	in	a	lame	attempt	at
conversation	as	we	approach	the	hall.	A	small	greenspace	surrounds	the	redbrick
box	of	a	building.	 In	the	greenspace,	I	catch	sight	of	a	flower	bed	full	 of	the
ever-present	newroses	and	also	some	kind	of	ethereal	wildflower.

And	then	a	memory	so	specific	and	so	clear	that	it’s	hard	to	believe	I	haven’t
thought	of	it	until	 now	comes	to	mind.	I	 remember	a	night	when	I	was	much
younger	and	my	parents	returned	from	an	evening	out.	Grandfather	had	come	to
stay	with	Bram	and	me,	and	I	heard	my	parents	talking	with	 him	before	my
father	went	to	Bram’s	room	 and	my	mother	came	into	mine.	A	soft	pink-and-
yellow	bloom	 fell	out	 of	her	hair	when	she	leaned	over	to	pull	up	my	blankets.
She	tucked	it	quickly	back	behind	her	ear	out	of	sight,	and	I	 was	too	sleepy	to
ask	how	she	came	by	the	blossom.	At	the	time,	it	confused	me	as	I	drifted	off	to
sleep:	How	did	she	get	the	flower	when	picking	 them	is	forbidden?	I	forgot	 the
question	in	my	dreams	and	never	asked	it	upon	waking.

137
question	in	my	dreams	and	never	asked	it	upon	waking.

Now	I	know	 the	answer:	My	father	sometimes	bends	the	rules	for	those	he	loves.
For	my	mother.	For	Grandfather.	My	 father	is	a	little	 like	Xander,	the	night	 that
he	bent	the	rules	to	help	Em.

Xander	takes	my	arm,	bringing	me	back	into	the	present.	When	he	does,	I	can’t
help	myself;	I	glance	over	at	the	Official.	 He	doesn’t	 say	anything.

The	inside	of	the	dining	hall	 looks	nicer	than	a	regular	meal	hall,	too.	“Look,”
Xander	says.	Flickering	lights	 in	the	center	of	each	table	simulate	an	old
romantic	system	of	lighting,	 candles.

People	look	at	us	as	we	pass	among	the	tables.	We’re	clearly	the	youngest
patrons	there.	Most	are	our	parents’	age	or	young	couples	several	years	older
than	Xander	and	me,	couples	newly	Contracted.	I	see	a	few	people	who	are
probably	Singles	out	on	recreational	dates,	but	not	many.	The	Boroughs	in	this
area	are	primarily	family	 boroughs,	full	 of	parents	and	contracted	couples	and
youth	under	the	age	of	twenty-one.

Xander	notices	the	staring	and	stares	back,	his	arm	still	linked	with	mine.	 Under
his	breath	he	whispers	to	me,	“At	least	everyone	at	school	is	pretty	much	over
our	Match	by	now.	I	 hate	the	watching.”

“I	do,	too.”	 Thankfully,	 the	Official	  doesn’t	gawk	at	us.	He	leads	the	way
through	the	tables	and	finds	one	marked	with	our	names	near	the	back.	The
waiter	arrives	with	 our	food	almost	as	soon	as	we	sit	down.

The	simulated	candlelight	flickers	 across	the	round	black	metal	table	in	front	of
me.	No	tablecloths,	and	the	food	is	regulation	food—we’ll	  eat	the	same	thing
here	that	we’d	eat	at	home.	That’s	why	it’s	 necessary	to	book	in	advance;	so	the
nutrition	personnel	can	get	your	meal	to	the	right	spot.	Obviously	 dining	 here
doesn’t	compare	at	all	to	the	Match	Banquet	at	City	Hall,	 but	it’s	 the	second-
nicest	place	I’ve	ever	eaten	in	my	life.

“The	food’s	 good	and	hot,”	Xander	says	as	the	steam	escapes	from	his	foilware
container.	He	peels	back	the	lid	and	peers	inside.	“Look	at	my	portion.	 They
want	me	to	bulk	up	so	they	keep	giving	me	more	and	more.”

I	glance	over	at	Xander’s	portion	of	 noodles	with	sauce.	It	is	enormous.	“Can

138
you	eat	all	of	that?”

“Are	you	 joking?	Of	 course	I	can.”	Xander	acts	offended.

I	peel	back	the	foilware	and	look	 at	my	portion.	Next	 to	Xander’s,	it	seems
minuscule.	Maybe	I’m	 making	this	up,	but	my	 portions	seem	to	be	smaller
lately.	I’m	 not	sure	why.	The	hiking	 and	running	on	the	tracker	keep	me	fit.	If
anything,	I	should	be	getting	more	food,	not	 less.

It	must	be	my	imagination.

The	Official,	 looking	 even	less	interested	than	before,	twists	the	noodles	from
his	container	on	a	fork	and	looks	around	the	room	at	the	other	patrons.	His	food
is	exactly	the	same	as	ours.	I	guess	the	myths	about	certain	departments’
Officials	 eating	better	than	anyone	else	aren’t	true.	Not	when	they	eat	in	public,
anyway.

“How’s	 hiking	 going?”	Xander	asks	me,	popping	a	bite	of	noodles	into	his
mouth.

“I	like	 it,”	 I	answer	honestly.	Except	for	today.

“Even	more	than	swimming?”	 Xander	teases	me.	“Not	that	you	ever	did	much	of
that,	I	guess.	Sitting	there	on	the	edge.”

“I	swam,”	 I	tell	 him,	teasing	back.	“Sometimes.	Anyway.	 I	do	like	 it	more	than
being	at	the	pool.”

“That’s	not	 possible,”	Xander	says.	“Swimming	 is	the	best.	I	heard	that	all
you’ve	been	doing	at	hiking	 is	climbing	 that	same	little	hill	 over	and	over.”

“All	 you	do	at	swimming	 is	swim	around	the	same	little	pool	 over	and	over.”

“That’s	different.	 Water’s	 always	moving.	It’s	 never	the	same.”

Xander’s	comment	reminds	me	of	what	Ky	 said	in	the	music	hall	about	the
songs.	“I	guess	that’s	true.	But	the	hill	is	 always	moving,	too.	The	wind	 moves
things,	and	the	plants	grow	and	change	…”	I	fall	 silent.	Our	neatly	pressed
Official	 tilts	his	 head,	listening	to	our	conversation.	That’s	why	 he’s	here,	isn’t
it?

139
I	move	my	food	around	and	the	motion	makes	me	think	of	writing	with	Ky.	One
of	the	noodles	is	curved	like	a	C.	Don’t.	I	have	to	stop	thinking	about	Ky.

Some	of	my	food	stubbornly	refuses	to	wrap	around	my	fork.	I	twirl	the	utensil
around	and	around	and	finally	give	up	and	shove	some	noodles	into	my	mouth,
the	ends	sticking	out.	I	have	to	slurp	them	in.

Embarrassing.	For	some	reason	my	eyes	fill	with	tears.	I	put	down	my	fork	and
Xander	reaches	over	to	straighten	it.	As	he	does,	he	looks	straight	into	my	eyes,
and	I	can	see	the	question	there	as	though	he	speaks	it	out	loud:	What’s	wrong?

Shaking	my	head	slightly,	I	smile	back	at	him.	Nothing.

I	glance	over	at	our	Official.	He’s	momentarily	distracted,	listening	to	something
on	his	earpiece.	Of	course.	He	is	still	on	duty.

“Xander,	why	didn’t	you—you	know—kiss	me	the	other	night?”	I	ask	suddenly,
since	the	Official	isn’t	listening	right	at	this	moment.	I	should	be	embarrassed,
but	I’m	not.	I	want	to	know.

“There	were	too	many	people	watching.”	Xander	sounds	surprised.	“I	know	the
Officials	don’t	care,	since	we’re	Matched,	but,	you	know.”	He	inclines	his	head
slightly	toward	the	Official	next	to	us.	“It’s	not	the	same	when	you’re	being
watched.”

“How	could	you	tell?”

“Haven’t	you	noticed	all	the	Officials	on	our	street	lately?”

“Watching	my	house?”

Xander	raises	his	eyebrows.	“Why	would	they	be	watching	your	house?”

Because	I	read	things	I	shouldn’t	read	and	learn	things	I’m	not	meant	to	know
and	I	might	be	falling	in	love	with	someone	else.	What	I	say	is,	“My	father	…”	I
let	my	voice	trail	off.

Xander	flushes.	“Of	course.	I	should	have	realized	.	.	.	It’s	not	that,	at	least	I
don’t	think	so.	These	are	basic-level	Officials,	police	officers.	They’ve	been
patrolling	a	lot	more	lately	and	not	just	in	our	Borough.	In	all	the	Boroughs.”

140
Our	street	was	full	of	Officials	that	night	and	I	didn’t	even	know.	Ky	must	have
known.	Maybe	that’s	why	he	wouldn’t	come	up	the	porch	steps.	Maybe	that’s
why	he	never	touches	me.	He’s	afraid	of	being	caught.

Or	maybe	it’s	even	more	simple	than	that.	Maybe	he	never	wants	to	touch	me.
Perhaps	to	Ky	I	am	only	a	friend.	A	friend	who	finally	wants	to	know	his	story,
nothing	more.

And	at	first	that’s	who	I	was.	I	wanted	to	know	more	about	this	boy	who	lives
among	us,	but	who	never	truly	speaks.	More	about	what	happened	before.	I
wanted	to	know	more	about	my	mistaken	Match.	But	now	I	feel	like	finding	out
about	him	is	one	of	the	ways	I	find	out	about	myself.	I	did	not	expect	to	love	his
words.	I	did	not	expect	to	find	myself	in	them.

Is	falling	in	love	with	someone’s	story	the	same	thing	as	falling	in	love	with	the
person	himself?

141
                                            CHAPTER	        18

Another	air	car	sits	on	our	street,	this	time	in	front	of	Em’s	house.	“What’s	going
on?��	 I	ask	Xander,	whose	eyes	widen	with	fear.	The	Official	with	us	looks
interested	but	not	surprised.	I	resist	the	urge	to	grab	his	shirtfront	tight,	wrinkling
it	in	my	hands.	I	hold	back	from	hissing,	“Why	do	you	watch	us?	What	do	you
know?”

The	door	to	Em’s	house	opens	and	three	Officials	come	out.	Our	Official	turns
to	Xander	and	me	and	says,	almost	abruptly,	“I	hope	you	both	had	an	enjoyable
evening.	I’ll	file	the	report	with	the	Matching	Committee	first	thing	tomorrow.”

“Thank	you,”	I	say	automatically	as	he	turns	back	to	the	air-train	stop,	although	I
don’t	know	why.	I	don’t	feel	grateful.

The	Officials	at	Em’s	house	walk	across	her	yard	and	go	to	the	house	next	door.
They	hold	a	container,	something	Society-issued,	and	they’re	not	smiling.	In
fact,	if	I	had	to	say	how	they	looked,	I	would	say	they	looked	sad.	I	don’t	like	it.
“Should	we	go	see	if	Em	is	all	right?”	I	ask,	and	as	I	do,	she	opens	her	front	door
and	looks	out.	She	sees	Xander	and	me	and	hurries	across	the	yard	to	meet	us.

“Cassia,	it’s	all	my	fault.	It’s	all	my	fault!”	Em’s	voice	shakes,	and	tears	mark
her	face.

“What’s	your	fault,	Em?	What	happened?”	I	glance	next	door	to	make	sure	the
Officials	aren’t	watching	us,	but	they’ve	already	disappeared	inside.	Em’s
neighbors	opened	the	door	before	the	Officials	had	to	knock,	as	though	they
were	expected.

“What’s	this	about?”	Xander’s	voice	sounds	harsh	and	I	send	him	a	look,	trying
to	tell	him	to	be	patient.

Em’s	face	grows	even	paler	and	she	grabs	my	arm.	Her	voice	is	hushed.	“The
Officials	are	collecting	all	the	artifacts.”

“What?”

Em’s	lips	tremble.	“They	said	that	I’d	been	seen	with	an	artifact	at	the	Match
Banquet,	and	they’d	come	to	collect	it.	I	told	them	it	wasn’t	mine,	I’d	borrowed

142
Banquet,	and	they’d	come	to	collect	it.	I	told	them	it	wasn’t	mine,	I’d	borrowed
it	from	you	and	given	it	back.”	She	swallows	and	I	remember	the	night	of	the
green	tablet.	I	put	my	arm	around	her	and	glance	at	Xander.	Em	keeps	speaking,
her	voice	shaky.	“I	shouldn’t	have	told	them.	But	I	was	so	scared!	Now	they’re
going	to	take	it	from	you.	They’re	going	house	to	house.”

House	to	house.	They’ll	be	at	mine	soon.	I	want	to	comfort	Em,	but	I	have	to	try
to	save	my	artifact,	futile	as	the	effort	might	be.	I	have	to	go	home.	I	give	Em	a
hug.	“Em,	it’s	not	your	fault.	Even	if	you	hadn’t	told	them,	they	knew	I	had	an
artifact.	It’s	registered,	and	I	took	it	to	my	Banquet.”

Then	I	remember	something,	and	fear	washes	over	me.	Ky’s	artifact.	I	still	have
it	tucked	away	in	my	closet.	The	Officials	might	know	about	my	artifact,	but
they	don’t	know	about	Ky’s.	It	could	get	us	both	in	trouble.

How	can	I	hide	it?

“I	have	to	go	home,”	I	say,	out	loud	this	time.	I	pull	my	arm	away	from	Em’s
shoulders	and	turn	toward	my	house.	How	long	do	I	have	before	the	Officials	get
there?	Five	minutes?	Ten?

Em	starts	crying	harder,	but	I	don’t	have	time	to	reassure	her	again.	I	walk	as
quickly	as	I	can	without	drawing	attention.	A	few	steps	later	and	Xander	is	next
to	me,	linking	his	arm	in	mine	as	if	we	have	been	on	a	normal	outing	and	are	on
our	way	home.

“Cassia,”	he	says.	I	don’t	look	at	him.	I	can’t	stop	thinking	about	all	that	could
be	lost	in	a	few	short	moments.	Ky	is	already	an	Aberration.	If	they	find	out	that
he	has	an	artifact,	will	he	become	an	Anomaly?

I	could	cover	up	for	him.	I	could	say	that	it’s	mine	and	I	found	it	when	we	hiked
in	the	woods.	Would	they	believe	me?

“Cassia,”	Xander	says	again.	“I	can	hide	it	for	you.	Say	you’ve	lost	it.	Make
your	story	convincing.”

“I	can’t	let	you	do	that	for	me.”

“You	can.	I’ll	wait	for	you	outside	while	you	grab	the	compact.	It’s	small
enough	to	fit	in	your	hand,	right?”	I	nod.	“When	you	come	back	out,	act	like
you’re	crazy	about	me,	like	you	hate	saying	good-bye.	Throw	your	arms	around
me.	Drop	it	down	my	shirt.	I’ll	take	care	of	it	after	that.”

143
me.	Drop	it	down	my	shirt.	I’ll	take	care	of	it	after	that.”

I’ve	never	seen	this	side	of	Xander	before,	I	think,	and	then	I	instantly	realize
that	I	have.	When	he	plays	the	games	he’s	like	this.	Cool	and	calm	and	full	of
strategy	and	daring.	And	in	the	games	at	least,	his	risks	almost	always	pay	off.

“Xander,	this	isn’t	a	game.”

“I	know	that.”	His	face	looks	grim.	“I’ll	be	careful.”

“Are	you	sure?”	I	shouldn’t	let	him	do	this.	It’s	weak	to	consider	it.	But	still:	He
can	take	my	compact	for	me.	He	would	save	it	for	me.	He	would	risk	this	for	me.

“I’m	sure.”

Once	I	close	the	front	door	behind	me,	I	run	down	the	hall	to	my	room	as	fast	as
I	can.	No	one	from	my	family	sees	me,	for	which	I’m	grateful.	With	shaking
hands	I	tear	open	my	closet	door	and	push	the	sets	of	plainclothes	along	the	rack
until	I	find	the	pair	where	I’ve	hidden	Ky’s	artifact	inside	the	pocket.	I	open	the
brown	paper	envelope	and	tip	it	so	that	the	arrow	in	its	case	slides	out.	I	shove
the	envelope	into	my	pocket;	I	grab	the	compact	from	the	shelf	and	look	at	the
two	items	in	my	hands.

Golden	and	beautiful.	In	spite	of	myself,	I’m	tempted	to	give	Xander	my
compact	instead	of	Ky’s	spinning	arrow,	but	I	put	the	compact	onto	my	bed	and
close	my	hand	over	Ky’s	artifact.	Saving	my	compact	would	be	selfish.	It	would
only	save	a	thing.	But	saving	Ky’s	artifact	saves	both	of	us	from	questioning	and
him	from	becoming	an	Anomaly.	And	how	can	I	let	them	take	the	last	piece	of
his	old	life?

This	is	safer	for	Xander,	too.	They	don’t	know	Ky’s	artifact	exists,	so	hopefully
they	won’t	miss	it.	My	compact	will	be	accounted	for	and	taken	away,	as
expected,	so	they	won’t	look	for	it	or	wonder	if	I’ve	given	it	to	someone	else.

I	run	back	down	the	hall	and	open	the	front	door.

“Xander,	wait!”	I	call	out	to	him,	trying	to	make	my	voice	light.	“Aren’t	you
going	to	kiss	me	good	night?”

Xander	turns,	his	face	open	and	natural.	I	don’t	think	anyone	else	could	see	the
glint	of	cunning	in	his	eyes,	but	I	know	him	so	well.

144
glint	of	cunning	in	his	eyes,	but	I	know	him	so	well.

I	skip	down	the	steps	and	he	holds	out	his	arms	to	me.	We	embrace,	his	hands	at
the	small	of	my	back	and	my	arms	around	his	neck.	I	place	my	hand	just	under
the	collar	of	his	plainclothes	and	open	my	fingers.	The	artifact	slides	down	his
back	and	my	palm	lies	flat	against	his	warm	skin.	We	look	each	other	straight	in
the	eyes	for	a	moment	and	then	I	lean	close	to	his	ear.

“Don’t	open	it,”	I	whisper	to	Xander.	“Don’t	keep	it	in	your	house.	Bury	it	or
hide	it	somewhere.	It’s	not	what	you	think.”

Xander	nods.

“Thank	you,”	I	say,	and	then	I	kiss	him	right	on	the	lips	and	I	mean	that	kiss.
Even	though	I	know	I’m	falling	for	Ky	it	is	impossible	not	to	love	Xander	for
everything	he	is	and	everything	he	does.

“Cassia!”	Bram	calls	from	the	steps.

Bram.	He’s	going	to	lose	something	today,	too.	I	think	of	Grandfather’s	watch
and	anger	rises	in	me.	Do	they	have	to	take	everything?

Xander	breaks	away	from	our	embrace.	He	has	to	hurry	to	hide	the	artifact
before	they	get	to	his	house.	“Good-bye,”	he	says	with	a	smile.

“Good-bye,”	I	call	back.

“Cassia!”	Bram	calls	again,	fear	in	his	voice.	I	glance	back	down	the	street,	but	I
don’t	see	any	Officials	yet.	They	must	still	be	in	one	of	the	houses	between	mine
and	Em’s.

“Hi,	Bram,”	I	say,	attempting	to	sound	casual.	It’s	better	for	us	all	if	he	doesn’t
suspect	what	Xander	and	I	have	done.	“Where’s—”

“They’re	taking	the	artifacts,”	Bram	says,	voice	shaking.	“They	called	Papa	in	to
help	with	the	collection.”

Of	course.	I	should	have	realized.	They	need	someone	like	him	to	help
determine	if	the	artifacts	are	real	or	false.	Another	fear	strikes	me.	Was	he
supposed	to	take	our	artifacts?	Did	he	pretend	mine	was	lost?	Did	he	lie	for
Bram	or	me?	How	many	stupid	mistakes	is	he	willing	to	make	for	those	he

145
loves?

“Oh	no,”	I	say,	trying	to	act	as	though	all	of	this	is	new	to	me.	Hopefully	Bram
won’t	find	out	that	Em	told	me	earlier.	“Did	he	take	ours	with	him?”

“No,”	Bram	says.	“They	won’t	let	anyone	collect	from	their	own	families.”

“Did	he	know	this	was	going	to	happen?”

“No.	When	the	call	came	over	the	port	he	was	shocked.	But	he	had	to	report
right	away.	He	told	me	to	listen	to	the	Officials	and	not	to	worry.”

I	want	to	put	my	arm	around	Bram	and	comfort	him	because	he	is	about	to	lose
something,	something	important.	So	I	do.	I	hold	onto	my	brother	and	for	the	first
time	in	years	he	hugs	me	back,	tight,	the	way	he	did	when	he	was	a	little	boy	and
I	was	the	big	sister	he	admired	more	than	anyone	else	in	the	world.	I	wish	I
could	have	saved	his	watch,	but	it	was	the	wrong	color,	silver	instead	of	gold.
And	the	Officials	know	about	it.	There	was	nothing	I	could	do,	I	tell	myself,
trying	to	believe	it.

We	hold	on	for	a	few	seconds	and	then	I	pull	away	and	look	Bram	in	the	eyes.
“Go	get	it,”	I	say	to	him.	“Go	look	at	it	for	the	last	few	minutes	you	have	and
remember	it.	Remember	it.”

Bram	doesn’t	pretend	to	hide	the	tears	in	his	eyes	now.

“Bram,”	I	say,	and	I	hug	him	again.	“Bram.	Something	bad	could	have	happened
to	the	watch	even	without	this.	You	could	have	lost	it.	You	could	have	broken	it.
But	this	way	you	can	look	at	it	one	last	time.	It’s	never	really	lost	to	you	as	long
as	you	remember	it.”

“Can’t	I	try	to	hide	it?”	Bram	asks.	He	blinks	and	a	tear	escapes.	He	brushes	it
away	angrily.	“Will	you	help	me?”

“No,	Bram,”	I	say	gently.	“I	wish	we	could,	but	it’s	too	dangerous.”	What	I	risk
has	a	limit.	I	won’t	risk	Bram.



When	the	Officials	arrive	at	our	house	and	come	in	the	door	they	find	Bram	and
me	sitting	on	the	divan	side	by	side.	Bram	holds	silver;	I	hold	gold;	we	both	look

146
me	sitting	on	the	divan	side	by	side.	Bram	holds	silver;	 I	hold	gold;	 we	both	look
up.	But	then	Bram’s	gaze	flickers	back	to	the	polished	silver	 surface	in	his	hands
and	I	glance	down	at	the	gold	one	in	mine.

My	face	looks	back	at	me,	distorted	by	the	curve	of	the	compact’s	 surface,	the
way	it	was	at	the	Match	Banquet.	Then,	the	question	I	asked	myself	was:	Do	I
look	pretty?

Now	the	question	I	ask	is:	Do	I	 look	strong?

As	I	look	 at	my	eyes	and	the	set	of	my	jaw,	it	seems	to	me	that	the	answer	is	yes.

A	short,	balding	Official	  speaks	first.	“The	Government	has	decided	that
artifacts	promote	inequality	 among	members	of	Society,”	he	says.	“We	request
that	everyone	turn	in	their	artifacts	for	 catalog	and	display	at	the	Museum	in
each	City.”

“Our	records	indicate	that	there	are	two	legal	artifacts	in	 this	residence,”	a	tall
Official	 adds.	Does	he	stress	the	word	legal,	or	is	it	my	imagination?	“One	silver
watch,	one	gold	compact.”

I	don’t	say	anything	and	neither	does	Bram.

“Are	these	the	artifacts?”	the	bald	Official	  asks,	looking	at	the	items	we	hold.	He
seems	weary.	This	must	be	a	terrible	job.	I	imagine	my	father	taking	 artifacts
from	people—old	 people	like	Grandfather,	children	like	 Bram—and	I	 feel	sick.

I	nod.	“Do	 you	want	them	now?”

“You	 may	retain	them	for	a	few	more	minutes.	We	are	required	to	do	a	quick
search	of	the	house.”

Bram	and	I	both	sit	quietly	 while	they	go	through	 our	house.	It	doesn’t	take	long.

“Nothing	 valuable	here,”	one	of	them	says	quietly	to	another	in	the	hallway.

My	heart	is	on	fire	 and	I	have	to	keep	my	mouth	shut	tight	so	that	I	don’t	 try	to
burn	these	Officials	with	 the	flames.	That’s	what	you	think,	 I	say	to	myself.	You
think	there’s	nothing	here	because	we’re	not	putting	 up	a	fight.	But	there	are
words	in	our	heads	that	no	one	else	knows.	And	my	grandfather	died	on	his
terms,	not	yours.	We	have	things	of	value	but	you	can	never	find	them	because

147
you	don’t	even	know	how	to	look.

They	walk	back	into	 the	room	and	I	stand	up.	Bram	does,	too.	The	Officials
wave	detection	instruments	around	us	to	make	sure	we	haven’t	concealed
anything	on	our	persons.	Of	course,	they	find	nothing.

The	female	Official	 comes	forward	and	I	see	a	pale	band	of	skin	on	her	finger,
where	a	ring	must	have	been.	She	lost	something	today,	too.	I	hold	out	the
compact,	thinking	about	how	my	 artifact	has	traveled	from	a	time	before	the
Society,	from	one	family	 member	to	another,	to	me.	And	now	I	 have	to	let	it	go.

The	Official	 takes	my	compact;	she	takes	the	watch	from	Bram.	“You	 can	come
see	them	in	the	Museum.	Any	time	you	like.”

“It’s	 not	the	same,”	he	says,	and	then	he	straightens	his	shoulders.	And	oh,	I	see
Grandfather,	I	do.	My	 heart	swells	with	the	thought	that	perhaps	he	isn’t
completely	gone	after	all.	“You	 can	take	it,”	 Bram	says,	“but	it	 will	 always	be
mine.”

Bram	goes	to	his	room.	The	heaviness	in	his	step	and	the	way	he	closes	the	door
tells	me	that	he	wants	to	be	alone.

I	feel	like	 punching	something	but	I	shove	my	hands	into	my	pockets	instead.
There	I	find	the	brown	 paper	envelope:	a	crumpled	shell	that	once	contained
something	valuable	and	beautiful.	It’s	 only	an	envelope,	not	an	artifact;	it	didn’t
even	register	on	the	Officials’	 detection	instruments.	I	pull	 it	out	and	tear	it	in
half,	angrily.	 I	want	to	rip	 it	up	and	shred	it	to	pieces.	The	jagged	line	along	the
envelope	pleases	me.	It	feels	good	to	destroy.	I	get	ready	to	make	another
wound.	I	look	 down	for	another	place	to	tear.

My	breath	catches	in	my	throat	when	I	see	what	I	almost	ruined.

Another	part	of	Ky’s	 story.	There’s	something	else	the	Officials	 have	missed.

Drowning,	drinking	 the	words	at	the	top	say,	the	letters	strong	and	beautiful,	like
he	is.	I	think	of	 his	hand	writing	them,	his	skin	 brushing	the	napkin.	I	bite	my	 lip
and	look	at	the	picture	below.

Two	Kys	again,	the	younger	one,	and	the	one	now,	both	of	them	with	 hands	still
cupped.	The	background	in	the	first	one	is	a	spare,	bare	landscape,	the	bones	of
rocks	rising	behind	Ky.	 In	the	second	picture,	he’s	here	in	the	Borough.	I	see	a

148
rocks	rising	behind	Ky.	 In	the	second	picture,	he’s	here	in	the	Borough.	I	see	a
maple	tree	behind	him.	Rain	falls	in	both	 pictures,	but	in	the	first	one	his	mouth
is	open,	his	head	tipped	back,	he	drinks	from	the	sky.	In	the	second	one	his	head
is	down,	his	eyes	panicked,	the	rain	thick	around	him,	streaming	off	 him	like	 a
waterfall.	There	is	too	much	rain	 here.	He	could	drown.

When	it	rains,	I	remember	are	the	words	written	at	the	bottom.

I	look	out	the	window	 where	the	burning	evening	sun	sets	in	a	clear	sky.	There	is
no	trace	of	clouds,	but	I	promise	myself	that	when	it	 rains	I	will	 remember	too.
This	paper,	these	pictures	and	words.	This	piece	of	him.

149
                                            CHAPTER	        19

The	air	train	into	the	City	the	next	morning	is	almost	silent.	No	one	wants	to	talk
about	what	happened	in	the	Borough	last	night.	Those	who	gave	up	their
artifacts	are	hushed	with	the	loss;	those	who	never	had	any	to	begin	with	are
quiet	out	of	respect.	Or,	perhaps,	out	of	satisfaction,	because	now	everything	has
been	equalized.

Before	he	gets	off	at	his	stop	for	swimming,	Xander	leans	over	to	kiss	my	cheek
and	says	softly,	“Under	the	newroses	in	front	of	Ky’s	house.”

He	steps	off	the	air	train	and	disappears	with	the	other	students	while	I	ride	on
toward	the	Arboretum.	Questions	crowd	my	mind:	How	did	Xander	hide	the
artifact	in	the	Markhams’	flower	bed	unseen?	Does	he	know	it	belongs	to	Ky	or
is	it	coincidence	that	he	picked	the	Markhams’	house	as	the	hiding	place?

Does	he	know	what	I’m	starting	to	feel	for	Ky?

Whatever	Xander	knows	or	guesses,	one	thing	is	certain:	He	couldn’t	have
picked	a	better	hiding	place.	We’re	all	charged	with	keeping	our	yards	neat	and
clean.	If	Ky	digs	in	his	own	yard,	no	one	will	suspect	anything.	I	just	have	to	tell
him	where	to	look.

Like	everyone	else,	Ky	stares	out	the	window	as	we	glide	toward	the	Arboretum.
Did	he	see	Xander’s	kiss?	Did	he	care?	He	does	not	meet	my	eyes.

“We’re	pairing	off	for	this	next	round	of	hiking,”	the	Officer	says	once	we	reach
the	bottom	of	the	Hill.	“You	are	each	partnered	with	another	hiker	according	to
ability	assessed	by	analyzing	the	data	I	collected	from	your	earlier	hikes.	That
means	Ky	is	paired	with	Cassia;	Livy	is	paired	with	Tay	…”

Livy’s	face	falls	and	I	try	to	keep	mine	expressionless.

The	Officer	finishes	reading	his	list.	“You	have	a	different	goal	on	the	Hill,”	he
says.	“You	won’t	ever	see	the	top	here.	The	Society	has	asked	us	to	use	our
hiking	time	to	mark	obstacles	on	the	Hill.”	He	gestures	to	the	bags	piled	next	to
him.	They	hold	strips	of	red	cloth.	“Every	pair	takes	a	bag.	Tie	the	markers	on
branches	near	fallen	trees,	in	front	of	particularly	bad	thickets,	etc.	Later,	a
survey	crew	will	come	through.	They’re	going	to	clear	and	pave	a	path	on	the

150
survey	crew	will	 come	through.	They’re	going	 to	clear	and	pave	a	path	on	the
Hill.”

They’re	going	to	pave	the	Hill.	 At	 least	Grandfather	doesn’t	have	to	see	it.

“What	if	 we	run	out	of	cloths?”	 Lon	whines.	“They	 haven’t	 cleared	the	Hill	in
years.	There’ll	be	obstacles	everywhere!	We	might	as	well	mark	 every	tree	we
see.”

“If	 you	run	out	of	cloths,	 use	rocks	to	make	cairns,”	the	Officer	says.	He	turns	to
Ky.	“Do	 you	know	 how	to	make	a	cairn?”

There’s	the	briefest	of	hesitations	before	Ky	answers.	“Yes.”

“Show	them.”

Ky	gathers	a	few	rocks	from	the	ground	around	us	and	stacks	them,	largest	first,
in	a	small	pile.	His	hands	are	quick	and	sure,	the	way	they	are	when	he’s
teaching	me	to	write.	The	tower	looks	precarious	but	does	not	fall.

“See?	It’s	simple,”	 the	Officer	says.	“I’ll	  blow	my	 whistle	later	and	that	means
you	need	to	start	making	your	way	back.	You	blow	 your	whistles	 if	you	get
lost.”	He	gives	us	each	a	standard-issue	metal	whistle.	“It	shouldn’t	 be	hard.	Just
head	back	down	the	mountain	the	way	you	came.”

The	Officer’s	 thinly	 veiled	disgust	for	us	used	to	amuse	me.	Today,	I	understand
it.	I	feel	disgust	when	I	 think	of	 how	we	climb	 our	little	 hills	when	the	Officials
say	the	word.	How	we	hand	over	our	most	precious	items	at	their	bidding.	 How
we	never,	ever	fight.

We	are	barely	out	of	view	of	 the	others	when	Ky	turns	to	me	and	I	turn	to	him
and	for	a	moment	I	think	he	is	going	to	 touch	me.	I	sense,	more	than	see,	his
hand	move	slightly	and	then	drop	back	down.	I	feel	 a	disappointment	deeper
than	the	disappointment	I	felt	this	morning	 when	I	opened	my	closet	and	did	not
see	the	compact	resting	there.

“Are	you	 all	right?”	 he	asks.	“Last	night,	when	they	searched	the	houses—I
didn’t	know	 until	 after	I	came	home.”

“I’m	 fine.”

“My	 artifact	…”

151
“My	artifact	…”

Is	that	all	he	cares	about?	I	whisper	fiercely,	“It’s	in	your	flower	bed.	Buried
under	the	newroses.	Dig	it	up	and	then	you’ll	have	it	back.”

“I	don’t	care	about	the	artifact,”	he	says,	and	although	he	still	does	not	touch	me,
I	am	warmed	at	the	fire	in	his	eyes.	“I	couldn’t	sleep	all	night,	worrying	that	I’d
gotten	you	in	trouble.	I	care	about	you.”

Those	words	are	quiet	here	under	the	trees	but	they	sing	loudly	in	my	heart,
louder	than	all	the	Hundred	Songs	caroled	all	at	once.	And	his	eyes	are
shadowed	underneath,	from	thinking	about	me.	I	want	to	reach	up	and	touch	that
skin	under	his	eyes,	the	one	place	I’ve	seen	any	vulnerability	in	him,	make	him
feel	better.	And	then	I	could	run	my	fingers	there,	across	his	cheekbones,	down
to	his	lips,	to	the	place	where	his	jaw	meets	his	neck,	where	his	neck	meets	his
shoulder	line.	I	like	the	places	where	one	part	meets	another,	I	think,	eyes	to
cheek,	wrist	to	hands.	Somewhat	shocked	at	my	own	thoughts,	I	take	a	step
back.

“How	did	you—”

“Someone	helped	me.”

“Xander,”	he	says.

How	does	he	know?	“Xander,”	I	agree.

Neither	of	us	speaks	for	a	moment;	I	stand	back,	seeing	him	whole.	Then	he
turns	and	begins	to	walk	through	the	trees	again.	It	is	slow	going;	the	underbrush
grows	so	tangled	here	that	it’s	more	of	a	climb	than	a	hike.	Trees	that	fell	have
not	been	cleared	away	and	lie	like	giant	bones	across	the	forest	floor.

“Yesterday	…”	I	begin.	I	have	to	ask,	as	inconsequential	as	the	question	now
seems.	“Were	you	teaching	Livy	how	to	write?”

Ky	stops	again	and	looks	at	me.	His	eyes	seem	almost	green	under	the	canopy	of
the	trees.	“Of	course	not,”	he	says.	“She	wanted	to	know	what	we	were	doing.
She	saw	us	writing.	We	weren’t	careful	enough.”

I	feel	stupid	and	relieved.	“Oh.”

“I	told	her	I’d	been	showing	you	how	to	draw	the	trees.”	He	picks	up	a	stick	next

152
“I	told	her	I’d	been	showing	you	how	to	draw	the	trees.”	He	picks	up	a	stick	next
to	me	and	starts	moving	it	around	to	make	a	pattern	that	does	look	remarkably
like	leaves.	Then	he	places	the	stick	down	as	the	trunk	of	the	tree.	I	keep	looking
at	his	hands	after	he	has	finished,	not	sure	what	else	to	do.

“No	one	draws	once	they’re	out	of	First	School.”

“I	know,”	he	says.	“But	at	least	it’s	not	expressly	forbidden.”

I	reach	into	the	bag	I	carry	for	a	piece	of	red	cloth	and	tie	it	on	a	fallen	tree	near
Ky.	I	keep	my	eyes	down,	looking	now	at	my	fingers	as	they	twist	the	fabric	into
a	knot.	“I’m	sorry.	About	the	way	I	acted	yesterday.”	When	I	straighten	up,	Ky
has	already	moved	on.

“Don’t	be,”	Ky	says,	pulling	a	tangle	of	climbing	green	vines	away	from	a	shrub
so	that	we	can	pass	through.	He	throws	the	vines	at	me	and	I	catch	them	in
surprise.	“It’s	good	to	see	you	jealous	once	in	a	while.”	He	smiles,	sun	in	the
woods.

I	try	not	to	smile	in	return.	“Who	said	I	was	jealous?”

“No	one,”	he	says.	“I	could	tell.	I’ve	been	watching	people	for	a	long	time.”

“Why	did	you	let	me	hold	onto	it,	anyway?”	I	ask	him.	“The	case	with	the
arrow.	It’s	beautiful.	But	I	wasn’t	sure—”

“No	one	but	my	parents	know	that	I	have	it,”	he	says.	“When	Em	gave	me	the
compact	to	give	back	to	you,	I	noticed	how	much	alike	they	were.	I	wanted	you
to	see	it.”

His	voice	sounds	lonely	all	of	a	sudden,	and	I	can	almost	hear	another	sentence,
the	one	that	instinct	still	keeps	him	from	saying:	I	wanted	you	to	see	me.	Because
isn’t	this	what	it’s	all	about,	the	golden	case	with	the	arrow,	the	bits	of	story
offered	here	and	there?	Ky	wants	someone	to	see	him.

He	wants	me	to	see	him.

My	hands	ache	to	reach	for	him.	But	I	can’t	bring	myself	to	betray	Xander	in
that	way	after	everything	he	has	done.	After	he	saved	us	both—Ky	and	me—just
last	night.

153
But	there	is	something	I	can	continue	to	give	Ky	that	is	purely	mine,	that	doesn’t
belong	to	Xander.	The	poem.

I	only	mean	to	tell	him	a	few	more	lines,	but	once	I	start	telling	him	it’s	hard	to
hold	back,	and	I	say	the	whole	thing.	The	words	go	together.	Some	things	are
created	to	be	together.

“The	words	aren’t	peaceful,”	Ky	says.

“I	know.”

“Then	why	do	they	make	me	feel	calm?”	Ky	asks	in	wonder.	“I	don’t
understand.”

In	silence,	we	push	our	way	through	more	undergrowth,	the	poem	heavy	in	our
minds.

Finally,	I	know	what	it	is	I	want	to	say.	“I	think	it’s	because	when	we	hear	it	we
know	we’re	not	the	only	ones	who	ever	felt	this	way.”

“Tell	it	to	me	again,”	Ky	asks	softly.	His	breath	catches;	his	voice	is	husky.

All	the	rest	of	the	time,	until	we	hear	the	Officer’s	whistle,	we	move	up	the	Hill
repeating	the	poem	back	to	each	other	like	a	song.	A	song	that	just	the	two	of	us
know.

Before	we	leave	the	forest,	Ky	finishes	teaching	me	to	write	my	name	in	the	soft
dirt	underneath	one	of	the	fallen	trees.	We	crouch	down,	red	cloths	in	hand,
acting	as	though	we	are	tying	them	on	in	case	anyone	comes	by	and	sees	us.	It
takes	me	a	little	while	to	learn	s	but	I	like	the	way	it	looks—like	something
leaning	into	the	wind.	The	clean	line	and	dot	of	i	is	easy	to	master,	and	I	already
know	how	to	write	a.

I	write	each	letter	in	my	name	and	connect	them	together,	Ky’s	hand	near	mine
to	guide	me.	We	don’t	quite	touch,	but	I	feel	the	warmth	of	his	hand,	the	length
of	his	body	crouched	behind	me	as	I	write.	Cassia.

“My	name,”	I	say,	leaning	back	and	looking	at	the	letters.	They	are	wavery,	less
sure	than	the	letters	Ky	writes.	Someone	passing	by	might	not	even	recognize
mine	as	letters	at	all.	Still,	I	can	tell	what	they	say.	“What	next?”

154
“Now,”	Ky	says,	“we	go	back	to	the	beginning.	You	know	a.	Tomorrow	we’ll
do	b.	Once	you	know	them	all,	you	can	write	your	own	poems.”

“But	who	would	read	them?”	I	ask,	laughing.

“I	would,”	he	says.	He	gives	me	another	folded	napkin.	There,	between	greasy
thumbprints	and	traces	of	food,	is	more	of	Ky	for	me	to	see.

I	put	the	napkin	in	my	pocket	and	I	think	of	Ky	writing	out	his	story	with	his	red
hands,	seared	from	the	heat	of	the	job	he	does.	I	think	of	him	risking	everything
each	time	he	slips	one	napkin	into	his	pocket.	All	these	years	he’s	been	so
careful,	but	now	he’s	willing	to	take	a	chance.	Because	he’s	found	someone	who
wants	to	know.	Someone	he	wants	to	tell.

“Thank	you,”	I	say.	“For	teaching	me	how	to	write.”

“Thank	you,”	he	answers.	There	is	a	light	in	his	eyes	and	I	am	the	one	who	put	it
there.	“For	saving	my	artifact	and	for	the	poem.”

There’s	more	to	say,	but	we’re	learning	how	to	speak.	Together	we	step	out	of
the	trees.	Not	touching.	Not	yet.

155
                                            CHAPTER	        20

I	walk	home	from	the	air-train	stop	with	Em	after	school	and	sorting.	Once	the
others	who	came	with	us	have	gone	ahead	or	fallen	behind,	Em	puts	her	hand	on
my	arm.	“I’m	so	sorry,”	she	says	quietly.

“Em,	don’t	worry	about	it	anymore.	I’m	not	angry.”	I	look	her	in	the	eye	so	that
she	knows	I	mean	it	but	her	eyes	are	still	sad.	So	many	times	in	my	life	I’ve	felt
as	though	looking	at	Em	is	like	seeing	another	variation	of	myself,	but	I	don’t
feel	that	way	now.	Too	much	has	changed	recently.	Still,	Em	is	my	best
girlfriend.	Growing	apart	doesn’t	change	the	fact	that	for	a	long	time	we	grew
side	by	side;	our	roots	will	always	be	tangled.	I’m	glad	for	that.	“You	don’t	have
to	keep	apologizing,”	I	tell	her.	“I’m	happy	I	lent	it	to	you.	At	least	we	both	got
to	enjoy	it	before	they	took	it	away.”

“I	still	don’t	understand,”	Em	says	softly.	“They	have	plenty	of	displays	in	the
Museum.	It	doesn’t	make	any	sense.”

I’ve	never	heard	anything	so	close	to	insubordination	come	out	of	Em’s	mouth
before,	and	I	grin	at	her.	Maybe	we	aren’t	becoming	so	different	after	all.

“What	are	we	doing	tonight?”	I	ask,	changing	the	subject.

Em	seems	relieved	about	the	shift	in	topic.	“I	talked	to	Xander	today	and	he
wants	to	go	to	the	game	center	tonight.	What	do	you	think?”

What	I	really	think	is	that	I’d	like	to	go	back	to	the	top	of	the	first	little	hill.	The
thought	of	being	in	that	center	with	its	stuffiness	and	crowds	when	we	could	be
sitting	and	talking	under	a	clean	night	sky	seems	like	more	than	I	can	take.	But	I
can	do	it.	I	can	do	whatever	I	need	to	in	order	to	keep	things	normal.	I	have	Ky’s
words	to	read.	And	perhaps,	if	I’m	lucky,	I’ll	see	Ky	himself	later.	I	hope	he
comes	with	us.

Em	interrupts	my	thoughts	by	saying,	“Look.	Your	mother’s	waiting	for	you.”

Em’s	right.	My	mother	sits	on	the	steps	of	the	house	with	her	face	turned	in	our
direction.	When	she	sees	me	looking	at	her,	she	stands	up,	waves,	and	starts
walking	toward	us.	I	wave	back	and	Em	and	I	pick	up	the	pace	a	little.

156
“She’s	back,”	I	 say	out	loud,	and	it	isn’t	 until	I	 hear	the	surprise	in	my	voice	that
I	recognize	that	part	of	me	worried	that	she	would	stay	away	forever.

“Was	she	gone?”	Em	asks,	and	I	realize	that	my	mother’s	absence	is	likely	one
of	those	things	that	we	aren’t	supposed	to	mention	outside	of	our	family.	 Not
that	the	Officials	said	that	explicitly;	  it’s	simply	 the	kind	of	 thing	we’ve	 learned
to	keep	to	ourselves.

“Back	early	from	 work,”	 I	clarify.	 It’s	 not	even	a	lie.

Em	says	good-bye	and	goes	into	her	house.	Her	maple	tree	isn’t	going	to	make
it,	I	think,	 noticing	that	even	in	the	middle	 of	summer	the	tree	only	has	about	ten
green,	tired	leaves.	Then	I	look	toward	my	house,	where	the	tree	grows	full	and
the	flowers	are	beautiful	and	my	mother	comes	to	meet	me.

This	reminds	me	of	times	when	I	was	very	small	 in	First	School	and	my
mother’s	work	hours	ended	before	I	got	home.	She	and	Bram	sometimes	walked
up	the	street	to	meet	my	train.	They	never	made	it	far	because	Bram	stopped	to
look	at	everything	along	the	way.	“That	 kind	 of	attention	to	detail	might	 be	a
sign	that	he’s	meant	to	be	a	sorter,”	my	father	used	to	say,	until	Bram	got	older
and	it	became	apparent	that	he	lost	his	ability	to	pay	attention	to	detail	along
with	his	baby	teeth.

When	I	reach	my	mother	she	hugs	me	right	there	on	the	sidewalk.	“Oh,	Cassia,”
she	says.	Her	face	looks	pale	and	tired.	“I’m	so	sorry.	I	missed	your	first	 official
outing	with	 Xander.”

“You	 missed	something	else	last	night,	too,”	I	say,	my	face	against	her	shoulder.
She	is	taller	than	I	am	and	I	don’t	think	 I	will	 ever	catch	up.	I’m	 slight	and	short,
like	my	father’s	 family.	 Like	Grandfather.	I	 smell	my	mother’s	 familiar	 smell	of
flowers	and	clean	fabric,	and	I	breathe	in	deeply.	I’m	 so	glad	she’s	back.

“I	know.”	 My	 mother	never	speaks	against	the	government.	The	most	defiant
she’s	ever	been	was	when	the	Officials	searched	my	father.	I	don’t	expect	her	to
rant	and	rave	about	the	unfairness	of	the	Officials	taking	the	artifacts,	and	she
doesn’t.	It	occurs	to	me	that	if	she	did,	she’d	be	ranting	and	raving	against	her
own	husband.	He	is,	after	all,	an	Official,	 too.

Though	he	isn’t	the	one	who	held	out	his	hand	and	asked	us	to	drop	our	prized
possessions	into	it,	he	did	that	to	other	people.

157
When	my	father	came	home	last	night,	he	gave	Bram	and	me	each	a	long	hug
and	then	went	straight	to	his	room	without	 saying	anything.	Maybe	because	he
couldn’t	stand	to	see	the	pain	in	our	faces	and	remember	that	he	had	caused	that
same	pain	in	others.

“I’m	 sorry,	Cassia,”	my	mother	 says	now	as	we	walk	home.	“I	know	 how	much
that	compact	meant	to	you.”

“I	feel	 sorry	for	Bram.”

“I	know.	 I	do,	too.”

When	we	enter	the	front	door	I	hear	the	chime	that	means	our	food	has	arrived.
But	when	I	go	into	 the	kitchen	only	two	 portions	sit	in	the	delivery	 area.	“What
about	Papa	and	Bram?”

“Papa	requested	dinner	early	so	he	and	Bram	could	go	for	a	walk	before	Bram’s
free-rec	hours.”

“Really?”	 I	ask.	We	don’t	 often	make	such	requests.

“Yes.	Your	 father	thought	that	Bram	could	use	something	special	after
everything	that’s	happened	lately.”

I’m	happy,	especially	 for	Bram’s	sake,	that	the	nutrition	 Officials	 granted	Papa’s
request.	“Why	didn’t	 you	go	too?”

“I	wanted	to	see	you.”	She	smiles	at	me	and	then	looks	around	the	kitchen.	“We
haven’t	eaten	together	in	a	long	time.	And	of	course,	I	want	 to	hear	about	your
outing	with	 Xander.”

We	sit	across	from	each	other	at	the	table,	and	I	notice	again	how	tired	she	looks.
“Tell	 me	about	your	trip,”	 I	say,	before	she	can	ask	about	last	night.	“What	did
you	see?”

“I’m	 still	 not	sure,”	she	says	softly,	almost	to	herself.	Then	she	straightens	up.
“We	went	to	another	Arboretum	 to	look	at	some	crops.	After	 that,	we	had	to	go
to	some	Farmlands.	It	all	took	some	time.”

“But	now	 everything’s	back	to	normal,	 right?”

158
“For	the	most	part.	I	have	to	write	 a	formal	report	and	submit	it	 to	the	Officials
in	charge	of	the	other	Arboretum.”

“What’s	 the	report	about?”

“I’m	 afraid	that’s	 confidential	information,”	  my	mother	says	regretfully.

We	both	fall	silent,	 but	it	is	a	good	silence,	a	mother-daughter	one.	Her	thoughts
are	far	away	somewhere,	perhaps	back	at	the	Arboretum.	Maybe	she’s	writing
the	report	in	her	mind.	That’s	all	 right	with	 me,	though.	I	relax	and	let	my	 own
thoughts	go	where	they	want,	which	is	to	Ky.

“Thinking	 about	Xander?”	my	 mother	says,	giving	me	a	knowing	smile.	 “I
always	daydreamed	about	your	father,	too.”

I	smile	back.	There’s	no	point	telling	 her	that	I’m	 thinking	 about	the	wrong	boy.
No,	not	the	wrong	boy.	Ky	 may	be	an	Aberration	but	there’s	nothing	 about	him
that	is	defective.	It’s	our	 Government	and	their	classification	system	and	all	their
systems	that	are	wrong.	Including	the	Matching	System.

But	if	the	system	is	wrong	and	false	and	unreal,	then	what	about	the	love
between	my	parents?	If	their	love	was	born	because	of	the	Society,	can	it	still	be
real	and	good	and	right?	This	is	the	question	that	I	can’t	get	out	of	my	 mind.	I
want	the	answer	to	be	yes.	That	their	love	is	true.	I	want	it	to	have	beauty	and
reality	independent	of	anything	else.

“I	should	get	ready	to	go	to	the	game	center,”	I	tell	 her,	and	she	yawns.	“You
should	go	to	sleep.	We	can	talk	more	tomorrow.”

“Well,	 maybe	I’ll	 rest	for	a	little	 while,”	 she	says.	We	both	stand	up:	I	take	her
foilware	container	to	the	recycling	 bin	for	 her	and	she	carries	my	water	bottle	to
the	sterilizer	for	me.	“Come	 say	good-bye	before	you	leave,	though,	won’t	you?”

“Of	course.”

My	mother	goes	into	her	room	and	I	slip	 into	mine.	I	 have	a	few	minutes	before
I’m	due	to	meet	everyone.	Do	I	have	time	to	 read	a	little	more	of	Ky’s	 story?	I
decide	that	I	do.	I	pull	the	crumpled	 napkin	from	my	 pocket.

I	want	to	know	 more	about	Ky	before	I	see	him	tonight.	I	 feel	as	if	the	two	of	 us
are	our	true	selves	when	we	hike	in	the	trees	on	the	hills.	When	we’re	with

159
are	our	true	selves	when	we	hike	in	the	trees	on	the	hills.	When	we’re	with
everyone	else	on	Saturday	nights,	though,	it	becomes	difficult.	We	go	through	a
forest	that	is	complicated	and	full	 of	tangles	and	there	are	no	stone	cairns	to
guide	us	except	the	ones	we	build	ourselves.

Sitting	on	my	bed	to	read,	I	glance	again	at	the	spot	in	my	closet	where	I	kept	the
compact.	I	feel	a	sharp	pain	of	loss	and	turn	back	to	Ky’s	story.	 But	as	I	read	and
the	tears	slip	down	my	cheeks,	I	realize	that	I	do	not	know	anything	 about	loss.

In	the	middle	of	the	crease	Ky	drew	a	village,	 little	 houses,	little	people.	But	all
the	people	lie	prone,	on	their	backs.	No	one	stands	straight,	except	the	two	Kys.
The	young	one’s	hands	are	no	longer	empty;	they	carry	something.	One	hand
holds	the	word	Mother,	slumping	 over	the	edge	of	his	hand,	shaped	a	little	like	a
body.	The	top	of	the	t	tips	up,	like	 an	arm	flung	askew.

The	other	hand	holds	the	word	Father,	and	that	word	lies	still	 too.	And	the
young	Ky’s	 shoulders	are	bent	with	the	weight	of	these	two	little	 words,	and	his
face	is	still	tipped	to	the	sky,	where	I	 see	now	the	rain	has	turned	into	something
dark,	something	deadly	and	solid.	Ammunition,	 I	think.	 I’ve	 seen	it	in	the
showing.

The	older	Ky	has	turned	his	face	away	from	the	village	 in	the	middle,	from	 the
other	boy.	His	hands	are	no	longer	open.	They	are	clenched.	Behind	him,	people
in	Official	 uniforms	 watch	him.	His	 lips	curve	in	a	smile	that	never	touches	his
eyes;	he	wears	plainclothes,	a	line	indicating	the	crisp	crease	where	he’s	ironed
them	neat.

at	first	when	the	rain	 fell

from	the	sky	so	wide	and	deep

it	smelled	like	sage,	my	favorite	smell

I	went	up	on	the	plateau	to	watch	it	come

to	see	the	gifts	it	always	brought

but	this	rain	changed	from	blue	to	 black

and	left

160
nothing.




There’s	a	drought	of	Officials	 at	the	game	center,	even	though	the	center	itself
brims	with	people	playing,	 winning,	 losing.	I	see	three	Officials,	watching	 the
largest	of	the	game	tables.	They	look	earnest	and	on	edge	in	their	white
uniforms,	their	faces	showing	more	stress	than	usual.	This	is	strange.	Usually,
we	have	twelve	or	more	lower-level	 Officials	 in	the	center,	keeping	the	peace,
keeping	score.	Where	are	the	rest	of	them	tonight?

Somewhere,	things	aren’t	going	quite	right.

But	here,	as	far	as	I’m	concerned,	at	least	one	thing	has.	Ky’s	with	us.	I	look	 at
him	once	as	we	weave	our	way	through	the	masses	of	people,	following	Xander,
hoping	that	Ky	understands	from	that	look	 that	I	have	read	his	story,	that	I	care.
He	walks	right	behind	me	and	I	want	to	 reach	back	and	take	his	hand	but	there
are	too	many	people.	The	one	thing	I	can	do	for	Ky	is	to	 help	keep	him	safe,	to
hold	onto	what	I	want	to	 say	until	there	is	a	good	place	to	say	it.	And	to
remember	the	words	he	wrote,	the	pictures	he	made,	even	though	I	wish	that	part
of	the	story	had	never	happened	to	him.

His	parents	died.	He	saw	it	happen.	Death	came	from	the	sky,	and	that’s	what	he
remembers.	Every	time	it	rains.

Xander	stops	and	so	we	all	do,	too.	To	my	surprise,	he	gestures	to	a	game	table
where	the	games	played	are	one-on-one.	Games	Xander	doesn’t	usually	play.	He
likes	to	take	on	a	group,	to	win	when	the	stakes	are	higher	and	more	players	are
involved.	It’s	 a	better	test	of	his	abilities—more	 challenging,	more	variables.
Less	personal.	“You	want	to	play?”	 Xander	asks.

I	turn	to	see	who	he	means.

Ky.

“All	 right,”	 Ky	 says	without	hesitation,	nothing	 revealed	in	his	voice.	He	keeps
his	eyes	on	Xander,	waiting	for	the	next	move.

“What	kind	 of	game	do	you	want	to	play?	Skill	 or	chance?”	Is	there	a	trace	of
challenge	in	Xander’s	voice?	His	face	remains	perfectly	 even,	as	does	Ky’s.

161
“I	don’t	care,”	Ky	answers.

“How	about	a	game	of	chance,	then,”	Xander	says,	which	surprises	me	again.
Xander	hates	games	of	chance.	He	much	prefers	ones	that	involve	actual	skill.

Em	and	Piper	and	I	stay,	watching,	as	Xander	and	Ky	sit	down	and	scan	their
cards	into	the	datapod	at	the	table.	Xander	sets	out	the	playing	cards,	red	with
black	markings	in	the	center,	first	stacking	the	edges	even	with	two	sharp	hits	of
the	deck	against	the	metal.	“Want	to	go	first?”	Xander	asks	Ky,	and	Ky	nods	and
reaches	to	draw.

“What	game	are	they	playing?”	someone	asks	next	to	me.	Livy.	She’s	here	for
Ky,	I’m	sure	of	it,	her	eyes	possessive	as	she	watches	his	hands	over	the	cards.

His	hands	are	not	yours	to	watch,	I	think	to	her,	and	I	remember	again	that	they
aren’t	mine,	either.	I	should	be	watching	Xander.	I	should	be	hoping	for	Xander
to	win.

“Prisoner’s	dilemma,”	Em	says	next	to	me.	“They’re	playing	prisoner’s
dilemma.”

“What’s	that?”	Livy	asks.

She	doesn’t	know	the	game?	I	turn	to	her	in	surprise.	It’s	one	of	the	simplest,
most	common	games.	Em	tries	to	explain	it	to	Livy	in	a	low	voice	so	she	doesn’t
disturb	the	players.	“They	each	put	down	a	card	at	the	same	time.	If	they	both
have	an	even	card,	they	each	get	two	points.	If	they’re	both	odd,	then	they	each
get	one	point.”

Livy	interrupts	Em.	“What	if	one	has	even	and	one	has	odd?”

“If	one	is	even	and	one	is	odd,	the	person	who	puts	down	the	odd	card	gets	three
points.	The	person	who	puts	down	the	even	one	gets	zero.”

Livy’s	eyes	fix	on	Ky’s	face.	Jealously,	I	think	that	even	if	she	sees	him	in	the
same	amount	of	detail	that	I	do—which	I	doubt—she	doesn’t	know	anything
about	him.	Would	she	still	be	so	interested	in	Ky	if	she	knew	about	his	status	as
an	Aberration?

I	have	a	thought	that	strikes	me	cold:	Would	I	be	so	interested	if	I	didn’t	know

162
that	he’s	an	Aberration?	I	never	paid	Ky	 particular	attention	before	I	knew	 about
his	classification.

And	before	you	saw	his	face	on	the	microcard,	I	remind	myself.	 Naturally,	 that
piqued	your	interest.	Besides.	You	weren’t	supposed	to	be	interested	in	anyone
until	you	were	Matched.

I	feel	a	little	 sick	thinking	 that	Livy	 might	see	Ky’s	 true	worth	in	a	way	that	is
somehow	more	pure;	she’s	simply	interested	in	him.	No	hidden	reasons.	No
tangles.	No	extra	layers	beneath	her	basic	attraction	to	him.

But	then	again,	I	realize,	I	never	know.	She	could	be	hiding	 something,	as	I	am.
We	could	all	be	hiding	 something.

I	turn	my	attention	back	to	the	game	and	I	watch	Ky’s	 and	Xander’s	faces
closely.	Neither	one	of	them	blinks	 an	eye,	pauses	before	a	move,	shows	their
hand.

In	the	end,	it	doesn’t	matter.	Ky	 and	Xander	end	the	rounds	with	an	even	number
of	points.	They’ve	 each	won,	and	lost,	an	equal	amount	of	hands.

“Let’s	 go	walk	around	for	a	minute,”	 Xander	says,	reaching	for	me.	I	want	to
look	at	Ky	 before	I	twine	my	 fingers	with	Xander’s,	 but	I	don’t.	 I	have	to	play
the	game,	too.	Surely	Ky	will	 understand.

But	would	Xander?	If	 he	knew	about	Ky	and	me,	and	the	words	we	share	on	the
Hill?

I	push	the	thought	away	as	I	walk	from	 the	table	with	Xander.	Livy	 immediately
slides	into	his	place	and	starts	up	a	conversation	with	Ky.

Xander	and	I	go	out	in	the	hallway	 alone.	I	wonder	if	he’s	about	to	kiss	me	and	I
wonder	what	I’m	 going	to	do	if	 he	does,	but	then	he	whispers	to	me	instead,	his
words	soft	and	close.	“Ky	 throws	the	games.”

“What?”

“He	loses	the	games	on	purpose.”

“You	 tied.	He	didn’t	 lose.”	I	don’t	 know	what	 Xander’s	getting	at.

163
“Not	tonight.	 Because	it	wasn’t	a	game	of	skill.	 Those	are	the	ones	he	usually
throws.	I’ve	 been	watching	him	for	a	while.	 He’s	careful	about	how	he	does	it,
but	I’m	 sure	that’s	what	he’s	doing.”

I	stare	back	at	Xander,	not	sure	how	to	respond.

“It’s	 easy	to	throw	a	game	of	skill,	especially	 when	it’s	a	big	group.	Or	 a	game
like	Check,	when	you	can	put	your	pieces	in	harm’s	way	 and	make	it	look
natural.	But	today,	in	a	game	of	chance,	one-on-one,	he	didn’t	lose.	He’s	no	fool.
He	knew	that	I	was	watching.”	 Xander	grins.	Then	his	face	gets	puzzled.	“What
I	don’t	understand	is	why?”

“Why	 what?”

“Why	 would	he	throw	so	many	games?	He	knows	the	Officials	 watch	us.	He
knows	they’re	looking	 for	people	who	can	play	well.	 He	knows	our	play
probably	influences	what	vocations	they	assign	us.	It	doesn’t	make	sense.	Why
wouldn’t	 he	want	them	to	know	how	smart	he	is?	Because	he	is	smart.”

“You’re	 not	going	to	tell	 anyone	about	this,	are	you?”	Suddenly	I	am	very
worried	for	 Ky.

“Of	course	not,”	 Xander	says,	thoughtfully.	 “He	must	have	his	reasons.	I	can
respect	that.”

Xander’s	right.	Ky	 does	have	his	reasons,	and	they	are	good	ones.	I	read	them
on	the	last	napkin,	the	one	with	the	stains	that	I	know	must	be	tomato	sauce	but
that	look	like	 blood.	Old	blood.

“Let’s	 play	one	more	time,”	Ky	 says	when	we	get	back,	his	eyes	on	Xander.
They	flicker	 once,	and	I	think	he’s	looked	down	 at	my	hand	in	Xander’s,	but	I
can’t	be	sure.	His	face	shows	nothing.

“All	 right,”	 Xander	says.	“Chance	or	skill?”

“Skill,”	  Ky	suggests.	And	something	in	his	expression	suggests	that	he	might	not
throw	the	game	this	time.	He	might	be	in	it	 to	win.

Em	rolls	her	eyes	at	me	and	gestures	at	the	boys	as	if	to	say,	“Can	you	believe
how	primitive	 this	is?”	 But	we	both	follow	 them	to	another	table.	Livy	 comes,
too.

164
too.

I	sit	between	Ky	and	Xander,	equidistant	from	 both	of	them.	It’s	 as	if	I’m	 a	piece
of	metal	and	they	are	two	magnets	and	there’s	a	pull	from	either	side.	They’ve
both	taken	risks	for	me—Xander	with	 the	artifact,	Ky	 with	 the	poem	and	the
writing.

Xander	is	my	Match	and	my	oldest	friend	 and	one	of	the	best	people	I	know.
When	I	kissed	him,	it	was	sweet.	I’m	 drawn	to	him	 and	tied	to	him	with	 the
cords	of	a	thousand	different	memories.

Ky	is	not	my	 Match,	but	he	might	have	been.	He’s	the	one	who	taught	me	how
to	write	my	name,	how	to	keep	the	poems,	how	to	build	 a	tower	of	rocks	that
looks	like	it	 should	fall	but	 doesn’t.	I	have	never	kissed	him	and	I	don’t	know	 if	I
ever	will,	 but	I	think	 it	might	be	more	than	sweet.

It	is	almost	uncomfortable,	this	 awareness	of	him.	Each	pause,	each	movement
when	he	places	a	piece	on	the	black-and-gray	board.	I	want	to	reach	out	and	grab
his	hand	and	hold	it	to	me,	right	over	my	 heart,	right	where	it	aches	the	most.	I
don’t	know	 if	doing	that	would	 heal	me	or	make	my	heart	break	entirely,	but
either	way	this	constant	hungry	waiting	 would	be	over.

Xander	plays	with	daring	and	intelligence,	 Ky	with	 a	kind	of	 deep	and	calculated
intuition;	 both	are	strong.	They	are	so	evenly	matched.

It’s	Ky’s	 move.	In	 the	quiet	before	Ky	takes	his	turn,	Xander	watches	him
carefully.	Ky’s	 hand	hovers	over	the	board.	For	a	moment,	as	he	holds	the	piece
in	the	air,	I	see	where	he	could	put	it	to	win	 and	I	know	he	sees	it,	too,	that	he
planned	the	whole	game	for	that	last	move.	He	looks	at	Xander	and	Xander
looks	back,	both	of	them	locked	in	 some	kind	of	challenge	that	seems	to	run
deeper	and	older	than	what’s	happening	here	on	this	board.

Then	Ky	moves	his	hand	and	puts	his	piece	down	in	a	spot	where	Xander	can
eventually	overtake	him	for	 the	win.	Ky	 doesn’t	hesitate	once	he	places	the
piece;	he	sets	it	down	with	a	solid	sound	and	leans	back	in	his	chair,	looking	up
at	the	ceiling.	I	think	 I	see	the	slightest	hint	of	a	smile	on	his	lips	but	I	 can’t	be
sure;	it’s	gone	faster	than	a	snowflake	on	an	air-train	track.

Ky’s	move	may	 not	be	the	brilliant	one	I	 know	he	could	have	made,	but	it’s	not
stupid,	either.	He	made	the	move	of	an	average	player.	When	he	looks	back
down	from	the	ceiling,	 he	meets	my	gaze	and	holds	it,	as	he	held	the	game	piece

165
down	from	the	ceiling,	 he	meets	my	gaze	and	holds	it,	as	he	held	the	game	piece
earlier	before	putting	it	 down.	He	tells	me	something	in	that	silent	pause	that	he
cannot	say	out	loud.

Ky	can	play	this	game.	He	can	play	all	of	 their	games,	including	the	one	in	front
of	him	that	he	just	lost.	He	knows	exactly	 how	to	play,	and	that’s	why	 he	loses
every	time.

166
                                            CHAPTER	        21

I	have	a	hard	time	concentrating	at	sorting	the	next	day.	Sundays	are	for	work;
there	are	no	leisure	activities,	so	I	won’t	likely	see	Ky	until	Monday.	I	can’t	talk
to	him	about	his	story	until	then;	I	can’t	say,	“I’m	sorry	about	your	parents.”	I
said	those	words	before,	when	he	first	came	to	live	with	the	Markhams	and	we
all	welcomed	him	and	expressed	our	condolences.

But	it’s	different	now	that	I	really	know	what	happened.	Before,	I	knew	they
died,	but	I	didn’t	know	how.	I	didn’t	know	that	he	saw	it	rain	down	from	the	sky
while	he	watched,	helpless.	Burning	the	napkin	with	that	part	of	his	story	on	it	is
one	of	the	hardest	things	I’ve	ever	done.	Like	the	books	out	at	the	Restoration
site,	like	Grandfather’s	poem,	Ky’s	story,	bit	by	bit,	is	turning	into	ash	and
nothing.

Except.	He	remembers	it,	and	now	I	do,	too.

A	message	from	Norah	appears	on	my	screen,	interrupting	my	sort.	Please
report	to	the	supervisor’s	station.	I	lift	my	head	to	look	across	the	sorting	slots
toward	Norah,	and	then	I	stand	straight	up	in	surprise.

The	Officials	are	back	for	me.

They	watch	me	as	I	walk	along	the	aisles	of	other	workers	and	I	think	I	see
approval	in	their	eyes.	I	feel	relieved.

“Congratulations,”	the	gray-haired	Official	tells	me	when	I	reach	them.	“You
scored	very	well	on	your	test.”

“Thank	you,”	I	say,	as	I	always	do	to	the	Officials.	But	this	time	I	mean	it.

“The	next	step	is	a	real-life	sort,”	the	Official	tells	me.	“At	some	point	in	the
near	future,	we	will	come	and	escort	you	to	the	site	of	the	test.”

I	nod.	I’ve	heard	about	this,	too.	They’ll	take	you	to	sort	something	real—actual
data,	like	news,	or	actual	people,	or	a	small	subset	of	a	school	class—to	see	if
you	can	apply	things	in	the	real	world.	If	you	can,	you	move	on	to	the	next	step,
which	is	likely	your	final	work	position.

167
This	is	happening	quickly.	 In	fact,	everything	seems	hurried	lately:	the	hasty
removal	of	the	artifacts	from	 personal	residences,	my	mother’s	sudden	trip,	and
now	this,	more	and	more	of	us	leaving	school	early	in	the	year.

The	Officials	 wait	for	 me	to	respond.

“Thank	you,”	 I	say.

In	the	afternoon	my	mother	receives	a	message	at	work:	Go	home	and	pack.	She
is	needed	for	another	trip;	it	may	be	even	longer	than	the	last	one.	I	can	tell	my
father	doesn’t	like	this;	 and	neither	does	Bram.	Neither	do	I,	as	a	matter	of	fact.

I	sit	on	the	bed	and	watch	her	as	she	packs.	She	folds	her	two	extra	sets	of
plainclothes.	She	folds	her	pajamas,	underclothes,	socks.	She	opens	her	tablet
container	and	checks	the	tablets.

She’s	missing	one,	the	green	tablet.	She	glances	up	at	me	and	I	look	away.

It	makes	me	think	that	perhaps	these	trips	are	harder	than	they	seem	and	I	realize
that	in	seeing	the	missing	tablet,	I	haven’t	seen	an	example	of	her	weakness	but
an	example	of	her	strength.	What	she’s	dealing	with	is	difficult	  enough	to	make
her	take	the	green	tablet,	so	it	must	also	be	difficult	to	keep	inside,	to	not	share
with	us.	But	she	is	strong	and	she	keeps	the	secrets	because	it	protects	us.

“Cassia?	Molly?”	 My	 father	walks	into	the	room	and	I	 stand	up	to	leave.	I	move
quickly	over	 to	my	mother	to	embrace	her.	When	I	step	back,	our	eyes	meet	and
I	smile	at	her.	I	want	her	to	know	 that	I	know	that	I	 shouldn’t	have	looked	away
earlier.	I’m	 not	ashamed	of	her.	I	know	how	hard	it	is	to	 keep	a	secret.	I	may	be
a	sorter	like	my	father	and	my	grandfather	before	me,	but	I	am	also	my	mother’s
daughter.

On	Monday	morning,	 Ky	and	I	walk	 into	the	trees	and	find	the	spot	where	we
stopped	the	time	before.	We	start	marking	again	with	red	flags.	I	 wish	it	were	so
easy	to	begin	where	we	left	off	in	 other	ways.	At	first	 I	hesitate,	not	wanting	to
disturb	the	peace	of	these	woods	with	the	horror	of	the	Outer	Provinces,	but	he
has	suffered	so	long	alone	that	I	can’t	bear	to	make	him	wait	one	more	minute.

“Ky.	 I’m	 so	sorry.	I’m	 so	sorry	they	are	gone.”

He	doesn’t	say	anything	but	bends	to	tie	a	red	cloth	around	a	particularly	thorny
shrub.	His	hands	shake	a	bit.	I	know	what	that	brief	moment	of	 losing	control

168
shrub.	His	hands	shake	a	bit.	I	know	what	that	brief	moment	of	 losing	control
means	for	someone	like	Ky	and	I	want	to	comfort	 him.	I	 place	my	hand	on	his
back,	gently,	softly,	just	 enough	so	that	he	knows	I	am	there.	As	my	hand	meets
the	cloth	of	his	shirt	he	spins	around	and	I	pull	back	when	I	 see	the	pain	in	his
eyes.	His	look	begs	me	not	to	say	any	more;	it	is	enough	that	I	know.	It	may	be
too	much.

“Who’s	 Sisyphus?”	I	ask,	trying	 to	think	of	 something	to	distract	him.	“You
mentioned	his	name	once.	When	the	Officer	told	us	that	we	were	going	to	start
coming	to	the	Hill.”

“Someone	whose	story	has	been	told	for	a	long	time.”	Ky	 stands	up	and	starts
walking	again.	I	can	tell	 that	he	needs	to	keep	moving	today.	“It	was	one	of	my
father’s	favorite	stories	to	tell.	 I	think	 he	wanted	to	be	like	Sisyphus,	because
Sisyphus	was	crafty	and	sneaky	and	always	causing	trouble	for	the	Society	and
the	Officials.”

Ky’s	never	talked	about	his	father	before.	Ky’s	 voice	 sounds	flat;	I	can’t	tell
from	his	tone	how	he	feels	about	the	man	who	died	years	ago,	the	man	whose
name	Ky	held	in	his	hand	in	the	picture.

“There’s	a	story	about	how	Sisyphus	once	asked	an	Official	to	show	him	 how	a
weapon	worked	and	then	he	turned	it	on	the	Official.”

I	must	look	shocked,	but	Ky	 seems	to	have	anticipated	my	surprise.	His	eyes	are
kind	as	he	explains.	“It’s	 an	old	story,	from	back	when	the	Officials	 carried
weapons.	They	don’t	use	them	anymore.”

What	he	doesn’t	say,	but	what	we	both	know,	is	They	don’t	 have	to.	The	threat
of	Reclassification	is	enough	to	keep	almost	everyone	in	line.

Ky	turns	back,	pushes	his	way	ahead.	I	watch	him	move,	the	muscles	in	his	back
inches	away	from	me;	I	follow	 close	so	that	I	can	slip	through	the	branches	he
holds	back	for	me.	The	smell	of	the	forest	seems,	for	a	moment,	to	be	simply	the
smell	of	him.	I	 wonder	what	sage	smells	like,	the	smell	he	said	was	his	favorite
in	his	old	life.	 I	hope	that	the	smell	of	this	forest	is	 his	favorite	now.	I	 know	it	 is
mine.

“The	Society	decided	that	they	needed	to	give	Sisyphus	a	punishment,	a	special
one,	because	he	dared	to	think	he	could	be	as	clever	as	one	of	them,	when	he
wasn’t	an	Official,	 or	even	a	citizen.	He	was	nothing.	An	 Aberration	from	 the

169
wasn’t	an	Official,	 or	even	a	citizen.	He	was	nothing.	An	 Aberration	from	 the
Outer	Provinces.”

“What	did	 they	do	to	him?”

“They	gave	him	a	job.	He	had	to	roll	 a	rock,	a	huge	one,	to	the	top	of	a
mountain.”

“That	doesn’t	sound	so	terrible.”	 There’s	relief	 in	my	voice.	If	 the	story	ends
well	for	 Sisyphus,	maybe	it	can	end	well	for	Ky.

“It	wasn’t	 as	easy	as	it	sounds.	As	he	was	about	to	reach	the	top,	the	rock	rolled
back	to	the	bottom	and	he	had	to	start	again.	That	happened	every	time.	He
never	got	the	rock	to	the	top.	He	went	on	pushing	forever.”

“I	see,”	I	 say,	realizing	why	our	hikes	on	the	little	 hill	 reminded	Ky	 of	Sisyphus.
Day	after	day	we	did	the	same	thing:	climbed	back	up	and	came	back	down.
“But	we	did	 make	it	to	the	top	of	the	little	 hill.”

“We	were	never	allowed	to	stay	there	for	 long,”	Ky	 points	out.

“Was	he	from	your	 Province?”	I	stop	for	 a	moment,	thinking	I’ve	 heard	the
Officer’s	 whistle,	but	it’s	 merely	a	shrill	 birdcall	 from	the	canopy	of	leaves
above	us.

“I	don’t	 know.	I	 don’t	know	 if	he’s	real,”	 Ky	 says.	“If	he	ever	existed.”

“Then	why	 tell	his	story?”	 I	don’t	understand,	and	for	a	second	I	feel	betrayed.
Why	did	Ky	 tell	me	about	this	person	and	make	me	feel	empathy	for	him	when
there’s	no	proof	that	he	ever	lived	at	all?

Ky	pauses	for	a	moment	before	he	answers,	his	eyes	wide	and	deep	like	the
oceans	in	other	tales	or	like	the	sky	in	his	own.	“Even	 if	he	didn’t	 live	his	story,
enough	of	us	have	lived	lives	just	like	 it.	So	it’s	true	anyway.”

I	think	about	what	Ky	 said	while	 we	move	again,	quickly,	tying	 off	 areas	and
helping	each	other	around	and	through	the	tangled	parts	of	the	forest.	There’s	a
smell	here	that	I	have	smelled	before:	a	smell	of	decay,	but	it	doesn’t	seem
rotten.	It	smells	almost	rich,	the	scent	of	the	plants	returning	to	the	earth,	of
wood	giving	 way	to	dust.

But	the	Hill	 could	be	hiding	something.	I	 remember	Ky’s	words	 and	pictures	and

170
But	the	Hill	could	be	hiding	something.	I	remember	Ky’s	words	and	pictures	and
I	realize	that	no	place	is	completely	good.	No	place	is	completely	bad.	I’ve	been
thinking	in	terms	of	absolutes;	first,	I	believed	our	Society	was	perfect.	The
night	they	came	for	our	artifacts,	I	believed	it	was	evil.	Now	I	simply	don’t
know.

Ky	blurs	the	lines	for	me.	He	helps	me	see	clearly,	too.	And	I	hope	I	do	the	same
for	him.

“Why	do	you	throw	the	games?”	I	ask	him	as	we	pause	in	a	small	clearing.

His	face	tightens.	“I	have	to.”

“Every	time?	Don’t	you	even	let	yourself	think	about	winning?”

“I	always	think	about	winning,”	Ky	tells	me.	There’s	fire	in	his	eyes	again,	and
he	snaps	a	branch	off	a	tree	to	make	room	for	us	to	go	through.	He	tosses	the
first	branch	to	the	side	and	holds	another	one	back,	waiting	for	me	to	pass,	but	I
stay	right	there	next	to	him.	He	looks	down	at	me,	shadows	from	the	leaves
crossing	his	face,	and	also	sun.	He’s	looking	at	my	lips,	which	makes	it	hard	to
speak,	even	though	I	know	what	I	want	to	say.

“Xander	knows	you	lose	on	purpose.”

“I	know	he	does,”	Ky	says.	A	smile	tugs	at	the	corners	of	his	mouth,	like	the	one
I	thought	I	saw	last	night.	“Any	other	questions?”

“Just	one,”	I	say.	“What	color	are	your	eyes?”	I	want	to	know	what	he	thinks,
how	he	sees	himself—the	real	Ky—when	he	dares	to	look.

“Blue,”	he	says,	sounding	surprised.	“They’ve	always	been	blue.”

“Not	to	me.”

“What	do	they	look	like	to	you?”	he	says,	puzzled,	amused.	Not	looking	at	my
mouth	anymore,	looking	into	my	eyes.

“Lots	of	colors,”	I	say.	“At	first,	I	thought	they	were	brown.	Once	I	thought	they
were	green,	and	another	time	gray.	They	are	most	often	blue,	though.”

“What	are	they	now?”	he	asks.	He	widens	his	eyes	a	little,	leans	closer,	lets	me
look	as	long	and	as	deep	as	I	want.

171
look	as	long	and	as	deep	as	I	want.

And	there’s	so	much	to	see.	They	are	blue,	and	black,	and	other	colors,	too,	and	I
know	some	of	what	they’ve	 seen	and	what	I	hope	they	see	now.	Me.	Cassia.
What	I	feel,	who	I	 am.

“Well?”	 Ky	 asks.

“Everything,”	 I	 tell	him.	 “They’re	 everything.”

Neither	of	us	moves	for	a	moment,	locked	instead	in	each	other’s	eyes	and	in	the
branches	of	this	Hill	 we	might	never	finish	 climbing.	 I’m	the	one	who	moves
first.	I	step	past	him	and	push	my	way	through	some	more	tangled	leaves,	climb
over	a	small	fallen	tree.

Behind	me	I	hear	Ky	doing	 the	same.

I’m	falling	 in	 love.	I	am	in	love.	 And	it’s	 not	with	 Xander,	although	I	do	love
him.	I’m	 sure	of	that,	as	sure	as	I	am	of	the	fact	that	what	I	feel	for	Ky	 is
something	different.

As	I	tie	another	red	flag	on	the	trees	and	wish	for	the	fall	 of	our	Society	and	its
systems,	including	the	Matching	System,	so	that	I	can	be	with	Ky,	 I	realize	that
it	is	a	selfish	wish.	Even	if	 the	fall	of	 our	Society	would	 make	life	better	for
some,	it	would	make	it	worse	for	 others.	Who	am	I	to	try	to	change	things,	to	get
greedy	and	want	more?	If	our	Society	changes	and	things	are	different,	who	am
I	to	tell	the	girl	 who	would	 have	enjoyed	the	safe	protected	life	that	now	she	has
to	have	choice	and	danger	because	of	me?

The	answer	is:	I’m	not	anyone.	I’m	 just	one	of	the	people	who	happened	to	fall
in	the	majority.	 All	 my	life,	 the	odds	have	been	on	my	side.

“Cassia,”	Ky	 says.	He	snaps	another	branch	off	and	bends	down	in	a	swift
movement	to	write	in	the	thick	 dirt	on	the	forest	floor.	 He	has	to	push	away	a
layer	of	leaves	and	a	spider	hurries	away.	“Look,”	 he	says,	showing	me	another
letter.	K.

Thankful	for	 the	distraction,	I	crouch	down	 beside	him.	This	letter	is	more
difficult	 and	it	takes	me	several	tries	to	even	come	close.	In	spite	of	my	practice
with	the	other	letters	my	hands	are	still	not	used	to	this;	to	writing	 in	 any	way
but	tapping.	When	I	finally	 get	it	 right	and	look	up,	I	 see	that	Ky	is	grinning	at

172
but	tapping.	When	I	finally	get	it	right	and	look	up,	I	see	that	Ky	is	grinning	at
me.

“So,	I’ve	learned	K,”	I	say,	grinning	back.	“That’s	strange.	I	thought	we	were
going	alphabetically.”

“We	were,”	Ky	tells	me.	“But	I	think	K	is	a	good	letter	to	know.”

“What’s	my	next	letter,	then?”	I	ask	with	mock	innocence.	“Could	it	be	Y?”

“It	could,”	Ky	agrees.	He’s	no	longer	smiling	but	his	eyes	are	mischievous.

The	whistle	sounds	behind	and	below	us.	Hearing	it,	I	wonder	how	I	could	have
ever	thought	that	the	birdcall	I	heard	earlier	sounded	anything	like	the	Officer’s
whistle.	One	sounds	metallic	and	man-made	and	the	other	is	high	and	clear	and
lovely.

I	sigh	and	brush	my	hand	across	the	dirt,	returning	the	letters	to	the	earth.	Then	I
reach	for	a	rock	to	make	a	cairn.	Ky	does	the	same.	Together	we	build	the	tower
piece	by	piece.

When	I	put	the	last	rock	on	top	of	the	pile,	Ky	puts	his	hand	over	mine.	I	do	not
pull	it	away.	I	do	not	want	anything	to	fall	and	I	like	the	feeling	of	his	rough
warm	hand	on	top	of	mine	with	the	cool	smooth	surface	of	the	rocks	underneath.
Then	I	turn	my	hand	slowly	so	that	my	palm	is	up	and	our	fingers	intertwine.

“I	can	never	be	Matched,”	he	says,	looking	first	at	our	hands	and	then	into	my
eyes.	“I’m	an	Aberration.”	He	waits	for	my	reaction.

“But	you’re	not	an	Anomaly,”	I	say,	trying	to	make	light	of	things,	knowing
immediately	that	it’s	a	mistake;	there’s	nothing	light	about	this.

“Not	yet,	anyway,”	he	says,	but	the	humor	in	his	voice	sounds	forced.

It	is	one	thing	to	make	a	choice	and	it	is	another	thing	to	never	have	the	chance.	I
feel	a	sharp	cold	loneliness	deep	within	me.	What	would	it	be	like	to	be	alone?
To	know	that	you	could	never	choose	anything	else?

That’s	when	I	realize	that	the	statistics	the	Officials	give	us	do	not	matter	to	me.
I	know	there	are	many	people	who	are	happy	and	I	am	glad	for	them.	But	this	is
Ky.	If	he	is	the	one	person	who	falls	by	the	wayside	while	the	other	ninety-nine
are	happy	and	fulfilled,	that	is	not	right	with	me	anymore.	I	realize	that	I	don’t

173
are	happy	and	fulfilled,	that	is	not	 right	with	 me	anymore.	I	realize	that	I	don’t
care	about	the	Officer	pacing	below	or	the	other	hikers	among	the	trees	or	really
anything	else	at	all,	and	that	is	when	I	realize	how	dangerous	this	truly	is.

“But	if	 you	were	Matched,”	 I	say	softly,	 “what	do	you	think	 she’d	be	like?”

“You,”	 he	says,	almost	before	I’ve	finished.	 “You.”

We	do	not	kiss.	We	do	nothing	but	hold	 on	and	breathe,	but	still	I	know.	I	 cannot
go	gently	now.	Not	even	for	 the	sake	of	my	parents,	my	family.

Not	even	for	Xander.

174
                                            CHAPTER	        22

A	few	days	later,	I	sit	in	Language	and	Literacy,	staring	at	the	instructor	as	she
talks	about	the	importance	of	composing	succinct	messages	when
communicating	via	port.	Then,	as	if	to	illustrate	her	point,	one	such	message
comes	through	the	main	port	in	the	classroom.

“Cassia	Reyes.	Procedural.	Infraction.	An	Official	will	arrive	to	escort	you
shortly.”

Everyone	turns	to	look	at	me.	The	room	goes	silent:	students	stop	tapping	on
their	scribes;	their	fingers	stilled.	Even	the	instructor	allows	an	expression	of
pure	surprise	to	cross	her	face;	she	doesn’t	try	to	keep	teaching.	It’s	been	a	long
time	since	someone	here	committed	an	Infraction.	Especially	one	announced
publicly.

I	stand	up.

In	some	ways,	I	am	ready	for	this.	I	expect	it.	No	one	can	break	as	many	rules	as
I	have	and	not	get	caught	somehow,	sometime.

I	gather	my	reader	and	scribe,	dropping	them	into	my	bag	with	my	tablet
container.	It	seems	very	important,	suddenly,	to	be	ready	for	the	Official.	For	I
have	no	doubt	which	Official	will	come	this	time.	The	first	one,	the	one	from	the
greenspace	near	the	game	center,	the	one	who	told	me	everything	would	be	all
right	and	nothing	would	change	with	my	Match.

Did	she	lie	to	me?	Or	did	she	tell	the	truth,	and	my	choices	made	a	lie	of	her
words?

The	teacher	nods	to	me	as	I	leave	the	room,	and	I	appreciate	this	simple
courtesy.

The	hall	is	empty,	long,	the	floor	slick-surfaced	from	a	recent	cleaning.	Yet
another	place	where	I	cannot	run.

I	don’t	wait	for	them	to	come	for	me.	I	walk	down	the	hall,	setting	my	feet
precisely	on	the	tile,	careful,	careful,	not	to	slip,	not	to	fall,	not	to	run	while	they
are	watching.

175
are	watching.

She	is	there	in	the	greenspace	next	to	the	school.	I	have	to	walk	across	the	paths
to	sit	on	another	bench	under	her	eye.	She	waits.	I	walk.

She	does	not	stand	to	greet	me.	When	I	come	close	to	her,	I	do	not	sit	down.	It’s
bright	out	here,	and	I	squint	my	eyes	against	the	white	of	her	uniform	 and	the
metal	of	the	bench,	both	dazzling,	sharp,	crisp	in	the	sunlight.	I	wonder	 if	she
and	I	see	things	differently	now	that	we	don’t	 just	see	what	we	hope	to	see.

“Hello,	 Cassia,”	she	says.

“Hello.”

“Your	 name	has	come	up	lately	in	several	Society	departments.”	She	gestures
for	me	to	sit.	“Why	 do	you	think	 that	is?”

There	could	be	any	number	of	reasons,	I	think	to	myself.	Where	do	I	 begin?	I’ve
hidden	artifacts,	read	stolen	poems,	learned	how	to	write.	I’ve	 fallen	 in	love	with
someone	who’s	not	my	Match	and	I’m	keeping	that	fact	from	my	Match.

“I’m	 not	sure,”	I	 say.

She	laughs.	“Oh,	Cassia.	You	were	so	honest	with	me	the	last	time	we	talked.	I
should	have	known	it	might	 not	last.”	She	points	at	the	spot	on	the	bench	next	to
her.	“Sit	down.”

I	obey.	The	sun	shines	almost	directly	overhead,	the	light	unflattering.	 Her	skin
looks	papery	and	misted	with	sweat.	Her	edges	seem	blurred,	her	uniform	and	its
insignia	small,	less	powerful	than	the	last	time	we	talked.	 I	tell	myself	 this	so
that	I	won’t	 panic,	so	that	I	won’t	 give	anything	away,	especially	Ky.

“There’s	no	need	to	be	modest,”	she	says.	“Surely	you	have	some	idea	of	how
well	you	performed	 on	your	sorting	test.”

Thank	goodness.	Is	that	why	she’s	here?	But	what	about	the	Infraction?

“You	 have	the	highest	score	of	the	year.	Of	course,	everyone	is	fighting	to	get
you	assigned	to	their	department	for	your	vocation.	We	in	 the	Match	Department
are	always	looking	for	a	good	sorter.”	 She	smiles	at	me.	Like	last	time,	she
offers	relief	and	comfort,	 reassurance	about	my	place	in	the	Society.	I	wonder
why	I	hate	her	so	much.

176
why	I	hate	her	so	much.

In	a	moment	I	know.

“Of	course,”	 she	says,	her	tone	now	touched	with	what	sounds	like	regret,	“I	had
to	tell	the	testing	Officials	 that,	unless	we	see	a	change	in	some	of	your	personal
relationships,	we	would	be	averse	to	hiring	you.	And	 I	had	to	mention	to	them
that	you	might	also	be	unfit	for	 other	sorting-related	work	 if	these	things	keep
up.”

She	doesn’t	look	at	me	as	she	says	all	of	this;	she	watches	the	fountain	in	the
center	of	this	greenspace,	which	I	suddenly	notice	has	run	dry.	Then	she	turns
her	gaze	on	me	and	I	feel	my	heart	racing,	my	pulse	pounding	clear	to	my
fingertips.

She	knows.	Something,	at	least,	if	not	everything.

“Cassia,”	she	says	kindly.	“Teenagers	are	hot-blooded.	Rebellious.	It’s	 part	of
growing	up.	In	fact,	 when	I	checked	your	data,	you	were	predicted	to	have	some
of	these	feelings.”

“I	don’t	 know	what	 you’re	talking	 about.”

“Of	course	you	do,	Cassia.	But	it’s	 nothing	to	worry	 about.	You	might	 have
certain	feelings	for	Ky	 Markham	now,	 but	by	the	time	you	are	twenty-one,	there
is	a	ninety-five	percent	chance	that	it	will	 all	 be	over.”

“Ky	 and	I	are	friends.	We’re	hiking	 partners.”

“Don’t	 you	think	 this	happens	quite	often?”	the	Official	 says,	sounding	amused.
“Almost	 seventy-eight	percent	of	teenagers	who	are	Matched	have	some	kind	of
youthful	fling.	 And	 most	of	those	occur	within	 the	year	or	so	after	the	Matching.
This	is	not	unexpected.”

I	hate	the	Officials	the	most	when	they	do	this:	 when	they	act	as	if	they	have
seen	it	all	before,	as	if	they	have	seen	me	before.	When	really	they	have	never
seen	me	at	all.	Just	my	data	on	a	screen.

“Usually,	 all	we	do	in	these	situations	is	smile	and	let	things	work	 themselves
out.	But	the	stakes	are	higher	for	you	because	of	Ky’s	Aberration	status.	Having
a	fling	with	 a	member	of	Society	in	good	standing	is	one	thing.	For	the	two	 of
you,	it’s	different.	 If	 things	continue,	you	could	be	declared	an	Aberration

177
you,	it’s	different.	 If	 things	continue,	you	could	be	declared	an	Aberration
yourself.	Ky	 Markham,	of	course,	could	be	sent	back	to	the	Outer	Provinces.”
My	blood	 runs	cold,	but	she	isn’t	finished	with	 me	yet.	She	moistens	her	lips,
which	are	as	dry	as	the	fountain	behind	her.	“Do	you	understand?”

“I	can’t	 quit	speaking	to	him.	He’s	 my	hiking	 partner.	We	live	in	 the	same
neighborhood—”

She	interrupts	me.	“Of	course	you	may	talk	with	 him.	There	are	other	lines	you
should	not	cross.	Kissing,	for	example.”	 She	smiles	at	me.	“You	wouldn’t	 want
Xander	to	know	about	this,	would	 you?	You	don’t	 want	to	lose	him,	do	you?”

I	am	angry,	and	my	face	must	show	it.	And	what	 she	says	is	true.	I	don’t	want	to
lose	Xander.

“Cassia.	Do	you	regret	your	decision	to	be	Matched?	Do	you	wish	 that	you	had
chosen	to	be	a	Single?”

“That’s	not	 it.”

“Then	what	is	it?”

“I	think	 people	should	be	able	to	choose	who	they	Match	with,”	 I	say	lamely.

“Where	would	 it	end,	Cassia?”	she	says,	her	voice	patient.	“Would	you	say	next
that	people	should	be	able	to	choose	how	many	children	they	have,	and	where
they	want	to	live?	Or	when	they	want	 to	die?”

I	am	silent,	but	not	because	I	agree.	I	am	thinking	of	Grandfather.	Do	 not	go
gentle.

“What	Infraction	 have	I	committed?”	 I	ask.

“Excuse	me?”

“When	they	called	me	out	of	 school	over	the	port,	the	message	said	I’d
committed	an	Infraction.”

The	Official	 laughs.	Her	laugh	sounds	easy	and	warm,	which	makes	a	shiver	of
cold	prickle	my	 scalp.	“Ah,	 that	was	a	mistake.	Another	one,	it	seems.	They
seem	to	keep	happening	where	you	are	concerned.”	She	leans	a	little	closer.

178
seem	to	keep	happening	where	you	are	concerned.”	She	leans	a	little	closer.
“You	 haven’t	committed	an	Infraction,	 Cassia.	Yet.”

She	stands	up.	I	keep	my	eyes	on	the	dry	fountain,	willing	the	water	back	to	it.
“This	is	your	 warning,	Cassia.	Do	you	understand?”

“I	understand,”	I	 say	to	the	Official.	 The	words	are	not	entirely	a	lie.	I	 do
understand	her,	on	some	level.	I	know	why	she	has	to	keep	things	safe	and	stable
and	some	part	of	me	respects	that.	I	hate	that	most	of	all.

When	I	finally	 meet	her	gaze,	her	expression	is	satisfied.	She	knows	she’s	won.
She	sees	in	my	eyes	that	I	won’t	risk	making	things	worse	for	 Ky.

“There’s	a	delivery	 for	you,”	 Bram	tells	me	when	I	 arrive	home,	his	face	eager.
“Someone	brought	it	by.	It	 must	be	something	good.	I	had	to	have	my	fingerprint
entered	in	their	datapod	when	I	accepted	it.”

He	follows	me	into	 the	kitchen	where	a	small	package	sits	on	the	table.	Looking
at	the	pulpy	brown	paper	wrapped	around	it,	I	think	 how	much	of	Ky’s	 story	 he
could	put	on	those	pages.	But	he	can’t	do	that	anymore.	It’s	too	dangerous.

Still,	I	 can’t	help	but	open	the	paper	carefully.	I	smooth	it	 out	neatly,	taking	my
time.	This	almost	drives	Bram	crazy.	“Come	 on!	Hurry	 up!”	 Deliveries	don’t
happen	every	day.

When	Bram	and	I	finally	 see	what’s	in	the	package	we	both	sigh.	Bram’s	is	a
sigh	of	disappointment	and	mine	is	a	sigh	of	something	else	I	can’t	quite	 define.
Longing?	Nostalgia?

It’s	the	scrap	of	my	dress	from	the	Match	Banquet.	In	 keeping	with	tradition
they	have	placed	the	silk	between	two	pieces	of	clear	glass	with	a	small	silver
frame	around	the	edge.	The	glass	and	the	material	both	reflect	the	light,	blinding
me	for	a	moment	and	reminding	me	of	the	glass	mirror	in	 my	lost	compact.	I
stare	at	the	fabric,	trying	to	remember	the	night	at	the	Match	Banquet	when	we
were	all	pink	and	red	and	gold	and	green	and	violet	and	blue.

Bram	groans.	“That’s	all	 it	is?	A	piece	of	 your	dress?”

“What	did	 you	think,	Bram?”	 I	say,	and	the	acid	in	my	tone	surprises	me.	“Did
you	think	they	were	going	 to	send	our	artifacts	back?	Did	you	think	this	 was
going	to	be	your	watch?	Because	it’s	not.	We’re	not	getting	 any	of	it	back.	Not
the	compact.	Not	the	watch.	Not	Grandfather.”

179
the	compact.	Not	the	watch.	Not	Grandfather.”

Shock	and	hurt	register	on	my	brother’s	face,	and	before	I	can	say	anything	he
leaves	the	room.	“Bram!”	 I	call	 after	him.	“Bram—”

I	hear	the	sound	of	his	door	closing.

I	pick	up	the	box	that	the	framed	sample	came	in.	As	I	do,	I	 realize	that	it	is	the
perfect	size	to	hold	a	watch.	My	brother	dared	to	hope,	and	I	mocked	him	for	 it.

I	want	to	take	this	frame	and	walk	to	 the	middle	of	the	greenspace.	I’ll	stand	next
to	that	dry	fountain	and	wait	 until	the	Official	 finds	 me.	And	when	she	does	and
asks	me	what	I’m	doing,	I’ll	  tell	her	and	everyone	else	that	I	know:	they	are
giving	us	pieces	of	a	real	life	instead	of	the	whole	 thing.	And	I’ll	  tell	her	that	I
don’t	want	my	 life	to	be	samples	and	scraps.	A	taste	of	everything	but	a	meal	of
nothing.

They	have	perfected	the	art	of	giving	us	just	enough	freedom;	just	enough	that
when	we	are	ready	to	snap,	a	little	bone	is	offered	and	we	roll	over,	belly	 up,
comfortable	and	placated	like	a	dog	I	saw	once	when	we	visited	my
grandparents	in	the	Farmlands.	They’ve	had	decades	to	perfect	this;	why	am	I
surprised	when	it	works	on	me	again	and	again	and	again?

Even	though	I	am	ashamed	of	myself,	I	take	the	bone.	I	worry	it	 between	my
teeth.	Ky	has	to	be	safe.	That’s	what	matters.

I	don’t	take	the	green	tablet;	I’m	 still	 stronger	than	they	are.	But	not	strong
enough	to	burn	the	last	bit	of	Ky’s	 story	before	reading	it,	the	piece	he	pressed
into	my	hand	earlier	on	our	way	back	down	 through	the	forest.	No	more	after
this,	I	tell	myself.	 Only	this,	no	more.

This	picture	is	the	first	 one	with	color.	A	 red	sun,	low	in	the	sky,	right	 on	the
napkin	crease	again	so	that	it	is	part	of	both	boys,	both	lives.	The	younger	Ky
has	dropped	the	words	of	father	and	mother;	they	have	vanished	from	the
picture.	Forgotten,	or	left	behind,	or	 so	much	a	part	of	him	that	they	don’t	have
to	be	written	anymore.	He	looks	over	at	the	older	Ky,	 reaches	for	him.

they	were	too	much	to	carry

so	I	left	them	behind

180
for	a	new	life,	in	 a	new	place

but	no	one	forgot	who	I	was

I	didn’t

and	neither	did	the	people	who	watch

they	watched	for	years

they	watch	now

The	older,	current	Ky’s	 hands	are	in	handlocks	in	front	of	him,	 an	Official	 on
each	side.	He’s	colored	his	hands	red,	too—I	don’t	know	 if	he	means	to
represent	the	way	they	look	after	he’s	been	working,	or	if	 he	means	something
else.	His	parents’	blood	still	on	his	 hands	from	all	those	years	ago,	even	though
he	did	not	kill	 them.

The	hands	of	the	Officials	are	red,	too.	And	I	 recognize	one	of	them;	he’s	caught
her	face	in	a	few	lines,	a	few	sharp	strokes.

My	Official.	  She	came	for	him,	too.

181
                                            CHAPTER	        23

The	next	morning	I	wake	to	a	shrieking	so	high	and	keening	that	I	bolt	straight
out	of	bed,	tearing	the	sleep	tags	from	my	skin.

“Bram!”	I	scream.

He	is	not	in	his	room.

I	run	down	the	hall	to	my	parents’	room.	My	mother	came	home	from	her	trip
last	night;	they	should	both	be	there.	But	their	room	is	empty,	too,	and	I	can	tell
they	left	in	a	hurry:	I	see	twisted	sheets	and	a	blanket	on	the	floor.	I	draw	back.
It’s	been	a	long	time	since	I’ve	seen	their	bed	unmade	and,	even	in	the	fear	of
the	moment,	the	intimacy	of	that	tangled	bedding	catches	my	eye.

“Cassia?”	My	mother’s	voice.

“Where	are	you?”	I	call	in	a	panic,	turning	around.

She	hurries	down	the	hall	toward	me,	still	wearing	her	sleepclothes.	Her	long,
blond	hair	streams	behind	her,	and	she	looks	almost	unearthly	until	she	pulls	me
into	arms	that	feel	real	and	strong.	“What	happened?”	she	asks	me.	“Are	you	all
right?”

“The	screaming—”	I	say,	looking	around	her	for	the	source.	Just	then	I	hear
another	sound	added	to	the	screaming:	the	sound	of	metal	on	wood.

“It’s	not	screaming,”	my	mother	says,	her	voice	sad.	“You’re	hearing	the	saws.
They’re	cutting	down	the	maple	trees.”

I	hurry	out	onto	the	front	steps	where	Bram	and	my	father	also	stand.	Other
families	wait	outside,	too,	many	of	them	still	wearing	their	sleepclothes	like	us.
This	is	another	intimacy	so	shocking	and	unusual	that	I	am	taken	aback.	I	can’t
think	of	another	time	when	I’ve	seen	any	of	my	neighbors	dressed	like	this.

Or	maybe	I	can.	The	time	when	Patrick	Markham	went	out	and	walked	up	and
down	the	street	in	his	sleepclothes	after	his	son	died,	and	Xander’s	father	found
him	and	brought	him	home.

The	saw	bites	into	the	trunk	of	our	maple	tree,	slices	through	so	fast	and	clean

182
The	saw	bites	into	the	trunk	of	our	maple	tree,	slices	through	so	fast	and	clean
that	at	first	I	think	 nothing	happened	except	the	scream.	The	tree	seems	fine	for	a
brief	moment,	but	it	 is	dead	as	it	stands.	Then	it	falls.

“Why?”	 I	ask	my	mother.

When	she	doesn’t	answer	right	away,	my	father	puts	his	arm	around	her	and	tells
me.	“The	maple	trees	have	become	too	much	of	a	problem.	The	leaves	get	too
messy	in	the	fall.	They’re	 not	growing	uniformly.	  For	example,	ours	grew	too
big.	Em’s	is	too	small.	 And	some	of	them	have	diseases,	so	they	all	need	to	be
chopped	down.”

I	look	at	our	tree,	at	its	leaves	still	reaching	for	 the	sun,	still	working	 to	turn	light
into	food.	They	don’t	 know	they	are	dead	yet.	Our	yard	looks	like	 a	different
place	without	the	tree	standing	tall	in	front	 of	our	house.	Things	seem	smaller.

I	look	over	at	Em’s	 house.	Her	yard,	on	the	other	hand,	doesn’t	look	much
different	now	that	their	 sad	little	tree	is	gone,	the	one	that	never	quite	grew.	It
was	never	much	more	than	a	stick-stalk	of	a	tree	with	a	little	 burst	of	leaves	on
the	top.	“It’s	 not	as	bad	for	Em,”	I	 say.	“Her	tree	isn’t	as	much	of	a	loss.”

“It’s	 sad	for	all	of	us,”	 my	mother	says	fiercely.

Last	night	when	I	couldn’t	 sleep,	I	crouched	down	near	the	wall	to	listen	 to	her
talk	with	 my	father.	They	spoke	so	softly	that	I	 couldn’t	make	out	any	of	 the
words,	but	she	sounded	tired	and	sad.	Eventually	I	gave	up	and	climbed	back
into	bed.	Now	she	looks	angry,	standing	in	front	 of	the	house	with	her	arms
folded	across	her	chest.

The	workers	with	the	saws	have	already	moved	on	to	another	house	now	that	our
tree	is	down.	That	part	was	easy.	Tearing	up	the	roots	will	be	the	hard	part.

My	father	holds	my	 mother	close.	He	doesn’t	love	the	trees	the	way	she	does;
but	he	loves	other	things	that	were	destroyed	and	he	understands.	My	mother
loves	the	plants;	my	father	loves	the	history	of	things.	 They	love	each	other.

And	I	love	 them	both.

It	isn’t	 only	myself	 and	Ky	and	Xander	I’ll	 hurt	if	 I	commit	 an	Infraction.	 It’s	all
these	other	people	I	love.

183
“It’s	a	warning,”	my	mother	says,	almost	to	herself.

“I	didn’t	do	anything!”	Bram	exclaims.	“I	haven’t	even	been	late	to	school	in
weeks!”

“The	warning	isn’t	for	you,”	my	mother	says.	“It’s	for	someone	else.”

My	father	puts	his	hands	on	my	mother’s	shoulders	and	it	is	as	though	they	are
alone,	the	way	he	looks	at	her.	“Molly,	I	promise.	I	didn’t	…”

And	at	the	same	time,	I	open	my	mouth	to	say	something—I	don’t	know	what—
something	about	what	I	have	done	and	how	this	is	all	my	fault.	But	before	my
father	can	finish	and	I	can	begin,	my	mother	speaks.

“It’s	a	warning	for	me.”

She	turns	and	goes	back	into	the	house,	brushing	a	hand	across	her	eyes.	As	I
watch	her	go,	the	guilt	slices	quick	through	me	like	the	cuts	in	the	tree.

I	don’t	think	the	warning	is	for	my	mother.

If	the	Officials	truly	can	see	my	dreams,	they	should	be	happy	with	what	I
dreamed	last	night.	I	burned	the	last	of	Ky’s	story	in	the	incinerator,	but
afterward	I	kept	thinking	of	what	it	showed,	what	it	told	me:	The	sun	was	red
and	low	in	the	sky	when	the	Officials	came	to	get	him.

So	then,	when	I	dreamed,	I	saw	scene	after	scene	of	Ky	surrounded	by	Officials
in	their	white	uniforms	with	a	red	sky	behind	him,	a	glimpse	of	sun	waiting	on
the	horizon.	Whether	it	was	rising	or	setting,	I	could	not	tell;	I	had	no	sense	of
direction	in	the	dream.	In	each	dream	he	did	not	show	any	fear.	His	hands	did
not	shake;	his	expression	remained	calm.	But	I	knew	he	was	afraid,	and	when
the	red	light	of	the	sun	hit	his	face	it	looked	like	blood.

I	do	not	want	to	see	this	scene	played	out	in	real	life.	But	I	have	to	know	more.
How	did	he	escape	last	time?	What	happened?

The	two	desires	struggle	within	me:	the	desire	to	be	safe,	and	the	desire	to	know.
I	cannot	tell	which	one	will	win.

My	mother	hardly	speaks	as	we	ride	the	train	to	the	Arboretum	together.	She
looks	over	at	me	and	smiles	now	and	then,	but	I	can	tell	she’s	deep	in	thought.

184
looks	over	at	me	and	smiles	now	and	then,	but	I	can	tell	she’s	deep	in	thought.
When	I	ask	her	questions	about	her	trip,	she	answers	carefully,	and	finally	I	stop.

Ky	rides	the	same	air	train	we	do,	and	he	and	I	walk	together	toward	the	Hill.	 I
try	to	act	friendly	 but	reserved—the	way	we	once	were	around	each	other—even
though	I	want	to	touch	his	hand	again,	to	look	in	 his	eyes	and	ask	him	about	the
story.	About	what	happened	next.

It	only	takes	a	few	seconds	in	the	forest	before	I	lose	control	and	I	have	to	ask
him.	I	put	my	 hand	on	his	arm	as	we	follow	our	path	to	the	spot	where	we	last
marked.	When	I	touch	him	he	smiles	at	me,	and	it	warms	my	heart	and	makes	it
hard	to	take	my	hand	away,	to	let	go.	I	don’t	 know	if	 I	can	do	this,	despite
wanting	him	to	be	safe	even	more	than	I	want	him.

“Ky.	 An	Official	  contacted	me	yesterday.	She	knows	about	us.	They	know	about
us.”

Ky	nods.	“Of	 course	they	do.”

“Did	 they	talk	to	you,	too?”

“They	did.”

For	someone	who	has	spent	his	entire	life	avoiding	attention	from	the	Officials,
he	seems	remarkably	composed	about	this.	His	eyes	are	deep	as	ever	but	there	is
a	calm	there	that	I	haven’t	seen	before.

“Aren’t	 you	worried?”

Ky	doesn’t	answer.	Instead,	he	reaches	into	the	pocket	of	his	shirt	and	pulls	out	a
paper.	He	hands	it	to	me.	It’s	different	from	 the	brown	paper	of	napkins	and
wrappings	that	he’s	been	using—whiter,	smoother.	The	writing	 on	it	 is	not	his
own.	It’s	from	 some	kind	of	port	 or	scribe,	but	something	about	it	seems	foreign.

“What	is	this?”	 I	ask.

“A	 late	birthday	present	for	you.	A	 poem.”

My	jaw	 drops—a	poem?	How?—and	Ky	hurries	to	reassure	me.	“Don’t	 worry.
We’ll	 destroy	the	paper	soon	so	we	don’t	get	in	trouble.	It	won’t	 take	long	to
memorize.”	His	 face	is	alight	with	 happiness	and	I	suddenly	realize	that	Ky

185
looks	the	slightest	bit	like	Xander,	with	his	face	open	and	joyful	like	this.	I	am
reminded	of	the	shifting	faces	on	the	portscreen	the	day	after	I	got	my	Match,
when	I	saw	Xander,	then	Ky.	But	now,	I	see	only	Ky.	Only	Ky	and	no	one	else.

A	poem.	“Did	you	write	it?”

“No,”	he	says,	“but	it’s	by	the	same	man	who	wrote	the	other	poem.	Do	not	go
gentle.”

“How?”	 I	ask	him.	There	were	no	other	poems	by	Dylan	Thomas	in	the	port	at
school.

Ky	shakes	his	head,	evading	my	question.	“It’s	not	the	whole	thing.	I	could	only
afford	part	of	a	stanza.”	Before	I	can	ask	what	he	gave	in	exchange	for	the	poem,
he	clears	his	throat	a	little	nervously	and	looks	down	at	his	hands.	“I	liked	it
because	it	mentions	a	birthday	and	because	it	reminds	me	of	you.	How	I	felt
when	I	saw	you	that	first	day,	in	the	water	at	the	pool.”	He	looks	confused	and	I
see	a	trace	of	sadness	on	his	face.	“Don’t	you	like	it?”

I	hold	the	white	paper,	but	my	eyes	are	so	blurred	with	tears	that	I	can’t	read	it.
“Here,”	I	say,	thrusting	the	poem	back	at	him.	“Will	you	read	it	to	me?”	I	turn
away	and	start	walking	through	the	trees,	staggering	almost,	so	blinded	am	I	by
the	beauty	of	his	surprise	and	so	overwhelmed	by	possibility	and	impossibility.

Behind	me,	I	hear	Ky’s	voice.	I	stop	and	listen.

My	birthday	began	with	the	water—

Birds	and	the	birds	of	the	winged	trees	flying	my	name

Above	the	farms	and	the	white	horses

And	I	rose

In	rainy	autumn

And	walked	abroad	in	a	shower	of	all	my	days.

I	begin	walking	again,	not	bothering	with	cairns	or	cloths	or	anything	that	might
slow	me	down.	I’m	careless	and	I	disturb	a	group	of	birds,	which	flutters	up	and
away	from	us	into	the	sky.	White	on	blue,	like	the	colors	of	City	Hall.	Like	the

186
away	from	us	into	the	sky.	White	 on	blue,	like	the	colors	of	 City	Hall.	 Like	 the
colors	of	angels.

“They’re	 flying	 your	name,”	Ky	 says	from	behind	me.

I	turn	around	and	I	see	him	standing	in	the	forest,	the	white	poem	in	his	hand.

The	birds’	cries	fly	 away	on	the	air	with	 them.	In	the	quiet	that	follows	 I	don’t
know	who	moves	first,	 Ky	or	me,	but	soon	there	we	are,	standing	close	but	not
touching,	breathing	in	but	not	kissing.

Ky	leans	toward	me,	his	eyes	holding	mine,	near	enough	that	I	can	hear	the
slight	crackle	of	the	poem	as	he	moves.

I	close	my	eyes	as	his	lips	touch	warm	on	my	cheek.	I	think	of	 the	cottonwood
seeds	brushing	against	me	that	day	on	the	air	train.	Soft,	light,	full	of	 promise.

187
                                            CHAPTER	        24

Ky	gives	me	three	gifts	for	my	birthday.	A	poem,	a	kiss,	and	the	hopeless,
beautiful	belief	that	things	might	work.	When	I	open	my	eyes,	as	I	put	my	hand
up	to	the	place	on	my	cheek	where	his	lips	touched,	I	say,	“I	didn’t	give	you
anything	on	your	birthday,	I	don’t	even	know	when	it	is.”	And	he	says,	“Don’t
worry	about	that,”	and	I	say,	“What	can	I	do?”	and	he	answers,	“Let	me	believe
in	this,	all	of	this,	and	you	believe	it,	too.”

And	I	do.

For	one	entire	day	I	let	his	kiss	burn	on	my	cheek	and	into	my	blood,	and	I	don’t
push	the	memory	away.	I	have	kissed	and	been	kissed	before.	This	is	different.
This,	more	than	my	real	birthday	the	day	of	the	Match	Banquet,	feels	like	a	day
to	mark	time	by.	This	kiss,	these	words,	they	feel	like	beginning.

I	let	myself	imagine	futures	that	can	never	be,	the	two	of	us	together.	Even	when
I	sort	later	that	day,	I	keep	my	mind	on	the	task	at	hand	by	pretending	each
number	sorted	is	a	code,	a	message	to	Ky	that	I	will	keep	our	secret.	I	will	keep
us	safe;	I	won’t	reveal	a	thing.	Each	sort	I	perform	correctly	keeps	attention
away	from	us.

Since	it	is	not	my	turn	for	the	sleep	tags	that	night,	I	let	my	dreams	take	me
where	they	will.	To	my	surprise,	I	don’t	dream	of	Ky	on	the	Hill.	I	dream	of	him
sitting	on	the	steps	in	front	of	my	house,	watching	the	wind	shuffle	the	leaves	of
the	maple	tree.	I	dream	of	him	taking	me	to	the	private	dining	hall	and	pulling
my	chair	out,	bending	so	close	to	me	that	even	the	pretend	candles	flutter	at	his
presence.	I	dream	of	the	two	of	us	digging	up	the	newroses	in	his	yard	and	of	Ky
teaching	me	how	to	use	the	artifact.	Everything	I	dream	is	something	simple	and
plain	and	everyday.

That’s	how	I	know	they	are	dreams.	Because	the	simple	and	plain	and	everyday
things	are	the	ones	that	we	can	never	have.

“How?”	I	ask	him	the	next	day	on	the	Hill,	once	we	are	deep	enough	into	the
forest	that	no	one	can	hear	us.	“How	can	we	believe	this	might	work?	The
Official	threatened	to	send	you	back	to	the	Outer	Provinces,	Ky!”

Ky	doesn’t	answer	for	a	moment,	and	I	feel	as	though	I’ve	yelled	when	really	I

188
Ky	doesn’t	answer	for	a	moment,	and	I	feel	as	though	I’ve	yelled	when	really	I
kept	my	voice	as	low	as	possible.	Then	we	walk	past	the	cairn	from	our	last	hike
and	he	looks	straight	at	me	and	I	swear	I	feel	that	kiss	again.	But	this	time,	I	feel
it	on	my	lips	instead.

“Have	you	ever	heard	of	the	prisoner’s	dilemma?”	Ky	asks	me.

“Of	course.”	Is	he	teasing	me?	“It’s	the	game	you	played	against	Xander.	We’ve
all	played	it	before.”

“No,	not	the	game.	The	Society	changed	the	game.	I	mean	the	theory	behind	the
game.”

I	don’t	know	what	he’s	talking	about.	“I	guess	not.”

“If	two	people	commit	a	crime	together,	are	caught,	and	then	separated	and
interrogated,	what	happens?”

I	am	still	lost.	“I	don’t	know.	What?”

“That’s	their	dilemma.	Do	they	tell	on	each	other	in	hopes	that	the	Officials	will
go	easy	on	them—a	plea	bargain?	Do	they	refuse	to	say	anything	that	would
betray	their	partner?	The	best	scenario	is	for	both	to	say	nothing.	Then	they	can
both	be	safe.”

We’ve	stopped	near	a	group	of	fallen	trees.	“Safe,”	I	say.

Ky	nods.	“But	that	never	happens.”

“Why	not?”

“Because	one	prisoner	will	almost	always	betray	the	other.	They’ll	tell	what	they
know	to	get	a	break.”

I	think	I	know	what	he’s	asking	me.	I’m	getting	better	at	reading	his	eyes,	at
knowing	his	thoughts.	Perhaps	it	comes	from	knowing	his	story,	from	finally
knowing	more	of	him.	I	hand	him	a	red	cloth;	neither	of	us	try	anymore	not	to	let
our	fingers	touch,	come	together,	cling	before	letting	go.

Ky	continues.	“But	in	the	perfect	scenario,	neither	would	say	anything.”

“And	you	think	we	can	do	that?”

189
“And	 you	think	we	can	do	that?”

“We’ll	 never	be	safe,”	Ky	 says,	brushing	my	face	with	his	hand.	“I	 finally
understand	that.	But	I	trust	you.	We’ll	 keep	each	other	as	safe	as	we	can	for	as
long	as	we	can.”

Which	means	that	our	kisses	have	to	stay	promises,	promises	left	like	his	first
kiss,	soft	on	my	cheek.	Our	lips	do	not	meet.	Not	yet.	For	 once	we	do	that,	the
Infraction	will	  have	been	committed.	The	Society	will	 be	betrayed.	And	so	will
Xander.	We	both	know	this.	How	 much	time	can	we	steal	from	them?	From
ourselves?	Because	I	can	see	in	his	eyes	that	he	wants	that	kiss	as	much	as	I	do.

There	are	other	parts	to	our	lives:	many	hours	of	work	for	 Ky;	sorting	 and
Second	School	for	me.	But	when	I	look	 back,	I	know	those	moments	won’t	 be
remembered	the	way	I	remember	each	detail	of	those	days	with	Ky,	hiking	 on
the	Hill.

Except	one	memory,	of	a	strained	Saturday	night	at	the	showing	theater	where
Xander	holds	my	hand	and	Ky	acts	as	though	nothing	is	different.	There	is	a
terrible	moment	at	the	end	when	the	lights	go	up	and	I	see	the	Official	from	 the
greenspace	looking	around.	When	she	meets	my	eyes	and	sees	my	hand	in
Xander’s	she	looks	at	me	and	gives	me	a	tiny	smile	and	disappears.	I	glance	over
at	Xander	after	she’s	gone	and	an	ache	of	longing	goes	through	me,	an	ache	so
deep	and	real	that	I	can	still	feel	it	later,	when	I	 think	of	that	night.	 The	longing
isn’t	for	 Xander,	it’s	for	 the	way	things	used	to	be	between	us.	No	secrets,	no
complications.

But	still.	 Though	I	feel	guilty	 about	Xander,	though	I	 worry	for	 him,	these	days
belong	to	Ky,	to	me.	To	learning	 more	stories	and	writing	more	letters.

Sometimes	Ky	asks	me	if	I	remember	things.	“Remember	Bram’s	 first	day	of
school?”	he	asks	me	one	day	as	we	move	fast	through	the	forest	to	make	up	for
all	the	time	we	spent	writing	 earlier	on	the	hike.

“Of	course,”	 I	say,	breathless	from	hurrying	and	from	 thinking	about	his	hands
on	mine.	“Bram	wanted	to	stay	home.	He	caused	a	scene	at	the	air-train	stop.
Everyone	remembers	that.”	Children	start	First	School	the	autumn	after	they	turn
six.	It’s	supposed	to	be	an	important	rite	of	passage,	a	prequel	to	the	Banquets	to
come.	At	the	end	of	the	first	successful	day,	the	children	bring	 a	small	cake
home	to	eat	after	dinner,	along	with	a	tangle	of	brightly	 colored	balloons.	I	 don’t
know	which	Bram	 was	more	excited	about—the	cake,	which	we	have	so	rarely,

190
know	which	Bram	 was	more	excited	about—the	cake,	which	we	have	so	rarely,
or	the	balloons,	which	are	unique	to	the	occasion	of	the	First	Day.	That	was	also
the	day	he	would	receive	his	reader	and	scribe,	but	Bram	didn’t	care	one	bit
about	that	part	of	it.

When	the	time	came	to	board	the	train	to	First	School,	Bram	wouldn’t	 get	on.	“I
don’t	want	to	go,”	 he	said.	“I’ll	 stay	here	instead.”

It	was	morning	and	the	station	brimmed	with	 people	leaving	for	work	 and
school.	Heads	turned	to	look	at	us	as	Bram	refused	to	board	the	air	train	with	my
parents.	My	father	looked	worried	 but	my	mother	took	it	 in	stride.	“Don’t
worry,”	 she	whispered	to	me.	“The	Officials	 in	charge	of	his	pre-School	care
center	warned	me	this	might	happen.	They	predicted	he’d	have	a	little	trouble
with	this	milestone.”	 Then	she	knelt	down	next	to	him	 and	told	him,	“Let’s	 get
on	the	train,	Bram.	Remember	the	balloons.	Remember	the	cake.”

“I	don’t	 want	them.”	 And	then,	to	everyone’s	surprise,	he	began	to	cry.	Bram
never	cried,	not	even	back	when	he	was	very	small.	All	the	confidence	left	 my
mother’s	face,	and	she	put	her	arms	around	him	and	held	him	tight.	Bram	is	the
second	child	she	thought	she	might	never	have.	After	having	me	quickly	 and
easily,	it	took	her	years	to	become	pregnant	with	him,	and	he	was	born	weeks
before	her	thirty-first	 birthday,	the	cutoff	 age	for	having	children.	 We	all	feel
lucky	to	have	Bram,	but	my	 mother	especially.

I	knew	if	 the	crying	kept	up	much	longer	we’d	 be	in	trouble.	Back	then,	an
Official	 assigned	to	watch	out	for	problems	lived	 on	each	street.

So	I	said	loudly	to	Bram,	 “Too	bad	for	 you.	No	reader,	no	scribe.	You’ll	 never
know	how	to	write.	 You’ll	 never	know	 how	to	read.”

“That’s	not	 true!”	Bram	 yelled.	“I	 can	learn.”

“How?”	 I	asked	him.

He	narrowed	his	eyes,	but	at	least	he	stopped	crying.	“I	don’t	care	if	I	 can’t	read
or	write.”

“That’s	fine,”	 I	 said,	and	out	of	the	corner	of	my	eye	I	saw	someone	knocking	on
the	Official’s	 door	at	the	house	right	next	to	the	air-train	 stop.	No.	Bram	already
has	too	many	citations	from	the	care	center.

191
The	train	swooshed	to	a	stop	and	in	that	moment	I	knew	what	I	had	to	do.	I
picked	up	his	schoolbag	and	held	it	out	to	him.	“It’s	  up	to	you,”	I	 said,	looking
right	into	his	eyes	and	holding	his	gaze.	“You	 can	grow	up	or	you	can	be	a
baby.”

Bram	looked	hurt.	I	 shoved	the	bag	into	his	arms	and	whispered	into	his	ear,	“I
know	a	way	to	play	games	on	the	scribe.”

“Really?”

I	nodded.

Bram’s	face	lit	 up.	He	took	the	bag	and	went	through	the	air-train	doors	without
a	backward	glance.	My	parents	and	I	climbed	on	after	him,	and	my	mother
hugged	me	tight	once	we	were	inside.	“Thank	you,”	 she	said.

There	weren’t	any	games	on	the	scribe,	of	course.	I	had	to	invent	some,	but	I’m
not	a	natural	sorter	for	nothing.	It	 took	Bram	months	to	figure	 out	that	none	of
the	other	kids	had	older	siblings	who	hid	patterns	and	pictures	in	screens	full	of
letters	and	then	timed	them	to	see	how	fast	they	could	find	them	all.

That	was	why	I	knew	before	anyone	else	that	Bram	would	never	be	a	sorter.	But
I	still	 invented	levels	and	records	of	achievement	and	spent	almost	all	my	free
time	during	those	months	coming	up	with	 games	I	thought	he	would	like.	And
even	when	he	figured	it	out,	he	wasn’t	mad.	We’d	 had	too	much	fun,	and	after
all,	I	hadn’t	 lied.	I	had	known	 a	way	to	play	games	on	the	scribe.

“That	was	the	day,”	Ky	 says	now,	and	stops.

“What?”

“The	day	I	knew	 about	you.”

“Why?”	 I	say,	feeling	hurt	 somehow.	“Because	you	could	see	I	followed	the
rules?	That	I	made	my	brother	follow	 them,	too?”

“No,”	 he	says,	as	if	it	should	be	obvious.	“Because	I	saw	the	way	you	cared
about	your	brother	and	because	I	saw	that	you	were	smart	enough	to	help	him.”
Then	he	smiles	at	me.	“I	already	knew	what	you	looked	 like,	but	that	day	was
when	I	first	knew	 about	you.”

192
“Oh,”	I	say.

“What	about	me?”	he	asks.

“What	do	you	mean?”

“When	did	you	first	see	me?”

For	some	reason	I	can’t	tell	him.	I	can’t	tell	him	that	it	was	his	face	on	the	screen
the	morning	after	my	Match	Banquet—the	mistake—that	made	me	first	begin	to
think	of	him	this	way.	I	can’t	tell	him	that	I	didn’t	see	him	until	they	told	me	to
look.

“On	the	top	of	the	first	hill,”	I	say	instead.	And	I	wish	that	I	did	not	have	to	tell
him	this	lie,	when	he	knows	more	of	my	truth	than	anyone	else	in	the	world.

Later	that	night	I	realize	that	Ky	did	not	give	me	any	more	of	his	story	and	I	did
not	ask.	Perhaps	it	is	because	now	I	live	in	his	story.	Now	I	am	a	part	of	his,	and
he	of	mine,	and	the	part	we	write	together	sometimes	feels	like	the	only	part	that
matters.

But	still,	the	question	haunts	me:	What	happened	when	the	Officials	took	him
away	and	the	sun	was	red	and	low	in	the	sky?

193
                                            CHAPTER	        25

Our	time	together	feels	like	a	storm,	like	wild	wind	and	rain,	like	something	too
big	to	handle	but	too	powerful	to	escape.	It	blows	around	me	and	tangles	my
hair,	leaves	water	on	my	face,	makes	me	know	that	I	am	alive,	alive,	alive.	There
are	moments	of	calm	and	pause	as	there	are	in	every	storm,	and	moments	when
our	words	fork	lightning,	at	least	for	each	other.

We	hurry	up	the	Hill	together,	touching	hands,	touching	trees.	Talking.	Ky	has
things	to	tell	me	and	I	have	things	to	tell	him	and	there	is	not	enough	time,	not
enough	time,	never	enough	time.

“There	are	people	who	call	themselves	Archivists,”	Ky	says.	“Back	when	the
Hundred	Committee	made	their	selections,	the	Archivists	knew	the	works	that
didn’t	get	selected	would	become	a	commodity.	So	they	saved	some	of	them.
The	Archivists	have	illegal	ports,	ones	they’ve	built	themselves,	for	storing
things.	They	saved	the	Thomas	poem	I	brought	you.”

“I	had	no	idea,”	I	say,	touched.	I	never	thought	that	someone	might	think	far
enough	ahead	to	save	some	of	the	poems.	Did	Grandfather	know	this?	It	doesn’t
seem	like	he	did.	He	never	gave	them	his	poems	to	save.

Ky	puts	his	hand	on	my	arm.	“Cassia.	The	Archivists	aren’t	altruistic.	They	saw
a	commodity	and	they	did	what	they	could	to	preserve	it.	Anyone	can	have	it
who’s	willing	to	pay,	but	their	prices	are	high.”	He	stops	as	though	he’s	revealed
too	much—that	this	poem	cost	him	something.

“What	did	you	trade	with	them?”	I	ask,	suddenly	afraid.	As	far	as	I	know,	Ky
has	two	things	of	value:	his	artifact	and	the	words	of	the	Do	not	go	gentle	poem.
I	don’t	want	him	to	give	up	the	artifact,	his	last	tie	to	his	family.	And	for	some
reason,	the	thought	of	our	poem	being	traded	repulses	me.	Selfishly,	I	don’t	want
just	anyone	to	have	it.	I	realize	that	I’m	not	much	better	than	the	Officials	in	this
regard.

“Something,”	he	says,	and	his	eyes	are	amused.	“Don’t	worry	about	the	price.”

“Your	artifact—”

194
“Don’t	worry.	I	didn’t	trade	that.	I	didn’t	trade	our	poem,	either.	But	Cassia,	if
you	ever	need	to,	they	don’t	know	about	the	poem.	I	asked	how	many	Dylan
Thomas	writings	they	had	and	they	didn’t	have	much.	The	birthday	poem,	and	a
story.	That	was	all.”

“If	I	ever	need	to	what?”

“Trade,”	he	says	carefully.	“Trade	for	something	else.	The	Archivists	have
information,	connections.	You	could	tell	them	one	of	the	poems	your
grandfather	gave	you.”	He	frowns.	“Although	proving	authenticity	might	be	a
problem,	since	you	don’t	have	the	original	paper	.	.	.	still,	I’m	sure	they	would	be
worth	something.”

“I’d	be	too	afraid	to	trade	with	people	like	that,”	I	say,	and	then	I	wish	I	hadn’t.	I
don’t	want	Ky	to	think	I	get	scared	easily.

“They’re	not	completely	evil,”	he	says.	“I’m	trying	to	get	you	to	see	that	they’re
no	better	or	worse	than	anyone	else.	No	better	or	worse	than	the	Officials.	You
have	to	be	careful	with	the	Archivists	the	same	way	you	have	to	be	careful	with
everyone	else.”

“Where	would	I	find	them?”	I	ask	him,	frightened	by	his	need	to	let	me	know
this.	What	does	he	think	is	going	to	happen?	Why	does	he	think	I	might	need	to
know	how	to	sell	our	poem?

“The	Museum,”	he	tells	me.	“Go	to	the	basement	and	stand	in	front	of	the
exhibit	about	the	Glorious	History	of	Oria	Province.	No	one	ever	goes	there.	If
you	stay	long	enough,	someone	will	ask	you	if	you	want	them	to	tell	you	more
about	the	history.	You	say	yes.	They’ll	know	you	want	contact	with	an
Archivist.”

“How	do	you	know	this?”	I	ask	him,	surprised	again	at	all	the	ways	he	knows
how	to	survive.

He	shakes	his	head.	“It’s	better	if	I	don’t	tell	you.”

“What	if	someone	goes	there	who	really	does	want	to	know	more	about	the
history?”

Ky	laughs.	“No	one	ever	does,	Cassia.	No	one	here	wants	to	know	anything
about	the	past.”

195
about	the	past.”

We	hurry	on,	hands	still	touching	 through	the	branches.	I	hear	Ky	humming	a
piece	of	one	of	the	Hundred	Songs,	the	one	we	heard	together.	“I	love	that	one,”
I	say,	and	he	nods.	“The	woman	who	sings	it	has	such	a	beautiful	voice.”

“If	 only	it	 were	real,”	he	says.

“What	do	you	mean?”	I	 ask	him.

He	looks	at	me,	surprised.	“Her	voice.	She’s	not	real.	It’s	 generated.	The	perfect
voice.	Like	all	 of	the	singers,	in	all	of	 the	songs.	Didn’t	you	know	 that?”

I	shake	my	head,	disbelieving.	“That	can’t	 be	right.	When	she’s	singing,	I	 can
hear	her	breathe.”

“That’s	part	of	 it,”	 Ky	says,	his	eyes	distant,	remembering	something.	“They
know	that	we	like	 to	feel	that	things	are	authentic.	We	like	to	hear	them
breathe.”

“How	 do	you	know?”

“I’ve	 heard	real	people	singing,”	he	says.

“So	have	I,	at	school.	And	my	 father	sang	to	me.”

“No,”	 he	says.	“I	mean,	singing	out,	as	loud	as	you	can.	Whenever	you	felt	like
it.	I’ve	 heard	people	sing	like	that,	but	not	here.	And	even	the	most	beautiful
voice	in	the	world	 didn’t	sound	anywhere	near	as	perfect	as	that	voice	in	the
music	hall.”

For	a	split	second,	I	imagine	him	at	home	in	that	landscape	he	has	drawn	for	me,
listening	to	others	sing.	Ky	 glances	up	at	the	sun	blinking	through	the	trees
above	us.	He’s	gauging	the	time.	He	trusts	the	sun	more	than	his	watch.	I’ve
noticed	this.	As	he	stands	there,	shielding	his	eyes	with	one	hand,	another	line
from	the	Thomas	poem	comes	to	mind

Wild	men	who	caught	and	sang	the	sun	in	flight

I	would	like	 to	hear	Ky	sing.

Ky	reaches	into	his	pocket,	pulls	out	my	birthday	 poem.	“Do	 you	know	it	 well

196
Ky	reaches	into	his	pocket,	pulls	out	my	birthday	poem.	“Do	you	know	it	well
enough	yet?”

I	know	what	he’s	saying.	It’s	time	to	destroy	the	poem.	It’s	dangerous	to	keep	it
for	too	long.

“Yes,”	I	say.	“But	let	me	look	at	it	one	more	time.”	I	read	it	over	and	look	back
up	at	Ky.	“It’s	not	as	sad	to	destroy	this	one,”	I	say,	telling	him	and	reminding
myself.	“Other	people	know	it.	It	still	exists	somewhere	else.”

He	nods	at	me.

“Do	you	want	me	to	take	it	home	and	incinerate	it?”	I	ask.

“I	thought	we	could	leave	it	here,”	he	says.	“Bury	it,	in	the	ground.”

I’m	reminded	of	planting	with	Xander.	But	this	poem	has	nothing	tied	to	it;	it’s
severed,	neat	and	clean,	from	where	it	came.	We	know	the	name	of	the	author.
We	don’t	know	anything	about	him,	don’t	know	what	he	wanted	the	poem	to
mean,	what	he	thought	when	he	formed	the	words,	how	he	wrote	it.	That	long
ago,	were	there	scribes?	I	can’t	remember	from	the	Hundred	History	Lessons.	Or
did	he	write	it	as	Ky	writes,	with	his	hands?	Did	the	poet	know	how	lucky	he
was,	to	have	such	beautiful	words	and	a	place	to	put	them	and	keep	them?

Ky	reaches	for	the	poem.

“Wait,”	I	say.	“Let’s	not	bury	all	of	it.”	I	hold	out	my	hand	for	the	paper	and	he
gives	it	to	me,	smoothing	it	flat	over	my	palm.	There’s	not	much	to	the	poem;
it’s	small,	one	verse.	It	will	be	easily	buried.	I	tear	carefully	along	the	line	that
talks	about	the	birds:

Birds	and	the	birds	of	the	winged	trees	flying	my	name

I	tear	it	smaller,	smaller,	until	the	pieces	are	tiny	and	light.	Then	I	toss	them	into
the	breeze,	to	let	them	fly	for	a	moment.	They	are	so	small	that	I	don’t	see	where
most	of	them	settle,	but	one	lands	soft	on	a	branch	near	me.	Perhaps	a	real	bird
will	use	it	for	a	nest,	will	tuck	it	away	from	everyone	else,	as	I	have	the	other
Thomas	poem.

We	do	know	about	the	author,	I	realize	as	Ky	and	I	bury	the	rest	of	the	paper.

197
We	know	him	through	his	words.

And	someday	I	will	have	to	share	the	poems.	I	know	it.	And	someday	I	will	have
to	tell	Xander	what	is	happening	here	on	the	Hill.

But	not	yet.	I	burned	poetry	before	to	be	safe.	I	can’t	do	it	now.	I	hold	tight	to
the	poetry	of	our	moments	together,	protecting	them,	protecting	us.	All	of	us.

“Tell	me	about	your	Match	Banquet,”	Ky	says	another	time.

He	wants	me	to	tell	him	about	Xander?

“Not	about	Xander,”	he	says,	reading	my	mind	and	smiling	that	smile	I	love.
Even	now,	when	he	smiles	more	often,	I	am	still	greedy	for	it.	Sometimes,	I
reach	out	and	touch	his	lips	with	my	hand	when	he	does	it.	I	do	that	now,	feel
them	move	as	he	says,	“About	you.”

“I	was	nervous,	excited	…”	I	stop.

“What	did	you	think	about?”

I	wish	I	could	tell	him	that	I	thought	about	him,	but	I	lied	to	him	once	and	I
won’t	do	it	again.	And	besides,	I	wasn’t	thinking	about	Xander	either.

“I	thought	about	angels,”	I	say.

“Angels?”

“You	know.	The	ones	in	the	old	stories.	How	they	can	fly	to	heaven.”

“Do	you	think	anyone	believes	in	them	anymore?”	he	asks.

“I	don’t	know.	No.	Do	you?”

“I	believe	in	you,”	he	says,	his	voice	hushed	and	almost	reverent.	“That’s	more
faith	than	I	ever	thought	I’d	have.”

We	move	quickly	through	the	trees.	I	feel	more	than	see	that	we	must	be	nearing
the	top	of	the	Hill.	Eventually,	our	work	here	will	be	done	and	this	time	will	be
over.	It	doesn’t	take	long	anymore	to	traverse	the	first	part	of	the	Hill;
everything	is	tamped	down	and	well	marked	and	we	know	where	we	are	going,
at	least	initially.	But	there	is	still	unexplored	territory	left.	There	are	still	things

198
at	least	initially.	But	there	is	still	unexplored	territory	left.	There	are	still	things
to	discover.	For	that	I	am	grateful.	I’m	so	grateful	that	I	wish	I	did	believe	in
angels	so	that	I	could	express	my	gratitude	to	someone	or	something.

“Tell	me	more,”	Ky	says.

“I	wore	a	green	dress.”

“Green,”	he	says,	glancing	back	at	me.	“I’ve	never	seen	you	in	green.”

“You’ve	never	seen	me	in	anything	but	brown	or	black,”	I	tell	him.	“Brown
plainclothes.	Black	swimwear.”	I	flush.

“I	take	back	what	I	said,”	he	says	later,	as	the	whistle	blows.	“I	have	seen	you	in
green.	I	see	you	in	green	everyday,	here	in	the	trees.”

The	next	day,	I	ask	him,	“Can	you	tell	me	why	you	cried	in	the	showing	that
day?”

“You	saw	me?”

I	nod.

“I	couldn’t	help	it.”	His	gaze	is	distant,	hard	now.	“I	didn’t	know	they	had
footage	like	that.	It	could	have	been	my	village.	It	was	definitely	one	of	the
Outer	Provinces.”

“Wait.”	I	think	of	the	people,	dark	shadows	running.	“You’re	saying	this	was—”

“Real,”	he	finished.	“Yes.	Those	aren’t	actors.	It’s	not	a	stage.	It	happens	in	all
the	Outer	Provinces,	Cassia.	When	I	left,	it	was	happening	more	and	more.”

Oh	no.

The	whistle	will	blow	soon,	I	can	tell.	He	knows,	too.	But	I	reach	for	him	and
hold	on	here	in	the	forest	where	the	trees	screen	us	and	the	birdcalls	cover	our
voices.	The	entire	Hill	is	complicit	in	our	embrace.

I	pull	away	first	because	I	have	something	to	write	before	our	time	ends.	I’ve
been	practicing	in	air,	but	I	want	to	carve	in	earth.

“Close	your	eyes,”	I	say	to	Ky,	and	I	bend	down,	his	breathing	above	me	while

199
“Close	your	eyes,”	I	say	to	Ky,	and	I	bend	down,	his	breathing	above	me	while
he	waits.	“There,”	I	say,	and	he	looks	at	what	I’ve	written.

I	love	you.

I	feel	embarrassed,	as	though	I	am	a	child	who	has	tapped	out	these	words	on	her
scribe	and	held	them	out	for	a	boy	in	her	First	School	class	to	read.	My	writing	is
awkward	and	straggly	and	not	smooth	like	Ky’s.

Why	are	some	things	easier	to	write	than	say?

Still,	I	feel	undeniably	brave	and	vulnerable	as	I	stand	there	in	the	forest	with
words	that	I	cannot	take	back.	My	first	written	words,	other	than	our	names.	It’s
not	much	of	a	poem,	but	I	think	Grandfather	would	understand.

Ky	looks	at	me.	For	the	first	time	since	the	showing,	I	see	tears	in	his	eyes.

“You	don’t	have	to	write	it	back,”	I	say,	feeling	self-conscious.	“I	just	wanted
you	to	know.”

“I	don’t	want	to	write	it	back,”	he	tells	me.	And	then	he	says	it,	right	out	there	on
the	Hill,	and	of	all	the	words	I	have	hidden	and	saved	and	treasured,	these	are	the
ones	I	will	never	forget,	the	most	important	ones	of	all.

“I	love	you.”

Lightning.	Once	it	has	forked,	hot-white,	from	sky	to	earth,	there	is	no	going
back.

It’s	time.	I	feel	it,	I	know	it.	My	eyes	on	him,	his	on	me,	and	both	of	us
breathing,	watching,	tired	of	waiting.	Ky	closes	his	eyes,	but	mine	are	still	open.
What	will	it	feel	like,	his	lips	on	mine?	Like	a	secret	told,	a	promise	kept?	Like
that	line	in	the	poem—a	shower	of	all	my	days—silvery	rain	falling	all	around
me,	where	the	lightning	meets	the	earth?

The	whistle	blows	below	us	and	the	moment	breaks.	We	are	safe.

For	now.

200
                                            CHAPTER	        26

We	hurry	back	down	from	the	Hill.	I	see	glimpses	of	white	through	the	trees,
and	I	know	they	are	not	the	birds	we	saw	earlier.	These	white	figures	aren’t
made	for	flight.	“Officials,”	I	say	to	Ky,	and	he	nods.

We	report	to	the	Officer,	who	looks	a	bit	preoccupied	with	the	visitors	waiting
for	us.	I	wonder	again	how	he	ended	up	with	this	assignment.	Even	supervising
the	marking	of	the	big	Hill	seems	like	a	waste	of	time	for	someone	of	his	rank.
As	I	turn	away,	I	see	all	the	lines	that	discipline	has	etched	in	his	face	and	I
realize	again	that	he	is	not	very	young.

The	Officials,	I	discover	when	I	get	closer,	are	ones	I’ve	seen	before.	The	ones
who	tested	my	sorting	abilities.	The	blond	female	Official	takes	charge	this	time;
apparently	this	is	her	portion	of	the	test	to	administer.	“Hello,	Cassia,”	she	says.
“We’re	here	to	take	you	to	your	on-site	portion	of	the	sorting	test.	Can	you	come
with	us	now?”	She	glances	over	at	the	Officer	with	a	touch	of	deference	in	her
look.

“Go	on,”	the	Officer	says,	glancing	at	the	others	who	have	returned	from	the
Hill.	“You	can	all	go.	We’ll	meet	here	again	tomorrow.”

A	few	of	the	other	hikers	look	at	me	with	interest	but	not	concern;	many	of	us
await	our	final	work	positions	and	Officials	always	seem	to	be	a	part	of	that
process.	“We’ll	take	the	air	train,”	the	blond	Official	says	to	me.	“The	test	will
only	last	a	few	hours.	You	should	be	home	in	time	for	your	evening	meal.”

We	walk	toward	the	air-train	stop,	two	Officials	on	my	right	and	one	on	my	left.
There’s	no	escaping	them;	I	don’t	dare	look	back	at	Ky.	Not	even	when	we
climb	onto	the	train	he	takes	into	the	City.	When	he	walks	past	me,	his	“hello”
sounds	perfect:	friendly,	unconcerned.	He	continues	on	down	the	length	of	the
car	and	sits	next	to	a	window.	Anyone	watching	would	be	convinced	that	he
doesn’t	feel	anything	at	all	for	me.	He’s	almost	convinced	me.

We	don’t	get	off	the	air	train	at	the	City	Hall	stop,	or	at	any	of	the	other	stops	in
the	City	proper.	We	keep	going.	More	and	more	blue-clothed	workers	climb	on,
laughing	and	talking.	One	of	them	cuffs	Ky	on	the	shoulder	and	Ky	laughs.	I
don’t	see	any	other	Officials	or	anyone	else	wearing	student	plainclothes	like
me.	The	four	of	us	sit	together	in	the	sea	of	blue,	the	train	twisting	and	turning

201
me.	The	four	of	us	sit	together	in	the	sea	of	blue,	the	train	twisting	 and	turning
like	a	river	running,	 and	I	know	it’s	 hard	to	fight	 against	a	current	as	strong	as
the	Society.

I	look	out	the	window	 and	hope	with	all	 my	heart	that	this	isn’t	what	 I	think	 it	is.
That	we	aren’t	going	to	the	same	place.	That	I	won’t	 be	sorting	Ky.

Is	this	a	trick?	Are	they	watching	 us?	That’s	a	stupid	question,	I	think	 to	myself.
Of	course	they’re	watching	us.

Hulking	 gray	buildings	crowd	 around	in	this	part	of	town;	 I	see	signs,	but	the	air
train	moves	too	fast	for	me	to	read	them.	But	it’s	 clear	where	we	are:	the
Industrial	District.

Up	ahead,	I	see	Ky	shift,	stand.	He	doesn’t	have	to	reach	up	for	the	grips
hanging	from	the	ceiling;	 he	keeps	himself	level	and	balanced	as	the	train	slides
to	a	stop.	For	a	moment,	I	think	everything	will	  be	fine.	The	Officials	 and	I	will
keep	going,	past	these	gray	buildings,	beyond	the	airport	with	its	landing	 strips
and	bright	red	traffic	 flags	whipping	 in	the	wind	like	 kites,	like	 markers	on	the
Hill.	 We’ll	 go	on	out	to	the	Farmlands,	where	they’ll	 have	me	sort	nothing	more
important	than	a	crop	or	some	sheep.

Then	the	Officials	next	 to	me	stand	up	and	I	have	no	choice	but	to	follow	them.
Don’t	panic,	 I	tell	myself.	 Look	at	all	 these	buildings.	Look	at	all	 these	workers.
You	could	be	sorting	anything	or	anyone.	Don’t	 jump	to	conclusions.

Ky	doesn’t	look	 to	see	if	I’ve	 gotten	off,	too.	I	 study	his	back	and	his	hands	to
see	if	I	can	find	any	of	the	tension	running	through	 him	that	runs	through	me.
But	his	muscles	are	relaxed	and	his	stride	even	as	he	walks	around	to	the	side	of
the	building	where	the	employees	enter.	Many	of	the	other	workers	wearing	 blue
plainclothes	go	through	the	same	door.	Ky’s	hands	are	loose	at	his	sides,	open.
Empty.

As	Ky	disappears	into	the	building,	 the	blond	Official	 leads	me	around	to	the
front,	to	a	kind	of	 antechamber.	The	other	Officials	hand	her	datatags	and	she
places	them	behind	my	ear,	at	my	pulse	points	on	my	wrists,	under	the	neck	of
my	shirt.	She’s	quick	and	efficient	 about	it;	now	 that	I’m	 being	monitored,	I	try
even	harder	to	relax.	I	don’t	want	to	seem	unusually	nervous.	I	breathe	deep	and
I	change	the	words	of	the	poem.	I	tell	myself	 to	go	gentle,	just	for	now.

“This	is	the	food	 distribution	 block	of	the	City,”	 the	Official	  informs	me.	“As	 we

202
“This	is	the	food	 distribution	 block	of	the	City,”	 the	Official	  informs	me.	“As	 we
mentioned	before,	the	goal	of	the	real-life	sort	is	to	see	if	you	 can	sort	real
people	and	situations	within	certain	parameters.	We	want	to	see	if	you	can	help
the	Government	improve	function	 and	efficiency.”

“I	understand,”	I	 say,	although	I’m	 not	sure	I	do.

“Then	let’s	 get	started.”	She	pushes	open	the	doors	and	another	Official	comes
to	greet	us.	He’s	apparently	the	Official	 in	charge	of	this	building,	 and	the
orange	and	yellow	bars	on	his	shirt	mean	he’s	involved	in	one	of	the	most
important	Departments	of	all,	the	Nutrition	 Department.	“How	  many	do	you
have	today?”	he	asks,	and	I	realize	that	I’m	not	the	only	one	taking	the	test	and
completing	real-life	 sorts	here.	The	thought	makes	me	relax	a	little.

“One,”	she	says,	“but	this	is	our	high	 scorer.”

“Excellent,”	 he	says.	“Let	me	know	when	 you	finish.”	 He	strides	away	and	I
stand	still,	overwhelmed	by	the	sights	and	smells	around	me.	And	by	the	heat.

We	stand	in	a	gaping	space,	a	chamber	larger	than	the	gymnasium	at	Second
School.	This	room	looks	like	 a	steel	box:	metal	floors	dotted	with	 drains,	gray-
painted	concrete	walls,	and	stainless-steel	appliances	lining	the	sides	and
bisecting	the	middle	of	the	room	in	 rows.	Steam	mists	and	writhes	around	the
room.	Vents	at	the	top	and	sides	of	the	building	open	to	the	outside,	but	there	are
no	windows.	The	appliances,	the	foilware	trays,	the	steaming	hot	water	coming
out	of	the	faucets:	Everything	is	gray.

Except	for	the	dark-blue	workers	and	their	burned-red	hands.

A	whistle	blows	 and	a	new	stream	of	workers	comes	in	from	the	left	while	 the
other	workers	exit	on	the	right.	Their	 bodies	sag,	tired,	weighted.	They	all	wipe
their	brows	and	leave	their	work	without	 a	backward	glance.

“The	new	workers	have	been	in	a	sterilization	chamber	to	remove	all	 outside
contaminants,”	the	Official	 tells	me	conversationally.	 “That’s	 where	they	pick	up
their	numbers	and	adhere	them	to	their	uniforms.	This	new	shift	is	the	one	you’ll
be	concerned	with.”

She	gestures	up	and	I	notice	several	outlook	points	throughout	the	room:	small
metal	towers	with	Officials	 standing	at	the	top.	There	are	three	towers;	the	one	in
the	middle	of	the	floor	 is	empty.	“We’ll	  be	up	there.”

203
the	middle	of	the	floor	 is	empty.	“We’ll	  be	up	there.”

I	follow	 her	up	the	metal	stairs,	the	kind	that	we	have	at	air-train	stops.	But	these
stairs	end	on	a	small	platform	with	barely	 enough	space	for	the	four	of	us	to
stand.	Already	the	gray-haired	Official	 perspires	heavily	and	his	face	is	red.	My
hair	sticks	to	the	back	of	my	neck.	And	 all	we	have	to	do	is	stand	and	watch.	We
don’t	even	have	to	work.

I	knew	Ky’s	 job	was	hard	but	I	had	no	idea.

Tubs	and	tubs	of	dirty	containers	stand	next	to	small	stations	with	sinks	and
recycling	tubes.	Through	a	large	opening	at	the	end	of	the	building,	the	soiled
foilware	arrives	in	 a	never-ending	stream,	flowing	from	 the	recycling	bins	in	 our
residences	and	meal	halls.	The	workers	wear	clear	protective	gloves,	but	I	don’t
see	how	the	plastic	or	latex	doesn’t	melt	into	their	skin	 as	they	spray	off	the
foilware	containers	with	 hot	water.	Then	they	put	the	clean	foilware	 down	into
the	recycling	tubes.

It	goes	on	and	on	and	on,	a	steady	flow	of	steam	and	scalding	water	and
foilware.	My	 mind	threatens	to	glaze	over	and	shut	down	as	it	does	when	I’m
confronted	with	a	particularly	 difficult	  sort	on	the	screen	and	I	feel
overwhelmed.	But	these	aren’t	numbers	on	the	screen.	These	are	people.

This	is	Ky.

So	I	force	myself	to	stay	clear	and	focused.	I	force	myself	 to	watch	those	bent
backs	and	those	burning	hands	and	the	vastness	of	all	the	refuse	sliding	silver
along	the	tracks.

One	of	the	workers	raises	his	hand,	and	an	Official	comes	down	from	his	perch
to	confer	with	the	worker.	 He	gives	a	foilware	container	to	 the	Official,	 who
scans	the	bar	code	on	the	side	of	the	container	with	his	datapod.	After	a	moment,
he	takes	the	foilware	container	with	him	 and	disappears	into	an	office	at	the	edge
of	the	large	open	room.	The	worker	is	already	back	at	work.

The	Official	 looks	at	me	as	if	she’s	waiting	 for	something.	“What	 do	you	think?”
she	asks.

I’m	not	 sure	what	she	wants,	so	I	hedge.	“Of	course,	the	most	efficient	thing	to
do	would	be	to	get	machines.”

“That	is	not	an	option,”	 the	Official	 says	pleasantly.	“Food	preparation	and

204
“That	is	not	an	option,”	 the	Official	 says	pleasantly.	“Food	preparation	and
distribution	needs	to	be	handled	by	personnel.	Live	personnel.	It’s	a	rule.	But	 we
would	like	 to	free	up	more	of	the	workers	for	 other	projects	and	vocations.”

“I	don’t	 see	how	to	make	it	any	more	efficient,”	 I	 say.	“There’s	the	other
obvious	answer	.	.	.	to	make	them	work	more	hours	.	.	.	but	they	look	exhausted
as	it	is	…”	My	 voice	trails	 off,	a	wisp	of	 steam	too	small	to	matter.

“We’re	 not	asking	you	to	come	up	with	a	solution.”	 The	Official	  sounds	amused.
“Those	who	are	higher	up	than	you	have	already	done	that.	Hours	will	 be
extended.	Leisure	hours	will	cease.	Then	some	of	the	personnel	from	this	area
can	be	spared	for	another	vocation.”

I’m	beginning	 to	understand	and	I	wish	I	weren’t.	 “So	if	 you	don’t	want	 me	to
sort	the	other	variables	in	the	work	situation,	you	 want	me	to—”

“Sort	the	people,”	she	says.

I	feel	sick.

She	holds	out	a	datapod.	“You	have	three	hours	to	watch.	Enter	the	numbers	of
the	workers	you	think	are	the	most	efficient,	 those	who	should	be	sent	to	work
on	an	alternative	project.”

I	look	at	the	numbers	on	the	back	of	the	workers’	shirts.	This	 is	like	a	sort	on	the
screen;	I’m	supposed	to	watch	for	the	faster	patterns	among	the	workers.	They
want	to	see	if	my	mind	will	  automatically	register	the	workers	who	move	 the
most	quickly.	Computers	could	 do	this	job	and	probably	have.	But	now	they
want	to	see	if	I	can	do	it,	too.

“And	 Cassia,”	the	Official	 says	from	the	metal	stairs.	I	look	down	 at	her.	“Your
sort	will	 hold.	That’s	part	of	 the	test.	We	want	to	see	if	you	can	make	decisions
well	when	you	know	 they	have	actual	results.”

She	sees	the	shock	on	my	face	and	continues.	I	can	tell	she’s	trying	to	be	kind.
“It’s	 one	shift	of	one	group	of	menial	 laborers,	Cassia.	Don’t	worry.	 Just	do	your
best.”

“But	what’s	 the	other	project?	Will	 they	have	to	leave	the	City?”

The	Official	 looks	shocked.	“We	can’t	 answer	that.	It’s	not	relevant	to	the	sort.”

205
The	Official	 looks	shocked.	“We	can’t	 answer	that.	It’s	not	relevant	to	the	sort.”

The	gray-haired	Official,	 still	 breathing	heavily,	turns	back	to	see	what’s
happening.	She	nods	to	him	that	she’s	on	her	way	down,	and	then	tells	me
gently,	“Better	 workers	get	the	better	work	positions,	Cassia.	That’s	all	you	need
to	know.”

I	don’t	want	 to	do	this.	For	a	moment,	I	contemplate	throwing	 the	datapod	into
one	of	the	sinks,	letting	it	drown.

What	would	Ky	do	if	he	were	the	one	standing	up	here?

I	don’t	throw	 the	datapod.	I	take	deep	breaths.	Sweat	runs	down	my	back	and	a
piece	of	my	hair	falls	 into	my	eyes.	I	push	the	hair	back	with	one	hand	and	then	I
straighten	my	shoulders	and	look	out	at	the	workers.	My	eyes	dart	from	place	to
place.	I	try	not	to	see	faces,	only	numbers.	I	look	for	 fast	patterns	and	slow	ones.
I	start	to	sort.

The	most	disturbing	part	of	the	whole	experience	is	that	I	am	very,	 very	good	at
it.	Once	I	tell	 myself	to	do	what	Ky	 would	do,	I	 don’t	look	 back.	Over	the	course
of	the	sort,	I	watch	for	 pacing	and	patterns	and	I	watch	for	stamina.	I	see	the
slower,	more	steady	ones	who	get	more	done	than	you	might	think.	I	see	the
quick,	deft	ones	who	are	the	very	best.	I	see	the	ones	who	can’t	quite	keep	up.	I
see	their	red	hands	move	amid	the	steam,	and	I	see	the	pile	of	foilware	moving
along	in	its	silver	stream	as	it	turns	from	 dirty	to	clean.

But	I	don’t	 see	people.	I	don’t	see	faces.

When	the	three	hours	are	almost	over	my	sort	is	complete	and	I	know	it’s	a	good
one.	I	know	I’ve	 classified	the	best	workers	in	the	group	by	their	 numbers.

But	I	can’t	 resist.	I	look	at	the	number	of	the	very	middle	 worker,	the	one	who	is
right	in	between	the	best	and	the	worst	of	the	group.

I	look	up.	It’s	 the	number	on	Ky’s	 back.

I	want	to	laugh	and	cry.	It’s	 as	though	he’s	sending	me	a	message.	No	one	fits	in
the	way	he	does;	no	one	else	has	mastered	the	art	of	being	exactly	average	so
well.	For	a	few	seconds	I	let	myself	 watch	the	boy	in	blue	plainclothes	with	 the
dark	hair.	My	 instincts	tell	me	to	put	him	 with	the	more	efficient	 group;	I	 know
that’s	where	he	belongs.	That’s	the	group	that	gets	the	new	vocation.	They	might
have	to	leave	the	City,	but	at	least	he	wouldn’t	be	trapped	here	forever.	Still,	I

206
have	to	leave	the	City,	but	at	least	he	wouldn’t	be	trapped	here	forever.	Still,	I
don’t	think	 I	could	do	it.	 What	would	my	 life	be	like	 if	he	left?

I	let	myself	imagine	 climbing	 down	from	that	ladder	and	pulling	 Ky	 close	in	the
middle	of	all	 this	heat	and	sound.	And	then	I	imagine	something	even	better.	I
imagine	walking	 over	and	taking	his	hand	and	leading	him	out	of	this	place	into
light	and	air.	I	could	 do	this.	If	I	 sort	him	into	 the	higher	group,	he	won’t	have	to
work	here	anymore.	His	life	 will	 be	better.	I	could	be	the	one	to	change	that	for
him.	And	suddenly	that	desire,	the	desire	to	help	him,	is	even	stronger	than	my
selfish	desire	to	keep	him	close.

But	I	think	 of	the	boy	in	the	story	he’s	given	 me.	The	boy	who	has	done
everything	he	can	to	survive.	What	would	 that	boy’s	instincts	say?

He	would	want	me	to	put	him	 in	the	lower	group.

“Almost	 finished?”	 the	Official	 asks	me.	She	waits	on	the	metal	steps	a	few	feet
below.	I	nod.	She	climbs	toward	me,	and	I	pull	 up	another	number	of	someone
who	is	near	the	middle	so	that	she	doesn’t	know	I’ve	been	looking	 at	Ky.

She	stands	next	to	me,	looking	at	the	number	and	then	out	at	the	person	on	the
floor.	“The	 middle	workers	are	always	the	most	difficult	  to	sort,”	she	says	with
sympathy	in	her	voice.	“It’s	 hard	to	know	 what	to	do.”

I	nod,	but	she’s	not	finished.

“Menial	 laborers	like	these	don’t	usually	live	 to	eighty,”	 she	says.	Her	voice
hushes.	“Many	of	them	are	Aberration	status,	you	know.	The	Society	 doesn’t
worry	as	much	about	them	reaching	optimal	age.	Many	die	early.	Not	 horribly
early,	of	course.	Not	pre-Society	early,	or	Outer	Province	 early.	But	sixty,
seventy.	Lower-level	vocations	in	 nutrition	 disposal	are	particularly	dangerous,
even	with	all	the	precautions	we	take.”

“But	…”	 The	shock	on	my	 face	doesn’t	surprise	her,	and	I	realize	that	this	must
be	part	of	the	test,	too.	Coming	across	an	unknown	factor	in	the	middle	of	an
otherwise	straightforward	sort	just	when	you	 thought	you	were	done.	And	I
wonder:	What’s	going	on	here?	Why	are	the	stakes	so	high	for	a	test	sort?

There’s	something	happening	that	is	something	bigger	than	me,	bigger	than	Ky.

“This	is	all	 confidential	 information,	 of	course,”	the	Official	 says.	Then	she

207
“This	is	all	 confidential	 information,	 of	course,”	the	Official	 says.	Then	she
glances	down	at	her	datapod.	“You	have	two	minutes.”

I	need	to	concentrate	but	my	mind	is	off	on	another	sort	of	its	 own,	asking
questions	and	lining	them	up	to	make	an	answer:

Why	do	the	laborers	die	early?

Why	couldn’t	 Grandfather	share	the	food	from	his	plate	at	the	Final	Banquet?

Why	do	so	many	Aberrations	work	 in	food	cleanup?

They	poison	the	food	for	the	elderly.

It’s	all	 clear	now.	Our	Society	prides	itself	 on	never	killing	 anyone,	having	done
away	with	the	death	penalty,	but	what	I	see	here	and	what	I’ve	heard	about	the
Outer	Provinces	tells	me	that	they	have	found	another	way	to	take	care	of	things.
The	strong	survive.	Natural	selection.	With	 help	from	our	 Gods,	of	course—the
Officials.

If	I	get	to	play	 God,	or	angel,	then	I	have	to	do	the	best	I	can	for	Ky.	I	 can’t	let
him	die	early	and	I	can’t	 let	him	spend	his	life	in	 this	room.	There	has	to	be
something	better	out	there	for	him.	I	have	enough	faith	left	 in	my	Society	 to
think	that;	I	have	seen	many	people	living	good	lives,	 and	I	want	one	of	those
lives	to	be	Ky’s.	 Whether	or	not	I	can	be	a	part	of	it.

I	sort	Ky	into	 the	higher	group	and	close	the	datapod	as	if	the	decision	has	cost
me	nothing	at	all.

Inside,	I	scream.

I	hope	I	made	the	right	choice.

“Tell	 me	more	about	where	you’re	from,”	 I	say	to	Ky	 on	the	Hill	 the	next	day,
hoping	he	doesn’t	hear	the	desperation	in	my	voice,	hoping	he	doesn’t	ask	about
the	sort.	I	have	to	know	more	about	his	story.	I	have	to	know	 if	I	 did	the	right
thing.	The	sort	has	changed	things	between	us;	we	feel	watched,	even	here	in	the
trees.	We	speak	softly;	we	don’t	look	 at	each	other	too	long.

“It’s	 red	and	orange	there.	Colors	you	don’t	see	here	very	often.”

“That’s	true,”	 I	say,	and	I	try	 to	think	of	 things	that	are	red.	Some	of	the	dresses

208
“That’s	true,”	I	say,	and	I	try	to	think	of	things	that	are	red.	Some	of	the	dresses
at	the	Match	Banquet.	The	fires	in	the	incinerators.	Blood.

“Why	is	there	so	much	green	and	brown	and	blue	here?”	he	asks	me.

“Maybe	because	they	are	growing	colors	and	so	much	of	our	Province	is
agricultural,”	I	say.	“You	know.	How	blue	is	the	color	of	water,	and	brown	the
color	of	fall	and	harvest.	And	green	is	the	color	of	spring.”

“People	always	say	that,”	Ky	says.	“But	red	is	the	first	color	of	spring.	It’s	the
real	color	of	rebirth.	Of	beginning.”

He’s	right,	I	realize.	I	think	of	the	ruddy	color	of	the	tight	new	buds	on	the	trees.
Of	the	red	of	his	hands	the	day	before	in	the	nutrition	disposal	center	and	the
new	beginning	I	hope	I	have	given	him.

209
                                            CHAPTER	        27

Warning.	Warning.	The	light	on	the	tracker	flashes	and	words	scroll	across	the
screen.	You	have	reached	maximum	speed	earlier	than	recommended	for	this
exercise	session.

I	punch	the	numbers	so	that	I	go	even	faster.

Warning.	Warning.	You	have	exceeded	your	optimal	heart	rate.

Usually,	when	I	push	too	hard	on	the	tracker	I	stop	in	time.	I	take	things	to	the
edge	but	I	never	jump.	But	if	I	go	to	the	edge	enough	times,	I’m	going	to	get
pushed	over	or	fall	right	in.

Maybe	it’s	time	to	jump.	But	I	can’t	do	it	without	dragging	all	the	people	I	love
with	me.

Warning.	Warning.

I’m	going	too	fast.	I’m	too	tired.	I	know	it.	But	my	fall	still	surprises	me.

My	foot	slips	and	before	I	know	it	I’m	down,	down	on	the	tracker	with	the	belt
still	going	and	burning,	burning,	burning	my	skin.	I	lie	there	for	a	moment,	in
shock	and	on	fire,	and	then	I	roll	off	as	fast	as	I	can.	The	tracker	keeps	going,	but
it	will	notice	my	absence	in	a	moment.	It	will	stop	and	then	they	will	know	I
couldn’t	keep	up.	But	if	I	get	back	on	fast	enough,	no	one	has	to	know	what
happened.	I	glance	at	my	skin,	rubbed	raw	and	red	from	the	moving	belt.	Red.

I	jump	up.	I	tense	my	muscles	and	spring	at	just	the	right	time	and	I	hit	the
tracker	running.	Pound.	Pound.	Pound	pound	pound.

My	knees	and	elbows	stream	blood	and	I	have	tears	in	my	eyes,	but	I	am	still
going.	The	plainclothes	will	hide	my	wounds	tomorrow	and	no	one	will	ever
know	that	I	fell.	No	one	will	ever	know	what	happened	until	it	is	too	late.

When	I	come	back	upstairs	after	running	on	the	tracker,	my	father	gestures	me
toward	the	port.	“Just	in	time,”	he	says.	“There’s	a	communication	for	you.”

The	sorting	Officials	wait	on	the	screen.	“Your	sort	looks	excellent,”	the	blond
Official	tells	me.	“Congratulations	on	passing	the	test.	I’m	sure	you’ll	hear	news

210
Official	tells	me.	“Congratulations	on	passing	the	test.	I’m	sure	you’ll	hear	news
regarding	your	work	position	soon.”

I	nod	my	head,	sweat	dripping	off	me	and	blood	from	my	cuts	running	down	my
knees	and	my	arms.	She	can	only	see	the	sweat,	I	think	to	myself.	I	tug	my
sleeves	down	a	little	to	make	sure	they	cover	everything,	so	that	no	one	will
know	that	I	am	injured	and	bloody.

“Thank	you.	I	look	forward	to	it.”	I	step	back,	sure	that	the	portscreen
communication	is	finished,	but	the	Official	has	one	last	question	for	me.

“Are	you	sure	that	there	aren’t	any	changes	you	want	to	make	before	the	sort	is
implemented?”

My	last	chance	to	take	back	what	I’ve	done.	I	almost	say	it.	I	have	his	number
memorized;	it	would	be	so	easy.	Then	I	remember	what	she	told	me	about	life
expectancy,	and	the	words	turn	to	rocks	in	my	mouth	and	I	can’t	speak	around
them.

“Cassia?”

“I’m	sure.”

I	turn	away	from	the	port	and	almost	run	into	my	father.	“Congratulations,”	he
says.	“Sorry.	I	hope	you	don’t	mind	that	I	listened.	They	didn’t	say	it	was	a
private	communication.”

“It’s	fine,”	I	 say.	Then	I	ask,	“Did	you	ever	wonder	…”	I	pause,	unsure	of	how
to	phrase	this.	How	to	ask	him	if	he	ever	doubted	his	Match	with	my	mother.	If
he	ever	wanted	someone	else.

“Did	I	ever	wonder	what?”	he	asks	me.

“Never	mind,”	I	say,	because	I	think	I	already	know	the	answer.	Of	course	he
didn’t.	They	fell	in	love	immediately	and	never	looked	back.

I	go	into	my	room	and	open	my	closet.	Once	it	held	the	compact	and	the	poem.
Now	it	is	empty	except	for	clothes	and	shoes	and	the	small,	framed	piece	of	my
dress.	I	don’t	know	where	my	silver	box	is	and	I	panic.	Did	they	accidentally
take	it	when	they	took	the	artifacts?	No,	of	course	not.	They	know	what	the
silver	boxes	are.	They’d	never	mistake	them	for	something	from	the	past.	The

211
silver	boxes	are.	They’d	never	mistake	them	for	something	from	 the	past.	The
Match	Banquet	boxes	are	clearly	for	the	future.

I’m	hunting	 around	through	my	meager	belongings	when	my	mother	comes	into
the	room.	She	returned	late	last	night	from	her	third	trip	 out	of	Oria.	“Are	 you
looking	for	 something?”	she	asks.

I	straighten	up.	“I	 found	it,”	 I	say,	holding	up	the	fragment	of	 green	under	glass.
I	don’t	want	 to	tell	her	that	I	can’t	 find	the	Match	 Banquet	box.

She	takes	the	square	from	me	and	holds	it	up,	the	green	fabric	from	the	dress
catching	the	light.	“Did	 you	know	 that	there	used	to	be	windows	with	colored
glass?”	she	asks.	“People	put	them	in	places	where	they	worshipped.	Or	in	their
own	homes.”

“Stained	glass,”	I	say.	“Papa’s	told	 me	about	it.”	It	 does	sound	beautiful:	light
shining	through	color,	windows	 as	art	or	tribute.

“Of	course	he	has,”	she	says,	laughing	at	herself.	“I	finally	 submitted	that	report
today,	and	now	I’m	 so	tired	I	can’t	think	 well.”

“Is	everything	 all	right?”	 I	ask.	I	want	to	ask	her	what	she	meant	about	the	trees
that	day,	why	she	thought	their	loss	was	a	warning	to	her,	but	I	don’t	 think	I
want	to	know.	After	 the	real-life	 sort	I	feel	like	 I	can’t	take	any	more	pressure;	I
feel	as	though	I	already	know	too	much.	Besides,	my	mother	seems	happier	now
than	she’s	seemed	in	weeks,	and	I	don’t	want	to	change	that.

“I	think	 it	will	  be,”	she	says.

“Oh,	good,”	 I	say.	We’re	both	silent	 for	a	moment,	looking	 at	my	dress	under
glass.

“Are	you	 going	to	have	to	travel	again?”

“No,	I	 don’t	think	 so,”	she	says.	“I	think	 that’s	finished.	I	 hope.”	She	still	looks
exhausted,	but	I	can	see	that	submitting	the	report	has	lifted	a	burden.

I	take	the	memento	back	from	her,	and	as	I	do,	I	have	an	idea.	“Can	I	see	the
piece	of	your	dress?”	The	last	time	I	looked	at	it	 was	the	night	before	my	Match
Banquet.	I	was	a	little	nervous,	and	she	brought	me	the	dress	fragment	and	told
me	again	the	story	of	their	Match	with	 its	happy	ending.	But	so	much	has

212
changed	since	then.

“Of	course,”	 she	says,	and	I	follow	her	into	her	bedroom.	The	framed	bit	of
fabric	sits	on	a	little	 shelf	inside	the	closet	she	shares	with	my	father,	along	with
two	silver	boxes—hers	and	Papa’s—that	held	their	microcards	and,	later,	the
rings	for	their	Contract.	 The	rings	are	purely	ceremonial,	of	course—they	don’t
get	to	keep	them—and	they	give	the	microcards	back	to	the	Officials	 at	the
Contract	celebration.	So	my	parents’	silver	boxes	are	empty.

I	pick	up	her	dress	fragment	and	hold	it	up.	My	 mother’s	gown	was	blue	and
thanks	to	preservation	techniques,	the	satin	is	still	bright	and	lovely	 in	its	frame.

I	put	it	next	to	mine	 along	the	windowsill.	 Together,	side	by	side,	I	imagine	that
they	look	a	little	 like	a	stained-glass	window.	The	light	 behind	them	brightens
them,	and	I	can	almost	imagine	that	I	could	look	 through	the	colors	and	see	a
world	made	beautiful	and	different.

My	mother	understands.	“Yes,”	 she	says.	“I	imagine	the	windows	looked
something	like	that.”

I	want	to	tell	 her	everything	but	I	can’t.	 Not	now.	I	 am	too	fragile.	I	am	trapped
in	glass	and	I	want	to	break	out	and	breathe	deep	but	I’m	too	afraid	that	it	will
hurt.

My	mother	puts	her	arm	around	me.	“Can	you	tell	 me	what’s	wrong?”	 she	asks
gently.	“Is	it	 something	to	do	with	 your	Match?”

I	reach	for	my	dress	fragment	and	take	it	down	from	 the	window	so	my	mother’s
sits	up	there	alone.	I	don’t	trust	myself	to	 speak,	so	I	shake	my	head.	How	can	I
explain	to	my	perfectly	 Matched	mother	everything	that	has	happened?
Everything	I’ve	 risked?	How	can	I	 explain	to	her	that	I’d	 do	it	again?	How	can	I
tell	her	that	I	hate	the	system	that	created	her	life,	her	love,	her	family?	That
created	me?

Instead,	I	ask,	“How	did	 you	know?”

She	reaches	for	her	frame	and	takes	it	down,	too.	“At	first,	I	 could	see	that	you
were	falling	deeper	and	deeper	in	love,	but	I	didn’t	 worry	 about	it	because	I
thought	your	Match	was	perfect	for	 you.	Xander	is	wonderful.	 And	you	might	 be
able	to	stay	in	Oria,	nearby,	since	both	of	your	families	 live	here.	As	a	mother,	I
couldn’t	imagine	 a	better	scenario.”

213
couldn’t	imagine	 a	better	scenario.”

She	pauses,	looking	at	me.	“And	then	I	was	so	busy	with	work.	 It	took	until
today	for	me	to	realize	that	I	was	wrong.	You	 weren’t	thinking	 of	 Xander.”

Don’t	say	it,	 I	beg	her	with	my	eyes.	Don’t	 say	that	you	know	I’m	in	 love	with
someone	else.	Please.

“Cassia,”	she	tells	me,	and	the	love	in	her	eyes	for	me	is	pure	and	true	and	that’s
what	makes	her	next	words	cut	deep,	because	I	know	she	has	my	best	interests	at
heart.	“I’m	 married	to	someone	wonderful.	I	 have	two	beautiful	children	 and	a
job	I	love.	It’s	 a	good	life.”	 She	holds	out	the	piece	of	blue	satin.	“Do	 you	know
what	would	happen	if	I	 broke	this	glass?”

I	nod.	“The	cloth	 would	disintegrate.	It	 would	be	ruined.”

“Yes,”	 she	says,	and	then	it’s	almost	as	if	she’s	speaking	to	herself.	“It	would	be
ruined.	Everything	would	 be	ruined.”

Then	she	puts	her	hand	on	my	arm.	“Do	you	remember	what	I	said	the	day	they
cut	the	trees	down?”

Of	course	I	do.	“About	 how	it	 was	a	warning	for	you?”

“Yes.”	 She	flushes.	“That	wasn’t	true.	I	was	so	worried	 that	I	wasn’t	acting
rationally.	Of	 course	it	wasn’t	a	warning	for	 me.	It	wasn’t	 a	warning	for	anyone.
The	trees	simply	needed	to	come	down.”

I	hear	in	her	voice	how	badly	she	wants	to	believe	that	what	she	says	is	true,	how
she	almost	does	believe	it.	Wanting	to	hear	more,	but	not	wanting	to	push	too
hard,	I	ask,	“What	was	so	important	about	the	report?	What	makes	it	different
from	other	reports	you’ve	 done?”

My	mother	sighs.	She	doesn’t	answer	me	directly;	instead,	she	says,	“I	don’t
know	how	the	workers	at	the	medical	center	stand	it	when	they’re	working	 on
people	or	delivering	babies.	It’s	too	 hard	to	have	other	lives	in	your	hands.”

My	unspoken	question	hovers	in	the	air:	What	do	you	mean?	She	pauses.	She
seems	to	be	deciding	whether	or	not	to	answer	me,	and	I	hold	perfectly	still	until
she	speaks	again.	Absentmindedly	she	picks	up	her	dress	fragment	and	begins

214
polishing	the	glass.

“Someone	out	in	Grandia,	and	then	in	another	Province,	reported	that	there	were
strange	crops	popping	up.	The	one	in	Grandia	was	in	the	Arboretum,	in	an
experimental	field	that	had	been	fallow	 for	a	long	time.	The	other	field	 was	in
the	Farmlands	of	the	second	Province.	The	Government	asked	me	and	two
others	to	travel	to	the	fields	and	submit	reports	about	the	crops.	They	wanted	to
know	two	things:	 Were	the	crops	viable	as	foodstuffs?	And	were	the	growers
planning	a	rebellion?”

I	draw	in	my	 breath.	It’s	forbidden	 to	grow	food	unless	the	Government	has
specifically	requested	it.	They	control	 the	food;	they	control	 us.	Some	people
know	how	to	grow	 food,	some	know	how	to	harvest	it,	 some	know	how	to
process	it;	others	know	how	to	cook	it.	But	 none	of	us	know	how	to	do	all	 of	it.
We	could	never	survive	on	our	own.

“The	three	of	us	agreed	that	the	crops	were	definitely	usable	as	foodstuffs.	The
grower	at	the	Arboretum	had	an	entire	field	of	 Queen	Anne’s	lace.”	My	 mother’s
face	changes	suddenly,	lights	up.	“Oh,	Cassia,	it	was	so	beautiful.	I’ve	only	 seen
a	sprig	here	and	there.	This	was	a	whole	field,	waving	in	the	wind.”

“Wild	 carrot,”	 I	say,	remembering.

“Wild	 carrot,”	 she	agrees,	her	voice	sad.	“The	second	grower	had	a	crop	I’d
never	seen	before,	of	white	flowers	even	more	beautiful	than	the	first.	Sego
lilies,	they	called	them.	One	of	 the	others	with	me	knew	what	they	were.	You
can	eat	the	bulb.	Both	growers	denied	knowing	you	could	use	the	plants	for
food;	they	both	asserted	that	their	interest	was	in	the	flower.	They	insisted	the
plants	were	new	to	them	and	that	they	cultivated	them	as	research,	for	the
blossoms.”

Her	voice,	which	has	been	soft	and	sad	since	she	mentioned	the	field	of	Queen
Anne’s	lace,	grows	stronger.	“The	three	of	us	argued	the	whole	way	back	after
the	second	trip.	One	expert	was	convinced	the	growers	were	telling	the	truth.
The	other	thought	they	were	lying.	They	 submitted	conflicting	 reports.	Everyone
waited	for	mine.	I	 asked	for	one	last	trip	to	be	sure.	After	all,	these	growers	will
be	Relocated	or	Reclassified	based	on	our	reports.	Mine	would	tip	the	balance
one	way	or	the	other.”

She	stops	polishing	the	glass	and	looks	down	at	the	piece	of	blue	cloth	as	though
there	is	something	written	there	for	her	to	see.	And	I	realize	that	for	 her,	there	is.

215
there	is	something	written	there	for	her	to	see.	And	I	realize	that	for	 her,	there	is.
That	blue	cloth	represents	the	night	she	was	Matched	to	my	father.	She	reads	her
life,	the	life	 she	loves,	in	that	square	of	blue	satin.

“I	knew	 all	along,”	 she	whispers.	“I	knew	when	I	 saw	the	fear	in	their	eyes	when
we	first	arrived.	They	 knew	what	they	were	doing.	And	 something	the	Queen
Anne’s	lace	grower	said	on	my	second	visit	convinced	me	even	more	of	the
truth.	He	acted	as	though	he’d	never	seen	the	plant	outside	of	a	portscreen	before
until	he	raised	the	crop,	but	he	grew	up	in	a	town	near	mine,	and	I	knew	I’d	 seen
the	flower	there	growing	 wild.

“But	I	 still	 hesitated.	And	then	when	I	came	home	again	and	saw	all	of	you,	I
realized	I	had	to	report	the	truth.	I	had	to	fulfill	  my	duty	 to	the	Society	and
guarantee	our	happiness.	And	keep	us	all	safe.”

That	last	word,	safe,	is	as	soft	and	hushed	as	the	swish	of	silk.

“I	understand,”	I	 tell	her,	and	I	do.	And	 the	hold	she	has	over	me	is	much	greater
than	the	Officials,	because	I	love	her	and	admire	her.

Back	in	my	room	I	 find	the	silver	 box	where	it	fell	 inside	one	of	my	winter
boots.	I	open	it	up	and	take	out	the	microcard	with	all	 of	Xander’s	information
and	the	courtship	guidelines.	If	there	hadn’t	been	a	mistake,	if	I’d	 just	seen	his
face	and	everything	had	been	normal,	none	of	this	would	have	happened.	I
wouldn’t	 have	fallen	in	love	with	 Ky	 and	the	choice	wouldn’t	 have	been	so	hard
to	make	in	the	sort.	Everything	would	 have	been	fine.

Everything	can	still	 be	fine.	If	the	sort	is	what	 I	suspect,	if	Ky	leaves	for	a	better
life,	will	 I	 pick	up	the	pieces	of	my	life	 here?	The	biggest	piece,	my	Match	with
Xander,	would	not	be	hard	to	shape	a	life	around.	I	could	love	him.	 I	do	love
him.	And	because	I	do,	I	have	to	tell	him	 about	Ky.	I	do	not	 mind	stealing	from
the	Society.	But	I	will	 not	steal	from	 Xander	any	longer.	Even	if	 it	hurts,	I	have
to	tell	him.	Because	either	way,	whichever	life	 I	build,	 has	to	be	built	on	truth.

Thinking	 of	telling	 Xander	hurts	almost	as	much	as	thinking	of	losing	Ky.	 I	roll
over	and	hold	the	tablet	container	tight	in	my	 palm.	Think	of	something	else.

I	remember	the	first	time	I	 saw	Ky	on	top	of	that	little	 hill,	 leaning	back,	sun	on
his	face,	and	I	realize	that	is	when	I	fell	 in	love	with	 him.	I	didn’t	 lie	 to	him	after
all.	I	didn’t	 see	him	differently	 because	I	saw	his	face	on	the	portscreen	the

216
morning	after	my	Match;	I	saw	him	differently	because	I	saw	him	outside,
unguarded	for	a	moment,	with	eyes	the	color	of	the	sky	in	the	evening	before	it
goes	down	into	dark.	I	saw	him	seeing	me.

Lying	in	bed,	my	body	and	soul	bruised	and	tired,	I	realize	that	the	Officials	are
right.	Once	you	want	something,	everything	changes.	Now	I	want	everything.
More	and	more	and	more.	I	want	to	pick	my	work	position.	Marry	who	I	choose.
Eat	pie	for	breakfast	and	run	down	a	real	street	instead	of	on	a	tracker.	Go	fast
when	I	want	and	slow	when	I	want.	Decide	which	poems	I	want	to	read	and
what	words	I	want	to	write.	There	is	so	much	that	I	want.	I	feel	it	so	much	that	I
am	water,	a	river	of	want,	pooled	in	the	shape	of	a	girl	named	Cassia.

Most	of	all	I	want	Ky.

“We’re	running	out	of	time,”	Ky	says.

“I	know.”	I’ve	 been	counting	the	days,	too.	Even	if	Ky’s	new	work	position	is
still	here	in	the	City,	the	summer	leisure	activities	are	almost	over.	I	won’t	see
Ky	nearly	as	much.	I	allow	myself	to	daydream	for	a	few	seconds—what	if	his
new	position	is	one	that	allows	him	more	time?	He	could	come	to	all	of	the
Saturday	night	activities.	“Only	a	couple	of	weeks	of	hiking	left.”

“That’s	not	what	I	mean,”	he	says,	moving	closer.	“Don’t	you	feel	it?
Something’s	changing.	Something’s	happening.”

Of	course	I	feel	it.	For	me,	everything	is	changing.

His	eyes	are	wary,	as	though	he	still	feels	watched.	“Something	big,	Cassia,”	he
says,	and	then	he	whispers	softly,	“I	think	the	Society	is	having	trouble	with
their	war	on	the	borders.”

“What	makes	you	say	that?”

“I	have	a	feeling,”	he	says.	“From	what	you	told	me	about	your	mother.	From
the	shortage	of	Officials	during	free-rec	hours.	And	there	are	changes	coming	at
work.	I	can	tell.”	He	glances	at	me	and	I	duck	my	head.

“Do	you	want	to	tell	me	why	you	were	there?”	he	asks	gently.

I	swallow.	I’ve	been	wondering	when	he	would	want	to	know.	“It	was	a	real-life
sort.	I	had	to	sort	the	workers	into	two	groups.”

217
sort.	I	had	to	sort	the	workers	into	two	groups.”

“I	see,”	he	says,	and	he	waits	to	see	if	I	will	say	more.

And	I	wish	I	could.	But	I	can’t	get	the	words	out.	Instead,	I	say,	“You	haven’t
given	me	any	more	of	the	story.	What	happened	after	the	Officials	came	to	get
you?	When	did	that	happen?	I	know	it	wasn’t	long	ago,	because	…”	My	voice
trails	off.

Ky	ties	a	red	cloth	on	the	tree	slowly,	methodically,	and	then	he	looks	up.	After
years	of	seeing	only	surface	emotions	from	him,	the	new	and	deeper	ones	startle
me	sometimes.	The	expression	on	his	face	now	is	not	one	I	have	seen	before.

“What’s	wrong?”	I	ask.

“I’m	afraid,”	he	says	simply.	“Of	what	you’re	going	to	think.”

“About	what?	What	happened?”	After	everything	he’s	been	through,	Ky’s	afraid
of	what	I	might	think?

“It	was	in	the	spring.	They	came	to	talk	with	me	at	work,	pulled	me	aside	into	a
room	there.	They	asked	if	I	ever	wondered	what	my	life	would	be	like	if	I
weren’t	an	Aberration.”	Ky’s	jaw	tightens	at	this	and	I	feel	sorry	for	him.	He
glances	up	and	sees	it	on	my	face	and	his	jaw	becomes	even	more	set.	He	does
not	want	my	pity,	so	I	turn	my	face	away	to	listen.

“I	said	I	never	thought	about	that	much.	I	said	I	didn’t	worry	about	things	I
couldn’t	change.	Then	they	told	me	there	had	been	a	mistake.	My	data	had	been
entered	into	the	Matching	pool.”

“Your	data?”	I	 ask,	surprised.	But	the	Official	told	me	it	was	a	mistake	on	the
microcard,	Ky’s	picture	where	it	shouldn’t	be.	She	told	me	that	he	hadn’t	been
entered	into	the	pool.

She	lied.	The	error	was	much	bigger	than	she	said	it	was.

Ky	keeps	talking.	“I’m	not	even	a	full	citizen.	They	said	the	whole	incident	was
completely	irregular.”	He	smiles,	a	bitter	twist	to	his	mouth	that	it	hurts	me	to
see.	“Then	they	showed	me	a	picture.	The	girl	who	would	have	been	my	Match
if	I	weren’t	what	I	am.”	Ky	swallows.

218
“Who	was	she?”	I	ask.	My	voice	sounds	harsh,	grating.	Don’t	say	that	it	was	me.
Don’t	say	that	it	was	me,	because	then	I	will	know	that	you	saw	me	because	they
told	you	to	look.

“You,”	he	says.

And	now	I	see.	Ky’s	love	for	me,	which	I	thought	was	pure	and	unblemished	by
any	Officials	or	data	or	Matching	pools,	is	not.	They	have	touched	even	this.

I	feel	like	something	is	dying,	ruined	beyond	repair.	If	the	Officials	orchestrated
our	whole	love	affair,	the	one	thing	in	my	life	I	thought	happened	in	spite	of
them—I	can’t	finish	the	thought.

The	forest	around	me	blurs	into	green	and	without	the	red	flags	marking	the
way,	I	would	not	know	my	way	down.	As	it	is,	I	tear	at	them	wildly,	pulling
them	off	the	branches.

“Cassia,”	he	says	behind	me.	“Cassia.	Why	does	it	matter?”

I	shake	my	head.

“Cassia,”	he	calls	after	me.	“You’re	keeping	something	from	me,	too.”

A	whistle	sounds	sharp	and	clear	below	us.	We	have	come	so	far	but	never	made
it	to	the	top.

“I	thought	you	were	eating	lunch	at	the	Arboretum,”	Xander	says.	The	two	of	us
sit	together	in	the	meal	hall	at	Second	School.

“I	changed	my	mind,”	I	tell	him.	“I	wanted	to	eat	here	today.”	The	nutrition
personnel	frowned	at	me	when	I	asked	for	one	of	the	extra	meals	they	keep	on
hand,	but	after	checking	my	data,	they	handed	over	the	meal	without	further
comment.	They	must	have	seen	that	I	hardly	ever	do	this.	Or	maybe	there’s	some
other	flag	on	my	data	that	I	can’t	think	about	right	now.	Not	after	the	revelation
from	Ky.

I	realize	how	much	food	my	container	holds	this	time,	now	that	it’s	a	general
portion	and	not	labeled	specifically	for	me.	My	portions	have	been	getting
smaller.	What	purpose	does	that	serve?	Am	I	too	fat?	I	look	down	at	my	arms
and	legs,	strong	from	all	the	hiking.	I	don’t	think	so.	And	I	realize	again	how

219
distracted	my	parents	must	be;	under	normal	circumstances,	they	would	have
noticed	my	smaller	portions	and	had	plenty	to	say	to	the	nutrition	 personnel
about	them.

Things	are	wrong	everywhere.

I	push	back	my	chair.	“Will	  you	come	with	me?”

Xander	glances	at	his	watch.	“Where?	Class	starts	soon.”

“I	know,”	 I	 say.	“We’re	 not	going	far.	Please.”

“All	 right,”	 Xander	says,	looking	 at	me	with	a	puzzled	expression	on	his	face.

I	lead	him	down	the	hall	 to	the	classroom	area	and	push	open	the	door	at	the	end.
There,	in	a	small	area	like	a	courtyard,	is	the	Applicable	Sciences	botany	pond.
Xander	and	I	are	alone.

I	have	to	tell	him.	 This	is	Xander.	He	deserves	to	know	about	Ky,	and	he
deserves	to	hear	it	from	me.	Not	from	an	Official	 in	 a	greenspace,	today	or	some
other	day.

Drawing	a	deep	breath,	I	look	down	at	the	pond.	It	isn’t	 blue	like	 the	pool	where
we	swim.	This	water	is	brownish-green	 under	its	silvery	surface,	messy	with	life.

“Xander,”	 I	say,	my	voice	as	quiet	as	if	we	were	hidden	in	trees	on	the	Hill.	 “I
have	something	to	tell	you.”

“I’m	 listening,”	 he	says,	waiting,	looking	 at	me.	Always	steady.	Always	 Xander.

It’s	better	to	say	this	quickly,	 before	I	find	 myself	unable	to	say	it	at	all.	 “I	think
I’m	falling	 in	 love	with	 someone	else.”	I	speak	so	softly,	I	almost	can’t	hear	my
own	voice.	But	Xander	understands.

Almost	before	I’ve	 finished,	he’s	shaking	his	 head	and	saying,	“No,”	putting	up
his	hand	to	stop	me	before	I	say	more.	But	it	isn’t	 either	of	those	gestures	or	that
word	that	makes	me	fall	silent.	It’s	 the	hurt	in	his	eyes.	And	what	they	are	saying
isn’t	No.	It’s:	 Why?

“No,”	 Xander	says	again,	turning	away	from	me.

220
I	can’t	bear	that,	so	I	move	in	front	of	him,	try	to	see	him,	too.	He	won’t	look	at
me	for	a	long	moment.	I	don’t	know	what	to	say.	I	don’t	dare	to	touch	him.	All	I
can	do	is	stand	there,	hoping	he	will	look	back.

When	he	does,	the	pain	is	still	there.

And	something	else	too.	Something	that	doesn’t	look	like	surprise.	It	looks	like
recognition.	Did	some	part	of	him	know	this	was	happening?	Is	that	why	he
challenged	Ky	to	the	games?

“I’m	sorry,”	I	say,	rushing.	“You’re	my	friend.	I	love	you	too.”	It	is	the	first	time
I’ve	said	those	words	to	him,	and	it	comes	out	all	wrong.	The	sound	of	it,	hurried
and	strained,	makes	the	words	seem	like	less	than	they	are.

“You	love	me	too?”	Xander	says,	his	voice	cold.	“What	game	are	you	playing?”

“I’m	not	playing	a	game,”	I	whisper.	“I	do	love	you.	But	it’s	different.”

Xander	says	nothing.	An	hysterical	giggle	rises	up	in	me;	it’s	exactly	like	the	last
time	we	had	an	argument	and	he	refused	to	speak	to	me.	Years	ago,	when	I
decided	that	I	didn’t	like	playing	the	games	as	much	as	I	once	had.	Xander	was
mad.	“But	no	one	else	plays	like	you,”	he	said.	And	then,	when	I	wouldn’t	give
in,	he	wouldn’t	talk	to	me.	I	still	wouldn’t	play.

It	took	two	weeks	before	our	peace	was	brokered,	that	day	he	saw	me	jump	into
the	pool	from	the	diving	board	after	Grandfather	jumped	first.	I	surfaced,
frightened	and	exhilarated,	and	Xander	swam	over	to	congratulate	me.	In	the
rush	of	the	moment	all	was	forgotten.

What	would	Grandfather	think	of	this	jump	I’m	taking?	Would	this	be	one	time
he	would	tell	me	to	hang	on	to	the	edge	with	all	my	might?	Would	he	say	to
cling	to	the	side	of	the	board	until	my	fingers	became	bloody	and	scraped?	Or
would	he	say	that	it	was	all	right	to	let	go?

“Xander.	The	Officials	played	a	game	with	me.	The	morning	after	the	Match
Banquet,	I	put	the	microcard	in	the	port.	Your	face	came	up	on	the	screen	and	it
disappeared.”	I	swallow.	“And	then	someone	else’s	face	appeared	instead.	It	was
Ky’s.”

“Ky	Markham?”	Xander	asks,	disbelieving.

221
“Yes.”

“But	Ky’s	 not	your	 Match,”	 Xander	says.	“He	can’t	be,	because—”

“Because	why?”	I	ask.	Does	Xander	know	 about	Ky’s	status	after	all?	How?

“Because	I	am,”	Xander	says.

For	a	long	moment,	neither	of	us	speak.	Xander	doesn’t	look	away	and	I	don’t
think	that	I	can	stand	this.	If	 I	had	a	green	tablet	in	my	mouth	now,	I’d	 bite,	taste
the	bitterness	before	the	calm.	I	think	back	to	that	day	in	the	meal	hall	when	he
told	me	Ky	could	 be	trusted.	Xander	believed	that.	And	he	believed	he	could
trust	me.

What	does	he	think	of	us	both	now?

Xander	leans	closer.	Blue	eyes	holding	mine,	hand	hovering	next	to	mine.	I	close
my	eyes,	both	to	shut	out	the	pain	in	his	gaze	and	to	stop	myself	from	turning	my
hand	up,	weaving	my	fingers	through	his,	leaning	forward,	 meeting	his	lips.	I
open	my	eyes	and	look	at	Xander	again.

“I	came	up	on	the	screen,	too,	Cassia,”	he	says	quietly.	“But	he	was	the	one	you
chose	to	see.”	And	then,	quick	as	a	player	making	his	last	move,	he	turns	away
and	pushes	through	the	doors.	He	leaves	me	behind.

Not	at	first!	 I	want	to	tell	 him.	And	I	still	 see	you!

One	by	one,	the	people	I	can	talk	to	have	gone.	Grandfather.	My	mother.	And
now,	Xander.

You	are	strong	enough	to	go	without	it,	Grandfather	told	 me	about	the	green
tablet.

But,	Grandfather.	Am	I	 strong	enough	to	go	without	you?	Without	 Xander?

The	sun	shines	down	on	me	where	I	have	chosen	to	stand.	No	trees,	no	shade,	no
height	from	which	 I	can	look	down	 on	what	I’ve	done.	And	 even	if	there	were,	I
cannot	see	for	the	tears.

222
                                            CHAPTER	        28

At	home	that	night,	I	take	out	the	green	tablet	again.	I	know	what	it	can	do	for
me;	I	saw	what	it	did	for	Em.	It	will	make	me	calm.	That	word,	calm,	sounds
impossibly	beautiful,	gloriously	uncomplicated.	A	water-smooth	word,	a	word
that	can	take	the	edge	away	from	fear,	gloss	it	over,	make	it	shiny.	Calm.	Gentle.

I	put	the	tablet	back	in	the	container	and	snap	it	shut,	turning	to	another	kind	of
green	next	to	me.	My	framed	piece	of	dress	in	its	bit	of	glass.	I	wrap	my	hand	in
one	of	my	socks	and	then	press	down,	hard.	A	faint	snap.	I	lift	my	hand.

It’s	harder	to	break	something	than	you	would	think.	I	wonder	if	the	Society	is
finding	this	to	be	true	of	me	as	well.	I	put	my	hand	down	again,	push	harder.

It	would	be	easy	if	no	one	watched,	if	no	one	could	hear	me.	If	these	walls
weren’t	so	thin	and	my	life	weren’t	so	transparent,	I	could	throw	the	glass
against	the	wall,	smash	it	with	a	rock,	destroy	with	abandon	and	noise.	I	think
the	glass	would	make	a	glittery	sound	when	it	broke;	I	would	like	to	see	it	burst
into	a	million	pieces	and	shine	all	the	way	down.	But	instead,	I	have	to	be
careful.

Another	long	silvery	crack	runs	across	the	surface	of	the	glass.	Underneath,	the
smooth	ice-green	cloth	is	undisturbed.	Carefully	I	pull	the	pieces	of	glass	apart,
lift	the	largest	one	up,	and	pull	out	the	fabric.

I	take	off	the	sock	and	hold	up	my	hand.	I’m	not	even	cut,	not	even	bleeding.

After	the	scratchy	wool	of	my	sock,	the	silk	feels	cool	in	my	hand,	luxurious,
like	water.	My	birthday	began	with	the	water,	I	think	as	I	fold	the	material,	and	I
smile.

After	I’ve	tucked	both	the	fabric	and	the	tablet	container	into	the	pocket	of
tomorrow’s	plainclothes,	I	climb	into	bed	with	that	image	in	my	mind.	Water.	I
will	drift	away	tonight	on	my	dreams.	That	way	the	datatags	won’t	pick	up	a
thing	in	my	mind	except	me,	Cassia,	floating	on	the	waves,	letting	them	carry
my	weight	for	a	little	while.

The	Officer	is	not	at	hiking	today.

223
Instead,	we	have	a	junior	Official	 who	bites	his	words	out	quick	 and	fast,	as
though	he	thinks	this	is	how	the	Officers	 speak.	His	eyes	sweep	over	us,	happy
with	the	power	to	oversee,	to	direct.	“The	 decision	has	been	made	to	shorten
leisure	activities	this	summer.	Today’s	 your	last	day	of	hiking.	 Take	down	as
many	of	the	red	flags	as	you	can	and	knock	over	the	cairns.”

I	glance	over	at	Ky,	who	does	not	seem	surprised.	I	try	not	to	let	my	 gaze	linger
on	his	face,	try	not	to	look	for	 answers	in	his	eyes.	We	were	both	polite	and
normal	on	the	air-train	ride	to	 the	Arboretum	this	morning;	 we	both	know	how	 to
perform	when	we’re	being	watched.	All	 the	time	 I	wondered	what	he	thought	of
me	running	away	from	him	 on	the	Hill	 yesterday.	What	he	will	 think	of	me	once
he	finds	out	about	the	sort,	and	if	he	will	 accept	the	gift	I	want	to	give	 him	today.

Or	if	he	will	 do	to	me	what	I	 did	to	Xander	and	turn	me	away.

“Why?”	 Lon	asks	in	a	whine.	“We	 spent	half	the	summer	marking	these	paths!”

I	think	I	 see	a	faint	smile	on	Ky’s	face	and	I	realize	that	he	likes	Lon.	 Who	asks
the	questions	no	one	else	will	ask	even	though	he	never	gets	an	answer.	It	strikes
me	that	this	is	a	kind	of	bravery.	A	 wearing-down	kind	 of	bravery,	but	bravery
nonetheless.

“Don’t	 ask	questions,”	the	Official	 snaps	at	Lon.	“Get	started.”

And	so,	for	the	last	time,	Ky	 and	I	begin	to	climb	 the	Hill.

When	we	are	far	enough	onto	our	own	path	that	no	one	else	can	see	us,	Ky	grabs
my	hand	as	I	reach	to	untie	a	red	cloth	from	one	of	the	shrubs.	“Forget	it	all,”	 he
says.	“We’re	going	to	the	top.”

Our	eyes	meet.	I’ve	never	seen	him	look	so	reckless.	I	open	my	mouth	to	say
something	but	he	interrupts	me.	“Unless	you	don’t	 want	to	try?”

There’s	a	challenge	in	his	voice	I	haven’t	 heard	before.	His	voice	isn’t	cruel,	 but
he’s	not	just	curious.	He	needs	to	know	the	answer;	what	I	do	now	tells	him
something	about	me.	He	doesn’t	say	anything	about	yesterday.	His	face	is	open,
his	eyes	alight,	his	body	tense,	every	muscle	saying	It’s	time.	Now.

“I	want	 to	try,”	 I	tell	him.	 To	prove	it,	 I	lead	the	way	along	the	path	we’ve
marked	together.	It	isn’t	long	 before	I	feel	his	hand	brush	mine	and	when	our

224
fingers	intertwine	I	feel	the	same	urgency	he	does.	We	have	to	make	it	to	the	top.

I	don’t	turn	around	but	I	hold	on	tight.

As	we	break	into	the	last	part	of	the	forest,	the	part	we	haven’t	charted,	I	stop.
“Wait,”	I	say.	If	we’re	really	going	to	clear	this	Hill,	I	want	to	pull	out	the	last
tangles	and	twists	so	we	can	stand	on	the	top	free	and	open.

Behind	the	patience	on	Ky’s	face	I	see	worry,	worry	that	we	aren’t	going	to
make	it	in	time.	Even	now,	the	whistle	could	be	shrilling	below	us	and	I
wouldn’t	hear	it	over	the	beating	of	our	hearts	and	the	sound	of	our	breathing	in
and	out,	in	and	out,	the	same	air.	“I	was	scared	yesterday.”

“Of	what?”

“That	we	fell	in	love	because	of	the	Officials,”	I	say.	“They	told	you	about	me.
They	told	me	about	you,	the	morning	after	my	Match,	when	your	face	came	up
on	my	microcard	by	mistake.	You	and	I	knew	each	other	all	along,	but	we	never
did	anything	about	it	until	…”	I	can’t	finish	my	sentence,	but	Ky	knows	what	I
mean.

“You	don’t	throw	something	away	just	because	they	predicted	it,”	he	protests.

“But	I	don’t	want	to	be	defined	by	their	choices,”	I	say.

“You’re	not,”	he	says.	“You	never	have	to	be.”

“Sisyphus	and	the	rock,”	I	say,	remembering.	Grandfather	would	have
understood	that	story.	He	rolled	the	rock,	he	lived	the	life	the	Society	planned	for
him,	but	his	thoughts	were	always	his	own.

Ky	smiles.	“Exactly.	But	we,”	he	tugs	at	my	hand,	gently,	“are	going	to	make	it
to	the	top.	And	maybe	even	stand	there	for	a	minute.	Come	on.”

“I	have	to	tell	you	something	else,”	I	say.

“Is	it	about	the	sort?”	he	asks.

“Yes—”

Ky	interrupts	me.	“They	told	us.	I’m	part	of	the	group	that’s	going	to	get	a	new

225
Ky	interrupts	me.	“They	told	us.	I’m	part	of	the	group	that’s	going	to	get	a	new
work	position.	I	already	know.”

Does	he	know?	Does	he	know	his	life	will	be	shorter	if	he	keeps	working	at	the
disposal	center?	Does	he	know	he	was	right	on	the	line	between	those	who
stayed	and	those	who	moved	on?	Does	he	know	what	I	did?

He	sees	the	questions	in	my	eyes.	“I	know	you	had	to	sort	us	into	two	groups.	I
know	I	was	probably	right	in	the	middle.”

“Do	you	want	to	know	what	I	did?”

“I	can	guess,”	he	says.	“They	told	you	about	the	life	expectancy	and	the	poisons,
didn’t	they?	That’s	why	you	put	me	where	you	did.”

“Yes,”	I	say.	“You	know	about	the	poisons,	too?”

“Of	course.	Most	of	us	figure	it	out.	But	none	of	us	are	in	a	position	to	complain.
Our	lives	are	still	much	longer	here	than	they’d	be	in	the	Outer	Provinces.”

“Ky.”	 It’s	hard	to	ask,	but	I	have	to	know.	“Are	you	leaving?”

He	looks	up.	Above	us,	fierce	and	golden,	the	sun	climbs	the	sky.	“I’m	not	sure.
They	haven’t	told	us	yet.	But	I	know	we	don’t	have	much	time.”

When	we	reach	the	top	of	the	Hill	it	feels	completely	different	in	some	ways	and
not	in	others.	He	is	still	Ky.	I	am	still	Cassia.	But	we	stand	together	in	a	place
where	neither	of	us	has	been	before.

It’s	the	same	world,	gray	and	blue	and	green	and	gold,	that	I’ve	seen	all	my	life.
The	same	world	I	saw	from	Grandfather’s	window	and	from	the	top	of	the	little
hill.	But	I	am	higher	now.	If	I	had	wings,	I	could	spread	them.	I	could	soar.

“I	want	you	to	have	this,”	Ky	says,	handing	me	the	artifact.

“I	don’t	know	how	to	use	it,”	I	say,	not	wanting	to	reveal	how	much	I	want	to
accept	his	gift.	How	deeply	I	ache	to	hold	and	have	something	that	is	part	of	his
story	and	part	of	him.

“I	think	Xander	can	teach	you,”	he	says	gently,	and	I	draw	in	my	breath.	Is	he
telling	me	good-bye?	Is	he	telling	me	to	trust	in	Xander?	To	be	with	Xander?

226
Before	I	can	ask,	Ky	pulls	 me	close	and	his	words	are	in	my	ear,	warm	and
whispered.	“It	will	  help	you	find	 me,”	he	says.	“If	I	 ever	do	go	anywhere.”

My	face	fits	 perfectly	into	the	spot	against	his	shoulder,	near	his	neck,	where	I
can	both	hear	his	heart	and	smell	his	skin.	I’m	safe	here,	too.	Some	essential	part
of	me	is	safer	with	Ky	 than	anywhere	else.

Ky	presses	another	piece	of	paper	into	my	hand.	“The	last	part	of	my	story,”	 he
says.	“Will	 you	save	it?	Don’t	 look	at	it	yet.”

“Why?”

“Just	wait,”	 he	says,	voice	quiet,	strong.	“Wait	a	little	 while.”

“I	have	something	for	 you,	too,”	I	 say,	pulling	away	just	a	little,	 reaching	into
my	pocket.	I	give	him	 the	scrap	of	fabric,	the	green	silk	from	 my	dress.

He	holds	it	up	to	my	face	to	see	how	I	looked	that	night	 at	the	Match	Banquet.
“Beautiful,”	 he	says,	gently.

He	puts	his	arms	around	me	on	the	top	of	the	Hill.	From	where	we	stand	I	see
clouds	and	trees	and	the	dome	of	City	Hall	and	the	tiny	houses	of	the	Boroughs
in	the	distance.	For	one	brief	moment,	I	see	it	all,	this	world	 of	mine,	and	then	I
look	back	at	Ky.

Ky	says,	“Cassia,”	and	closes	his	eyes,	and	I	close	mine	too	so	that	I	can	meet
him	in	the	dark.	I	feel	 his	arms	around	me	and	the	smoothness	of	the	green	silk
as	he	presses	his	hand	against	the	small	of	my	back	and	pulls	me	closer,	closer.
“Cassia,”	he	says	once	more,	softly,	so	close	his	lips	meet	mine,	at	last.	At	last.

I	think	he	might	 have	meant	to	say	something	more,	but	when	our	lips	touch,
there	is	no	need,	for	once,	for	any	words	at	all.

227
                                            CHAPTER	        29

There	is	screaming	in	the	Borough	again	and	this	time	it	is	human.

I	open	my	eyes.	It	is	so	early	in	the	morning	that	the	sky	is	more	black	than	blue,
the	slice	of	dawn	at	the	edge	of	the	horizon	more	promise	than	reality.

My	door	slams	open	and	in	the	rectangle	of	light	I	see	my	mother.	“Cassia,”	she
says	in	relief,	and	she	turns	back	to	call	to	my	father,	“She’s	fine!”

“Bram,	too,”	he	calls	back,	and	then	we	are	all	in	the	hall,	going	toward	the	front
door,	because	someone	on	our	street	is	screaming	and	the	sound	of	it	is	so
uncommon	it	cuts	deep.	We	may	not	hear	the	sound	of	pain	often	in	Mapletree
Borough,	but	the	instinct	to	try	to	help	has	not	yet	been	Matched	out	of	us.

My	father	throws	open	the	door	and	we	all	look	out.

The	streetlights	seem	dimmer;	the	Officials’	coats	dull	and	gray.	They	walk	fast,
a	figure	between	them.	Behind	them,	a	few	more	people.	Officers.

And	someone	else,	screaming.	Even	in	the	muted	glow	of	the	streetlights,	I
recognize	her.	Aida	Markham.	Someone	who	has	borne	pain	before	and	who
bears	it	again	now	as	she	chases	the	figure	surrounded	by	Officials	and	Officers.

Ky.

“Ky!”

For	the	first	time	in	my	life,	I	run	as	fast	as	I	can	in	public.	No	tracker	to	slow
me,	no	branches	to	stop	me.	My	feet	fly	over	grass,	over	cement.	I	cut	across	the
lawns	of	my	neighbors	and	through	their	flowers,	trying	to	catch	up	to	the	lead
group	moving	toward	the	air-train	stop.	An	Officer	detaches	from	them	and
hurries	toward	Aida.	She’s	drawing	too	much	attention;	other	houses	have	open
doors	and	people	standing	on	the	steps	watching.

I	run	faster;	my	feet	hit	the	sharp,	cool	grass	of	Em’s	lawn.	A	few	houses	more.

“Cassia?”	Em	calls	from	her	doorway.	“Where	are	you	going?”

Ky	hasn’t	heard	me	over	Aida’s	screams.	They’re	almost	to	the	steps	that	go	up

228
Ky	hasn’t	heard	me	over	Aida’s	 screams.	They’re	almost	to	the	steps	that	go	up
to	the	air-train	platform.	 When	they	walk	 under	the	light	at	the	bottom,	I	see
they’ve	locked	Ky’s	 hands	together.

Just	like	they	did	in	the	picture.

“Ky!”	  I	scream	again,	and	his	head	snaps	up.	He	turns	his	face	toward	me,	but	I
am	not	close	enough	to	see	his	eyes.	I	have	to	see	his	eyes.

Another	Officer	 breaks	away	from	the	group	and	heads	in	my	direction.	I	should
have	waited	until	I	was	closer	before	I	called	 out,	but	I	am	still	 fast.	I’m	 almost
there.

Part	of	my	mind	tries	to	process	what	is	happening.	Are	they	taking	him	away	for
his	new	work	position?	If	 so,	why	so	early	in	the	morning?	Why	is	Aida	so
upset?	Wouldn’t	she	be	happy	to	know	he	has	a	new	chance,	something	better
than	washing	foilware?	 Why	is	he	wearing	handlocks?	Did	he	try	to	fight	 them?

Did	they	see	the	kiss?	Is	that	why	this	is	happening?

I	see	the	air	train	sliding	along	the	tracks	toward	the	station,	but	it’s	 not	the	air
train	we	usually	ride,	the	silvery-white	 one.	It’s	 the	charcoal-gray	long-distance
train,	the	kind	that	only	 departs	from	the	City	Center.	I	can	hear	it	coming,	too;
it’s	heavier,	louder,	than	the	white	one.

Something	isn’t	right.

And	if	 I	didn’t	 know	that	already,	the	word	Ky	 calls	to	me	as	they	push	him	up
the	steps	confirms	everything.	Because	there	in	front	of	everyone,	all	his	survival
instincts	leave	him	and	a	different	instinct	 takes	over.

He	calls	my	name.	“Cassia!”

In	that	one	word,	I	hear	it	all:	 That	he	loves	me.	That	he’s	afraid.	And	I	 hear	the
good-bye	he	was	trying	to	tell	me	yesterday	on	the	Hill.	 He	knew.	He’s	 not	just
leaving	for	a	new	work	 position;	he’s	going	somewhere	and	he	doesn’t	think
he’ll	come	back.

I	hear	footsteps	behind	me,	soft	on	the	grass	and	footsteps	in	front	of	me,	hard	on
the	metal.	I	glance	back	and	see	an	Officer	hurrying	toward	me;	forward,	 and	an
Official	 rushes	down	the	metal	stairs.	Aida’s	no	longer	screaming;	they	want	to

229
Official	rushes	down	the	metal	stairs.	Aida’s	no	longer	screaming;	they	want	to
stop	me	the	way	they	stopped	her.

I	can’t	get	to	him.	Not	this	way.	Not	now.	I	can’t	push	past	the	Officer	on	the
stairs.	I’m	not	strong	enough	to	fight	them	or	fast	enough	to	outrun	them—

Do	not	go	gentle.

I	don’t	know	if	Ky	speaks	the	words	to	my	mind	somehow	or	if	I	think	them	to
myself	or	if	Grandfather	might	be	out	there	somewhere	in	this	almost-night,
calling	words	on	the	wind,	words	with	wings	like	angels.

I	veer	to	the	side	of	the	platform,	feet	fast	on	the	cement.	Ky	sees	what	I’m
doing	and	he	twists	away,	a	sharp	movement	that	earns	him	a	second	of	freedom
before	their	hands	clamp	down	on	him	again.

It	is	enough.

For	a	moment,	he	leans	over	the	edge	of	the	lighted	platform	and	I	see	what	I
need	to	see.	I	see	his	eyes,	bright	with	life	and	fire,	and	I	know	he	won’t	stop
fighting.	Even	if	it’s	the	kind	of	quiet	fight	on	the	inside	that	you	can’t	always
see.	And	I	won’t	stop	fighting	either.

The	calls	of	the	Officials	and	the	sound	of	the	air	train	sliding	to	a	stop	will
cover	my	words.	Ky	won’t	be	able	to	hear	anything	I	say.

So	in	the	middle	of	all	the	noise,	I	point	to	the	sky.	I	hope	he	understands	what	I
mean,	because	I	mean	so	many	things:	My	heart	will	always	fly	his	name.	I
won’t	go	gentle.	I’ll	find	a	way	to	soar	like	the	angels	in	the	stories	and	I	will
find	him.

And	I	know	he	understands	as	he	looks	straight	at	me,	deep	into	my	eyes.	His
lips	move	silently,	and	I	know	what	he	says:	the	words	of	a	poem	that	only	two
people	in	the	world	know.

Tears	well	up	but	I	blink	them	away.	Because	if	there	is	one	moment	in	my	life
that	I	want	to	see	clearly,	this	is	it.

The	Officer	reaches	me	first,	grabbing	my	arm	and	pulling	me	back.

“Leave	her	alone,”	my	father	says.	I	had	no	idea	he	could	run	so	fast.	“She’s
done	nothing.”	My	mother	and	Bram	hurry	across	the	grass	toward	us.	Xander

230
done	nothing.”	My	 mother	and	Bram	hurry	across	the	grass	toward	us.	Xander
and	his	family	follow	 behind.

“She’s	causing	a	disturbance,”	the	Officer	 says	grimly.

“Of	course	she	is,”	my	father	 retorts.	“They’ve	 taken	her	childhood	friend	 away
in	the	early	hours	of	the	morning	while	 his	mother	screams.	What’s	going	on?”

I	hear	how	loud	my	father’s	 voice	is	as	he	dares	to	ask	this	question,	and	I	dart	a
glance	over	at	my	mother	to	see	how	she	feels	about	this.	Her	face	shows
nothing	but	pride	as	she	looks	at	him.

To	my	surprise,	Xander’s	father	speaks	up.	“Where	are	they	taking	the	boy?”

A	white-coated	Official	  takes	charge,	his	voice	loud	so	that	everyone	gathering
can	hear.	His	words	are	clipped	and	formal.	“I’m	 sorry	your	 morning	has	been
disrupted.	This	young	man	received	a	new	work	position	 and	we	were	merely
picking	him	 up	to	transport	him.	Since	the	position	is	outside	of	Oria	 Province,
his	mother	became	overwrought	and	upset.”

But	why	all	the	Officers?	 Why	all	the	Officials?	 Why	the	handlocks?	The
Official’s	 explanation	makes	no	sense,	but	after	a	short	pause,	everyone	nods,
accepting	it.	Except	Xander.	He	opens	his	mouth	as	if	to	speak	but	then	he
glances	over	at	me	and	closes	it.

All	 the	adrenaline	from	trying	to	 catch	up	to	Ky	leaves	me	and	a	horrible
realization	begins	to	sink	in.	Wherever	Ky	went,	it’s	 because	of	me.	Because	of
my	sort,	or	because	of	my	kiss.	Either	way,	this	is	my	fault.

“Lies,”	 Patrick	Markham	 says.	Everyone	turns	to	look	at	him.	Even	standing
there	in	his	sleepclothes,	his	face	drawn	and	thin	from	all	he	has	suffered,	he	still
has	a	quiet	dignity—a	quality	 no	one	can	touch.	It	is	something	I	have	only	seen
in	one	other	person.	Though	Patrick	and	Ky	are	not	related	by	blood,	they	both
possess	the	same	kind	of	strength.

“The	Officials	 told	 Ky	and	other	workers,”	 he	says,	looking	at	me,	“that	they’d
been	given	a	new	work	position.	A	 better	one.	But	in	reality,	they’re	 sending
them	to	the	Outer	Provinces	to	fight.”

I	reel	backward	as	if	I’ve	 been	struck,	and	my	mother	reaches	out	her	hand	to
steady	me.

231
steady	me.

Patrick	is	still	 talking.	“The	 war	with	 the	Enemy	isn’t	going	 well.	They	need
more	people	to	fight.	All	 the	original	 villagers	are	dead.	All	of	them.”	 He	pauses,
speaks	as	if	to	himself.	“I	should	have	known	 they’d	take	Aberrations	first.	 I
should	have	known	Ky	would	 be	on	the	list	.	.	.	I	thought,	since	we’d	 been
through	so	much	…”	His	 voice	shakes.

Aida	turns	on	him,	furious,	 forgiving.	 “We	 forgot,	sometimes.	But	he	never	did.
He	knew	it	was	coming.	Did	 you	see	him	fight?	Did	 you	see	his	eyes	when	they
took	him	away?”	 She	throws	her	arms	around	Patrick’s	neck	and	he	holds	her
close,	her	sobs	ringing	out	in	the	cool	morning.	“He’s	 going	 to	die.	It’s	a	death
sentence	back	there.”	Then	she	pulls	away,	screams	at	the	Officials,	“He’s	going
to	die!”

Two	of	the	Officials	 move	quickly,	 pinning	 Patrick’s	and	Aida’s	 hands	behind
their	backs	and	pulling	the	Markhams	away.	Patrick’s	 head	snaps	back	as	one	of
them	gags	him	to	keep	him	from	talking,	 and	they	do	the	same	to	Aida	to	stifle
her	screams.	I’ve	never	seen	or	heard	of	Officials	using	such	force.	Don’t	 they
realize	that	doing	so	gives	truth	to	Patrick’s	and	Aida’s	 words?

An	air	car	descends	near	us	and	disgorges	more	Officials.	The	Officers	push	the
Markhams	toward	it	and	Aida	 reaches	for	her	husband’s	hand.	Their	fingers	miss
by	centimeters	and	she	is	denied	that	touch,	the	one	thing	in	the	world	that	could
comfort	her	now.

I	close	my	eyes.	I	wish	I	couldn’t	 hear	her	screams	echoing	in	my	ears	and	the
words	I	know	I	 will	 never	forget.	He’s	going	 to	die.	I	wish	my	 mother	could	take
me	back	inside	my	house,	tuck	me	back	in	bed	like	she	did	when	I	was	a	child.
When	I	watched	night	fall	 outside	my	window	 without	 a	worry,	when	I	 did	not
know	what	it	 was	like	to	want	to	break	free.




“Excuse	me.”

I	know	that	voice.	It’s	 my	Official,	  the	one	from	the	greenspace.	Next	to	her
stands	an	Official	with	 the	insignia	of	the	highest	level	of	 government:	three
golden	stars,	shining	visibly	under	the	streetlight.	A	 hush	falls	over	us.

“Everyone,	please	take	out	your	tablet	containers,”	he	says	pleasantly.	“Remove
the	red	tablet.”

232
the	red	tablet.”

We	all	obey.	My	 hand	closes	on	the	small	container	with	its	three	tablets	secured
inside	my	pocket.	Blue	and	red	and	green.	Life	and	death	and	oblivion	always	at
my	fingertips.

“Now,	 keep	the	red	tablets	and	hand	Official	Standler”—he	gestures	to	my
Official,	 who	holds	a	square	plastic	receptacle—”your	containers.	Shortly	 after
we’ve	finished	here	you’ll	 receive	new	containers	and	a	new	set	of	tablets.”

Once	again,	we	obey.	I	drop	the	little	metal	cylinder	 in	with	 the	others,	but	I	do
not	meet	my	Official’s	 eyes.

“We’ll	 need	you	to	take	your	red	tablets.	Official	 Standler	and	I	will	 make	sure
you	do.	There’s	nothing	to	worry	 about.”

Officers	seem	to	multiply.	 They	walk	 down	the	street,	keeping	everyone	who
stayed	in	their	houses	where	they	are	and	isolating	the	dozen	or	so	of	us	who
stand	near	the	air-train	stop—the	handful	of	us	who	know	what	 happened	today
in	Mapletree	Borough	and	across	the	country.	I	imagine	other	scenes	went	more
smoothly	than	this;	likely	 none	of	the	other	Aberrations	had	parents	or	family
high	up	enough	to	know	what	was	really	happening.	And	 even	Patrick	Markham
could	do	nothing	to	save	his	son.

And	it’s	 all	my	fault.	 I	didn’t	 play	God	or	angel;	I	 played	Official.	 I	let	 myself
think	that	I	knew	 what	was	best	and	changed	someone’s	life	accordingly.	It
doesn’t	matter	whether	or	not	the	data	backed	me	up;	in	the	end,	I	made	the
decision	myself.	And	the	kiss—

I	can’t	let	myself	 think	about	the	kiss.

I	look	down	 at	the	red	tablet,	so	small	in	my	hand.	Even	if	it	 means	death,	I	think
I	would	welcome	 that	now.

But	wait.	I	 promised	Ky.	I	 pointed	to	the	sky	and	promised	him.	And	now,
moments	later,	I’m	going	 to	give	up?

I	drop	the	tablet	on	the	ground,	trying	to	 be	discreet.	For	a	second	I	see	it	small
and	red	in	the	grass,	and	I	remember	what	Ky	said	about	red	being	the	color	of
birth	and	renewal.	“To	 a	new	beginning,”	 I	say	to	myself,	and	I	 shift	my	feet	the

233
tiniest	bit	so	that	I	crush	the	tablet;	it	 bleeds	beneath	my	feet.	It	reminds	me	of
the	time	I	saw	Ky’s	 face	across	the	crowded	room	at	the	game	center	just	as	my
feet	crushed	the	lost	tablets	beneath	me.

Except	now,	when	I	look	 up,	he	is	nowhere	to	be	found.

No	one	has	followed	the	orders	yet.	Even	though	the	Official	 is	the	highest-
ranking	one	we’ve	ever	seen	and	he’s	ordered	us	to	do	it,	we’ve	heard	years	of
rumors	about	the	red	tablet.

“Would	 anyone	like	to	go	first?”

“I	will,”	  my	mother	 says,	stepping	forward.

“No,”	 I	say,	but	a	look	from	 my	father	stops	me.	I	know	what	 he’s	trying	to	tell
me,	She’s	doing	this	for	us.	For	you.	And	 somehow,	he	knows	it’s	going	to	be	all
right.

“I	will,	  too,”	he	says,	moving	to	stand	next	to	her.	Together,	as	we	all	watch,
they	both	swallow	their	 tablets	down.	The	Official	 checks	my	parents’	mouths
and	nods	briefly.	“They	 dissolve	within	 seconds,”	he	tells	us.	“Too	quickly	 for
you	to	try	and	throw	it	 back	up,	but	it’s	 unnecessary	anyway.	It	won’t	hurt	you.
All	 it	does	is	clear	your	mind.”

All	it	 does	is	clear	your	mind.	Of	course.	I	know	 now	why	we’re	 going	to	take
them.	So	we	forget	what	happened	to	Ky,	so	we	forget	that	the	Enemy	is
winning	the	war	in	 the	Outer	Provinces,	that	the	villagers	there	are	all	dead.	And
I	realize	why	they	didn’t	 have	us	take	the	tablets	when	something	happened	to
the	first	Markham	boy:	 because	we	needed	to	remember	how	dangerous
Anomalies	can	be.	How	vulnerable	we	would	 be	without	the	Society	to	keep
them	all	away.

Did	they	let	that	Anomaly	 out	on	purpose?	To	remind	us?

What	will	 they	tell	us	happened	to	Ky,	later?	What	story	will	  we	all	believe
instead	of	his	true	one?	Will	we	take	the	green	tablet	next,	a	calm	after	the
forgetting?

I	don’t	want	 to	be	calm	anymore.	I	don’t	want	 to	forget.

As	much	as	it	hurts,	I	have	to	hold	onto	the	whole	story	 of	him,	the	painful	 parts,

234
As	much	as	it	hurts,	I	have	to	hold	onto	the	whole	story	 of	him,	the	painful	 parts,
too.

My	mother	turns	to	look	 at	me	and	I	worry	I’ll	  see	blank	eyes	or	a	vacant,	slack
expression.	But	she	looks	fine.	So	does	my	father.

Soon,	everyone	lines	up,	red	tablets	in	their	palms,	ready	to	get	this	over	with
and	go	back	to	their	lives.	What	will	 I	 do	when	they	find	out	I	 got	rid	of	 mine?	I
glance	down	at	the	grass	beneath	my	feet,	almost	expecting	to	see	a	tiny	patch	of
it	seared	and	obliterated,	wiped	clean.	Instead	it	looks	exactly	as	it	did	before.	I
can’t	even	see	the	red	fragments	in	the	grass.	I	must	have	crushed	them
completely.

Bram	looks	terrified	 but	excited.	He’s	still	 not	old	enough	to	carry	his	own	 red
tablet,	so	my	father	gives	him	the	extra	one	he	carries.

My	Official	  starts	checking	people,	too.	She	moves	closer	and	closer	to	me,	but	I
can’t	take	my	eyes	from	Bram	and	then	from	Em	 as	she	takes	the	tablet.	For	a
moment,	I	remember	my	dream	and	I	feel	horror	as	I	watch	her.	But	nothing
happens.	Nothing	that	I	can	see,	anyway.

And	then	it	is	Xander’s	 turn.	He	glances	over	and	sees	me	watching	him,	and	an
expression	crosses	his	face	that	is	nothing	but	pain.	I	want	to	look	away,	but	I
don’t.	I	watch	 as	Xander	nods	to	me	and	lifts	the	red	tablet	toward	me,	almost	in
a	toast.

Before	I	see	him	take	it,	someone	blocks	my	view	of	 everyone	and	theirs	of	me.
It’s	my	Official.

“Let	me	see	your	tablet,	please,”	she	says.

“I	have	it.”	 I	hold	 out	my	hand	but	I	don’t	 open	my	palm.

I	think	I	 almost	see	her	smile.	Even	though	I	know	she	carries	extra	tablets—I’ve
seen	them—she	doesn’t	offer	me	one	yet.

Her	glance	flickers	down	to	 the	grass	at	my	feet	and	then	back	up	to	my	face.	I
lift	 my	arm	and	pretend	to	put	something	in	my	mouth	and	then	I	swallow,	 hard.
And	she	moves	on	to	the	next	person.

Even	though	this	is	what	I	want,	I	 hate	her.	She	wants	me	to	remember	what

235
happened	here.	What	I’ve	done.

236
                                            CHAPTER	        30

When	the	darkness	finally	lifts,	it	is	a	flat,	hot,	steel-colored	morning,	a	morning
without	dimension	or	depth.	The	houses	around	me	could	be	the	set	for	a
showing;	they	could	be	pictures	on	a	bigscreen.	I	feel	that	if	I	walk	too	far	I’ll
walk	right	into	canvas	or	through	a	paper	wall	and	then	out	into	black-nothing
and	the	end	of	everything.

Somehow	I’ve	run	out	of	fear;	I	feel	lethargic	instead,	which	is	almost	worse.
Why	care	about	a	flat	planet	populated	by	flat	people?	Who	cares	about	a	place
where	there	is	no	Ky?

This	is	one	of	the	reasons	I	need	Ky,	I	realize.	Because	when	I	am	with	him,	I
feel.

But	he	is	gone.	I	saw	it	happen.

I	made	it	happen.

Did	Sisyphus	have	to	do	this,	too?	I	wonder.	Stop	for	a	minute	and	concentrate
on	holding	firm,	on	pushing	the	rock	just	enough	to	keep	it	from	rolling	down
and	crushing	him,	before	he	could	even	think	about	trying	to	climb	again?

��

The	red	tablet	took	effect	almost	immediately	after	the	Officers	and	Officials
shepherded	us	home.	The	events	of	the	past	twelve	hours	have	been	wiped	from
my	family’s	minds.	Within	the	hour,	a	delivery	of	new	containers	and	tablets
arrived	with	a	letter	of	explanation	that	ours	were	found	to	be	defective	and
removed	earlier	this	morning.	Everyone	else	in	my	family	accepts	the
explanation	without	question.	They	have	other	things	to	worry	about.

My	mother	is	confused—where	did	she	put	her	datapod	for	work	when	she
finished	with	it	last	night?	Bram	can’t	remember	whether	he	finished	writing	his
assignment	on	his	scribe.

“Well,	turn	it	on	and	check,	honey,”	my	mother	says,	flustered.	My	father	looks
a	little	blank,	too,	but	not	as	confused.	I	think	he’s	experienced	this	before,
possibly	many	times	in	his	line	of	work.	While	the	tablet	still	works,	he	seems

237
possibly	many	times	in	his	line	 of	work.	While	 the	tablet	still	 works,	he	seems
less	bewildered	by	the	feeling	of	disorientation.

Which	is	good,	because	the	Officials	haven’t	finished	 with	 our	family	 yet.

“Private	message	for	Molly	 Reyes,”	the	generic	voice	from	the	port	 calls	out.

My	mother	looks	 up,	surprised.	“I’ll	 be	late	for	 work,”	 she	protests	softly,
although	whoever	sent	this	message	can’t	hear	her.	They	also	can’t	see	her
straighten	her	shoulders	before	she	walks	over	to	the	port	and	puts	on	the
earpiece.	The	screen	darkens,	the	picture	on	it	only	visible	from	the	exact	spot	in
which	she	stands.

“What	now?”	 says	Bram.	“Should	I	 wait?”

“No,	go	on	to	school,”	 my	father	tells	 him.	“We	 don’t	want	you	 to	be	late.”

On	his	way	out	the	door,	Bram	complains,	“I	 always	miss	everything.”	 I	wish	 I
could	tell	him	 that	wasn’t	true;	but	then	again,	would	I	 really	want	him	 to	keep
the	memory	of	what	happened	this	morning?

Something	happens	to	me	when	I	look	at	Bram	leaving	our	house,	and	things
become	real	again.	Bram	is	real.	I	am	real.	Ky	is	real,	and	I	need	to	get	started	on
finding	him.	 Now.

“I’m	 going	into	 the	City	for	 the	morning,”	 I	tell	my	 father.

“Don’t	 you	have	hiking?”	 he	asks,	and	then	he	shakes	his	head	as	if	to	clear	it.
“Sorry.	I	 remember.	Summer	leisure	activities	ended	early	this	year,	right?
That’s	why	Bram’s	 already	on	his	way	to	school	instead	of	swimming.	 My
mind’s	foggy	 this	morning.”	 He	doesn’t	seem	surprised	by	that	fact,	and	I	think
again	that	this	is	something	that’s	happened	to	him	before.	And	I	remember	how
he	let	my	mother	take	the	red	tablet	first;	somehow	he	knew	it	wouldn’t	  hurt	her.

“They	didn’t	 assign	us	anything	else	to	do	yet	to	take	the	place	of	hiking,”	 I	tell
my	father.	“So	I	 have	time	to	go	into	the	City	 before	Second	School.”	This	in
itself	is	an	oversight,	another	little	 hitch	in	the	well-oiled	 machine	of	 our	Society
that	proves	something	is	wrong	somewhere.

My	father	doesn’t	answer.	He	stares	at	my	mother,	whose	face	is	ashen	and	pale
as	she	stares	at	the	portscreen.	“Molly?”	he	says.	You’re	not	supposed	to

238
interrupt	a	private	message,	but	he	takes	a	few	steps	closer.	And	then	closer
again.

Finally,	when	he	puts	his	hand	on	her	shoulder,	she	turns	away	from	the	screen.
“This	is	my	 fault,”	 my	mother	says,	and	for	the	first	time	 in	my	life,	 I	see	her
look	through	my	father,	 not	at	him,	her	gaze	fixed	on	some	distant	point	beyond.
“We’ve	 been	Relocated	to	the	Farmlands,	effective	immediately.”

“What?”	  my	father	asks.	He	shakes	his	head,	glances	back	behind	her	at	the
port.	“That’s	 impossible.	You	submitted	the	report.	You	 told	the	truth.”

“I	suppose	they	don’t	want	those	of	us	who	saw	the	rogue	crops	to	continue
working	in	 positions	of	authority,”	 my	 mother	says.	“We	know	too	much.	We
might	be	tempted	to	do	the	same.	They’ll	put	us	out	in	the	Farmlands	where	we
won’t	be	in	charge.	Where	they	can	watch	us	and	wear	us	out	planting	what	they
tell	us	to	plant.”

“But	at	least,”	 I	say,	trying	to	comfort	 her,	“we’ll	  be	closer	to	Grandmother	and
Grandfather.”

“Not	the	Farmlands	in	Oria,”	 my	 mother	says.	“The	Farmlands	in	a	different
province.	We	leave	tomorrow.”	 Then	that	blank,	stunned	gaze	of	hers	shifts	to
my	father	and	I	see	her	begin	to	feel	again.	I	watch	realization	and	emotion	come
back	into	her	face.	As	I	see	it	happen	to	her,	I	feel	a	sense	of	urgency	so	strong	I
don’t	know	 if	I	 can	bear	it.	I	have	to	find	out	where	they	sent	Ky.	Before	we
leave.

“I’ve	 always	wanted	to	live	 in	the	Farmlands,”	my	father	says,	and	my	mother
leans	her	head	on	his	shoulder,	too	tired	to	cry	and	too	overcome	to	pretend	that
everything	is	all	right.

“But	I	 did	what	I	was	supposed	to	do,”	she	whispers.	“I	 did	exactly	what	they
asked.”

“It	 will	 be	all	right,”	  he	whispers	to	my	mother	and	to	me.	Maybe	if	 I	had	taken
the	red	tablet	I	could	believe	him.

Down	the	street,	there’s	an	Official	 air	car	in	front	 of	the	Markhams’	 house.	Our
Borough	has	had	entirely	too	much	attention	from	the	Officials	 in	 the	past	few
weeks.

239
Em	bounces	out	the	door	of	her	treeless	house.	“Did	you	hear?”	she	asks,
excited.	“The	Officials	 are	gathering	the	Markhams’	 things.	Patrick	has	been
transferred	to	work	in	the	Central	Government!	 It’s	such	an	honor.	And	he’s
from	our	Borough!”	  She	frowns.	“It’s	 too	bad	we	didn’t	 get	to	say	good-bye	to
Ky.	I’ll	  miss	him.”

“I	know,”	 I	 say,	and	my	heart	aches,	and	I	stop	again	under	my	stone,	pushing
back	against	the	weight	of	being	the	only	one	who	knows	what	really	 happened
this	morning.

Except	for	a	few	select	Officials.	 And	even	they	don’t	 know	that	I	 know.	Only
two	people	truly	know	 what	took	place,	that	I	didn’t	 take	the	red	tablet.	Me.	And
my	Official.

“I	have	to	go,”	 I	tell	 Em,	and	I	start	moving	again,	toward	the	air-train	 stop.	I
don’t	look	 back	at	the	Markhams’	house.	Patrick	and	Aida,	gone	for	good,	too.
Have	they	been	assigned	Aberration	status	or	a	quiet	Retirement	somewhere	far
from	here?	Have	they	taken	the	red	tablet,	too?	Do	they	look	around	their	new
place	with	surprise,	wondering	what	happened	to	their	second	son?	I’ll	have	to
try	to	find	 them,	too,	for	Ky,	 but	right	now	 I	have	to	find	Ky.	 There’s	only	 one
place	I	can	think	of	to	look	 for	information	 about	where	they	might	 have	sent
him.

On	the	ride	to	City	Hall,	 I	keep	my	head	down.	There	are	too	many	places	I	can’t
look:	at	the	seats	where	Ky	used	to	sit;	at	the	floor	of	the	air-train	 car	where	he
set	his	feet	and	kept	his	balance,	always	making	it	seem	easy,	natural.	I	can’t
bring	myself	to	look	 out	the	windows	at	all,	 knowing	that	I	 might	catch	a
glimpse	of	the	Hill	 where	Ky	 and	I	stood	yesterday.	Together.	When	the	train
stops	to	let	more	people	on	and	a	breeze	wafts	in,	I	wonder	if	the	strips	of	red
cloth	that	Ky	and	I	 left	there	flutter	 in	the	wind.	Signal	flags	 of	a	new	beginning,
though	not	the	kind	we	wanted.

Finally,	I	 hear	the	announcer’s	voice,	calling	my	destination.

City	Hall.

My	idea	won’t	 work.	 I	know	it	 the	minute	I	stand	on	the	steps	of	the	Hall	for
only	the	second	time	in	my	life.	 This	is	not	the	place	of	open	doors	and
twinkling	 lights	that	welcomed	 me,	invited	me	to	catch	a	glimpse	of	my	future.
In	the	daylight,	this	is	 a	place	with	armed	guards,	a	place	of	business,	a	place
where	past	and	present	are	locked	safe	inside.	They	won’t	let	me	in,	and	even	if

240
where	past	and	present	are	locked	safe	inside.	They	won’t	let	me	in,	and	even	if
they	did,	they	wouldn’t	 tell	 me	anything.

They	might	not	know	 there	was	anything	to	tell.	Even	Officials	 carry	red	tablets.

I	turn	back	and	there	across	the	street	I	see	possibility	and	my	heart	flutters.	Of
course.	Why	didn’t	I	think	 of	this	first?	 The	Museum.

The	Museum	is	long,	low,	 white,	blind.	 Even	its	windows	are	made	of	frosted
white	opaque	glass	to	keep	the	artifacts	inside	safe	from	the	light.	City	Hall,
across	the	street,	has	tall,	clear	windows.	City	Hall	sees	everything.	Still,	the
Museum	might	have	something	for	me	behind	its	tightly	 closed	eyes.	Hope
quickens	my	step	as	I	cross	the	street,	gives	me	strength	as	I	push	open	the
enormous	white	doors.

“Welcome,”	 says	a	curator,	sitting	at	a	round	white	desk.	“Can	I	help	you	 find
anything?”

“I’m	 wandering,”	 I	say,	trying	 to	look	relaxed.	“I	 have	some	extra	time	today.”

“And	 you	came	here,”	the	curator	says,	pleased,	puzzled.	“Wonderful.	You
might	want	to	try	 the	second	level.	Some	of	our	most	popular	displays	are	up
there.”

I	don’t	want	 to	draw	too	much	attention	to	myself,	 so	I	nod	and	climb	the	steps,
their	metal	echo	reminding	me	painfully	 of	Ky’s	 feet	on	the	stairs	at	the	station.
Don’t	think	 about	that	now.	Stay	calm.	Remember	coming	here	that	time	in	First
School,	before	Ky	came	to	the	Borough?	Back	when	we	had	time	to	consider	the
past,	before	we	went	to	Second	School	where	all	that	matters	is	the	future?
Remember	walking	into	the	dining	hall	 in	the	basement	of	the	Museum	with	the
other	schoolchildren,	all	 of	us	so	excited	to	be	eating	somewhere	new	and
different?	Remember	Xander’s	bright	blond	 head	among	the	rest,	the	way	he
pretended	to	listen	to	the	curator’s	 speech	but	kept	making	jokes	to	the	side	that
no	one	else	could	hear?

Xander.	If	I	 leave	him	here,	will	 another	piece	of	my	heart	be	torn	away,	too?

Of	course	it	will.

A	sign	points	to	the	Hall	 of	Artifacts	 and	I	veer	right,	suddenly,	wanting	 to	see
the	display.	Wanting	to	see	where	they	put	all	those	things	they	took.	Perhaps	I’ll

241
the	display.	Wanting	to	see	where	they	put	all	those	things	they	took.	Perhaps	I’ll
see	my	compact,	Xander’s	cuff	links,	 Bram’s	watch.	I	could	 bring	him	 here	one
more	time	before	we	leave	for	the	Farmlands.

I	stop	in	the	middle	of	 the	hall,	realizing	that	none	of	those	things	are	here.

The	other	cases	are	still	crammed	with	artifacts,	but	the	new	display	is	nothing
but	a	long	glass	case,	huge	and	empty.	A	sign	in	the	middle	of	it,	printed	in
lettered	words	that	look	so	different	from	 Ky’s	 cursive,	reads:	ADDITIONAL
ARTIFACTS	 COMING	  SOON.	A	light	 from	 above	illuminates	the	sign	in	its
empty,	cavernous	case.	That	sign	could	last	forever	in	this	sealed	and	pristine
environment.	Like	 the	scrap	of	my	dress	from	the	Match	Banquet.

But	I’ve	 already	broken	the	glass;	I’ve	given	the	green	away;	I’ve	 made	my
choice.	I’m	already	dying	 without	 Ky	here	and	now	I	have	to	make	sure	I	live	to
find	him.

I	realize	that	our	artifacts	will	 likely	 never	make	it	into	 the	case.	The	sign	is	the
only	display	there	may	ever	be.	I	don’t	 know	what	they’ve	 done	with	them.

Now	I	know	 for	myself	 that	there	is	nothing	left.

I	walk	down	 the	stairs	into	the	basement.	Where	they	keep	the	Glorious	History
of	Oria	Province,	where	I	 meant	to	go	all	along	before	the	chance	to	glimpse
what	was	lost	distracted	me	from	what	must	be	found.

I	stand	close	to	the	glass	and	look	at	the	map	of	our	Province	with	its	city,
farmlands,	and	rivers,	listening	to	the	footsteps	on	the	marble	floor	 behind	me.	A
small,	uniformed	man	comes	to	stand	next	to	me.	“Would	 you	like	me	to	tell	 you
more	about	the	history	of	Oria?”	 he	asks.

Our	eyes	meet:	mine	searching,	his	sharp	and	bright.

I	look	at	him	 and	realize:	I	will	 not	sell	our	poem.	I	am	selfish.	Besides	the	scrap
of	fabric,	it	 is	all	I	had	to	give	 Ky,	and	we	are	the	last	two	people	in	the	world
who	know	the	whole	thing.	 Even	this	is	a	dead	end,	even	this	last	idea	of	mine
won’t	work.	 I	could	 trade	the	poem	but	it	would	gain	me	nothing.	This	 isn’t
something	I	can	barter;	it’s	something	I	 have	to	do.

“No,	thank	you,”	 I	tell	 the	man,	even	though	I	would	like	 to	know	the	true

242
history	of	this	place	where	I	live.	 But	I	 don’t	think	 anyone	knows	it	anymore.

Before	I	leave,	I	look	 once	more	at	the	geographic	map	of	our	Society.	There,	in
the	middle	of	the	map,	fat	and	happy,	sit	the	large	plump	shapes	of	the
Provinces.	And	around	their	edges	are	all	the	Outer	Provinces,	the	lines	dividing
them	into	sections,	but	none	of	them	named.

“Wait,”	 I	 call	out	to	the	man.

He	turns	and	looks	back	at	me	expectantly.	“Yes?”

“Does	anyone	know	the	names	of	the	Outer	Provinces?”

He	waves	his	hand,	uninterested	now	that	he	knows	he	isn’t	going	to	get
something	worth	trading	from	 me.	“That	is	their	 name,”	he	calls	back.	“The
Outer	Provinces.”

Those	blank,	divided	Outer	Provinces	on	the	map	hold	my	gaze.	The	map	is
thick	with	 letters	and	information,	and	it’s	 hard	to	make	out	all	the	names.	I	scan
them	over,	not	really	reading	them,	not	sure	what	I’m	 looking	 for.

Then.	Something	stands	out	to	me,	one	piece	of	information	lodges	in	my	sorting
brain:	Sisyphus	River.	It	threads	through	some	of	the	Western	Provinces	and
then	through	two	of	the	Outer	Provinces	and	off	into	 the	void	of	 the	Other
Countries.

Ky	must	be	from	one	of	those	two	Outer	 Provinces.	And	since	that’s	where	the
attack	came	when	he	was	young,	that	could	be	where	the	trouble	is	now.	I	lean
closer	to	the	map	to	memorize	the	location	of	the	two	places	that	might	be	his.

I	hear	footsteps	coming	closer,	again,	and	I	turn.	“Are	 you	sure	I	can’t	help	you
with	anything?”	 the	small	man	asks.

I	don’t	want	 to	trade	anything!	 I	almost	exclaim	to	him,	 and	then	I	realize	that	he
seems	to	be	sincere.

I	point	to	the	Sisyphus	River	on	the	map,	one	tiny	black	 thread	of	hope	running
along	the	paper.	“Do	you	know	 anything	about	this	river?”

His	voice	hushes.	“I	heard	a	story	about	it	once	when	I	was	younger.	A	long	 time
ago	the	river	turned	toxic	partway	down	 and	no	one	could	live	near	its	banks.

243
ago	the	river	turned	toxic	partway	down	 and	no	one	could	live	near	its	banks.
But	that’s	all	I’ve	 heard.”

“Thank	you,”	 I	tell	 him,	because	now	I	have	an	idea,	thanks	to	what	I’ve	learned
about	the	way	our	elderly	die.	Could	our	 Society	have	poisoned	the	waters	on
their	way	down	to	the	enemy	country?	But	 Ky	and	his	family	 weren’t	 poisoned.
Perhaps	they	lived	farther	up,	in	the	higher	of	the	two	Provinces	along	that	river.

“It’s	 only	a	story,”	 the	man	warns	me.	He	must	have	seen	the	hope	flash	across
my	face.

“Isn’t	 everything?”	 I	say.

I	walk	out	of	 the	Museum	and	I	do	not	look	back.

My	Official	  waits	for	me	in	the	greenspace	outside	the	Museum.	Wearing	white,
sitting	on	a	white	bench,	backed	by	a	white-yellow	 sun.	It’s	too	 much;	I	blink.

If	I	close	my	 eyes	a	little	I	can	pretend	that	this	is	the	greenspace	next	to	the
game	center,	where	I	will	meet	my	Official	  for	the	first	 time.	I	can	pretend	that
she’s	going	to	tell	me	that	there’s	a	mistake	with	my	 Match.	But	this	 time	things
will	 take	a	different	turn,	go	down	a	different	 path,	one	where	Ky	and	I	can	be
together	and	happy.

But	there	is	no	such	path,	not	here	in	Oria.

She	gestures	for	me	to	come	and	sit	by	her	on	her	bench.	It	strikes	me	that	she’s
chosen	a	strange	place	to	meet,	right	here	next	to	the	Museum	doors.	Then	I
remember	that	it’s	a	perfect	place,	still	and	empty.	Ky	 was	right.	No	one	here	is
interested	in	the	past.

The	bench	is	carved	of	stone	and	feels	solid	and	cool	from	the	hours	it	spends	in
the	shade	of	the	Museum.	I	put	my	hand	against	the	rock	after	I	sit	down,
wondering	where	they	quarried	the	stone.	Wondering	who	had	to	move	the
rocks.

This	time	I	speak	first.	“I	 made	a	mistake.	You	have	to	bring	him	 back.”

“Ky	 Markham	has	already	had	one	exception	made	for	him.	Most	Aberrations
don’t	even	have	that,”	she	says.	“You’re	the	one	who	sent	him	away.	You’ve
proven	our	point.	People	who	let	the	data	slide,	who	let	emotions	get	involved,
create	a	mess	for	themselves.”

244
create	a	mess	for	themselves.”

“You	did	this,”	 I	say.	“You	 set	up	that	sort.”

“But	you	 performed	it,”	 she	says.	“Perfectly,	I	might	add.	You	 might	be	upset;
his	family	 might	be	devastated,	but	it	was	the	right	decision,	as	far	as	his	ability
was	concerned.	You	knew	he	was	more	than	he	pretended	to	be.”

“He	should	be	the	one	who	decides	whether	to	go	or	stay.	Not	me.	Not	you.	Let
him	choose.”

“If	 we	did,	everything	would	 fall	 apart,”	she	says,	patiently.	“Why	 do	you	think
we	can	guarantee	such	long	life	spans?	How	do	you	think	we	eradicated	cancer?
We	Match	for	everything.	 Genes	included.”

“You	 guarantee	these	long	life	spans	but	then	you	kill	us	at	the	end.	I	know
about	the	poison	in	the	food	for	people	like	 Grandfather.”

“We	can	also	guarantee	a	high	quality	of	life	 up	until	the	very	 last	breath.	Do
you	know	how	many	miserable	people	in	how	 many	miserable	societies	across
the	years	would	have	given	almost	anything	for	that?	And	the	method	of
administering	the—”

“Poison.”

“Poison,”	she	says,	unflinching,	 “is	unbelievably	 humane.	Small	doses,	in	the
patient’s	favorite	foods.”

“So	we	eat	to	die.”

She	dismisses	my	concern.	“Everyone	eats	to	die,	regardless	of	what	we	do.
Your	problem	is	that	you	 don’t	respect	the	system	and	what	it	offers	you,	even
now.”

This	almost	makes	me	want	to	laugh.	The	Official	 sees	the	twist	of	my	lips	and
launches	into	a	list	of	examples,	of	ways	I’ve	 broken	with	the	Society’s	 rules	in
the	past	two	months—and	she	doesn’t	even	know	the	worst	of	them—but	she
doesn’t	cite	a	single	example	from	all	the	years	before.	If	 she	had	a	way	to	track
all	my	memories,	she	would	see	they	are	pure.	That	I	truly	wanted	to	fit	 in	and
be	Matched	and	do	everything	the	right	way.	That	I	 truly	believed.

245
That	part	of	me	still	believes.

“It	was	time	for	this	little	experiment	to	end	anyway,”	the	Official	says,
sounding	regretful.	“We	don’t	have	the	manpower	to	focus	on	it	anymore.	And,
of	course,	situations	being	what	they	are—”

“What	experiment?”

“The	one	with	you	and	Ky.”

“I	already	know,”	I	say.	“I	know	that	you	told	him.	And	I	know	it	was	a	bigger
mistake	than	you	led	me	to	believe	that	first	time	we	spoke.	Ky	was	actually	in
the	Matching	pool.”

“It	was	no	mistake,”	she	says.

And	I	am	falling	again,	just	when	I	thought	I	had	hit	the	bottom.

“We	decided	to	put	Ky	into	the	Matching	pool,”	she	says.	“Now	and	then	we	do
that	with	an	Aberration,	simply	to	gather	additional	data	and	watch	for	variation.
The	general	public	doesn’t	know	about	it;	there’s	no	reason	they	should.	What’s
important	for	you	to	know	was	that	we	were	in	control	of	the	experiment	all
along.”

“But	the	odds	of	him	Matching	with	me—”

“Are	virtually	impossible,”	the	Official	agrees.	“So	you	can	see	why	we	were
intrigued.	Why	we	let	you	see	Ky’s	picture	so	that	you	would	be	curious.	Why
we	made	sure	you	were	assigned	to	the	same	hiking	group,	and	then	to	the	same
pairs.	Why	we	had	to	follow	it	through,	at	least	for	a	time.”

She	smiles.	“It	was	so	intriguing;	we	could	control	so	many	variables.	We	even
reduced	your	meal	portions	to	see	if	that	would	make	you	more	stressed,	more
likely	to	give	up.	But	you	didn’t.	Of	course,	we	were	never	cruel.	You	always
had	sufficient	calories.	And	you’re	strong.	You	never	did	take	the	green	tablet.”

“Why	does	that	matter?”

“It	makes	you	more	interesting,”	she	says.	“A	very	intriguing	subject,	in	fact.
Ultimately	predictable,	but	still	unusual	enough	to	want	to	watch.	It	would	have
been	interesting	to	see	your	situation	play	out	to	the	final	predicted	outcome.”

246
been	interesting	to	see	your	situation	play	out	to	the	final	predicted	outcome.”
She	sighs,	a	sigh	of	genuine	sadness.	“I	planned	to	write	an	article	about	it,
available	only	to	select	Officials,	 of	course.	It	would	 have	been	an	unparalleled
proof	of	the	validity	 of	 Matching.	That’s	 why	I	didn’t	 want	you	 to	lose	your
memory	of	what	happened	this	morning	at	the	air-train	 station.	All	 my	work
would	have	been	for	nothing.	Now,	 at	least	I	can	see	you	make	your	final	choice
while	you	still	 know	 what	happened.”

The	anger	fills	me	so	full	 that	there	is	no	room	for	thought	or	speech.	It	would
have	been	interesting	to	see	it	play	out	to	the	final	predicted	outcome.

It	was	all	planned	from	the	start.	Everything.

“Unfortunately,	 my	skills	 are	needed	elsewhere	now.”	She	runs	her	hand	along
the	datapod	in	front	of	her.	“We	 simply	don’t	 have	the	time	to	monitor	 the
situation	anymore,	so	we	can’t	extend	it	any	longer.”

“Why	 tell	me	all	of	 this?”	I	ask.	“Why	 do	you	want	 me	to	know	every	last
detail?”

She	looks	surprised.	“Because	we	care	about	you,	Cassia.	No	more	or	less	than
we	care	about	all	our	citizens.	As	the	subject	of	an	experiment,	you	have	the
right	to	know	 what	happened.	The	right	to	make	the	choice	we	know	you’ll
make	now	instead	of	waiting	any	longer.”

It’s	so	funny,	her	use	of	the	word	choice,	so	unintentionally	 hysterical	 that	I
would	laugh	if	 I	didn’t	 think	 it	would	 come	out	sounding	like	a	cry.	“Did	 you	tell
Xander?”

She	looks	offended.	“Of	course	not.	He’s	still	 your	Match.	 In	order	for	 the
experiment	to	be	controlled,	he	had	to	remain	in	the	dark.	He	knows	nothing
about	any	of	this.”

Except	what	I	told	him,	I	 think,	and	I	realize	that	she	doesn’t	know.

There	are	things	she	doesn’t	know.	With	this	realization,	 it	is	as	though
something	has	been	given	back	to	me.	The	knowledge	drops	into	my	anger	and
distills	it	 into	something	pure	and	clear.	And	one	of	the	things	she	knows	nothing
about	is	love.

“Ky,	 however,	was	different,”	 she	says.	“We	told	him.	We	pretended	we	were
warning	him,	but	of	 course	we	were	hoping	to	give	him	impetus	to	try	 to	be	with

247
warning	him,	but	of	 course	we	were	hoping	to	give	him	impetus	to	try	 to	be	with
you.	And	that	worked	as	well.”	 She	smiles,	smug,	because	she	also	thinks	that	I
don’t	know	 this	part	of	the	story.	But,	of	 course,	I	do.

“So	you	watched	us	all	the	time,”	 I	say.

“Not	all	 the	time,”	 she	answers.	“We	watched	you	enough	to	get	an	effective
sample	of	what	your	interactions	were	like.	 We	couldn’t	 watch	all	of	your
interactions	on	the	Hill,	 for	example,	or	even	on	the	smaller	hill.	 Officer	 Carter
still	had	jurisdiction	 over	that	area	and	did	not	look	kindly	 on	our	being	there.”

I	wait	for	 her	to	ask;	somehow	I	know	she	will.	 Even	though	she	thinks	she	has
an	accurate	sample,	there	is	a	part	of	her	that	has	to	know	more.

“So	what	did	happen	between	you	and	Ky?”	she	asks.

She	doesn’t	know	about	the	kiss.	That	was	not	what	sent	him	away.	That
moment	on	the	Hill	 is	still	ours,	mine	and	Ky’s.	 Ours.	No	 one	has	touched	it	but
the	two	of	us.

This	will	 be	what	I	have	to	hold	onto	as	I	go	forward.	 The	kiss,	and	the	poem,
and	the	I	love	you’s	we	wrote	and	said.

“If	 you	tell	me,	I	 can	help	you.	I	can	recommend	you	for	a	work	position	 in	the
City.	You	 could	stay	here;	you	wouldn’t	 have	to	leave	for	the	Farmlands	with
your	family.”	 She	leans	closer.	“Tell	 me	what	happened.”

I	look	away.	In	 spite	of	everything,	the	offer	 is	tempting.	I’m	 a	little	 afraid	of
leaving	Oria;	I	 don’t	want	to	leave	Xander	and	Em.	I	don’t	 want	to	leave	the
places	that	hold	so	many	memories	of	Grandfather.	And	most	of	all	I	 don’t	want
to	leave	this	City	and	my	Borough	 because	they	are	where	I	found	and	loved	Ky.

But	he’s	not	here	anymore.	I	have	to	find	him	 somewhere	else.

The	prisoner’s	dilemma.	Somewhere	Ky	keeps	faith	with	 me	and	I	can	do	the
same	for	him.	I	won’t	 give	up.

“No,”	 I	say	clearly.

“I	thought	 you’d	say	that,”	she	tells	me,	but	I	 hear	the	disappointment	in	her	tone
and	I	suddenly	want	to	laugh.	I	want	to	ask	her	if	 it	ever	gets	tedious	being	right

248
and	I	suddenly	want	to	laugh.	I	want	to	ask	her	if	it	ever	gets	tedious	being	right
all	the	time.	But	I	think	I	know	what	her	answer	would	be.

“So	what	is	the	final	predicted	outcome?”	I	ask.

“Does	it	matter?”	she	smiles.	“It’s	what	will	happen.	It’s	what	you’ll	do.	But	I’ll
tell	you	if	you’d	like.”

I	realize	that	I	don’t	need	to	hear	it;	I	don’t	need	to	hear	anything	she	has	to	say
or	any	predictions	she	thinks	she	can	make.	They	do	not	know	that	Xander	hid
the	artifact,	that	Ky	can	write,	that	Grandfather	gave	me	poetry.

What	else	doesn’t	she	know?

“You	say	you	planned	this	all	along,”	I	say	suddenly,	on	instinct,	acting	as
though	I	want	to	be	certain.	“You’re	telling	me	you	put	Ky	into	the	Matching
pool	yourselves.”

“Yes,”	she	answers.	“We	did.”

This	time,	I	look	right	at	her	when	she	speaks	and	that’s	when	I	see	it.	The
faintest	twitch	of	muscle	in	her	jaw,	a	slight	shift	of	her	eyes,	the	smallest	ring	of
performance	in	the	tone	of	her	voice.	She	doesn’t	often	have	to	lie;	she’s	never
been	an	Aberration,	so	this	doesn’t	come	easily	to	her,	she	hasn’t	had	as	much
practice.	She	can’t	keep	her	face	perfectly	still	the	way	Ky	does	when	he’s
playing	a	game	and	he	knows	what	he	has	to	do,	whether	it’s	better	to	win	or
lose.

And	although	she’s	been	told	how	to	play,	she	doesn’t	know	exactly	which	cards
she’s	holding.

She	doesn’t	know	who	put	Ky	into	the	Matching	pool.

If	the	Officials	didn’t,	who	did?

I	look	at	her	again.	She	doesn’t	know,	and	she	isn’t	listening	to	her	own	words.
If	the	almost-impossible	happened	before—my	being	Matched	to	two	boys	I
already	knew—then	it	can	happen	again.

I	can	find	him.

I	stand	up	to	leave.	I	think	I	smell	rain	in	the	air,	even	though	there	isn’t	a	cloud

249
I	stand	up	to	leave.	I	think	I	smell	rain	in	the	air,	even	though	there	isn’t	a	cloud
in	the	sky,	and	I	remember.	I	still	have	a	piece	of	Ky’s	story	left.

250
                                            CHAPTER	        31

Xander	sits	on	the	steps	of	my	house.

It’s	a	familiar	place	for	him	to	be	in	the	summer,	and	his	position	looks	familiar,
too.	Legs	outstretched,	elbows	resting	on	the	step	behind	him.	The	shadow	he
casts	in	the	summer	sun	is	smaller	than	he	is,	a	darker,	compacted	version	of
Xander	next	to	the	real	one.

He	watches	me	as	I	walk	up	the	path,	and	when	I	get	close,	I	see	the	pain	still
there	in	his	eyes,	a	shadow	behind	the	blue.

I	almost	wish	the	red	tablet	had	wiped	away	more	than	the	past	twelve	hours	for
Xander.	That	he	didn’t	remember	what	I	told	him,	how	much	it	ached.	Almost.
But	not	quite.	Even	though	telling	the	truth	has	caused	us	both	hurt,	I	don’t	see
how	I	could	have	given	Xander	anything	different.	It	was	all	I	had	to	give	and	he
deserved	to	have	it.

“I’ve	been	waiting	for	you,”	Xander	says.	“I	heard	about	your	family.”

“I	was	in	the	City,”	I	tell	him.

“Come	sit	by	me,”	Xander	says.	I	hesitate—does	he	mean	this?	Does	he	want	me
to	sit	by	him,	or	is	he	helping	me	put	on	a	show	for	whoever	might	be	watching?
Xander	keeps	looking	up	at	me,	waiting.	“Please.”

“Are	you	sure?”	I	ask.

“Yes,”	he	says,	and	then	I	know	that	he	is.	He’s	in	pain.	I	am,	too.	It	strikes	me
that	perhaps	this	is	part	of	what	we	are	fighting	to	choose.	Which	pain	we	feel.

Not	much	time	has	passed	since	the	Match	Banquet,	but	we	are	different	now,
stripped	of	our	fancy	clothes,	our	artifacts,	our	belief	in	the	Match	System.	I
stand	there,	thinking	about	this.	How	much	has	changed.	How	little	we	knew.

“You	always	have	to	make	me	speak	first,	don’t	you?”	Xander	asks,	a	hint	of	a
smile	on	his	face.	“You	always	win	our	arguments	in	the	end.”

“Xander,”	I	say,	and	I	sit	down	and	slide	right	next	to	him.	His	arm	goes	around
me,	and	I	put	my	head	on	his	shoulder	and	he	bends	his	head	to	rest	on	mine.	I

251
me,	and	I	put	my	head	on	his	shoulder	and	he	bends	his	head	to	rest	on	mine.	I
sigh,	so	deep	it	is	almost	a	shudder,	at	the	relief	I	feel.	At	how	good	this	is,	to	 be
held	like	this.	None	of	 it	is	for	 the	Society,	watching,	always.	It	is	all	 real,	for
me.	I	will	 miss	him	so	much.

Neither	of	us	says	anything	for	a	moment,	as	we	look	out	at	our	street	together
one	last	time.	I	might	come	back,	but	I	won’t	 live	 here	again.	Once	you’ve	been
Relocated,	you	don’t	return	except	to	visit.	 Clean	breaks	are	best.	And	I	will
make	the	cleanest	break	of	all,	when	I	go	to	find	Ky.	 That	is	the	kind	of
Infraction	that	no	one	can	overlook.

“I	heard	you	leave	tomorrow,”	 Xander	says,	and	I	nod,	my	head	moving	against
his	cheek.	“I	have	to	tell	you	 something.”

“What	is	it?”	 I	ask.	I	look	 ahead,	feeling	his	shoulder	move	under	the	shirt	of	his
plainclothes	as	he	shifts	position	slightly,	 but	I	don’t	 move	away.	What	will	 he
tell	me?	That	he	can’t	believe	I	betrayed	him?	That	he	wishes	he’d	been
Matched	with	anyone	but	me?	Those	are	the	things	I	deserve	to	hear,	but	I	don’t
think	he	will	 say	them.	Not	Xander.

“I	remember	what	happened	this	morning,”	 Xander	whispers	to	me.	“I	 know
what	really	happened	to	Ky.”

“How?”	 I	sit	upright,	 look	at	him.

“The	red	tablets	don’t	work	 on	me,”	he	whispers,	soft	into	 my	ear,	so	no	one	else
can	hear.	He	looks	down	the	street,	back	toward	the	Markhams’	house.	“They
didn’t	work	 on	Ky,	 either.”

“What?”	How	 is	it	that	these	two	boys	who	are	so	different	are	connected	in	such
unexpected,	deep	ways?	Maybe	we	all	are,	I	think,	and	we	don’t	know	how	 to
see	it	anymore.	“Tell	me.”

Xander	still	gazes	at	the	little	house	with	the	yellow	 shutters	where	Ky	lived
hours	ago.	Where	Ky	watched	and	learned	how	to	survive.	Xander	taught	him
some	of	that,	without	knowing	 it.	And	 perhaps	Xander	has	been	learning	from
Ky,	too.

“I	dared	him	to	 take	it	once,	a	long	time	ago,”	Xander	says	quietly.	“It	 was	when
he	first	got	here.	I	acted	friendly	 to	him,	but	inside	I	 was	jealous.	I	saw	how	you
looked	at	him.”

252
looked	at	him.”

“Really?”	I	don’t	remember	this	at	all,	but	suddenly	I	hope	Xander’s	right.	I
hope	part	of	me	fell	in	love	with	Ky	before	anyone	else	told	me	to.

“It’s	not	a	memory	I’m	proud	of,”	Xander	tells	me.	“I	asked	him	to	come
swimming	with	me	one	day	and	then	on	the	way	I	told	him	I	knew	about	his
artifact.	I	knew	about	it	because	once,	one	Borough	over,	I	was	coming	back
from	taking	something	to	a	friend	and	I	caught	Ky	using	it,	trying	to	find	his	way
home.	He	was	so	careful.	I	think	it	was	the	one	time	he	got	it	out,	ever,	but	he
had	bad	timing.	I	saw	him.”

This	image	almost	breaks	my	heart;	it’s	another	side	of	Ky	I	haven’t	seen	before
—lost.	Taking	risks.	As	well	as	I	know	him,	as	much	as	I	love	him,	there	are	still
parts	of	him	I	don’t	know.	It’s	that	way	with	everyone,	even	Xander,	who	I
never	could	have	pictured	being	so	cruel.

“I	dared	him	to	find	and	steal	two	red	tablets.	I	thought	it	would	be	impossible.	I
said	that	if	he	didn’t	bring	them	to	swimming	the	next	day	to	prove	he	could,	I’d
tell	everyone	about	the	compass—the	artifact—and	get	Patrick	in	trouble.”

“What	did	he	do?”

“You	know	Ky.	He	wouldn’t	risk	his	uncle.”	Then	Xander	starts	to	laugh.
Shocked,	I	ball	my	fists	up	in	anger.	Does	he	think	this	is	funny?	What,	in	this
story,	could	there	possibly	be	to	laugh	at?

“So	Ky	got	the	tablets.	And	guess	who	he	stole	them	from?”	Xander	says,	still
laughing.	“Just	guess.”

“I	don’t	know.	Tell	me.”

“My	parents.”	Xander	stops	laughing.	“Of	course,	it	wasn’t	funny	at	the	time.
That	night	my	parents	were	upset	because	their	red	tablets	were	missing.	I	knew
right	away	what	had	happened,	but	of	course	I	couldn’t	say	anything.	I	couldn’t
tell	them	about	the	dare.”	Xander	looks	down	and	I	notice	that	he	has	a	large
brown	paper	envelope	in	his	hand.	It	makes	me	think	of	Ky’s	story.	I’m	hearing
another	part	of	it	now.	“It	was	a	big	mess.	Officials	came	and	everything.	I	don’t
know	if	you	remember	that.”

I	shake	my	head.	I	don’t.

253
I	shake	my	head.	I	don’t.

“They	checked	to	make	sure	we	hadn’t	taken	the	tablets,	and	they	could	tell
somehow	that	we	hadn’t,	and	my	parents	were	pretty	convincing,	saying	they
didn’t	know	what	happened.	They	were	completely	panicked.	Finally,	the
Officials	decided	that	my	parents	must	have	lost	the	tablets	when	they	were
swimming	earlier	in	the	week	and	that	they’d	been	negligent	not	to	notice	it
sooner.	They’d	never	caused	any	trouble	before,	so	they	got	off	without	an
Infraction.	Just	a	citation.”

“Ky	did	that?	Took	the	tablets	from	your	parents?”

“He	did.”	Xander	takes	a	deep	breath.	“I	went	to	his	house	the	next	day	ready	to
tear	him	apart.	He	stood	on	the	front	steps	waiting	for	me.	When	I	got	there	he
held	out	the	two	red	tablets,	right	for	everyone	to	see.

“Of	course,	I	was	so	scared	I	grabbed	them	out	of	his	hand	and	asked	him	what
he	was	trying	to	do.	That’s	when	he	told	me	that	you	don’t	play	with	other
people’s	lives.”	Xander	seems	ashamed,	remembering.	“And	then	he	told	me
that	we	could	start	over	if	I	wanted.	All	we	had	to	do	was	take	the	red	tablets,
one	for	each	of	us.	He	promised	me	we	wouldn’t	get	hurt.”

“That’s	cruel	of	him,	too,”	I	say	in	shock,	but	to	my	surprise	Xander	disagrees
with	me.

“He	knew	the	tablets	didn’t	work	on	him;	I	don’t	know	how,	but	he	did.	He
thought	they	would	work	on	me.	He	thought	I	wouldn’t	remember	how	horrible
I’d	been	and	that	I’d	be	able	to	start	clean.”

“How	many	other	people	do	you	think	are	walking	around	out	there,	pretending
that	their	tablets	worked	when	they	didn’t?”	I	ask,	wondering.

“As	many	as	want	to	stay	out	of	trouble,”	Xander	says.	He	glances	at	me.
“Apparently	they	don’t	work	on	you,	either.”

“It’s	not	exactly	like	that,”	I	say,	but	I	don’t	want	to	tell	him	the	whole	story.	He
already	carries	enough	of	my	secrets.

Xander	studies	me	for	a	moment,	but	then	when	I	don’t	say	more,	he	speaks
again.	“While	we’re	talking	about	tablets,”	he	says,	“I	have	a	gift	for	you.	A
farewell	gift.”	He	hands	me	the	envelope	and	whispers,	“Don’t	open	it	now.	I
put	some	things	in	there	to	remind	you	of	the	Borough,	but	the	real	gift	is	a

254
put	some	things	in	there	to	remind	you	of	the	Borough,	but	the	real	gift	is	a
bunch	of	blue	tablets.	In	case	you	have	to	go	on	another	long	journey	or
something.”

He	knows	I’m	going	to	try	to	find	Ky.	And	he’s	helping	me.	In	spite	of
everything,	Xander	hasn’t	betrayed	me.	And	I	realize,	too,	that	I	never
wondered,	as	I	ran	down	the	street	after	Ky,	if	it	was	Xander	who	had	set	those
events	in	motion.	I	knew	he	hadn’t.	He	kept	faith	with	me.	It’s	the	prisoner’s
dilemma.	This	dangerous	game	that	I	must	play	with	Ky,	and	again	with	Xander.
But	what	I	know,	and	the	Official	doesn’t,	is	that	all	of	us	will	do	our	best	to
keep	each	other	safe.	“Oh,	Xander.	How	did	you	get	these?”

“They	keep	extra	supplies	in	the	pharmacy	at	the	medical	center,”	Xander	says.
“These	were	slated	for	disposal.	They’re	about	to	expire,	but	I	think	they’ll	still
work	for	a	few	months	past	expiration.”

“The	Officials	will	still	miss	them.”

He	shrugs.	“They	will.	I’ll	be	careful,	and	you	should	be,	too.	I’m	sorry	I
couldn’t	bring	you	real	food.”

“I	can’t	believe	you’re	doing	all	of	this	for	me,”	I	say	to	Xander.

He	swallows	hard.	“Not	just	for	you.	For	all	of	us.”

It	all	makes	sense	now.	If	we	could	change	things,	in	time,	maybe	.	.	.	maybe	we
could	all	choose.

“Thank	you,	Xander,”	I	say.	I	think	about	how	I	might	have	a	chance	to	find	Ky,
thanks	to	Ky’s	compass	and	Xander’s	tablets,	and	I	realize	that,	in	so	many
ways,	Xander	is	the	one	who	made	it	possible	for	me	to	love	Ky.

“Ky	thought	you	might	be	able	to	help	me	learn	how	to	use	the	artifact,”	I	tell
him.	“Now	I	know	why.	Did	you	recognize	it	that	day,	when	I	gave	it	to	you?”

“I	thought	I	did.	But	it	had	been	a	long	time	and	I	kept	my	promise.	I	didn’t	open
it.”

“But	you	know	how	to	use	it.”

“I	figured	out	the	basic	principles	of	what	it	was	after	I’d	seen	it.	I	used	to	ask

255
“I	figured	out	the	basic	principles	of	what	it	was	after	I’d	seen	it.	I	used	to	ask
him	questions	about	it	once	in	a	while.”

“It	might	help	me	find	him.”

“Even	if	I	could	show	you,	why	would	I?”	And	Xander	can’t	cover	it	anymore;
bitterness	and	anger	mingle	with	the	pain.	“So	you	can	go	off	and	be	happy	with
him?	Where	does	that	leave	me?	What	does	that	leave	me?”

“Don’t	say	that,”	I	tell	him.	“You	gave	me	the	blue	tablets	so	I	could	find	him,
right?	If	I’m	gone,	and	we	can	change	things,	maybe	you	can	choose	someone,
too.”

“I	did,”	he	says,	looking	at	me.

I	don’t	know	what	to	say.

“So	I	have	to	wish	for	the	end	of	the	world	as	I	know	it?”	Xander	asks,	another
hint	of	his	old	laugh	in	his	voice.

“Not	the	end	of	the	world.	For	the	beginning	of	a	better	one,”	I	say,	and	I	am
frightened,	too.	Is	this	what	we	really	want	to	wish	for?	“One	where	we	can	get
Ky	back.”

“Ky,”	 Xander	says,	and	there’s	sadness	in	his	voice.	“Sometimes	it	seems	like
everything	I’ve	done	has	been	to	help	you	be	ready	for	someone	else.”

I	don’t	know	what	to	say,	how	to	tell	him	that	he	is	wrong,	how	I	was	wrong
moments	ago	when	I	thought	the	same	thing.	Because	yes,	Xander	has	helped
Ky	and	me	time	and	time	again.	But	how	can	I	explain	to	Xander	that	he	is	a
reason	for	wanting	a	new	world,	too?	That	he	is	important?	That	I	love	him?

“I	can	teach	you,”	Xander	says,	finally.	“I’ll	send	you	some	instructions	in	a
message	over	the	port.”

“But	anyone	can	read	those.”

“I’ll	 make	it	so	it	looks	like	a	love	letter.	We	are	still	Matched,	after	all.	And
we’re	good	at	pretending.”	Then	he	whispers,	“Cassia	.	.	.	If	we	could	choose,
would	you	ever	have	chosen	me?”

256
I’m	surprised	he	has	to	ask.	And	then	I	realize	that	he	doesn’t	know	that	at	one
point	I	did	choose	him.	When	I	first	saw	his	face	on	the	screen	and	then	Ky’s
over	it,	I	wanted	safe	and	known	and	expected.	I	wanted	good	and	kind	and
handsome.	I	wanted	Xander.

“Of	course,”	I	say.

We	both	look	at	each	other	and	start	to	laugh.	Then	we	can’t	stop.	We’re
laughing	so	hard	that	tears	roll	down	our	faces	and	Xander	pulls	away	from	me,
leaning	over	and	gasping	for	air.	“We	could	still	end	up	together,”	he	says.
“After	all	this.”

“We	could,”	I	agree.

“Then	why	do	any	of	it?”

I’m	serious	now.	All	this	time	it’s	taken	me	to	understand	what	Grandfather
meant.	Why	he	didn’t	want	to	have	the	sample	stored;	why	he	didn’t	want	a
chance	to	live	forever	on	someone	else’s	terms.	“Because	it’s	about	making	our
own	choices,”	I	tell	him.	“That’s	the	point.	Isn’t	it?	This	is	bigger	than	us	now.”

He	looks	up.	“I	know.”	Maybe	for	Xander	it	has	always	been	bigger	than	us;
since	he’s	seen	more,	known	more,	for	years.	As	Ky	has.

“How	many	times?”	I	whisper	to	Xander.

He	shakes	his	head,	confused.

“How	many	times	have	the	rest	of	us	taken	the	tablet,	and	we	can’t	remember?”
I	ask.

“Once,	that	I	know	of,”	Xander	says.	“They	don’t	use	it	much	on	citizens.	I	was
sure	they’d	make	us	take	it	after	the	Markhams’	son	died,	but	they	didn’t.	But,
one	day,	I’m	pretty	sure	everyone	in	the	Borough	took	it.”

“Did	I?”

“I’m	not	positive,”	he	says.	“I	didn’t	actually	see	you	do	it.	I	don’t	know.”

“What	happened?”	I	ask.

257
Xander	shakes	his	head.	“I’m	not	going	to	say,”	he	whispers.

I	don’t	press	him	further.	I	haven’t	told	him	everything—about	the	kiss	on	the
Hill,	the	poem—and	I	cannot	ask	him	to	do	what	I	have	not.	This	is	a	difficult
balance,	telling	the	truth:	how	much	to	share,	how	much	to	keep,	which	truths
will	wound	but	not	ruin,	which	will	cut	too	deep	to	heal.

So	I	gesture	to	the	envelope	instead.	“What	did	you	put	in	here?	Besides	the
tablets?”

He	shrugs.	“Not	much.	I	was	mostly	trying	to	hide	the	tablets.	A	couple	of
newrose	blooms,	like	the	ones	we	planted.	They	won’t	last	long.	I	printed	a	copy
of	one	of	the	Hundred	Paintings	from	the	port,	that	picture	you	did	a	report	on	a
long	time	ago.	That	won’t	last	long	either.”	He’s	right;	the	paper	from	the	ports
always	deteriorates	quickly.	Xander	looks	at	me,	sad.	“You’ll	have	to	use	all	of
it	in	the	next	couple	of	months.”

“Thank	you,”	I	tell	him.	“I	didn’t	get	anything	for	you—everything	happened	so
fast	this	morning—”	I	fall	silent	again.	Because	I	used	what	time	I	did	have	for
Ky.	I	chose	him,	again,	over	Xander.

“It’s	all	right,”	 he	says.	“But	maybe—you	could—”

He	looks	into	my	eyes,	deep,	and	I	know	what	he	wants.	A	kiss.	Even	though	he
knows	about	Ky.	Xander	and	I	are	still	connected;	this	is	still	good-bye.	I	know
already	that	that	kiss	would	be	sweet.	It	would	be	what	he	would	hold	on	to,	as	I
hold	on	to	Ky’s.

But	that’s	something	I	don’t	think	I	can	give.	“Xander—”

“It’s	all	right,”	 he	says,	and	then	he	stands	up.	I	do,	too,	and	he	reaches	for	me,
pulls	me	close.	Xander’s	arms	are	as	warm	and	safe	and	good	around	me	as	they
have	always	been.

We	both	hold	on,	tight.

Then	he	lets	go	and	walks	down	the	path,	without	another	word.	He	doesn’t	look
back.	But	I	watch	him	go.	I	watch	him	all	the	way	home.

The	journey	to	our	new	home	is	fairly	straightforward:	ride	the	air	train	to	the
City	Center,	change	to	a	long-distance	air	train	for	the	Farmlands	of	Keya

258
City	Center,	change	to	a	long-distance	air	train	for	the	Farmlands	of	Keya
Province.	Most	of	our	belongings	 fit	into	 one	small	case	each;	the	few	things	that
don’t	will	 be	sent	later.

As	the	four	of	us	walk	 to	the	air-train	stop,	neighbors	and	friends	come	out	to
say	good-bye	and	wish	us	well.	They	know	we’re	 being	Relocated	but	they	don’t
know	why;	 it	isn’t	 considered	polite	to	ask.	As	we	come	to	the	end	of	the	street
we	see	that	a	new	sign	has	been	hammered	into	place:	Garden	Borough.	Without
the	trees	and	without	the	name,	Mapletree	Borough	is	gone.	It’s	as	though	it
never	existed.	The	Markhams	are	gone.	We	are	gone.	Everyone	else	will	live	on
here	in	Garden	Borough.	They’ve	already	added	extra	newroses	to	all	the	flower
beds.

The	quickness	with	which	Ky	 disappeared,	with	which	 the	Markhams
disappeared,	with	which	we	will	 disappear,	makes	me	cold.	It	is	as	if	we	never
happened.	And	I	suddenly	remember	a	time	back	when	I	was	small,	when	I	used
to	look	for	 the	air	train	home	to	Stony	Borough	and	we	had	paths	made	of	low
flat	stones	that	led	to	our	doors.

This	happened	before.	This	Borough	keeps	changing	names.	What	other	bad
things	lie	beneath	the	surface	of	our	Borough?	What	have	we	buried	underneath
our	rocks	and	trees	and	flowers	and	houses?	That	time	Xander	won’t	talk	about,
when	we	all	took	the	red	tablet—what	 happened?	When	other	people	left,	where
did	they	really	go?

They	could	not	write	 their	names,	but	I	can	write	mine,	and	I	will	 again,
somewhere	where	it	will	 last	for	a	long,	long	time.	 I	will	 find	 Ky,	and	then	I	will
find	that	place.




Once	we	are	on	the	long-distance	air	train,	my	mother	and	Bram	both	fall	 asleep,
exhausted	from	the	emotion	and	exertion	of	the	journey.

I	find	it	 strange,	with	everything	else	that	happened,	that	it	was	my	mother’s
obedience	which	spelled	the	need	for	our	Relocation.	She	knew	too	much	and
she	admitted	it	in	that	report.	She	couldn’t	do	otherwise.

The	ride	is	long	and	there	are	other	travelers.	No	soldiers	like	Ky.	 They	keep
them	on	their	own	trains.	But	there	are	tired	families	 who	look	much	 like	ours,	a
group	of	Singles	who	laugh	and	talk	excitedly	 about	their	jobs,	and,	in	the	last

259
group	of	Singles	who	laugh	and	talk	excitedly	 about	their	jobs,	and,	in	the	last
car,	a	few	rows	of	young	women	about	my	age	going	on	a	work	 detail	for	a	few
months.	I	watch	these	girls	with	interest;	they	are	girls	 who	did	not	get	work
positions	and	therefore	will	 float	around	wherever	they	are	needed	for	a	time.
Some	of	them	seem	sad	and	faded,	disappointed.	Others	have	faces	turned	to	the
windows	with	 interest	in	their	eyes.	I	catch	myself	glancing	 over	at	them	more
than	I	should.	We’re	supposed	to	keep	to	ourselves.	And	I	need	to	concentrate	on
finding	Ky.	 I	have	equipment	now:	blue	 tablets,	the	artifact	called	a	compass,
knowledge	of	the	Sisyphus	River,	memories	of	a	grandfather	who	did	 not	go
gentle.

My	father	notices	me	watching	the	girls.	 While	 my	mother	and	Bram	sleep	he
says	softly,	“I	 don’t	remember	what	happened	yesterday.	But	I	know	the
Markhams	left	the	Borough	and	I	 think	that	has	hurt	you.”

I	try	to	change	the	subject.	I	glance	over	at	my	sleeping	mother.	“Why	 didn’t
they	use	a	red	tablet	on	her?	Then	we	wouldn’t	have	had	to	leave.”

“A	 red	tablet?”	my	father	asks,	surprised.	“Those	are	only	for	extreme
circumstances.	This	isn’t	one	of	them.”	 Then,	to	my	surprise,	he	says	more.	He
speaks	to	me	like	an	adult;	more	than	that,	like	an	equal.	“I’m	 a	sorter	by	nature,
Cassia,”	he	says.	“All	the	information	 adds	up	to	something	being	wrong.	The
way	they	took	the	artifacts.	Your	 mother’s	trips	to	the	other	Arboretums.	 The
gap	in	my	memory	from	 yesterday.	Something	is	wrong.	They	are	losing	a	war
and	I	can’t	tell	who	 it’s	against—people	on	the	inside	or	people	on	the	outside.
But	there	are	signs	of	cracking.”

I	nod.	Ky	told	 me	almost	the	same	thing.

But	my	father	goes	on.	“And	 I’ve	 noticed	other	things,	too.	I	think	 you’re	in	 love
with	Ky	 Markham.	I	 think	you	want	 to	find	him,	 wherever	he’s	gone.”	He
swallows.

I	glance	over	at	my	mother.	Her	eyes	are	open	now.	She	looks	at	me	with	love
and	understanding,	and	I	realize:	She	knows	what	my	father	did.	She	knows
what	I	want.	She	knows	and	even	though	she	would	not	destroy	a	tissue	sample
or	love	someone	who	was	not	her	Match,	she	still	loves	us,	even	though	we	have
done	those	things.

My	father	has	always	broken	the	rules	for	those	he	loves,	just	as	my	mother	has
always	kept	them	for	the	same	reason.	Perhaps	that	is	yet	another	reason	why

260
always	kept	them	for	the	same	reason.	Perhaps	that	is	yet	another	reason	why
they	make	a	perfect	Match.	I	can	trust	in	my	parents’	love.	 And	it	strikes	me	that
that	is	a	big	thing	to	trust,	a	big	thing	 to	have	had,	no	matter	what	else	happens.

“We	can’t	 give	you	the	life	 you	want,”	my	 father	says,	his	eyes	wet.	He	looks	at
my	mother	and	she	nods	at	him	to	continue.	“We	wish	we	could.	 But	we	can
help	you	have	a	chance	to	decide	which	life	you	want.”

I	close	my	eyes	and	ask	the	angels	and	Ky	and	Grandfather	for	strength.	Then	I
open	them	and	look	straight	at	my	father.	“How?”

261
                                            CHAPTER	        32

My	hands	are	in	the	soil;	my	body	is	tired,	but	I	will	not	let	this	work	take	away
my	thoughts.	Because	that	is	what	the	Officials	here	want:	workers	who	work
but	do	not	think.

Do	not	go	gentle.

So	I	fight.	I	fight	the	only	way	I	know	how,	with	thinking	of	Ky,	even	though	the
pain	of	missing	him	is	so	strong	I	can	hardly	stand	it.	I	put	the	seeds	into	the
ground	and	cover	them	with	soil.	Will	they	grow	toward	the	sun?	Will
something	go	wrong	so	that	they	never	push,	never	turn	into	anything,	just	stay
here	rotting	in	the	ground?	I	think	of	him,	I	think	of	him,	I	think	of	him.

I	think	of	my	family.	Of	Bram.	Of	my	parents.	I	have	learned	something	about
love	through	all	of	this—about	the	love	I	have	for	Ky	and	the	love	I	have	for
Xander	and	the	love	my	parents	and	Bram	and	I	have	for	one	another.	When	we
reached	our	new	home,	my	parents	requested	that	I	be	sent	on	a	three	months’
work	detail	because	I	showed	signs	of	rebellion.	The	Officials	in	our	new	village
checked	my	data;	it	correlated	with	my	parents’	statement.	My	father	mentioned
a	particular	work	detail	he	had	in	mind:	hard	farming,	planting	an	experimental
winter	crop	in	a	Western	Province	through	which	the	river	of	Sisyphus	runs.	He
and	Xander	and	my	mother	keep	me	updated	on	anything	they	learn	about	where
Ky	might	be.	I	am	closer	to	him	here;	I	feel	it.

I	think	of	Xander.	We	could	have	been	happy,	I	know	that,	and	it	is	perhaps	the
hardest	thing	to	know.	I	could	have	held	his	hand,	warm	and	strong,	and	we
could	have	had	what	my	parents	have,	and	it	would	have	been	beautiful.	It	would
have	been	beautiful.

We	wear	no	chains.	We	have	nowhere	to	go.	They	wear	us	down	with	work;
they	don’t	beat	us	or	hurt	us.	They	simply	want	to	make	us	tired.

And	I	am	tired.

When	I	think	I	might	give	up	after	all,	I	remember	the	last	part	of	the	story	that
Ky	gave	me,	the	part	I	finally	read	before	we	left	our	home	for	the	last	time:

262
Cassia,	he	wrote	at	the	top	of	the	page,	in	letters	that	were	tall	and	clear	and
unafraid,	that	curled	and	moved	and	turned	my	name	into	something	beautiful,
something	more	than	a	word.	A	declaration,	a	piece	of	a	song,	a	bit	of	art,
framed	by	his	hands.

There	was	only	one	Ky	drawn	on	the	napkin.	Smiling.	 A	 smile	in	which	 I	could
see	both	who	he	had	been	and	who	he	became.	His	hands	were	empty	again,	and
open,	and	reaching	a	little.	Toward	me.

Cassia.

I	know	which	life	 is	my	real	one	now,	no	matter	what	happens.	It’s	the	one	with
you.

For	some	reason,	knowing	that	even	one	person	knows	my	story	makes	things
different.	Maybe	it’s	 like	the	poem	says.	Maybe	this	is	my	way	of	not	going
gentle.

I	love	you.

I	had	to	burn	that	part	of	his	story,	too,	but	I	 held	the	heat	of	that	I	love	you
close,	like	red,	like	a	new	beginning.

Without	knowing	 the	pieces	of	Ky’s	 story	and	the	words	of	my	poems	I	might
give	up.	But	I	think	 of	my	 words	and	of	the	cache	of	tablets	and	compass	hidden
away	and	my	family	 and	Xander	who	send	me	messages	on	the	work	camp
portscreen	that	tell	me	they	are	still	looking;	 they	are	still	helping	 me.

Sometimes,	when	I	look	down	at	the	pale	seeds	I	scatter	in	the	black	dirt,	it
reminds	me	of	the	night	of	my	 Banquet	when	I	imagined	that	I	could	 fly.	The
darkness	behind	doesn’t	worry	me;	neither	do	the	stars	ahead.	I	think	of	how
perhaps	the	best	way	to	fly	would	be	with	 hands	full	of	earth	so	you	always
remember	where	you	came	from,	how	hard	walking	could	 sometimes	be.

And	I	look	 at	my	hands,	too,	which	move	in	the	shape	of	my	own	inventions,	 my
own	words.	It	is	hard	to	do,	and	I	am	not	good	at	it	 yet.	I	write	 them	in	the	soil
where	I	plant	and	then	step	on	them,	dig	holes	in	them,	drop	seeds	in	them	to	see
if	they	will	 grow.	 I	steal	a	piece	of	black	burned	wood	from	 one	of	the	cropfires
and	write	on	a	napkin.	Later,	at	another	cropfire;	my	 hand	brushes	over	the
flames	with	the	napkin,	and	the	words	die.	Ash	and	nothing.

263
My	words	never	last	long.	I	have	to	destroy	them	before	anyone	sees	them.

But.	I	remember	them	all.	For	some	reason,	the	act	of	writing	them	down	makes
me	remember.	Each	word	I	write	brings	me	closer	to	finding	the	right	ones.	And
when	I	see	Ky	again,	which	I	know	will	happen,	I	will	whisper	the	words	I	have
written	in	his	ear,	against	his	lips.	And	they	will	change	from	ash	and	nothing
into	flesh	and	blood.

264
                               ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

My	deep	gratitude	and	appreciation	to:

Scott,	my	husband,	who	makes	writing	not	only	possible	but	probable;

My	three	boys,	who	make	everything	exciting—I	love	you,	and	you,	and	you;

My	parents,	Robert	and	Arlene	Braithwaite;	my	brother,	Nic;	and	my	sisters,
Elaine	and	Hope,	who	read	every	word,	every	time	(and	in	Elaine’s	case,	over
and	over	again);

My	reader	friends	and	writer	friends,	who	give	essential	feedback	and
encouragement;

Alec	Shane,	who	went	the	extra	mile	even	though	he	is	a	fourth-degree	black
belt,	not	a	distance	runner;

Jodi	Reamer,	who	is	brilliant	and	down-to-earth	(and	fun!),	the	advocate	of
every	writer’s	dreams;

Julie	Strauss-Gabel,	a	woman	of	unparalleled	graciousness	and	genius,	who
makes	every	page	better;

And	the	wonderful	team	at	Penguin	who	all	believed	and	who	exercised	their
myriad	talents	on	the	behalf	of	this	story,	including,	but	not	limited	to,	Theresa
Evangelista,	Lauri	Hornik,	Rosanne	Lauer,	Linda	McCarthy,	Shanta	Newlin,
Irene	Vandervoort,	Don	Weisberg,	and	Lisa	Yoskowitz.

265
                                       ALLY	    CONDIE

                             is	a	former	high	school	English	teacher

who	lives	with	her	husband	and	three	sons

outside	of	Salt	Lake	City,	Utah.

                            Visit	her	online	at	www.allycondie.com

