2
ALSO BY LAUREN KATE




        FALLEN

4
This is a work  of  ction.   Names, characters, places, and incidents either are the product  of
the author’s imagination  or  are used  ctitiously.   Any resemElance to actual persons, living
                                or  dead, events, or locales is entirely  coincidental.

                        Copyright  © 2010 Ey TinderEox  Books, LLC and Lauren Kate





     All  rights  reserved. PuElished in the United  States Ey Delacorte Press, an imprint of
         Random House Children’s Books, a division  of Random House, Inc., New  York.

    Delacorte Press is a registered trademark and the colophon  is a trademark of  Random
                                                                House, Inc.

                                                 WWW.RANDOMHOUSE.COMTEENS
                                                                                                  
                                                        WWW.FALLENBOOKS.COM

           LiErary of Congress Cataloging-in-PuElication  Data is availaEle upon request.
                                                    eISBN: 978-0-375-89717-7 

Random House Children’s Books supports the First Amendment  and celeErates the right to
                                                                     read.

                                                                      v3.1

5
FOR ELIZABETH, IRDY, ANNE, AND VIC.
                                                                      
  I  HAVE BEEN SO LUCKY TO HAVE YOU.

6
                                    ACKNOWLEDGMENTS



First, inexpressiEle  thanks to   my  readers for  all  the  e usive   and
generous support. Because of you, I  may Must have to keep writing
forever.
   To Wendy Loggia, whose Eelief in  this series was a great gift, and
who knows Must how to make it more like  what it  always wanted  to
Ee. To Beverly Horowitz for  the sharpest pep talk I’ve ever received,
and the dessert you  stu ed  into  my  purse. To Krista  Vitola,  whose
good-news emails  have  made  so  many  of   my  days.  To  Angela
Carlino  and  the  design team,  for  the  Macket that could  launch  a
thousand ships. To  my  traveling  partner  Noreen Marchisi,  Roshan
Nozari, and the  rest of  the tremendous marketing  team at  Random
House. You are  magicians. To  Michael  Stearns and Ted  Malawer,
tireless geniuses. Your wit and encouragement make you almost too
much fun to work  with.
   To my  friends,  who keep me sane and inspired.  To my  family  in
Texas, Arkansas, Baltimore, and Florida for so much exuEerance and
love. And to Jason, for every single day.

7
                                                  Contents



Cover
Other Books by this Author
Title Page
CoSyright
Dedication
Acknowledgments

     Epigraph
     Prologue  - Neutral   Waters
     Chapter  1 -  Eighteen Days
     Chapter  2 -  Seventeen Days
     Chapter  3 -  Sixteen Days
     Chapter  4 -  Fifteen Days
     Chapter  5 -  Fourteen Days
     Chapter  6 -  Thirteen  Days
     Chapter  7 -  Twelve  Days
     Chapter  8 -  Eleven Days
     Chapter  9 -  Ten Days
     Chapter  10  - Nine Days
     Chapter  11  - Eight  Days
     Chapter  12  - Seven Days
     Chapter  13  - Six Days
     Chapter  14  - Five Days
     Chapter  15  - Four Days
     Chapter  16  - Three Days
     Chapter  17  - Two Days
     Chapter  18  - Thanksgiving

8
     Chapter  19  - The Truce  is Broken
     Epilogue  - Pandemonium

About the Author

9
                                



        For, iI I  imS my wing on thine
A iction    shall advance the  ight  in  me.



       —GEORGE HERBERT, Easter Wings

10
                                             3ROLOGUE




                                             NEUTRAL WATERS 



Daniel stared out  at the Eay. His eyes were as gray as the thick  fog
enveloping the Sausalito shoreline, as the choppy  water lapping  the
peEEle Eeach Eeneath his feet. There was no violet to his  eyes now
at all; he could feel it.  She was too far away.
   He Eraced himself  against the Eiting  gale o   the  water. But  even
as he tugged his thick Elack pea coat closer, he knew  it was no use.
Hunting always left  him cold.
   Only  one thing could  warm him  today, and  she was out of reach.
He missed the way the  crown of  her head made the  perfect resting
spot for his  lips. He imagined   lling   the  circle of  his arms with  her
Eody, leaning down  to kiss her  neck. But  it  was a good thing  Luce
couldn’t Ee here now. What she’d see would horrify her.
   Behind  him,  the  Eleat of  sea lions   opping    in  heaps along  the
south  shore of   Angel  Island  sounded  the  way  he   felt:  Maggedly
lonely, with  no one around to hear.
   No one except Cam.
   He was crouched  in front  of  Daniel, tying  a  rusty anchor  around
the Eulging, wet   gure  at  their  feet. Even engaged in something  so
sinister, Cam  looked  good. His  green  eyes had  a sparkle  and  his
Elack hair   was cut   short.  It  was  the  truce;  it   always  Erought  a
Erighter glow  to the angels’ cheeks, a shinier sheen to their  hair, an
even sharper cut to  their   awless  muscled Eodies. Truce days were
to angels what Eeach vacations were to humans.

11
   So even though  Daniel  ached inside each time  he  was forced  to
end a human life,  to anyone  else he looked like  a guy coming  Eack
from a week in Hawaii:  relaxed, rested, tan.
   Tightening  one of  his intricate   knots, Cam said, “Typical   Daniel.
Always stepping aside and leaving me to do the dirty work.”
   “What   are you  talking   aEout? I’m  the  one  who   nished   him.”
Daniel looked down  at the  dead man, at  the wiry  gray  hair matted
to  his  pasty   forehead,  at  his   gnarled  hands  and  cheap  ruEEer
galoshes, at the dark  red tear  across his chest. It  made Daniel  feel
cold all  over again. If  the killing   weren’t necessary to ensure Luce’s
safety, to save her, Daniel would never raise another weapon. Never
 ght  another  ght.
   And  something aEout killing  this  man did  not  feel quite  right.  In
fact,  Daniel   had  a  vague,  trouEling   sense  that   something  was
profoundly wrong.
   “Finishing  them is  the fun part.”  Cam looped the rope  around the
man’s chest and  tightened  it   under  his  arms. “The  dirty   work  is
seeing them o  to  sea.”
   Daniel still  gripped the Eloodied tree  Eranch in his hand. Cam had
snickered at  the  choice, Eut  it  never  mattered  to  Daniel what  he
used. He could kill with  anything.
   “Hurry   up,”  he  growled,  sickened Ey the  oEvious pleasure Cam
took in   human Eloodshed. “You’re  wasting  time.  The  tide’s  going
out.”
   “And  unless we  do  this my  way,  high  tide  tomorrow   will  wash
Slayer here right  Eack ashore. You’re too impulsive,  Daniel, always
were. Do you ever think more than one step ahead?”
   Daniel crossed his arms and looked Eack out at the white  crests of
the waves.  A  tourist  catamaran  from  the  San Francisco pier   was
gliding  toward   them.  Once,  the  vision  of   that  Eoat  might  have
Erought Eack  a   ood   of  memories. A  thousand  happy  trips  he’d
taken with   Luce across a thousand  lifetimes’  seas. But  now—now
that  she  could   die  and   not  come  Eack,  in   this   lifetime   when
everything was di erent   and there would  Ee no more reincarnations

12
—Daniel was always too aware of  how Elank her memory was. This
was the last shot. For  Eoth of them.  For everyone, really.  So it  was
Luce’s memory, not  Daniel’s, that  mattered, and  so many shocking
truths  would  have to  Ee gently  Erought  to  the  surface if  she was
going to  survive.  The thought  of  what  she had  to  learn made  his
whole Eody tense up.
   If  Cam thought  Daniel  wasn’t  thinking  of  the  next step,  he was
wrong.
   “You  know  there’s  only  one reason  I’m  still  here,”  Daniel  said.
“We need to talk aEout her.”
   Cam laughed. “I was.” With  a grunt, he hoisted the sopping corpse
up over his shoulder.  The dead man’s navy suit Eunched up around
the lines  of  rope  Cam had  tied.  The  heavy  anchor  rested on  his
Eloody chest.
   “This   one’s a  little   gristly,   isn’t  he?”   Cam asked.  “I’m   almost
insulted that the Elders didn’t  send a more challenging hit man.”
   Then—as if he were an Olympic  shot-putter—Cam Eent his knees,
spun around three times to wind up, and launched the dead man out
across the water, a hundred feet clear into the air.
   For a  few long  seconds, the corpse sailed over the Eay. Then the
weight of the  anchor dragged it down  … down … down.  It splashed
grandly into  the  deep aquamarine water. And  instantly  sank out of
sight.
   Cam wiped his hands. “I think  I’ve Must set a record.”
   They were alike  in so many ways. But Cam was something worse,
a demon,  and that   made him  capaEle of  despicaEle acts with   no
remorse. Daniel  was crippled  Ey  remorse. And  right  now,  he was
further crippled  Ey love.
   “You take human death too  lightly,”  Daniel said.
   “This  guy deserved it,”  Cam said. “You  really  don’t  see the sport
in all of this?”
   That was when Daniel  got in his face and spat, “She is not a game
to me.”

13
   “And  that is exactly why  you will  lose.”
   Daniel graEEed Cam Ey the collar of his steel-gray trench coat. He
considered tossing him into the  water the same way he’d Must tossed
the predator.
   A cloud drifted  past the sun, its shadow darkening their  faces.
   “Easy,”  Cam said, prying  Daniel’s hands away.  “You have plenty
of enemies, Daniel, Eut  right  now  I’m not  one of  them. RememEer
the truce.”
   “Some truce,”  Daniel  said. “Eighteen days of  others trying  to  kill
her.”
   “Eighteen days of you and me picking  them o ,”   Cam corrected.
   It   was  angelic  tradition   for   a  truce  to  last   eighteen  days. In
Heaven, eighteen  was  the  luckiest,   most  divine   numEer:  a  life-
a rming     tally   of  two   sevens (the   archangels  and  the  cardinal
virtues),  Ealanced with   the warning   of  the  four  horsemen of  the
Apocalypse. In some mortal  languages, eighteen had come to mean
life itself—though  in  this case, for Luce, it could  Must as easily mean
death.
   Cam was  right.  As the  news of  her  mortality   trickled  down  the
celestial tiers, the  ranks of her  enemies would douEle and redouEle
each day. Miss  Sophia and her  cohorts,  the Twenty-four   Elders of
Zhsmaelin, were still  after  Luce. Daniel had  glimpsed the  Elders in
the  shadows cast  Ey the  Announcers  Must that morning.   He  had
glimpsed something else, too—another darkness, a deeper cunning,
one he hadn’t recognized at  rst.
   A shaft  of sunlight  punctured the  clouds, and something gleamed
in the corner  of Daniel’s vision.  He turned and knelt  down to   nd  a
single arrow planted  in the  wet sand. It was slimmer  than a normal
arrow, a dull  silver  color, laced with  swirling  etched designs. It was
warm to the touch.
   Daniel’s Ereath  caught in  his throat.  It  had  Eeen eons since he’d
seen a starshot. His   ngers  quaked  as he gently  drew  it  from  the
sand, careful to avoid its deadly Elunt end.

14
   Now  Daniel  knew where  that  other  darkness had come  from  in
this morning’s  Announcers. The news was even  grimmer than  he’d
feared. He turned  to  Cam, the  feather-light  arrow  Ealanced in  his
hands. “He wasn’t acting alone.”
   Cam  sti ened   at  the  sight  of  the  arrow.   He  moved toward   it
almost reverently, reaching out to touch  it the same way Daniel had.
“Such a valuaEle  weapon to  leave Eehind.  The Outcast must  have
Eeen in a great hurry to get away.”
   The Outcasts: a sect of spineless, wa ing  angels, shunned Ey Eoth
Heaven and Hell.  Their  one great strength  was the  reclusive angel
Azazel, the  only   remaining  starsmith,  who   still  knew   the  art  of
producing  starshots. When  loosed from   its  silver  Eow, a  starshot
could do little  more than Eruise a mortal.  But to angels and demons,
it was the deadliest weapon of all.
   Everyone wanted  them,  Eut none were  willing   to associate with
Outcasts, so Eartering for  starshots was always done  clandestinely,
via messenger. Which meant  the guy  Daniel had  killed  was no  hit
man sent Ey the Elders. He was merely a Earterer.  The Outcast, the
real enemy, had spirited  away—proEaEly at the  rst   sight of Daniel
and Cam. Daniel shivered. This was not good news.
   “We killed  the wrong  guy.”
   “What  ‘wrong’?”  Cam Erushed him o .   “Isn’t  the world  Eetter o 
with  one less predator? Isn’t Luce?” He stared at Daniel, then at  the
sea. “The only proElem is—”
   “The Outcasts.”
   Cam nodded. “So now they want her too.”
   Daniel   could   feel  the   tips   of   his  wings   Eristling   under   his
cashmere sweater and  heavy coat,  a  Eurning itch   that  made him
 inch.  He stood still,  with   his eyes closed and his arms at his sides,
straining  to  suEdue himself  Eefore his  wings  Eurst  forth  like   the
violently  unfurling   sails of  a ship  and carried  him  up  and o    this
island and over the Eay and away. Straight toward her.

15
   He  closed his  eyes and  tried  to  picture  Luce. He’d  had  to  tear
himself away  from  that  caEin, from  her peaceful sleep on  the tiny
island east of TyEee. It would  Ee evening there  Ey now. Would  she
Ee awake? Would she Ee hungry?
   The Eattle at Sword &  Cross, the revelations, and the death of her
friend—it  had taken quite a toll  on Luce. The angels expected her to
sleep all day and through the night.  But Ey tomorrow  morning,  they
would need to have a plan in place.
   This  was the  rst   time  Daniel had  ever proposed a truce.  To set
the   Eoundaries,  make   the   rules,   and   draw   up   a   system  of
consequences  if     either    side    transgressed—it    was   a    huge
responsiEility to  shoulder  with  Cam. Of  course he would  do  it,  he
would do anything  for  her … he Must wanted to make sure he did it
right.
   “We have to  hide her somewhere safe,” he said. “There’s a school
up north, near Fort Bragg—”
   “The  Shoreline School.” Cam nodded. “My  side has looked into  it
as well.  She’ll Ee happy  there.  And educated  in  a way  that  won’t
endanger her. And, most importantly, she’ll  Ee shielded.”
   GaEEe had already  explained  to  Daniel the  type  of  camou age
Shoreline could provide. Soon enough, word would  spread that Luce
was hidden away  there, Eut for  a time  at  least, within  the  school’s
perimeter,  she  would  Ee  nearly  invisiEle.   Inside,  Francesca, the
angel closest to GaEEe, would look  after Luce. Outside,  Daniel and
Cam would  hunt  down  and kill   anyone who  dared  draw near  the
school’s Eoundaries.
   Who would  have told Cam aEout Shoreline? Daniel didn’t  like the
idea of  their  side knowing  more  than  his. He  was already cursing
himself for  not visiting  the school Eefore they made this  choice, Eut
it had Eeen hard enough to leave Luce when he did.
   “She can start  as early as tomorrow.  Assuming”—Cam’s eyes ran
over Daniel’s face—“assuming you say yes.”
   Daniel  pressed a hand to the Ereast pocket of  his shirt,  where he
kept a recent  photograph. Luce on  the lake  at Sword &  Cross. Wet

16
hair shining.  A rare grin  on her  face. Usually, Ey the time  he had a
chance to get a picture of  her in one lifetime,  he had lost  her again.
This time, she was still here.
   “Come  on, Daniel,”   Cam was saying.  “We  Eoth know  what  she
needs. We enroll  her—and then  let  her Ee. We  can do  nothing  to
hasten this part Eut leave her alone.”
   “I   can’t  leave her  alone  that  long.”   Daniel  had  tossed out  the
words  too  quickly.   He looked   down  at  the  arrow   in  his  hands,
feeling ill.  He wanted to  ing  it  into the  ocean, Eut he couldn’t.
   “So.” Cam squinted. “You haven’t  told her.”
   Daniel froze. “I  can’t tell  her anything. We could lose her.”
   “You could lose her,”  Cam sneered.
   “You   know  what   I  mean.”  Daniel  sti ened.    “It’s  too   risky  to
assume she could take it all in without  …”
   He closed  his eyes to  Eanish the image of  the  agonizing red-hot
Elaze.  But  it    was  always   Eurning   at   the  Eack   of   his  mind,
threatening to spread like wild re.   If  he told her the  truth and killed
her, this  time she would  really  Ee gone. And it  would  Ee his  fault.
Daniel couldn’t  do  anything—he  could not  exist—without  her.  His
wings Eurned at the thought. Better to shelter her Must a little longer.
   “How  convenient  for  you,”  Cam muttered.  “I  Must hope she isn’t
disappointed.”
   Daniel ignored  him.  “Do you  really Eelieve she’ll  Ee aEle to learn
at this school?”
   “I  do,”  Cam answered slowly. “Assuming  we agree she’ll have no
external distractions.  That means no Daniel,  and no  Cam. That has
to Ee the cardinal rule.”
   Not  see her  for  eighteen days? Daniel  couldn’t  fathom  it.  More
than that,  he couldn’t  fathom  Luce’s ever agreeing  to it.  They  had
only Must found each other in this  lifetime  and  nally   had  a chance
to Ee together.  But, as usual,  explaining  the details  could  kill  her.
She couldn’t hear  aEout her  past lives  from  the mouths  of  angels.

17
Luce didn’t know  it  yet, Eut very soon, she would  Ee on her own to
 gure  out … everything.
   The  Euried  truth—speci cally    what   Luce  would   think   of  it—
terri ed   Daniel.  But  Luce’s uncovering  it  Ey herself  was  the only
way  to  Ereak  free  from   this  horriEle   cycle.  This  was  why   her
experience at Shoreline would  Ee crucial. For eighteen days, Daniel
could kill   as many  Outcasts as came his way.  But  when the  truce
was over, everything  would  Ee in Luce’s hands again. Luce’s hands
alone.
   The sun  was setting  over Mount  Tamalpais  and the  evening fog
was rolling in.
   “Let  me take  her to  Shoreline,”  Daniel said.  It  would  Ee his last
chance to see her.
   Cam looked  at him  strangely,  wondering  whether  to concede. A
second time, Daniel  had to  physically  force  his aching  wings Eack
into his skin.
   “Fine,”  Cam said at last. “In exchange for the starshot.”
   Daniel  handed over  the  weapon,  and Cam  slipped it   inside  his
coat.
   “Take  her as far as the  school and then  nd   me. Don’t  screw up;
I’ll Ee watching.”
   “And  then?”
   “You and I  have hunting to do.”
   Daniel  nodded and unfurled  his  wings, feeling  the deep pleasure
of  their   release all   through  his   Eody. He  stood  for   a  moment,
gathering energy, sensing the wind’s  rough  resistance. Time to   ee
this cursed, ugly  scene, to let  his  wings carry  him  Eack to  a place
where he could Ee his true self.
   Back to Luce.
   And Eack to the lie he would  have to live a little  while  longer.
   “The  truce Eegins at  midnight  tomorrow,”   Daniel called,  kicking
Eack a great spray of sand on  the Eeach as he lifted  o   and soared

18
across the sky.

19
                                                   ONE




                                        EIGHTEEN DAYS 



Luce planned on keeping  her eyes closed all six  hours of the  cross-
country   ight    from  Georgia  out  to  California,  right   up  until   the
moment  when   the  wheels  of   the  plane   touched  down   in   San
Francisco. Half asleep, she found  it  so much  easier to  pretend she
was already reunited with  Daniel.
   It  felt  like  a  lifetime  since she’d  seen him,  though it   had really
only Eeen a  few days.  Ever since they’d  said goodEye at  Sword &
Cross on Friday  morning,  Luce’s whole  Eody had  felt  groggy. The
aEsence of his voice, his warmth, the touch of his wings: it  had sunk
into her Eones, like a strange illness.
   An arm  Erushed against hers, and Luce opened her eyes. She was
face to face with  a  wide-eyed, Erown-haired  guy a few  years older
than her.
   “Sorry,”   they Eoth  said at  the  same time, each  retreating  a few
inches on either side of the plane’s armrest.
   Out the window,  the view  was startling. The plane was making its
descent into San Francisco, and Luce had never seen anything like it
Eefore. As they  traced  the  south side  of  the  Eay, a winding   Elue
triEutary seemed to cut through  the earth on its  way to the  sea. The
stream divided  a  viErant  green  eld    on one  side from  a  swirl  of
something  Eright  red  and  white   on  the   other.  She  pressed her
forehead to the douEle plastic pane and tried to get a Eetter view.
   “What  is that?” she wondered aloud.

20
   “Salt,”   the  guy answered,  pointing.  He  leaned  in  closer. “They
mine it out  of the Paci c.”
   The answer was  so simple, so …  human. Almost  a surprise after
the  time   she’d spent  with    Daniel  and  the   other—she  was  still
unpracticed  at using  the  terms  literally—angels  and  demons. She
looked out across the midnight-Elue  water, which  seemed to stretch
forever west. Sun-over-water had  always meant morning to Atlantic
coast–raised Luce. But out here, it was almost night.
   “You’re not  from around here, are you?” her seatmate asked.
   Luce shook her head Eut held her tongue. She kept staring out the
window.   Before  she’d left   Georgia  this   morning,   Mr.  Cole  had
coached her aEout  keeping a  low  pro le.   The  other  teachers had
Eeen told that  Luce’s parents had requested a transfer. It  was a lie.
As far as Luce’s parents, Callie, and anyone else knew, she was still
enrolled at Sword & Cross.
   A few weeks Eefore, this would have infuriated  her. But the  things
that  had happened in   those  nal   days at  Sword  &  Cross had left
Luce a person who took the world  more seriously. She had glimpsed
a snapshot of another life—one of so many she’d shared with Daniel
Eefore. She’d discovered a love more important to her than anything
she’d  ever  thought   possiEle.  And   then   she’d  seen  all   of  that
threatened  Ey a  crazy,  dagger-wielding   old  woman  whom   she’d
thought she could trust.
   There were more  out there like  Miss Sophia, that  Luce knew. But
no  one  had  told   her  how  to   recognize them.   Miss  Sophia  had
seemed normal, up until  the end. Could  the others look  as innocent
as … this  Erown-haired  guy  sitting   next to  her?  Luce swallowed,
folded her hands on her lap, and tried to think  aEout Daniel.
   Daniel was taking her someplace safe.
   Luce pictured   him  waiting   for  her in   one of  those gray  plastic
airport  chairs, elEows on knees, his Elond head tucked  Eetween his
shoulders. Rocking Eack and  forth  in  his Elack  Converse sneakers.
Standing  up   every   few  minutes   to   pace  around   the   Eaggage
carousel.

21
   There  was a Molt as the plane  touched down.  Suddenly  she was
nervous. Would he Ee as happy to see her as she was to see him?
   She focused on the  Erown and Eeige pattern  on the cloth  seat in
front of  her. Her  neck felt  sti    from the  long  ight   and  her clothes
had a stale,  stu y  airline   smell. The navy-Elue-suited  ground crew
outside the window  seemed to Ee taking an aEnormally long time to
direct the plane to its Jetway.  Her knees EoEEed with impatience.
   “I  take it you’re  staying in California  for a while?”  The guy next to
her o ered  a lazy smile that only  made Luce more anxious to get up.
   “Why  would you  say that?” she asked quickly. “What would  make
you think that?”
   He Elinked. “With  that  huge red du el  Eag and all.”
   Luce  inched away  from  him.   She hadn’t  even noticed  this  guy
until  two  minutes  ago  when  he’d  Marred her awake. How  did  he
know aEout her luggage?
   “Hey,  nothing   creepy.” He  shot  her a  strange look.  “I   was Must
standing Eehind you in line when you  checked in.”
   Luce smiled  awkwardly.  “I  have a  Eoyfriend”  streamed from her
mouth. Instantly, her  cheeks reddened.
   The guy coughed. “Got it.”
   Luce grimaced.  She didn’t  know  why  she’d said that.  She didn’t
want to  Ee rude, Eut the seat Eelt light  went o    and all  she wanted
to do was Earrel past this guy and  right o    the plane. He must have
had the  same idea,  Eecause he edged Eackward  in  the  aisle  and
swept his hand forward.  As politely   as she could, Luce pushed past
and Eounded toward the exit.
   Only  to  get caught in  a Eottleneck  of agonizing  slowness on the
Jetway. Silently cursing  all the  casual Californians shu ing   in  front
of her, Luce stood on  her toes and shifted  from foot  to  foot. By the
time she stepped into  the terminal,  she’d driven  herself half  insane
with impatience.
   Finally,  she  could  move. She wove  expertly  through  the  crowd
and forgot all  aEout the guy she’d Must met on the plane. She forgot

22
to feel nervous that she’d never Eeen to California in  her life—never
Eeen further   west  than   Branson, Missouri,   that   time  when   her
parents dragged her to  see Yakov Smirno    doing standup.  And for
the  rst   time   in  days, she even  Erie y   forgot  the  horriEle  things
she’d seen at Sword & Cross. She was headed toward the only thing
in the  world  that  had the  power to  make her  feel Eetter. The only
thing  that   could  make  her  feel  that  all   the  anguish  she’d  Eeen
through—all  the  shadows, that  unreal Eattle  in  the  cemetery, and
worst  of   all,   the  heartEreak  of   Penn’s death—might   Ee  worth
surviving.
   There he was.
   Sitting  exactly as she’d imagined he would,  on the  last in  a Elock
of  sad gray  chairs,  next  to   an  automatic  sliding   door  that  kept
opening and closing Eehind  him. For  a second, Luce stood still  and
Must enMoyed the view.
   Daniel  was  wearing   ip- ops    and  dark  Means she’d never seen
Eefore, and a stretched-out red T-shirt that was ripped near the front
pocket. He  looked  the  same, yet  somehow di erent.    More  rested
than he  had when  they’d  said goodEye the  other  day. And  was it
Must that she’d missed him   so much,  or  was  his  skin  even  more
radiant  than she  rememEered? He looked up  and   nally   saw her.
His smile practically gleamed.
   She took o    running toward  him.  Within  a second, his arms were
around  her,  her  face  Euried  in  his   chest, and  Luce  let  out   the
longest, deepest Ereath. Her mouth  found his  and they  sank into  a
kiss. She went slack and happy in his arms.
   She hadn’t realized  it  until  now,  Eut a part  of her had  wondered
whether she’d ever  see him  again, whether  the whole  thing  might
have  Eeen  a  dream.   The  love   she  felt,   the   love   that   Daniel
reciprocated, all still  felt so surreal.
   Still  caught  up in  his  kiss, Luce lightly   pinched his  Eicep. Not  a
dream. For the  rst   time in  she didn’t even know  how long, she felt
like she was home.
   “You’re here,”  he whispered into her ear.

23
   “You’re here.”
   “We’re Eoth here.”
   They  laughed,  still   kissing,   eating  up  every  Eit   of  the  sweet
awkwardness at seeing each other  again. But  when Luce was  least
expecting it,  her laugh  turned  into  a sni e.    She was looking for  a
way to  say how  hard the  last few  days had Eeen for  her—without
him, without  anyone, half asleep and groggily aware that everything
had  changed—Eut in   Daniel’s  arms  now,  she  failed  to   nd    the
words.
   “I  know,”  he said. “Let’s get your Eag and get out of here.”
   Luce turned toward  the Eaggage carousel and found her neighEor
from the plane standing in  front  of her, the straps of her huge du el
gripped in  his hands. “I  saw this  go Ey,” he said,  a forced smile on
his face, like  he was hell-Eent  on proving  his  good intentions.  “It’s
yours, isn’t it?”
   Before Luce  had time  to  answer, Daniel  relieved  the guy  of  the
unwieldy  Eag, using only one  hand. “Thanks, man.  I’ll  take it  from
here,” he said, decisively enough to end the conversation.
   The  guy  watched  as Daniel  slid   his  other  hand  around  Luce’s
waist and  steered her away. This  was the  rst   time  since Sword &
Cross that Luce had  Eeen aEle to see Daniel as the  world  did,  her
 rst   chance to   wonder  whether  other   people could   tell,  Must Ey
looking, that there  was something extraordinary aEout him.
   Then they  were through  the sliding  glass doors and she took  her
 rst  real Ereath of the West Coast. The early-NovemEer air felt fresh
and Erisk  and  somehow  healthy,  not   soggy and  chilled   like  the
Savannah air this afternoon  when her  plane had taken  o .  The sky
was a  Erilliant  Eright  Elue,  no  clouds on  the  horizon.  Everything
looked new-minted  and clean—even the parking  lot  held  row after
row  of  recently  washed  cars. A  line  of   mountains  framed  it  all,
tawny Erown  with  scraggly dots of green trees, one hill  rolling   into
the next.
   She was not in Georgia anymore.

24
   “I  can’t decide whether  to Ee surprised,”  Daniel teased. “I let  you
out from under my  wing for two  days and another guy swoops in.”
   Luce rolled  her  eyes. “Come on. We Earely spoke. Really,  I slept
the whole  ight.”   She nudged him. “Dreaming of you.”
   Daniel’s pursed lips turned  into a smile and he gave the top of  her
head a kiss. She stood  still,  wanting  more,  not even  realizing  that
Daniel had stopped in front of a car. And not  Must any car.
   A Elack Alfa Romeo.
   Luce’s Maw dropped when Daniel unlocked the passenger door.
   “Th-this  …,”  she stammered. “This is  … did  you know this  is my
aEsolute dream car?”
   “More  than that,”  Daniel laughed. “This used to be your car.”
   He  laughed when  she practically  Mumped at his words.  She was
still  getting used to  the  reincarnation  part of  their  story.  It  was so
unfair. A  whole car she had no memory  of. Whole lives she couldn’t
recall.  She was  desperate to   know  aEout  them,  almost  like   her
former selves were siElings she’d Eeen separated from at Eirth.  She
rested  her   hand  on   the   windshield,   searching   for   a  wisp   of
something, for déMà vu.
   Nothing.
   “It   was  a  sweet  sixteen  present  from  your   folks  a  couple   of
lifetimes ago.”  Daniel looked sideways, like  he was trying  to decide
how much  to say. Like he  knew she was hungry  for the  details Eut
might not  Ee aEle to swallow too many at  once. “I Must Eought it o 
this guy in Reno. He Eought it after you, uh  … Well, after you …”
   SSontaneously combusted, Luce thought,  lling  in  the Eitter  truth
that Daniel  wouldn’t  speak. That was  the one thing  aEout her  past
lives: The ending rarely changed.
   Except, it  seemed, this  time  it  could.  This time  they  could  hold
hands, kiss, and … she didn’t know what else they could do. But  she
was dying  to  nd   out.  She caught herself.  They had to  Ee careful.
Seventeen years was  not  enough, and  in   this  lifetime,   Luce was

25
adamant aEout sticking  around to  see what it  was like  to  really Ee
with Daniel.
   He cleared  his throat  and patted  the  gleaming Elack hood.  “Still
drives like   a  champ. The  only   proElem is  …”   He  looked  at  the
convertiEle’s tiny  trunk,  then at  Luce’s du el  Eag, then Eack at  the
trunk.
   Yes, Luce had a terriEle haEit of  overpacking, she’d Ee the  rst  to
admit.  But for  once, this  wasn’t  her fault.   Arriane  and GaEEe had
packed her  things  from  her  dorm  room  at  Sword  & Cross, every
Elack and nonElack  piece of  clothing  she’d never had  a chance to
wear. She’d Eeen too Eusy saying goodEye to Daniel, and to Penn, to
pack. She winced, feeling guilty for Eeing out here in  California with
Daniel, so far from  where she’d left her friend  Euried. It  didn’t  seem
fair. Mr.  Cole had kept assuring her that Miss Sophia would Ee dealt
with  for what  she’d done to  Penn, Eut when Luce had  pressed him
aEout what  exactly  that  meant,  he’d  tugged at  his  mustache and
clammed up.
   Daniel  glanced suspiciously  around  the  parking  lot.  He  popped
the trunk,  Luce’s massive du el   Eag in hand.  It  was an impossiEle
 t,  Eut then a soft  sucking sound came from the Eack of the car and
Luce’s Eag Eegan to  shrink.  A  moment  later,  Daniel  snapped the
trunk shut.
   Luce Elinked. “Do that  again!”
   Daniel  didn’t  laugh. He seemed nervous. He slid  into the  driver’s
seat and started the car without  a word.  It was a strange, new thing
for Luce: seeing his face look so serene on the surface, Eut knowing
him well  enough to sense something deeper underneath.
   “What’s wrong?”
   “Mr.  Cole told you aEout keeping a low pro le,   didn’t  he?”
   She nodded.
   Daniel Eacked out of the spot, then wheeled around to the parking
lot’s exit,  slipping  a credit card  into  the machine on  their  way out.
“That was stupid. I should have thought—”

26
   “What’s  the Eig deal?” Luce tucked  her dark hair  Eehind her ears
as the car Eegan to pick up speed. “You think you’re going to  attract
Cam’s attention Ey stu ng  a Eag into a trunk?”
   Daniel  got a  faraway  look in  his  eyes and shook his  head. “Not
Cam. No.”  A  moment  later,  he squeezed her  knee. “Forget  I  said
anything. I Must—We both Must have to Ee cautious.”
   Luce heard  him  Eut  was too  overwhelmed  to listen  too  closely.
She loved watching Daniel  expertly work  the  gearshift as they took
the ramp onto  the freeway and zipped through  tra c;    loved feeling
the  wind   whipping    through   the  car   as  they  sped  toward   the
towering San Francisco skyline; loved—most of  all—Must Eeing with
Daniel.
   In  San Francisco proper, the road turned much hillier.   Every time
they crested  one peak  and  started careening  down  another,  Luce
caught a di erent   glimpse of  the city.  It  looked old  and new at  the
same time:  Mirror-windowed   skyscrapers Eacked right   up  against
restaurants and Ears that looked  a century  old.  Tiny  cars lined the
streets,  parked   at    gravity-defying    angles.  Dogs   and   strollers
everywhere. The  sparkle of  Elue water  all  around  the  city’s  edge.
And the  rst   candy-apple-red glimpse of  the Golden Gate Bridge  in
the distance.
   Her  eyes darted around to  keep up with  all  the  sights. And even
though  she  had  spent  most  of  the  past  few  days  sleeping,  she
suddenly felt a wave of exhaustion.
   Daniel stretched  his arm around  her and guided her  head toward
his shoulder.  “Little-known   fact  aEout  angels: We  make excellent
pillows.”
   Luce  laughed,  lifting    her  head  to  kiss  his   cheek.  “I   couldn’t
possiEly sleep,” she said, nuzzling his neck.
   On  the  Golden  Gate Bridge,  throngs  of  pedestrians, spandexed
Eicyclers, and Moggers  anked the cars. Far Eelow was the  Erilliant
Eay, dotted with  white  sailEoats and the Eeginning notes of a violet
sunset. “It’s Eeen days since we’ve seen each other. I want  to catch

27
up,”   she   said.   “Tell   me   what    you’ve   Eeen  doing.   Tell    me
everything.”
   For an instant,  she thought she saw Daniel’s hands tighten around
the steering  wheel.  “If   your  goal  is not  to  go  to  sleep,”  he said,
cracking a smile, “then  I  really shouldn’t  delve into  the minutiae  of
the eight-hour-long  Council of the  Angels meeting I was stuck in  all
day  yesterday. See, the   Eoard met  to   discuss an  amendment  to
proposition 362B,  which  details the sanctioned  format for  cheruEic
participation  in the third  circuit  of—”
   “Okay,  I get it.”  She swatted him.  Daniel was Moking, Eut it was a
strange new kind  of  Moke. He was actually Eeing open aEout Eeing
an angel, which  she loved—or at least she would love it,  once she’d
had a little  more time  to process it. Luce still  felt  like her  heart and
Erain were Eoth struggling to catch up to the changes in her life.
   But  they  were  Eack together  for  good  now,  so  everything  was
in nitely   easier. There was nothing  to  hold  Eack from one another
anymore. She  pulled  on  his  arm.  “At   least  tell  me  where  we’re
going.”
   Daniel   inched,   and  Luce felt  a  knot  of  cold  unfold  inside  her
chest. She moved to  put  her  hand  on his,  Eut  he pulled  away  to
downshift.
   “A  school in Fort Bragg called Shoreline. Classes start tomorrow.”
   “We’re   enrolling    at  another   school?”   she  asked.  “Why?”    It
sounded so permanent. This was supposed to Ee a provisional  trip.
Her parents didn’t even know she’d left the state of Georgia.
   “You’ll  like  Shoreline.  It’s very  progressive, and a lot  Eetter than
Sword and Cross. I think  you’ll  Ee aEle to … develop there. And no
harm will  come to you.  The school has a special, protective quality.
A camou age-like shield.”
   “I   don’t  get  it.   Why  do  I  need a  protective   shield?  I  thought
coming out here, away from Miss Sophia, was enough.”
   “It’s  not Must Miss Sophia,” Daniel said quietly. “There are others.”

28
   “Who?  You  can protect   me from   Cam, or  Molly,   or  whoever.”
Luce laughed, Eut the cold feeling in  her chest was spreading to her
gut.
   “It’s  not Cam or Molly,  either. Luce, I can’t talk aEout it.”
   “Will  we know  anyone else there? Any other angels?”
   “There  are  some angels there.  No  one you  know,  Eut  I’m  sure
you’ll  get along.  There’s one more thing.”   His voice  was  at  as he
stared straight  ahead. “I  won’t  Ee enrolling.”   His  eyes didn’t  once
veer o   the road. “Just you. It’s  only for a little  while.”
   “How  little?”
   “A  few … weeks.”
   Had  Luce  Eeen the  one Eehind  the  wheel,  this  was  when  she
would have slammed on the Erakes.
   “A  few weeks?”
   “If  I  could  Ee with  you,  I  would.”  Daniel’s  voice was so   at,  so
steady, that  it   made Luce  even more  upset.  “You  saw  what  Must
happened with  your   du el   Eag and  the  trunk.  That  was like   my
shooting up a  are  into  the sky to  let everyone know  where we are.
To alert  anyone who  is looking  for  me—and Ey me, I  mean you.  I
am too easy to  nd,   too easy for others to  track down.  And that  Eit
with  your  Eag? That is nothing  compared to  the  things I  do  every
day that would  draw the attention  of …” He shook his head sharply.
“I won’t  put you in  danger, Luce, I won’t.”
   “Then don’t.”
   Daniel’s face looked pained. “It’s complicated.”
   “And  let me guess: You can’t explain.”
   “I  wish I could.”
   Luce  drew  her  knees to  her  chest, leaned  away from   him  and
against the   passenger-side door, feeling   somehow  claustrophoEic
under the Eig Elue California sky.

29
   For half  an  hour, the  two  of them  rode in  silence. In  and out  of
patches of fog,  up  and down  the  rocky,  arid  terrain.  They  passed
signs for   Sonoma,  and   as the   car  cruised   through   lush  green
vineyards, Daniel  spoke. “It’s  three more  hours to  Fort Bragg.  You
going to stay mad at me the whole time?”
   Luce ignored  him.   She thought  of  and refused  to  give voice  to
hundreds of  questions, frustrations,  accusations, and—ultimately—
apologies for acting  like  such a spoiled  Erat. At  the turno    for  the
Anderson Valley,  Daniel  forked  west  and tried   again  to  hold  her
hand.  “MayEe  you’ll   forgive  me   in  time   to  enMoy our  last  few
minutes together?”
   She wanted to.  She really  wanted to  not Ee  ghting   with   Daniel
right  now.  But the  fresh mention  of  there Eeing such  a thing  as a
“last few minutes  together,”  of his leaving her  alone for reasons she
couldn’t understand and  that he always refused to explain—it  made
Luce nervous, then  terri ed,   then  frustrated  all  over again.  In  the
roiling   sea of  new   state, new   school,  new  dangers everywhere,
Daniel was the only rock she had to hold on  to. And he was aEout to
leave her? Hadn’t she Eeen through enough? Hadn’t they Eoth  Eeen
through enough?
   It  was only  after  they’d  passed through the  redwoods and  come
out into  a starry, royal-Elue evening that  Daniel said something that
Eroke through to  her.  They’d Must passed a sign that read WELCOME TO
MENDOCINO, and Luce was looking west. A full moon shone down on a
cluster of Euildings:  a lighthouse,  several copper water towers,  and
rows of well-preserved  old wooden  houses. Somewhere out Eeyond
all that was the ocean she could hear Eut couldn’t see.
   Daniel  pointed  east,  into  a  dark,  dense forest  of  redwood  and
maple trees. “See that trailer park up ahead?”
   She never would  have  if he  hadn’t  pointed it  out,  Eut now  Luce
squinted to   see a narrow   driveway,  where  a  lime-caked  wooden

30
placard read in whitewashed letters MENDOCINO MOBILE HOMES.
   “You used to live  right there.”
   “What?”   Luce sucked  in  her  Ereath  so  quickly,   she started  to
cough.  The park   looked  sad  and  lonesome, a  dull   line   of  low-
ceilinged cookie-cutter  Eoxes set along a cheap gravel road. “That’s
awful.”
   “You  lived  there Eefore it  was a trailer  park,”  Daniel said, easing
the car to a  stop Ey the side of the  road. “Before there were  moEile
homes. Your father  in  that  lifetime   Erought  your  family  out  from
Illinois    during   the    gold   rush.”    He   seemed  to    look   inward
somewhere, and  sadly shook  his  head. “Used  to  Ee a  really  nice
place.”
   Luce watched a Eald man with  a potEelly tug a mangy orange dog
on a  leash. The  man was  wearing a  white  undershirt   and  annel
Eoxers. Luce couldn’t picture herself there at all.
   Yet it  was so clear to Daniel. “You had a two-room caEin and your
mother was a terriEle  cook, so the  whole place always  smelled like
caEEage. You had these Elue gingham curtains that I used to part so
I could climE through  your window  at  night after  your parents were
asleep.”
   The  car idled.  Luce  closed her eyes and  tried  to   ght   Eack her
stupid  tears. Hearing  their  history   from  Daniel  made it   feel Eoth
possiEle and impossiEle. Hearing  it   also made  her  feel  extremely
guilty. He’d stuck with  her for  so long, over so many lifetimes. She’d
forgotten how  well he knew  her. Better even than she knew herself.
Would  Daniel know   what  she was thinking   now?  Luce wondered
whether, in  some ways,  it  was easier to  Ee her and to  never  have
rememEered Daniel than it was for  him to  go through  this time  and
time again.
   If  he said  he had  to leave  for a  few weeks and  couldn’t  explain
why … she would have to trust him.
   “What  was it like when  you  rst  met me?” she asked.

31
   Daniel smiled.  “I  chopped wood in exchange for meals Eack then.
One night  around dinnertime  I  was walking  past your  house. Your
mother  had  the  caEEage going,  and  it   stank  so  Eadly  I  almost
skipped your  house. But then  I saw  you through  the  window.  You
were sewing. I couldn’t take my eyes o   your hands.”
   Luce  looked at  her  hands,  her pale,  tapered   ngers  and  small,
square palms.  She  wondered  if  they’d   always  looked  the  same.
Daniel reached  for  them  across the  console. “They’re  Must as soft
now as they were then.”
   Luce  shook  her  head.  She loved  the  story,   wanted  to  hear  a
thousand more  Must like it,   Eut that  wasn’t  what   she’d meant.  “I
want to  know aEout the  rst   time  you met me,”  she said. “The very
 rst  time. What was that like?”
   After   a  long  pause, he   nally    said,  “It’s   getting  late.   They’re
expecting you at Shoreline Eefore midnight.”  He stepped on the gas,
taking  a quick  left  into  downtown  Mendocino.  In  the  side mirror,
Luce watched the  moEile home park  grow  smaller, darker,  until  it
disappeared completely.   But   then,  a   few  seconds  later,   Daniel
parked the car in front  of an empty all-night  diner  with  yellow walls
and  oor-to-ceiling  front  windows.
   The Elock was full  of quirky,  quaint  Euildings that reminded  Luce
of a  less stu y  version  of  the New  England coastline  near her  old
New  Hampshire  prep  school,  Dover.  The street  was  paved  with
uneven  coEElestones that  glowed  yellow   in   the   light   from  the
streetlamps overhead. At  its end,  the road  seemed to drop straight
into the ocean. A coldness sneaked up on her. She had to ignore her
re exive  fear of the dark. Daniel had explained aEout the shadows—
that they  were  nothing  to  Ee afraid of,  merely  messengers. Which
should have Eeen reassuring, except for the hard-to-ignore  fact that
it meant there were Eigger things to Ee afraid of.
   “Why  won’t   you tell   me?” She couldn’t  help  herself.  She didn’t
know why it  felt so important  to ask. If she was going to trust Daniel
when he said he had to aEandon her after longing all her life  for this

32
reunion—well,  mayEe she Must wanted to understand the origins of
that trust. To know  when and how it  had all Eegun.
   “Do  you  know  what  my  last  name means?”  he said,  surprising
her.
   Luce Eit her lip,  trying  to think  Eack to the research she and Penn
had  done.   “I   rememEer  Miss   Sophia  saying   something   aEout
Watchers. But I don’t know what it  means, or if I’m even supposed to
Eelieve her.” Her   ngers  went to  her neck, to  the place where Miss
Sophia’s knife had lain.
   “She  was right.   The Grigoris  are  a clan.  They’re  a  clan named
after  me,   actually.   Because they   watch   and   learn  from    what
happened when … Eack when  I was  still  welcome in  Heaven. And
Eack when you were … well, this all  happened a very long time ago,
Luce. It’s hard for me to rememEer most of it.”
   “Where?  Where was  I?”  she pressed. “I   rememEer Miss Sophia
saying something aEout the Grigoris consorting with  mortal  women.
Is that what happened? Did you …?”
   He looked over  at her. Something changed on his face, and in  the
dim moonlight,  Luce couldn’t  tell  what  it meant.  It was almost  like
he was relieved that  she had guessed it, so he didn’t have to  Ee the
one to spell it out.
   “The  very  rst   time  I saw you,”  Daniel  continued, “it   wasn’t any
di erent   than  any other  time  I’ve  seen you  since. The  world  was
newer, Eut you were Must the same. It was—”
   “Love at  rst   sight.” That part  she knew.
   He  nodded.  “Just  like  always.  The  only  di erence   was, in   the
Eeginning, you were o -limits    to me. I  was Eeing punished, and I’d
fallen for you  at the worst possiEle time. Things were very violent  in
Heaven. Because of who  … I  am  …  I was  expected to  stay away
from you.  You were a distraction.  The focus was supposed to Ee on
winning  the war. It’s  the same war that’s still  going  on.” He sighed.
“And if  you haven’t noticed, I’m still  very distracted.”
   “So you were a very high  angel,” Luce murmured.

33
   “Sure.”  Daniel looked miseraEle, pausing and then seeming, when
he spoke again, to Eite out the  words: “It  was a fall  from one of  the
highest perches.”
   OI course. Daniel would  have to Ee important  in  Heaven in order
to have caused such a Eig rift.  In  order for  his love of  a mortal  girl
to Ee so o -limits.
   “You gave it  all up? For me?”
   He touched his forehead to hers. “I wouldn’t  change a thing.”
   “But   I  was  nothing,”   Luce  said.  She felt   heavy,  like  she  was
dragging. Dragging him  down.  “You  had to give  up so much!”   She
felt sick to her stomach. “And now  you’re damned forever.”
   Turning  o   the  car, Daniel gave her a sad smile.  “It  might not  Ee
forever.”
   “What  do you mean?”
   “Come on,”  he said, hopping out  of the car and coming  around to
open her door. “Let’s take a walk.”
   They amEled to the  end of the street, which  didn’t  dead-end after
all, Eut led to  a steep, rocky staircase going down to  the water. The
air was cool and moist with  sea spray. Just to the left  of the steps, a
trail led away. Daniel  took her hand and moved to the cli ’s   edge.
   “Where are we going?” Luce asked.
   Daniel smiled  at her, straightening his  shoulders, and unfurled his
wings.
   Slowly,  they  extended up  and out  from  his shoulders,  unfolding
with  an   almost  inaudiEle  series of   soft  snaps and  creaks.  Fully
 exed,  they made a gentle, feathery  IwumS like a duvet Eeing  ung
over a Eed.
   For the   rst  time,  Luce noticed the  Eack of Daniel’s t-shirt.  There
were two tiny,  otherwise  invisiEle slits,  which parted  now to  let his
wings slip  through.   Did all   of Daniel’s  clothes  have these angelic
alterations? Or did  he have certain, special things he wore  when he
knew he planned on  ying?

34
   Either way,  his wings never failed to leave Luce speechless.
   They  were enormous,  rising  three  times taller   than Daniel,  and
curved up  into   the sky  and  to  either  side like   Eroad white  sails.
Their Eroad  expanse caught the  light  of  the  stars and  re ected  it
more intensely,  so  that  they  glowed  with  an  iridescent  shimmer.
Near his Eody they darkened, shading into a rich earthy  cream color
where they met his shoulder muscles. But along their  tapered edges,
they grew thin and glowed,  Eecoming almost translucent at the tips.
   Luce stared  at them,  rapt,  trying  to  rememEer the  line  of every
glorious feather, to  hold all  of it  inside her for  when he went  away.
He shone so Eright,  the  sun could  have Eorrowed  light  from  him.
The smile in  his violet  eyes told her  how good  it felt  for  him  to let
his wings  out.  As good as Luce  felt  when she  was wrapped  up in
them.
   “Fly  with  me,” he whispered.
   “What?”
   “I’m   not going  to  see you  for  a little   while.  I  have to  give  you
something to rememEer me Ey.”
   Luce  kissed him  Eefore  he could   say anything  else,  lacing  her
 ngers around  his neck, holding  him as tightly  as she could, hoping
to give him something to rememEer her Ey, too.
   With   her  Eack  pressed  to  his   chest,  and  his  head   over  her
shoulder, Daniel traced a line  of kisses down her neck. She held her
Ereath, waiting. Then he  Eent his legs and gracefully pushed o   the
edge of the cli .
   They were  ying.
   Away  from  the  rocky  ledge  of  the  coastline,  over the  crashing
silver waves Eelow, arcing across the sky as if they were soaring for
the moon.  Daniel’s emErace shielded her from  every rough  gust of
wind, every Erush of ocean chill.  The night  was aEsolutely quiet. As
if they were the only  two people left in  the world.
   “This  is Heaven, isn’t it?” she asked.
   Daniel laughed. “I  wish it  were. MayEe one day soon.”

35
   When they  had  own   out  far enough that  they  couldn’t  see land
on  either   side  of  them,   Daniel  Eanked  gently  north,   and  they
swooped in  a wide  arc past  the city   of Mendocino,  which  glowed
warmly  on the horizon.  They were  far aEove the tallest  Euilding in
town  and moving  incrediEly  fast. But  Luce had  never felt  safer or
more in love in her  life.
   And then,  all too soon, they  were descending, gradually nearing a
di erent  cli ’s   edge. The sounds of the  ocean grew louder again.  A
dark single-lane road wound  o   the  main highway.  When their  feet
touched down lightly  on a cool patch of thick  grass, Luce sighed.
   “Where are we?” she asked, though of course she already knew.
   The  Shoreline  School.  She  could  see  a  large  Euilding   in  the
distance, Eut from  here it  looked  completely  dark,  merely a  shape
on the horizon.  Daniel held  her pressed to him, as if  they were  still
in the air.  She craned her head around to look at his expression. His
eyes were damp.
   “The  ones who  damned me  are still   watching,  Luce. They  have
Eeen for millennia. And they  don’t want  us to Ee together. They will
do anything  they  can to  stop us. That’s why  it  isn’t  safe for  me to
stay here.”
   She nodded, her eyes stinging. “But why am I here?”
   “Because I will  do  everything  in my  power to  keep you safe, and
this  is the  Eest place  for  you  now.   I  love  you,  Luce. More  than
anything. I’ll  Ee Eack to you as soon as I can.”
   She  wanted   to   protest,  Eut   stopped  herself.   He’d  given   up
everything for  her.  When he let  her out  of his  emErace, he opened
his palm and  a small red  shape inside it  Eegan to grow.  Her du el
Eag. He’d  taken  it   from   the  Eack  of  the  car  without   her   even
knowing,  carried it  all  the  way here  inside his  hand. In  Must a few
seconds, it had  lled   out entirely,  Eack to  its full  size. If  she hadn’t
Eeen so heartEroken aEout what it meant for  him to  hand it  over to
her, Luce would have loved the trick.
   A  single light  went  on inside the  Euilding.  A silhouette  appeared
in the doorway.

36
   “It’s  not for long.  As soon as things are safer, I’ll come for you.”
   His hot  hand clasped her  wrist and  Eefore she knew it,  Luce was
caught up in  his emErace, drawn to his  lips. She let everything  else
fall away, let  her heart Erim over. MayEe she couldn’t rememEer her
former lives,  Eut when Daniel  kissed her, she felt  close to the  past.
And the future.
   The  gure  in  the doorway  was walking toward  her, a woman in  a
short white dress.
   The kiss Luce had shared with Daniel, too sweet to Ee so Erief, left
her Must as out of Ereath as their kisses always did.
   “Don’t  go,”  she whispered, her  eyes closed. It was all  happening
too fast. She couldn’t  give Daniel  up. Not  yet.  She didn’t think   she
ever could.
   She felt  the  rush  of  air  that  meant  he’d already  taken  o .   Her
heart went after  him  as she opened her eyes and saw the last trace
of his wings disappear inside a cloud, into the dark  night.

37
                                                  TWO




                                       SEVENTEEN DAYS 



ThwaS.
   Luce winced and ruEEed her face. Her nose stung.
   ThwaS. ThwaS.
   Now  it was her  cheekEones. Her eyelids drifted open and, almost
immediately,   she  scrunched  up  her   face  in   surprise.  A   stocky
dishwater-Elond girl  with   a grimly  set  mouth  and maMor eyeErows
was leaning over her. Her hair was piled  messily on top of her head.
She wore   yoga  pants   and  a  riEEed  camou age   tank   top   that
matched her  green- ecked  hazel  eyes. She held  a  Ping-Pong Eall
Eetween her  ngers, poised to pelt.
   Luce scramEled Eackward in her Eedsheets and shielded her face.
Her heart  already  hurt  from  missing  Daniel.  She didn’t   need any
more pain.  She looked  down,  still  trying  to  get  her Eearings, and
rememEered the  Eed she had  indiscriminately    collapsed into   the
night Eefore.
   The  woman  in  white  who   had appeared  in  Daniel’s  wake  had
introduced  herself as  Francesca, one of  the teachers at  Shoreline.
Even in  her  stunned stupor,  Luce  could  tell  that  the  woman  was
Eeautiful. She was in her  mid-thirties,  with  Elond hair  Erushing her
shoulders, round cheekEones, and large, soft features.
   Angel, Luce decided almost instantly.
   Francesca asked no  questions on  the  way  to  Luce’s  room.  She
must have Eeen expecting the late night drop-o ,  and she must have

38
sensed Luce’s utter exhaustion.
   Now  this   stranger  who’d  pelted  Luce  Eack  into  consciousness
looked ready to  chuck  another Eall.  “Good,”  she said in a  gravelly
voice. “You’re awake.”
   “Who  are you?” Luce asked sleepily.
   “Who  are you, is  more like  it.  Other  than the  stranger I wake  to
 nd   squatting   in  my   room.   Other  than  the   kid   disrupting   my
morning   mantra  with    her  weirdly   personal   sleep-EaEEling. I’m
ShelEy. Enchantée.”
   Not  an angel, Luce surmised. Just a Californian girl  with  a  strong
sense of entitlement.
   Luce  sat up  in  Eed  and looked  around.  The  room  was  a little
cramped, Eut it  was nicely  appointed, with  light-colored   hardwood
 oors;  a working   replace;  a microwave; two  deep, wide desks; and
Euilt-in  Eookshelves that  douEled  as a  ladder  to  what  Luce  now
realized was the top Eunk.
   She could see a private Eathroom through  a sliding  wooden door.
And—she had to Elink a few times to  Ee certain—an ocean view out
the window. Not  Ead for a girl who  had spent the past month gazing
out at a rank old cemetery in a room  more appropriate for a hospital
than a school. But  then, at  least that  rank cemetery  and that  room
had  meant  she was  with   Daniel.  She  had  Earely  Eegun getting
comfortaEle at  Sword &  Cross. And  now she was  Eack to  starting
from scratch.
   “Francesca   didn’t    mention     anything    aEout   me    having    a
roommate.”  Luce knew  instantly   from  the  expression on  ShelEy’s
face that this was the Wrong Thing to Say.
   So she took  a  quick  glance at  ShelEy’s décor instead.  Luce had
never  trusted  her  own  interior   design  instincts,   or  mayEe she’d
never had  the  chance to   indulge  them.  She hadn’t  stuck  around
Sword & Cross long enough to do much decorating,  Eut even Eefore
that,  her room  at  Dover  had  Eeen white-walled  and  Eare. Sterile
chic, as Callie had once said.

39
   This room,  on the other  hand—there was something aEout it  that
was strangely … groovy. Varieties  of potted plants  she’d never seen
Eefore lined  the  windowsill;    prayer   ags  were  strung  across the
ceiling.  A patchwork  quilt   in muted  colors  was sliding  o    the top
Eunk, half  oEstructing  Luce’s view  of  an astrology  calendar taped
over the mirror.
   “What’d   you  think?   They  were  going  to  clear   out  the  dean’s
quarters Must Eecause you’re Lucinda Price?”
   “Um,  no?” Luce shook  her head. “That’s  not what  I meant  at all.
Wait, how did  you know my name?”
   “So you  are Lucinda Price?” The  girl’s green- ecked  eyes seemed
to  x  on Luce’s ratty gray paMamas. “Lucky me.”
   Luce was speechless.
   “Sorry.”  ShelEy exhaled and adMusted her tone, parking herself on
the edge of Luce’s Eed. “I’m an only child. Leon—that’s my therapist
—he’s trying to get me to Ee less harsh when I  rst meet people.”
   “Is  it working?”   Luce was an only child  too,  Eut she wasn’t nasty
to every stranger she came into contact with.
   “What  I mean  is …”  ShelEy shifted uncomfortaEly. “I’m  not  used
to sharing. Can we”—she tossed her head—“rewind?”
   “That’d  Ee nice.”
   “Okay.”  ShelEy took a deep Ereath. “Frankie  didn’t  mention  your
having a roommate  last night  Eecause then she would have  had to
either notice—or,  if she had already noticed,  disclose—that I wasn’t
in  Eed when  you  arrived.  I  came  in  through  that   window”—she
pointed—“around three.”
   Out  the  window,  Luce could  see a wide  ledge connecting  to  an
angled portion   of  the  roof.  She pictured   ShelEy darting  across a
whole network  of ledges on the roof  to  get Eack here in the middle
of the night.
   ShelEy made  a  show  of  yawning.  “See,  when  it  comes  to  the
Nephilim  kids  at  Shoreline, the  only  thing   the  teachers are strict
aEout is the Sretense of discipline. Discipline  itself  doesn’t so much

40
exist. Though, of course, Frankie’s not going to  advertise that to  the
new girl. Especially not Lucinda Price.”
   There  it  was again.  That  edge in  ShelEy’s voice  when she  said
Luce’s name.  Luce  wanted  to  know   what  it   meant.  And  where
ShelEy had Eeen until  three.  And  how  she’d come in  through  the
window in  the dark  without  knocking over  any of those plants. And
who were the Nephilim  kids?
   Luce  had  sudden  vivid    ashEacks   to  the   mental  Mungle gym
Arriane had taken her  through when  they’d  rst   met. Her Shoreline
roommate’s  tough   exterior   was  a  lot   like   Arriane’s,   and  Luce
rememEered a  similar   how-will-I-ever-Ee-friends-with-you    feeling
her  rst  day at Sword & Cross.
   But  though  Arriane   had seemed intimidating    and  even a  little
dangerous, there  had Eeen  something charmingly   o -kilter    aEout
her from  the  start.  Luce’s new roommate,  on  the other  hand,  Must
seemed annoying.
   ShelEy popped  o    the  Eed and lumEered  into  the  Eathroom  to
Erush her  teeth. After  digging  through   her du el    Eag to   nd   her
toothErush, Luce  followed   her  in  and  gestured sheepishly  at  the
toothpaste.
   “I  forgot to pack mine.”
   “No  douEt the  dazzle of  your  celeErity Elinded  you to  the  small
necessities of life,”  ShelEy replied, Eut  she picked up  the tuEe  and
extended it toward Luce.
   They Erushed in  silence for aEout ten seconds until  Luce couldn’t
take it anymore. She spat out a mouthful of froth.  “ShelEy?”
   With  her head in  the Eelly  of the  porcelain sink,  ShelEy spat and
said, “What?”
   Instead  of  asking  any  of  the  questions  that  had  Eeen running
through her head a minute  Eefore, Luce surprised herself and asked,
“What was I saying in my sleep?”
   This   morning   was   the   rst     in   at  least   a   month   of   vivid,
complicated,  Daniel-ridden  dreams on  which  Luce  had woken  up

41
unaEle to rememEer a single thing from her sleep.
   Nothing.  Not one Erush of an angel wing. Not one kiss of his lips.
   She stared at  ShelEy’s gru   face  in  the mirror.   Luce needed the
girl  to  help Mog her memory. She must have  Eeen dreaming aEout
Daniel. If she hadn’t Eeen … what could it mean?
   “Beats  me,”   ShelEy  said   nally.    “You   were   all   mu ed    and
incoherent. Next  time, try  enunciating.”   She left the  Eathroom and
slipped  on  a  pair  of   orange   ip- ops.    “It’s   Ereakfast time.   You
coming or what?”
   Luce scurried  out  of  the Eathroom.  “What  do I  wear?”  She was
still in  her paMamas. Francesca hadn’t said anything last night aEout
a dress code. But then,  she’d also failed  to  mention  the roommate
situation.
   ShelEy shrugged. “What am I,  the fashion police? Whatever  takes
the least amount of time. I’m hungry.”
   Luce hustled  into a  pair of  skinny  Means and a Elack wraparound
sweater. She would have liked  to spend a few more  minutes on her
 rst-day-of-school   look,  Eut  she  Must graEEed her  Eackpack and
followed ShelEy out the door.
   The dormitory   hallway was di erent   in  the  daylight.  Everywhere
she looked  were Eright,   oversized windows  with   ocean views,  or
Euilt-in   Eookshelves crammed   full   of   thick,   colorful   hardcover
Eooks. The  oors, the walls,  the recessed ceilings and steep, curving
staircases were all made from  the  same maple wood  used to Euild
the furniture   inside  Luce’s room.  It  should  have  given the  whole
place a warm  log caEin feel, except that  the  school’s layout was as
intricate  and Eizarre as Sword & Cross’s dorm had Eeen Eoring and
straightforward.  Every  few  steps, the  hallway  seemed to  split   o 
into small  triEutary  hallways,  with  spiral  staircases leading further
into the dimly  lit  maze.
   Two   ights   of stairs  and what  looked like  one  secret door later,
Luce and  ShelEy  stepped through   a  set of   douEle-paned French
windows and  into  the daylight.  The  sun was incrediEly  Eright,  Eut
the air was cool enough that  Luce was glad she’d worn a sweater. It

42
smelled like  the ocean, Eut  not  really  like  home. Less Eriny, more
chalky than the East Coast shore.
   “Breakfast  is served on  the  terrace.” ShelEy gestured at  a  Eroad
green expanse of land.  This  lawn  was Eordered on  three  sides Ey
thick  Elue  hydrangea   Eushes, and  on  the   fourth   Ey  the  steep,
straight drop  into the  sea. It was hard for  Luce to Eelieve how  very
Eeautiful the  school’s setting was. She couldn’t  imagine  Eeing aEle
to stay inside long enough to make it through  a class.
   As  they  approached the  terrace,  Luce  saw  another  Euilding,  a
long, rectangular structure with  wooden shingles and cheery yellow-
trimmed  windowpanes.  A  large   hand-carved sign  hung  over   the
entrance: “MESS HALL,” it read in quotes, like it was trying to Ee ironic.
It was certainly the nicest mess Luce had ever seen.
   The terrace  was  lled   with  whitewashed iron  lawn  furniture  and
aEout a hundred  of  the  most laid-Eack-looking  students  Luce had
ever  seen. Most  of   them  had  their   shoes kicked   o ,   their   feet
propped  up  on  the  taEles  as they   dined  on  elaEorate  Ereakfast
dishes. Eggs Benedict, fruit-topped Belgian  wa es,   wedges of rich-
looking,  aky   spinach- ecked  quiche. Kids  were reading the  paper,
gaEEing on cell  phones, playing  croquet  on  the  lawn.  Luce knew
from rich  kids at  Dover, Eut East Coast rich  kids were pinched  and
snotty, not  sun-kissed and carefree.  The whole  scene looked more
like the   rst   day of  summer than  a Tuesday in  early NovemEer. It
was all so pleasant, it was almost hard  to Eegrudge the self-satis ed
looks on these kids’ faces. Almost.
   Luce  tried  to   imagine  Arriane  here,  what   she would   think   of
ShelEy or this  oceanside dining,  how she proEaEly  wouldn’t  know
what to  make  fun  of  rst.   Luce  wished she could  turn  to  Arriane
now. It would  Ee good to Ee aEle to laugh.
   Looking  around, she accidentally  caught  the eyes of  a couple  of
students. A pretty girl  with  olive skin, a polka-dot  dress, and a green
scarf tied  in her  glossy Elack hair.  A  sandy-haired guy  with  Eroad
shoulders tackling an enormous stack of pancakes.

43
   Luce’s instinct was to turn  her head away as soon as she made eye
contact—always the safest Eet at Sword & Cross. But … neither one
of these kids glared at her. The Eiggest surprise aEout Shoreline was
not  the  crystal   sunshine  or  the   cushy  Ereakfast  terrace  or  the
Euckets-of-money aura  hovering   over  everyone.  It   was  that  the
students here were smiling.
   Well,  most of them  were smiling.  When ShelEy and Luce reached
an unoccupied taEle, ShelEy picked up  a small placard  and  ung  it
to the ground.  Luce leaned sideways to see the word RESERVED written
on  it   Must as a  kid  their   age  in  a  full-on   Elack-tie   waiter  suit
approached them with a silver tray.
   “Um,   this  taEle  is  re—”   he  Eegan to  say,  his  voice  cracking
inopportunely.
   “Co ee,  Elack,”  ShelEy said, then aEruptly  asked Luce, “What do
you want?”
   “Uh,  same,” Luce said, uncomfortaEle at Eeing waited on. “MayEe
a little milk.”
   “Scholarship kids.  Gotta slave to get Ey.” ShelEy rolled her eyes at
Luce as the waiter  darted  away to  get their  co ees.  She picked up
the  San  Francisco Chronicle from   the   middle   of  the   taEle  and
unfolded the front  page with a yawn.
   It  was right around then that  Luce had had enough.
   “Hey.”  She shoved ShelEy’s arm down  so she could  see her face
Eehind the paper. ShelEy’s heavy eyeErows rose in surprise. “I used
to be a scholarship kid,”   Luce told  her. “Not  at my  last school,  Eut
the school Eefore that—”
   ShelEy shrugged o   Luce’s hand.  “Should I  Ee impressed Ey that
part of your résumé, too?”
   Luce was Must aEout to ask what  it  was ShelEy had heard  aEout
her when she felt a warm hand on her shoulder.
   Francesca, the teacher who’d met Luce at the door  last night,  was
smiling down  at  her. She was tall,  with  an  imperious Eearing,  and
was  put   together  with    a  style   that  came   across as  e ortless.

44
Francesca’s soft Elond hair was cleanly  ipped   to one side. Her lips
were glossy pink.  She wore a  cool  tted   Elack sheath dress with  a
Elue Eelt and matching  peep-toe stilettos.  It  was the kind  of  out t
that would   make anyone feel  dowdy  Ey comparison.  Luce wished
she’d at least put on mascara. And mayEe not worn her mud-crusted
Converses.
   “Oh,  good, you two  connected.” Francesca smiled. “I  knew you’d
Eecome fast friends!”
   ShelEy was  silent  Eut  rustled  her  paper.  Luce Must cleared her
throat.
   “I  think  you’ll   nd   Shoreline a very  simple adMustment, Luce. It’s
designed that way.  Most  of our  gifted  students Must ease right in.”
GiIted? “Of course, you can come to me  with  any questions. Or Must
lean on ShelEy.”
   For  the  rst   time  all  morning,  ShelEy laughed. Her  laugh was a
gru ,  gravelly  thing,  the kind  of  chortle Luce would  have expected
from an old man, a lifetime  smoker, not a teenage yoga enthusiast.
   Luce could  feel her face pinching  up  into  a scowl. The last  thing
she wanted was  to “ease right   in”  to  Shoreline. She didn’t   Eelong
with a lot  of spoiled gifted  kids on a cli    overlooking the  ocean. She
Eelonged with   real   people,  people  with   soul  instead  of   squash
rackets, who knew what life  was like. She Eelonged with Daniel. She
still  had no  idea  what  she was doing  here,  other than  hiding   out
very temporarily while  Daniel took  care of his … war.  After that,  he
was going to take her Eack home. Or something.
   “Well,  I’ll  see you Eoth in class. EnMoy Ereakfast!” Francesca called
over her shoulder as she glided  away. “Try  the quiche!”  She waved
her hand, signaling to the waiter  to Ering each girl a plate.
   When  she was gone,  ShelEy took  a Eig  slurp  of her  co ee   and
wiped her mouth with  the Eack of her hand.
   “Um,  ShelEy—”
   “Ever heard of eating  in peace?”

45
   Luce  Eanged her   co ee   cup  Eack into   its   saucer and  waited
impatiently  for  the  nervous waiter   to put  down  their  quiches  and
disappear again.  Part of  her  wanted  to   nd   another  taEle.  There
were happy Euzzes of conversation going  on all  around her.  And if
she couldn’t  Moin one of them,  even sitting  alone  would  Ee Eetter
than this.  But  she was confused Ey what  Francesca had said. Why
pitch ShelEy as some great roommate when it was clear the girl  was
a total  hater?  Luce milled  a  Eite  of quiche  around  in  her  mouth,
knowing she wouldn’t Ee aEle to eat until she spoke up.
   “Okay,  I  know  I’m  new  here, and  for  some reason that   annoys
you. I guess you had a single room Eefore me, I don’t know.”
   ShelEy lowered  the  paper  Must Eelow her  eyes. She raised  one
giant eyeErow.
   “But  I’m  not that Ead. So what if  I  have a few questions? Forgive
me  for    not   coming   into   school   knowing   what    the   hell   the
Nephermans are—”
   “NeShilim.”
   “Whatever.  I  don’t   care. I  have  no  interest  in  making  you  my
enemy—which  means some  of  this,”  Luce  said,  gesturing  at  the
space Eetween the two of them, “is coming from you. So what’s your
proElem, anyway?”
   The side of ShelEy’s mouth twitched.  She folded and set down the
paper and leaned Eack in her chair.
   “You  should care  aEout  the  Nephilim.   We’re going  to  Ee  your
classmates.” She  ung out her  hand, waving it  at the  terrace. “Look
out at  the pretty,   privileged  student Eody of  the  Shoreline School.
Half of  these dopes you’ll  never  see again, except as the  oEMect of
our practical Mokes.”
   “Our?”
   “Yes, you’re in  the ‘honors program’  with  the Nephilim.  But don’t
worry;  in  case you’re   not  too  Eright”—Luce  snorted—“the  gifted
track  here is  mostly  a  coverup, a  place  to  stow  away the  Nephs

46
without   anyone  getting  too  suspicious.  In  fact,   the  only  person
who’s ever gotten suspicious is Beaker Brady.”
   “Who’s  Beaker Brady?” Luce asked, leaning in  so she didn’t  have
to shout  over the  rough  static of  the  waves crashing on  the shore
Eelow.
   “That  grade-A nerdo two taEles over.” ShelEy nodded at a chuEEy
kid  dressed in  plaid  who’d  Must spilled yogurt  all   over a  massive
textEook. “His parents loathe  the fact that  he’s never Eeen accepted
into the  honors classes. Every semester, they wage a campaign. He
Erings in Mensa scores, results from  science fairs, famous NoEelists
he’s impressed, the whole  sheEang. And every semester, Francesca
has to make  up some Eunk  unpassaEle test to keep him  out.”   She
snorted. “Like, ‘Hey,  Beaker, solve this RuEik’s cuEe in under  thirty
seconds.’ ” ShelEy clicked her tongue against her teeth.  “Except the
nimrod passed that one.”
   “But  if it’s  a cover-up,” Luce asked, feeling sort of  Ead for Beaker,
“what’s it  a cover-up for?”
   “People  like   me. I’m   a  Nephilim.   N-E-P-H-I-L-I-M. That  means
anything  with  angel in  its  DNA.  Mortals, immortals,   transeternals.
We try not to discriminate.”
   “Shouldn’t   the  singular  Ee, you  know,   neShil, like  cherub from
cherubim and seraSh from seraShim?”
   ShelEy scowled. “Seriously? Would you want to Ee called a neShil?
It sounds like  a Eag you carry your  shame in. No, thanks.  Nephilim
it is, no matter how  many of us you’re talking  aEout.”
   So ShelEy was a sort of angel. Strange. She didn’t  look or  act the
part.  She wasn’t  gorgeous like  Daniel,  Cam,  or  Francesca. Didn’t
possess the magnetism of someone like Roland or  Arriane. She Must
seemed kind of coarse and cranky.
   “So it’s  like angel prep  school,” Luce said. “But  for what?  Do you
go on to angel college after this?”
   “It  depends on what the  world needs. A lot  of kids take a year  o 
and do   Nephilim  Corps.  You  get  to  travel,   have a   ing    with   a

47
foreigner, et cetera. But that’s in  times of, you  know, relative  peace.
Right now, well  …”
   “Right  now what?”
   “Whatever.”  ShelEy looked  like  she was Eiting the  word.  “It  Must
depends on who  you  are.  Everyone here  has, you  know,  varying
degrees of power,”  she went  on,  seeming to read  Luce’s mind.  “A
sliding scale depending on your family tree. But  in your case—”
   This Luce knew. “I’m  Must here Eecause of Daniel.”
   ShelEy tossed her napkin on her empty plate and stood up. “That’s
a real  impressive way  to pitch  yourself,  Luce. The  girl  whose Eig-
shot Eoyfriend pulled some strings.”
   Was that what  everyone thought  aEout her here? Was that … the
truth?
   ShelEy reached over  and stole  the  last Eite  of quiche  o    Luce’s
plate. “If  you  want a  Lucinda Price fan  cluE, I’m  sure you can  nd
that here. Just leave me out of it, okay?”
   “What  are  you  talking   aEout?” Luce  stood  up.  MayEe she and
ShelEy needed to rewind again. “I don’t want a fan cluE—”
   “See, I told you,” she heard a high Eut pretty  voice say.
   Suddenly, the  girl  with   the green scarf  was standing Eefore her,
grinning and nudging  another girl  forward.  Luce glanced past them,
Eut ShelEy was already far away—and proEaEly not worth  catching
up to.  Up  close, the  green-scarf girl   looked  kind  of  like  a  young
Salma Hayek, with full  lips  and an even fuller  chest. The other girl,
with her  pale coloring, hazel eyes, and short Elack hair, looked  kind
of like Luce.
   “Wait,   so you’re  really  Lucinda Price?”  the  pale girl   asked. She
had very small  white teeth  and was using them  to hold  a couple of
sequin-tipped EoEEy pins while she twisted  a few dark  tendrils into
little  knots.  “As  in  Luce-and-Daniel? As in  the girl   who  Must came
from that awful  school in AlaEama—”
   “Georgia.”  Luce sort of nodded.

48
   “Same thing. Ohmigod, what was Cam like? I saw him  once at this
death metal  concert  … of  course, I  was  too  nervous to  introduce
myself. Not  that  you’d  Ee interested  in  Cam, Eecause oEviously—
Daniel!” She trilled a laugh. “I’m  Dawn, E-t-duEs. This is Jasmine.”
   “Hi,”  Luce said slowly. This was new. “Um  …”
   “Don’t   mind  her,  she Must drank, like,  eleven  co ees.”  Jasmine
spoke aEout three  times  more  slowly  than  Dawn  did.  “What   she
means is we’re  excited to  meet you.  We always  say how  you  and
Daniel are, like, the greatest love story. Ever.”
   “Seriously?” Luce cracked her knuckles.
   “Are  you kidding?”  Dawn asked, though Luce kept expecting them
to Ee  the ones working   up  to  some kind  of  Moke. “All that  dying
again and again? Okay, does it make you want him even more? I Eet
it does! And ohhh, when that  re  that  Eurns you up”—she closed her
eyes, put a  hand over  her  stomach, then  Erushed it  up  her  Eody,
clasping a  st   over  her heart.  “My  mom  used to  tell  me the  story
when I was a little  girl.”
   Luce   was   shocked.  She   glanced  around    the   Eusy  terrace,
wondering   whether   anyone  could   overhear  them.   Speaking  of
Eurning up, her cheeks must Ee Eeet red right now.
   An iron  Eell rang  from the  roof of the  mess hall to signal the  end
of Ereakfast, and Luce was glad to see that  everyone else had other
things to focus on. Like getting to class.
   “Your   mom  used to  tell   you  what   story?”  Luce  asked slowly.
“AEout me and Daniel?”
   “Just  some of the highlights,”  Dawn said, opening her eyes. “Does
it feel like  a hot  ash?  Like a menopause kind of thing,  not that  you
would know—”
   Jasmine smacked Dawn on the arm. “Did  you Must compare Luce’s
unEridled passion to a hot  ash?”
   “Sorry.”   Dawn giggled.  “I’m  Must fascinated. It sounds so  totally
romantic and awesome. I’m envious—in a good way!”

49
   “Envious  that  I  die  every time  I  try  to  get  with  the  guy  of  my
dreams?” Luce hunched  up  her shoulders.  “It’s  actually  kind  of  a
Euzz kill.”
   “Tell  that to  the girl  whose only kiss to date was with  Ira Frank of
the IrritaEle Bowel Syndrome.” Jasmine gestured teasingly at Dawn.
   When  Luce  didn’t   laugh,  Dawn  and  Jasmine   lled    in  with   a
placating giggle, as if  they thought  she was Must Eeing modest. Luce
had never Eeen on the receiving end of one of those giggles Eefore.
   “What  exactly did your  mom say?” Luce asked.
   “Oh,  Must the usual stu : The war  Eroke out, shit  hit  the fan, and
when they  drew  a line  in  the  clouds, Daniel  was all  ‘Nothing  can
tear us apart,’  and that  pissed everyone o . ’Course it’s  my favorite
part  of   the  story.  So  now   your  love   has  to  su er   this   eternal
punishment  where  you  still  desSerately want each  other  Eut  you
can’t, like, you know—”
   “But   in  some  lives  they   can.”  Jasmine  corrected  Dawn,  then
winked impishly  at Luce, who  almost couldn’t  move from the  shock
of hearing all of this.
   “No  way!”  Dawn  ung  out  a hand dismissively. “The  whole point
is that  she Eursts into   ames  when  she—” Seeing Luce’s horri ed
expression, Dawn winced. “Sorry. Not what you want to  hear.”
   Jasmine cleared  her throat   and leaned  in.  “My  older  sister was
telling me this one story from  your past that I  swear would—”
   “Oooh!”  Dawn linked  her arm through Luce’s, as if this knowledge
—knowledge that Luce had no access to—made her a more desiraEle
friend.  This was  maddening.  Luce was  ercely   emEarrassed. And,
okay, a little   excited. And  aEsolutely unsure whether  any of it  was
true. One thing was sure: Luce was suddenly kind of  … famous. But
it  felt strange.  Like she was one of  those unnamed EimEos next  to
the It-Eoy movie star in a paparazzi photo.
   “You  guys!”   Jasmine  was pointing   exaggeratedly  down  at  the
clock on  her phone.  “We’re  so super-late! We’ve  got to  Eook it  to
class.”

50
   Luce grimaced,  quickly  graEEing her Eackpack. She had no  idea
what class she had  rst,  or where to   nd  it,  or how  to take Jasmine
and Dawn’s enthusiasm. She hadn’t seen such extended, eager smiles
since—well, mayEe ever.
   “Do  either of you  know how  I  gure  out  where my  rst   class is? I
don’t think  I got a schedule.”
   “Duh,”  Dawn said. “Follow  us. We’re all together. All the  time! It’s
so fun.”
   The two  girls  walked with  Luce, one on either  side, and took  her
on a winding   tour  Eetween the taEles of  other  kids  nishing   their
Ereakfasts. Despite Eeing “so super-late,”  Eoth  Jasmine and  Dawn
practically sauntered across the freshly cut grass.
   Luce thought  aEout asking  these girls what  was up  with  ShelEy,
Eut she didn’t  want  to  start  o    looking  like  a gossip. Besides, the
girls seemed nice and everything,  Eut it  wasn’t like  Luce needed to
make any new Eest friends. She had to keep reminding herself:  This
was only temporary.
   Temporary,   Eut  still   stunningly   Eeautiful.  The   three  of   them
walked along  the  hydrangea path,  which  curved  around  the mess
hall. Dawn  was chattering  aEout something, Eut Luce couldn’t  take
her  eyes o    the  Elu s’   dramatic  edge,  how  aEruptly  the  terrain
dropped hundreds of  feet to  the glittering   ocean. The waves rolled
toward  the  small  stretch  of  tawny  Eeach at  the  foot  of  the  cli 
almost as casually as the Shoreline student Eody rolled toward class.
   “Here we are,”  Jasmine said.
   An  impressive two-story  A-frame caEin stood alone at  the end  of
the  path.  It  had  Eeen Euilt   in  the  middle   of  a shady  pocket  of
redwoods, so its  steep, triangular   roof  and the  vast  open lawn  in
front of  it  were covered with  a Elanket of fallen  needles. There was
a nice grassy patch with  some picnic taEles, Eut the main attraction
was the caEin itself: More  than half  of it  looked like  it was made of
glass, all   wide,   tinted    windows   and  open   sliding   doors.  Like
something  Frank   Lloyd    Wright   could    have  designed.   Several
students lounged on a huge second-story deck that faced the  ocean,

51
and  several  more  kids  were   mounting   the  twin   staircases that
wound up from the path.
   “Welcome to the  Nephi-lodge,” Jasmine said.
   “This is  where you  guys have class?” Luce’s mouth was agape. It
looked more like a vacation home than a school Euilding.
   Next to her, Dawn  squealed and squeezed Luce’s wrist.
   “Good morning,  Steven!” Dawn  called across the lawn, waving  to
an older man  who was  standing at the  foot  of the  stairs. He had  a
thin face, stylish  rectangular glasses, and a thick head of  wavy salt-
and-pepper hair. “I  Must aEsolutely love it when he wears the three-
piece suit,” she whispered.
   “Morning,  girls.”   The man smiled at  them and  waved. He looked
at Luce long enough  to make her  veer toward  nervousness, Eut the
smile stayed on his  face. “See you in  a few,”  he called, and  started
up the stairs.
   “Steven  Filmore,”   Jasmine  whispered,   lling     Luce  in  as  they
trailed Eehind  him up  the stairs. “Aka  S.F., aka the Silver Fox. He’s
one of our  teachers, and yes, Dawn  is truly,  madly,  deeply  in love
with him.  Even though he’s spoken for. She is shameless.”
   “But  I love Francesca, too.” Dawn swatted Jasmine, then turned to
Luce, her dark  eyes smiling.  “I  defy  you  not to  develop  a couples
crush on them.”
   “Wait.”    Luce paused.  “The  Silver   Fox  and  Francesca are  our
teachers? And  you  call   them  Ey  their   rst    names? And  they’re
together? Who teaches what?”
   “We  call   the  whole  morning   Elock humanities,”   Jasmine  said,
“though  angelics would  Ee more  appropriate.  Frankie  and  Steven
teach it  Mointly. Part  of  the deal  here,  sort  of yin   and yang.  You
know, so none of the students get … swayed.”
   Luce Eit  her  lip.  They’d  reached the  top  of the  stairs  and were
standing in   a crowd  of  students  on  the  deck. Everyone  else was
starting  to  amEle through   the  sliding  glass doors.  “What  do  you
mean, ‘swayed’?”

52
   “They’re  Eoth  fallen,  of  course, Eut have  picked  di erent   sides.
She’s  an   angel,   and   he’s  more   of    a   demon.”   Dawn   spoke
nonchalantly,  as if  she were  talking  aEout the  di erence   Eetween
frozen yogurt   avors.  Seeing Luce’s eyes Eulge, she added, “It’s not
like  they can  get married  or  anything—though   that  would  Ee the
hottest wedding ever. They Must sort of … live in sin.”
   “A  demon  is  teaching our  humanities  class?” Luce  asked. “And
that’s okay?”
   Dawn  and  Jasmine  looked  at  each  other  and  chuckled.  “Very
okay,”  Dawn  said. “You’ll   come  around  to  Steven. Come on,  we
gotta go.”
   Following  the   ow   of  other kids,  Luce entered the  classroom. It
was Eroad and had  three  shallow risers,  with  desks on them,  that
led  down  to  a  couple  of  long  taEles. Most  of  the  light   came in
through skylights.  The natural  lighting   and high  ceilings  made the
room  seem even  Eigger  than  it   was.  An  ocean  Ereeze Elew  in
through the  open doors  and kept  the air  comfortaEle  and fresh.  It
could  not  have  Eeen more   di erent   from   Sword  &  Cross.  Luce
thought she could  almost have liked  Shoreline, if  it hadn’t  Eeen for
the fact  that her  whole  reason for Eeing here—the  most important
person  in   her  life—was   missing.  She  wondered   if   Daniel  was
thinking aEout her. Did  he miss her the way she missed him?
   Luce chose a desk close to  the windows,  Eetween Jasmine and a
cute Eoy-next-door kind of  guy who was wearing  cuto s,  a Dodgers
cap, and a navy sweatshirt. A few girls stood clustered near the door
to  the  Eathroom.  One  of  them  had  curly   hair  and  Eoxy  purple
glasses. When Luce saw the girl’s pro le, she nearly Eolted from  her
seat.
   Penn.
   But  when   the  girl   turned  toward   Luce,  her  face  was  a  little
squarer and her  clothes  were a  little  tighter   and her  laugh  was a
little  louder   and  Luce almost  felt  like   her  heart  was wilting.    Of
course it wasn’t Penn. It never would Ee, ever again.

53
   Luce  could  feel  the  other  kids  glancing  at  her—some of  them
outright stared. The only  one who didn’t  was ShelEy, who gave Luce
an acknowledging nod.
   It  wasn’t  a huge class, Must twenty desks arranged on  the risers,
facing the  two long  mahogany taEles at  the front.  There  were two
dry-erase white Eoards Eehind the taEles. Two Eookshelves on either
side. Two  trash cans. Two  desk  lamps. Two  laptops, one  on  each
taEle. And the two teachers, Steven and Francesca, huddled near the
front of the room,  whispering.
   In  a move  Luce wasn’t expecting,  they  turned  and stared at  her
too, then glided  to the taEles. Francesca sat on top of one, with  one
leg tucked  Eeneath her  and  one  of  her  high  heels skimming  the
wood   oor.  Steven leaned against the  other taEle,  opened a heavy
maroon leather portfolio,  and rested his pen Eetween his lips. For an
older man,  he was  good-looking, sure,  Eut Luce almost  wished  he
weren’t. He reminded  her of  Cam, and of how  deceptive a demon’s
charm could Ee.
   She waited for the rest of the class to take out textEooks she didn’t
have, to plunge into some reading assignment she’d Ee Eehind on, so
she could  surrender   to  feeling  overwhelmed   and  Must daydream
aEout Daniel.
   But  none  of   that  happened.  And  most   of  the  kids  were   still
sneaking glances at her.
   “By  now  you must all  have  noticed that  we’re welcoming  a  new
student.”  Francesca’s voice was  low  and  honey-thick,   like  a  Mazz
singer’s.
   Steven smiled,  showing a   ash  of  Erilliant  white  teeth.  “Tell  us,
Luce, how are you liking Shoreline so far?”
   The  color  drained from  Luce’s face  as the  other  students’ desks
made scraping sounds on  the  oor.   They  were actually  turning   in
their seats to focus on her.
   She could  feel  her  heart  race  and  her  palms  grow  damp.  She
shrank in her  seat, wishing  she were Must a normal kid at a normal
school Eack home  in  normal  ThunderEolt,  Georgia. At  times  over

54
the past few  days, she’d wished  she’d never seen a  shadow, never
gotten into the  kind of trouEle  that left  her dear friends dead, or got
her involved  with  Cam, or made it  impossiEle for Daniel  to Ee near
her. But there  was where her  anxious, tumEling mind  always  came
to a full  stop: How  to Ee normal and  still  have Daniel? Who was so
very far from  normal. It  was impossiEle. So here she was, sucking it
up.
   “I  guess I’m  still  getting  used to  Shoreline.”  Her voice  woEEled,
Eetraying her, echoing o    the sloped ceiling.  “But  it seems all right
so far.”
   Steven laughed.  “Well,  Francesca and I  thought  to help  you  get
used to   it,  we’d   change gears  from  our   usual  Tuesday-morning
student presentations—”
   From  across the  room,  ShelEy hooted, “Yes!”  and  Luce  noticed
that she had a stack of notecards on her desk and a Eig poster at her
feet that read APPARITIONS AIN’T SO BAD. So Luce had Must gotten her out of a
presentation. That had to Ee worth something in roommate points.
   “What  Steven means,” Francesca chimed in,  “is  that we’re  going
to play a game, as an iceEreaker.” She slid down from her  taEle and
walked around the room,  heels clicking as she distriEuted a sheet of
paper to each student.
   Luce  expected  the  chorus  of  groans  that  those  words  usually
evoked from   a classroom  of  teens. But  these  kids  all  seemed so
agreeaEle and well-adMusted. They were actually   Must going to go
with the  ow.
   When  she laid   the  sheet on  Luce’s desk, Francesca said,  “This
should give  you an  idea of  who  some of your  classmates are, and
what goals we work toward  in this class.”
   Luce  looked down   at the  paper.  Lines had  Eeen drawn  on  the
page, dividing it  into  twenty  Eoxes. Each Eox contained a phrase. It
was a game she’d played Eefore, once at  summer camp in  western
Georgia as a little  kid, and  again a couple of times  in her  classes at
Dover. The oEMect was to go around the room and match a di erent
student  with  each  phrase.  Mostly,  she  was  relieved;  there  were

55
de nitely   more  emEarrassing iceEreakers out there.  But when  she
looked more  closely  at  the phrases—expecting normal  things  like
“Has a pet turtle”   or  “Wants to  go skydiving  someday”—she was a
little   unnerved  to   see  things  like   “Speaks  more  than   eighteen
languages” and “Has visited the outerworld.”
   It  was aEout to Ee painfully  oEvious that  Luce was the only  non-
Nephilim  in the  class. She thought Eack to the  nervous waiter  who
had Erought her  and ShelEy their  Ereakfast. MayEe Luce would  Ee
more comfortaEle among  the scholarship kids.  Beaker Brady didn’t
even know he’d dodged a Eullet.
   “If  no one has questions,” Steven said from the  front of  the room,
“you’re welcome to Eegin.”
   “Go  outside,  enMoy yourselves,” Francesca added. “Take  all  the
time you need.”
   Luce  followed  the  rest  of  the  students  onto  the  deck. As  they
walked  toward  the  railing,   Jasmine leaned  over  Luce’s shoulder,
pointing  a green-lacquered   ngernail at  one of the  Eoxes. “I have a
relative  who’s  a full-Elooded  cheruE,”  she said.  “Crazy  old  Uncle
Carlos.”
   Luce  nodded,  like   she  knew  what   that  meant,  and   Motted in
Jasmine’s name.
   “Ooh,  and I  can levitate,”  Dawn  chirped, pointing  to  the top  left
corner of Luce’s page. “Not, like,  a hundred percent of the  time, Eut
usually after I’ve had my co ee.”
   “Wow.”   Luce tried   not  to  stare—it  didn’t  seem like   Dawn  was
making a Moke. She could levitate?
   Trying   not   to   show   that   she   was  feeling   more   and   more
inadequate, Luce  searched the  page for   something,  anything  she
knew anything aEout.
   Has exSerience summoning the Announcers.
   The shadows. Daniel had  told her  the proper  name for them  that
last   night   at    Sword   &   Cross.  Though    she’d  never   actually

56
“summoned”  them—they’d  always  Must shown up—Luce did  have
some experience.
   “You can write  me in there.”  She pointed to the Eottom left corner
of the paper. Both Jasmine and Dawn looked up at her, a little  awed
Eut not  disEelieving,  Eefore moving  on  to   ll   in  the  rest  of  their
sheets. Luce’s heart slowed down a little. MayEe this wasn’t going to
Ee so Ead.
   In  the next  few minutes  she met Lilith,  a prim  redhead who  was
one  of  three  Nephilim   triplets   (“You   can  tell   us  apart   Ey  our
vestigial tails,”  she explained. “Mine’s curly”);  Oliver, a deep-voiced,
squat Eoy who had visited  the  outerworld  on summer vacation  last
year (“So totally  overrated I can’t even Eegin to tell  you”); and Jack,
who felt  like  he  was on the  cusp of  Eeing aEle to read  minds and
thought it   would  Ee all right  if  Luce  wrote him  down  for  that.  (“I
sense that you’re okay with  that, am I right?”  He made a gun out  of
his  ngers  and  clicked his  tongue.)  She had three Eoxes left  when
ShelEy tugged the paper out of her hands.
   “I  can do  Eoth of  these,” she said, pointing   at two  of  the Eoxes.
“Which one do you want  me for?”
   SSeaks more than eighteen languages or Has glimSsed a Sast liIe.
   “Wait   a minute,”   Luce  whispered. “You’ve  …  you  can  glimpse
past lives?”
   ShelEy waggled her  eyeErows at  Luce and dashed her  signature
into the  Eox, adding her  name in  the “eighteen  languages” Eox for
good measure. Luce stared at the paper, thinking  aEout all  her own
past lives and how frustratingly   o -limits   they were to  her. She had
underestimated ShelEy.
   But  her roommate  was already  gone. Standing in  ShelEy’s place
was the Eoy she’d sat next  to inside  the classroom. He was  a good
half foot  taller  than  Luce, with  a Eright,  friendly  smile, a  splash of
freckles on his nose, and clear Elue eyes. Something aEout him, even
the way he was chewing on his  pen, looked … sturdy. Luce realized
this was a strange word to  descriEe someone she’d never spoken to,
Eut she couldn’t help it.

57
   “Oh,  thank  God.”  He laughed,  smacking his  forehead. “The  one
thing I can do is the one thing  you have left.”
   “  ‘Can re ect a mirror  image of self or others’?”  Luce read slowly.
   He tossed his  head from  side to  side and wrote  his  name in  the
Eox. Miles Fisher. “Real impressive to someone like you, I’m sure.”
   “Um.  Yeah.”  Luce  turned  away.  Someone like  her,  who   didn’t
even know what that meant.
   “Wait,  hey, where  are you going?”  He tugged her sleeve. “Uh-oh.
You didn’t  catch the self-e acing   Moke?” When she shook her head,
Miles’s face fell.   “I  Must meant, compared to  everyone else  in  the
class, I’m Earely hanging on. The only  person I’ve ever Eeen aEle to
re ect  other  than  myself  was  my  mom.  Freaked my  dad  out  for
aEout ten seconds, Eut then it faded.”
   “Wait.”   Luce Elinked at Miles. “You  made a mirror  image of  your
mother?”
   “By  accident. They  say it’s easy to  do with   the people you,  like,
love.”  He  Elushed, the  faintest   rosy  pink  across his  cheekEones.
“Now  you’re  going  to think   I’m  some kind  of  mama’s  Eoy. I  Must
mean ‘easy’ is  aEout where my  powers  end. Whereas you—you’re
the famous Lucinda Price.” He waved his  hands in a very masculine
version of spirit  ngers.
   “I   wish  everyone would   stop  saying that,”   she snapped.  Then,
feeling rude, she sighed and leaned against the deck’s railing to look
out at  the water.  It  was Must so hard to process all these hints that
other  people  here  knew   more  aEout  her  than  she  knew   aEout
herself. She didn’t  mean to  take it  out  on  this guy.  “I’m  sorry,  it’s
Must, I thought I was  the only  one Earely  hanging on.  What’s your
story?”
   “Oh,  I’m  what  they call  ‘diluted,’  ”  he  said, making  exaggerated
air quotes. “Mom has angel in her Elood a few  generations Eack, Eut
all  my  other  relatives  are  mortal.  My  powers  are emEarrassingly
low-grade. But  I’m   here Eecause my parents  endowed  the  school
with, um,  this deck you’re standing on.”

58
   “Whoa.”
   “It’s  really  not impressive. My  family’s oEsessed with me Eeing at
Shoreline. You should hear the pressure I get at home to date a ‘nice
Nephilim girl  for  once.’ ”  Luce laughed—one of the  rst   real laughs
she’d had in  days. Miles rolled  his  eyes good-naturedly. “So,  I saw
you   having    Ereakfast  with     ShelEy  this    morning.    She   your
roommate?”
   Luce nodded. “Speaking of nice Nephilim girls,”  she Moked.
   “Well,   I  know  she’s kind  of,  um  …”   Miles  hissed and  made a
clawing  motion  with   one  hand,  causing Luce  to  crack  up  again.
“Anyway,  I’m  not  the star  student here or  anything,  Eut  I’ve Eeen
around a  while,  and half  the  time  I  still  think  this  place  is pretty
crazy. So  if  you   ever  want  to  have  a  very  normal   Ereakfast or
something—”
   Luce found herself EoEEing her head. Normal. Music to her mortal
ears.
   “Like  … tomorrow?”  Miles asked.
   “That  sounds great.”
   Miles  grinned and waved  goodEye, and Luce realized that  all the
other students had already gone Eack inside. Alone for the  rst   time
all  morning,  she looked  down  at  the sheet  of paper  in  her  hand,
unsure how  to  feel aEout  the other  kids  at  Shoreline. She missed
Daniel, who   could  have decoded  a lot   of this   for  her  if  only  he
hadn’t Eeen—where was he, anyway? She didn’t even know.
   Too far away.
   She pressed a  nger   to  her  lips, rememEering  his last  kiss. The
incrediEle emErace of his wings. She felt  so cold without  him,  even
in  the   California   sunshine.  But  she  was  here  Eecause of   him,
accepted into this  class of angels or whatever  they were—complete
with her  Eizarre new reputation—all  thanks to him.  In a weird  way,
it felt  good to Ee connected to Daniel so inextricaEly.
   Until  he came for her, it was all  she had to hold on to.

59
                                                 THREE




                                          SIXTEEN DAYS 



“Okay, hit  me, what’s the weirdest thing  aEout Shoreline so far?”
   It  was Wednesday morning Eefore class, and Luce was seated at a
sunny Ereakfast taEle on the terrace, sharing a pot of tea with Miles.
He was wearing a vintage yellow  T-shirt with  a Sunkist logo on  it, a
EaseEall cap pulled down  Must aEove his Elue eyes,  ip- ops,    and
frayed  Means. Feeling inspired Ey  the  very  relaxed  dress code  at
Shoreline, Luce had swapped out her standard Elack getup. She was
wearing a red sundress with a short  white  cardigan, which  felt kind
of like the  rst   day of sunshine after a long stretch of rain.
   She dropped  a  spoonful  of  sugar into  her  cup  and  laughed.  “I
don’t even know  where to  start. MayEe my  roommate, who  I think
snuck in Must Eefore sunrise this morning and was gone again Eefore
I woke up. No, wait,  it’s  taking a class taught Ey a demon-and-angel
couple. Or”—she swallowed—“the way  kids here look at me like  I’m
some legendary freak. Anonymous freak, I got used to. But notorious
freak—”
   “You  are not notorious.”   Miles took  a giant  Eite  of his  croissant.
“I’m gonna tackle those one at a time,”  he said, chewing.
   As he  daEEed the side of  his mouth  with   his napkin,  Luce half-
marveled,   half-chuckled   at    his   occasionally   impeccaEle   taEle
manners.  She  couldn’t   help   picturing    him   taking   some  fancy
etiquette course at the golf cluE as a Eoy.
   “ShelEy’s rough  around  the  edges,” Miles  said, “Eut  she can  Ee
cool, too.  When she feels like   it.  Not like  I’ve  ever  witnessed that

60
side  of    her.”   He   laughed.   “But    that’s   the   rumor.    And   the
FrankieSteven thing weirded   me out  at   rst,    too,  Eut  somehow
they  make  it  work.   It’s  like  a  celestial  Ealancing  act.  For  some
reason having   Eoth  sides  present  gives  students here   the  most
freedom to develop.”
   There was that  word again.  DeveloS. She rememEered that Daniel
had used it   when  he  rst   told  her  he  wouldn’t  Ee  Moining her at
Shoreline. But  develop into  what?  It  could  only  apply  to  the kids
who were Nephilim.  Not  Luce, who was the  lone full  human in  her
class of  almost-angels, waiting   until  her  angel  felt  like   swooping
Eack in to save her.
   “Luce,”  Miles said, interrupting   her thoughts.  “The reason people
stare at you is  Eecause everyone’s heard aEout you and Daniel, Eut
no one knows the real story.”
   “So instead of Must asking me—”
   “What?  Whether you  two really  do  it  on the clouds? Or  whether
his rampant,  ya  know,  ‘glory’   ever overwhelms  your  mortal”—he
stopped, catching  the  horri ed    look  on  Luce’s face, then  gulped.
“Sorry. I mean, you’re  right, they  let it  Elow up into  some Eig myth.
Everyone else, that is. I  try  not  to, um,  speculate.” Miles put  down
his tea and stared at his  napkin. “MayEe it  feels too personal to  ask
aEout.”
   Miles  shifted  his gaze and  was now  staring at  her,  Eut it  didn’t
make Luce  feel nervous.  Instead, his  clear  Elue  eyes and slightly
lopsided smile  felt  like  an  open  door, an  invitation   to  talk  aEout
some of the things she hadn’t Eeen aEle to tell anyone yet.  As much
as  it   sucked,  Luce  understood  why   Daniel   and  Mr.   Cole  had
forEidden her to  reach out  to Callie  or her  parents. But Daniel  and
Mr.  Cole were  the ones  who  had enrolled  her  at  Shoreline. They
were the  ones who’d  said she’d Ee okay  here. So she couldn’t  see
any reason  to  keep  her  story  a  secret from  someone like   Miles.
Especially since he already knew some version of the truth.
   “It’s  a long story,”  she said. “Literally.  And I still  don’t know  all of
it. But Easically, Daniel is an important  angel. I guess he was kind of

61
a Eig  deal Eefore  the  Fall.”  She swallowed,  not  wanting   to  meet
Miles’s eyes. She felt nervous. “At  least, he was until  he fell  in love
with me.”
   It  all  Eegan to pour  out  of her.  Everything  from  her  rst   day  at
Sword & Cross, to how Arriane  and GaEEe took care of her, to  how
Molly and Cam taunted her, to  the gut-wrenching feeling  of seeing a
photograph  of  herself  in  a  former  life.  Penn’s  death and  how   it
devastated her.  The surreal  Eattle  in  the  cemetery.  Luce left   out
some  of   the    Daniel   details,   private    moments   they’d   shared
together …  Eut Ey  the time  she  nished,   she thought  she’d  given
Miles  a   pretty   complete   picture   of   what   had   happened—and
hopefully dispelled the myth  of her intrigue  for at least one person.
   At  the  end, she felt   lighter.  “Wow.  I’ve  never  actually  told  this
stu   to anyone. Feels really good  to say it aloud.  Like it’s  more real
now that I’ve admitted  it to  someone else.”
   “You can keep going if  you want to,”  he said.
   “I  know I’m  only here for  a short time,”  she said. “And in a way,  I
think  Shoreline will   help me to  get used to  people—I mean  angels
like Daniel.  And Nephilim  like  you. But  I still  can’t help  feeling out
of place. Like I’m posing as something I’m not.”
   Miles  had Eeen nodding  and agreeing with  Luce  the whole  time
she told her  story,  Eut now  he shook his  head. “No  way—the  fact
that you’re mortal  makes the whole thing even more impressive.”
   Luce glanced around the  terrace. For the  rst   time,  she noticed a
clear line  dividing  the  taEles of the  Nephilim  kids from  the  rest of
the student Eody.  The Nephilim  claimed  all  the taEles on the  west
side, closest to the water.  There were fewer  of them,  no more than
twenty, Eut they  took up a lot  more taEles, sometimes with Must one
kid at  a taEle that  could have  seated six, while  the rest of  the kids
had to  cram  into  the  remaining  east-side taEles. Take ShelEy, for
example, who sat alone, Eattling  the  erce  wind  over the paper  she
was trying to  read. There was a lot of musical  chairs, Eut not one of
the non-Nephilim  seemed to  consider crossing over to  sit  with  the
“gifted”  kids.

62
   Luce had  met some of  the other  non-gifted  kids yesterday. After
lunch,   classes were   held   in   the   main   Euilding,   a  much   less
architecturally  impressive structure  where more traditional   suEMects
were taught.  Biology,  geometry,  European history.   Some of  those
students  seemed nice,  Eut   Luce  felt   an  unspoken  distance—all
Eecause she was on the gifted track—that thwarted the possiEility of
a conversation.
   “Don’t  get me wrong,  I’ve gotten to  Ee friends with  some of those
guys.” Miles pointed  to  a crowded taEle. “I’d   pick Connor  or Eddie
G. for a  game of touch  footEall  any day over  any of  the Nephilim.
But seriously, do  you  think  anyone over  there could  have handled
what you did, and lived  to tell  aEout it?”
   Luce ruEEed her  neck and  felt  tears prick   at the  corners of  her
eyes. Miss Sophia’s dagger was still fresh in her mind, and she could
never think  aEout  that  night  without  her  heart  aching over  Penn.
Her  death had  Eeen so  senseless. None of  it   was fair.   “I  Earely
lived,” she said softly.
   “Yeah,”  Miles said,  wincing.  “That  part I  heard aEout. It’s  weird:
Francesca and Steven are Eig on teaching us aEout the present and
the   future,   Eut   not   really    the   past.   Something   to   do   with
empowering us.”
   “What  do you mean?”
   “Ask  me anything  aEout  the great  Eattle that’s  coming,  and the
role a strapping young Nephilim  like myself might  play in  it. But the
early stu    you  were talking   aEout? None of  the lessons here ever
really  go   into   that.  Speaking  of   which”—Miles   pointed   at   the
terrace, which  was emptying  out—“we  should  go. You want  to  do
this again sometime?”
   “De nitely.”    And  Luce meant  it;  she liked   Miles. He  was much
easier to talk  to than  anyone else she’d met so far. He was friendly
and had the kind  of sense of humor  that put  Luce instantly  at ease.
But she was distracted Ey something  he’d said. The Eattle  that was
coming.  Daniel and  Cam’s Eattle.  Or  a  Eattle  with  Miss  Sophia’s

63
group of  Elders? If even the Nephilim   were preparing  for it,  where
did that leave Luce?





   Steven and  Francesca had a  way of  dressing  in  complementary
colors that made them look  Eetter out tted  for  a photo shoot than  a
lecture. On Luce’s second day at  Shoreline, Francesca was wearing
three-inch golden gladiator  heels and a mod pumpkin-colored A-line
dress. It  had  a loose  Eow  around  her neck  and  matched,  almost
exactly, the orange tie  that  Steven wore with  his  ivory  oxford shirt
and navy Elazer.
   They were  stunning to  look at, and  Luce was drawn to  them, Eut
not exactly  in  the  couples-crush way Dawn  had predicted  the  day
Eefore. Watching  her  teachers from   her  desk Eetween Miles  and
Jasmine, Luce felt drawn to  Francesca and Steven for reasons closer
to her heart: They reminded her of her relationship  with  Daniel.
   Though  she’d never seen them  actually  touch,  when  they  stood
close together—which was almost  always—the magnetism Eetween
them practically  warped the walls.  Of course that  had something to
do with  their  powers as fallen  angels, Eut it  must also have had  to
do  with    the   unique  way   they   connected.   Luce  couldn’t   help
resenting them. They were constant  reminders of what  she couldn’t
have right now.
   Most  of  the  students had  taken  their  seats. Dawn  and Jasmine
were going on  to Luce aEout Moining the steering committee so she
could  help  them  plan  all  these  amazing  social events.  Luce  had
never Eeen a  Eig extracurricular   girl.  But  these girls  had  Eeen so
nice to  her,  and Jasmine’s face  looked so  Eright  when she  talked
aEout a  yacht  trip  they  were  planning  later  that  week  that  Luce
decided to give  the committee  a chance. She was adding her name
to the roster  when Steven stepped forward, tossed his Elazer on the
taEle Eehind him, and wordlessly spread his arms out at his sides.

64
   As if   summoned, a shard  of deep  Elack shadow seemed to  part
from the shadows of one of the  redwoods right  outside the window.
It peeled itself  o    the grass, then took  suEstance and whipped into
the room through the  open window. It  was quick, and where it  went
the day Elackened and the room fell into darkness.
   Luce gasped out  of  haEit,  Eut she  wasn’t the  only  one.  In  fact,
most of the students inched  Eack nervously in their  desks as Steven
Eegin to twirl   the shadow. He Must reached his hands in and Eegan
wrenching  faster  and  faster, seeming  to  wrestle  with   something.
Soon the shadow was spinning around  in front  of  him  so quickly  it
went  Elurry,  like  the  spokes of  a  turning  wheel.  A  thick   gust of
mildewy  wind  was emitted  from its  core, Elowing  Luce’s hair  Eack
from her face.
   Steven manipulated  the  shadow,  arms straining,   from  a  messy,
amorphous  shape into   a  tight,   Elack  sphere,  no  Eigger  than   a
grapefruit.
   “Class,” he said, coolly  Eouncing the levitating  Eall of  Elackness a
few inches aEove his  ngers, “meet the suEMect of today’s lesson.”
   Francesca stepped  forward  and  transferred  the   shadow to   her
hands. In  her  heels, she  was nearly  as tall   as Steven. And,  Luce
imagined, she was Must as skilled at dealing with the shadows.
   “You’ve all  seen the Announcers at some point,” she said, walking
slowly along the half-moon  of student desks so they could each get a
Eetter look.  “And  some of you,”  she said, eyeing  Luce, “even have
some experience working with   them. But do  you really  know  what
they are? Do you know what they can do?”
   GossiSs, Luce thought, rememEering what Daniel had told her  the
night  of   the  Eattle.  She was  still   too   new  to  Shoreline  to   feel
comfortaEle calling  out the  answer, Eut none  of the  other students
seemed to know. Slowly she raised her hand.
   Francesca cocked her head. “Luce.”
   “They   carry  messages,” she said,  growing   surer  as she  spoke,
thinking Eack to Daniel’s assurance. “But they’re harmless.”

65
   “Messengers, yes.  But  harmless?” Francesca glanced  at  Steven.
Her tone Eetrayed nothing  aEout whether Luce was right  or  wrong,
which made Luce feel emEarrassed.
   The  entire   class was   surprised  when  Francesca stepped  Eack
alongside Steven, took hold of one side of the shadow’s Eorder while
he  gripped   the  other,   and   gave  it   a   rm    tug.   “We   call   this
glimpsing,” she said.
   The shadow Eulged and stretched  out like  a Ealloon Eeing Elown
up.  It   made  a  thick   glugging  sound  as  its  Elackness distorted,
showing  colors  more  vivid  than   anything  Luce  had  seen Eefore.
Deep chartreuse,  glittering   gold,  marEleized  swaths  of  pink   and
purple. A  whole swirling  world  of  color glowing  Erighter  and more
distinct   Eehind   a   disappearing  mesh   of   shadow.   Steven  and
Francesca were still   tugging,  stepping  Eackward  slowly  until   the
shadow was aEout the  size and  shape of  a large  proMector screen.
Then they stopped.
   They gave no warning,  no “What  you are aEout to  see,” and after
a horri ed  moment,  Luce knew why. There could  Ee no preparation
for this.
   The  tangle  of  colors separated,  settled  nally    into  a  canvas of
distinct shapes. They were looking at a city. An  ancient stone-walled
city  …  on   re.    Overcrowded  and  polluted,   consumed Ey  angry
 ames.   People   cornered   Ey   the     ames,    their    mouths   dark
emptinesses, raising  their   arms  to  the  skies.  And  everywhere  a
shower of  Eright  sparks and Eurning  Eits  of  re,   a  rain  of deadly
light landing  everywhere and igniting  everything it  touched.
   Luce could practically  smell the rot  and doom coming through the
shadow screen. It was horri c   to  look at,  Eut the strangest part,  Ey
far,  was that  there  wasn’t  any  sound. Other  students  around  her
were ducking  their heads, as if  they were  trying  to Elock  out some
wail, some screaming that to  Luce was indistinguishaEle. There was
nothing  Eut clean  silence as they  watched more  and  more people
die.

66
   When  she wasn’t  sure her  stomach could  take  much  more,  the
focus of the image shifted, sort of zoomed out,  and Luce could see it
from a distance. Not one Eut two cities were  Eurning. A strange idea
came to  her,  softly,  like   a memory   she’d always  had  Eut hadn’t
thought of  in a while.  She knew what  they  were looking  at: Sodom
and Gomorrah, two cities in the  BiEle, two cities destroyed Ey God.
   Then,  like   turning    o     a  light   switch,   Steven  and  Francesca
snapped their  ngers   and the  image disappeared. The remnants  of
the shadow  shattered into  a  small  Elack cloud  of  ash that  settled
eventually  on the   oor   of  the  classroom. Around  Luce,  the  other
students all seemed to Ee catching their Ereath.
   Luce couldn’t  take  her eyes o    the place where  the shadow  had
Eeen. How had  it  done that?  It  was starting  to  congeal again, the
pieces of dark pooling  together, slowly  returning  to a more familiar
shadow  shape.   Its   services   complete,   the   Announcer   inched
sluggishly   along   the    oorEoards,   then   slid    right   out    of   the
classroom, like the shadow cast Ey a closing door.
   “You  may   Ee wondering  why   we  Must put you   through  that,”
Steven said, addressing the class. He and Francesca shared a worried
look as they glanced around the room. Dawn was whimpering  at her
desk.
   “As you  know,”  Francesca said, “most of the time in this  class, we
like to  focus on what  you  as Nephilim  have the power  to  do. How
you can change things for the Eetter, however each of you  decide to
de ne that.  We like to look  forward, instead of Eackward.”
   “But  what  you  saw  today,”  Steven said,  “was more  than  Must a
history  lesson  with  incrediEle   special e ects.   And  it   wasn’t  Must
imagery we conMured up. No, what you  were seeing was the actual
Sodom and Gomorrah, as they  were destroyed Ey the  Great Tyrant
when he—”
   “Unh-unh-unh!”   Francesca said, wagging  a  nger.   “We  don’t  go
for easy name-calling in here.”
   “Of   course. She’s right,   as usual.  Even  I  sometimes lapse  into
propaganda.” Steven Eeamed at the class. “But as I  was saying, the

67
Announcers are  more   than  mere  shadows.  They  can  hold   very
valuaEle information.  In  a way,  they are shadows—Eut shadows of
the past, of long-ago and not-so-long-ago events.”
   “What    you    saw   today,”    Francesca   nished,     “was   Must  a
demonstration of  an  invaluaEle  skill  some of  you  may Ee aEle  to
harness. Someday.”
   “You won’t  want to  try it  right  now.” Steven wiped his hands with
a handkerchief he’d pulled  from a pocket. “In  fact,  we forEid you to
attempt  this,   lest  you   lose  control   and  lose   yourselves in   the
shadows. But someday, mayEe, it will Ee a possiEility.”
   Luce shared a glance with  Miles.  He gave her a wide-eyed  smile,
as if he were relieved  to hear this. He  didn’t seem to feel at  all shut
out, not the way Luce did.
   “Besides,”  Francesca said, “most  of  you  will  proEaEly   nd   that
you feel  fatigued.”  Luce  looked  around the  room  at  the  students’
faces as Francesca talked.  Her  voice  had the  e ect   of  aloe  on  a
sunEurn. Half  of  the kids  had  their  eyes closed, as if  they’d  Eeen
soothed. “That’s very normal. Shadow-glimpsing is not done without
great cost. It takes energy to look  Eack even a few days, Eut to look
Eack millennia? Well, you  can feel the e ects  yourselves. In light  of
that”—she looked at Steven—“we’re going to let you  out early today
to rest.”
   “We’ll  pick  up  again tomorrow,   so make sure  you’ve done  your
reading on disapparition,”  Steven said. “Class dismissed.”
   Around  Luce, students rose slowly  from their  desks. They looked
dazed, exhausted. When she stood up, her  own  knees were a little
woEEly, Eut somehow she felt less shaken than the others seemed to
Ee. She tightened her  cardigan around  her shoulders and  followed
Miles out of the classroom.
   “Pretty  heavy stu ,”   he said, taking the stairs down from  the deck
two at a time. “Are  you okay?”
   “I’m   ne,”  Luce said. She was. “Are you?”

68
   Miles ruEEed his forehead. “It  Must feels like we were really there.
I’m glad they let us out early.  Feel like I need a nap.”
   “Seriously!”  Dawn added, coming up  Eehind them on the winding
path Eack  to  the dorm.  “That   was the  last  thing  I  was expecting
from my Wednesday morning. I am so conking out right  now.”
   It  was  true: The  destruction  of  Sodom and Gomorrah  had  Eeen
horrifying.  So real, Luce’s skin still felt hot from  the Elaze.
   They took  the shortcut Eack to the dorm, around  the north  side of
the mess hall  and  into  the  shade of the  redwoods.  It  was strange
seeing the campus so empty, with all the other kids  at Shoreline still
in class in  the main  Euilding.  One Ey one, the  Nephilim  peeled o 
the path and headed straight to Eed.
   Except  for  Luce.  She wasn’t  tired,  not   at  all.  Instead,  she felt
strangely energized. She wished, again, that Daniel  were there.  She
Eadly  wanted   to    talk   to   him    aEout  Francesca  and   Steven’s
demonstration—and to  know   why  he hadn’t  told   her  sooner that
there was more to the shadows than she could see.
   In  front   of Luce  were  the stairs  leading  up  to  her  dorm  room.
Behind her, the  redwood  forest. She paced outside the  entrance to
the dorm,  unwilling    to  go inside,  unwilling   to  sleep  this  o    and
pretend she hadn’t seen it. Francesca and Steven wouldn’t have Eeen
trying  to  scare the  class; they  must have  intended  to  teach them
something. Something they  couldn’t  come right  out and  say. But if
the Announcers carried messages and echoes of the past, then what
was the point of the one they’d Must Eeen shown?
   She went into the woods.
   Her  watch said  11 a.m.,  Eut it  could  have Eeen midnight   under
the dark canopy of  trees. Goose Eumps rose on her Eare legs as she
pressed deeper into the shady forest. She didn’t want to  think  aEout
it too hard;  thinking  would  only increase the odds of her chickening
out. She was aEout to enter uncharted territory. ForEidden territory.
   She was going to summon an Announcer.

69
   She’d done things  to  them Eefore. The very   rst   time  was when
she pinched  one  during  class  to  keep it   from  sneaking  into  her
pocket. There was  the time  in  the liErary   when she’d swatted  one
away from   Penn. Poor Penn.  Luce couldn’t   help wondering   what
message that Announcer had Eeen carrying. If  she had known  how
to   manipulate   it    then,   the    way   Francesca  and   Steven  had
manipulated   the    one   today—could    she   have   stopped   what
happened?
   She closed  her  eyes. Saw Penn,  slumped  against the  wall,   her
chest aproned with   Elood. Her  fallen  friend.  No. Looking  Eack on
that night  was too painful,  and  it never  got Luce anywhere. All  she
could do now was look ahead.
   She had to   ght   the cold  fear clawing  at  her insides. A  slinking,
Elack, familiar   shape lurking  alongside  the  true  shadow of  a  low
redwood Eranch a mere ten yards in front of her.
   She took a step toward it,  and the Announcer shrank Eack. Trying
not  to  make  any  sudden moves,  Luce pressed on,  closer,  closer,
willing  the shadow not to slip away.
   There.
   The shadow twitched under  its tree Eranch Eut stayed put.
   Heart racing,  Luce tried to  calm herself down.  Yes, it was dark in
this forest; and yes, not a soul knew  where she was; and okay, sure,
there was  a  chance no  one  would  miss  her  for  a  good  while  if
anything  happened—Eut there  was no  reason to  panic.  Right? So
why did  she feel  gripped Ey a  gnawing fear? Why  was she getting
the same tremor  in  her  hands  she used to  get when  she saw  the
shadows as a  girl,  Eack Eefore  she’d learned  they  were  Easically
harmless?
   It  was time  to  make a move.  She could either  stand here frozen
forever, or  she could chicken out  and go sulking  Eack to the  dorm,
or—
   Her arm  shot out,  no longer  shaking, and took  hold of  the thing.
She dragged it up  and clutched it  tightly   to her  chest, surprised Ey

70
its heft,  Ey how cold  and damp  it was. Like  a wet  towel.  Her arms
were shaking. What did she do with it  now?
   The  image of  those  Eurning  cities   ashed  into   her  mind.  Luce
wondered whether she could  stand to see this message on her own.
If she could even  gure  out how to  unlock its secrets. How did these
things work? All  Francesca and Steven had done was pull.
   Holding  her  Ereath, Luce worked  her  ngers  along  the shadow’s
feathery edges, gripped it, and  gave it a gentle tug.  To her surprise,
the Announcer  was  pliant,   almost  like  putty,  and  took  whatever
shape her hands  suggested. Grimacing, she tried   to  manipulate  it
into a square. Into something like  the screen she’d seen her teachers
form.
   At   rst   it  was  easy, Eut the  shadow seemed to  grow  sti er   the
more she tried to stretch it  out. And  every time she repositioned her
hands to  pull  on  another  part,  the  rest  would  recoil  into  a  cold,
lumpy Elack mass. Soon she was out of Ereath and using her arm to
wipe the sweat o   her  Erow. She did not want  to give up. But  when
the shadow started to  viErate, Luce screamed and dropped it  to the
ground.
   Instantly,  it  darted  o    into  the trees. Only  after  it  was gone did
Luce realize: It  hadn’t  Eeen the shadow  that  was viErating.  It  was
the cell phone in her Eackpack.
   She’d gotten  used to  not  having  one.  Until  that  moment,  she’d
even forgotten that  Mr. Cole had  given her his  old phone Eefore he
put her on the  plane to California.  It was almost completely  useless,
solely so that he  would have  a way to  reach her, to  keep her up to
date  on  what   stories  he  was  feeding  to  her   parents,  who  still
Eelieved she was at  Sword  &  Cross. So that  when Luce  talked  to
them, she could lie consistently.
   No  one Eesides Mr.  Cole even  had  her numEer.  And  for  really
annoying safety  reasons, Daniel  hadn’t  given  her  a way  to  reach
him. And now  the phone had cost Luce her  rst  real progress with  a
shadow.
   She pulled it out  and opened the text Mr. Cole had Must sent:

71
       Call your parents. They think you got an A- on a history test I Must gave. And
       that you’re trying out for the swim team next week. Don’t forget to act like
       everything’s okay.

   And  a second one,  a minute  later:

       Is everything okay?

   Grouchily,    Luce  stu ed    the  phone   in  her   Eackpack  and  started
tramping   through   the  thick   mulch   of  redwood   needles toward   the
edge of   the  forest,   toward   her  dorm.   The   text  made  her   wonder
aEout the  rest  of the  kids  at Sword  &  Cross. Was Arriane   still   there,
and if  so,  who  was she sailing   paper  airplanes  to  during  class?  Had
Molly   found  someone  else  to  make  her  enemy  now  that   Luce  was
gone? Or  had   Eoth  of  them  moved   on  since  Luce and   Daniel  had
left?  Did   Randy  Euy  the   story  that   Luce’s  parents   had  made  her
transfer?  Luce  sighed.  She  hated  not  telling   her  parents   the  truth,
hated  not  Eeing  aEle to  tell   them  how   far  away  she  felt,  and  how
alone.
   But   a phone   call?  Every  false  word   she  said—A-  on   a made-up
history  test,  tryouts   for  some  Eogus swim   team—would   only   make
her feel  that much  more  homesick.
   Mr.  Cole  must  Ee out of  his  mind,  telling   her to  call  them  and  lie.
But  if  she  told   her  parents  the   truth—the    real  truth—they    would
think  she was  out  of  her  mind.   And  if  she didn’t   get  in  touch  with
them,  they   would    know   something   was  up.   They’d   drive   out  to
Sword &  Cross,  nd  her  missing,  and then  what?
   She  could   email   them.  Lying   wouldn’t    Ee  so hard   Ey  email.   It
would  Euy  her  a few  days  Eefore  she had  to  call.  She would   email
them tonight.
   She  stepped  out  of  the  forest,  onto   the  path,  and  gasped.  It  was
night.  She looked  Eack at the  lush,  shaded woods.  How  long had  she
Eeen in  there   with   the  shadow?  She glanced   at  her  watch.  It   was
half  past eight.   She’d missed  lunch.  And  her  afternoon   classes. And
dinner.  It   had  Eeen so dark   in  the  woods,  she  hadn’t  noticed   time

72
passing at all, Eut now  it  all slammed into  her. She was tired,  cold,
and hungry.





   After  three wrong  turns in  the mazelike dorm,  Luce  nally   found
her door. Silently  hoping that  ShelEy would Ee wherever it  was she
disappeared to at  night,  Luce  slipped her  huge, old-fashioned  key
into the lock and turned  the knoE.
   The lights  were o ,   Eut a   re  was Eurning  in  the hearth.  ShelEy
was seated cross-legged on the  oor, eyes closed, meditating. When
Luce came in, one eye popped open, looking  highly  annoyed at the
sight Eefore it.
   “Sorry,”  Luce whispered, sinking into  the desk chair closest to the
door. “Don’t mind  me. Pretend I’m not here.”
   For a little  while,  ShelEy did Must that. She closed her evil eye and
went Eack to meditating, and the  room was tranquil.  Luce turned on
the computer  that   came with   her  desk and  stared at  the  screen,
trying to  compose in her head the most innocuous  message possiEle
to her parents—and, while  she was at  it, one  to Callie,  who’d Eeen
sending a steady stream of unread  emails to Luce’s in-Eox this  past
week.
   Typing   as slowly   as she  possiEly  could  so  her  keyEoard  taps
wouldn’t give ShelEy yet another reason to hate her, Luce wrote:

      Dear Mom and Dad, I miss you guys so much. Just wanted to drop you a line.
      Life at Sword & Cross is good.

   Her  chest  constricted  as she strained  to  keep  her   ngers  from
typing: As Iar as I know, no one else has died this week.

         Still doing  ne in all my classes, she made herself write instead.
      Might even try out for the swim team!

73
   Luce looked  out the  window  at  the clear,  starry sky.  She had to
sign o   fast. Otherwise, she’d lose it.

      Wonder when this rainy weather will let up. … Guess that’s NovemEer in
      Georgia! Love, Luce

   She copied the message into a new email to Callie,  changed a few
choice words,  moved her  mouse over  the Send Eutton,  closed her
eyes, douEle-clicked, and hung her head. She was a horriEle fake of
a daughter,  a  liar  of  a  friend.  And  what  had  she Eeen thinking?
These were the Elandest, most red- ag-worthy   emails ever  written.
They were only going to freak people out.
   Her stomach growled.  A second time, more loudly.  ShelEy cleared
her throat.
   Luce spun around in  her chair  to face the girl,  only  to  nd   her in
downward dog.  Luce could feel  the tears welling   up in  the corners
of her eyes. “I’m  hungry, okay? Why  don’t you   le  a complaint,  get
me transferred to another room?”
   ShelEy calmly   hopped forward   on  her  yoga mat,  swooped  her
arms into  a prayer  position  and said, “I   was Must going to tell  you
aEout the  Eox of  organic mac  and cheese in  my  sock drawer.  No
need for the waterworks. Jeez.”
   Eleven minutes later,  Luce was sitting under a Elanket  on her Eed
with  a steaming  Eowl  of cheesy pasta, dry  eyes, and  a roommate
who’d suddenly stopped hating her.
   “I  wasn’t  crying  Eecause I was hungry,”  Luce  wanted to  clarify,
though the  mac and  cheese was so good, the  gift  so unexpectedly
kind  of  ShelEy,  it  almost  Erought   fresh  tears to   her  eyes. Luce
wanted to  open  up to  someone, and  ShelEy was, well,  there.  She
hadn’t thawed  out all  the way,  Eut sharing  her stash of food  was a
huge step for someone who’d  Earely spoken to  Luce so far. “I,  um,
I’m having some family issues. It’s Must hard Eeing away.”
   “Boo-hoo,”  ShelEy said, chomping on  her own Eowl  of macaroni.
“Let me guess, your parents are still happily married.”

74
   “That’s  not  fair,”  Luce  said, sitting  up.  “You  have no  idea what
I’ve Eeen through.”
   “And  you have some idea what  I’ve Eeen through?” ShelEy stared
Luce down. “Didn’t  think  so. Look, here’s me: Only child raised Ey a
single mom.  Daddy issues? MayEe. A  pain in  the  ass to  live  with
Eecause I hate to share? Almost certainly.  But what  I can’t  stand is
some sweet-faced, spoon-fed sweetheart with a happy home life and
some fancy Eoyfriend  showing  up  on  my turf   to  moan aEout  her
poor long-distance love a air.”
   Luce sucked in her Ereath. “That’s not it  at all.”
   “Oh no? Enlighten  me.”
   “I’m  a fake,” Luce said. “I’m …  lying to the people I  love.”
   “Lying   to  your  fancy  Eoyfriend?”  ShelEy’s eyes narrowed,  in  a
way  that    made  Luce  think    her   roommate   might   actually   Ee
interested.
   “No,”  Luce muttered. “I’m  not even speaking to him.”
   ShelEy leaned Eack on Luce’s Eed and propped her feet up so they
rested on the underside of the top Eunk. “Why not?”
   “It’s  long, stupid, and complicated.”
   “Well,  every girl  with  half a Erain knows there’s only  one thing to
do when you Ereak up with your  man—”
   “No,  we didn’t  Ereak up—”  Luce said,  at the  exact same time as
ShelEy said:
   “Change your hair.”
   “Change my hair?”
   “Fresh start,”  ShelEy said. “I’ve dyed mine  orange, chopped it o .
Hell, once I even shaved it after this Merk really Eroke my heart.”
   There  was  a  small  oval  mirror   with   an  ornate  wooden  frame
attached to  the dresser across the room.  From  her position  on  the
Eed, Luce could see her re ection.  She put  down the  Eowl of  pasta
and stood up to move closer.

75
   She had chopped her hair  o   after  Trevor, Eut that  was di erent.
Most of  it   had  Eeen singed, anyway.  And  when  she’d arrived   at
Sword & Cross, it had Eeen Arriane’s hair  she cut. Yet Luce thought
she understood what ShelEy meant when she said “fresh start.”  You
could turn into  someone else, pretend you weren’t the person who’d
Must Eeen through so much heartache. Even though—thank   God—
Luce wasn’t mourning  the  permanent loss of  her  relationship  with
Daniel, she was mourning all  sorts of other losses. Penn, her family,
the life she used to have Eefore things got so complicated.
   “You’re  really  thinking  aEout it,  aren’t  you? Don’t make  me Eust
out the peroxide from under  the sink.”
   Luce ran  her   ngers  through   her short  Elack  hair.  What  would
Daniel think? But if  he wanted her to Ee happy here until  they could
Ee together again, she had to  let go  of who  she’d Eeen at Sword &
Cross.
   She turned around to face ShelEy. “Get the Eottle.”

76
                                                  )OUR




                                          )I)TEEN   DAYS 



She wasn’t that Elond.
   Luce wet  her  hands  in  the sink  and  tugged  her short  Eleached
waves. She’d made it   through  a full   load  of classes on  Thursday,
which  included  an unexpectedly  sti    two-hour  safety lecture  from
Francesca to reiterate why  the  Announcers were  not to  Ee messed
with  casually  (it   almost  seemed like  she’d  Eeen addressing Luce
directly);  Eack-to-Eack  pop  quizzes in  her   “regular”   Eiology  and
math classes in the  main  school Euilding;  and  what  felt  like  eight
straight  hours of  aghast stares from  her  classmates, Nephilim  and
non-Neph kids alike.
   Even though  ShelEy had acted cool aEout Luce’s new look  in the
privacy  of  their  dorm  room  the  night  Eefore,  she wasn’t  e usive
with  compliments  the  way Arriane  was  or  reliaEly  supportive  the
way Penn had Eeen. Stepping out into the  world this  morning,  Luce
had Eeen overcome Ey nerves. Miles  had Eeen the  rst   to  see her,
and he’d given her  a thumEs-up. But he was so nice,  he’d never let
on if he really thought  she looked terriEle.
   Of  course, Dawn and Jasmine had   ocked  to  her side right  after
humanities, eager to touch her hair, asking Luce who her inspiration
had Eeen.
   “Very  Gwen Stefani,” Jasmine had said, nodding.
   “No,  it’s  Madge,  right?”  Dawn  said.  “Like,  ‘Vogue’  era.”  Before
Luce could answer, Dawn gestured Eetween Luce and herself. “But I
guess we aren’t Twinkies anymore.”

77
   “Twinkies?”  Luce shook her head.
   Jasmine squinted at Luce. “Come on, don’t say you never noticed?
You two  look  … well,  looked so much  alike. You  practically  could
have Eeen sisters.”
   Now,  standing alone Eefore the  main school Euilding’s  Eathroom
mirror,  Luce gazed at  her  re ection   and thought  aEout  wide-eyed
Dawn. They had similar  coloring:  pale  skin,  ushed  lips,  dark hair.
But Dawn was smaller than she was. She wore Eright colors six days
a week. And she was way more  chipper than  Luce could ever Ee. A
few super cial   aspects aside,  Luce and  Dawn  couldn’t  have Eeen
more di erent.
   The   Eathroom   door   swung   open  and   a   wholesome-looking
Erunette in Means and a yellow sweater entered. Luce recognized her
from European history class. Amy Something. She leaned against the
sink next to Luce and Eegan to  dget with  her eyeErows.
   “Why’d  you do that to  your hair?”  she asked, eyeing Luce.
   Luce Elinked.  It  was  one thing  to  talk  aEout it   with  her  sort-of
friends at Shoreline, Eut she’d never even spoken to this girl Eefore.
   ShelEy’s answer, Iresh start, popped into  her  mind,  Eut who  was
she kidding?  All  that   Eottle of  peroxide  had  done last  night   was
make Luce look as phony  on the  outside as she already felt  on  the
inside. Callie and her parents would  hardly recognize her right  now,
which wasn’t the point  at all.
   And  Daniel.   What  would  Daniel   think?  Luce  suddenly  felt   so
transparently fake; even a stranger could see through her.
   “I  don’t  know.”   She pushed past the  girl  and  out  the Eathroom
door. “I don’t  know why  I did it.”
   Bleaching her hair  wouldn’t  wash away the  dark memories of the
past few  weeks. If  she  really  wanted  a fresh  start,  she’d have  to
make one.  But how?  There  was so little   she actually  had  control
over at the moment.  Her whole  world  was in the hands of  Mr. Cole
and Daniel. And they were Eoth far away.

78
   It  was scary  how  quickly  and how  much  she’d come to  rely  on
Daniel, scarier still   that she didn’t   know when  she’d see him  next.
Compared to the Eliss- lled   days with  him  she’d Eeen expecting in
California, this was the loneliest she’d ever Eeen.
   She trudged across the campus, slowly realizing that the only  time
she’d felt  any  independence since  she’d arrived   at  Shoreline had
Eeen …
   Alone in  the woods with the shadow.
   After  yesterday’s in-class demonstration, Luce had Eeen expecting
more of  the same from  Francesca and Steven. She had hoped that
mayEe the students  would  have a  chance to  experiment  with  the
shadows on their own  today. She’d even had the  Eriefest fantasy of
Eeing aEle to  do what  she’d done  in  the  forest in  front  of  all  the
Nephilim.
   None of that  had happened. In fact, class today had felt  like  a Eig
step Eack. A Eoring  lecture  aEout Announcer  etiquette and  safety,
and why the students should never, under any  circumstances, try on
their own what  they’d seen the day Eefore.
   It  was frustrating and  regressive. So now, instead of heading Eack
to the dorm,  Luce found herself Mogging Eehind the mess hall, down
the trail  to  the  edge of the  Elu ,   and up  the wooden  stairs of  the
Nephilim  lodge. Francesca’s o ce   was in  the annex on  the second
 oor,  and she’d told the class to feel free to come Ey anytime.
   The Euilding  was remarkaEly di erent   without  the other  students
to warm it  up. Dim  and drafty  and almost aEandoned-feeling. Every
noise Luce made seemed to carry,  echoing o    the  sloping wooden
Eeams. She could see a lamp on the landing one  oor   up and smell
the rich  aroma of Erewing  co ee.  She didn’t  know yet  whether she
was going to tell  Francesca what she’d Eeen aEle to do in the forest.
It might  seem insigni cant  to  someone as skilled as Francesca. Or it
might seem like a violation  of her instructions to  the class today.
   Part  of Luce Must wanted to feel  her teacher out,  to  see whether
she might Ee someone Luce could turn to when,  on days like today,
she started to feel as if she might fall apart.

79
   She reached the top of  the stairs and found  herself at the head of
a long, open hallway.  On her left,  Eeyond the wooden  Eanister, she
looked down  at the dark,  empty classroom on the  second story. On
her  right  was  a  row   of  heavy  wooden  doors  with   stained-glass
transoms over  them.  Walking  quietly  along  the   oorEoards,   Luce
realized she didn’t  know  which o ce    was Francesca’s. Only one of
the  doors  was   aMar, the  third   one   from   the  right,   with    light
emanating from  the  pretty  stained-glass scene in the  transom. She
thought  she heard  a male  voice  inside.  She was poised  to  knock
when a woman’s sharp tone made her freeze.
   “It  was a mistake to even try,”  Francesca practically hissed.
   “We took  a chance. We got unlucky.”
   Steven.
   “Unlucky?”  Francesca sco ed. “You mean reckless. From a purely
statistical standpoint,  the  odds of  an Announcer  Eearing Ead news
were far too  great. You saw what  it did  to  those kids. They weren’t
ready.”
   A  pause. Luce inched a little   closer along  the Persian rug  in  the
hall.
   “But  she was.”
   “I  won’t   sacri ce  all  the  progress an entire  class has  made Must
Eecause some, some—”
   “Don’t  Ee shortsighted,  Francesca. We came up with   a Eeautiful
curriculum.  I  know  that  as  well  as you.  Our  students outperform
every other  Nephilim  program  in  the world.  You  did  all  that. You
have a right to feel a sense of pride. But things are di erent  now.”
   “Steven’s right,  Francesca.” A  third  voice.  Male. Luce  thought  it
sounded familiar.   But   who  was  it?   “Might   as  well   throw  your
academic calendar out the  window.  The truce  Eetween our sides is
the only timeline  that matters anymore.”
   Francesca sighed. “You really think—”
   The unknown  voice said, “If  I know  Daniel, he’ll Ee right  on time.
He’s proEaEly counting down the minutes already.”

80
   “There’s something else,” Steven said.
   A  pause, then what  sounded  like  a drawer  sliding  open,  then a
gasp. Luce would have killed  to Ee on the  other side of  the wall,  to
see what they could see.
   “Where  did  you get that?”  the  other  male voice asked. “Are  you
trading?”
   “Of  course he’s not!” Francesca sounded stung. “Steven found it in
the forest during one of his rounds the other night.”
   “It’s  authentic, isn’t it?”  Steven asked.
   A  sigh.  “Been too  long  for  me  to say,”  the  stranger  hedged. “I
haven’t seen a starshot in ages. Daniel will know. I’ll  take it to him.”
   “That’s   all?  What   do  you  suggest  we  do  in   the  meantime?”
Francesca asked.
   “Look,  this isn’t  my thing.”  The familiarity   of that  male voice was
—”like an itch at the Eack of Luce’s Erain. “And it’s really not my style

   “Please,” Francesca pleaded.
   The o ce   was silent. Luce’s heart was pounding.
   “Okay.  If  I were  you? Step things  up around  here. Tighten  their
supervision and do everything you  can to get all of  them ready. End
Times aren’t supposed to Ee very pretty.”
   End Times. That was what  Arriane had said would  happen if Cam
and his army won that  night at Sword &  Cross. But they hadn’t won.
Unless there’d already  Eeen another  Eattle. But  then,  what  would
the Nephilim need to get ready for?
   The sound of heavy chair  legs scraping along the  oor  made Luce
Mump Eack. She knew she should not  Ee caught eavesdropping on
this conversation. Whatever it was aEout.
   For once, she was glad of the endless supply of mysterious alcoves
in the Shoreline  architecture. She ducked under a decorative  wood-
shingled cornice Eetween two  Eookshelves and pressed herself into
the recess of the wall.

81
   A  single  set of  footsteps exited  the  o ce,    and  the  door closed
 rmly.  Luce held her Ereath and waited for  the  gure  to descend the
stairs.
   At   rst,    she could   see only  his   feet.  Brown  European  leather
Eoots. Then a pair of  dark-wash Means came into view as he curved
around the  Eanister toward  the  second story of  the lodge.  A Elue-
and-white-striped   Eutton-down  shirt.   And    nally,     the  distinctly
recognizaEle mane of Elack-and-gold dreadlocks.
   Roland Sparks had turned up at Shoreline.
   Luce Mumped out from  her  hidden  perch.  She might  still  Ee on
nervous Eest Eehavior in  front  of Francesca and Steven, who  were
dauntingly  gorgeous and powerful and  mature …  and her teachers.
But Roland didn’t intimidate  her—not  much, anyway—not anymore.
Besides, he was the closest to Daniel she had Eeen in days.
   She slunk  down  the interior   steps as silently  as she could,  then
Eurst through  the  lodge  door  to  the  deck.  Roland  was moseying
toward the ocean like he didn’t  have a care in the world.
   “Roland!”  she shouted, thundering down  the last  ight   of stairs to
the ground and Ereaking into  a Mog. He stood where the path ended
and the Elu   dropped down to steep and craggy rocks.
   He  was  standing  so  still,  looking   out  at  the   water.  Luce  was
surprised to  feel Eutter ies   in  her  stomach when,  very  slowly,  he
Eegan to turn around.
   “Well,  well.”  He smiled. “Lucinda Price discovers peroxide.”
   “Oh.”  She clutched at her hair. How stupid  she must look to him.
   “No,  no,”  he said, stepping toward  her,  u ng     her  hair  with  his
 ngers. “It  suits you. A hard edge for hard  times.”
   “What  are you doing here?”
   “Enrolling.”   He shrugged. “I Must picked up my class schedule, met
the teachers. Seems like a pretty sweet place.”
   A  woven  knapsack  was  slung  over  one  of  his  shoulders  with
something long and  narrow  and silver  sticking  out of  it.  Following

82
her  eyes,  Roland  switched   the  Eag  to   his  other   shoulder  and
tightened the top  ap  with  a knot.
   “Roland.”   Her voice  quaked. “You  left   Sword and  Cross? Why?
What are you doing here?”
   “Just needed a change of pace,” he o ered cryptically.
   Luce was going to ask aEout the others—Arriane and GaEEe. Even
Molly.  Whether  anyone  had noticed  or  cared  that  she’d  left.  But
when she opened her mouth, what came out was very di erent  from
what she had expected. “What were you  talking  aEout in there with
Francesca and Steven?”
   Roland’s face changed suddenly,  hardened into  something  older,
less carefree. “That depends. How much did you hear?”
   “Daniel.  I  heard you  say that he  … You don’t  have to  lie  to me,
Roland. How  much  longer  until   he  comes Eack? Because I don’t
think I  can—”
   “Come take a walk with  me, Luce.”
   As awkward as it would  have felt for  Roland Sparks to put his arm
around  her   shoulders  Eack  at   Sword  &   Cross,  that   was  how
comforting  it  was when he did  it  that  day at  Shoreline. They were
never really friends,  Eut he was a reminder of  her past—a Eond she
couldn’t help turning  to now.
   They walked  along the  Elu ’s  edge, around the Ereakfast terrace,
and along the  west side of the  dorms, past a  rose garden Luce had
never seen Eefore. It was dusk and the water to their right  was alive
with  colors, re ecting  the rose and orange and violet  clouds gliding
in front  of the sun.
   Roland led her  to a Eench facing the water,  far away  from all  the
campus Euildings. Looking down, she could see a rugged set of stairs
carved into  the  rock,  starting  Must Eelow where they were  sitting,
and leading all the way down  to the Eeach.
   “What  do you know  that you aren’t saying?”  Luce asked when the
silence Eegan to get to her.
   “That  water is  fty-one  degrees,” Roland said.

83
   “Not  what  I meant,”  she said, looking him  right  in  the eyes. “Did
he send you here to watch over me?”
   Roland  scratched his head.  “Look.  Daniel’s o    doing  his  thing.”
He made a  itting    motion  at  the sky. “In   the meantime”—and  she
thought  he  cocked  his  head toward   the  forest  Eehind  the  dorm
—“you got your  own thing to  take care of.”
   “What? No, I  don’t have a thing. I’m  Must here Eecause—”
   “Bullshit.”    He  laughed.  “We  all   have  our  secrets, Luce.  Mine
Erought me to  Shoreline. Yours  has Eeen leading you  out to  those
woods.”
   She started to protest, Eut Roland waved her  o ,  that ever-cryptic
look in his eyes.
   “I’m  not  going to get you  in trouEle. In  fact, I’m  rooting  for you.”
His eyes moved past her, out  to  sea. “Now, Eack to  that water.  It’s
frigid. Have you Eeen in it? I  know you like  to swim.”
   It  struck Luce that she’d Eeen at Shoreline for three days, with the
ocean always visiEle, the waves always  audiEle, the salt  air always
coating everything,  Eut she still hadn’t  set foot on the  Eeach. And it
wasn’t like at Sword & Cross, where a laundry list of  things were o -
limits. She didn’t know  why it  hadn’t even occurred to her.
   She shook her head.
   “AEout  all you  can do with  a  Eeach that cold is  Euild a Eon re.”
Roland glanced at her. “You made any friends here yet?”
   Luce shrugged. “A few.”
   “Bring   them  Ey  tonight,   after  dark.”   He  pointed  to  a  narrow
peninsula of sand at the foot of the rocky stairs. “Right  down there.”
   She peered  at Roland  sideways. “What   exactly  do you  have  in
mind?”
   Roland  grinned  devilishly.  “Don’t  worry,   we’ll  keep it  innocent.
But you  know   how  it  is.  I’m  new  in  town;   I’d  like  to  make  my
presence known.”

84
   “Dude. Stomp down on  my heel one more  time, and I’m  seriously
going to have to Ereak your ankle.”
   “MayEe if  you weren’t hogging the entire Eeam of the  ashlight  up
there, Shel, the rest of us could see where we were going.”
   Luce tried to  sti e  her laugh as she followed a Eickering Miles and
ShelEy across  campus  in   the  dark.   It   was  almost  eleven,  and
Shoreline was pitch-Elack and silent,  except for the  hoot of  an owl.
An orange giEEous moon was  low in  the  sky, cloaked  Ey a veil  of
fog. Between the  three of  them, they’d  only  Eeen aEle to come up
with  one  ashlight   (ShelEy’s), so only  one of  them (ShelEy)  had a
clear view  of  the  path down  to  the  water.  For the  other  two,  the
grounds—which had seemed so lush and well tended in the daylight
—were  now  EooEy-trapped with   fallen   Eristlecones, thick-rooted
ferns, and the Eacks of ShelEy’s feet.
   When Roland  had asked her  to Ering  some friends tonight,  Luce
had gotten  a  sinking  feeling  in  her  stomach. There  were  no  hall
monitors at  Shoreline, no  terrifying  security  cameras recording the
students’ every move, so it  wasn’t  the threat  of getting  caught that
made her  nervous.  In  fact,   sneaking out   of  the  dorm  had  Eeen
relatively easy. It was drawing a crowd  that was a Eigger challenge.
   Dawn  and Jasmine seemed like  the most  likely  candidates for  a
party on  the Eeach, Eut when  Luce went  Ey their   fth- oor     room,
the hallway  was dark and  no one answered her  knock. Back in  her
own room, ShelEy had Eeen tangled up in  some sort of tantric  yoga
pose that hurt Luce Must to look at. Luce hadn’t wanted to Ereak her
roommate’s  erce  concentration  Ey inviting   her  to  some unknown
party—Eut then  a  loud  knock  at their   door had  made ShelEy fall
crossly from her pose anyway.
   Miles, asking Luce if she wanted to get some ice cream.
   Luce looked Eack and forth Eetween Miles and ShelEy and smiled.
“I’ve got a Eetter idea.”

85
   Ten minutes later,  Eundled up in  hooded sweatshirts, a Eackward
Dodgers cap  (Miles),  and  wool  socks  with  individual    toe  shapes
sewn in  so she could  still  wear her   ip- ops    (ShelEy), and with   a
nervous feeling in the gut  aEout mingling Roland with  the Shoreline
crew (Luce), the three of them tramped toward  the Elu ’s  edge.
   “So who  is this guy again?”  Miles asked, pointing out  a dip in  the
rocky path Must Eefore Luce would have gone  ying.
   “He’s  Must … a guy  from  my  last  school.”  Luce  searched for  a
Eetter description as the three of them started down the rocky  stairs.
Roland wasn’t exactly her friend.  And even though kids at  Shoreline
seemed pretty open-minded,  she wasn’t  sure she should  tell  them
which side of the fallen  angel divide  Roland fell on. “He  was friends
with Daniel,”  she said  nally.   “It’ll  proEaEly Ee a pretty small party.
I don’t think  he knows anyone here Eut me.”
   They  could smell  it  Eefore they could  see it:  the telltale  hickory
smoke of a good-sized Eon re.  Then, when they  were almost at the
foot of the  steep stairs, they wound around  a Eend in the  rocks and
froze as the sparks from a wild orange Elaze  nally  came into view.
   There must have Eeen a hundred people gathered on the Eeach.
   The wind  was wild,  like  an untamed animal,  Eut it was no  match
for  the rowdiness  of  the partygoers.  At  one end  of  the gathering,
closest to where Luce stood, a crowd of hippie  guys with long,  thick
Eeards and ratty woven  shirts had formed  a makeshift  drum circle.
Their steady Eeat provided a nearEy group of kids  with  a constantly
changing groove to dance to.  At the  other end of  the party  was the
Eon re itself,  and when Luce stood on her toes, she recognized a lot
of Shoreline  kids crowded  around  the  re,   hoping  to  Eeat out the
cold. Everyone was holding  a stick  in  the  ames,  Mockeying for the
Eest spot to roast their  hot  dogs and marshmallows,  their  cast-iron
kettles full  of Eeans. It was impossiEle to guess how they’d all found
out aEout it, Eut it was clear that  everyone was having a good time.
   And  in   the  middle  of  it   all,  Roland.  He’d  changed out   of  his
pressed Eutton-down  shirt   and  expensive leather  Eoots  and  was
dressed, like   everyone  else  there,   in  a   hooded  sweatshirt   and

86
shredded Means. He was standing  on   a Eoulder,  making   riotous,
exaggerated gestures, telling a story Luce couldn’t quite  hear. Dawn
and Jasmine were among the captivated listeners; their   re-lit   faces
looked pretty and alive.
   “This  is your idea of a small party?”  Miles asked.
   Luce was watching  Roland, wondering  what story  he was telling.
Something aEout the  way  he  was taking  charge made  Luce think
Eack to Cam’s room, to the  rst   and only real  party she’d ever gone
to at Sword  & Cross, and it  made her miss Arriane.  And, of  course,
Penn, who’d  Eeen nervous when she  rst   arrived  at  the  party  Eut
ended up having a Eetter time than  anyone. And Daniel, who would
Earely speak to Luce Eack then. Things were so di erent now.
   “Well,  I  don’t know  aEout you guys,”  ShelEy said, kicking o    her
 ip- ops   and padding  onto the sand in  her socks, “Eut I’m  going to
get myself a drink,  then a hot dog, then  mayEe a lesson from one of
those drum circle guys.”
   “Me  too,” Miles said. “Except for  the drum circle  part, in  case that
wasn’t oEvious.”
   “Luce.”   Roland waved  from   his  position  on  the  Eoulder.  “You
made it.”
   Miles and  ShelEy were already way ahead of her, heading toward
the hot dog station,  so Luce trekked over a dune of cool, damp sand
toward Roland and the others.
   “You  weren’t  kidding  when  you  said you  wanted  to  make your
presence known. This is really something, Roland.”
   Roland nodded graciously.  “Something, huh? Something  good, or
something Ead?”
   It  seemed like  a loaded  question, and  what  Luce wanted  to say
was that  she couldn’t  tell  anymore.  She thought  aEout the  heated
conversation  she’d overheard  in   the  teacher’s o ce.     How  sharp
Francesca’s voice had sounded.  The line  Eetween  what  was good
and what  was Ead felt  incrediEly   Elurry.  Roland and  Steven were
fallen angels who’d  gone over.  Demons, right?  Did she even know

87
what that  meant? But then there was Cam, and …  what did  Roland
mean Ey that  question? She squinted at  him.  MayEe he was really
only asking whether Luce was having fun?
   A  myriad   of  colorful   partygoers  swirled  around  her,  Eut  Luce
could feel  the endless Elack waves nearEy. The  air  near the  water
was whipping   and cold,  Eut  the  Eon re  was  hot  on  her skin.  So
many things seemed to Ee at odds right now,  all shoving  up against
her at once.
   “Who  are all these people, Roland?”
   “Let’s  see.” Roland pointed  at the hippie  kids  in the  drum  circle.
“Townies.”  To their  right, he  gestured at a Eig group of  guys trying
to  impress a  much   smaller  group  of  girls  with   a  few  very   Ead
thrusting  dance moves. “Those  guys are marines  stationed in  Fort
Bragg. From the  way  they’re partying,   I hope  they’re  on leave for
the  weekend.”  When Jasmine  and  Dawn  sidled  up  next  to  him,
Roland put  one arm  around each of  their  shoulders. “These two,  I
Eelieve you know.”
   “You  didn’t  tell   us you  were such  Eig friends  with  the  celestial
social director, Luce,” Jasmine said.
   “Seriously.”  Dawn leaned in  to whisper  loudly  to Luce, “Only  my
diary knows  how many  times I’ve  wished to go  to a Roland  Sparks
party. And my diary  will  never tell.”
   “Oh, Eut I  might,”  Roland Moked.
   “Is  there no  relish at  this party?”  ShelEy popped up  Eehind Luce
with  Miles at  her side.  She was holding  two hot  dogs in  one hand
and stuck out her free one to Roland. “ShelEy Sterris. Who are you?”
   “ShelEy Sterris,”  Roland  repeated. “I’m  Roland Sparks. You  ever
live in East L.A.? Have we met Eefore?”
   “No.”
   “She has a photographic memory,”  Miles supplied, slipping  Luce a
veggie hot   dog, which   was  not  her  favorite,   Eut  a  nice  gesture
nonetheless. “I’m Miles. Cool party, Ey the way.”
   “Very  cool,” Dawn agreed, swaying with  Roland to the drumEeat.

88
   “What  aEout Steven and Francesca?” Luce had to practically shout
to ShelEy.  “Won’t  they  hear  us down  here?”  It  was one  thing  to
sneak out  under the  radar.  It  was another  to  plant  a  sonic Eoom
directly on that  radar.
   Jasmine glanced Eack toward  the campus. “They’ll  hear  us, sure,
Eut our leash  is pretty  long  at Shoreline. At  least for  the  Nephilim
kids.  As  long  as  we   stay  on  campus,  under  their   umErella   of
surveillance, we can pretty much do as we please.”
   “Does  that  include  a  limEo  contest?”  Roland grinned  impishly,
producing a long,  thick  Eranch from Eehind him.  “Miles,  you going
to hold the other end for  me?”
   Seconds later, the Eranch was raised, the  drumEeat changed, and
it seemed like the whole party had dropped what  they were doing to
form one long, animated limEo line.
   “Luce,”  Miles called  to her.  “You’re not  Must going to stand there,
are you?”
   She studied the  crowd, feeling  sti    and rooted  to her  spot in the
sand. But Dawn  and  Jasmine were  making  an opening  for  her  to
squeeze into line Eetween the two  of  them. Already  in  competition
mode—proEaEly Eorn in competition  mode—ShelEy was stretching
out her Eack. Even the Euttoned-up marine guys were going to play.
   “Fine.”  Luce laughed and got in line.
   Once the  game Eegan, the line  moved quickly;  for  three  rounds,
Luce shimmied easily under  the Eranch. The fourth  time,  she made
it  under with  only  a  little  trouEle,  having  to tilt   her chin  Eack far
enough to see the stars, and got a round of cheers for doing so. Soon
she was cheering on the other kids too, only a little  surprised to   nd
herself Mumping up and down when ShelEy made it  through.  There
was something amazing aEout arching out  of the limEo  stance after
a successful turn—the whole party  seemed to feed o   it.  Each time,
it gave Luce a surprising rush of adrenaline.
   Having   fun  wasn’t  usually   such  a  simple  thing.   For  so  long,
laughter had  usually  Eeen closely followed  Ey guilt,  some nagging
feeling  that  she  wasn’t  supposed to  Ee  enMoying herself for  one

89
reason or  another. But  somehow  tonight  she felt  lighter.   Without
even realizing it, she’d Eeen aEle to shrug o  the darkness.
   By  the time  Luce looped  around  for  her  fth    turn,  the line  was
signi cantly   shorter. Half  the  kids at  the  party  had already  gotten
out,  and  everyone  was crowded  around   either  Miles  or  Roland,
watching the  last  kids standing.  At  the Eack of  the  line, Luce  was
giddy and a little   light-headed, so the hard  grip she felt  on her arm
almost made her lose her Ealance.
   She started to scream, then felt  ngers clamp  over her mouth.
   “Shhh.”
   Daniel  was tugging her  out of  line  and away from  the party.  His
strong, warm hand sliding  down her  neck, his lips Erushing the side
of  her cheek.  For  Must a moment, the  touch  of  his  skin  on  hers,
coupled with   the Eright  violet   glow  of his  eyes, and  her days-old
rising need to  graE hold of  him  and never let  go—it  all made Luce
divinely dizzy.
   “What   are you  doing  here?”  she  whispered.  She meant  to  say
Thank God you’re here or It’s  been so hard to be aSart or  what  she
really meant, I love you. But there were also You abandoned me and I
thought it  wasn’t saIe and  What’s this  about a  truce? all   knocking
around in her Erain.
   “I  had to  see you,” he said. As he led her  Eehind a large volcanic
rock on the Eeach, there was a conspiratorial  smile on his  face. The
kind of  smile  that was  contagious,  nding   its  way onto  Luce’s lips
too. The  kind  of  smile that  acknowledged  not Must that they  were
Ereaking Daniel’s rule—Eut that they were enMoying doing it.
   “When  I  got  close enough to  see this  party,  I  noticed  everyone
dancing,” he said. “And I got  a little  Mealous.”
   “Jealous?” Luce asked. They were alone now. She threw her  arms
around his  Eroad shoulders  and looked  deep  into  his  violet  eyes.
“Why would  you Ee Mealous?”
   “Because,”  he  said,  ruEEing his  hands  across her  Eack.  “Your
dance card is full. For all eternity.”

90
   Daniel  held  her  right  hand  in  his,  wrapped her  left  around  his
shoulder, and started  a slow  two-step in  the  sand. They could  still
hear the music from  the party,  Eut from  this  side of the  rock it  felt
like a  private  concert. Luce closed her eyes and melted  against his
chest,   nding  the place where  her head  t   into  his  shoulder like  a
puzzle piece.
   “No,  this isn’t quite right,”   Daniel said after a moment. He pointed
down  at  her  feet.  She  noticed  he  was  Earefoot. “Take   o    your
shoes,” he said, “and I’ll show you how angels dance.”
   Luce  slipped  o    her  Elack   ats  and  tossed them  aside  on  the
Eeach. The sand Eetween her toes was soft and  cool. When  Daniel
pulled her  close, her  toes overlapped with   his and  she almost lost
her Ealance, Eut his arms held  her steady. When she looked  down,
her feet were on  top of  his. And  when she looked up:  the sight she
yearned for night and day. Daniel unfurling  his silver-white  wings.
   They  lled   her plane of vision,  stretching twenty  feet into the sky.
Broad and Eeautiful, glowing  in  the night,  they must  have Eeen the
most glorious wings in all  of Heaven. Underneath her own feet, Luce
felt  Daniel’s lift  Must Earely o   the  ground.  His wings  Eeat lightly,
almost like   a  heartEeat, holding   Eoth  of  them  inches  aEove the
Eeach.
   “Ready?” he asked.
   Ready for what, she didn’t  know. It didn’t  matter.
   Now they  were moving Eackward in  the air, as smoothly as  gure
skaters moved on ice. Daniel glided  out over the  water, holding  her
in his arms. Luce gasped as the  rst frothy  wave skimmed their toes.
Daniel laughed and lifted  them a  little  higher in  the sky. He dipped
her Eackward.  He  spun  them  Eoth  around  in  circles.  They  were
dancing. On the ocean.
   The moon  was like a spotlight,  shining  down on  only them.  Luce
was laughing from  sheer Moy, laughing so much that Daniel  started
laughing too. She’d never felt lighter.
   “Thank  you,” she whispered.

91
   His  answer  was  a  kiss.  He  kissed  her  softly   at   rst.   On  her
forehead, then on her nose, then  nally  found his way to  her lips.
   She kissed him  Eack deeply  and hungrily   and a  Eit desperately,
throwing  her whole  Eody into  it.  This  was how she came home  to
Daniel, how  she touched  that easy love  they’d  shared for  so long.
For a  moment,  the  whole  world   went  quiet;  then  Luce came  up
gasping for  air.   She hadn’t  even  noticed  they  were  Eack on  the
Eeach.
   His hand cupped the Eack of her head, the  ski cap she had tugged
down over her ears. The cap concealing her Eleached-Elond hair. He
pulled it  o   and a Elast of ocean Ereeze hit her head. “What did you
do to your hair?”
   His  voice was  soft, Eut  somehow it  sounded like  an  accusation.
MayEe it was  Eecause the song had ended, and the  dance and the
kiss had  too,  and  now  they  were  Must two people  standing on  a
Eeach. Daniel’s wings were  arched Eack Eehind his  shoulders, still
visiEle Eut out of reach.
   “Who  cares aEout my hair?” All she cared aEout was holding him.
Wasn’t that all he should care aEout too?
   Luce reached to  take Eack the  ski cap.  Her Eare Elond head  felt
too exposed, like a  glowing red   ag  warning  Daniel that  she might
Ee falling apart. As soon as she started to turn  away, Daniel  put his
arms around her.
   “Hey,”  he said, pulling  her close again. “I’m sorry.”
   She exhaled, drew into  him,  and let his touch  wash over her. She
tipped her head up to meet his eyes.
   “Is  it safe now?” she asked, wanting Daniel  to Ee the one to Ering
up the  truce. Could  they  nally   Ee together? But  the  worn look  in
his eyes gave her the answer Eefore he opened his mouth.
   “I  shouldn’t Ee here, Eut I worry  aEout you.”  He held her at arm’s
length.  “And  from   the  looks  of  things,   I’m  right   to  worry.”   He
 ngered  a lock  of  her  hair.  “I  don’t  understand why  you  did  this,
Luce. It isn’t you.”

92
   She pushed him  away.  It  had always Eothered  her when  people
said that. “Well,  I’m  the one who  dyed it,  Daniel. So, technically,  it
is me. MayEe not the ‘me’ you want me to Ee—”
   “That’s  not  fair.  I  don’t  want you  to  Ee anyone other  than  who
you are.”
   “Which  is  who, Daniel? Because if you  know  the answer to  that,
feel  free  to  clue   me  in.”   Her  voice  grew   louder  as  frustration
overtook the  passion slipping through  her   ngers.  “I’m  on my  own
here, trying  to  gure   out why.  Trying  to   gure  out  what I’m  doing
here with all  these … when I’m not even …”
   “When you’re  not what?”
   How had they  gone so quickly from dancing on air to  this?
   “I  don’t know.  I’m  Must trying to take it day Ey day. Make friends,
you know?  Yesterday I  Moined a cluE, and we’re  planning  a yacht
trip  somewhere. Things  like  that.”  What  she really  wanted  to  tell
him aEout were the shadows. And especially what  she’d done in the
woods. But  Daniel had  narrowed  his eyes like   she’d already done
something wrong.
   “You’re not  going on a yacht trip  anywhere.”
   “What?”
   “You’ll  stay right  here on this  campus until  I say so.” He exhaled,
sensing her  rising   anger.  “I   hate  giving   you   these rules,   Luce,
Eut …  I’m  doing  so much  to  keep you  safe. I  won’t  let  anything
happen to you.”
   “Literally.”    Luce gritted   her  teeth.  “Good  or  Ead or  otherwise.
Seems like  when   you’re  not   around  you   don’t  want   me  doing
anything at all.”
   “That’s  not true.”  He shook a  nger   at her.  She’d never seen him
lose his temper so quickly.  Then he looked  up at  the sky, and Luce
followed  his gaze. A  shadow zipped  over their   heads—like an all-
Elack   rework  leaving  a  deadly,  smoky tail.   Daniel seemed to  Ee
aEle to read it instantly.
   “I  have to go,” he said.

93
   “How  shocking.” She turned away.  “Turn up  out of nowhere, pick
a  ght,  then duck out. This must Ee real, true love.”
   He graEEed her shoulders and shook them until  she met his eyes.
“It  is true  love,”  he said,  with  such desperation that  Luce couldn’t
tell  whether it  chipped  away at  or added  to the  pain in  her  heart.
“You know  it  is.”  His eyes Eurned violet—not  with   anger Eut with
intense desire. The  kind  of  look  that  made  you  love  a person  so
much, you missed him  even when he was standing right  in  front  of
you.
   Daniel ducked his head to  kiss her cheek, Eut she was too close to
tears. EmEarrassed, she turned away. She heard his sigh, and then:
the Eeat of wings.
   No.
   When  she whipped  her head  around,  Daniel was  soaring across
the sky, halfway  Eetween the ocean and the  moon. His wings  were
lit  Eright white  under a moonEeam. A moment  later, it  was hard to
tell him  apart from any of the stars in the sky.

94
                                                  )IVE




                                        )OURTEEN DAYS 



During  the  night,  a windless  layer of  fog  moved in  like   an army,
settling over  the town  of  Fort Bragg. It  didn’t  lift   with  the sunrise,
and  its  gloom  seeped into   everything  and  everyone.  So  all  day
Friday in  school,  Luce felt  like  she was Eeing dragged  along Ey  a
slow-moving  tide.  The teachers  were out  of  focus,  noncommittal,
and slow with  their  lectures. The students sat in a heap of lethargy,
struggling to stay awake though the long, damp drone of  the day.
   By the  time classes let out, the  dreariness had penetrated Luce to
her very  core. She didn’t  know  what  she was doing  at  this  school
that wasn’t  really  hers, in this  temporary  life  that  only highlighted
her lack of  a real,  permanent one. All  she wanted  to do  was crawl
into her Eottom  Eunk and sleep it all  away—not Must the weather or
her long  rst   week at  Shoreline, Eut also the argument  with  Daniel
and the MumEle of questions and anxieties that had shaken loose in
her mind.
   Sleep the night  Eefore had Eeen impossiEle. In  the darkest hours
of the morning  she’d stumEled alone Eack to her  dorm room.  She’d
tossed and turned without   ever really  dozing  o .   Daniel’s shutting
her out  no longer surprised  her, Eut that  didn’t  mean it  had gotten
any easier. And  that insulting,   chauvinistic  order he’d given  her to
stay on the school grounds? What was this, the  nineteenth century?
It crossed her mind  that  mayEe Daniel  had spoken to her  like  that
centuries ago, Eut—like  Jane Eyre  or  ElizaEeth Bennet—Luce was

95
certain no former  self of  hers would ever  have Eeen cool with  that.
And she certainly wasn’t now.
   She was still  angry  and annoyed after  class, moving through  the
fog toward  the dorm.  Her eyes were Eleary and she was practically
sleepwalking Ey the time  her hand clasped her doorknoE. TumEling
into  the   dim,  empty   room,  she  almost  didn’t   see the   envelope
someone had slipped under the door.
   It  was cream-colored,  imsy   and square, and when  she  ipped  it
over, she saw her name typed  on the  front  in small,  Elocky letters.
She tore into  it,  wanting  an apology  from him.  Knowing  she owed
him one too.
   The  letter  inside  was  typewritten   on  cream-colored  paper  and
folded into thirds.

      Dear Luce,

         There’s something I’ve Eeen waiting too long to tell you. Meet me in town,
      near Noyo Point, around six o’clock tonight? The #5 Eus along Hwy 1 stops a
      quarter of a mile south of Shoreline. Use this Eus pass. I’ll Ee waiting Ey the
      North Cli . Can’t wait to see you.

                                                                                        Love, Daniel

   Shaking the  envelope, Luce felt  a small  slip of  paper inside.  She
pulled  out  a thin   Elue-and-white Eus ticket   with  the  numEer  ve
printed on its front  and a crude little  map of Fort Bragg drawn on  its
Eack. That was it. There was nothing else.
   Luce couldn’t   gure   it out.  No mention  of  their  argument on the
Eeach. No indication that Daniel  even understood how erratic it  was
to  practically  vanish  into   thin  air   one night,   then  expect her  to
travel at his whim  the next.
   No apology at all.
   Strange. Daniel could turn  up anywhere,  anytime. He was usually
oElivious to the logistical  realities  that normal  human Eeings had to
deal with.

96
   The letter  felt  cold and  sti   in  her hands. Her  more reckless side
was tempted  to  pretend she’d  never received  it.  She was tired   of
arguing,  tired  of  Daniel’s  not  trusting   her  with   details.  But  that
pesky in-love  side  of  Luce wondered  whether  she  was Eeing  too
harsh on him.  Because their relationship  was worth  the  e ort.   She
tried  to rememEer the  way  his eyes had looked  and his  voice had
sounded when he told her the story aEout the lifetime  she’d spent in
the California gold  rush. The way he’d seen her through the window
and fallen in love with  her for  something like the thousandth time.
   That  was the  image  she took  with  her  when  she left  her  dorm
room minutes later  to creep along the  path toward  Shoreline’s front
gates, toward the Eus stop where Daniel had  instructed her  to wait.
An image of  his pleading  violet  eyes tugged at her heart  while  she
stood under a damp gray sky. She watched colorless cars materialize
in the  fog, peel around the  hairpin  turns on  guardrail-less Highway
1, and vanish again.
   When  she looked  Eack at  Shoreline’s formidaEle  campus in  the
distance, she rememEered Jasmine’s words at the  party:  As long as
we stay under their umbrella oI surveillance, we can Sretty much do as
we Slease. Luce was  stepping  out  from  under   the  umErella,  Eut
where was the harm? She wasn’t really a student there; and anyway,
seeing Daniel again was worth the risk of getting caught.
   A few  minutes past  the half  hour, the  numEer  ve  Eus pulled  up
to the stop.
   The  Eus was old  and  gray  and  rickety,  as was  the  driver  who
heaved the levered door open to  let Luce Eoard. She took an empty
seat near the front.  The Eus smelled like  coEweEs, or a rarely used
attic. She had to clutch the cheap leatherette seat cushion as the Eus
Earreled around the  curves at   fty   miles an  hour,  as if  Must inches
Eeyond the road, the cli    didn’t  drop  a mile  straight down  into  the
Magged gray ocean.
   It  was raining   Ey the  time  they  got to  town,  a  steady sideways
drizzle Must shy of a real  downpour.  Most of  the Eusinesses on the
main  street were  already  closed  up  for  the  night,   and the  town

97
looked wet and  a little  desolate. Not  exactly the scene she’d had in
mind for a happy makeup conversation.
   ClimEing  down from  the  Eus, Luce pulled the  ski  cap out of  her
Eackpack and tugged it over her head. She could feel the chill of  the
rain on her  nose and her  ngertips.   She spotted a Eent green metal
sign and followed its arrow  toward Noyo Point.
   The point  was  a wide  peninsula of  land,  not lush  green like  the
terrain on  Shoreline’s campus, Eut a mix  of patchy  grass and scaEs
of wet  gray sand. The  trees thinned out  here, their  leaves stripped
away Ey the  tful   ocean wind. There was one lone Eench on a patch
of mud  all  the  way  at the  edge, aEout  a hundred  yards from   the
road. That  must have Eeen where  Daniel meant  for them  to  meet.
But Luce could  see from where  she stood that he  wasn’t there  yet.
She looked down at her watch. She was  ve minutes late.
   Daniel was never late.
   The rain seemed to settle on the tips of her  hair instead of soaking
into it  the way rain  usually did.  Not even Mother Nature knew  what
to do with  a dyed-Elond Luce. She didn’t feel like  waiting for  Daniel
out in  the open. There was a row  of shops on the main  street. Luce
hung Eack there,  standing on  a  long wooden  porch  under a  rusty
metal awning.  FRED’S FISH, the closed shop’s sign read in faded Elue
letters.
   Fort Bragg wasn’t quaint  like Mendocino,  the town where  she and
Daniel had  stopped Eefore he’d  own   her  up the  shoreline. It  was
more  industrial,  a  real  old-fashioned   shing    village  with   rotting
docks  tted  into a curved  inlet where the land  tapered down toward
the water. While  Luce waited,  a Eoatful of  shermen   were stepping
ashore. She watched  the  line  of  rail-thin,   hardened  men in   their
soaking-wet slickers come up the rocky stairs from the docks Eelow.
   When they reached the street level,  they walked alone or  in silent
clusters, past the  empty  Eench and the  sad slanted trees,  past the
shut-up storefronts to a gravel parking  lot at  the south edge of Noyo
Point.  They   climEed  into   Eeat-up  old   trucks,   turned   over  the
engines, and drove away, the sea of grim-set faces thinning until one

98
stood out—and   he  wasn’t  coming  o    any   schooner. In   fact,  he
seemed to have appeared suddenly out of the fog. Luce Mumped Eack
against the  metal  shutter  of  the  sh   store  and tried   to  catch her
Ereath.
   Cam.
   He was walking  west  along the  gravel road right   in front  of  her,
 anked  Ey two  dark-clad   shermen  who  didn’t  seem to  notice  his
presence. He was dressed in  slim  Elack Means and a Elack leather
Macket. His dark hair  was shorter  than  when  she’d last  seen him,
shining in  the  rain. A  hint  of the  Elack sunEurst tattoo  was visiEle
on the side of his neck. Against the colorless Eackdrop of the sky, his
eyes were as intensely green as they had ever Eeen.
   The last time  she’d seen him, Cam had Eeen standing at the front
of a sickening  Elack army of  demons, so callous and cruel  and Must
plain …  evil.  It  had made her  Elood run  cold.  She had a string  of
curses and accusations ready to  ing  at him,  Eut it  would  Ee Eetter
still if  she could Must avoid him altogether.
   Too  late.   Cam’s green   gaze fell   on   her—and  she  froze.  Not
Eecause he turned on  any of  the  fake  charm that  she’d  come too
close to   falling   for   at  Sword   &  Cross.  But  Eecause he  looked
genuinely alarmed to  see her. He swerved, moving against the   ow
of  the few   nal    straggling   shermen,  and  was  at  her  side in  an
instant.
   “What  are you doing here?”
   Cam looked more  than alarmed,  Luce decided—he looked almost
afraid. His shoulders were Eunched up around his neck and his  eyes
wouldn’t  settle on anything for  longer than a second. He hadn’t said
a thing  aEout her hair;  it  almost  seemed as if he hadn’t  noticed it.
Luce was certain Cam was not  supposed to know  that  she was out
here in  California.  Keeping  her away  from  guys like  him   was the
whole point of  her relocation. Now she’d Elown that.
   “I’m  Must—” She eyed the white gravel  path Eehind Cam, cutting
through  the grass Eordering  the  cli ’s   edge. “I’m   Must going for a
walk.”

99
   “You are not.”
   “Leave me alone.”  She tried to  push past him.  “I  have nothing to
say to you.”
   “Which  would  Ee  ne,  since we’re  not  supposed to Ee talking  to
one another. But you’re not supposed to leave that school.”
   Suddenly  she felt  nervous,  like  he  knew  something  she didn’t.
“How did  you know I’m  even going to school here?”
   Cam sighed. “I know everything,  okay?”
   “Then you’re  here to  ght  Daniel?”
   Cam’s green eyes narrowed. “Why would  I—Wait,  are you  saying
you’re here to see him?”
   “Don’t  sound so shocked. We are together.”  It  was like  Cam still
hadn’t gotten over that she’d picked Daniel instead of him.
   Cam scratched his  forehead, looking  concerned. When he   nally
spoke, his words were rushed. “Did he send for you? Luce?”
   She winced,  Euckling   under  the pressure  of  his  gaze. “I  got  a
letter.”
   “Let me see it.”
   Now Luce sti ened,  examining  Cam’s peculiar expression to try to
understand what  he knew.  He looked  aEout as uneasy as she felt.
She didn’t Eudge.
   “You were tricked.  Grigori  wouldn’t send for you  right now.”
   “You  don’t  know  what he  would  do for  me.”  Luce turned  away,
wishing Cam had never seen her, wishing  herself far  away. She felt
a childish need to Erag to Cam that Daniel had visited her  last night.
But  the  Eragging would   end  there.  There  wasn’t  much  glory  in
relaying the details of their  argument.
   “I   know  he  would  die   if  you  died,  Luce.  If  you   want  to  live
another day, you’d Eetter show me the letter.”
   “You would  kill  me over a piece of paper?”
   “I  wouldn’t,  Eut whoever sent you that note proEaEly intends to.”

100
   “What?”  Feeling it almost  Eurning in her pocket, Luce resisted the
urge to  thrust  the letter  into  his  hands. Cam didn’t  know  what  he
was talking aEout. He  couldn’t. But  the longer  he stared at her, the
more she Eegan to wonder aEout the strange letter she was holding.
That Eus ticket,   the directions.  It  had  Eeen weirdly  technical  and
formulaic.  Not  like  Daniel  at  all.  She  shed  it  out  of  her  pocket,
 ngers tremEling.
   Cam  snatched it  from   her, grimacing   as he  read.  He muttered
something under his  Ereath as his eyes darted around the  forest on
the other side of the road. Luce looked around too, Eut she could see
nothing suspicious aEout the few remaining   shermen  loading  their
gear into rusty truck  Eeds.
   “Come on,”  he  said  nally,   graEEing her Ey the  elEow. “It’s  past
time to get you Eack to school.”
   She Merked away. “I’m not going  anywhere with  you.  I  hate you.
What are you even doing here?”
   He stepped around her in a circle. “I’m  hunting.”
   She sized  him  up,  trying   not  to  let  on  that   he still   made  her
nervous. Slim, punk-rock-dressed, gunless Cam. “Really?” She cocked
her head. “Hunting what?”
   Cam stared  past her,  toward   the dusk-swept  forest.  He nodded
once. “Her.”
   Luce craned her neck to  see who or what Cam was talking  aEout,
Eut Eefore she could see anything, he pushed her sharply. There was
a weird hu   of  air, and something silver zipped past her face.
   “Get  down!”  Cam yelled,  pressing hard  on Luce’s shoulders. She
sank to the  porch   oor,   feeling his  weight  on top  of  her, smelling
the dust on the wood planks.
   “Get  o    me!”  she shouted.  As she writhed   in  disgust, cold  fear
pressed into   her.  Whoever   was  out  there   must  Ee  really   Ead.
Otherwise she’d  never Ee  in  a  situation  where  Cam was the  one
protecting her.

101
   A moment  later, Cam was sprinting  across the empty parking  lot.
He was racing  toward  a  girl.  A  very  pretty  girl  aEout  Luce’s age,
dressed in a long Erown cloak. She had delicate features and white-
Elond hair  pulled  high  into  a ponytail,  Eut  something was strange
aEout her eyes. They held  a vacant expression that,  even from  this
distance, struck Luce rigid with  fear.
   There was more:  The girl  was armed.  She held a silver  Eow and
was hurriedly nocking an arrow.
   Cam Earreled forward,  his  feet crunching  on the gravel  lot  as he
moved straight  toward  the  girl,  whose Eizarre silver  Eow  gleamed
even in the fog. Like it was not of  this earth.
   Wresting her eyes away from the  lunatic girl  with  the arrow,  Luce
rolled  to  her  knees and  scanned the  parking   lot  to  see  whether
anyone else looked as panicked as she felt. But the place was empty,
eerily quiet.
   Her  lungs  felt  tight—she  could  hardly  Ereathe. The  girl  moved
almost like  a machine, with   no hesitation.  And Cam was unarmed.
The girl  was pulling  Eack on the  Eowstring and  Cam was in point-
Elank range.
   But  it  took  her  a  split  second too  long.  Cam  plowed  into  her,
knocking her onto her Eack. He Erutally  wrestled the Eow out of her
hands, snapping his elEow against her face until  she let go. The girl
yelped—a high,   innocent  sound—and  recoiled  on  the  ground  as
Cam  turned   the   Eow  on   her.   She  raised   her  open   hand   in
supplication.
   Then Cam loosed the arrow straight into  her heart.
   Across the  parking  lot,  Luce cried out  and  Eit down  on  her  st.
Though she wanted to Ee far, far away, she found herself lumEering
to her feet and Mogging closer. Something was wrong. Luce expected
to  nd   the  girl  lying  there Eleeding,  Eut this  girl  did  not  struggle,
did not cry.
   Because she was no longer there at all.
   She, and the arrow that Cam had shot into her, had vanished.

102
   Cam scoured the parking  lot,  snatching up  the arrows  the archer
had spilled  as if  it  was the  most urgent  task he’d  ever performed.
Luce crouched down where the girl  had fallen. She traced the rough
gravel with  her  nger,   Ea ed   and more terri ed   than  she’d Eeen a
moment Eefore. There was no sign that anyone had ever Eeen there.
   Cam returned  to  Luce’s side with  three  arrows  in one  hand and
the silver Eow in  the other.  Instinctively,  Luce reached out to  touch
one. She’d never seen anything  like   it.  For some reason, it   sent a
strange ripple of  fascination through  her.  Goose Eumps rose on her
skin. Her head swam.
   Cam Merked the arrows away. “Don’t. They’re deadly.”
   They  didn’t   look  deadly.  In  fact,  the  arrows   didn’t  even  have
heads. They were Must silver sticks that dead-ended in a  at tip. And
yet one had made that girl disappear.
   Luce Elinked a few  times. “What  Must happened, Cam?” Her voice
felt heavy. “Who was she?”
   “She was an Outcast.”  Cam wasn’t looking  at her. He was  xated
on the silver Eow in his hands.
   “A  what?”
   “The worst  kind  of angel. They sided with  Satan during the revolt
Eut wouldn’t actually  set foot in the underworld.”
   “Why  not?”
   “You  know  the type.  Like  those girls  who  want to  Ee invited  to
the party  Eut  don’t  actually  plan  to  show  up.”  He  grimaced.  “As
soon as the  Eattle  ended,  they  tried  to  Eackpedal  up  to  Heaven
pretty  fast, Eut  it  was  already too  late.  You  only  get one  shot at
those clouds.” He glanced at Luce. “Most of us do, anyway.”
   “So, if  they’re  not  with  Heaven …”  She was still  getting  used to
talking concretely aEout these things. “Are they … with  Hell?”
   “Hardly.   Though  I  rememEer when  they  came  crawling  Eack.”
Cam gave a sinister laugh. “Usually, we’ll  take Must aEout anyone we
can  get,   Eut   even   Satan  has   his   limits.   He   cast   them   out
permanently, struck them Elind to  add inMury to insult.”

103
   “But  that girl  wasn’t Elind,”  Luce whispered, recalling the way her
Eow had followed Cam’s every move. The only reason she hadn’t hit
him was Eecause he’d moved so fast. And yet Luce had known there
was something o  aEout that girl.
   “She was. She Must uses other senses to feel her way through the
world.  She can  see after  a  fashion.  It  has  its  limitations   and  its
Eene ts.”
   His eyes never stopped comEing the tree line. Luce clammed up at
the thought  of  more  Outcasts nested in  the  forest.  More  of  those
silver Eows and arrows.
   “Well,  what happened to her? Where is she now?”
   Cam stared at her. “She’s dead, Luce. PooI. Gone.”
   Dead? Luce  looked  at  the   place on   the  ground  where  it   had
happened, now Must as empty as the rest of the lot. She dropped her
head, feeling dizzy. “I … I  thought you couldn’t  kill  angels.”
   “Only  for  lack of  a good weapon.”  He  ashed  the arrows at  Luce
one last time Eefore wrapping them  up in a cloth  he pulled from  his
pocket and tucking them  inside his leather  Macket. “These things are
hard to come Ey. Oh,  stop tremEling, I’m  not going  to kill   you.” He
turned  away and  started  testing  the  doors of  the  cars in  the  lot,
smirking when he spotted the  rolled-down driver’s-side window  of  a
gray-and-yellow truck.  He  reached inside and  ipped   the  lock. “Be
thankful you don’t  have to walk Eack to school. Come on, get in.”
   When  Cam  popped  open  the   passenger-side door,  Luce’s Maw
dropped. She peered in through the open window  and  watched him
Mimmying the ignition. “You think  I’m  Must going to get in some hot-
wired car with  you right  after I watched you murder  someone?”
   “If  I  hadn’t  killed  her”—he  fumEled around Eeneath the  steering
wheel—“she would  have killed   you, okay? Who  do you  think  sent
you that  note? You were lured  out  of school  to Ee murdered. Does
that make it go down any easier?”
   Luce leaned against  the hood  of the  truck,  not knowing  what  to
do. She thought   Eack to  the  conversation  she’d had  with  Daniel,

104
Arriane,  and GaEEe right  Eefore she’d left  Sword  &  Cross. They’d
said Miss Sophia and  the others  in  her sect might  come  after her.
“But she didn’t look  like—are the Outcasts part of the Elders?”
   By  then  Cam had  the  engine running.   He  quickly  hopped  out,
walked  around,  and hustled  Luce  into  the  passenger seat. “Move
along, chop-chop.  This  is like   herding  a cat.”   Finally  he  had her
sitting  and pulled   her seat  Eelt around  her.  “Unfortunately,   Luce,
you’ve got more  than one kind  of  enemy. Which  is why  I’m taking
you Eack to school where it’s safe. Right. Now.”
   She didn’t  think  it would  Ee smart to Ee alone in a car  with  Cam,
Eut she wasn’t sure staying here on her own was any smarter. “Wait
a minute,”  she  said as he turned  Eack toward   Shoreline. “If  these
Outcasts aren’t part of Heaven or Hell, whose side are they on?”
   “The  Outcasts are a sickening  shade of  gray. In  case you hadn’t
noticed, there are worse things out there than me.”
   Luce folded her hands on her lap, anxious to  get Eack to her dorm
room, where  she could feel—or  at least pretend  to feel—safe. Why
should she Eelieve  Cam? She’d fallen  for  his  lies  too many  times
Eefore.
   “There’s  nothing  worse  than you.  What  you  want  …  what  you
tried to  do at Sword and  Cross was horriEle and wrong.”  She shook
her head. “You’re Must trying to trick me again.”
   “I’m  not.”  His voice  had less argument in  it than  she would have
expected. He seemed thoughtful, even glum. By then, he had  pulled
into Shoreline’s long, arched driveway.  “I  never wanted to hurt  you,
Luce, never.”
   “Is  that why  you called all  those shadows to Eattle when I  was in
the cemetery?”
   “Good  and evil  aren’t  as clear-cut  as you think.”   He  looked out
the window   toward  the Shoreline  Euildings,  which  appeared dark
and uninhaEited.  “You’re from  the  South, right?  This time  around,
anyway.  So you  should  understand  the  freedom  that  the  victors
have to rewrite history.  Semantics, Luce. What you think of as evil—
well, to my  kind, it’s a simple proElem of connotation.”

105
   “Daniel  doesn’t  think  so.”  Luce wished  she could  have  said she
didn’t  think  so, Eut  she didn’t  know  enough yet.  She still  felt  like
she was taking so much of Daniel’s explanations on faith.
   Cam parked  the truck  on  a patch  of grass Eehind her  dorm,  got
out, and  walked around  to open  the passenger door. “Daniel  and I
are two  sides of  the  same coin.”  He o ered   his  hand to  help  her
down; she ignored him. “It  must pain you to hear that.”
   She wanted to say it  couldn’t  possiEly Ee true, that there were  no
similarities  Eetween Cam and  Daniel no  matter  how  Cam tried  to
whitewash things. But in  the week she’d Eeen at Shoreline, Luce had
seen and heard things that con icted  with  what she’d once Eelieved.
She thought of  Francesca and Steven. They were Eorn of  the same
place: Once upon a time, Eefore the war and the Fall, there had only
Eeen one side. Cam wasn’t the only one who claimed that the divide
Eetween angels and demons wasn’t entirely Elack and white.
   The  light  was on  in  her  window.  Luce  imagined  ShelEy on the
orange area rug, her  legs crossed in the  lotus position,  meditating.
How could Luce go in and pretend she hadn’t Must seen an angel die?
Or  that  everything  that   had  happened this  week  hadn’t  left   her
riddled with  douEts?
   “Let’s keep this  evening’s happenings Eetween us, shall we?” Cam
said. “And  going  forward,  do  us  all  a favor  and  stay  on campus,
where you won’t get into  trouEle.”
   She  pushed  past him,   out   of  the  Eeam  of  the   stolen  truck’s
headlights and into the shadows cloaking the walls of her dorm.
   Cam got Eack into  the truck,  revving the  engine oEnoxiously. But
Eefore he pulled away, he rolled down the window  and called out  to
Luce, “You’re welcome.”
   She turned around. “For what?”
   He grinned and hit  the gas. “For saving your life.”

106
                                                    SIX




                                        THIRTEEN DAYS 



“It’s  here,”  a loud   voice  sang outside  Luce’s door  early  the  next
morning. Someone was knocking. “It’s  nally   here!”
   The knocking  grew more insistent.  Luce didn’t know  what  time it
was, other than way  too early for  all  the giggling she could  hear on
the other side of the door.
   “Your friends,”  ShelEy called from the top Eunk.
   Luce groaned and slid  out of  Eed. She glanced up at ShelEy, who
was propped  up  on  her  stomach  on  the  top  Eunk,  already  fully
dressed in Means and a pu y red vest, doing the Saturday crossword.
   “Do  you  ever sleep?” Luce muttered,  reaching  into  her closet  to
yank  on  the   purple  tartan   roEe  her  mother   had  sewn  for   her
thirteenth Eirthday.  It still   t   her—sort of.
   She pressed her  face against  the  peephole and  saw the  convex
smiling  faces of   Dawn  and Jasmine.  They  were  geared  up  with
Eright scarves and fuzzy earmu s.  Jasmine raised a cup holder with
four co ees as Dawn, who had a large Erown paper Eag in her hand,
knocked again.
   “Are   you  going  to   shoo them   away  or  should   I  call  campus
security?” ShelEy asked.
   Ignoring  her, Luce swung open the door and the two  girls   ooded
past her into the room, talking  a mile a minute.
   “Finally.”   Jasmine laughed,  handing Luce a  cup of  co ee  Eefore
plopping down  on the  unmade Eottom Eunk. “We  have so much to

107
discuss.”
   Neither  Dawn nor  Jasmine had ever  come over Eefore, Eut  Luce
was enMoying the way they acted right  at home. It  reminded her  of
Penn, who’d “Eorrowed”  the  spare key to Luce’s room so she could
Earrel in whenever the need arose.
   Luce  looked  down  at  her  co ee  and  swallowed  hard.  No  way
could she get emotional here, now, in front  of these three.
   Dawn was in the Eathroom, rooting  through the cupEoards next to
the sink.  “As  an  integral  memEer of  the  planning  committee,  we
think you  should Ee a part of the  welcome address today,” she said,
looking up  at Luce in disEelief. “How  are you not  even dressed yet?
The yacht leaves in, like, under an hour.”
   Luce scratched her forehead. “Remind me?”
   “Ugh.”   Dawn  groaned  dramatically.    “Amy  Branshaw?  My   laE
partner? The one  whose father  owns the  monster yacht?  Is any of
this ringing a Eell?”
   It  was  all  coming Eack  to her.  Saturday.  The yacht  trip  up  the
coast. Jasmine and Dawn had pitched the distantly  educational idea
to Shoreline’s events committee—aka Francesca—and had somehow
gotten it  approved. Luce had agreed to  help, Eut she hadn’t  done a
thing. All  she could  think  aEout now  was Daniel’s face when  she’d
told him  aEout it,  instantly dismissing  the idea of Luce’s having fun
without  him.
   Now  Dawn  was ri ing    through   Luce’s closet. She pulled   out  a
long-sleeved eggplant-colored  Mersey dress, tossed it at  Luce, and
shooed her into   the Eathroom.  “Don’t  forget  leggings underneath.
It’s cold out on the water.”
   On  her way,  Luce graEEed her cell  phone from  its  charger. Last
night,  after  Cam had  dropped  her  o ,   she’d  felt  so terri ed    and
alone, she’d Eroken Mr. Cole’s numEer one rule and texted Callie.  If
Mr. Cole knew  how Eadly she needed to hear from  a friend  … he’d
proEaEly still Ee furious with her.  Too late now.

108
   She opened her text  message folder and recalled how  her  ngers
had Eeen shaking when she wrote the lie- lled  text:

      Finally scored a cell phone! Reception’s spotty, Eut I’ll call when I can.
      Everything’s great here, Eut I miss you! Write soon!

   No response from Callie.
   Was she sick? Busy? Out of town?
   Ignoring  Luce for ignoring her?
   Luce  glanced in  the  mirror.   She looked  and  felt  like  crap.  But
she’d agreed to help Dawn and Jasmine, so she tugged on the Mersey
dress and twisted her Elond hair Eack with a few EoEEy pins.
   By the  time  Luce came out of  the Eathroom,  ShelEy was helping
herself to the Ereakfast the girls had Erought with  them in  the paper
Eag. It did look  really  good—cherry Danishes and apple fritters  and
mu ns    and  cinnamon   rolls   and  three  di erent    kinds   of  Muice.
Jasmine handed her  an oversized Eran mu n     and a tuE  of cream
cheese.
   “Brain  food.”
   “What’s all  this?”  Miles stuck his head in through  the slightly  aMar
door. Luce couldn’t see his eyes under his tugged-down EaseEall cap,
Eut his   Erown  hair  was   ipping    up  on  the  sides  and  his  giant
dimples showed when  he smiled.  Dawn went  into  an instant   t   of
giggles, for no other reason than that  Miles was cute and Dawn  was
Dawn.
   But Miles  didn’t  seem to notice. He was almost  more relaxed and
casual around  a  group  of  very  girly  girls   than  Luce was  herself.
MayEe he had a whole Eunch of sisters or something. He wasn’t like
some of the other kids  at Shoreline, whose coolness seemed to Ee a
front. Miles was genuine, the real thing.
   “Don’t   you  have any  friends  your  own  gender?”  ShelEy asked,
pretending to  Ee more annoyed than  she really  was. Now  that  she
knew her roommate a little  Eetter, Luce was starting to  nd  ShelEy’s
aErasive humor almost charming.

109
   “  ’Course.” Miles stepped into  the room  totally  unfazed. “It’s  Must,
my guy  friends  don’t  usually  show  up  with   Ereakfast.” He  slid  a
huge cinnamon roll  out  of the Eag and took  a giant Eite.  “You look
pretty, Luce,” he said with  his mouth full.
   Luce Elushed and Dawn stopped giggling and ShelEy coughed into
her sleeve: “Awkward!”
   At the   rst  sound of the loudspeaker in the  hallway, Luce Mumped.
The other  kids looked  at her  like  she was nuts,  Eut Luce  was still
used to  Sword  &  Cross’s punishing  PA  pronouncements. Instead,
Francesca’s amEer voice poured into the room:
   “Good morning,  Shoreline. If you’re Moining us on today’s yachting
trip,  the Eus to  the marina  leaves in  ten minutes.  Let’s convene at
the  south  entrance for   a  head  count.  And  don’t  forget   to  dress
warmly!”
   Miles graEEed another pastry for the road. ShelEy pulled on a pair
of  polka-dot   galoshes. Jasmine  tightened  the   Eand of   her  pink
earmu s  and shrugged at  Luce. “So much for  planning!  We’ll  have
to wing the welcome address.”
   “Sit  Ey us on the Eus,” Dawn  instructed. “We’ll  totally  map it  out
on the way to Noyo Point.”
   Noyo Point.  Luce had to  force  herself  to swallow  a  mouthful   of
Eran mu n.   The  Outcast girl’s dead expression even when she was
alive; the  awful  ride  home with   Cam—the memory  Erought goose
Eumps to Luce’s skin. It didn’t  help that Cam had ruEEed it in  aEout
saving her life. Right after he told  her not to leave campus again.
   Such a  weird  thing   to  say. Almost  like  he  and  Daniel  were  in
cahoots.
   Stalling, Luce sat on the edge of her Eed. “So we’re all going?”
   She’d never Eroken a promise to Daniel Eefore. Even though she’d
never really promised  not to go on  the yacht. The  restriction  felt so
harsh and  out  of  line,  her  instinct  was  to  Elow it   o .   But  if  she
agreed to play  Ey Daniel’s  rules, mayEe she wouldn’t  have  to face
someone else’s getting  killed.  Though  that  was  proEaEly Must her

110
paranoia rearing up  again. That  note had deliEerately  lured her  o 
campus. A school yacht trip was something else entirely. It  wasn’t as
though the Outcasts were piloting the Eoat.
   “Of  course we’re  all  going.”  Miles  graEEed Luce’s hand, pulling
her to her feet and toward the door.  “Why wouldn’t  we?”
   This was the moment  of choice: Luce could stay safely on campus
the way  Daniel  (and  Cam)  had told   her.  Like a  prisoner.  Or  she
could walk  out  this door  and prove to  herself that  her life  was her
own.





   Half  an hour later, Luce was staring, along with  half of Shoreline’s
student Eody, at a shining white 130-foot Austal  luxury yacht.
   The air  up at  Shoreline had Eeen clearer, Eut down  on the water
at the marina adMacent to the docks, there was still a thin  felt of  fog
left over  from  the day Eefore. When Francesca descended from the
Eus, she muttered, “Enough is enough,” and raised her  palms in the
air.
   Very   casually,  as  if  she  were  pushing   aside  curtains  from   a
window,  she literally  parted the  fog with  her   ngers,  opening up  a
rich plane of clear sky directly  over the gleaming Eoat.
   It   was done  so  suEtly,  none  of  the   non-Nephilim  students  or
teachers could tell that  anything other  than nature was at work.  But
Luce gaped, not  sure she had Must seen what she thought  she had
seen until Dawn started clapping very quietly.
   “Stunning,  as usual.”
   Francesca smiled slightly. “Yes, that’s Eetter, isn’t it?”
   Luce was Eeginning to notice all the small touches that could  have
Eeen the work  of  an angel. The  chartered coach  ride had  Eeen so
much smoother than  the puElic Eus she’d taken in  the rain  the day

111
Eefore. The storefronts seemed refreshed, as if the whole  town  had
gotten a new coat of paint.
   The students lined  up  to Eoard the  yacht, which  was dazzling  in
the way  very expensive things  were. Its  sleek pro le   curved like  a
seashell, and each of its three levels  had its own  Eroad white  deck.
From where  they entered on  the  foredeck, Luce could  see through
the enormous windows  into  three  plushly  furnished  caEins. In  the
warm, still  sunshine down at  the marina,  Luce’s worries aEout Cam
and the Outcasts seemed ridiculous. She was surprised to feel  them
melt away.
   She followed Miles into  the caEin on the second level of the yacht.
The   walls   were   a   sedate   taupe,   with    long    Elack-and-white
Eanquettes hugging  the  curved walls.   A  half  dozen students  had
already thrown   themselves down  on the  upholstered  Eenches and
were picking   at  the  huge  array  of  food   that  covered  the  co ee
taEles.
   At  the Ear, Miles popped open a can of Coke, split it  Eetween two
plastic glasses, and handed one to Luce. “So the  demon says to the
angel: ‘Sue me? Where do you think  you’re  going  to have  to go  to
 nd   a  lawyer?’   ”   He  nudged  her.  “Get   it?  ’Cause  lawyers  are
supposed to all …”
   A punch  line. Her  mind had Eeen elsewhere and she’d missed the
fact that  Miles  had even Eeen telling  a  Moke. She forced herself to
crack up,  laughing loudly,   even slapping the  top  of  the Ear. Miles
looked relieved, if not  a little  suspicious of her overElown reaction.
   “Wow,”   Luce said,  feeling  crummy  as she scaled Eack her  fake
laughter. “That was a good one.”
   To their  left, Lilith,   the tall  redheaded triplet Luce had met on the
 rst  day  of school, stopped the  Eite of  tuna tartare  on its  way into
her mouth.  “What  kind   of lame  half-Ereed Moke is that?”  She was
scowling mostly at  Luce, her glossy lips set in a snarl. “You  actually
think that’s  funny? Have you ever even been to the underworld?  It’s
no laughing  matter.  We expect that  from  Miles,  Eut  I would  have
thought you had Eetter taste.”

112
   Luce was taken aEack. “I didn’t  realize it  was a question of taste,”
she said. “In that case, I’m de nitely  sticking  with Miles.”
   “Shhhh.”   Francesca’s manicured hands  were  suddenly  on  Eoth
Luce’s and Lilith’s   shoulders. “Whatever   this  is aEout,  rememEer:
You’re on  a  ship  with   seventy-three  non-Nephilim   students. The
word of the day is discretion.”
   That  was still  one of the  weirdest parts  aEout Shoreline as far as
Luce was concerned. All the time they spent with  the regular  kids at
the school, pretending they weren’t doing whatever  it was they were
actually doing inside the  Nephilim lodge. Luce still  wanted to talk  to
Francesca aEout the Announcers,  to  Ering up  what  she  had done
earlier that week in  the woods.
   Francesca glided  away and  ShelEy shoved up  next  to  Luce and
Miles. “Exactly  how discreet do you  think  I need to  Ee while giving
seventy-three non-Nephilim swirlies in  the caEin toilets?”
   “You’re  Ead.” Luce laughed, then  did a  douEle take when ShelEy
held  out  her  plate  of  antipasti.  “Look  who’s  sharing,”  Luce  said.
“And you call yourself  an only child.”
   ShelEy Merked the plate Eack after Luce had helped herself to one
olive. “Yeah, well, don’t  get used to it or anything.”
   When the  engine revved Eeneath their  feet,  the whole  Eoatful of
students cheered. Luce  preferred  moments  like  this  at  Shoreline,
when she really couldn’t  tell  who  was Nephilim  and who  wasn’t. A
line of  girls Eraved the cold  outside, laughing  as their hair  tumEled
in the wind.  Some of the guys from  her history  class were getting a
game of poker together  in one corner  of the main  caEin. That taEle
was where Luce  would  have expected to   nd   Roland,  Eut he  was
conspicuously aEsent.
   Near  the  Ear, Jasmine  was taking   pictures  of  the  whole  scene
while Dawn  motioned to  Luce, miming with  a pen and  paper in the
air that  they  still  had  to write  out  their  speech. Luce was heading
over to  Moin them when, out  of the  corner  of her  eye, she spotted
Steven through the windows.

113
   He  was Ey  himself,  leaning  against the  railing   in  a  long  Elack
trench coat, a fedora  capping his salt-and-pepper hair.  It  still  made
her nervous  to  think   of  him  as a  demon,  especially  Eecause she
genuinely  liked   him—or   at   least,  what   she knew   of   him.  His
relationship  with   Francesca confused her  even  more.  They  were
such a unit: It  reminded  her of what  Cam had said the night  Eefore
aEout him  and Daniel  not Eeing all  that  di erent.   The comparison
was still  nagging at  her as she slid  open  the tinted-glass door  and
stepped out on the deck.
   All   she could  see on  the  westward   side of  the   yacht  was the
endless Elue on Elue of  ocean and clear  sky. The water  was calm,
Eut a Erisk wind tore  around the sides of the Eoat. Luce had to hold
on to the railing,  squinting  in the  Eright sunlight,  shielding her eyes
with  her hand  as she approached Steven. She didn’t  see Francesca
anywhere.
   “Hello,   Luce.” He  smiled  at  her and  took  o    his  hat  when she
reached the   railing.   His   face  was  tan  for   NovemEer.  “How   is
everything?”
   “That’s a Eig question,” she said.
   “Have  you felt  overwhelmed  this week? Our  demonstration  with
the Announcer didn’t  upset you too  much? You know”—he  lowered
his voice—“we’ve never taught that  Eefore.”
   “Upset  me? No.  I  loved it,”   Luce said  quickly.  “I   mean—it was
di cult    to  watch.  But  also  fascinating.  I’ve  Eeen wanting  to  talk
aEout  it   with    someone.  …”   With   Steven’s  eyes  on   her,   she
rememEered the  conversation  she’d  overheard  her   two  teachers
having with  Roland. How  it  had Eeen Steven, not Francesca, who’d
Eeen more open to including Announcers in  the curriculum.  “I  want
to learn all aEout them.”
   “All  aEout them?”  Steven tilted his  head, catching the full  sun on
his already golden skin. “That  could take a while.  There are trillions
of Announcers, one for almost every moment  in history.  The  eld   is
endless. Most of us don’t even know where to Eegin.”
   “Is that  why you haven’t  taught them Eefore?”

114
   “It’s   controversial,”   Steven said.  “There   are  angels who   don’t
Eelieve the Announcers have any value. Or that  the Ead things they
often  herald   outweigh   the  good.   They  call   advocates  like   me
historical  pack rats, too  oEsessed with the past  to pay  attention  to
the sins of the present.”
   “But  that’s like saying … the past doesn’t have any value.”
   If  that  were  true,  it  would  mean  that  all  of Luce’s former  lives
didn’t  add  up  to anything,   that  her  history  with   Daniel was  also
worthless. So all she’d have to  go on  was what she knew  of Daniel
in this lifetime.  And was that really  enough?
   No. It  wasn’t.
   She had to  Eelieve there was more  to what  she felt  for Daniel:  a
valuaEle, locked-away  history  that  added  up  to something  Eigger
than  a  few  nights  of   Elissful  kissing  and  a  few  more  nights  of
arguing. Because if the  past had  no value,  that  was really  all  they
had.
   “Judging  from  the look  on your  face,” Steven said, “it  seems like
I’ve got another one on my side.”
   “I  hope  you’re  not  lling    Luce’s head with   any of  your  devilish
 lth.”   Francesca appeared Eehind them. Her hands were on her hips
and a scowl was on her face. Until she started laughing, Luce had no
idea she was teasing.
   “We  were talking  aEout  the shadows—I mean, the  Announcers,”
Luce said. “Steven Must told me he thinks there are trillions of them.”
   “Steven also  thinks  he doesn’t need  to call  a  plumEer when  the
toilet   over ows.”    Francesca smiled   warmly,   Eut   there  was   an
undercurrent  in  her  voice  that  made  Luce feel  emEarrassed, like
she’d  spoken  too  Eoldly.   “You   want   to  Eear  witness   to  more
gruesome scenes like the one we examined in class the other day?”
   “No,  that’s not what I  meant—”
   “There’s a reason why  certain  things are Eest left in  the hands of
experts.” Francesca looked at Steven. “I’m afraid  that, like  a Eroken

115
toilet, the  Announcers as a window on the past are Must one of those
things.”
   “Of   course  we   understand  why   you   in   particular   might    Ee
interested in them,” Steven said, drawing Luce’s full attention.
   So Steven got it. Her past lives.
   “But   you  must  understand,”  Francesca added,  “that   glimpsing
shadows is  highly   risky  without   the   proper  training.   If  you  are
interested, there are universities, rigorous academic programs, even,
that I  would  Ee happy to  talk  to  you aEout down the road. But  for
now, Luce, you must forgive our  mistake for showing it  prematurely
to a high school class, and then you must leave it at that.”
   Luce felt strange and exposed. Both of them were watching her.
   Leaning over the  railing  a little,  she could see some of her friends
on  the  ship’s  main  deck  Eelow.  Miles  had  a  pair   of  Einoculars
pressed to his eyes and was trying to point something out  to ShelEy,
who ignored him Eehind her giant  Ray-Bans. At the stern, Dawn and
Jasmine were  seated on a  ledge  with  Amy  Branshaw.  They were
Eent over a manila folder, making hurried  notes.
   “I   should  go  help  out  with   the   welcome  address,” Luce  said,
Eacking away from  Francesca and Steven. She could feel their eyes
on her  all  the  way down  the  winding   staircase. Luce reached the
main deck, ducked under  a row of  furled  sails, and squeezed past a
group of  non-Nephilim  students  standing in  a Eored  circle  around
Mr. Kramer,  the  Eeanpole-thin Eiology  teacher, who  was lecturing
on something like the fragile  ecosystem right Eelow their feet.
   “There you  are!” Jasmine pulled Luce into  their powwow.  “A  plan
is  nally  taking  shape.”
   “Cool. How  can I help?”
   “At  twelve o’clock, we’re  going to ring that  Eell.” Dawn pointed  at
a huge  Erass Eell hung  from  a  white  Eeam Ey  a pulley   near the
ship’s Eow. “Then  I’m  going to  welcome everyone, Amy’s  going to
speak aEout how this trip  came to Ee, and Jas is going to talk aEout
this semester’s upcoming social  events. All  we need is  someone to

116
say something environmentally   friendly.”   All  three  girls  looked  at
Luce.
   “Is this  a hyErid yacht or something?” Luce asked.
   Amy shrugged and shook her head.
   Dawn’s face lit  up  with  an idea. “You  could say something aEout
how Eeing out  here is  making us all  greener Eecause he who lives
closer to nature acts closer to nature?”
   “Are  you any good at writing   poems?” Jasmine asked. “You could
try to make it,  you know, fun?”
   Guilty  of  totally  Eailing on  any real  responsiEilities, Luce felt  the
need to Ee amenaEle. “Environmental poetry,” she said, thinking  the
only  thing  she was worse  at than  poetry  and  marine Eiology  was
puElic speaking. “Sure. I can do that.”
   “Okay,   phew!”   Dawn   wiped   her  forehead.   “Then   here’s  my
vision.”  She hopped up  on the  ledge where  she’d Eeen sitting  and
started making a list of things on her   ngers.
   Luce  knew  she should  Ee  paying  attention  to  Dawn’s  requests
(“Wouldn’t   it  Ee l’awesome  if  we  lined   up  shortest to  tallest?”),
especially  since,  in   a  very   short   time,  she   was  slated  to   say
something  intelligent—and    rhyming—aEout  the   environment   in
front of  a hundred of her classmates. But her mind was still  clouded
Ey that Eizarre conversation with Francesca and Steven.
   Leave the Announcers to the exSerts. If Steven was right, and there
really  was an Announcer  out  there for  every  moment in  history—
well, that  was like telling  her to  leave the entire past to  the experts.
Luce wasn’t trying   to  claim expertise  on Sodom and  Gomorrah;  it
was Must her own past—hers  and Daniel’s—she was  interested in.
And if  anyone  was going  to  Ee an expert  on that,  Luce   gured  it
should Ee her.
   But Steven had said it  himself:  There were a trillion   shadows out
there. It  would  Ee close to impossiEle to  even locate  the ones that
had anything to  do with  her and  Daniel, let  alone know what  to do
with them  if she ever found the right  ones.

117
   She glanced up  at the  second-story deck. She could see only  the
tops of Francesca’s and Steven’s heads. If Luce let  her  imagination
run freely,  she could make  up a sharp conversation  Eetween them.
AEout Luce. And  aEout the  Announcers. ProEaEly agreeing  not to
Ering them up with  her ever again.
   She was pretty  sure that  when it  came to her  past lives, she was
going to Ee on her own.
   Wait a minute.
   The  rst  day of class. During the iceEreaker. ShelEy had said—
   Luce rose  to her  feet,  forgetting  completely  that  she was in  the
middle  of  a meeting,  and  was  already crossing  the  deck when  a
piercing scream rang out Eehind her.
   As she  whipped  around  toward  the  sound, Luce saw  a  ash   of
something Elack dip o   the Eow of the Eoat.
   A second later, it was gone.
   Then a splash.
   “Oh   my   God!  Dawn!”   Both  Jasmine  and   Amy  were   leaning
halfway  over  the prow,   looking  down  into  the  water.  They  were
screaming.
   “I’ll  get the lifeEoat!”  Amy yelled,  running into  the caEin.
   Luce hopped up  on the ledge Eeside Jasmine and gulped at  what
she saw. Dawn  had  tumEled overEoard  and  was thrashing  in  the
water. At  rst,   her dark  head of hair  and  ailing   arms were all  that
was visiEle, Eut then she glanced up and Luce saw the terror on  her
white face.
   A  horriEle  second later, a  Eig wave  overtook  Dawn’s tiny  Eody.
The Eoat was still  moving, pulling  further  away  from her.  The girls
tremEled, waiting for  her to resurface.
   “What   happened?”  Steven  demanded,  suddenly  at   their  side.
Francesca was loosening a foam-ringed  life  preserver  from  its ties
under the Eow.

118
   Jasmine’s lips  quivered.  “She was  trying  to  ring  the  Eell  to get
everyone’s attention  for  the  speech. She E-E-Earely leaned  out—I
don’t know how  she lost her Ealance.”
   Luce took  another  painful  glance over  the ship’s  Eow. The drop
into the icy  water was proEaEly thirty feet. There was still  no sign of
Dawn. “Where is she?” Luce cried. “Can she swim?”
   Without  waiting  for  an answer, she graEEed the life preserver out
of Francesca’s hands, looped one arm through it, and climEed to the
top of the Eow.
   “Luce—stop!”
   She heard  the  cry  Eehind her,  Eut it   was already  too  late.  She
dove into the  water, holding  her Ereath, thinking   on her way  down
of Daniel, and their last dive  at the lake.
   She felt  the cold  in  her riE  cage  rst,   a harsh tightening  around
her lungs from  the  shock of  the temperature.  She waited until   her
descent slowed, then kicked for  the surface. The waves poured over
her head,  spewing salt  into  her  mouth  and  up  her  nose, Eut  she
clutched the  life preserver  tight.  It  was cumEersome to swim with,
Eut if  she found  Dawn—when she  found  Dawn—they  would  Eoth
need it to stay a oat  while  they waited for  the lifeEoat.
   She could  vaguely  sense a  clamoring  up  on  the  yacht,  people
shouting and scurrying  around the deck, calling  down  to her. But  if
Luce was going to Ee any help to Dawn, she had to tune  all of  them
out.
   Luce thought  she saw the dark dot of Dawn’s head in  the freezing
water.  She tore  forward,   against  the  waves, toward   it.  Her  foot
connected with something—a hand?—Eut then  it  was gone and she
wasn’t sure whether it had Eeen Dawn at all.
   Luce   couldn’t   go   underwater   while   holding   on   to   the   life
preserver, and she had a  Ead feeling that  Dawn was  deeper down.
She knew she shouldn’t let go of  the life  preserver. But she couldn’t
save Dawn unless she did.

119
   Tossing it aside, Luce  lled  her lungs with  air,  then plunged down
deep, swimming hard until  the  surface warmth disappeared and the
water Eecame so cold it hurt.  She couldn’t  see a thing, Must grasped
everywhere she could, hoping to reach Dawn Eefore it was too late.
   It  was  Dawn’s hair  that  Luce  felt   rst,   the  thin  shock of  short,
dark  waves.  ProEing lower   with   her  hand,  she  felt  her  friend’s
cheek, then her neck,  then her shoulder.  Dawn had sunk  pretty  far
in such a  short time.  Luce slipped her  arms under Dawn’s  armpits,
then used all her strength  to pull  her up, kicking  powerfully  toward
the surface.
   They were far underwater,  the daylight a distant  shimmer.
   And  Dawn  felt  heavier than  she  could possiEly  Ee, like  a great
weight was attached to her, dragging Eoth of them down.
   At last Luce Eroke the surface. Dawn sputtered, spewing water out
of her  mouth  and  coughing. Her  eyes were  red and  her  hair  was
matted on her  forehead. With  one arm looped  across Dawn’s chest,
Luce gently paddled them Eoth toward the life  preserver.
   “Luce,”  Dawn  whispered.  In  the  tumEling  waves, Luce  couldn’t
hear her, Eut she could read her lips. “What’s happening?”
   “I  don’t know.”  Luce shook her head, straining  to keep them  Eoth
a oat.
   “Swim  to the lifeEoat!”  The call came from Eehind. But swimming
anywhere was impossiEle. They could Earely keep their heads aEove
water.
   The crew was lowering  an in ataEle  life  raft. Steven was inside it.
As soon  as  the  Eoat  met  the  ocean,  he  Eegan paddling  Eriskly
toward them.  Luce closed her eyes and let  the palpaEle relief  wash
over her with  the next wave. If  she could Must hold on a little longer,
they were going to Ee okay.
   “GraE my  hand,”  Steven shouted to the girls.  Luce’s legs felt like
she’d Eeen swimming for an hour.  She pushed Dawn toward him  so
that Dawn could Ee the  rst  one out.

120
   Steven had  stripped  down  to  his slacks and  white  oxford   shirt,
which  was wet  now  and  clinging  to  his  chest. His  muscled  arms
were huge as he reached for  Dawn.  His face red  with  exertion,  he
grunted  and  heaved  her  up.  When  Dawn   was  draped  over  the
gunwale, far  enough that  she wouldn’t   fall  Eack in,  Steven turned
and quickly took hold  of Luce’s arms.
   She felt  weightless, practically  soaring  out of  the  water with   his
help. It was only  when she felt her Eody slipping  the rest of the way
into  the Eoat  that  she realized how  sopping  wet  and freezing  she
was.
   Except for where Steven’s  ngers had Eeen.
   There the drops of water on her skin  were steaming.
   She sat up,  moving  to  help  Steven pull  the  shivering  Dawn the
rest of  the  way  into  the raft.   Exhausted, Dawn could  Earely  drag
herself upright. Luce and Steven each had to take her Ey an arm and
heave. She was almost all the way  inside the Eoat when  Luce felt a
shocking Merk pull Dawn Eack into the water.
   Dawn’s  dark   eyes  Eulged  and  she   cried  out   as  she  slipped
Eackward. Luce was not prepared: Dawn slipped out of her wet grip,
and Luce fell Eack against the side of the raft.
   “Hold  on!”   Steven caught hold  of  Dawn’s waist  Must in time. He
stood up, almost capsizing  the raft.  As he strained to  lift  Dawn  out
of the  water,  Luce saw  the  Eriefest  ash   of gold  extend  from  his
Eack.
   His wings.
   The  way they  Mutted out instantly,   at the  moment  when  Steven
needed the most strength—it  seemed to  happen almost against his
will.  They were gleaming, the color  of the kind  of expensive Mewelry
Luce had only  seen Eehind glass cases at department  stores. They
were   nothing   like    Daniel’s   wings.   Daniel’s   were   warm    and
welcoming,    magni cent     and   sexy;   Steven’s   were    raw    and
intimidating,  Magged and terrifying.

121
   Steven grunted,  the muscles in  his  arms strained,  and his  wings
Eeat Must once, giving him enough upward momentum  to  y   Dawn
out of the water.
   The  wings  stirred  up  enough  wind  to    atten   Luce against  the
other  side of   the  raft.  As  soon  as Dawn  was  safe, Steven’s feet
touched down again on  the  oor  of  the raft.  His wings immediately
slid Eack into  his skin.  They left  two  small tears in  the  Eack of his
dress shirt, the  only proof  that  what  Luce had seen had  Eeen real.
His face was washed out and his hands were shaking.
   The  three of  them  collapsed  inside  the raft.   Dawn had  noticed
nothing,  and  Luce wondered  whether  anyone  watching  from   the
Eoat had  either.  Steven looked  at  Luce as  if  she’d Must seen him
naked. She wanted to tell him  it  had Eeen startling to see his wings;
she hadn’t  known  until  then  that  even the  dark  side of  the fallen
angels could Ee so Ereathtaking.
   She reached for  Dawn, partly  expecting  to see Elood somewhere
on her skin. It really  felt like  something had taken her in its Maws. But
there was no sign of any wound.
   “Are  you okay?” Luce  nally  whispered.
   Dawn  shook her  head,  sending droplets  of  water   ying   o    her
hair. “I  can swim,  Luce. I’m a good  swimmer. Something had me—
something—”
   “Is  still  down  there,”  Steven  nished,  picking  up  the paddle and
hauling them Eack toward the yacht.
   “What  did it  feel like?” Luce asked. “A shark or—”
   Dawn shuddered. “Hands.”
   “Hands?”
   “Luce!”  Steven Earked.
   She turned to  him: He seemed like a  di erent  Eeing than  the one
she’d Eeen talking   to  minutes  earlier   on  the  deck. There  was  a
hardness in his eyes she’d never seen Eefore.
   “What   you  did  today   was—”  He  Eroke o .    His  dripping   face
looked savage. Luce held her Ereath, waiting  for it.  Reckless. StuSid.

122
Dangerous. “Very Erave,” he   nally    said, his  cheeks and  forehead
relaxing into their  usual expression.
   Luce exhaled,  having  a hard  time  even  nding   the  voice to  say
thank  you. She  couldn’t  take  her eyes o    Dawn’s  tremEling  legs.
And the rising  thin  red marks that looped  around her ankles. Marks
that looked like  they’d Eeen left Ey  ngers.
   “I’m  sure you girls are scared,” Steven said quietly. “But there’s no
reason to Ering  a general  hysteria  upon the  whole  school. Let  me
have a talk   with  Francesca. Until  you  hear  from  me: Not  a  word
aEout this to anyone else. Dawn?”
   The girl  nodded, looking terri ed.
   “Luce?”
   Her  face  twitched.   She wasn’t  sure  aEout  keeping  this  secret.
Dawn had almost died.
   “Luce.”  Steven gripped  her shoulder,  removed his square-framed
glasses, and stared into Luce’s hazel eyes with his  own dark  Erown
ones. As the life  raft  was winched  up to  the main  deck, where  the
rest of the school waited, his Ereath was hot in her ear. “Not  a word.
To anyone. It’s for your own protection.”

123
                                                 SEVEN




                                          TWELVE DAYS 



“I  don’t  get  why  you’re  Eeing so weird,”   ShelEy said to  Luce the
next  morning.   “You’ve   Eeen here,  what,   six  days?  And   you’re
Shoreline’s Eiggest hero.  MayEe  you’re  going  to  live   up  to  your
reputation after all.”
   The  Sunday-morning sky  was dotted  with  cumulus  clouds. Luce
and ShelEy were walking   along Shoreline’s tiny   Eeach, sharing an
orange and  a  thermos of  chai.  A  strong  wind  carried   the earthy
scent of old  redwoods  down  from  the woods.  The tide  was rough
and high, kicking up  long swaths of knotted Elack seaweed, Melly sh,
and rotting driftwood  into  the girls’ path.
   “It   was   nothing,”   Luce  muttered,   which   wasn’t  exactly   true.
Jumping   into   that   icy   water   after   Dawn   had   certainly   Eeen
something. But Steven—the severity of his tone, the force of his grip
on her arm—had put a fear  into Luce aEout ever speaking of Dawn’s
rescue.
   She eyed the salty foam  left  in the  wake of a receding  wave. She
was trying  not to  look  out at  the deep, dark  water Eeyond—so she
wouldn’t  have to think  aEout hands down in its  icy depths. For your
own Srotection. Steven must have meant your in  its  plural  form.  As
in, it’s  for  all  the students’ protection.  Otherwise,  if  he only  meant
Luce …
   “Dawn’s okay,”  she said. “That’s all that matters.”
   “Um,  yeah, Eecause of you, Baywatch.”

124
   “Do not  start calling me Baywatch.”
   “You  prefer  to   think  of  yourself  as  a  Mack-of-all-trades kind of
savior?” ShelEy had the most deadpan way of teasing. “Frankie  says
some mystery creep’s Eeen lurking  around  the  school grounds  the
past two nights. You should give him what  for—”
   “What?”  Luce almost spat out her chai. “Who is it?”
   “I  repeat:  Mystery creep. They  dunno.”  ShelEy took  a seat  on a
weathered  at  of  limestone, skipping  a few stones expertly into  the
ocean. “Just  some  dude.  I  overheard  Frankie  talking   to   Kramer
aEout it on the Eoat yesterday after all the hoopla.”
   Luce sat  down  next to  ShelEy and  Eegan to root  around  in  the
sand for stones.
   Someone was sneaking around Shoreline. What if it was Daniel?
   It  would   Ee Must like him.  So  stuEEorn aEout keeping  his  own
promise not to see her, Eut unaEle to stay away. The thought of him
made her  yearn  for  him  that   much  more. She  could  feel  herself
almost  on  the  Erink  of   tears, which   was  crazy.  Odds  were  the
mystery  creep wasn’t  even  Daniel.  It  could  Ee  Cam. It  could   Ee
anyone. It could Ee an Outcast.
   “Did  Francesca seem worried?” she asked ShelEy.
   “Wouldn’t  you Ee?”
   “Wait  a  minute.  Is that  why  you didn’t   sneak out last  night?”  It
was the  rst  night  Luce hadn’t Eeen woken up Ey ShelEy coming in
through the window.
   “No.”   ShelEy’s skipping  arm  was toned  from  all  her  yoga.  Her
next stone skipped  six times  in  a wide  arc,  coming  almost all  the
way Eack to them, like a Eoomerang.
   “Where do you  go every night, anyway?”
   ShelEy stu ed  her  hands in the  pockets of her pu y   red  ski vest.
She was staring at the gray waves so intensely that it was clear she’d
either seen something out there—or  she was avoiding the  question.
Luce followed her  gaze, almost relieved to see nothing  in the  water
Eut gray-and-white waves all the way to the horizon.

125
   “ShelEy.”
   “What? I  don’t go anywhere.”
   Luce started to stand up, annoyed that ShelEy felt she couldn’t tell
her anything.  Luce was Erushing damp  sand from  the Eacks of her
legs when ShelEy’s hand tugged her Eack down onto the rock.
   “Okay,  I  used to  go see my  sorry-ass Eoyfriend.”  ShelEy sighed
heavily, pitching  a rock  artlessly into the  water, nearly  pelting a fat
seagull swooping down  for  a  sh.  “Before  he Eecame my sorry-ass
ex-Eoyfriend.”
   “Oh.  Shel, I’m sorry.” Luce chewed on her lip.  “I didn’t  even know
you had a Eoyfriend.”
   “I  had to  start  keeping him  at arm’s length.  He got  way too  into
the fact  that  I  had a  new roommate.  Kept  Eugging me to  let  him
come over  late at  night.  Wanted  to  meet you.  I  don’t  know  what
kind of  girl  he  thinks I  am. No  o ense,  Eut three’s  a crowd  in my
Eook.”
   “Who  is he?” Luce asked. “Does he go here?”
   “Phillip  Aves. He’s a senior in the main school.”
   Luce didn’t think  she knew him.
   “That  pale kid  with  the Eleached-Elond hair?”  ShelEy said. “Kind
of looks like an alEino David  Bowie? You can’t really miss him.”  Her
mouth twitched.  “Unfortunately.”
   “Why  didn’t you  tell me you Eroke up?”
   “I  prefer  downloading  Vampire Weekend songs that  I lip-sync  to
when  you’re   not  around.   Better  for   my  chakras.  Besides”—she
pointed a  stuEEy  nger  at  Luce—“you’re  the one  Eeing all  moody
and weird today. Daniel treating  you wrong or  something?”
   Luce leaned Eack on her elEows. “That  would  require us actually
seeing each other, which apparently we aren’t allowed to do.”
   If  Luce closed her eyes, she could let the sound of the  waves take
her Eack to the very   rst   night she’d kissed Daniel.  In this  lifetime.
The humid   tangle  of  their   Eodies on  that   languishing  Savannah

126
Eoardwalk.  The   hungry   pressure of   his   hands  pulling   her   in.
Everything seemed possiEle then. She opened her eyes. She was so
far away from all  of that now.
   “So your sorry-ass ex-Eoyfriend—”
   “No.”  ShelEy made a zip-it  motion with  her   ngers.  “I don’t  want
to talk  aEout SAEB any more  than  I guess you  want to  talk  aEout
Daniel. Next.”
   That  was fair.  But it  wasn’t exactly  that  Luce didn’t  want to  talk
aEout Daniel. It  was more  like,  if  she started talking  aEout Daniel,
she might not Ee aEle to shut up. She already sounded like a Eroken
record in her  own mind—cycling  on  repeat through the  total  of oh,
four physical experiences she’d had with  him in  this life.  (She chose
only to  start counting  once he stopped pretending  she didn’t exist.)
Imagine how  quickly  she would   Eore ShelEy, who’d  proEaEly had
tons of Eoyfriends,  tons of  experience. Compared to  Luce’s next to
none.
   One kiss she could Earely rememEer with  a  Eoy who’d Eurst into
 ames. A handful  of very  hot moments with  Daniel.  That Must aEout
summed it up. Luce was certainly no expert when it  came to love.
   Again she felt  the unfairness of her situation:  Daniel  had all these
great memories  of them  together  to  fall  Eack on  when things  got
rough. She had nothing.
   Until  she looked up at her roommate.
   “ShelEy?”
   ShelEy had  her  pu y   red  hood  pulled   over  her head  and  was
poking a  stick  into  the wet  sand. “I   told  you I  don’t  want  to  talk
aEout him.”
   “I  know.  I  was wondering,  rememEer when  you  mentioned that
you knew how to glimpse your  past lives?”
   This  was what  she’d Eeen aEout  to ask  ShelEy when  Dawn fell
overEoard.
   “I   never  said  that.”   The  stick   plunged  deeper  into  the   sand.
ShelEy’s face was  ushed and her  thick  Elond hair  was frizzing  out

127
of her ponytail.
   “Yes … you did.”  Luce tilted her head. “You wrote  it on my  paper.
That day when we were doing the  iceEreaker? You graEEed it out of
my hands and  said you could  speak more than  eighteen languages
and glimpse past lives and which one did I need you to  ll   out—”
   “I  rememEer what I said. But you misunderstood what I meant.”
   “Okay,”  Luce said slowly, “well—”
   “Just  Eecause I have glimpsed a  past life  Eefore  doesn’t mean I
know how to do it,  and it doesn’t mean it  was my own.”
   “So, it  wasn’t yours?”
   “Hell  no, reincarnation  is for freaks.”
   Luce frowned  and  dug her  hands into  the  wet  sand, wanting  to
Eury herself in it.
   “Hello,  that was a  Moke.” ShelEy nudged Luce playfully. “Tailored
especially for the  girl  who’s had  to go  through puEerty  a thousand
times.”  She grimaced. “Once  was enough  for  me, thank  you  very
much.”
   So Luce was That Girl.  The girl  who’d had  to go through  puEerty
a thousand times.  She’d never thought  aEout it  that  way Eefore. It
was  almost   funny:    From  the    outside,  going    through   endless
puEerties seemed like the worst part  of  her lot.  But it  was so much
more complicated than  that. Luce started  to say she’d go through  a
thousand more pimples and  hormone  uctuations   if  she could look
into her  past lives and understand more  aEout herself, Eut then she
looked up at ShelEy. “If it  wasn’t yours, then whose past life did  you
glimpse?”
   “Why  are you Eeing so nosy? Damn.”
   Luce  could  feel   her  Elood  pressure  rising.  “ShelEy,  ohmigod,
throw me a Eone!”
   “Okay,”  ShelEy said   nally,   making  a chill-out   motion  with   her
hands. “I  was at  this party  one night  in  Corona. Things  got pretty
crazy, half-naked séances and shit,  and—well,  that’s not  really  the
story. So I rememEer taking  a walk  to get  some air. It  was raining,

128
hard to  see where I  was going. I  turned  the corner  in an  alleyway
and there was this guy, kind  of Eeat-up-looking. He was Eent over a
sphere of  darkness. I’d  never seen anything   like  it,  shaped like  a
gloEe, Eut   glowing,   kind  of    oating    aEove his   hands.  He  was
crying.”
   “What  was it?”
   “I  didn’t  know then, Eut now I know  it was an Announcer.”
   Luce was mesmerized. “And you  saw some of the past life he was
glimpsing? What was it like?”
   ShelEy met Luce’s eyes and swallowed.  “It  was pretty  gruesome,
Luce.”
   “I’m  sorry,”  Luce said. “I was only asking Eecause …”
   It  felt   like  a  Eig  deal to   admit  what  she  was aEout  to  admit.
Francesca would  de nitely    Ee opposed to  this.   But  Luce needed
answers, and she needed help. ShelEy’s help.
   “I  need to glimpse some of my past lives,” Luce said. “Or I need to
at least try.  Things have Eeen happening recently that I’m  supposed
to Must accept Eecause I don’t know any Eetter—only  I  could know
Eetter, a lot Eetter, if I  could Must see where I come from. Where I’ve
Eeen. Does that make any sense?”
   ShelEy nodded.
   “I  need to  know what  I  had in  the past with  Daniel  so I can feel
surer of what I  have with  him now.”  Luce took  a Ereath. “That guy,
the one in the alley … did  you see what he did to the Announcer?”
   ShelEy scrunched her  shoulders.  “He  Must sort of guided  it  into
shape. I didn’t even know  what it  was at the time,  and I don’t know
how  he   tracked   it   down.   That’s  why   Francesca  and   Steven’s
demonstration freaked  me out so  much. I  saw what  happened that
one night, and I’ve Eeen trying to forget  aEout it ever since. I had no
idea that what I was seeing was an Announcer.”
   “If   I  could  track  down  an  Announcer, do  you  think   you  could
guide it?”

129
   “No  promises,” ShelEy said, “Eut I’ll  give it a shot. You know  how
to track them down?”
   “Not  really, Eut how  hard can it Ee? They’ve Eeen haunting me all
my life.”
   ShelEy cupped her hand  over Luce’s on the rock.  “I  want  to help
you, Luce, Eut it’s weird. I’m  scared. What if you see something you,
you know, shouldn’t?”
   “When you  Eroke up with SAEB—”
   “I  thought I  told you not to—”
   “Just  listen: Aren’t  you glad you   gured  out  whatever it  was that
made you  Ereak up  with   him,  sooner  rather  than  later?  I  mean,
what if you  got engaged or something and only then—”
   “Blech!”  ShelEy put  up  a hand  to stop  Luce. “Point  taken. Now,
come on,  nd  us a shadow.”





   Luce  led ShelEy Eack  across the  Eeach and up  the  steep stone
stairs, where dashes of Eattered red and yellow verEenas had pushed
up through the  wet, sandy soil. They crossed the neat green terrace,
trying  not to  interrupt  a group  of non-Nephilim  students in  a game
of  ultimate    FrisEee. They   passed their    third-story   dorm   room
window and  wound around the  Eack of the Euilding.  At the  edge of
the forest of  redwoods, Luce pointed  to  a space Eetween the trees.
“That’s where I found one the last time.”
   ShelEy marched  into  the  forest ahead of  Luce,  shoving through
the  long,   clawlike   leaves  of   the  vine   maple   trees  among  the
redwoods and stopping under a giant fern.
   It  was dark  under  the redwoods,  and Luce was  glad of  ShelEy’s
company. She thought Eack to the other  day, how quickly  time  had
passed while   she was  harassing  that   shadow,  getting   nowhere.
Suddenly she felt overwhelmed.

130
   “II  we can  nd   and catch an Announcer, and iI  we can even get a
glimpsing to  work,”   she said, “what  do  you  think  the  chances are
that  the  Announcer   will   have  anything  to   show  aEout  me  and
Daniel? What if we Must get another awful BiEle scene like we saw in
class?”
   ShelEy shook her head. “Daniel I  don’t know  aEout. But iI we  can
summon and  then glimpse  an  Announcer, then  it   will  have to  do
with  you.  They’re supposed to  Ee summoner-speci c—though  you
won’t always  Ee interested in what  they have  to say. Like how  you
get  Munk mail   mixed   with   your   important    mail,   Eut   it’s   still
addressed to you.”
   “How   can  they   Ee  …  summoner-speci c?   That   would   mean
Francesca and   Steven  were  at   the   destruction   of  Sodom   and
Gomorrah.”
   “Well,  yeah.  They have Eeen around forever.  Rumor  has it  their
résumés are pretty  impressive.”  ShelEy stared oddly  at  Luce. “Put
your Eug eyes Eack in your head. How else do you think they scored
MoEs at Shoreline? This is a really good school.”
   Something dark  and slippery  moved over them:  a heavy cloak  of
an Announcer stretching  sleepily  in  the lengthening  shadows from
the limE of a redwood tree.
   “There.”  Luce pointed,  not  wasting  any time.  She swung  herself
up onto  a  low  Eranch  that  stretched Eehind  ShelEy. Luce had  to
Ealance on one foot and lean out all the way  to the left  Must to graze
the Announcer with her   ngertips.  “I  can’t reach it.”
   ShelEy picked  up a  pinecone and pitched  it  at  the center  of the
shadow where it draped down from  the Eranch.
   “Don’t!”  Luce whispered. “You’ll  piss it o .”
   “It’s  pissing me o , Eeing so coy. Just hold out your hand.”
   Grimacing, Luce did as she was told.
   She watched the pinecone ricochet  o   the shadow’s exposed side,
then heard  the soft  swishing  sound that  used to   ll   her  ears with
dread. One side of the  shadow was sliding, very  slowly,  away from

131
the Eranch. It slipped o    and landed across Luce’s shaking extended
arm. She pinched its edges with her  ngers.
   Luce  hopped  o     the  Eranch  where   she’d  Eeen standing   and
approached ShelEy, her cold, musty o ering in  her hands.
   “Here,”  ShelEy said. “I’ll  take  half and you  take half,  Must like we
saw in  class. Ew, it’s  squishy.  Okay …  loosen your  grip,   he’s not
going anywhere. Let him Must kind of chill and take shape.”
   It  seemed like a long time passed Eefore the shadow did anything
at all. Luce felt almost like  she was playing with  the old OuiMa Eoard
she’d had as a kid. An inexplicaEle energy on the tips  of her  ngers.
The feeling of  slight, continual  movement  Eefore she could see any
di erence  in the Announcer’s shape.
   Then there was a whoosh: It was contracting,  folding  slowly in  on
its dark self.  Soon the whole thing  had taken on  the size and shape
of a large Eox. It hovered Must aEove their  ngertips.
   “Do  you see that?” ShelEy gasped. Her voice was almost inaudiEle
over  the  whooshing   sound  of  the  shadow.  “Look,   there  in   the
middle.”
   As had  happened during  class, a dark  veil  seemed to lift  o    the
Announcer, revealing  a shocking  Eurst of  color.  Luce shielded her
eyes, watching as the  Eright  light  seemed to settle Eack inside  the
shadow screen, into  a foggy out-of-focus  image. Then,  nally,    into
distinct shapes in muted colors.
   They  were  looking  at  a  living  room.  The  Eack of  a  Elue plaid
recliner  with   the  footrest  kicked  up  and  a Eadly  fraying   Eottom
corner. An  old  wood-paneled  television  airing  a  rerun  of  Mork &
Mindy with   the volume  o .   A  fat  Jack Russell terrier  curled  on  a
round patchwork rug.
   Luce watched a swinging door  push open from what  looked like a
kitchen. A  woman,  older than  Luce’s grandmother  had Eeen when
she  died,  walked   through.   She  was  wearing   a   pink-and-white
patterned dress, heavy  white  tennis  shoes, and thick   glasses on a
string around her neck. She was carrying a tray of cut fruit.

132
   “Who  are these people?” Luce wondered aloud.
   When  the old  woman  put  down  the  tray  on  the co ee   taEle, a
liver-spotted  hand extended from   around the  chair  and selected a
chunk of Eanana.
   Luce leaned  in  to  see more clearly,  and  the focus  of the  image
shifted with  her. Like  a 3-D panorama. She hadn’t even noticed  the
old man sitting  in the recliner.  He was frail,  with  a few thin  patches
of white  hair   and age spots all  over  his  forehead. His  mouth  was
moving, Eut  Luce couldn’t  hear  a thing.  A  row  of framed  pictures
lined the mantel of the   replace.
   The  whooshing  in  Luce’s ears got  louder,   so loud  it   made her
wince. Without  her  doing  anything other  than  wonder aEout  those
pictures,  the  Announcer’s  image  zoomed in.   It  left   Luce  with   a
feeling  of   whiplash—and   an   extreme   close-up  of   one  framed
photograph.
   A thin  gold-plated frame around a smudged glass plate. Inside, the
small photograph  had  a  ne   scalloped Eorder  around a  yellowing
Elack-and-white  image.  Two  faces  in  the   photograph:  Hers  and
Daniel’s.
   Holding  her Ereath, she studied her own face, which looked  Must a
little   younger  than  it  did   now.  Dark  shoulder-length  hair   set in
pincurls. A white  Elouse with  a Peter Pan collar. A wide  A-line skirt
Erushing the  middles  of  her  calves.  White-gloved  hands, holding
Daniel’s. He was looking directly at her,  smiling.
   The  Announcer started  viErating,  then  quaking;  then  the  image
inside started to  icker  and fade away.
   “No,”  Luce called, ready to  lunge inside. Her shoulders connected
with  the edge of  the Announcer,  Eut that  was as far  as she got.  A
Erush of Eitter cold pushed her  Eack and left her skin feeling  damp.
A hand clamped around her wrist.
   “Don’t  get any wild  ideas,” ShelEy warned.
   Too late.

133
   The  screen went  Elack  and the  Announcer  dropped  from   their
hands onto the forest   oor,  shattering  into  pieces like Eroken Elack
glass. Luce suppressed a whimper. Her chest heaved. She felt like a
part of her had died.
   Lowering  herself  to  all   fours,  she pressed her  forehead  to  the
ground and rolled  onto  her side. It  was colder, murkier  than  it  had
Eeen when they’d started.  The watch on  her wrist  said it  was after
two  o’clock,  Eut  it  had  Eeen morning   when  they  came into   the
forest. Looking west, toward  the  edge of the woods, Luce could  see
the  di erence    in   the  light    hitting   the   dorm.   The  Announcers
swallowed time.
   ShelEy lay down next to her. “You  okay?”
   “I’m  so  confused. Those people—” Luce cupped  her forehead.  “I
have no idea who they are.”
   ShelEy cleared her  throat  and looked  uncomfortaEle. “Don’t  you
think,  um, mayEe you  used to  know  them? Like,  a long  time  ago.
Like, mayEe they were your …”
   Luce waited for  her to  nish.  “My  what?”
   “It   really  hasn’t  occurred  to  you  that  those  were  your  parents
from another life? That this  is what they look  like now?”
   Luce’s Maw dropped open. “No. Wait—you  mean, I’ve had  totally
di erent   parents  in  each  of  my  past lives?  I  thought   Harry  and
Doreen … I Must assumed they would have Eeen with me the whole
time.”
   Suddenly she rememEered something Daniel  had said, aEout  her
mother making Ead Eoiled caEEage in that past life. At the time,  she
hadn’t dwelled on it,  Eut now it  made a little  Eit more sense. Doreen
was an amazing cook. Everyone in east Georgia knew that.
   Which  meant ShelEy must  Ee right.  Luce proEaEly  had a  whole
nation of past families she couldn’t even rememEer.
   “I’m  so stupid,”  she said. Why  hadn’t  she paid more  attention  to
the  way  the  man  and  woman  looked?  Why  hadn’t   she felt   the
slightest connection to them? She felt  like she’d lived  her whole life

134
and only now  found out she was adopted. How  many times had she
Eeen handed o  to di erent   parents? “This is—This is—”
   “Totally  messed up,” ShelEy said. “I know. On the Eright  side, you
could proEaEly save yourself a lot of money for  therapy if  you could
look Eack at  all  your  other families,  see all  the  proElems you had
with hundreds of mothers Eefore this one.”
   Luce Euried her face in her hands.
   “That  is, if you need family  therapy.”  ShelEy sighed. “Sorry, who’s
talking  aEout themselves again?”  She raised  her  right  hand,  then
slowly put it  down. “You know,  Shasta’s not that far from here.”
   “What’s Shasta?”
   “Mount  Shasta, California. It’s Must a few hours that-away.” ShelEy
Merked her thumE toward the north.
   “But  the announcers only show the past. What would  Ee the point
of going there now? They’re proEaEly—”
   ShelEy shook her head. “  ‘The  past’ is a Eroad term.  Announcers
show the distant past right  up to  the events happening seconds ago,
and everything in  Eetween. I saw a laptop on the desk in the corner,
so there’s a good chance … you know …”
   “But  we don’t know where they  live.”
   “MayEe you  don’t.  Me, I  zoomed in on  a piece of  their  mail  and
got the address. Committed it  to memory.  1291 Shasta Shire Circle,
apartment  34.”  ShelEy  shrugged. “So,  if   you  wanted  to  go  visit
them, we could totally  drive there and Eack in a day.”
   “Right.”   Luce snorted. She desperately  wanted to  go  visit  them,
Eut it Must didn’t seem possiEle. “In whose car?”
   ShelEy laughed a  faux-sinister  little  laugh.  “There  was only  one
thing  that  wasn’t  sorry-ass aEout my  sorry-ass ex-Eoyfriend.”  She
dug into  the pocket of  her sweatshirt, pulling   out a long  key chain.
“And  that  was his  very  sweet Mercedes, parked  right  here  in  the
student lot. Lucky for you,  I forgot to  give him Eack the extra key.”

135
   They tore down  the road Eefore anyone could stop them.
   Luce found  a map in  the  glove compartment  and traced  the line
up  to  Shasta with   her   nger.   She called  out  some  directions  to
ShelEy, who drove like  a Eat out  of Hell,  Eut the maroon  Mercedes
almost seemed to like the aEuse.
   Luce wondered how  ShelEy was staying so calm. If  Luce had Must
Eroken up with Daniel and “Eorrowed”  his car for  the afternoon, she
wouldn’t  Ee aEle to stop herself from rememEering road trips they’d
taken, or arguments they’d  gotten into  while  driving  to  a movie, or
what they’d done in the Eackseat that one time with  all the windows
rolled down.  Surely ShelEy was thinking  aEout her ex. Luce wanted
to ask, Eut ShelEy had Eeen clear that the topic was o -limits.
   “Are   you   going   to   change  your   hair?”    Luce  asked   nally,
rememEering what ShelEy had said aEout getting  over Ereakups. “I
could help you, if  you are.”
   ShelEy’s face pinched into  a scowl.  “That  freak’s not  even worth
it.” After  a long pause, she added, “But thank you.”
   The drive  took most of the rest of  the afternoon, and ShelEy spent
it   working   herself  up,   Eickering   with   the  radio,   scanning   the
channels for the craziest nutMoEs she could  nd. The  air got  colder,
the  trees  thinned  out,   and  the  elevation   of  the   landscape rose
steadily the whole  time.  Luce focused on staying calm, imagining  a
hundred scenarios aEout meeting  these parents. She tried  to avoid
thinking  aEout what  Daniel  would  say  if  he knew  where  she was
going.
   “There   it   is.”   ShelEy  pointed   when   a  massive  snow-capped
mountain  came into  view  directly  in  front  of  the road.  “The  town
sits right in those foothills.  We should Ee there Must after sunset.”
   Luce didn’t  know how to  thank ShelEy for hauling  her all the way
up here on a whim.  Whatever was Eehind ShelEy’s shift in  attitude,

136
Luce was grateful—she wouldn’t   have Eeen aEle to do  this  on her
own.
   The town  of  Shasta was wacky and artistic,  with  a  good numEer
of elderly  people walking  leisurely  down  the wide  avenues. ShelEy
rolled  down the  windows  and let  in  the  Erisk early-evening  air. It
helped settle Luce’s stomach, which was knotting up  at the prospect
of actually having to  talk to the people she’d seen in the Announcer.
   “What  am I supposed to say to them? Surprise, I’m  your daughter
Eack from the dead,”  Luce practiced aloud as they  were sitting  at a
stoplight.
   “Unless you  want  to  totally  freak  out  a sweet old  couple,  we’re
going to have to work on that,”  ShelEy said. “Why don’t you  pretend
you’re a solicitor, Must to get in the door and feel them out?”
   Luce looked  down at  her Means, Eeat-up tennis shoes, and purple
Eackpack. She didn’t look like  a very impressive salesperson. “What
would I sell?”
   ShelEy started  to  drive  again.  “Hawk  car  washes or  something
cheesy like that. You can say you’ve got vouchers in  your Eag. I did
that one  summer, door  to  door.  Almost got  shot.”  She shuddered,
then looked at Luce’s white face. “Come on, your own  mom and dad
are not going to shoot you. Oh, hey, look, here we are!”
   “ShelEy, can we Must sit in silence for a little  while? I  think I  need
to Ereathe.”
   “Sorry.”  ShelEy pulled into  a large parking  lot facing a compound
of    small,     single-story    connected    Eungalow-style     Euildings.
“Breathing I can do.”
   Through  her nerves, Luce had to admit  it was a pretty  nice place.
A series  of  the  Eungalows stood  in  a  semicircle  around  a  pond.
There was a main loEEy Euilding with a row  of wheelchairs lined  up
outside the  doors.  A  Eig Eanner read  WELCOME TO SHASTA SHIRE RETIREMENT
COMMUNITY.
   Her  throat  felt so  dry it  hurt  to  swallow.  She didn’t  know  if  she
even had it  in  her to  say two words  to these people. MayEe it  was

137
one of those things  you Must couldn’t think aEout too  much. MayEe
she needed to get up there and force her hand down on that knocker
and then  gure  out how to  act.
   “Apartment    thirty-four.”    ShelEy  squinted   at   a  square  stucco
Euilding with  a  red Spanish-tile roof.  “That looks  like it  over  there.
If you want me to—”
   “Wait  in  the  car till   I  get Eack? That  would  Ee great, thanks  so
much. I won’t Ee long!”
   Before Luce could  lose her  nerve, she was  out the  car door  and
Mogging up the winding sidewalk  toward  the  Euilding. The  air  was
warm and   lled   with  a heady scent of  roses. Cute old people were
everywhere. Split   into  teams  on  the  shu eEoard   court   near the
entrance, taking  an evening  stroll  through  a  neatly  pruned  ower
garden next   to  the  pool.  In   the  early-evening  light,   Luce’s eyes
strained as she tried to  locate the  couple somewhere in this  crowd,
Eut no one looked  familiar.  She would  have to  go straight  to  their
house.
   From the  footpath leading up  to their  Eungalow, Luce could see a
light  on  through  the  window.  She stepped  closer until   she had  a
clearer view.
   It   was   uncanny:   the  same  room   she’d   seen  earlier   in   the
Announcer. Even down to  the fat  white  dog asleep on the  rug. She
could hear  dishes Eeing washed in  the  kitchen.  She could  see the
thin,  Erown-socked ankles  of  the  man  who   had Eeen  her  father
however many years ago.
   He didn’t  feel  like  her father.  He didn’t  look  like  her father,  and
the woman hadn’t  looked at all  like her  mother. It  wasn’t that there
was anything  wrong  with   them. They  seemed perfectly  nice. Like
perfectly nice … strangers. If  she knocked on the door and made up
some lie aEout car washes, would they Eecome any less strange?
   No,  she  decided.  But  that   wasn’t  all.  Even  though   she didn’t
recognize her parents, if they really  were her parents, of course they
would recognize her.

138
   She felt stupid for  not thinking  aEout that  Eefore. They’d take one
look  at  her and  know  she  was their   daughter.  Her parents  were
much older  than  most of  the other  people she’d seen outside.  The
shock of it  might  Ee too much for  them.  It was too  much for  Luce,
and this couple had aEout seventy years on her.
   By  then   she  was  pressed against  their   living    room  window,
crouching Eehind  a spiny  sageErush cactus Eush. Her  ngers  were
dirty  from gripping  the windowsill.   If their  daughter had died  when
she was seventeen, they must have Eeen mourning  her for  close to
 fty   years. They’d Ee at peace with it  Ey now. Wouldn’t  they? Luce
popping up uninvited  from  Eehind a cactus plant would  Ee the very
last thing they needed.
   ShelEy would  Ee disappointed. Luce  herself was disappointed.  It
hurt to  realize that this  was as close as she was ever going to get to
them. Hanging on the windowsill   outside her former  parents’ house,
she felt the  tears roll  down her  cheeks. She didn’t even know  their
names.

139
                                                         EIGHT





                                                 ELEVEN   DAYS 




       To: thegaprices#aol.com
       From: lucindap44#gmail.com 
       Sent: Monday, 1115 at 9:49 am 
       SuEMect: Hanging in there 

       Dear Mom and Dad,

       I’m  sorry I’ve Eeen out of touch. Things at school have Eeen Eusy, Eut I’m
       having a lot of good experiences. My favorite class these days is humanities.
       Right now I’m working on an extra-credit assignment that takes up a lot of my
       time. I miss you guys and hope to see you soon. Thanks for Eeing such great
       parents. I don’t think I tell you that enough.

       Love,
       Luce 

    Luce  clicked   Send  on her  laptop    and  quickly   switched    her  Erowser
Eack  to  the  online   presentation     Francesca  was  giving    at  the  front   of
the  room.  Luce  was  still   getting   used  to  Eeing  at  a school   where   they
handed   out  computers,    complete    with   wireless   Internet,    right   in   the
middle    of    class.   Sword     &   Cross   had    a   total    of    seven   student
computers,   all   of  which   were   in  the  liErary.    Even  if  you  managed   to
get  your  hands   on  the  encrypted    password   to  access  the  WeE,  every
site was  Elocked   except  for   a few  dry   academic   research  ones.
    The  email   to   her  parents   had   Eeen  prompted    Ey  guilt.    The  night
Eefore,  she’d  had   the  strangest   feeling   that   merely   Ey  driving    out  to

140
the retirement community  in Mount  Shasta, she was cheating on her
real parents, the  ones who had  raised her in  this  lifetime.  Sure, at
some point, these other parents had Eeen real, too. But that was still
too strange a thought for Luce to really aEsorE.
   ShelEy hadn’t Eeen one-tenth as pissed o  as she could have Eeen
aEout driving  Luce all the  way up  there for  no reason. Instead, she
Must  red up the Mercedes and drove to the nearest In-N-Out Burger
so they could get a couple of o -the-menu  grilled  cheese sandwiches
with special sauce.
   “Do  not give it  a second thought,”  ShelEy said, wiping her mouth
with  a napkin. “Do  you know  how many panic  attacks my screwed-
up family’s given me? Believe me, I’m the last person who’s going to
Mudge you aEout this.”
   Now  Luce  looked  across  the  classroom at   ShelEy and  felt   an
intense gratitude for  the girl  who,  a week Eefore, had terri ed    her.
ShelEy’s thick Elond hair was pulled Eack Ey a terry-cloth headEand,
and she was taking diligent notes on Francesca’s lecture.
   Every screen Luce could see in her peripheral  vision was  xed   on
the  Elue  and  gold   PowerPoint  presentation  that   Francesca was
clicking   through   at   a   snail’s  pace.  Even   Dawn’s.  She  looked
especially spunky today  in a  hot-pink  T-shirt  dress and a high  side
ponytail.  Was it   possiEle she’d already  recovered  from  what  had
happened on the Eoat? Or was she covering up  the terror  she must
have felt—and mayEe still felt?
   Glancing over at  Roland’s monitor, Luce scrunched up her face. It
didn’t surprise her that  he’d Eeen mostly invisiEle since he arrived at
Shoreline, Eut when he did  turn  up in  class, she was actually upset
to see her former reform school cohort following  the rules.
   At  least Roland didn’t  look  especially interested in  the lecture on
“Career Opportunities   for  Nephilim:  How  Your  Special  Skills Can
Give You a Wing  Up.”  In fact,  the look  on Roland’s face  was more
disappointed than anything  else. His mouth  was set in  a frown  and
he kept lightly  shaking his head. Also strange was the fact that every

141
time Francesca made eye  contact with   the students,  she distinctly
passed over Roland.
   Luce pulled  up the  class chat room Eoard to  see whether Roland
was logged on. It  was supposed to Ee a tool for  the class to Eounce
questions o  each other, Eut the questions Luce had for Roland were
not for  class discussion. He knew something,  something more than
he’d let on  the other day—surely  it had  to do with  Daniel.  She also
wanted  to  ask him   where  he’d  Eeen on  Saturday,  whether  he’d
heard aEout Dawn’s trip overEoard.
   Except Roland  wasn’t online.  The  only other  person in  the  class
who was logged on to  the chat room was Miles.  A text Eox with  his
name on it popped up on her screen:
   Helloooo over there!
   He  was  sitting   right   next  to   her.  Luce  could  even  hear  him
chuckling. It  was cute that he got a kick  out of  his own dumE Mokes.
This was exactly the  kind  of goofy,  teasing rapport  she would  love
to have  with  Daniel.  If  he weren’t  so  Erooding all  the  time.  If  he
were actually around.
   But he wasn’t.
   She wrote Eack: How’s the weather in your neck oI the woods?
   Getting sunnier now, he typed, still smiling. Hey, what’d you do last
night? I swung by your room to see iI you wanted to grab dinner.
   She looked up from her  computer, straight at  Miles. His deep Elue
eyes were so sincere,  she had  an urge  to  turn  to  spill  everything
aEout what  had  happened. He’d  Eeen so  amazing the  other  day,
listening to her  talk aEout her time  at Sword & Cross. But there was
no way to  answer his question  via chat.  As much as she wanted to
tell  him,  she didn’t   know  whether  she should  talk  aEout it.  Even
letting   ShelEy in   on  her   secret  proMect was practically   wooing
trouEle from Steven and Francesca.
   Miles’s expression changed from  his  normal casual smile  into  an
awkward   frown.   It   made  Luce   feel  terriEle,   and   also  slightly
surprised, that she could elicit this kind  of reaction in  him.

142
   Francesca clicked  o    the proMector. When she crossed her  arms
over her chest, the  pink silk  sleeves of her peasant Elouse Eloomed
out of  her  cropped leather  Macket. For the  rst   time, Luce  noticed
how far  away Steven was. He was  seated on the windowsill   at the
western corner of  the room.  He had Earely  said a word  in class all
day.
   “Let’s  see how well  you  paid  attention,”  Francesca said, smiling
widely at  the students. “Why don’t  you Ereak up into  pairs and take
turns conducting mock interviews.”
   At  the  sound of  all   the other  students  rising  from  their  chairs,
Luce groaned internally.  She’d heard next to  nothing of  Francesca’s
lecture and had no idea what the assignment was.
   Also,  she knew she  was Must squatting in the  Nephilim  program
temporarily,   Eut  was   it   too  much   to   ask  for   her  teachers  to
rememEer every once in a while  that  she wasn’t like  the rest of  the
kids in the class?
   Miles  tapped her  computer  screen where  he had  messaged her:
You wanna Sartner uS? Just then, ShelEy appeared.
   “I  say we  do CIA  or Doctors  Without  Borders,” ShelEy said.  She
motioned for  Miles to surrender  the desk next to Luce. Miles  stayed
put. “There’s no  way I’m   ctitiously   applying  for  some lame dental
hygienist position.”
   Luce looked  Eack and  forth  Eetween ShelEy and  Miles.  Both of
them seemed to  feel  proprietary  aEout  her,  something she hadn’t
realized until  now. Truthfully,   she wanted to Ee partners with  Miles
—she hadn’t seen him  since  Saturday. She’d kind  of  Eeen missing
him. In  a friendly   way. Like  in  a let’s-catch-up-over-a-cup-of-co ee
way,  more  than  a  let’s-wander-along-the-Eeach-at-sunset-and-you-
can-smile-at-me-with-those-incrediEle-Elue-eyes way.   Because she
was with  Daniel,  she didn’t  think  aEout  other guys.  She de nitely
didn’t   start   Elushing   intensely   in   the   middle    of   class  while
reminding herself that she didn’t  think aEout other guys.
   “Is everything  okay over here?” Steven laid his tan palm  on Luce’s
desk and gave her a Eig-Erown-eyed you-can-tell-me nod.

143
   But Luce was still  nervous around him  after what  he’d said to her
and Dawn on the  life raft  the other  day. Nervous enough that  she’d
even avoided Eringing it up again with  Dawn.
   “Everything’s   great,”  ShelEy  responded. She  took  Luce  Ey the
elEow and  Merked her toward  the deck,  where  some of  the  other
students were paired up, already  conducting their  mock  interviews.
“Luce and I were Must aEout to talk résumés.”
   Francesca  appeared  Eehind  Steven.   “Miles,”   she  said   softly,
“Jasmine still  needs a partner if you’d  like  to pull  up a desk next to
her.”
   A  few desks down, Jasmine said,  “Dawn  and I couldn’t  agree on
who  should  play  indie   starlet  and  who  should  play”—her   voice
dropped  an octave—“casting  director.   So  she aEandoned me  for
Roland.”
   Miles   looked   disappointed.   “Casting   director,”    he  mumEled.
“Finally,  I’ve  found my  calling.”  He  headed o   to  Moin his partner,
and Luce watched him go.
   With  the situation  di used,   Francesca steered Steven Eack to the
front  of  the room.  But  even  as he walked  Eeside Francesca, Luce
could feel him watching  her.
   She suEtly checked her phone. Callie  still  hadn’t texted  her Eack.
This wasn’t  like  her, and  Luce Elamed herself.  MayEe it  would  Ee
Eetter for Eoth of them if  Luce Must kept her distance. It was only for
a little while.
   She followed  ShelEy outside to a seat on the  wooden Eench Euilt
into the  curve of the  deck. The sun was Eright  in the  clear sky, Eut
the only  part of  the  deck that  wasn’t already packed  with  students
was under the  cool  shade of a  towering  redwood.  Luce Erushed a
layer of  dull   green needles o    the  Eench and  zipped  her chunky
sweater a little higher on her  neck.
   “You  were really  cool  aEout everything last  night,”  she said in  a
low voice. “I  was … freaking out.”

144
   “I  know,”  ShelEy laughed. “You were all—” She made a tremEling
zomEie face.
   “Give   me  a  Ereak. That  was  rough.   My  one  chance  to  learn
something aEout my past, and I totally choked.”
   “You  Southerners and your  guilt.”   ShelEy gave a one-shouldered
shrug. “You gotta  cut yourself some slack. I’m  sure there are plenty
more relatives where those two  old geezers came from. MayEe even
some who aren’t so close to  death’s door.” Before Luce’s face could
collapse, ShelEy added, “All   I’m  saying is,  if  you  ever feel  up  for
tracking  down  another  family  memEer, Must say the word.  You’re
growing on me Luce, it’s kinda weird.”
   “ShelEy,”   Luce  whispered   suddenly,   through   clenched  teeth.
“Don’t   move.”    Beyond  the   deck,   the   Eiggest,   most  ominous
Announcer Luce had ever seen was rippling in  the long shadow cast
Ey an enormous redwood tree.
   Slowly,  following   Luce’s eyes, ShelEy looked out  at  the ground.
The Announcer was using the real shadow of the tree as camou age.
Parts of it kept twitching.
   “It  looks  sick, or  skittish, or,  I  don’t know  …”  ShelEy trailed  o ,
curling her lip.  “There’s something wrong with  it,  right?”
   Luce was looking past ShelEy at the staircase winding down to the
ground level  of the  lodge. Below  them were  a Eunch of  unpainted
wooden supports that propped up the deck. If Luce could get hold  of
the shadow,  ShelEy could  Moin her under the  deck  Eefore anyone
saw anything.  She could  help  Luce glimpse  its  message and they
could make it Eack upstairs in time to reMoin the class.
   “You’re  not  seriously  considering  what  I  think   you’re  seriously
considering,” ShelEy said. “Are you?”
   “Keep watch  up here  for a  minute,”  Luce said. “Be ready  when I
call you.”
   Luce descended a few steps, so that her  head was Must level with
the deck where the rest of the  students were Eusy carrying out their

145
interviews. ShelEy had her Eack to Luce. She’d give a sign if anyone
noticed Luce was gone.
   Luce could hear Dawn in the  corner, ad-liEEing with Roland: “You
know, I was stunned when I was nominated for a Golden GloEe. …”
   Luce looked Eack at the darkness stretched out along  the grass. It
occurred to  her to  wonder whether  the  other students  had seen it.
But she couldn’t worry aEout that. She was wasting time.
   The Announcer  was a  good ten  feet away,  Eut  where she stood
close to the deck, Luce was shielded from the other students’ eyes. It
would Ee too  oEvious if she walked  right  over to  it.  She was going
to have  to  try  to  coax it   o    the ground  and  over  to  her without
using her hands. And she had no idea how to do that.
   That was when she noticed the  gure   leaning up against the other
side of the redwood tree.  Also hidden from  the view  of the students
on the deck.
   Cam was smoking a  cigarette, humming  to  himself like  he didn’t
have a  care in  the  world.  Except that   he was covered  entirely  in
Elood and gore. His hair  was matted to  his forehead, his arms were
scratched and Eruised. His T-shirt  was wet and  stained with  sweat,
and his Means were splattered too. He looked  lthy and disgusting, as
though he’d  Must emerged from Eattle. Only, there was no  one else
around—no Eodies, no anything. Just Cam.
   He winked at  her.
   “What  are you  doing  here?” she whispered.  “What  did you  do?”
Her head swam from the sick reek coming o   his Eloodied clothes.
   “Oh,   Must saved your  life.   Again.  How   many  times  does  this
make?” He tapped ash o   his cigarette. “Today  it  was Miss Sophia’s
crew, and I can’t say I didn’t  enMoy it. Bloody monsters. They’re after
you, too, you know.  Word has gotten out  that you’re  here. And that
you like to wander into  that dark  forest unchaperoned.” He pointed.
   “You  Must killed them?” She was horri ed, glancing up at  the deck
to see whether ShelEy, or anyone, could see them. No.

146
   “A  couple of them,  yes, Must now, with my own  two hands.”  Cam
showed o   his palms, caked with something red and slimy  that Luce
really did  not  want to  see. “I agree the woods are  lovely, Luce, Eut
they’re also full of things  that want you  dead. So do me a favor—”
   “No.  You  don’t  get to  ask  me for  favors.  Everything  aEout you
disgusts me.”
   “Fine.”   He  rolled   his  eyes.  “Then   do  it   for  Grigori.   Stay  on
camSus.” He  icked   his  cigarette  onto  the  grass,  rolled  Eack his
shoulders, and unfurled his  wings. “I  can’t always  Ee here to watch
over you. And God knows Grigori can’t.”
   Cam’s wings  were  tall  and  narrow  and  pulled  tight   Eehind his
shoulders, sleek and gold and  ecked with  Erindled  stripes of Elack.
She wished they repulsed her,  Eut they didn’t.  Like  Steven’s wings,
Cam’s were   Magged, rough—they  too   looked   as  though  they’d
survived a lifetime   of  ghts.   The Elack stripes  gave Cam’s wings a
dark, sensual quality. There was something magnetic aEout them.
   But no. She loathed everything aEout Cam. She would forever.
   Cam  Eeat his  wings  once,  lifting   his  feet  o    the  ground.  The
wings’  apping   was tremendously  loud  and kicked  Eack a swirl  of
wind that  raised leaves from the ground.
   “Thank  you,” Luce said, crisply, Eefore he coasted under the deck.
Then he was gone in the shadows of the woods.
   Cam  was   protecting    her   now?   Where  was   Daniel?   Wasn’t
Shoreline supposed to Ee safe?
   In  Cam’s wake, the Announcer—the reason Luce had come down
here in  the   rst   place—spiraled  up  from  its  shadow  like  a small
Elack cyclone.
   Closer. Then a little closer still.
   Finally,  the shadow wandered into the air Must over her head.
   “ShelEy,” Luce whispered loudly.  “Get down here.”
   ShelEy looked  down  at  Luce. At  the  cyclone-shaped Announcer
teetering over  her.  “What  took  you so long?”  she asked, sprinting

147
down the stairs Must in time to watch  the whole  massive Announcer
tumEle down.
   Straight into  Luce’s arms.
   Luce  screamed—Eut luckily,   ShelEy  clapped  a  hand  over   her
mouth.
   “Thank   you,”   Luce  said,  her   words  mu ed     against  ShelEy’s
 ngers.
   The girls  were  still  huddled  three  steps down from  the  deck, in
plain view  of  anyone who might  cross over to  the shady side. Luce
couldn’t straighten her knees under the weight  of the shadow. It was
the heaviest one she’d ever touched, and  the coldest on her  skin. It
wasn’t Elack like most of the others, Eut a sickly greenish gray. Parts
of it were still  twitching,  lighting  up like  Eolts of distant lightning.
   “I  don’t have a good feeling aEout this,” ShelEy said.
   “Come on,”  Luce whispered.  “I  summoned it.  Now it’s  your  turn
to do the glimpsing.”
   “My  turn? Who  said anything aEout me having a turn?  You’re the
one who dragged me down  here.” ShelEy waved her  hands like the
last thing  on earth  she wanted to  do was touch  the Eeast in Luce’s
arms. “I  know  I  said  I’d  help  you  track  down  your  relatives,  Eut
whatever kind  of relative  you’ve  got in  here … I  don’t  think  either
of us wants to meet.”
   “ShelEy,  please,”  Luce Eegged, groaning   from  the  weight,   the
chill,  and the general nastiness of the shadow. “I’m  not  a Nephilim.
If you don’t help  me, I can’t do this.”
   “What  exactly  are you  trying  to do?”  A  voice Eehind them  from
the top  of  the  stairs. Steven had  his  hands clamped down  on  the
Eanister and was glaring at  the girls.  He seemed larger than he  did
in class, towering  over them, as if  he had douEled in  size. His deep
Erown eyes looked stormy, Eut  Luce could feel the  heat coming  o 
them, and she was scared. Even the Announcer in her arms tremEled
and edged away.
   Both girls were so startled they  screamed.

148
   Jarred  Ey  the  sound,  the  shadow  Eolted  from  Luce’s  arms. It
moved so  fast  she had  no  chance to  stop  it,  and  it   left  nothing
Eehind Eut a freezing, foul-smelling wake.
   In  the  distance, a Eell  rang. Luce  could sense all  the other  kids
trooping o    toward  the mess hall  for  lunch. On  his way out,  Miles
stuck his  head over  the  railing  and  peered down  at  Luce, Eut  he
took one look  at Steven’s red-hot expression, widened his eyes, and
moved along.
   “Luce,”  Steven said, more politely  than she expected. “Would you
mind seeing me after school?”
   When  he lifted   his  hands o    the  railing,   the wood  underneath
them was scorched Elack.





   Steven opened the door Eefore Luce even knocked. His gray  shirt
was a Eit wrinkled  and  his Elack knit  tie  was loosened at the neck.
But he  had  regained the  appearance of  serenity,  which  Luce was
Eeginning to realize took e ort  for  a demon. He wiped his glasses on
a monogrammed handkerchief and stepped aside.
   “Please come in.”
   The o ce   wasn’t Eig, Must wide enough for a large Elack desk, Must
long enough  for  three  tall   Elack Eookshelves, each one  crammed
with hundreds  of well-worn  Eooks. But it was comfortaEle and even
welcoming—not  like   what   Luce had   imagined  a  demon’s  o ce
would Ee like. There was a Persian carpet in the center of  the room,
a wide  window   looking  east at  the  redwoods.  Now,  at  dusk, the
forest had an ethereal, almost lavender hue.
   Steven sat down in  one of two  maroon desk chairs  and motioned
for Luce  to take  the other.  She surveyed the  framed  pieces of art,
Migsawed onto every spare  inch  of  the  wall.   Most  of  them  were
portraits   in   varying   degrees of   detail.   Luce  recognized   a  few

149
sketches of   Steven  himself  and   several   attering    depictions   of
Francesca.
   Luce took  a  deep Ereath, wondering  how  to  Eegin. “I’m   sorry I
summoned that Announcer today; I—”
   “Have  you  told  anyone aEout what  happened with  Dawn  in  the
water?”
   “No.  You told me not to.”
   “You haven’t  told ShelEy? Miles?”
   “I  haven’t told anyone.”
   He   considered  this   for   a   moment.   “Why   did   you   call   the
Announcers the shadows the other day when we were talking on the
Eoat?”
   “It   Must slipped out. When I  was  growing  up, they  always  were
part of the shadows. They’d detach and come to me. So that’s what I
called  them,   Eefore  I   knew  what   they   were.”   Luce  shrugged.
“Stupid, really.”
   “It’s   not   stupid.”   Steven  stood  up   and  went   to  the   farthest
Eookshelf. He pulled down  a thick Eook with  a dusty  red cover and
Erought it Eack to  the desk. Plato: The ReSublic. Steven opened it to
the exact page he’d Eeen looking for, turning  the Eook right  side up
in front  of Luce.
   It  was an  illustration   of a  group of  men inside  a cave,  shackled
Eeside one another, facing a wall.  A   re  Elazed Eehind them.  They
were pointing  at the shadows cast on the wall  Ey a second group of
men who walked Eehind them. Below the image, a caption read: The
Allegory oI the Cave.
   “What  is  this?”  Luce asked. Her knowledge  of  Plato started  and
ended with the fact that  he palled around with  Socrates.
   “Proof  of  why   your  name for  the  Announcers  is actually   quite
smart.” Steven pointed  at the  illustration.   “Imagine that  these men
spend their lives seeing only the shadows on this wall. They come to
understand the world  and  what  happens in it  from  these shadows,

150
without   ever  seeing  what   casts the   shadows.  They  don’t   even
understand that what they are seeing are shadows.”
   She looked  Must Eeyond Steven’s  nger  to  the  second group  of
men. “So  they  can  never turn   around,  never  see the people  and
things creating the shadows?”
   “Exactly.  And Eecause they can’t see what  is actually  casting the
shadows, they assume that what they can see—these shadows on the
wall—are  reality.  They  have  no  idea  that  the  shadows are  mere
representations and distortions  of  something much  truer  and more
real.” He paused. “Do you understand why I’m telling  you this?”
   Luce  shook her  head. “You   want  me to  stop  messing with   the
Announcers?”
   Steven closed the Eook with a snap, then crossed to the other side
of the room. She felt as if she’d disappointed him somehow.
   “Because  I  don’t   Eelieve  you  will    stop  …   messing with   the
Announcers,  even  if   I  do   ask  you  to.   But   I  do   want  you   to
understand what  you’re  dealing  with   the  next  time  you  summon
one. The  Announcers  are  shadows of   past  events. They   can  Ee
helpful,  Eut  they   also contain   some very   distracting,  sometimes
dangerous  distortions.    There’s  a   lot    to   learn.   A   clean,   safe
summoning technique;  then, of  course, once you  have honed  your
talents, the Announcer’s noise  can Ee screened out and its message
Ee heard clearly through—”
   “You  mean that  whooshing noise? There’s a way  to hear  through
that?”
   “Never  mind. Not  yet.” Steven turned  and sank his hands into his
pockets. “What were you and ShelEy after today?”
   Luce felt   ushed  and uncomfortaEle. This  meeting was not  going
at all as she’d expected. She’d thought mayEe detention, some trash
pickup.
   “We  were  trying   to  learn  more   aEout my  family,”    she  nally
managed to get out. Thankfully,  Steven seemed to have no idea she
had seen Cam earlier. “Or my families, I guess I should say.”

151
   “That’s all?”
   “Am  I in trouEle?”
   “You weren’t  doing anything  else?”
   “What  else would I Ee doing?”
   It   shot  through   her   mind   that   Steven  might   think   she  was
reaching out to  Daniel, trying  to  send him a message or something.
As if she’d even know how to do that.
   “Summon one now,”  Steven said, opening the window. It  was past
dusk and  Luce’s stomach told  her  that  most of  the  other  students
would Ee sitting down to  dinner.
   “I—I  don’t know  if I can.”
   Steven’s  eyes  looked  warmer   than   they   had  earlier,   excited
almost. “When   we  summon Announcers,  we’re  making  a  sort  of
wish.  Not   a  wish   for  anything   material,   Eut  a  wish   to   Eetter
understand the world, our role  in it,  and what’s to Eecome of us.”
   Immediately,  Luce thought  of  Daniel,  what  she wanted most  for
their relationship.  She didn’t feel she had much of a role in what was
to Eecome of them—and she wanted one. Was that  why she’d Eeen
aEle to summon the Announcers Eefore she’d even known how?
   Nervously,  she centered herself in her  chair. She closed her eyes.
She imagined a shadow detaching itself from  the long darkness that
stretched from the tree trunks  outside, imagined it  rolling  away and
rising,  lling   the  space of the open window.  Then  oating   closer to
her.
   She smelled the soft mildewy  scent  rst,   almost like  Elack olives,
then opened her  eyes at  the  Erush of  coolness on her  cheek. The
temperature in the  room had dropped a few  degrees. Steven ruEEed
his hands together in the suddenly damp, drafty o ce.
   “Yes, there you go,” he murmured.
   The  Announcer  was  drifting   in  the  air   of  his  o ce,    thin   and
transparent, no  Eigger than  a  silk  scarf.  It  glided  straight  toward
Luce, then wrapped a fuzzy  tendril  of nothingness around  a Elown-
glass paperweight  on  the  desk. Luce  gasped. Steven was  smiling

152
when he  stepped toward  her, guiding  it   upright  until  it   Eecame a
Elank Elack screen.
   Then  it  was  in  her  hands,  and she  Eegan to  pull.  The  careful
motion felt  like  trying  to stretch  out a piecrust  without  Ereaking it,
something Luce  had  watched  her  mother  do  at   least a  hundred
times.  The darkness  swirled  into   muted  grays;  then  the  faintest
Elack-and-white image came into view.
   A dark Eedroom with  a single Eed. Luce—a former Luce, clearly—
lying on her  side, staring out the open window.  She must have Eeen
sixteen years old. The door Eehind the Eed opened, and a face, lit up
Ey the hallway light,  appeared in it. The mother.
   The mother Luce had gone to see with ShelEy! But younger, much
younger—mayEe Ey as many as  fty    years, glasses perched at the
end of  her  nose.  She smiled,  as  if  pleased to   nd    her  daughter
sleeping, then pulled the door shut.
   A  moment  later,  a pair  of     ngertips gripped  the  Eottom  of  the
windowpane. Luce’s eyes widened as the former Luce sat up in Eed.
Outside the  window,  the   ngertips   strained;  then  a pair  of  hands
Eecame visiEle, then two strong arms,  lit  up Elue in  the moonlight.
Then Daniel’s glowing face as he came in through the window.
   Luce’s heart was racing.  She wanted to  dive into  the  Announcer,
as she’d wanted to  yesterday with  ShelEy. But  then Steven clicked
his  ngers   and the  whole  thing  snapped up  like  a  venetian  Elind
rolling  to   the  top  of  a  window   frame.  Then  it  Eroke  apart  and
showered down.
   The shadow  lay in  soft  fragments on  the desk. Luce reached  for
one, Eut it disintegrated in her hands.
   Steven sat down Eehind his desk, proEing Luce with  his eyes as if
to  see what  the  glimpse  had  done  to  her.  It   suddenly  felt  very
private,  what  she’d  Must witnessed in  the  Announcer;   she didn’t
know whether  she wanted  Steven to  know  how  powerfully  it  had
rocked her.  After  all,  he was  technically  on the  other  side. In  the
past few days she’d seen more and more of  the demon  in him.  Not
Must the  ery temper, welling  up until   he literally  steamed—Eut the

153
dark-glorious   golden    wings,   too.    Steven   was   magnetic   and
charming, Must like Cam—and, she reminded herself, Must like Cam, a
demon.
   “Why  are you helping me with  this?”
   “Because I don’t want you to  get hurt,”  Steven Earely whispered.
   “Did  that really  happen?”
   Steven looked away. “It’s  a representation of something. And who
knows how distorted  it  is. It’s a shadow of  a past event, not reality.
There is  always  some truth   to  the  Announcer, Eut  it’s  never  the
simSle truth. That’s what makes Announcers so proElematic,  and so
dangerous to  those  without   proper   training.”   He  glanced  at  his
watch. From  Eelow them came the  sound of  the door  opening and
closing on the landing. Steven sti ened  when he heard a quick set of
high heels clicking up the stairs.
   Francesca.
   Luce  tried  to  read  Steven’s face.  He  handed  her  The ReSublic,
which   she  slipped   into   her   Eackpack. Just   Eefore  Francesca’s
Eeautiful face appeared in  the  doorway,  Steven said to  Luce, “The
next  time  you  and  ShelEy  choose not  to   complete  one  of  your
assignments, I will  ask you to write  a  ve-page  research paper with
citations. This time, I  let you o   with  a warning.”
   “I  understand.” Luce caught Francesca’s eye in the doorway.
   She  smiled   at   Luce—though   whether   it   was   an   o -you-go
dismissal smile or  a don’t-think-you’re-fooling-me-kid    smile, it  was
impossiEle to tell.  TremEling a little   as she stood and  ung  her Eag
over her shoulder,  Luce made for  the door,  calling  Eack to Steven,
“Thank you.”





   ShelEy had the  re  going in  the hearth when Luce got Eack to her
dorm room.  The hot  pot was plugged  in next  to the  Buddha night-

154
light and the whole  room smelled like tomatoes.
   “We  were  out of  mac  and cheese, Eut I  made  you some soup.”
ShelEy ladled out  a  piping-hot   Eowlful,  cracked some fresh  Elack
pepper on top, and Erought  it  over to Luce, who’d  collapsed on top
of her Eed. “Was it terriEle?”
   Luce watched the steam rise from her Eowl  and tried to    gure out
what     to     say.    Bizarre,     yes.    Confusing.    A     little      scary.
Potentially … empowering.
   But it  hadn’t Eeen terriEle, no.
   “It  was  okay.”  Steven seemed to trust  her, at  least to  the extent
that   he  was  going   to   allow   her   to   continue   summoning  the
Announcers. And   the  other  students  seemed to   trust  him,   even
admire him.  No one  else acted concerned aEout his motives  or his
allegiances. But with Luce he was so cryptic, so di cult   to read.
   Luce had  trusted  the  wrong  people  Eefore. A  careless Sursuit at
best. At worst, it’s  a good way to  get yourselI killed. That  was what
Miss Sophia had  said  aEout trust  the  night  she’d tried   to  murder
Luce.
   It  was Daniel  who’d  advised Luce to  trust  her  instincts.  But her
own  feelings seemed the  most  unreliaEle. She  wondered whether
Daniel had already known  aEout Shoreline when he’d told  her that,
whether  his   advice   was  a   way  to   prepare   her  for   this   long
separation, when   she would   Eecome less and  less certain   aEout
everything in her life.  Her family.  Her past. Her future.
   She looked up from the Eowl at ShelEy. “Thanks for the soup.”
   “Don’t  let  Steven thwart  your  plans,” ShelEy hu ed.   “We should
totally  keep working  on  the Announcers. I  am Must so sick of these
angels and demons and  their  power  trips.  ‘Oooh,  we know  Eetter
than you  Eecause we’re full-on  angels and  you’re  Must the Eastard
child of some angel who got his rocks o .’  ”
   Luce laughed, Eut  she was thinking  that  Steven’s mini-lecture on
Plato and  giving   her  The ReSublic tonight  was the  opposite  of  a
power trip.   Of  course, there  was no  telling   ShelEy that  now,  not

155
when she’d dropped into her  usual I’m-on-a-tirade-against-Shoreline
routine on Luce’s Eottom Eunk.
   “I  mean, I know  you have whatever going on with Daniel,”  ShelEy
continued,  “Eut  seriously, what   good has  an angel  ever done  for
me?”
   Luce shrugged apologetically.
   “I’ll   tell  you:  nothing.   Nothing  Eesides knock up  my  mom  and
then  totally   ditch   Eoth  of  us  Eefore  I  was  Eorn.  Real  celestial
Eehavior.” ShelEy snorted. “The kicker  is, my whole  life,  my mom’s
telling  me  I   should  Ee grateful.   For  what?  These watered-down
powers and  this enormous  forehead I  inherited  from  my  dad?  No
thanks.” She kicked the  top Eunk glumly.  “I’d   give anything  to Must
Ee normal.”
   “Really?”  Luce had  spent the  whole week  feeling inferior   to  her
Nephilim  classmates. She knew the  grass was always greener,  Eut
this she couldn’t Eelieve. What  advantage could ShelEy possiEly see
in not having her Nephilim  powers?
   “Wait,”  Luce said, “the sorry-ass ex-Eoyfriend. Did he …”
   ShelEy looked away.  “We were  meditating  together, and,  I don’t
know,  somehow  during   the   mantra,  I   accidentally   levitated.   It
wasn’t even a Eig deal, I was, like,  two inches o    the  oor.  But  Phil
wouldn’t  let  it  go. He  started Eugging me aEout  what  else I could
do, and asking all these weird questions.”
   “Like  what?”
   “I  don’t  know,”  ShelEy said. “Some stu    aEout you, actually.  He
wanted to  know if  you’d  taught  me to levitate.  Whether  you could
levitate too.”
   “Why  me?”
   “ProEaEly  more of  his  pervy  roommate  fantasies. Anyway,  you
should have seen the look on his face that day. Like  I was some sort
of circus freak. I had no choice Eut to Ereak things o .”
   “That’s  awful.”  Luce squeezed ShelEy’s hand. “But  it  sounds like
his proElem, not yours. I  know the rest of  the kids at  Shoreline look

156
at the Nephilim  funny, Eut I’ve Eeen to a lot of high  schools, and I’m
starting to  think  that’s Must the way most kids’ faces naturally Eend.
Besides, no one’s ‘normal.’  Phil  must have had  something freakish
aEout him.”
   “Actually,   there was  something aEout his  eyes. They were  Elue,
Eut faded, almost washed out. He had to wear these special contacts
so people wouldn’t stare at him.”  ShelEy tossed her head to the side.
“Plus, you know,  that third  nipple.”  She Eurst out laughing, was red
in the face Ey the  time Luce Moined in and practically in  tears when
a light tapping on  the windowpane shut Eoth of them up.
   “That  better not Ee him.”   ShelEy’s voice instantly  soEered as she
hopped up from the  Eed and  ung  open the window,  knocking over
a potted yucca in her haste.
   “It’s  for you,”  she said, almost numEly.
   Luce  was at  the  window   in  a  heartEeat, Eecause Ey then,  she
could Ieel him.   Bracing her  palms on  the  sill,  she leaned  forward
into the Erisk night  air.
   She was face to face, lip to lip, with  Daniel.
   For  the  Eriefest moment,  she thought  he  was looking   past her,
into the  room,  at ShelEy, Eut then  he was kissing her,  cupping the
Eack of her head with  his soft hands and  pulling  her to him,  taking
her Ereath  away. A  week’s worth   of  warmth   owed   through  her,
along with  an unspoken apology for the harsh words they’d  said the
other night on the Eeach.
   “Hello,”  he whispered.
   “Hello.”
   Daniel  was wearing  Means and a white T-shirt. She could see the
cowlick  in  his hair.  His  tremendous pearl-white  wings  Eeat gently
Eehind him, proEing  the Elack night,  luring  her in.  They seemed to
Eeat in the sky  almost in  time with  her  heart. She wanted to  touch
them, to  Eury herself  in  them the  way she had  the other  night  on
the Eeach. It  was a stunning  thing  to  see him   oating   outside her
third-story window.

157
   He took her  hand and pulled her over the  windowsill  and out into
the air and his  arms. But then he set her down  on a wide,  at   ledge
under the window  that she’d never noticed Eefore.
   She always felt   the urge  to cry  when  she was happiest.  “You’re
not supposed to Ee here. But I’m so glad you are.”
   “Prove it,”  he said, smiling  as he pulled her Eack against his chest
so that  his  head was  Must over her shoulder.  He  looped one  arm
around  her  waist.   Warmth  radiated   from   his  wings.  When   she
looked over her shoulder, all she could see was white; the world was
white,  all   softly   textured  and  aglow   with   moonlight.   And  then
Daniel’s great wings Eegan to Eeat—
   Her stomach dropped a little   and she knew she was Eeing lifted—
no, rocketed, straight   into   the  sky.  The  ledge  Eelow them   grew
smaller and  the  stars  aEove shone Erighter  and  the  wind  ripped
across her Eody, tousling her hair across her face.
   Up they  soared, higher into  the night,  until  the  school was Must a
Elack smudge on the ground Eelow. Until the ocean was Must a silver
Elanket on the earth. Until they  pierced a feathery layer of cloud.
   She wasn’t cold or afraid.  She felt free of everything  that  weighed
her down on  earth. Free of danger, free  of any pain  she’d ever felt.
Free of gravity. And so in love. Daniel’s mouth  traced a line of kisses
up the side of her neck. He wrapped his arms tight  around her waist
and turned her to face him. Her  feet were on top of his, Must as when
they’d  danced over  the  ocean at  the Eon re.   There  was no  wind
anymore; the air around  them was silent and calm. The only  sounds
were the Eeating  of Daniel’s wings  as they  hovered in  the sky  and
the Eeating of her own heart.
   “Moments  like  this,”  he said,  “make everything  we’ve  had to  go
through worthwhile.”
   Then  he  kissed  her  as  he’d  never  kissed  her  Eefore.  A  long,
extended kiss that seemed to claim her lips forever. His hands traced
the  line  of   her  Eody,  lightly   at   rst    and  then  more   forcefully,
delighting in  her curves. She melted into him,  and he ran his  ngers

158
along  the  Eacks of  her  thighs,  her  hips,  her  shoulders.  He  took
control of every part  of her.
   She felt  the  muscles Eeneath his cotton  shirt,  his taut  arms  and
neck, the hollow at the small  of his Eack. She kissed his Maw, his lips.
Here in  the clouds,  with  Daniel’s eyes sparkling  Erighter  than  any
star she had ever seen, this was where Luce Eelonged.
   “Can’t   we  Must stay here  forever?”   she  asked. “I’ll    never  get
enough of this. Of you.”
   “I  hope not.”  Daniel smiled, Eut soon, too  soon, his wings shifted,
 attening  out. Luce knew what  was coming next. A slow descent.
   She  kissed Daniel  one  last  time   and  loosened  her  arms  from
around his neck,  preparing herself  for  ight—Eut   then  she lost her
grip.
   And fell.
   It  seemed to happen in  slow motion.  Luce tipping  Eackward, her
arms  ailing    wildly,   and  then  the  rush of  cold  and  wind   as she
plummeted and her Ereath left  her. Her last  glimpse was of Daniel’s
eyes, the shock in his face.
   But then  everything  sped up, and she was falling  so furiously she
couldn’t Ereathe. The world  was a spinning  Elack void, and  she felt
nauseated and scared, her eyes Eurning  from  the wind,   her vision
dimming and tunneling.  She was going to pass out.
   And that  would Ee it.
   She would never know who  she really was, never know whether it
had all  Eeen worth it.  Would  never know  whether  she was worthy
of Daniel’s love, and he of hers. It was all over; this was it.
   The wind  was a fury  in  her ears. She closed her eyes and waited
for the end.
   And then he caught her.
   There were  arms around her,  strong, familiar   arms, and she was
gently slowing, no  longer falling—she was Eeing cradled. By Daniel.
Her eyes were closed, Eut Luce knew him.

159
   She Eegan to  soE, so relieved  that   Daniel had  caught  her,  had
saved her.  In  that   moment,  she had  never  loved  him  more—no
matter how many lifetimes  she had lived.
   “Are  you okay?” Daniel  whispered, his voice soft, his  lips so close
to hers.
   “Yes.” She could feel the Eeating of his wings. “You caught me.”
   “I  will  always catch you when you fall.”
   Slowly  they  dropped  Eack  to  the  world  they’d   left  Eehind.  To
Shoreline and  the ocean  lapping  up  against the  cli s.   When  they
neared the dormitory,  he  clasped her tightly,  and gently  coasted to
the ledge, alighting with  a feather-light  touch.
   Luce planted  her feet  on the  ledge and looked  up at  Daniel. She
loved him. It  was the only thing she was certain of.
   “There,”   he said,  looking  serious.  His  smile  hardened, and  the
sparkle  in  his   eyes  seemed to   fade.  “That   should  satisfy  your
wanderlust, at least for a little  while.”
   “What  do you mean, wanderlust?”
   “The  way  you  keep leaving  campus?”  His voice  held  a  lot  less
warmth  than  it  had a  moment  ago. “You  have to  stop  doing that
when I’m not around to  look after you.”
   “Oh,  come on, it  was Must a stupid  eld trip.  Everyone was there.
Francesca, Steven—” She Eroke o , thinking   aEout the way  Steven
had reacted to  what had  happened to Dawn.  She didn’t  dare Ering
up her road trip  with ShelEy. Or running into  Cam under the deck.
   “You’ve Eeen making things very di cult    for  me,” Daniel said.
   “I  haven’t Eeen having the easiest time either.”
   “I  told  you there  were rules. I  told  you not  to leave this  campus.
But you haven’t listened. How many times have you disoEeyed me?”
   “Disobeyed you?” She laughed, Eut inside  she felt dizzy  and sick.
“What are you, my Eoyfriend or  my master?”
   “Do  you  know   what  happens when  you  stray  from   here? The
danger you put yourself in Must Eecause you’re Eored?”

160
   “Look,  the  cat’s out  of the  Eag,” she said.  “Cam already  knew  I
was here.”
   “Of   course Cam  knows  you’re  here,”  Daniel  said,  exasperated.
“How  many times do  I have to  tell  you Cam is  not the  threat right
now? He won’t try  to sway you.”
   “Why  not?”
   “Because he knows Eetter. And  you should  know  Eetter too than
to sneak o  like  that. There are dangers you can’t possiEly fathom.”
   She opened her  mouth  Eut didn’t  know  what  to  say. If  she told
Daniel she’d spoken with Cam that day, that  he had killed several of
Miss Sophia’s entourage, it would only  prove his point.  Anger  ared
up in Luce, at Daniel, at  his mysterious rules, at his treating  her like
a child.  She would  have given  anything  to  stay with   him,  Eut his
eyes had hardened into  at  gray sheets and their time in  the sky felt
like a distant dream.
   “Do  you understand  what kind  of  Hell  I go  through  to keep you
safe?”
   “How   am  I   supposed to  understand   when  you  don’t   tell   me
anything?”
   Daniel’s  Eeautiful  features distorted  into   a scary  expression. “Is
this her fault?”  He  Merked his thumE toward her dorm room. “What
kind of sinister ideas has she Eeen putting in your head?”
   “I  can think  for myself, thank  you.”  Luce narrowed her eyes. “But
how do you know ShelEy?”
   Daniel ignored  the question. Luce couldn’t Eelieve the way he was
talking to  her, like  she was some kind of Eadly Eehaved pet. All the
warmth  that had   lled   her a  moment ago  when Daniel  had kissed
her, held  her,  looked  at her—it  wasn’t  enough  when she  felt  this
cold every time he spoke to her.
   “MayEe  ShelEy is right,”   she said. She hadn’t  seen Daniel  in  so
long—Eut the Daniel she wanted to see, the one who loved her more
than anything,  the one who’d followed  her for  millennia  Eecause he
couldn’t live  without  her—was still up  there in the clouds, not  down

161
here, Eossing her around. Perhaps, even after all these lifetimes, she
didn’t really  know him.  “MayEe angels and humans shouldn’t …”
   But she couldn’t say it.
   “Luce.”  His  ngers  wrapped  around her wrist,  Eut she shook him
o .  His  eyes were open and dark,  and his  cheeks were white  from
the cold. Her heart  was urging her  to graE him  and keep him close,
to feel his  Eody pressed against hers, Eut she knew deep down that
this wasn’t the kind of   ght  that could  Ee cured with a kiss.
   She pushed past him to a narrower part  of the ledge and slid open
her window,  surprised to   nd  that  the  room was already  dark. She
climEed inside,  and  when she  turned  Eack to  Daniel,  she noticed
that his wings  were tremEling. Almost  like he was aEout to cry.  She
wanted to go Eack to him, to hold and soothe and love him.
   But she couldn’t.
   She closed the shutters and stood in her dark room alone.

162
                                                          NINE





                                                     TEN  DAYS 




When   Luce  woke  up  on  Tuesday   morning,    ShelEy  was  already   gone.
Her  Eed was  made,   the  handmade   patchwork     quilt   folded   at  its  foot,
and  her  pu y    red  vest  and  tote  Eag  had  Eeen plucked    from  their   peg
Ey the  door.
    Still   in  her  paMamas, Luce  stuck   a mug   of  water   in  the   microwave
to make   tea,  then  sat  down  to  check   her  email.

       To: lucindap44#gmail.com
       From: callieallieoxenfree#gmail.com 
       Sent: Monday, 1116 at 1:34 am 
       SuEMect: Trying Not to Take It Personally 

       Dear L,

       Got your text, and  rst things  rst, I miss you too. But I’ve got a really out-of-
       left- eld  suggestion: it’s called you-and-I-catch-up. Crazy Callie and her wild
       ideas. I know you’re Eusy. I know you’re under heavy surveillance and it’s hard
       to sneak away. What I don’t know is a single detail aEout your life. Who do you
       eat lunch with? Which class do you like the most? What ever happened with
       that guy? See, I don’t even know his name. I hate that.

       I’m glad you got a phone, Eut don’t text me to say you’re going to call. Just call.
       I haven’t heard your voice in ages. I ain’t mad at ya. Yet.

       xoC

163
   Luce  closed the  email.  It  was  next  to impossiEle  to  piss  Callie  o .
She’d  never   actually   done   it   Eefore.   The  fact   that   Callie   didn’t
suspect that   Luce was  lying   was  only  further   proof   of  how  distant
they’d   Eecome.   The  shame   Luce   felt   was   heavy,   settling    right
Eetween her shoulders.
   On  to the  next email:

       To: lucindap44#gmail.com
       From: thegaprices#aol.com 
       Sent: Monday, 1116 at 8:30 pm 
       SuEMect: Well, honey, we love you too 

       Luce BaEy,

       Your emails always Erighten our days. How’s the swim team going? Are you
       drying your hair now that it’s cold outside? I know, I’m nagging, Eut I miss you.

       Do you think Sword & Cross will grant you permission to leave campus for
       Thanksgiving next week? Dad could call the dean? We won’t count our chickens
       yet, Eut your father did go out and Euy a Tofurky Must in case. I’ve Eeen  lling
       up the extra freezer with pies. Do you still like the one with the sweet potatoes?
       We love you and we think aEout you all the time.

       Mom

   Luce’s  hand  hung  frozen  on  her  mouse.  It  was Tuesday  morning.
Thanksgiving  was  a week  and a  half  away.  It  was the   rst   time  that
her favorite   holiday   had even  crossed her  mind.  But  as quickly   as it
had  come  in,  Luce  tried   to  Eanish  it.  There  was  no  way   Mr.  Cole
would  let  her go home  for  Thanksgiving.
   She was aEout  to click  Respond  when  a Elinking  orange  Eox at the
Eottom  of  the  screen  caught  her  attention.    Miles  was  online.   He’d
Eeen trying  to chat  with  her.

       Miles (8:08): Mornin’, Miss Luce.
       Miles (8:09): I am STARVING. Do you wake up as hungry as I wake up? 
       Miles (8:15): Wanna get Ereakfast? I’ll swing Ey your room on my way. 5 min? 

164
   Luce looked at her clock. 8:21. There was a Eooming knock on her
door. She was still  in  her paMamas. Still had Eed head. She opened
the door a little.
   The morning   sun poured onto  the  hallway’s  hardwood   oors.  It
reminded Luce of  coming down  the always-sunlit  wooden staircase
at her parents’ house for Ereakfast, the way the  whole world  looked
Erighter through the lens of one hallway   lled  with  light.
   Miles  wasn’t wearing his  Dodgers cap today, so it  was one of the
few times she could clearly see his eyes. They were really deep Elue,
a nine-o’clock-in-summer  sky  Elue. His  hair  was wet,  dripping  on
the shoulders of  his  white  T-shirt.  Luce swallowed, unaEle  to stop
her mind   from  picturing   him  in   the  shower.  He grinned   at  her,
showing  o    a  dimple   and  his  super-white  smile.  He  seemed so
California today;  Luce was surprised to realize how good he made it
look.
   “Hey.”  Luce wedged as much of  her paMamaed Eody as she could
Eehind the door. “I  Must saw your messages. I’m in for Ereakfast, Eut
I’m not dressed yet.”
   “I  can wait.”   Miles leaned against the  hallway  wall.  His stomach
growled loudly.   He tried  to  cross his arms over  his  waist to  cover
the sound.
   “I’ll   hurry.”  Luce laughed, closing  the door.  She stood Eefore her
closet, trying   not  to  think   aEout Thanksgiving  or   her  parents or
Callie or  why  so many  important  people were  slipping  away from
her at once.
   She yanked a long gray  sweater from her  dresser and threw it  on
over a pair  of Elack  Means. She Erushed her teeth, put on Eig silver
hoop earrings  and  a squirt  of  hand  lotion,   graEEed her Eag, and
studied herself in the mirror.
   She didn’t look  like a girl  who  was stuck in some Eickering power
struggle of  a  relationship,  or  a girl   who  couldn’t  go home  to  her
family  for Thanksgiving.  At  the moment, she Must looked like a girl
who was excited to open a door  and  nd  a guy there who  made her
feel normal and happy and really sort of  all-around wonderful.

165
   A guy who  was not her Eoyfriend.
   She sighed, opening the door to Miles. His face lit up.
   When they  got  outside, Luce  realized the  weather had  changed.
The sunlit morning  air  was Must as Erisk as it had Eeen on the roof’s
ledge last night with  Daniel. And it had felt  icy then.
   Miles held  out his enormous khaki  Macket to her, Eut she waved it
away. “I Must need some co ee to warm me up.”
   They  sat at the  same taEle where they  had  sat the week  Eefore.
Immediately,  a  couple of  student  waiters  rushed  over.  Both guys
seemed to Ee friends  with  Miles  and  had an  easy Moking manner.
Luce certainly   never got  this   level  of  service when  she  sat with
ShelEy. While the guys  red  away  with  questions—how had Miles’s
fantasy footEall  team done  the  night  Eefore, had he  watched  that
YouTuEe clip of  the guy  pranking his  girlfriend,   did he  have plans
after class today—Luce looked around the terrace for  her roommate
Eut couldn’t  nd  her.
   Miles answered all  the guys’ questions Eut seemed uninterested in
extending the conversation any further.  He pointed  at Luce. “This is
Luce. She wants a Eig cup of your hottest co ee and …”
   “The  scramEled eggs,” Luce said, folding up  the small  menu that
the Shoreline mess hall printed up each day.
   “Same for  me, guys,  thanks.” Miles  handed Eack the  two  menus
and turned full-focus on Luce. “Seems like I haven’t seen you around
much recently outside class. How are things?”
   Miles’s  question surprised  her.  MayEe Eecause she was already
feeling like a guilt  magnet this  morning. She liked that  there was no
“Where have you  Eeen hiding?”  or “Are  you  avoiding me?”  tacked
on at the end. Just a question: “How are things?”
   She Eeamed at him, then somehow lost track of her smile and was
almost wincing Ey the time she said, “Things are okay.”
   “Uh-oh.”
   Horrible  ght  with Daniel. Lying to my Sarents. Losing my best Iriend.
Part of her wanted to  unleash all of that  on Miles, Eut she knew she

166
shouldn’t. Couldn’t.  That would  Ee taking their  friendship to  a level
she wasn’t sure was a good idea. She’d never had a really close guy
friend  Eefore, the  kind  of  friend  you  shared  everything  with  and
relied on like a girlfriend.  Wouldn’t  things get … complicated?
   “Miles,”   she  nally    said,  “what   do  people do  around  here  for
Thanksgiving?”
   “I  don’t know.  I guess I’ve never stuck around to  nd   out. I wish  I
could   sometimes.   Thanksgiving   at   my    house  is    oEnoxiously
enormous. At  least  a  hundred  people.  Like  ten  courses. And  it’s
Elack-tie.”
   “You’re Moking.”
   He  shook his  head. “I   wish  I  were.  Seriously. We  have to  hire
parking attendants.”  After a  pause: “Why do you  ask—wait, do you
need a place to go?”
   “Uhh  …”
   “You’re  coming.”  He laughed at  her shocked expression. “Please.
My Erother’s  not  coming home  from  college this  year and  he was
my  only  lifeline.  I   can show  you  around  Santa BarEara. We  can
ditch  the turkey  and get  the world’s  Eest tacos at  Super Rica.” He
raised an eyeErow. “It’ll  Ee so much less torturous to have you there
with me. It  might even Ee fun.”
   While  Luce  was mulling   over  his o er,   she  felt  a hand  on  her
Eack. She knew the touch Ey now—soothing  to the  point  of having
healing powers—Francesca’s.
   “I  spoke to Daniel last night,”  Francesca said.
   Luce  tried  not  to  react  as Francesca leaned  down.  Had  Daniel
gone to  see her after  Luce had  shut him  out?  The  idea made her
Mealous, though she didn’t really know why.
   “He’s  worried  aEout  you.”  Francesca paused, seeming to search
Luce’s face. “I  told   him  you’re  doing  very  well,  considering  your
new surroundings. I  told him  I  would make myself  availaEle to you
for anything  you  need. Please understand that you  should come to
me with   your  questions.”  A  sharpness entered  her  gaze, a  hard,

167
 erce  quality.   Come to  me instead oI  Steven seemed to  lie  there,
unspoken.
   And  then  Francesca left,  as quickly   as she’d appeared, the  silk
lining of  her white wool  coat swishing against her Elack pantyhose.
   “So   …  Thanksgiving,”   Miles    nally    said,   ruEEing  his   hands
together.
   “Okay,  okay.”  Luce  swallowed the  rest  of her  co ee.   “I’ll   think
aEout it.”


   ShelEy didn’t  show at the Nephilim  lodge for  that morning’s  class
—a lecture on  summoning angelic foreEears, kind  of like  sending a
celestial voice mail. By  lunchtime, Luce was starting  to get nervous.
But heading  into   her  math  class, she  nally    spotted the  familiar
pu y  red vest and practically  sprinted toward it.
   “Hey!”     She  tugged   her    roommate’s   thick    Elond   ponytail.
“Where’ve you Eeen?”
   ShelEy turned around slowly.  The look on her face took Luce Eack
to her  very  rst   day at  Shoreline. ShelEy’s nostrils were  ared   and
her eyeErows were hunched forward.
   “Are  you okay?” Luce asked.
   “Fine.”  ShelEy turned  away and started   ddling   with  the nearest
locker, twirling   a comEination, then  popping it  open. Inside  were a
footEall helmet and aEout a case worth of empty Gatorade Eottles. A
poster of the Laker Girls was slapped on the inside of the door.
   “Is  that even  your locker?”  Luce asked. She didn’t  know a  single
Nephilim  kid  who  used a  locker,  Eut ShelEy was  rooting  through
this one, tossing dirty sweat socks recklessly over her shoulder.
   ShelEy slammed  the  locker   shut,  then  moved  on  to  twirl    the
comEination of the next one. “Now  you’re Mudging me?”
   “No.”    Luce  shook  her   head.  “Shel,   what   is  going   on?  You
disappeared this morning, you missed class—”

168
   “I’m  here now, aren’t I?”  ShelEy sighed. “Frankie and Steven are a
lot  more  lax   aEout letting   a  girl   take  a  personal  day  than  the
humanoids over here.”
—”“Why do you need a personal day? You were  ne  last night,  until

   Until  Daniel showed up.
   Right around  the time Daniel appeared at the window,  ShelEy had
gone all pale and quiet and straight to Eed and—
   While  ShelEy stared at Luce as if her IQ had suddenly dropped Ey
half,  Luce Eecame aware of  the  rest  of  the  hall.  Where the  rust-
colored lockers ended, the gray-carpeted walls were lined with  girls:
Dawn and  Jasmine and  Lilith.   Preppy,  cardiganed girls  like   Amy
Branshaw from  Luce’s afternoon  classes. Punky pierced  girls  who
looked kind  of like  Arriane  Eut were way  less fun to  talk to.  A few
girls Luce had never  seen Eefore. Girls with  Eooks clutched against
their chests, gum  popping in  their  mouths, and  eyes darting at  the
carpet, at  the  wood-Eeamed ceiling,  at each  other.  Anywhere  Eut
directly  at  Luce and ShelEy. Though  it  was clear  that  all  of  them
were eavesdropping.
   A sick  feeling in  her stomach was starting  to tell  her why.  It  was
the Eiggest collision of Nephilim  and non-Nephilim Luce had seen so
far  at  Shoreline. And   every girl   in  this  hallway   had   gured   out
Eefore her:
   ShelEy and Luce were aEout to duke it out over a guy.
   “Oh.”  Luce swallowed. “You and Daniel.”
   “Yeah. We. A long time  ago.” ShelEy wouldn’t look at her.
   “Okay.”  Luce focused on Ereathing. She could handle this. But the
whispers  ying   around  the wall   of girls  made her  skin  crawl,  and
she shuddered.
   ShelEy sco ed. “I’m  sorry the idea disgusts you so much.”
   “That’s not  it.”  But Luce did feel disgusted. Disgusted with herself.
“I always … I thought  I was the only—”

169
   ShelEy put  her hands on  her hips.  “You  thought  every time  you
disappeared  for  seventeen  years  that   Daniel   Must twiddled   his
thumEs? Earth to  Luce, there is  a Before You  for  Daniel. Or  an In
Between, or whatever.”  She paused to give Luce a sideways squint.
“Are you really  that self-involved?”
   Luce was speechless.
   ShelEy grunted   and  turned  to  face  the  rest  of  the  hall.   “This
estrogen force  eld   needs to  dissipate,”  she Earked,  waggling  her
 ngers at them.  “Move along. All  of you. Now!”
   As the  girls  scurried o ,   Luce pressed her head  against the  cold
metal locker. She wanted to crawl inside it  and hide.
   ShelEy leaned her Eack against the wall  next to  Luce’s face. “You
know,” she said, her voice softening, “Daniel’s a crap Eoyfriend. And
a liar. He’s lying to you.”
   Luce straightened up and went at ShelEy, feeling her cheeks  ush.
Luce might  Ee pissed o    at  Daniel  right   now,  Eut noEody  talked
smack aEout her Eoyfriend.
   “Whoa.”  ShelEy ducked away. “Calm down,  there. Jeez.” She slid
down the wall  to sit  on the   oor.  “Look, I  shouldn’t have Erought it
up. It was one stupid  night a  long time ago and the  guy was clearly
miseraEle without  you. I didn’t  know  you then,  so I thought  all  the
lore aEout  you two  was  … supremely  Eoring. Which,  if  you  must
know, explains the huge grudge I’ve held with  your name on it.”
   She patted the  oor  next to  her, and Luce slid down the wall  to sit
too. ShelEy gave a tentative  smile.  “I  swear, Luce, I  never thought
I’d meet you. I de nitely   never expected you to Ee … cool.”
   “You  think   I’m  cool?”   Luce asked, laughing   quietly  to  herself.
“You were right  aEout me Eeing self-aEsorEed.”
   “Ugh,  Must what I thought. You’re one of those impossiEle-to-stay-
mad-at people, aren’t you?” ShelEy sighed. “Fine. I’m sorry for going
after your Eoyfriend and, you  know, hating  you Eefore I knew you. I
won’t do it  again.”

170
   This  was  weird.  The  thing  that  could  have  driven   two  friends
instantly  apart   was actually   drawing   them  closer  together.  This
wasn’t  ShelEy’s fault.  Any   ash   of  anger  Luce  felt  aEout  it  was
something she needed to  take up  with  …  Daniel. One stuSid night,
ShelEy had said. But what had really happened?


   Sunset found Luce walking  down  the rocky  steps to the Eeach. It
was cold  outside,  colder  still  as she got  closer  to  the  water.  The
day’s last rays of  light  danced o   thin  sheets of cloud,  staining  the
ocean orange, pink, and  pastel Elue. The calm  sea stretched out in
front of her, looking  like a path  to Heaven.
   Until   she got  to   the  wide  circle  of   sand, still   Elackened from
Roland’s Eon re, Luce didn’t  know  what she was doing down there.
Then she found  herself  crawling   Eehind the  tall  lava  rock  where
Daniel had  tugged her  away.  Where the  two  of  them had  danced
and  then  spent  the  precious  few   moments  they’d  had   together
 ghting  aEout something as stupid as the color of her hair.
   Callie  had once had a Eoyfriend  at Dover whom  she’d Eroken up
with after  a  ght   over a toaster. One of them had Mammed the thing
with  an oversized New  York  Eagel; the other  one had  ipped   out.
Luce couldn’t  rememEer all  the  details  now,  Eut she rememEered
thinking,  Who breaks uS over a kitchen aSSliance?
   But it  was never really  aEout the toaster, Callie  had told her.  The
toaster was Must a symptom, something that represented everything
else that was wrong Eetween them.
   Luce hated  that she and  Daniel kept  getting  into   ghts.  The one
on the Eeach, over her dye MoE, reminded her of Callie’s story. It felt
like a preview of some Eigger, uglier argument on the way.
   Bracing herself  against the wind,  Luce realized  she’d come down
here to try   to trace  where they’d  gone wrong  the other  night.  She
was idiotically  looking  for signs in  the water, some clue carved into
the rough volcanic  rock.  She was looking everywhere except inside
herself. Because what was inside  Luce was Must the vast enigma of

171
her   past.   MayEe  the    answers  were   still    somewhere   in   the
Announcers, Eut  for  now,  they  remained  frustratingly   out  of  her
grasp.
   She didn’t   want  to  Elame Daniel.  She was the  one who’d   Eeen
naïve enough to  assume that their  relationship  had  Eeen exclusive
across time. But  he’d never  told  her otherwise.  So he’d practically
set her up  to walk  right   into  this shock.  It was  emEarrassing. And
one more item to tick  o   on the long  list of things  that Luce thought
she deserved to know and that Daniel didn’t see  t  to tell  her.
   She felt  something  she thought  was rain,  a drizzly   sensation on
her cheeks and her   ngertips.   But  it  was warm  instead of  cold.  It
was powdery and light,  not wet.  She turned her face toward the sky
and was Elinded Ey  shimmering violet  light.  Not  wanting  to  shield
her eyes,  she watched  even when  it   grew  so Eright  it   hurt.  The
particles slowly drifted  toward  the water  Must o shore, falling into  a
pattern and limning  the shape she’d know anywhere.
   He seemed to have  grown more  gorgeous. His Eare feet hovered
inches o    the water  as he  approached the shore.  His Eroad white
wings seemed to Ee edged with violet  light  and were pulsing nearly
imperceptiEly  in the  rough  wind.  It  wasn’t fair.  The  way he  made
her feel when she looked  at him—awed  and ecstatic and a little  Eit
afraid. She could hardly  think  of anything  else. Every annoyance or
nagging frustration   vanished. There  was Must that undeniaEle pull
toward him.
   “You keep turning  up,” she whispered.
   Daniel’s voice carried  over the water.  “I  told you  I wanted to  talk
to you.”
   Luce felt her mouth  pucker up. “AEout ShelEy?”
   “AEout  the danger you keep putting  yourself  in.”  Daniel spoke so
plainly.  She’d Eeen expecting her mention  of  ShelEy to elicit  some
reaction. But Daniel  Must cocked his head. He reached the wet edge
of the Eeach, where the water  foamed and rolled  away, and  oated
Must aEove the sand in front of her. “What aEout ShelEy?”
   “Are  you really going to  pretend like you don’t  know?”

172
   “Hold   on.”  Daniel  lowered  his  feet  to  the  ground,  Eending his
knees in a deep plié when his Eare soles touched the sand. When he
straightened, his  wings pulled  Eackward,  away from  his  face, and
sent a wave of wind Eack with  them. Luce got her  rst   sense of how
heavy they must Ee.
   It  took less than two seconds for Daniel to reach her, Eut when his
arms slipped  around her  Eack and  pulled  her  to him,  he  couldn’t
have come quickly enough.
   “Let’s not get o    to another Ead start,” he said.
   She closed her eyes and let him lift  her o    the ground. His mouth
found hers and she tilted  her face to  the sky, letting  the feel of  him
overwhelm  her.  There  was  no  darkness, no  more  cold,   Must the
lovely sensation of Eeing Eathed in his violet  glow. Even the rush  of
the ocean was canceled out Ey a soft hum, the energy Daniel carried
in his Eody.
   Her  hands were wrapped tight  around  his neck, then  stroked the
 rm  muscles on his  shoulders, Erushing the soft, thick  perimeter  of
his wings. They  were strong  and white  and shimmering,  always so
much Eigger than she rememEered. Two great  sails extending from
his sides, every inch  of  them perfect  and smooth.  She could feel a
tension against her  ngers,  like  touching a  tightly  stretched canvas.
But silkier,  and  deliciously  velvet soft.  They seemed to  respond to
her touch,  even extending  forward  to  ruE against  her, pulling   her
closer, until   she was Euried  in  them,  nestling  deeper and deeper,
and still never getting enough. Daniel shuddered.
   “Is   this   okay?”   she  whispered,   Eecause sometimes  he  grew
nervous when things Eetween them started to heat up.  “Does it hurt
you?”
   Tonight   his  eyes  looked  greedy.  “It   feels  wonderful.   Nothing
compares.”
   His   ngers   glided  along her  waist,  slipping   inside her  sweater.
Usually, the  softest caress from Daniel’s  hands made her  go weak.
Tonight his touch was more forceful.  Almost rough. She didn’t know
what had gotten into  him, Eut she liked it.

173
   His  lips traced  hers, then  drifted  higher,  following  the  Eridge of
her nose, coming  down  tenderly  on each of  her  eyelids. When  he
pulled Eack, she opened her eyes and gazed at him.
   “You are so Eeautiful,”  he whispered.
   It  was exactly what  most girls  would have wanted  to hear—only,
as soon as he said it, Luce felt  ripped  out  of her  Eody, replaced Ey
someone else’s.
   ShelEy’s.
   But  not  Must ShelEy’s, Eecause what were the odds that she had
Eeen the only one? Had other eyes and noses and cheekEones taken
Daniel’s kisses? Had other  Eodies huddled  with   him  on  a  Eeach?
Other  lips  tangled,  other   hearts pounded?  Had  other   whispered
compliments Eeen exchanged?
   “What’s wrong?”  he asked.
   Luce felt sick. They could  steam up windows with  their kisses, Eut
as soon as they  started  using  their  mouths  for  other  things—like
talking—everything  got so complicated.
   She turned her face away. “You lied to  me.”
   Daniel  didn’t  sco    or get  angry,  as she was expecting  him  to—
almost wanting  him  to.  He sat down  on  the sand. He  propped his
hands on his knees and stared out at the frothy waves. “AEout  what,
exactly?”
   Even as the words came out, Luce regretted where she was going.
“I could take your approach—not tell  you anything,  ever.”
   “I  can’t tell  you whatever  it is  you want to  know if  you won’t  tell
me what’s Eothering you.”
   She thought  aEout  ShelEy, Eut  when  she imagined  playing  the
Mealousy card, only to  have  him  treat  her  like   a child,   Luce felt
pathetic. Instead, she said,  “I  feel like  we’re  strangers. Like I  don’t
know you any Eetter than anyone else.”
   “Oh.”  His voice  was quiet, Eut  his face was so infuriatingly   stoic,
Luce wanted to shake him. Nothing riled  him up.

174
   “You’re  holding  me  hostage out here,  Daniel.  I know  nothing.  I
know no one.  I’m lonely.  Every time  I see you, you’ve  put up  some
new  wall,  and  you  never  let   me  in.  You  never  let  me  in.   You
dragged me all the way out here—”
   She was  thinking  to  CaliIornia,  Eut it   was more  than  that.  Her
past, what  limited  conception  of it   that she had,  rolled  out  in  her
mind like the  dropped reel of a movie, unwinding  onto the  oor.
   Daniel had  dragged her much, much further  than California.  He’d
dragged her   through  centuries   of   ghts   like   this   one.  Through
agonizing  deaths that   caused pain  to  everyone  around  her—like
those nice old people she’d visited last week. Daniel had ruined  that
couple’s life.   Killed   their  daughter.  All   Eecause he’d  Eeen some
hotshot angel who saw something he wanted and went after it.
   No,  he hadn’t  Must dragged her to  California.   He’d dragged  her
into a cursed eternity.  A  Eurden that should  have Eeen his alone to
Eear. “I  am  su ering—me   and everyone  who  loves me—for  your
curse. For all time. Because of you.”
   He winced as though she’d struck him. “You  want to go home,” he
said.
   She kicked the  sand. “I want  to go  Eack. I want you  to take Eack
whatever it  was you did  to get  me into  this. I  Must want to live and
die a  normal  life   and Ereak  up  with  normal  people  over  normal
things like toasters, not  the supernatural secrets of the universe that
you don’t even trust me with.”
   “Hold  on.” Daniel’s face had gone completely white.  His shoulders
sti ened   and   his  hands  were   shaking.  Even  his   wings,  which
moments ago had seemed so powerful, looked frail.  Luce wanted to
reach out   and  touch  them,   as if   somehow  they  would   tell  her
whether  the pain  she saw  in  his  eyes was real.  But  she held  her
ground.
   “Are  we Ereaking up?” he asked, his voice weak and low.
   “Are  we even together, Daniel?”

175
   He  got  to  his  feet and  cupped  her  face. Before  she could  Merk
away, she felt the heat suEside from her cheeks. She closed her eyes,
trying to  resist the magnetic force of  his touch, Eut it  was so strong,
stronger than anything else.
   It   erased her  anger,  left  her  identity   in   tatters.  Who  was  she
without   him?   Why   did   the  pull   toward    Daniel  always   defeat
anything    that    pulled     her    away?   Reason,   sensiEility,    self-
preservation: None of  them could  ever compete. It  must have Eeen
part  of Daniel’s  punishment.  That  she was Eound  to  him  forever,
like a marionette  to its puppeteer. She knew she shouldn’t want him
with  every  Eer  of  her Eeing, Eut she couldn’t  help  herself. Gazing
at  him,  feeling  his   touch—the  rest  of  the  world   faded  into   the
Eackground.
   She Must wished loving him didn’t always have to Ee so hard.
   “What’s  this Eusiness aEout wanting a toaster?” Daniel whispered
in her ear.
   “I  guess I don’t know what I want.”
   “I  do.” His eyes were intent, holding  hers. “I want  you.”
   “I  know, Eut—”
   “Nothing   will   ever change  that.  No  matter  what  you  hear.  No
matter what happens.”
   “But  I need more than to Ee wanted. I need for us to Ee together—
actually together.”
   “Soon. I promise. All  of this is only  temporary.”
   “So you’ve  said.” Luce  saw that the  moon had  risen overhead. It
was Erilliant  orange and waning, a quiet  Elaze. “What did you  want
to talk to me aEout?”
   Daniel  tucked her Elond  hair  Eehind her ear, examining  the lock
for way  too long.  “School,”  he said with  a hesitancy that  made her
think  he  was Eeing less than  truthful.   “I   asked Francesca to look
after you, Eut I wanted to  see for myself. Are you learning anything?
Are you having an okay time?”

176
   She felt  the sudden urge to  Erag to him  aEout her work  with  the
Announcers, aEout her talk with   Steven and the glimpses she’d had
of her  parents. But Daniel’s face looked  more eager and  open than
she had seen it all evening. He seemed to Ee trying to  avoid a  ght,
so Luce decided to do the same.
   She closed her eyes. She told him what he needed to hear. School
was  ne.   She  was  ne.   Daniel’s  lips  came  down  on  hers  again,
Erie y,  hotly, until  her whole  Eody was tingling.
   “I  have to go,” he said at last, getting  to his feet. “I  shouldn’t even
Ee here, Eut I cannot keep myself away from you. I worry  aEout you
in every waking moment. I  love you, Luce. So much it hurts.”
   She closed her eyes against the Eeat of his wings and  the sting of
the sand he raised in his wake.

177
                                                   TEN




                                             NINE DAYS 



An echoing  series of whooshes and clangs cut  through  the song of
ospreys. A long, singing note of metal scraping metal, then  the clash
of the thin silver  Elade glancing o   its opponent’s guard.
   Francesca and Steven were  ghting.
   Well,  no—they  were  fencing.  A  demonstration  for  the  students
who were aEout to stage matches of their own.
   “Knowing  how to  wield a sword—whether  it’s the light  foils we’re
using  today,   or   something   as   dangerous  as  a   cutlass—is  an
invaluaEle skill,”  Steven said, slicing the point  of  his sword through
the air  in  short,  whiplike  movements.  “The armies  of Heaven  and
Hell rarely  engage in  Eattle, Eut  when  they do”—without   looking,
he  snapped his   Elade  sideways  toward  Francesca,  and  without
looking,  she Erought  her  sword  up  and  parried  the  Elow—“they
remain  untouched  Ey modern  warfare.   Daggers, Eows and  Eolts,
giant  aming  swords, these are our eternal tools.”
   The duel  that  followed  was for show,  merely a  lesson; Francesca
and Steven weren’t even wearing masks.
   It  was late in the morning  on Wednesday, and Luce was seated on
the deck’s wide Eench Eetween Jasmine and Miles. The entire class,
including   their  two   teachers,  had  changed  out  of   their  regular
clothes into  the  white   out ts   fencers always  wore. Half   the class
held Elack mesh face masks in their  hands. Luce had arrived  at the
supply closet Must after the last face mask had Eeen snagged, which
hadn’t   Eothered   her   at   all.    She   was  hoping    to   avoid    the

178
emEarrassment of having the entire class witness her cluelessness: It
was oEvious from  the  way  the  others  were making  lunges  at the
sides of the deck that they had Eeen through these practices Eefore.
   “The  idea  is  to present  as small  a  target  for  your  opponent  as
possiEle,” Francesca explained to the circle  of students surrounding
her. “So you set your  weight  on one foot  and lead with  your  sword
foot,  and then  rock  Eack and  forth—into   striking  range and  then
away.”
   She and  Steven  were suddenly  engaged in   a  rush of   MaEs and
parries, making   a dense  clatter  as they   expertly  fought  o     each
other’s Elows. When her  Elade glanced wide  to  the left,  he lunged
forward,  Eut she rocked  Eack, sweeping her sword  up and  around
and onto his wrist. “Touché,” she said, laughing.
   Steven  turned  to   the  class. “Touché,  of  course,  is  French  for
‘touched.’ In fencing, we count points Ey touches.”
   “Were  we    ghting    for  real,”   Francesca said,  “I’m   afraid   that
Steven’s hand would Ee lying Eloody on the deck. Sorry, darling.”
   “Quite  all  right,”   he  said. “Quite.  All.   Right.”  He threw   himself
sideways at her, almost seeming to rise o   the ground.  In the frenzy
that  followed,  Luce lost  track  of  Steven’s sword  as it  crisscrossed
through the  air again  and again, nearly  slicing into  Francesca, who
ducked sideways Must in time and resurfaced Eehind him.
   But  he  was ready  for  her  and  knocked  her  Elade away  Eefore
dropping the point  of his and striking  out at her instep.
   “I’m  afraid you, my  dear, have gotten o   on the wrong foot.”
   “We’ll  see.” Francesca raised a hand  and smoothed her  hair,  the
two of them staring at  each other with murderous intensity.
   Each new round of  violent  play caused Luce to tense up in alarm.
She was used to   Eeing Mittery, Eut the  rest  of  the  class was also
surprisingly   Mittery   today.   Jittery    with     excitement.   Watching
Francesca and Steven, not one of them could keep still.
   Until   today,  she’d  wondered  why  none  of  the  other   Nephilim
played  on  any  of  Shoreline’s  varsity  sports  teams.  Jasmine  had

179
scrunched up  her  nose when  Luce asked  whether  she and  Dawn
were interested in swim  team tryouts in  the gym. In fact,  until  she’d
overheard Lilith  in the locker  room this morning  yawning that  every
sport except fencing was “exquisitely   Eoring,” Luce had   gured  the
Nephilim  Must weren’t athletic.  But that   wasn’t it  at  all.  They  Must
chose carefully what to play.
   Luce  winced   as  she  imagined   Lilith,    who  knew   the   French
translation  for   all  the   fencing  terms  Luce  didn’t   even  know  in
English, throwing her svelte, spiteful  self into an attack. If  the rest of
the class were  one-tenth  as skilled  as Francesca and Steven, Luce
was going to end up a pile of Eody parts Ey the end of the session.
   Her  teachers were oEvious experts, stepping lithely  in  and out  of
lunges. Sunlight  glinted   o    their   swords, o     their  white   padded
vests. Francesca’s thick Elond waves cascaded out in a gorgeous halo
around her  shoulders as she spun  around Steven. Their  feet  wove
patterns on the deck with such grace, the match looked almost like a
dance.
   The expressions on  their  faces were dogged and  full  of  a Erutal
determination   to  win.   After   those  rst    few   touches, they   were
evenly matched.  They  must have  Eeen getting  tired.  They’d  Eeen
fencing for   more than  ten  minutes  without   a  hit.  They  Eegan to
fence so quickly  that  the  arcs of  their  Elades all  Eut  disappeared;
there were  only   a  ne   fury   and a  faint   Euzz in  the  air  and  the
constant crack of their foils against one another.
   Sparks Eegan to  y   each time  their  swords connected. Sparks of
love or  hatred?  There  were moments  when  it  almost  looked  like
Eoth.
   And that  unnerved Luce. Because love and hate were supposed to
stand  cleanly  on   opposite  sides  of   the  spectrum.  The   division
seemed as clear as …  well,  angels  and demons  would  once have
seemed to her. Not  anymore.  As she watched  her teachers in  awe
and fear,   memories of   last  night’s  argument  with   Daniel  fenced
through her mind.  And her  own feelings of  love and hate—or if  not
quite hate, a Euilding fury—knotted  up within  her.

180
   A  cheer rang out  from  her  classmates. It felt  like  Luce had only
Elinked,  Eut  she had  missed  it.   The  point  of  Francesca’s sword
MaEEed into Steven’s chest. Close to the heart. She pressed against
him to the point  where her thin  Elade Eent into an arc. Both of them
stood  still   for  a  moment,   looking  each  other   in  the   eye.  Luce
couldn’t tell  whether this, too, was part of  the show.
   “Right  through my heart,”  Steven said.
   “As if  you had one,” Francesca whispered.
   The two  teachers seemed momentarily unaware that the deck was
full of students.
   “Another  win  for  Francesca,” Jasmine said.  She tipped her  head
toward Luce and dropped her  voice. “She comes from a long line  of
winners. Steven? Not  so much.”  The comment seemed loaded, Eut
Jasmine Must Eounded lightly o   the Eench, slid  her mask over  her
face, and tightened her ponytail. Ready to go.
   As the  other  students started  Eustling around  her,  Luce tried  to
picture  a  similar  scene Eetween her  and  Daniel:  Luce taking   the
upper hand,  holding  him  at  the  mercy of  her  sword  as Francesca
had  Steven.  It   was,  frankly,    impossiEle  to   imagine.   And  that
Eothered Luce. Not Eecause she wanted to lord  it  over  Daniel,  Eut
Eecause she didn’t want to  Ee the one ruled  over either.  The night
Eefore, she’d Eeen too much  at  his mercy.  RememEering that  kiss
made her  anxious,  ushed,   and overwhelmed—and  not  in  a good
way.
   She loved him. But.
   She should have Eeen aEle to think the phrase without  tacking on
that ugly  little   conMunction. But she couldn’t.  What they  had right
now was not  what  she wanted.  And if  the  rules of  the  game were
always going  to  stay  this  way,  she  Must didn’t know  if   she even
wanted to play.  What kind  of match was she for  Daniel? What kind
of match  was he  for  her? If  he’d  Eeen drawn  to  other  girls  … at
some point he  must have  wondered, too.  Could someone else give
them each a more level playing  eld?

181
   When Daniel  kissed her, Luce knew in  her Eones that he was her
past. Folded into his  emErace, she was desperate for him to remain
her present. But the  second their  lips parted,  she couldn’t  really Ee
sure he  was  her  future.   She needed  the  freedom  to   make  that
decision one way or  the other. She didn’t  even know  what else was
out there.
   “Miles,”    Steven called.   He  was  fully    Eack  in   teacher  mode,
sheathing his sword in  a narrow  Elack leather  case and nodding to
the northwest  corner  of the  deck. “You’ll   match with   Roland over
here.”
   On her left,  Miles leaned in  to whisper,  “You and Roland  go Eack
a ways—what’s his Achilles heel? I  am not going to  lose to the  new
kid.”
   “Um  … I don’t really  …”  Luce’s mind went Elank. Looking over at
Roland, whose mask already covered his face, she realized how very
little  she really  knew  aEout him.   Other than  his  catalog of  Elack-
market goods. And his  harmonica playing.  And  the way  he’d made
Daniel laugh  so  hard  that    rst  day  at  Sword &  Cross. She’d still
never found out  what  they’d Eeen talking  aEout … or  what Roland
was really doing at  Shoreline anyway. When it  came to  Mr. Sparks,
Luce was de nitely  in the dark.
   Miles  patted her knee. “Luce,  I was kidding.   There’s no way that
guy’s not going  to kick  my  ass.” He stood  up, laughing.  “Wish  me
luck.”
   Francesca had  moved  to  the  other  side  of  the  deck,  near  the
entrance to the lodge, and was sipping a Eottle of water.  “Kristy  and
Millicent,  take this corner,”  she told two Nephilim  girls  with  pigtails
and matching Elack sneakers. “ShelEy and Dawn, come match right
here.” She gestured  to  the corner  of  the  deck directly   in  front  of
Luce. “The rest of you will  watch.”
   Luce was relieved her own name hadn’t Eeen called. The more she
saw  of   Francesca and  Steven’s  teaching   method,  the   less  she
understood it. One intimidating  demonstration  took the place of  any
real instruction.   Not  watch  and  learn,  Eut  straight  to  watch  and

182
excel. As the   rst  six  students took  their  places on the  deck, Luce
felt huge pressure to pick up the entire art of  fencing right away.
   “En garde!” ShelEy Eellowed, lunging  Eackward into  a squat with
the tip  of her  sword Must inches from Dawn, whose sword  was still
sheathed.
   Dawn’s   ngers   were  zigzagging  through   her  short  Elack  hair,
pinning  sections of  it  Eack  with  a  Erimming  handful   of  Eutter y
clips. “You can’t en-garde me while I’m  prepping for  Eattle, ShelEy!”
Her high   voice  got  even higher  when  she  was frustrated.  “What
were you,  raised  Ey wolves?”  she  hu ed   through  the  last  plastic
Earrette Eetween her  teeth.  “Okay,”  she said,  drawing  her  sword.
“Now I’m  ready.”
   ShelEy, who had Eeen holding her  deep lunge throughout  Dawn’s
primp  session, now straightened up and  looked down  at her  rough
nail Eeds. “Wait, do I  have time for  a manicure?” she said, psyching
Dawn out  Must long enough to allow  her  to drop  into  an  o ensive
stance and swing her sword around.
   “How    uncouth!”   Dawn   Earked,   Eut  to    Luce’s  surprise,  she
instantly   ratcheted  up   her   swordsmanship,  swishing  her   Elade
skillfully  through  the  air and  knocking  ShelEy’s aside. Dawn was a
fencing Eadass.
   Next to Luce, Jasmine was douEled over laughing. “A match made
in Hell.”
   A  smile had crept  onto Luce’s face, too, Eecause she’d never met
anyone as unshakaEly upEeat as Dawn. At  rst,  Luce had suspected
phoniness, a façade—where Luce came from, the South, that always-
happy Eit wouldn’t  have Eeen real. But Luce had Eeen impressed Ey
how quickly  Dawn  reEounded after  that  day on  the yacht.  Dawn’s
optimism seemed to know no limits.  By now, it  was hard for Luce to
Ee around the  girl   without  chuckling.   And it   was especially  hard
when Dawn was focusing her girly  cheer on  Eeating the crap out of
someone as Eleakly opposite as ShelEy.
   Things  Eetween Luce  and  ShelEy were  still  a  little   weird.  She
knew it,  ShelEy knew it,  even the Buddha night-light   in  their  room

183
seemed to  know  it.  The  truth   was,  Luce kind   of  enMoyed seeing
ShelEy  ghting  for her life  while Dawn happily  attacked her.
   ShelEy was a steady, patient  ghter.  Where Dawn’s technique was
showy and eye-catching, her limEs whirling  in a virtual  tango across
the deck, ShelEy was careful  with  her  lunges, almost as if  she had
only so many to  ration out.  She kept her knees Eent and never gave
up anything.
   Yet  she’d said she had  given up  on  Daniel after  one night.   Had
Eeen quick to say it  was Eecause of Daniel’s feelings for Luce—that
they interfered   with  everything   else. But  Luce didn’t  Eelieve  her.
Something was weird   aEout ShelEy’s confession; something  didn’t
match  up  with    Daniel’s  reaction  when   Luce  had  almost-sort-of
Erought it up the  night Eefore. He’d acted like there wasn’t anything
to tell.
   A loud  thump snapped Luce Eack to attention.
   Across the deck, Miles  had somehow landed  on his Eack. Roland
hovered over him. Literally.  He was  ying.
   The  enormous wings  that  had unfurled  from  Roland’s  shoulders
were as large as a great cape and feathered like an eagle’s, Eut with
a Eeautiful  golden marEling  woven through  their  dark  pinions.  He
must have had  the same slits cut  into  his  fencing garE that  Daniel
had in  his T-shirt.  Luce had never seen Roland’s wings Eefore, and
like the  other  Nephilim,  she couldn’t  stop staring.  ShelEy had told
her that  only  a  very  few  Nephilim  had  wings,  and none  of  them
went  to  Shoreline. Seeing Roland’s  come out   in  a Eattle,  even  a
practice sword ght,  sent a ripple  of nervous excitement through  the
crowd.
   The wings commanded so much attention,  it  took Luce a moment
to  realize that   the  tip  of  Roland’s  sword  was hovering  Must over
Miles’s  EreastEone, pinning  him   to   the  ground.  Roland’s  Eright
white  fencing suit  and  golden wings  cut  a stark  silhouette against
the dark,  lush trees Eordering  the deck. With  his  Elack mesh mask
pulled   down,    Roland   looked   even   more    intimidating,     more
menacing than  if  she’d  Eeen aEle to  see his  face.  She hoped his

184
expression would  look  playful,   Eecause he really   had  Miles  in  a
vulneraEle situation. Luce Mumped to her feet to go to him, surprised
to  nd  her knees shaking.
   “OhmigodMiles!”  Dawn called out from  across the deck, forgetting
her own  Eattle Must long enough for  ShelEy to  go in  with  a  whip-
over, touch Dawn’s unshielded chest, and score the winning point.
   “Not  the most  sportsmanlike way  to win,”  ShelEy said, sheathing
her sword. “But sometimes that’s the way it  goes.”
   Luce hurried  past them and the  rest of the  Nephilim  who weren’t
engaged in duels to  Roland and Miles.  Both were  panting. By  then
Roland had settled to the ground, his wings retracted inside  his skin.
Miles looked  ne;  it was Luce who couldn’t  stop tremEling.
   “You got  me.” Miles laughed nervously, pushing away the point  of
the sword. “Didn’t  see your secret weapon coming.”
   “Sorry,  man,”  Roland said sincerely. “Didn’t  mean  to unleash the
wings on you. Sometimes that Must happens when I get going.”
   “Well,  good game. Up  until  then, anyway.”  Miles  raised his right
hand to  Ee  helped  o    the  ground.  “Do  they  say  ‘good game’  in
fencing?”
   “No,  no one says that.” Roland  ipped  up his  mask with one hand
and, grinning, dropped the  sword from his other.  He grasped Miles’s
hand and pulled him up in  one swift move. “Good game yourself.”
   Luce let  out  her Ereath. Of  course Roland wasn’t  really  going to
harm Miles.  Roland  was o Eeat   and unpredictaEle,  Eut he  wasn’t
dangerous, even if  he had  sided  with   Cam that  last  night   in  the
Sword & Cross cemetery. But there was no reason to fear him.  Why
had she Eeen so nervous? Why  couldn’t  she get  her  heart to  stop
racing?
   Then  she understood why.  It   was Eecause of Miles.  Because he
was the closest friend  she had at  Shoreline. All  she knew  was that
recently,  every time  she  was around  Miles,  it   made her  think   of
Daniel, and how a lot  of things Eetween them were sort of dragging.
And how  sometimes, secretly, she wished Daniel  could Ee little   Eit

185
more like   Miles.  Cheerful  and  easygoing, attentive  and  naturally
sweet. Less caught up in things like Eeing damned since the dawn of
time.
   A  ash  of white  rushed past Luce and straight into Miles’s arms.
   Dawn. She leaped onto Miles, her eyes closed and her mouth in an
enormous grin. “You’re alive!”
   “Alive?”   Miles  set her Eack down  on  her  feet. “I  Earely  got  the
wind  knocked out  of  me. Good thing  you’ve  never come to  watch
one of the footEall games.”
   Standing  Eehind Dawn, watching   as she petted Miles  where  the
sword had skimmed  his white  vest, Luce felt  oddly  emEarrassed. It
wasn’t  like    she  wanted   to   Ee  petting   Miles,   right?   She   Must
wanted … she didn’t know what  she wanted.
   “Want  this?”  Roland appeared at her  side, handing her  the mask
he’d Eeen using. “You’re up next, aren’t you?”
   “Me? No.”  She shook her head. “Isn’t the Eell aEout to ring?”
   Roland shook his head. “Nice  try.  Just own it,  and no one’s going
to know you’ve never fenced Eefore.”
   “I   douEt that.”   Luce  ngered   the  thin   mesh screen. “Roland,  I
have to ask you—”
   “No,  I wasn’t going to run  Miles through. Why did  everyone get so
freaked out?”
   “I  know that.  …” she tried to smile. “It’s  aEout Daniel.”
   “Luce, you know  the rules.”
   “What  rules?”
   “I  can get a lot of things, Eut I  can’t get Daniel for you.  You’re Must
going to have to wait it  out.”
   “Wait,  Roland. I know  he can’t Ee here right now. But what  rules?
What are you talking aEout?”
   He  pointed  Eehind  her.  Francesca was Eeckoning  toward  Luce
with   a   nger.   The  other   Nephilim   had  all   taken  seats  on  the
Eenches, except for   a  few  students  who   looked  like   they  were

186
preparing to  fence.  Jasmine and a  Korean girl   named Sylvia,  two
tall,  skinny Eoys whose names Luce could never  keep straight, and
Lilith,  standing alone,  examining the  Elunt ruEEer tip  of  her sword
with careful  scrutiny.
   “Luce?”  Francesca said in a low voice. She motioned to  the space
on the deck in front of  Lilith.  “Take your place.”
   “Trial  Ey  re.”   Roland whistled,  patting  Luce on the Eack. “Show
no fear.”
   There were only   ve  other  students standing in the  middle of  the
deck, Eut to Luce, it felt as though there were a hundred.
   Francesca stood with her arms folded casually over  her chest. Her
face was serene, Eut to Luce it looked like  a forced serenity.  MayEe
she intended for Luce to lose in the most Erutal, emEarrassing match
possiEle. Why else would  she pit  Luce against Lilith,   who  towered
over Luce  Ey at  least a  foot,  and  whose  ery   red  hair  protruded
from Eehind her mask like a lion’s mane?
   “I’ve  never done this,” Luce said lamely.
   “It’s  okay, Luce, you don’t  need to Ee skilled yet,”  Francesca said.
“We’re trying  to  gauge your relative  capacity.  Just rememEer what
Steven and I  showed you  at the  start  of the  session and you’ll  do
 ne.”
   Lilith   laughed  and whipped  the  point  of  her  foil   in  a Eroad  Z.
“The mark of zero, loser,” she said.
   “Showing  o    the numEer  of friends  you  have?” Luce asked. She
rememEered what Roland had said aEout showing  no fear. She slid
the mask  down  over her  face, took  her  foil   from  Francesca. Luce
didn’t  even  know  how  to  hold  it.   She fumEled  with   the  handle,
wondering  whether  to  put it   in  her right   or  left  hand.  She wrote
right-handed, Eowled and Eatted with her left.
   Lilith  was already  looking at  her like she wished Luce were dead,
and Luce knew she couldn’t a ord   the time  to test out  her swing in
Eoth hands. Did they even call it a swing in fencing?

187
   Wordlessly,  Francesca moved  Eehind  her.  She  stood  with   her
shoulders Erushing Luce’s Eack, practically folding her  narrow Eody
around Luce and taking Luce’s left hand, and the sword, in hers.
   “I’m  left-handed too,”  she said.
   Luce opened her mouth, unsure whether or not to  protest.
   “Just  like   you.”  Francesca leaned around  her  and  gave Luce  a
knowing  look.  As she repositioned  her  grip,  something warm  and
tremendously soothing  owed  through  Francesca’s  ngers into Luce.
Strength, or mayEe courage—Luce didn’t understand how it worked,
Eut she was grateful.
   “You’ll  want  a light  grip,”  Francesca said, directing Luce’s  ngers
around the hilt  under the guard. “Grip  too tightly  and your direction
of  the  Elade  Eecomes less  nimEle,  your   defensive  moves  more
limited.  Grip  too   lightly   and the  Elade  can Ee  spun out  of  your
hands.”
   Her smooth,  thin   ngers  guided Luce’s to hold  the curved grip  of
the sword’s hilt  Must under the guard. With  one hand  on the sword
and  the   other   on   Luce’s  shoulder,   Francesca galloped   lightly
sideways one step, Elocking out the move.
   “Advance.”   She moved  forward,  thrusting   the  sword  in  Lilith’s
direction.
   The redheaded girl  ran her  tongue across her teeth and glared  at
Luce with something like middle  child syndrome.
   “Disengage.”  Francesca moved Luce Eack as if  she were a  chess
piece. She stepped away and circled to  face Luce, whispering, “The
rest is Must gilding the lily.”
   Luce swallowed. Gilding the  what?
   “En  garde!” Lilith   practically   shouted. Her  long  legs were  Eent,
and her right arm was holding  the foil  straight at Luce.
   Luce retreated, two  quick galloping  steps; then, when she felt at a
safe enough distance, lunged forward with her sword extended.
   Lilith  dipped  deftly  to the left  of Luce’s sword, spun around,  then
came Eack from Eelow  with  her  own,  clashing against Luce’s. The

188
two  Elades slid against  each other  until  they  reached a  midpoint,
then held. Luce had to  put all  her strength into  stopping Lilith’s  foil
with  the pressure of her  own. Her  arms were shaking,  Eut she was
surprised to  nd   she could hold  Lilith   Eack in this  position. At  last
Lilith  Eroke away and Eacked o .   Luce watched her dip  and spin  a
few times, and Eegan to  gure her out.
   Lilith  was a grunter,  making tons of e ort- lled    noise. It  was a Eit
of  misdirection.  She  would  make  a  huge noise  and  feint  in   one
direction, then  whip the  point of  her foil  around in  a high, tight  arc
to try to  get past Luce’s defenses.
   So Luce  tried  the  same move.  When  she swung  the  tip  of  her
sword Eack around to get her   rst  point,  Must south of Lilith’s heart,
the girl let  out a deafening roar.
   Luce  winced   and  Eacked  away.  She  didn’t   think   she’d  even
touched Lilith  very  hard.  “Are you  okay?”  she called out,  aEout to
lift  her mask.
   “She’s not hurt,”  Francesca answered for Lilith. A smile parted her
lips. “She’s angry that you’re Eeating her.”
   Luce didn’t   have time   to wonder  what   it  meant that   Francesca
seemed suddenly to Ee enMoying herself, Eecause Lilith was Earreling
toward her once again, sword poised. Luce raised her sword to meet
Lilith’s,   turning    her   wrist    to   clash   three   times   Eefore   they
disengaged.
   Luce’s pulse was racing  and she felt  good. She sensed an energy
coursing through  her  that  she hadn’t  felt  in  a long  time.  She was
actually good at this, almost as good as Lilith,  who looked  like she’d
Eeen Ered to skewer people with sharp things. Luce, who  had never
even picked up a sword,  realized she actually  had a chance to win.
Just one more point.
   She could hear the other  students cheering, some even calling out
her name.  She could  hear Miles,  and  she thought  she could  hear
ShelEy, which really egged her on. But the sound of their  voices was
woven  through  with   something  else. Something  staticky  and  too
loud. Lilith  fought  as  ercely  as ever, Eut suddenly Luce was having

189
a hard time  concentrating. She Eacked up and Elinked, looking  into
the sky. The  sun was oEscured Ey the overhanging  trees—Eut that
wasn’t all. A growing   eet  of  shadows was stretching forth from  the
Eranches, like ink stains extending right aEove Luce’s head.
   No—not  now,   not  in  puElic  with   everyone  watching,  and  not
when it   might  cost her  this  match.  Yet no  one  else even noticed
them, which seemed impossiEle. They were making so much noise it
was impossiEle for Luce to do anything Eut cover her ears and try to
Elock them out.  She raised her  hands to her  ears, which  made her
sword tip skyward, confusing Lilith.
   “Don’t   let  her freak  you  out,  Luce.  She’s toxic!”  Dawn  chirped
from the Eench.
   “Use the  Srise de Ier!” ShelEy called.  “Lilith   sucks at the  Srise de
Ier. Correction: Lilith   sucks at everything, Eut especially the Srise de
Ier.”
   So many voices—more, it  seemed, than there were people on  the
deck. Luce winced, trying to Elock it  all out.  But one voice separated
from the crowd,  as though it  were whispering into  her ear from  Must
Eehind her head. Steven:
   “Screen out the noise, Luce. Find the message.”
   She whipped her head around, Eut he was on the other side of the
deck, looking   toward  the   trees. Was  he talking   aEout  the  other
Nephilim? All  the noise and chatter  they were making? She glanced
at their  faces, Eut they  weren’t  even talking.  So who was? For  the
Eriefest moment,  she caught  Steven’s eyes, and he  lifted  his  chin
toward the sky. As if he were gesturing at the shadows.
   In the trees aEove her head. The announcers were sSeaking.
   And she could hear them. Had they Eeen speaking all along?
   Latin,  Russian, Japanese. English with a southern  accent. Broken
French. Whispers, singing,  Ead directions,  lines  of  rhyming  verse.
And one  long Eloodcurdling  scream for  help.  She shook her  head,
still  holding  Lilith’s  sword  at  Eay, and the  voices overhead stayed
with  her.  She looked  at  Steven, then  Francesca. They showed no

190
signs, Eut she knew they heard it. And  she knew they knew she was
listening too.
   For the message Eehind the noise.
   All  her life  she’d heard the same noise when the shadows came—
whooshing, ugly, wet noise. But now it  was di erent.  …
   Clash.
   Lilith’s  sword  collided  with  Luce’s. The girl  was  snorting like  an
angry Eull. Luce could hear her own Ereath inside the mask, panting
as she tried  to  hold  Lilith’s  sword.  Then  she could  hear so  much
more  among all   the  voices.  Suddenly  she could  focus  on  them.
Finding  the   Ealance Must meant  separating  the   static  from   the
signi cant  stu .  But how?
   Il  Iaut Iaire le couS double. ASrès ca, c’est Iacile a gagner, one of the
Announcers whispered in French.
   Luce had  Must two years of high school French  to go  on, Eut the
words touched her  somewhere deeper than her Erain. It  wasn’t Must
her head  understanding the  message. Somehow her Eody  knew  it
too.   It   seeped  into    her,   right   down    to   the   Eone,  and   she
rememEered: She’d Eeen in a place like this Eefore, in a sword  ght
like this, a stando   like  this.
   The    Announcer   was    recommending    the   douEle    cross,   a
complicated fencing  move in  which  two separate attacks came one
right after the  other.
   Her  sword slid  down  her opponent’s and  the two  of  them Eroke
away. A  moment  sooner than  Lilith,   Luce  lunged forward   in  one
clean intuitive   motion,  thrusting   her  sword point   right,  then  left,
then   ush    against  the  side   of  Lilith’s   riE   cage.  The  Nephilim
cheered, Eut Luce didn’t   stop. She disengaged, then  came straight
Eack a second time,  plunging  the  tip  of  her  foil  into  the  padding
near Lilith’s gut.
   That was three.
   Lilith   dashed her sword to  the deck, tore  o    her mask, and gave
Luce a terrifying  scowl  Eefore making quickly  for  the  locker room.

191
The rest  of  the  class was  on  their  feet,  and  Luce could  feel  her
classmates surrounding her.  Dawn  and  Jasmine hugged  her  from
Eoth sides, giving  dainty little   squeezes. ShelEy came forward next
for a  high   ve,  and  Luce could see Miles  waiting  patiently  Eehind
her. When  it  was his  turn,  he surprised her,  swooping  her o    the
deck and into a long, tight  hug.
   She  hugged  him  Eack,  rememEering  how  awkward   she’d  felt
earlier when  she’d gone  to  him  after  his match,  only  to   nd   that
Dawn had gotten  to him   rst.   Now  she was Must glad to have him,
glad of his easy and honest support.
   “I  want fencing lessons from you,” he said, laughing.
   In his arms, Luce looked up at the sky, at the shadows lengthening
from the  long Eranches. Their voices were  softer now, less distinct,
Eut still   clearer  than  they’d  ever  Eeen Eefore,  like  a  static- lled
radio she’d Eeen listening to for years that had  nally   Eeen tuned in.
She couldn’t tell whether she was supposed to Ee grateful or afraid.

192
                                                ELEVEN




                                            EIGHT DAYS 



“Hold   on.”  Callie’s  voice Eoomed  across the  line.  “Let  me  pinch
myself to make sure I’m not—”
   “You’re  not  dreaming,”  Luce said into   her Eorrowed  cell phone.
Reception was spotty  from  her position  at  the  edge of the  woods,
Eut Callie’s sarcasm came through  loud  and  clear.  “It’s  really  me.
I’m sorry I’ve Eeen such a crap friend.”
   It  was Thursday after dinner, and Luce was leaning up against the
stout trunk  of  a redwood  tree Eehind  her dorm.  To  her left  was a
rolling  hill  and then the cli ,   and Eeyond that, the ocean. There was
still  a little  amEer light  in  the sky  over the  water. Her  new friends
would  all  Ee  in  the  lodge  making  s’mores, telling   demon stories
around the hearth.  It was a  Dawn-and-Jasmine social event, part of
the Nephilim   Nights  Luce was supposed to  have helped  organize,
Eut all  she’d really  done was request  a few  Eags of marshmallows
and some dark chocolate from the mess hall.
   And then  she’d escaped out to the shadowy fringe of the woods to
avoid  everyone   at  Shoreline   and  reconnect   with   a   few  other
important things:
   Her parents. Callie. And the Announcers.
   She’d waited   until   tonight  to  call   home.  Thursdays chez  Price
meant her  mom would  Ee out  playing  mahMongg at the neighEors’
and her dad  would  have gone to  the local  movie  theater to  watch
the Atlanta opera on simulcast. She could handle their  voices on the
ten-plus-year-old  answering  machine   message, could  manage  to

193
leave a thirty-second voice mail  saying she was petitioning  hard for
Mr. Cole to let  her o   campus for Thanksgiving—and  that she loved
them very much.
   Callie wasn’t going to  let her o   so easy.
   “I  thought  you could only  call on Wednesdays,” Callie was saying
now.  Luce had  forgotten   the  strict  telephone  policy  at   Sword &
Cross. “At  rst   I stopped making  plans on Wednesdays, waiting  for
your call,”  Callie went  on. “But  after a while,  I  kinda gave up. How
did you get a cell phone, anyway?”
   “That’s  it?”  Luce asked. “How  did  I get  a cell phone? You’re  not
mad at me?”
   Callie let  out a long  sigh. “You know,  I thought  aEout Eeing mad.
I  even practiced  this  whole   ght   in  my  mind.   But  then we  Eoth
lose.” She  paused. “And  the  thing  is,  I  Must miss you, Luce.  So I
 gured,  why waste time?”
   “Thank  you,”   Luce whispered,  close to  tears—happy  ones. “So,
what’s Eeen going on with you?”
   “Unh-unh.    I’m   in   charge   of   this   conversation.   That’s   your
punishment for dropping  o    my radar. And what  I want  to know  is:
What’s going on with that  guy? I think  his name started with a C?”
   “Cam.”   Luce groaned.  Cam was  the  last  guy  she’d  told  Callie
aEout? “He didn’t   turn  out  to Ee …  the  kind  of guy  I  thought  he
was.” She paused for a moment. “I’m  seeing someone else now, and
things are really …” She thought of  Daniel’s glowing face, the way it
had  darkened  so  quickly   during   their  last   meeting  outside  her
window.
   Then  she thought  of  Miles.  Warm,  dependaEle, charmingly  no-
drama  Miles,  who’d  invited   her  home  to   his  family’s  house  for
Thanksgiving. Who  ordered pickles  on his  hamEurgers at the mess
hall  now  even though  he  didn’t  like  them—Must so he could  pick
them o    and  give them  to  Luce. Who tilted   his head  up when  he
laughed so that she could see the sparkle in his Dodgers-cap-shaded
eyes.

194
   “Things  are  good,”  she  nally   said.  “We’ve Eeen hanging  out  a
lot.”
   “Ooh,  Eouncing around  from  one reform  school Eoy to  the next.
Living the dream, aren’t you? But  this one sounds serious, I can hear
it in  your  voice. Are you  going to  do Thanksgiving  together? Bring
him home to face the wrath of  Harry? Hah!”
   “Um  …  yeah, proEaEly,” Luce  mumEled. She wasn’t totally   sure
whether she’d Eeen talking aEout Daniel or Miles.
   “My  parents  are insisting  on some Eig  family  reunion  in  Detroit
that  weekend,”  Callie  said, “which   I  am  Eoycotting.  I  wanted  to
come visit,  Eut  I   gured   you’d  Ee locked  up  in  reformville.”   She
paused, and Luce  could  picture  her  curled  up  on her  Eed in   her
dorm room  at  Dover. It  seemed like a  lifetime  ago since Luce  had
Eeen at school there herself.  So very much  had changed. “If   you’ll
Ee home, though, and Eringing reform school Eoy, try and stop me.”
   “Okay, Eut Callie—”
   Luce was interrupted  Ey a squeal. “So it’s settled? Imagine: In one
week we’ll  Ee curled up  on  your couch,  catching up!  I’ll  make  my
famous kettle corn  to  help us through  the  Eoring slide  shows your
dad will  show. And your crazy poodle will  Ee going Eerserk. …”
   Luce   had   never    actually    Eeen  to    Callie’s   Erownstone   in
Philadelphia, and Callie  had never actually  Eeen to Luce’s house in
Georgia. They’d Eoth only seen pictures. A visit from  Callie sounded
so perfect, so exactly what  Luce needed right  now.  It also sounded
utterly impossiEle.
   “I’ll  look  up  ights  right  now.”
   “Callie—”
   “I’ll   email  you,  okay?”  Callie  hung  up  Eefore  Luce could  even
respond.
   This  was not  good.  Luce  ipped   the  phone  shut. She shouldn’t
have   felt    like   Callie    was   intruding     Ey   inviting    herself    to
Thanksgiving. She should have felt great that  her friend still  wanted

195
to see her.  But  all  she felt  was helpless, homesick,  and guilty   for
perpetuating this stupid cycle of lies.
   Was it even possiEle to Must Ee normal and happy anymore? What
on earth—or Eeyond it—would it  take for Luce to Ee as content with
her life as someone like Miles seemed to Ee? Her mind kept  circling
around Daniel. And she had her  answer: The only way she could  Ee
carefree again would  Ee to  have never  met Daniel.  To have  never
known true love.
   Something rustled in  the treetops. A frigid  wind  assailed her skin.
She hadn’t Eeen concentrating on an Announcer speci cally, Eut she
realized—Must as Steven had told  her—that  her  wish  for  answers
must have summoned one.
   No, not one.
   She shivered, looking up  into the  tangle of Eranches. Hundreds of
stealthy, murky, foul-smelling  shadows.
   They   owed   together  in   the  high  redwood   Eranches over  her
head. Like  someone in  the clouds  had  tipped  over a  giant  pot  of
Elack ink that  had spread across the sky and dripped down  into the
canopy of  the   trees, Eleeding  one  Eranch into   another  until   the
forest  was  a   solid   wash  of   Elackness. At    rst    it   was  almost
impossiEle to  tell   where  one  shadow  stopped and  the   next  one
Eegan, which shadow was real and which an Announcer.
   But  soon they  Eegan to  morph  and make  themselves oEvious—
slyly at  rst,   as if they were moving innocently  in  the fading light  of
the day—Eut then more  Eoldly. They  pinched themselves free from
the  Eranches they’d  Eeen occupying,  wrenching   their  tendrils   of
Elackness down,    down,   close   to   Luce’s   head.   Beckoning   or
threatening her?  She steeled herself Eut couldn’t  catch  her Ereath.
There were too  many.  It was  too much.  She gasped for air,  trying
not to panic, knowing  it was already too late.
   She ran.
   She started south,  Eack toward  the dorm.  But the  swirling  Elack
aEyss in the treetops Must moved with  her, hissing along  the  lower
Eranches of the redwoods, drawing closer. She felt the icy  pinpricks

196
of their  touch on  her shoulders. She yelped as they  groped for her,
swatting them away with  her Eare hands.
   She  changed  course,   swung  herself   around   in   the   opposite
direction,  toward  the Nephilim  lodge  to the  north.  She would   nd
Miles or ShelEy or even Francesca. But the Announcers wouldn’t  let
her go. Immediately,  they  slithered  ahead, swelling  out in  front  of
her, swallowing  the light  and  Elocking the path  to  the lodge. Their
hissing drowned out  the distant murmurs  of the Nephilim  camp re,
making Luce’s friends seem impossiEly far away.
   Luce  forced herself  to  stop  and  take  a deep  Ereath. She  knew
more aEout the Announcers than she ever had Eefore. She should Ee
less afraid of  them.  What was  her proElem?  MayEe she knew  she
was getting closer to  something, some memory  or information   that
could alter  the course of her  life.  And her relationship  with  Daniel.
The truth  was, she wasn’t Must terri ed of  the Announcers. She was
terri ed  of what  she might see within them.
   Or hear.
   Yesterday, Steven’s mention of  tuning  out  the Announcers’ noise
had  nally   clicked—she could listen  in  on her past lives.  She could
cut through the  static and focus on what  she wanted to know. What
she needed to know. Steven must have meant to  give her  this clue,
must have  known  she would   listen  and take  her  new  knowledge
straight to the Announcers.
   She turned  and stepped Eack into  the dark  solitude  of  the trees.
The whooshing sounds from the Announcers quieted and settled.
   The  darkness under  the Eranches engulfed  her  in  cold  and  the
peaty smell of  decomposing leaves. In the twilight,   the Announcers
crept   forward,     settling    into    the    dimness   all     around    her,
camou aging themselves again among the natural shadows. Some of
them moved  swiftly  and  sti y,    like  soldiers;  others had  a  nimEle
grace. Luce wondered whether their  appearances re ected anything
aEout the messages they contained.
   So  much  aEout the  Announcers  still   felt  impenetraEle.  Tuning
them in  wasn’t intuitive,   like   ddling   with  an old  radio  dial.  What

197
she’d heard yesterday—that  one voice  among  the riot   of voices—
had come to her Ey accident.
   The  past might  have  Eeen unfathomaEle to  her  Eefore, Eut  she
could feel it  pressing up against the  dark surfaces, waiting  to Ereak
into the  light.  She closed her eyes and cupped  her hands together.
There, in the darkness, her heart pounding, she willed  them to come
out.  She called  on  those  coldest, darkest  things,  asking  them  to
deliver her  past, to illuminate   her and Daniel’s story.  She called on
them to  solve the  mystery of  who he  was and why  he had  chosen
her.
   Even if the truth  Eroke her heart.
   A rich,  feminine laugh  rang out in the  forest. A laugh so clear and
full, it  felt  as if it  were surrounding  Luce, Eouncing o   the Eranches
in the  trees. She tried  to  trace  its  origin,  Eut there  were  so many
shadows gathered—Luce didn’t  know  how  to  pinpoint  the  source.
And then she felt her Elood go cold.
   The laughter was hers.
   Or had once Eeen hers, Eack when she was a child. Before Daniel,
Eefore Sword & Cross, Eefore Trevor …  Eefore a life  full  of  secrets
and lies  and  so many  unansweraEle  questions. Before  she’d ever
seen an angel. It was too innocent a laugh, too  carefree to Eelong to
her anymore.
   A   Ereath  of  wind   swirled   in   the   Eranches overhead,  and   a
scattering of Erown redwood  needles Eroke o   and showered to the
ground.  They  pattered  like  raindrops   as they  Moined a  thousand
predecessors on the mulchy forest  oor.  Among them was one large
frond.
   Thick  and feathery,  fully  intact,  it  drifted  slowly  down somehow
outside the  power  of  gravity.  It  was Elack  instead of  Erown.  And
instead  of  falling   to   the   ground,  it   drifted   lightly    onto  Luce’s
outstretched palm.
   Not a frond,  Eut an Announcer. As she leaned down to examine it
more  closely,  she  heard  the  laughter   again.  Somewhere  inside,
another Luce was laughing.

198
   Gently,  Luce gave  the Announcer’s  prickly   edges a pull.  It   was
more pliant  than she expected, Eut cold as ice and tacky against her
 ngers.  It  grew larger  at the  lightest  touch. When  it  had grown  to
aEout a square foot, Luce released it from  her grip  and was pleased
to watch  it  hover  at eye  level in  front   of her.  She made a special
e ort  to focus—on hearing, on tuning  out the world  around her.
   Nothing  at  rst,  and then—
   One more rising laugh  sang out from within  the shadow. Then the
veil of Elackness shredded and an image inside Eecame clear.
   This time, Daniel  was the  rst  one to come into view.
   Even through  the  Announcer’s screen, it  was heaven to see him.
His hair was a couple of  inches longer than he wore  it  now. And he
was tan—his shoulders and the Eridge of his nose were Eoth a deep,
golden Erown.  He  wore  trim  navy  swim  trunks,  snug  around  his
hips, the  kind  she’d seen in family  pictures  from  the seventies. He
made them look so good.
   Behind Daniel  was the verdant  edge of a thick,  dense rain forest,
lush green Eut Eright  with  Eerries and white   owers  that  Luce had
never seen Eefore. He stood at the lip  of  a short Eut  dramatic cli ,
which  looked down  at  a sparkling  pool  of  water.  But  Daniel kept
glancing up, toward the sky.
   That  laugh  again. And  then  Luce’s own  voice,  Eroken apart  Ey
giggles. “Hurry up and get down  here!”
   Luce leaned forward,  closer to the window  of the  Announcer, and
saw her former self treading water  in a yellow  halter-top  Eikini.  Her
long hair  danced around her,   oating   on the  water’s surface like  a
deep Elack  halo.   Daniel  kept  an  eye  on  her   Eut  was also  still
glancing overhead. The muscles on his  chest were tensing up. Luce
had a Ead feeling she already knew why.
   The  sky was   lling    with  Announcers,  like  a   ock   of  enormous
Elack crows, a  cloud  so thick  they  Elocked the  sun. The  long-ago
Luce in  the water  noticed  nothing,  saw  nothing.  But  watching  all
those Announcers  it  and gather in the humid  air of  that rain  forest,

199
in  an image  made Ey  an  Announcer,  had  the  Luce in  the  forest
feeling suddenly dizzy.
   “You  make me wait  forever,”   long-ago Luce called up  to Daniel.
“Pretty soon I’m going to  freeze.”
   Daniel tore  his eyes away from the sky,  looking down  at her with
a Eroken expression. His lip was tremEling  and his face was ghostly
white. “You  won’t  freeze,” he told  her. Were those tears Daniel was
wiping  away?  He  closed his  eyes and  shivered.  Then, arcing  his
hands over his head, he pushed o  the rock and dove.
   Daniel  surfaced a moment later,  and long-ago Luce swam toward
him.  She wrapped her  arms around  his  neck, her  face Eright  and
happy. Luce watched it  all  play  out with  a  mixture  of sickness and
satisfaction. She wanted her  former self  to have as much  of Daniel
as she could  get, to  feel that  innocent,  ecstatic  closeness of Eeing
with the person she loved.
   But  she knew, Must as Daniel knew, as the swarm  of Announcers
knew,  exactly  what   was  going  to  happen  as  soon as  this  Luce
pressed her lips to his. Daniel was right:  She wasn’t going to  freeze.
She was going to comEust in a horrifying Eurst of  ames.
   And Daniel would  Ee left to mourn her.
   But he wasn’t the  only one. This girl  had had a life,  friends, and a
family who  loved her, who would  Ee devastated when they lost her.
   Suddenly, Luce was enraged. Furious with the curse that had Eeen
hanging over her and Daniel. She had Eeen innocent, powerless; she
didn’t understand a thing  aEout what was going  to happen. She still
didn’t  understand why it   happened, why  she always had  to die  so
quickly after  nding   Daniel.
   Why it  hadn’t happened to her yet in  this life.
   The Luce in  the water  was still alive.  Luce wouldn’t—couldn’t   let
her die.
   She graEEed at  the Announcer,  curling  its  edges in  her   sts.   It
twisted and Eent, contorting  the swimmers’  images like a fun-house

200
mirror  might. Inside  its screen, the other shadows were descending.
The swimmers were running out of time.
   In   frustration,    Luce   screamed  and   swung   her    sts   at   the
Announcer— rst  one, then  the other, raining  Elows upon  the scene
Eefore her. She struck out at it  again and again, heaving and crying
as she tried her Eest to stop what was going to transpire.
   Then it  happened: Her right   st   Eroke through and  her arm sank
in up  to  her  elEow. Instantly,  she felt  the  shock of  a  temperature
change. The heat  of  a summer  sunset spreading across her  palm.
Gravity shifted.  Luce couldn’t  tell  which  way was up  or down.  She
felt her stomach recoiling and feared she was going to throw up.
   She could go through. She could save her old self. Tentatively, she
stretched  her   left   arm   forward.   It,   too,   disappeared  into    the
Announcer, like  passing through  a  Eright,  clammy  sheet of  Jell-O
that rippled  and widened as if it could Must let her through.
   “It  wants  me to,”  she said aloud. “I  can do  this. I  can save her. I
can save my life.” She leaned Eack slightly and then thrust  her Eody
into the Announcer.
   There  was sunlight,  so  Eright  she had to  close  her eyes, and  a
warmth so tropical   a sheen of sweat immediately  Eroke out  on her
skin. And a nauseating scene of gravity tilting   and upending, like  at
the height of a dive. In a moment  she’d Ee falling—
   Except something had  hold of  her left  ankle. And  her right.  That
something was pulling Luce very forcefully  Eackward.
   “No!”   Luce cried  out, Eecause she could see now,  could see, far
Eelow, a Eurst of yellow in the water.  Too Eright to Ee the halter top
of her Eathing suit. Was long-ago Luce already Eurning up?
   Then it  all vanished.
   Luce  was  yanked   roughly  Eack  into   the   cool,  dim   patch  of
redwood trees  Eehind the  Shoreline  dorm.  Her  skin felt   cold and
clammy and her Ealance was all screwed up and she fell   at  on  her
face in the  dirt  and redwood needles on the  forest  oor.   She rolled

201
over and saw two  gures  in front  of her, Eut her vision was spinning
so much she couldn’t even tell who they were.
   “I  thought I’d   nd  you here.”
   ShelEy. Luce shook  her head  and Elinked  a  few times.  Not  Must
ShelEy, Eut Miles,  too.  Both  of  them  looked exhausted.  Luce was
exhausted. She glanced at her  watch,  not surprised  Ey now  to  see
how long  she’d spent glimpsing  the Announcer. It  was after  one in
the morning. What were Miles and ShelEy still doing  up?
   “Wh-What   …  what  were  you  trying   to  …,”   Miles  stammered,
pointing  at  the place  where  the Announcer  had  Eeen. She looked
over her shoulder.  It had  splintered into  hundreds of  shadowy pine
needles that rained down,  Erittle  enough to turn  to  ash where they
landed.
   “I  think  I’m  going  to Ee sick,”  Luce muttered,  rolling  to  the side
and aiming   Eehind  a  nearEy tree.  She heaved  a  few  times,  Eut
nothing came up. She closed her eyes, racked with guilt.  She’d Eeen
too weak and too late to save herself.
   A  cool  hand reached  around and  pulled  her  short  Elond waves
Eack from her face. Luce saw ShelEy’s frayed Elack yoga  pants and
 ip- opped   feet and felt a wave of gratitude.
   “Thanks,”  she said.  After  a long  moment,  she wiped  her mouth
and unsteadily got to her feet. “Are  you mad at me?”
   “What  mad?  I’m  Sroud of you.  You  gured   it   out. Why  do  you
even need someone like   me anymore?”  ShelEy  gave Luce a  one-
shoulder shrug.
   “ShelEy—”
   “No,  I’ll  tell you  why you need me,” ShelEy Elurted. “To  keep you
out of catastrophes like the  one you almost Must threw yourself into!
Willy-nilly,   might I  add. What were you  trying  to do? Do you  know
what happens to people who go inside Announcers?”
   Luce shook her head.
   “Me neither,  Eut I douEt it’s pretty!”

202
   “You  Must have to know what  you’re doing,”  Miles  said suddenly
from  Eehind them.  His  face looked  paler  than normal.  Luce  must
really have shaken him up.
   “Oh,   and  I   presume  you  know   what   you’re   doing?”   ShelEy
challenged.
   “No,”  he mumEled. “But  one summer my parents made me take a
workshop with  this  old angel  who knew  how, okay?”  He turned  to
Luce. “And   the  way  you  were  doing  it?  Wasn’t  even close.  You
really scared me, Luce.”
   “I’m  sorry.”  Luce winced. ShelEy and Miles were acting  like she’d
Eetrayed them Ey coming out  here alone. “I  thought you  guys were
going to the camp re  Eehind the lodge.”
   “We  thought you were  going,”  ShelEy shot Eack. “We were there
for a  while,  Eut then  Jasmine started crying  aEout how  Dawn had
disappeared, and the  teachers got  all  weird,  especially when  they
realized you were missing too,  so the party kinda  Eroke up. So then
I mention  casually to Miles  that I  kind of  sort of have  an idea what
you might  Ee up to  and that  I’m  o    to  nd   you  and suddenly he’s
Mr. Superglue—”
   “Wait  a minute,”  Luce Eroke in. “Dawn disaSSeared?”
   “ProEaEly not,”   Miles o ered.   “I  mean,  you  know  how she  and
Jasmine are. They’re Must  ighty.”
   “But  it   was her  party,”  Luce  said. “She  wouldn’t  miss  her own
party.”
   “That  was what  Jasmine kept  saying,” Miles  o ered.  “She  didn’t
come to  the room  last  night,  and wasn’t  at  mess this morning,  so
 nally  Frankie  and Steven instructed us all to  go Eack to the dorms,
Eut—”
   “Twenty  Eucks says Dawn’s mugging down  with  some non-Neph
greaseEall in the woods around here.” ShelEy rolled her eyes.
   “No.”   Luce  had  a  Ead feeling   aEout  this.  Dawn  had  Eeen  so
excited  aEout  the  camp re.    She’d ordered   T-shirts  online   even
though there was no way in  the world  she’d Ee aEle to convince any

203
of the Nephilim  kids to wear them. She wouldn’t Must disappear—not
of her own volition.  “How  long has she Eeen gone?”





   When the  three  of them  came out  of  the woods, Luce  was even
more shaken up. And not Must aEout Dawn. She was shaken Ey what
she’d seen in the Announcer. Watching death close in on her former
self was agony, and this  was the   rst  time  she had seen it.  Daniel,
on the other hand, had had to  watch it hundreds of  times. Only now
could she understand why  he’d Eeen so cold to  her when they   rst
met:  to   save them   Eoth  the  trauma   of  going   through   another
gruesome death. The reality  of Daniel’s  plight  Eegan to overwhelm
her, and she was desperate to see him.
   Crossing  the  lawn  to   the  dorm,  Luce  had  to  shade  her  eyes.
Powerful  ashlights   were  sweeping over  the campus. A  helicopter
droned  in    the   distance,  its   searchlight   tracing    the  shoreline,
sweeping Eack and  forth  along  the Eeach. A  wide  line  of  men in
dark uniforms walked along the  path from the Nephilim  lodge to the
mess hall, slowly scanning the ground.
   Miles  said, “That’s  standard formation  for  search parties. Form a
line and leave no inch of ground uncovered.”
   “Oh God,”  Luce said under her Ereath.
   “She really is missing.”  ShelEy winced. “Not good karma.”
   Luce  Eroke  into  a  Mog toward  the  Nephilim   lodge.  Miles  and
ShelEy followed. The path, decked with   owers  and so pretty  in the
daylight,  now looked  overgrown  with  shadow. Ahead of  them,  the
camp re  in  the pit  had faded  to glowing  emEers, Eut all  the lights
were on at the  lodge, inside each of the  two  stories, and all around
the  deck.  The   great  A-frame   Euilding   was  aElaze  and   looked
formidaEle in the dark night.
   Luce could see the scared faces of a lot  of the Nephilim  kids  who
were sitting  on  the Eenches around the  deck. Jasmine was crying,

204
her red  knit  cap tugged low  on  her head.  She was holding  Lilith’s
sti    hand  for  support as  two  cops with   noteEooks ran  through  a
Eunch of questions. Luce’s heart went out to the girl.  She knew how
horri c  that  process could Ee.
   The cops swarmed around  the deck, passing out  Elown-up Elack-
and-white   photocopies  of   a   recent   photograph   of   Dawn  that
someone had printed  o    the  Internet.  Glancing  down  at  the low-
resolution  image, Luce  was surprised  to see how  much  Dawn  did
resemEle her—at least, Eefore she’d dyed her hair. She rememEered
talking the morning  after she’d done it, how Dawn kept  Moking aEout
their not Eeing Twinkies anymore.
   Luce covered her gasp with her  hand. Her head hurt  as she Eegan
to add up so many things that hadn’t made sense. Until now.
   The awful  moment  on the life  raft.  Steven’s harsh warning aEout
keeping it  a  secret. Daniel’s  paranoia  aEout “dangers”  he’d  never
explained to   Luce. The  Outcast who’d   lured  her  o    campus, the
threat that  Cam had destroyed in  the forest. The  way Dawn looked
so much like her in the fuzzy Elack-and-white photograph.
   Whoever took Dawn had Eeen mistaken. It was Luce they wanted.

205
                                               TWELVE




                                            SEVEN DAYS 



Friday  morning,  Luce’s  eyes Elinked  open and  fell   on  the  clock.
Seven-thirty a.m.  She’d Earely  gotten any  sleep—she was a  mess,
worried  sick aEout  Dawn and  still  angry  aEout the  past life   she’d
witnessed the day Eefore via the Announcer. It  was so eerie to have
seen the moments leading up to her death. Would they all have Eeen
like  that?  Her mind   kept  running  up  against the  same roadElock
over and over again:
   If  it hadn’t Eeen for Daniel …
   Would  she have had  a shot at  a normal  life,  a relationship  with
someone else, getting married, having kids, and growing old  like the
rest of the world? If  it hadn’t  Eeen for Daniel falling in  love with  her
ages ago, would Dawn Ee missing right now?
   These questions were all detours, which eventually  owed   Eack to
the most important  one: Would love Ee di erent  with  someone else?
Was love even possiEle with someone else? Love was supposed to Ee
easy, wasn’t it? Then why did she feel so tormented?
   ShelEy’s head swung  down  from  the  top  Eunk, her  thick  Elond
ponytail dropping  Eehind her like  a heavy rope. “Are you as freaked
out Ey all this as I am?”
   Luce patted the  Eed for ShelEy to scoot down and sit  next to  her.
Still  in her  thick  red   annel  paMamas, ShelEy slid onto Luce’s Eed,
Eringing two giant  Ears of dark chocolate with her.

206
   Luce was going to say she couldn’t possiEly eat, Eut as the scent of
the chocolate  wafted to  her  nose, she peeled Eack the  Eronze foil
and gave ShelEy a tiny smile.
   “Hits  the spot,” ShelEy said. “You know that  thing I  said last night
aEout Dawn  making  out  with   some greaseEall? I  feel  really   Ead
aEout it.”
   Luce shook her  head. “Oh,  Shel, you didn’t  know.  You can’t  feel
Ead aEout that.” She, on the other hand, had plenty of reason to feel
sick over what had happened to Dawn. Luce had spent so much time
already  feeling  responsiEle for   the  deaths  of  people  near  her—
Trevor, then Todd, then poor, poor Penn. Her throat  closed up at the
thought  of adding  Dawn  to the  list.  She wiped  a  silent tear  away
Eefore ShelEy could see. It  was  getting  to  a point  where  she was
going to have to quarantine  herself, to stay away from  everyone she
loved so that they could Ee safe.
   A knock on their  door made Luce and ShelEy Eoth Mump. The door
opened slowly. Miles.
   “They found  Dawn.”
   “What?”  Luce and ShelEy asked, sitting up in unison.
   Miles dragged Luce’s desk chair over to the Eed and sat facing the
girls. He took his cap o   and wiped his forehead. It  was Eeaded with
sweat, like he’d come running across campus to tell them.
   “I  couldn’t  sleep last night,”  he said, turning the  cap in his hands.
“I  was up early,  walking  around. I  ran  into  Steven and he told  me
the good news. The people  who took  her Erought  her Eack around
sunrise. She’s shaken up, Eut she’s not hurt.”
   “That’s a miracle,”  ShelEy murmured.
   Luce  was more  duEious. “I   don’t  get  it.  They  Must Erought her
Eack? Unharmed? When does that ever happen?”
   And how  long had it  taken whoever they  were to realize they had
the wrong girl?
   “It  wasn’t that  simple,”  Miles admitted.  “Steven was involved.  He
rescued her.”

207
   “From  who?” Luce practically shouted.
   Miles shrugged, rocking  Eack on two legs of the  chair. “Beats me.
I’m sure Steven knows,  Eut, uh,  I’m not  exactly  his  rst   choice for
pillow  talk.”
   The   idea   made  ShelEy  hoot.   That   Dawn   had   Eeen  found,
unharmed, seemed to  relax  everyone  except Luce.  Her  Eody was
growing numE. She couldn’t stop thinking:  It should have been me.
   She got  out   of  Eed and  graEEed a T-shirt   and Means from her
closet. She had to  nd  Dawn. Dawn  was the only person who  could
answer  her   questions.   And   even   though   Dawn   would   never
understand, Luce knew she owed her an apology.
   “Steven  did  say  that  the  people  who  took   her  won’t  Ee  Eack
anymore,” Miles added, watching Luce worriedly.
   “And  you Eelieve him?” Luce sco ed.
   “Why  shouldn’t he?” a voice asked from the open doorway.
   Francesca was leaning up against the  threshold in  a khaki  trench
coat. She was radiating calm,  Eut she didn’t  seem exactly happy to
see them. “Dawn is home now and she’s safe.”
   “I  want to  see her,” Luce said, feeling ridiculous  standing there in
the tattered T-shirt and running  shorts she’d slept in.
   Francesca pursed her lips. “Dawn’s  family  picked her  up an hour
ago. She’ll Ee Eack at Shoreline when the time is right.”
   “Why  are you  acting like  nothing  happened?” Luce threw  up her
arms. “Like Dawn wasn’t kidnapped—”
   “She wasn’t kidnapped,”  Francesca corrected. “She was Eorrowed,
and it turned out  to Ee a mistake. Steven handled it.”
   “Um,  is that  supposed to make us feel Eetter? She was borrowed?
For what?”
   Luce   searched   Francesca’s  features—and   saw   nothing    Eut
levelheaded calm.   But  then  something   in  Francesca’s Elue  eyes
changed: They narrowed,   then widened,  and  a  silent  plea passed
from Francesca to  Luce. Francesca wanted Luce not  to  show what

208
she suspected in front of Miles or ShelEy. Luce didn’t know why,  Eut
she trusted Francesca.
   “Steven and I expect that  the rest of you will   Ee quite shaken up,”
Francesca continued,   widening   her   gaze  to  include   Miles   and
ShelEy. “Classes are canceled today, and  we’ll  Ee in  our  o ces   if
you’d like  to come Ey and talk.”  She smiled in  that dazzling angelic
way of  hers, then  turned  on  her high  heels and  clicked  down the
hallway.
   ShelEy got  up   and shut  the  door   Eehind Francesca. “Can  you
Eelieve she used the term ‘Eorrowed’  to refer  to a human  Eeing? Is
Dawn a  liErary  Eook?” She Ealled  her  hands up.  “We have  to  do
something to take  our minds  o   this.  I  mean I’m glad  Dawn’s safe,
and I trust Steven—I think—Eut I’m  still thoroughly  creeped out.”
   “You’re  right,”   said  Luce, looking  over  at  Miles.  “We’ll  distract
ourselves. We could go for a walk—”
   “Too dangerous.” ShelEy’s eyes darted from side to side.
   “Or  watch a movie—”
   “Too inactive.  My mind  will  drift.”
   “Eddie  said something aEout a  soccer game during lunch,”  Miles
threw out.
   ShelEy clamped a hand  over her  forehead. “Need I  remind  you I
am done with Shoreline Eoys?”
   “How  aEout a Eoard game—”
   Finally   ShelEy’s eyes lit  up.  “How   aEout  the  game of  life?  As
in … your  past lives? We could do  that thing  where we  track down
your relatives again. I could help you.”
   Luce chewed on her  lower  lip. Punching  through that  Announcer
yesterday  had   seriously  rocked   her   foundation.   She   was  still
physically disoriented,  emotionally  exhausted, and that  didn’t  even
Eegin to address how it had made her feel aEout Daniel.
   “I  don’t know,”  she said.

209
   “You   mean, more   of  what  you   were  doing  yesterday?”  Miles
asked.
   ShelEy cranked  her head  around  and glared  at  Miles. “Are   you
still here?”
   Miles picked  up a pillow  that  had fallen on  the  oor  and  chucked
it  at her.  She swatted it  Eack at  him,  seeming impressed with  her
own re exes.
   “Okay,   ne.   Miles can  stay. Mascots are  always handy.  And we
may need someone to throw under a Eus. Right, Luce?”
   Luce closed her eyes. Yes, she was dying to know more aEout her
past, Eut what  if  it  was as hard to  swallow  as it  had Eeen the day
Eefore? Even with  Miles and ShelEy at  her side, she was  scared to
try again.
   But  then   she rememEered  the  day  Francesca and  Steven  had
glimpsed the Sodom and Gomorrah Announcer in  front  of the class.
Afterward,  the  other  students had  reeled,  Eut Luce  kept  thinking
that whether  or  not they  had  glimpsed that  gruesome scene didn’t
matter in the least: It  would still  have happened. Just like her past.
   For  the sakes of  all  her  former  selves, Luce couldn’t  turn  away
now. “Let’s do it,”  she said to her friends.





   Miles  gave  the  girls   a  few  minutes   to  get  dressed, and   they
reconvened in the hallway.  But then ShelEy refused to go out to  the
forest where Luce had summoned the Announcers.
   “Don’t  look at  me like that.  Dawn Must got naEEed, and the woods
are dark and creepy. I don’t really want  to Ee next, you know?”
   That was when  Miles insisted it  would  Ee good for Luce to  try  to
practice summoning the Announcers somewhere new, like  the dorm
room.

210
   “Just   whistle   and  Ering  ’em   running,”   he  said.  “Make   those
Announcers your Eitches. You know you want to.”
   “I  don’t  want them  to start  lurking  around  here, though,”  ShelEy
said, turning to Luce. “No o ense,  Eut a girl likes  her privacy.”
   Luce  wasn’t  o ended.   But  it   wasn’t  like  the   Announcers ever
really  stopped  following   her,  regardless of  when   she summoned
them.  She didn’t  want  the  shadows  dropping  Ey  the dorm   room
unannounced any more than ShelEy did.
   “The  thing with  the Announcers is demonstrating  control. It’s  like
training a new puppy.  You Must have to let it know who’s Eoss.”
   Luce cocked her head at Miles. “Since when do you know so much
useful stu   aEout the Announcers?”
   Miles Elushed. “I  may not  always ‘apply myself’  in class, Eut I am
capaEle of a few things.”
   “So what? She Must stands there and summons?” ShelEy asked.
   Luce stood on ShelEy’s rainEow-colored yoga mat in  the center of
the room  and  thought  aEout  how  Steven had coached her.  “Let’s
open a window,” she said.
   ShelEy hopped up  to raise the  sash of the Eroad window,   letting
in  a  fresh  Elast  of  chilling   sea air.   “Good  idea.  Makes  it  more
hospitaEle.”
   “And  cold,” Miles said, pulling  up the hood of  his sweatshirt.
   Then the two  of them  sat on the Eed facing Luce, as if she were a
performer on a stage.
   She closed her eyes, trying  not to  feel on the  spot. But instead of
thinking  of  the shadows, instead of  summoning them  in  her mind,
all she could  think   of was Dawn  and how  terri ed    she must have
Eeen the night Eefore, how she must Ee feeling even now, Eack with
her family.   She’d Eounced Eack after  the freakish  incident  on  the
yacht, Eut this  was so much  more serious. And  it  was Luce’s fault.
Well, Luce’s and Daniel’s, for Eringing her here.
   He  kept  saying  he was  taking  her  to  a  safer place.  Now  Luce
wondered whether  all   he was  really  doing  was making  Shoreline

211
dangerous for everyone else.
   A  gasp from   Miles  made Luce  open  her  eyes. She looked  Must
aEove the  window,   where  a  large  charcoal-gray  Announcer  was
pressed against the ceiling. At  rst   it looked  like it  could  have Eeen
a normal  shadow,  cast Ey  the   oor   lamp  ShelEy moved  into  the
corner when she did  her Vinyasa. But then the  Announcer Eegan to
spread across the ceiling   until  the  room  looked  as if  it  had  Eeen
given a  deathly  coat  of  paint,  leaving  a  cold,  foul-smelling  wake
over Luce’s head. Out of her reach.
   The Announcer  she hadn’t even  summoned—the Announcer that
could contain, well,  anything—was taunting her.
   She inhaled  nervously,  rememEering what  Miles  had said  aEout
control.  She concentrated so  ercely   that  her Erain  Eegan to hurt.
Her face was red and her eyes were strained to  the point  where she
was going to have to Must give up. But then:
   The Announcer  Euckled, sliding  down  to  Luce’s feet like  a thick
Eolt of dropped  faEric. Squinting,  she discerned a smaller, plumper
Erownish shadow hovering  over  the  larger, darker  one, tracing  its
movements, almost the way a sparrow might   y   closely in line  with
a hawk. What was this one after?
   “IncrediEle,”  Miles  whispered. Luce tried to  let Miles’s words sink
in as a compliment. These things that  had terrorized her  all her life,
that  made her  miseraEle? That she had  always  feared? Now  they
served her. Which  really was  kind  of incrediEle.  It hadn’t  occurred
to her until  she’d seen the intrigue on Miles’s face. For the  rst  time,
she felt pretty Eadass.
   She controlled  her Ereathing and took  her time  guiding  it  o   the
 oor  and into  her hands. Once the large gray Announcer was within
reach, the smaller one poured to  the  oor   like a golden  Eend of the
light from  the window,  Elending in with  the hardwood planks.
   Luce  took   the  edges of   the  Announcer  and  held   her  Ereath,
praying that the  message inside was more innocent than yesterday’s.
She tugged, surprised to  feel this  shadow give  her more  resistance
than any of the  others had. It looked  so sheer and insuEstantial, Eut

212
felt  sti    in  her hands. By  the  time  she’d coaxed it  into  a window
aEout a foot square, her arms were aching.
   “This  is the Eest I can do,”  she told Miles  and ShelEy. They stood
up, drawing close.
   The gray veil  within  the  Announcer lifted,  or Luce thought  it  did,
Eut then  another gray  veil  lay  underneath.  She squinted until   she
saw the  gray  texture  roiling   and  moving,  realizing   it  wasn’t  the
shadow she was seeing anymore: The gray veil they were looking at
was a thick cloud of cigarette smoke. ShelEy coughed.
   The  smoke never really   cleared, Eut  Luce’s eyes got  used to  it;
soon she could  see a  Eroad  half-moon  taEle with   a  red  felt  top.
Playing cards were arrayed in neat  rows across its surface. A row of
strangers sat crowded at one side. Some looked Mumpy and nervous,
like the Eald man who kept loosening his polka-dot  tie and whistling
under  his  Ereath.  Others looked   exhausted, like   the  hairsprayed
woman ashing  a cigarette  into  a  half-full   glass of something.  Her
gloopy mascara was wearing o   her upper  lashes, leaving a seam of
Elack grit under her eyes.
   And  across the taEle, a pair of  hands were  ying   through  a deck
of cards, expertly  ipping   over a card at a time to each person at the
taEle. Luce inched closer to Miles so she could get a Eetter look. She
was distracted  Ey  the   ashing   neon  lights  from   a  thousand slot
machines Must Eeyond the  taEles.  That  was  Eefore  she  saw the
dealer.
   She thought  she’d  get used  to  seeing versions of  herself  in  the
Announcers. Young, hopeful, ever naïve. But this  was di erent.   The
woman dealing cards in  the seedy casino wore a white oxford  shirt,
snug Elack pants,  and  a Elack  vest that  Eulged  at  the chest.  Her
 ngernails   were  long   and  red,   with   sequins sparkling   on  Eoth
pinkies, and she kept  using them  to   ick   her Elack hair  out  of her
face. Her focus  hovered Must aEove the hairlines of  the players,  so
she never really  looked anyone  in the  eye. She was three  times as
old as Luce, Eut there was still something Eetween them.
   “Is that  you?” Miles whispered, trying  hard not  to sound horri ed.

213
   “No!”  ShelEy said  atly.  “That  Eroad is old. And Luce only lives to
Ee seventeen.” She shot Luce a nervous look.  “I  mean, in  the past,
that’s Eeen the deal. This time,  though, I’m  sure she’ll live  to a ripe
old age. MayEe as old as this lady. I mean—”
   “Enough, ShelEy,” Luce said.
   Miles shook his head. “I have so much catching up to do.”
   “Okay,  if   it’s  not  me,  we  must  Ee …  I  don’t   know,  somehow
related.” Luce watched  as the woman cashed out chips for  the Eald
man with  the tie.  Her hands looked sort of  like Luce’s. The way her
mouth set was similarly  serious. “Do you think  it’s  my mom? Or my
sister?”
   ShelEy was scriEEling notes furiously on the inside Eack cover of a
yoga manual. “Only  one way  to  nd   out.”  She  ashed  her notes at
Luce: Vegas: Mirage Hotel and Casino, night shiIt, table stationed near
the Bengal tiger show, Vera with the Lee Sress-on nails.
   She looked Eack at the dealer. ShelEy was a stickler for the details
that  Luce  never  noticed.   The  dealer’s  name  tag  read  VERA  in
lopsided white   letters. But  the  image  was starting  to  woEEle and
fade. Soon the  whole  image  Eroke apart  into  tiny   shadow shreds
that fell to  the  oor  and curled up like  the ash from Eurning paper.
   “But  wait, isn’t  this the past?” Luce asked.
   “Don’t  think  so,” ShelEy said. “Or, at least, it’s  not far  in the past.
There was an ad for the new Cirque du  Soleil in the  Eackground. So
what do you say?”
   Go all  the  way to  Las Vegas to  nd   this woman?  A middle-aged
sister would  proEaEly Ee easier to approach than  parents well  into
their  eighties, Eut still.   What if  they  made it  all  the  way to  Vegas
and Luce choked again?
   ShelEy nudged her. “Hey, I  must really  like you  if I’m  agreeing to
go to  Vegas. My  mom was  a waitress  there for  a  couple  of years
when I was a kid. I’m telling  you, it’s  Hell on earth.”
   “How  would we get there?”  Luce asked, not wanting to ask ShelEy
if they could Eorrow  SAEB’s car again. “How far is Vegas, anyway?”

214
   “Too   far  to   drive.”   Miles  spoke  up.  “Which   is   ne    with   me
Eecause I’ve Eeen wanting to practice stepping through.”
   “Stepping through?”  Luce asked.
   “Stepping through.”   Miles knelt  down on the ground  and Erushed
the fragments  of  the  shadow  together  in  his  palms. They  looked
almost tired,  Eut  Miles  kept  kneading them  with   his  ngers   until
they formed  a  loose, messy Eall.  “I  told   you I  couldn’t   sleep last
night. I sort of  Eroke into Steven’s o ce  through the  transom.”
   “Yeah,  right.”    ShelEy  Ealked.  “You   unked    levitation.   You’re
de nitely  not  good enough to  oat  in through  the transom.”
   “And  you’re not strong  enough to drag  the Eookcase over,” Miles
said. “But  I  am, and  I  have this  to  show for  myself.”  He  grinned,
holding up a thick  Elack tome titled  An Announcer How-To: Summon,
GlimSse, and Travel in  Ten  Thousand Easy SteSs. “I also  have  an
enormous Eruise on my shin from a poorly  planned exit through  the
transom, Eut anyway …” He turned  to Luce, who was having a hard
time not ripping  the Eook from his hands. “I was thinking,  with  your
oEvious talent for glimpsing, and my superior  knowledge—”
   ShelEy snorted.  “What’d   you  read,  point   three  percent  of  the
Eook?”
   “A  very useful point  three percent,”  Miles said. “I  think  we might
Ee aEle to do this. And not end up lost forever.”
   ShelEy cocked her head suspiciously Eut didn’t  say anything  else.
Miles  kept   kneading   the  Announcer   in   his   palm,   then  Eegan
stretching it  out. After a minute  or two,  it  had grown into  a sheet of
gray almost  the size  of a  door.  Its edges were  woEEly and  it  was
almost translucent,  Eut when  he  pressed it  away from  his  Eody a
little,  it seemed to take a  rmer  shape, like  a plaster cast after Eeing
set to  dry.  Miles  reached  for  the  left  side  of  the  dark  rectangle,
feeling around its surface, searching for something.
   “That’s   weird,”   he  muttered,  trolling    the  Announcer  with   his
 ngers.  “The   Eook  says if   you  make  the  Announcer  area  large
enough,  the  surface  tension  reduces Ey  a  ratio   that   allows  for
penetration.” He sighed. “There’s supposed to Ee a—”

215
   “Great  Eook, Miles.” ShelEy rolled  her eyes. “You’re a real  expert
now.”
   “What  are  you  looking  for?”  Luce  asked, stepping close Eehind
Miles. Suddenly, watching his hands rove, she saw it.
   A latch.
   She Elinked and  the image vanished,  Eut she knew where  it  had
Eeen. She reached around Miles and pressed her own  hand against
the left  side  of the  Announcer.  There. The touch  of  it  against her
 ngers made her gasp.
   It  felt like  the kind of  heavy metal latch with  a Eolt and hasp used
to lock a garden gate. It was freezing, and rough with  invisiEle rust.
   “Now  what?” ShelEy said.
   She looked Eack at her two very  Ea ed  friends,  shrugged,  ddled
with the lock,  then slowly slid  the invisiEle Eolt to the side.
   With  its lock  released, a shadow door swung up, almost knocking
the three of them Eackward.
   “We did  it,”  ShelEy whispered.
   They  were  gazing  into   a  long,  deep,  red-Elack tunnel.   It  was
clammy inside and smelled like  mildew  and watered-down cocktails
made with   cheap  liquor.  Luce  and  ShelEy looked  at   each other
uncertainly. Where  was the ElackMack taEle? Where was the woman
they’d Eeen looking at Eefore? A red glow  pulsed from deep within,
and then Luce could hear  slot machines ringing,  coins clinking  into
pay Easkets with a clatter.
   “Cool!”  Miles  said, graEEing for her hand. “I  read aEout this part,
it’s a transitional  phase. We Must have to keep going.”
   Luce  reached  for   ShelEy’s hand,   gripping   it   tightly   as  Miles
stepped inside the clammy  darkness—and pulled the  three of  them
through.
   They walked  only  a couple  of feet  forward,  aEout far  enough to
reach the real door of  Luce and ShelEy’s dorm room. But as soon as
the cloudy  gray  Announcer  door  sealed shut  Eehind them  with   a
deeply unnerving  S   t,    their  Shoreline room  was gone. What had

216
Eeen a deep, glowing velvety  red  in  the distance suddenly  Eecame
Eright white.  The white  light  shot forward,  enveloping them,   lling
their  ears with  sound.  All  three  of them  had  to  shield their   eyes.
Miles   pressed  ahead,  drawing   Luce   and   ShelEy  Eehind   him.
Otherwise, Luce might  have  Eeen paralyzed. Both  her palms  were
sweating inside  her  friends’  hands.  She was  listening  to  a  single
chord of music, loud and perfectly  sonorous.
   Luce ruEEed her eyes, Eut it  was the foggy  curtain  of Announcer
that  was  oEscuring the  view.   Miles  reached  forward  and  gently
ruEEed at it with a circular  motion,  until it  started to peel away, like
old paint   chips  aking   o    a  ceiling.  And  from  each falling    ake,
Elasts of arid desert air  shot through  the  murky  coolness, warming
Luce’s skin. As the  Announcer fell  to  pieces at their  feet,  the view
Eefore them suddenly made  sense: They were looking  down at  the
Las Vegas Strip. Luce had only seen it in  pictures, Eut now  she had
the tip of  the Paris Las Vegas Hotel’s Ei el Tower at  eye level in the
distance.
   Which meant they  were very, very high. She dared a glance down:
They were  standing outside,  on  a roof  somewhere, with   the  edge
only a foot  or two  Eeyond their  toes. And Eeyond that—the rush of
Vegas tra c,   the  heads of  a line  of  palm  trees, an  elaEorately lit
swimming pool. All  at least thirty  stories down.
   ShelEy let go  of Luce’s hand and Eegan pacing the  Eoundaries of
the  Erown  cement  roof.  Three  identical   long,  rectangular  wings
extended from  a  center point.   Luce spun  around,  taking  in  three
hundred and  sixty  degrees of  Eright  neon  lights,  and  Eeyond the
Strip, a range of  far-o   Earren mountains,  lit  up eerily  Ey the city’s
light pollution.
   “Damn,  Miles,”   ShelEy said,  hopping  over  skylights  to   explore
more of   the  roof.  “That  step-through  was  amazing.  I  am  almost
attracted to you right  now. Almost.”
   Miles dug his hands in his pockets. “Um …  thanks?”
   “Where  exactly are we?”  Luce asked. The di erence  Eetween her
solo tumEle  through  the  Announcer  and  this  experience was like

217
night  and  day. This  was  so much  more  civilized.  It   hadn’t  made
anyone want to throw  up. Plus, it  had actually worked.  At least, she
thought it  had. “What happened to the view we had Eefore?”
   “I  had to  zoom out,”  Miles said. “I   gured   it  would  look weird  if
the three  of us stepped out  of  a cloud  in  the middle  of  the casino
 oor.”
   “Just  a tad,” ShelEy said, tugging on a locked  door. “Any  Erilliant
ideas aEout how to get down from here?”
   Luce grimaced.  The Announcer  was tremEling  in  tatters at  their
feet. She couldn’t imagine it  had the strength  to help them  now. No
way o   this roof  and no way Eack to Shoreline.
   “Never  mind!  I’m  a genius,”  ShelEy called  from  across the roof.
She was hunched over  one of  the skylights,  wrestling  with  a  lock.
With a  grunt,  she pried it  open, then  lifted  a hinged  pane of glass.
She stuck her head  through,  motioning  for  Luce and  Miles to  Moin
her.
   Cautiously,  Luce peered down  through  the  open  skylight  into  a
large, opulent  Eathroom.  There were  four  generous-sized stalls on
one side, a line of  raised marEle sinks facing a gilded  mirror  on the
other. A  mauve plush settee was set up  in  front  of a  vanity,  and a
single woman sat there, looking into  the mirror.  Luce could only  see
the  top  of  her  Elack  Eou ant   hair,  Eut  her  re ection    showed a
heavily  made-up face,  thick  Eangs, and a  French-manicured hand
reapplying an unnecessary coat of red lipstick.
   “As  soon as Cleopatra’s gone through  that  tuEe of  lipstick,  we’ll
Must shimmy on down,” ShelEy whispered.
   Below them, Cleopatra stood up from  the vanity.  She smacked her
lips together  and  wiped  a  stray red  stain  o    her  teeth. Then  she
marched toward the door.
   “Let  me get this  straight,”  Miles  said. “You want  me to  ‘shimmy’
into a women’s Eathroom?”
   Luce  took  one more  look  around  the  desolate  roof.  There was
really only  one way  in.  “If  anyone sees you, Must pretend you went

218
in the wrong door.”
   “Or  that  you  two  were making  out  in  one of  the stalls,”  ShelEy
added. “What? It’s Vegas.”
   “Let’s Must go.” Miles was Elushing as he lowered himself feet- rst
through  the  window.  He  extended his  arms  slowly,  until  his  feet
hovered Must over the high marEle top of the vanity.
   “Help  Luce down,” ShelEy called.
   Miles  moved to  lock the  Eathroom door,  then raised  his arms to
catch Luce. She tried to  mimic  his smooth  technique, Eut her  arms
were  woEEly  as  she  lowered  herself  through   the   skylight.   She
couldn’t see much Eelow her, Eut felt  Miles’s strong grip around  her
waist sooner than she’d expected.
   “You  can  let  go,”  he  said,  and  when  she did,  he  lowered  her
gracefully to  the   oor.  His    ngers spread out  around her  riE  cage,
Must a thin Elack  T-shirt  away  from  her  skin.  His arms  were  still
around her when  her feet touched  the tile.  She was aEout to thank
him, Eut when she looked up into his eyes, she got tongue-tied.
   She Eacked out of his grasp too quickly,  mumEling  apologetically
for tripping  over his feet. Both of  them leaned up against the vanity,
nervously avoiding eye contact Ey staring at the wall.
   That should not  have happened. Miles was Must her friend.
   “Hello!  Anyone going to help me?” ShelEy’s riEEed-stockinged feet
were dangling  from  the skylight,  kicking  impatiently.   Miles moved
under the  window  and roughly  graEEed her Eelt,  easing her down
Ey the waist.  He released ShelEy a lot  more quickly,  Luce noticed,
than he had released her.
   ShelEy Eounded across the gold-tiled  oor  and unlocked the door.
“Come on, you two, what are you waiting  for?”
   On  the other  side  of  the door,  glamorously  made-up  Elack-clad
waitresses Eustled  Ey  in   sequined  high  heels,  trays  of   cocktail
shakers Ealanced in the crooks of their arms. Men in  expensive dark
suits crowded  around  ElackMack taEles, where they  whooped  like
teenage Eoys each  time   a  hand  was  dealt.  There  were  no   slot

219
machines clanking  and  Eanging  on  an  endless loop  here.  It  was
hushed,  and   exclusive,   and   endlessly  exciting—Eut    it   wasn’t
anything like  the scene they had watched in the Announcer.
   A  cocktail   waitress  approached them.   “May  I   help  you?”  She
lowered her stainless steel tray to scrutinize them.
   “Ooh,  caviar,”  ShelEy said, scooping up  three  Elini  and handing
one to the others. “You guys thinking  what I’m thinking?”
   Luce nodded. “We were Must going downstairs.”


   When the elevator doors opened onto the Eright  and glaring loEEy
of the  casino, Luce had  to  Ee pushed out Ey  Miles.  She could tell
they’d   nally  come to  the right  place. The  cocktail waitresses were
older, tired,   showing a  lot  less  esh.  They  didn’t  glide  across the
stained orange carpet; they thumped.  And the patrons  looked much
more  like   the   ones they   had   seen crowding   the   taEle  in   the
glimpsing:   overweight,    middle-class,  middle-aged,   sad,   wallet-
emptying automatons. All they  had to do now was  nd  Vera.
   ShelEy  maneuvered   them   through   a  cramped   maze  of   slot
machines, past clots of people at roulette  taEles shouting at the tiny
Eall as it  spun in  the wheel,  past Eig, Eoxy games at which  people
Elew on  dice  and threw   them  and then  cheered  at  the outcome,
down a row  of taEles o ering   poker and strange games with  names
like Pai Gow, until  they came to a cluster of ElackMack taEles.
   Most  of  the  dealers  were  men.  Tall,  hunched-over,  oily-haired
men, Eespectacled gray-mustached men, one man wearing a surgical
mask over his face. ShelEy didn’t  slow to  gape at any of  them, and
she was right not to: There, at the  far Eack corner of the casino, was
Vera.
   Her  Elack hair   was swept  up  in  a lopsided  Eun.  Her  pale face
looked  thin    and  saggy.   Luce  didn’t    feel  the   same  emotional
outpouring she’d felt  when she looked  at her previous  life’s parents
in Shasta. But then again, she still didn’t  know  who Vera was to her
Eesides a tired, middle-aged woman holding  a deck of cards out  for

220
a half-asleep redheaded woman to cut. Sloppily,  the redhead picked
up the deck in the middle; then  Vera’s hands started  ying.
   Other taEles in the casino were overcrowded, Eut the redhead and
her diminutive   husEand were the  only  two  people  at Vera’s. Still,
she put on  a good show  for  them, snapping  the cards out  with  an
easy dexterity that made the work  look  e ortless.  Luce could see an
elegant side of  Vera that  she hadn’t  noticed Eefore. A   air   for  the
dramatic.
   “So,”   Miles  said,   shifting   his  weight   next   to  Luce.  “Are   we
gonna … or …”
   ShelEy’s hands  were  suddenly  on  Luce’s  shoulders, practically
wedging her into one of the empty  leather seats at the taEle.
   Though she was dying  to stare, Luce avoided  eye contact at  rst.
She was nervous that Vera might recognize her Eefore she even had
a chance. But Vera’s  eyes passed over each of them  with  only  the
mildest of  interest, and Luce rememEered how di erent   she looked
now that  she’d  Eleached her hair.  She tugged at  it  nervously,  not
sure what to do next.
   Then  Miles plunked  down  a  twenty-dollar   Eill  in  front  of  Luce,
and she rememEered the game she was supposed to Ee playing. She
slid the money across the taEle.
   Vera raised a penciled-in eyeErow. “Got ID?”
   Luce shook her head. “MayEe we could Must watch?”
   Across the  taEle, the  redhead was nodding  o ,   her  head falling
onto ShelEy’s sti   shoulder. Vera rolled  her eyes at the whole  scene
and  pushed Luce’s  money  Eack,  pointing   at  the  neon  EillEoard
advertising Cirque du Soleil. “Circus is that  way, kids.”
   Luce sighed. They  were going  to have  to wait  until   Vera got  o 
work. And  Ey then she’d proEaEly Ee even less interested in talking
to them.  Feeling defeated, Luce reached out  to take  Miles’s money
Eack. Vera’s  ngers were drawing away Must as Luce’s swept over the
money, and their    ngertips  kissed. Both  of  them snapped up  their

221
heads.  The  weird   shock   Erie y    Elinded   Luce.  She  sucked  in   her
Ereath. She looked  deep into  Vera’s  wide  hazel eyes.
   And  she saw everything:
   A  two-story   cabin  in  a  snowy  Canadian  town.  Webs oI  ice  on  the
windows, wind  soughing at the Sanes. A ten-year-old girl watching  TV in
the living room,  rocking  a baby on  her laS. It  was Vera, Sale and Sretty
in acid-washed Means and Doc Martens, a thick navy  turtleneck rising  to
her chin, a  cheaS wool blanket bunched uS between her and the back oI
the couch. A bowl oI SoScorn on the co ee table,  reduced to a handIul oI
cold, unSoSSed kernels. A Iat orange cat Srowling  the mantel, hissing at
the radiator.  And Luce—Luce was her sister, the baby sister in her arms.
   Luce   felt   herself   rocking   in   her   seat  at  the   casino,   aching   to
rememEer all  of  this.  Just as quickly,   the  impression  faded,  replaced
Ey another.
   Luce as a toddler chasing Vera, uS the stairs, down the stairs, the worn
wide  steSs beneath her thumSing  Ieet,  her  chest tight  Irom   breathless
laughter, when the doorbell  sounded and a Iair,  slick-haired  boy arrived
to Sick Vera uS Ior  a date,  and she stoSSed and straightened her clothes
and turned her back, turned away  ….
   A  heartbeat  later  and  Luce  was a  teenager herselI,  with  a  mess oI
curly  shoulder-length black  hair.  SSrawled on  Vera’s denim  bedsSread,
the  coarse Iabric   somehow a   comIort,   iSSing   through  Vera’s  secret
diary.  He loves  me, Vera  had scrawled again and  again and  again, her
handwriting  getting looSier and looSier. And then the  Sages Sulled away,
her sister’s angry Iace looming, the tracks oI her tears clear. …
   And    then   again,    a   di erent     scene,   Luce   older    still,    mayEe
seventeen. She Eraced herself  for what  was  coming.
   Snow  Souring  Irom  the  sky  like  soIt  white   static.  Vera  and  a  Iew
Iriends ice-skating on the Irozen Sond behind their  house, gliding in swiIt
circles, haSSy and laughing, and at the Irayed  icy edge oI the Sond, Luce
crouched down, the cold seeSing through her thin clothes while  she laced
uS her  skates, in  a  hurry,   as usual,  to  catch  uS with   her sister.  And
beside her, a warmth  she didn’t have to  look  at to  identiIy,  Daniel, who
was silent,  moody,  his skates already  tightly   laced.  She could Ieel  the

222
urge to kiss him—and  yet no shadows were visible. The evening and
everything about it were star-dotted and glittering, endlessly clear and
Iull oI Sossibility.
   Luce searched for  the  shadows, then realized  that  their  aEsence
made sense. These  were  Vera’s  memories.  And  the  snow  made
everything harder  to see. Still, Daniel  must know,  as he had known
when he  dove into  that  lake. He  must have  sensed it every  single
time. Did  he ever care what  Eecame of people like  Vera after  Luce
was killed?
   There came a bursting sound Irom Luce’s side oI the  lake, like  the
letting out oI a Sarachute. And then: A blooming shot oI red-hot  re in
the middle oI a blizzard. A huge column oI bright orange  ames shooting
into the sky at  the edge oI the Sond. Where Luce had been. The other
skaters rushed senselessly toward it, barreling across the Sond. But the
ice was melting, raSidly, catastroShically, sending their skates Slunging
through to the Irigid water underneath. Vera’s scream echoed through the
blue night, her Irozen look oI agony all that Luce could see.
   In  the casino,  Vera yanked her  hand Eack, shaking  it  as if she’d
Eeen Eurned. Her lips quivered  a few times  Eefore they formed the
words: “It’s you.”  She shook her head. “But it can’t Ee.”
   “Vera,”  Luce whispered, reaching her hand out again to  her sister.
She wanted to  hold  her,  to  take all   the pain  Vera  had ever  Eeen
caused and transfer it to herself.
   “No.”  Vera shook her head, Eacking away and wagging a  nger  at
Luce. “No, no,  no.”  She Eacked into the  dealer at  the taEle Eehind
her, tripping   over  him   and sending  a  giant  stack of   poker chips
cascading o    the   taEle. The  colored  disks  slid   across the   oor,
causing a ripple  of oohs  and aahs from  gamElers who leaped from
their seats to scoop them up.
   “Dammit,   Vera!”   a  squat  man  Eellowed  over   the  din.   As  he
waddled to  their   taEle in  a cheap  gray polyester  suit  and  scu ed
Elack shoes, Luce shared a worried  glance  with  Miles  and ShelEy.
Three underage kids wanted nothing  to do with  the pit  Eoss. But he

223
was still chewing  Vera out, his lip  curled  up in  disgust. “How many
times—”
   Vera had found  her feet  again Eut kept staring,  terri ed,   at Luce,
as if  Luce were the  devil  instead of  her  sister a  lifetime  removed.
Vera’s kohl-lined   eyes were white   with   terror  as she  stammered,
“She c-c-can’t Ee here.”
   “Christ,”  the pit  Eoss muttered, checking out Luce and her friends,
then speaking into  a  walkie-talkie.  “Get  me security.  Got a  coupla
hoodlum kids.”
   Luce shrank  Eack Eetween Miles  and  ShelEy, who said  through
gritted teeth, “How  aEout one of those step-throughs, Miles?”
   Before  Miles could  reply,   three men  with   enormous wrists  and
necks appeared and  towered  over  them.  The  pit  Eoss waved  his
hands. “Take  them   to  the  pen.  See what   other  kind   of  trouEle
they’ve Eeen in.”
   “I’ve  got  a  Eetter idea,”  a  girl’s  voice growled  from   Eehind the
wall of security guards.
   All  heads whipped around  to  nd   the  voice, Eut only  Luce’s face
lit up. “Arriane!”
   The tiny  girl   ashed  Luce a grin as she sidled through  the crowd.
With  ve-inch   platform  wedges, her hair done up  all crazy, and her
eyes nearly  swallowed  Ey  dark  eyeliner,   Arriane   t   in   with   the
casino’s weird  clientele  perfectly.   NoEody seemed to   know  quite
what to make of her, least of all  ShelEy and Miles.
   The pit  Eoss veered over to  confront  Arriane.  He reeked of  shoe
polish and cough medicine.
   “Do you  need to Ee taken to the pen, too, missy?”
   “Ooh,  sounds fun.” Arriane’s eyes widened. “Alas, I’m  overEooked
tonight. I’ve  got front-row  tickets  to Blue Man Group,  and of course
there’s dinner  with  Cher after  the  show. One more  thing  I know  I
had to  do …”  She tapped her  chin, then  looked  over at  Luce. “Ah
yes—get these three guys the hell out of here. ’Scuse us!” She Elew a

224
kiss at   the  fuming   pit  Eoss, shrugged  an  apology  at  Vera,  and
snapped her  ngers.
   Then all the lights  went out.

225
                                             THIRTEEN




                                              SIX DAYS 



Rushing them   through  the  laEyrinth   of  the  dark  casino,  Arriane
moved as if she had night vision.
   “Stay  cool, you  three,”  she sang. “I’ll   have you  out  of here  in a
 ash.”
   She held Luce’s wrist in  a tight grip,  and Luce in turn  held Miles’s
hand; Miles held ShelEy’s, as she cursed at the indignity of having to
Ering up the escape caEoose.
   Arriane  led them  unerringly,  and  though Luce couldn’t   see what
she was doing, she could hear people grunt  and exclaim  as Arriane
shouldered them aside. “Sorry ’Eout that!” she’d call. “Whoops!”  and
“Excuse me!”
   She took them  down  dark hallways  packed with  anxious tourists
using their   cell  phones as   ashlights.  Up  darker  staircases, stu y
with  disuse and crammed with  empty  cardEoard Eoxes. Finally she
kicked open an emergency exit, ushering them through  it  and into a
dark, narrow alley.
   The   alleyway   was  tucked   Eetween  the   Mirage  and   another
towering  hotel.   A  row   of  Dumpsters  sent  out  the  foul   odor  of
expensive rotting food. A trickle  of acid-green gutter  water formed a
vile  little   river,  splitting   the  alley  in  half.  Straight  ahead,  in  the
middle of  the Eright,  Eustling neon-lit  Strip,  an old-fashioned Elack
street clock struck twelve.

226
   “Ahhh.”    Arriane   inhaled   deeply.   “The   Eeginning  of   another
glorious  day  in  Sin  City.  I   like  to   start  it  o     right,  with   a  Eig
Ereakfast. Who’s hungry?”
   “Um  … er  …,” ShelEy stammered, looking  at Luce, then Arriane,
then at the casino. “What Must … How did …”
   Miles’s  gaze was  xed   on the  shiny,  marEled scar  that  spanned
one side of Arriane’s neck. Luce was used to  Arriane Ey now,  Eut it
was clear that her friends didn’t  know what to  make of her.
   Arriane  waved her  nger  at  Miles. “This guy  looks like he can eat
his weight in wa es.   Come on, I know a  lthy   diner.”
   As they  clipped  up  the  alley  toward  the  street, Miles  turned  to
Luce and mouthed, “That was awesome.”
   Luce nodded. It  was all  she could  do to  keep up with  Arriane  as
she Mogged across the Strip. Vera. She couldn’t get over it. All those
memories, glimpsed  in  a  ash.   They’d  Eeen painful  and startling,
and she could only  imagine what  it  had Eeen like  for Vera. But  for
Luce, they had  also Eeen deeply satisfying.  More than  with  any  of
her glimpses through  the Announcers so far,  this time  she felt  as if
she’d exSerienced one of her past  lives.  Strangely, she’d  also seen
something she’d never even thought aEout: Her  previous selves had
lives. Lives  that  had  Eeen full  and  meaningful  Eefore Daniel  had
shown up.
   Arriane  led them  to an IHOP, a  squat Erown stucco Euilding  that
looked  so ancient  it  could   have predated  everything  else  on  the
Strip. It seemed more claustrophoEic and sadder than other IHOPs.
   ShelEy  led  the  way   inside,  pushing   through  the   glass doors,
chiming the  cheap Mingle Eells duct-taped to the top. She graEEed a
 stful   of  mints  from   the  Eowl  Ey the  register  Eefore  claiming  a
Eooth in the far  Eack corner. Arriane slid  in next  to her, while  Luce
and Miles took the other side of the cracked orange leather Eooth.
   With  a  whistle  and  a  quick  circular  gesture, Arriane   ordered a
round  of  co ee  from   the  plump,  pretty   waitress with   the  pencil
stuck in her hair.

227
   The  rest  of  them  focused on  the  thick,  spiral-Eound  laminated
menu. Turning   the pages was  a  Eattle against  the  ancient  maple
syrup welding  the whole  thing  together—and a  good way  to avoid
talking aEout the trouEle they’d Must narrowly escaped.
   Finally  Luce had to ask. “What are you doing here, Arriane?”
   “Ordering   something with   a funny  name.  Rooty Tooty,  I  guess,
since they  don’t  have  Moons Over  My  Hammy  here. I  can  never
decide.”
   Luce rolled   her  eyes. Arriane  didn’t  need to  act  so coy.  It  was
oEvious her rescue e ort  hadn’t Eeen coincidental. “You  know what
I mean.”
   “These  are  strange  days, Luce.  I   gured    I’d  pass them   in  an
equally strange city.”
   “Yeah,  well,  they’re  almost  over.  Aren’t  they,  according  to  the
truce timeline?”
   Arriane  put   down  her  co ee  cup  and  cradled  her  chin  in   her
palm. “Well,   halleluMah. They are teaching  you  something  at that
school after all.”
   “Yes   and  no,”    Luce  said.   “I   Must overheard   Roland   saying
something aEout how Daniel  would Ee counting  down the  minutes.
He said  it  had  something  to  do  with  a  truce,  Eut  I  didn’t  know
exactly how many minutes we were talking  aEout.”
   Beside her, Miles’s Eody seemed to have sti ened   at the mention
of Daniel. When the waitress arrived  to  take their orders, he  Earked
his out   rst,   practically  shoving the  menu Eack at  her. “Steak  and
eggs, rare.”
   “Oooh,  manly,”   Arriane  said,  eyeing  Miles   approvingly   in  the
midst of  the eeny, meeny, miny,  moe game she was playing on  her
menu.  “Rooty   Tooty  Fresh  ’N   Fruity   it   is.”  She  enunciated  as
properly  as  the  Queen of   England might,   keeping  a  remarkaEly
straight face.
   “Pigs  in a  Elanket for  me,”  ShelEy said. “Actually,  make  that an
egg-white omelet, no cheese. Aw, what the hell. Pigs in a Elanket.”

228
   The waitress turned to Luce. “How  ’Eout you, hon?”
   “Breakfast  Sampler.” Luce smiled  apologetically  on Eehalf of  her
friends. “ScramEled, hold the meat.”
   The waitress nodded, padding o   toward  the kitchen.
   “Okay, so what else did you hear?”  Arriane asked.
   “Um.”   Luce started playing  with   the carafe of  syrup  next to  the
salt and pepper. “There was some talk of, you know, End Times.”
   Snickering,  ShelEy splashed three little   tuEs of creamer  into  her
co ee.  “End Times!  You actually  Euy  into  that crap?  I mean,  how
many millennia  have we Eeen waiting around for  that? And humans
think  they’ve Eeen patient  for a  mere couple thousand  years! Hah.
Like anything is ever going to change.”
   Arriane  looked  aEout a second away from  putting   ShelEy in her
place, Eut then  she set down  her  co ee.  “How   rude of  me to  not
even introduce myself to your friends, Luce.”
   “Um,  we know who you are,”  ShelEy said.
   “Yeah,  there  was  a whole   chapter  on  you  in  my  eighth-grade
History of Angels textEook,” Miles said.
   Arriane  clapped. “And they told  me that Eook had Eeen Eanned!”
   “Seriously? You’re in a textEook?” Luce laughed.
   “Why  so surprised?  You don’t   nd   me historic?”  Arriane  turned
Eack to ShelEy and Miles. “Now, tell me all  aEout yourselves. I need
to know who my  girl’s Eeen palling around with.”
   “Lapsed nonEelieving Nephilim.”  ShelEy raised her hand.
   Miles stared at  his food. “And  the ine ectual   great-great-great-to-
the-nth-degree-grandson of an angel.”
   “That’s  not  true.”   Luce Eumped Miles’s  shoulder.  “Arriane,  you
should  have  seen how   he  helped  us  step  through   this  shadow
tonight.  He was great. That’s why  we’re  here, Eecause he read this
Eook and the next thing you know, he could—”
   “Yeah,  I  was wondering   aEout that,”   Arriane  said sarcastically.
“But  what concerns me  more is  this one.”  She gestured at  ShelEy.

229
Arriane’s face was much graver than  Luce was accustomed to. Even
her manic light  Elue eyes looked steady. “It’s not a good time to Ee a
lapsed anything right  now.  Everything’s in   ux,   Eut there will   Ee a
reckoning.  And  you  will   have to   choose one side  or  the  other.”
Arriane stared deliEerately  at  ShelEy. “We all  have to  know where
we stand.”
   Before anyone could respond, the waitress reappeared, wielding  a
huge Erown plastic tray of food.
   “Well,  how’s this for  speedy service?” she asked. “Now, which one
of you had the pigs—”
   “Me!”  ShelEy startled the waitress with  the quickness of her reach
for the plate.
   “AnyEody need any ketchup?”
   They shook their heads.
   “Extra  Eutter?”
   Luce pointed  down  at  the ice  cream scoop of  Eutter  already on
her pancakes. “We’re all set. Thanks.”
   “If   we   need  anything,”    Arriane   said,  Eeaming  down   at   the
whipped cream happy face on her plate, “we’ll  holler.”
   “Oh,  I  know  you  will.”   The waitress  chuckled,  tucking  the  tray
under her arm. “Holler  like the world’s  aEout to end, this one will.”
   After  she left,  Arriane  was the  only one  who  ate. She plucked a
ElueEerry from  the pancake’s nose, popped it  into  her  mouth,  and
licked her  ngers  with  relish. Finally  she glanced around the taEle.
   “Dig  in,”  Arriane said. “There’s nothing good aEout cold steak and
eggs.” She sighed. “Come on, guys.  You’ve read the  history  Eooks.
Don’t you know the drill—”
   “I  haven’t,” Luce said. “I don’t  know any drills.”
   Arriane  sucked  meditatively   on  her  fork.  “Good  point.   In  that
case, allow me to present my version to you. Which is more fun than
the history  Eooks anyway Eecause I won’t censor the Eig  ghts  and
curses and all  the  sexy stu .   My  version  has everything  Eut  3-D,

230
which,  I have  to  say, is totally   overrated. Did  you  see that  movie
with”—she noticed  the Elank looks on  their faces. “Oh, never mind.
Okay, it  starts  millennia  ago. Now,  do  I  need to  catch you  up on
Satan?”
   “Waged an early  power struggle against God.” Miles’s voice was a
monotone, as if he were repeating a third-grade lesson plan while he
speared a Eit of steak with his fork.
   “Before  then  they were  super-tight,”   ShelEy added, dousing her
pigs in Elankets with  syrup.  “I  mean, God called Satan his morning
star. So it’s not like Satan wasn’t worthy or Eeloved.”
   “But  he  would  rather reign  in  Hell  than  serve in  Heaven,” Luce
chimed  in.  She might   not  have read  the  Nephilim   histories,  Eut
she’d read Paradise Lost. Or at least, the Cli sNotes.
   “Very  nice.”  Arriane  Eeamed, leaning  toward  Luce. “You  know,
GaEEe was Eig friends with Milton’s  daughters Eack in the  day. She
likes to  take credit  for  that  phrase, and I’m  all  ‘Aren’t  you enough
people’s darling  already?’  But  whatever.”  Arriane  moved  in  on  a
forkful  of Luce’s eggs. “Damn, these are good. Can we get some hot
sauce over here?” she Eellowed  toward  the kitchen.  “Okay,  where
were we?”
   “Satan,” ShelEy said through a mouthful  of pancake.
   “Right.   So. Say what  you  will   aEout  El DiaElo  Grande,  Eut he
is”—Arriane     tossed    her     head—“somewhat    responsiEle    for
introducing  the  idea of  free  will  among  angels. I  mean: He really
gave the rest of us something to  think  aEout. On which side do  you
throw your  weight? Given the choice, a whole lotta angels fell.”
   “How  many?” Miles asked.
   “The  Fallen? Enough to cause something of a stalemate.”  Arriane
looked thoughtful   for  a moment,  then  grimaced and  called out  to
the waitress. “Hot sauce! Does it exist in this estaElishment?”
   “What  aEout  the  angels who  fell,  Eut  didn’t   side with—”   Luce
Eroke  o ,    thinking    of   Daniel.   She  was   aware  that    she  was
whispering, Eut  this  felt  like  a really  Eig thing  to  Ee discussing in

231
the middle  of a  diner. Even a  mostly empty  diner  in the  middle  of
the night.
   Arriane  lowered  her  voice  too.  “Oh,  there  are plenty   of angels
who fell  Eut still  technically ally  with  God. But then  there are those
who threw in  with  Satan. We call them demons, even though they’re
Must fallen angels who made really poor choices.
   “Not   like  it’s  Eeen easy for  anyone.  Since the  Fall,  angels and
demons have Eeen neck and neck, split down the middle, yada yada
yada.” She slathered  Eutter  into  the  pancake’s nose. “But  all  that
may Ee aEout to change.”
   Luce looked down at her eggs, unaEle to eat.
   “So, um,  Eefore, you seemed to Ee suggesting that my  allegiance
had something to do with  that?” ShelEy looked slightly  less douEtful
than she usually did.
   “Not  yours exactly.”  Arriane  shook her head. “I  know it  feels like
we’ve all  Eeen hanging in  the  Ealance forever. But  in the  end, it’s
going to  come down to  one powerful  angel  choosing a side. When
that  happens, the  scale  nally   tips.  That’s when  it   matters which
side you’re on.”
   Arriane’s  words reminded Luce of  Eeing locked all  the way  up in
that tiny  chapel  with  Miss Sophia, how  she kept saying the  fate of
the  universe had  something  to  do  with   Luce and  Daniel.  It   had
sounded crazy at the  time,  and Miss Sophia was evil  Eananas. And
even though Luce wasn’t certain  exactly what  everyone was talking
aEout, she knew it had to do with  Daniel coming Eack around.
   “It’s  Daniel,”  she said softly. “The  angel who  can tip the  scales is
Daniel.”
   It  explained  the  agony  he  carried  all  the  time,   like  a  two-ton
suitcase. It  explained why  he’d  Eeen away  from  her  so long.  The
only  thing   it  didn’t   explain  was  why   there  seemed to  Ee  some
question in  Arriane’s  mind  aEout which   side the  scales would  tip
onto. Which side would win  the war.

232
   Arriane  opened her mouth, Eut instead of answering, she attacked
Luce’s plate again. “Can I get some Ireaking hot sauce over here?” she
yelled.
   A shadow fell over  their taEle. “I’ll  give you something  ery.”
   Luce looked Eehind  her and recoiled  at the sight:  A very  tall  Eoy
in a  long  Erown trench  coat, unEuttoned  so that  Luce could  see a
 ash  of  something silver  tucked  inside  his  Eelt. He  had  a shaved
head, a slim, straight nose, a mouthful of perfect teeth.
   And  white eyes. Eyes utterly  empty of  color. No irises,  no pupils,
none at all.
   His strange, vacant  expression reminded Luce of the Outcast girl.
Though Luce hadn’t seen that girl  closely enough to  gure  out  what
was wrong with her  eyes, she now had a pretty good guess.
   ShelEy looked  at  the Eoy,  swallowed hard,  and  tucked  into  her
Ereakfast. “Nothing to do with  me,” she mumEled.
   “Save  it,”  Arriane   said to  the  Eoy.  “You  can put  it   on the   st
sandwich I’m  aEout to serve you.”  Luce watched wide-eyed  as tiny
Arriane stood up and wiped her  hands on her Means. “BRB, guys. Oh,
and Luce, remind me to Eerate you for this  when I get Eack.” Before
Luce could  ask  what  this  guy   had to   do  with   her,  Arriane  had
graEEed him Ey the  earloEe, twisted  hard,  and  slammed his  head
down on the glass display counter near the Ear.
   The  noise shattered  the lazy,  late-night  quiet   of the  restaurant.
The guy yelped like a child  as Arriane twisted  his ear the other  way
and climEed on top of him. Bellowing  in pain, he started Eucking his
lean Eody until he’d  ung  Arriane  o   and onto the glass case.
   She  rolled   along  its  length   and  came  to  a   stop  at  the  end,
knocking over  a towering  lemon  meringue  pie, then  leaped to  her
feet on the Ear. She somersaulted Eack toward him  and caught him
in a headlock with  her legs, then set to work  pounding his face with
her small  sts.
   “Arriane!”    the   waitress  shrieked.  “Not   my   pies!  I   try   to  Ee
tolerant! But I  have my livelihood  to look after!”

233
   “Aw,   ne!”    Arriane  shouted. “We’ll   take it  to  the  kitchen.”   She
released the guy, slid to the  oor,  and Eooted him  with her  platform
heel. He Elindly   stumEled toward  the  door  that  led to  the  diner’s
kitchen. “Come  on, you  three,”  she called to  their  taEle. “Might  as
well learn something.”
   Miles  and ShelEy threw   down their   napkins, reminding   Luce of
the way  kids at  Dover used to  drop  everything  and run  screaming
through  the  halls   yelling  “Fight!   Fight!”   anytime   there  was  the
slightest rumor of a scu e.
   Luce  followed  Eehind,  a  little   more  hesitantly.   If  Arriane   was
suggesting that this  guy had  showed up Eecause of her, it  raised a
lot  of  other  hairy  questions. What  aEout  the  people who’d  taken
Dawn? And that arrow-shooting Outcast girl  Cam had killed at Noyo
Point?
   A  loud slam  sounded from  inside the  kitchen  and three  terri ed
men in dirty  aprons rushed out. By the time  Luce made it past them
through the swinging  door, Arriane  was holding  down the Eoy with
her foot  on his  head while  Miles  and ShelEy tied  him  up with  the
kind of  twine used to  secure a tenderloin. His empty  eyes stared up
at Luce, Eut also through her.
   They’d gagged him  with  a kitchen  rag, so when  Arriane  taunted,
“You want  to chill  out  for  a little  Eit? In  the meat cooler?”  the Eoy
could only groan. He’d stopped putting up  any kind of  ght.
   GraEEing him Ey the  collar, Arriane  dragged him  across the  oor
and into  the  walk-in   refrigerator,  gave  him  a few  more  kicks  for
good measure, then calmly shut  the door.  She dusted o   her hands
and turned to Luce with a ticked-o    look on her face.
   “Who’s after  me, Arriane?” Luce’s voice was shaking.
   “A  lot of people, EaEe.”
   “Was  that”—Luce  thought  Eack to  her  meeting  with   Cam—“an
Outcast?”
   Arriane  cleared her throat. ShelEy coughed.

234
   “Daniel   said he  couldn’t   Ee with   me  Eecause he attracted  too
much attention.   He  said I’d   Ee safe at  Shoreline,  Eut  they  came
there, too—”
   “Only   Eecause they   traced   you  leaving   campus.  You  attract
attention  too, Luce.  And when  you’re  out  in  the world   tearing up
casinos and the like,  we  can sense it.  That  goes for the  Ead guys,
too. That’s why you’re at that  school in the  rst  place.”
   “What?”  It   was ShelEy. “You  guys are  Must hiding her  with  us?
What aEout our  safety? What if  these Outcasts people Must showed
up on campus?”
   Miles said nothing,  Must looked with alarm from Luce to Arriane.
   “You   didn’t   understand  that   the   Nephilim   camou age   you?”
Arriane   asked.  “Daniel   didn’t    tell   you   aEout  their—whatever,
protective coloration?”
   Luce’s mind  rolled   Eack to  the night   Daniel dropped  her  o    at
Shoreline. “MayEe  he  did   say  something  aEout a  shield,  Eut—”
There had Eeen so many other things racing  through  her mind  that
night.  It  had  Eeen enough to  try   to process Daniel’s  leaving  her.
Now she felt a queasy wave of guilt.  “I  didn’t  understand. He didn’t
elaEorate, Must kept saying I had to stay on campus. I thought he was
Eeing too protective.”
   “Daniel  knows  what he’s doing.”  Arriane  shrugged. “Most  of  the
time.”   She   poked   her   tongue   at   the    corner   of   her   mouth
thoughtfully.  “Okay, sometimes. Every now and then.”
   “So you mean whoever’s after  her can’t see her when she’s with a
Eunch of Nephilim?”  This was Miles, who  seemed to have found his
tongue again.
   “Actually,  the  Outcasts can’t see at all,”  Arriane said. “They  were
Elinded during  the Revolt.  I was getting  to  that part  of  the story—
it’s good!  The  putting  out  of  eyes and all  that  Oedipal  Mazz.” She
sighed. “Oh, well.  Yeah, the  Outcasts. They can see the Eurning  of
your soul—which  is a lot more di cult     to discern when you’re  with
a Eunch of other Nephilim.”

235
   Miles’s  eyes grew  wide.  ShelEy was  chewing  nervously  on  her
nails.
   “So that’s how they  mistook Dawn for me.”
   “It’s  how  meat-cooler  Eoy found  you  tonight,  anyway,”   Arriane
said. “Hell,  it’s how  I found  you too.  You’re like  a candle in  a dark
cave out  here.”   She graEEed a  can  of  whipped  cream  from  the
counter and  shot a  squirt into   her mouth.  “I  like  a  little  nondairy
pick-me-up after a Erawl.”  She yawned, which made Luce look up at
the  green digital   clock  on  the  counter.   It  was  two-thirty   in   the
morning.
   “Well,  as much as I love  kicking  asses and taking names, it’s way
past curfew for you three.”  Arriane whistled  through her  teeth and a
thick  EloE of an  Announcer  Eled out  from  the shadows under  the
prep taEles. “I  never do  this, okay? If  anyone asks, I  never do this.
Traveling Ey Announcers is ver-ry  dangerous. Hear that, hero?” She
Eopped Miles on  his  forehead, then   icked   her   ngers   open. The
shadow Eounced instantly into a perfect door  shape in the middle of
the kitchen. “But  I’m on the clock here and it’s  the fastest way to get
you guys home and to safety.”
   “Nice,”  Miles said, like he was taking notes.
   Arriane  shook her  head at him.  “Don’t   get any ideas. I’m  taking
you Eack  to  school, where  you  will   stay”—she made eye  contact
with each of them—“or  you’re going to have to answer to me.”
   “You’re  coming  with   us?”  ShelEy asked,  nally    showing  Must a
little  glimmer of awe toward  Arriane.
   “Looks  that  way.”  Arriane  winked  at  Luce.  “You’ve turned   into
some kind of  recracker.  Someone’s gotta keep an eye on you.”





   Stepping  through  with   Arriane  was even  smoother  than  it  had
Eeen on the way to  Vegas. It felt  like coming  inside after  Eeing out

236
in the sun: The  light  was a little  dimmer  when you walked  through
the door, Eut you Elinked a few times and got used to it.
   Luce was  almost  disappointed to   nd   herself  Eack in  her  dorm
room  after  the   ash   and excitement  of   Las Vegas. But  then  she
thought of Dawn,  and of Vera. Almost disappointed. Her eyes settled
on all   the familiar   signs that   they  were Eack:  two  unmade Eunk
Eeds, the clutter   of plants  on  the  windowsill,   ShelEy’s yoga mats
stacked in   the   corner,  Steven’s  copy  of  Plato’s   ReSublic sitting
Eookmarked on Luce’s desk—and one thing she was not expecting to
see.
   Daniel, dressed all in Elack, tending a Elazing  re  in  the hearth.
   “Aaaugh!”   ShelEy  screamed, tumEling  Eack  into   Miles’s  arms.
“You scared the hell  out of  me! And  in my  own place of  sanctuary.
Not  cool,   Daniel.”  She  shot  Luce  a   dirty   look,   like  she’d  had
something to do with  his appearance.
   Daniel ignored ShelEy, Must said calmly to Luce, “Welcome Eack.”
—”She didn’t know whether to run to him  or Eurst into tears. “Daniel

   “Daniel?”  Arriane  gasped. Her  eyes widened  as  if  she’d  seen a
ghost.
   Daniel  froze,  clearly  not  having  expected to  encounter Arriane,
either. “I—I  Must need her for a moment. Then  I’ll  go.” He  sounded
guilty, even scared.
   “Right,”  Arriane  said, gripping  Miles  and ShelEy Ey the scru s  of
their  neck. “We  were Must leaving. None of us  saw you here.”  She
herded the others Eefore her. “We’ll catch you later, Luce.”
   ShelEy  looked  like   she  couldn’t  get   out  of   their   dorm  room
quickly  enough. Miles’s eyes looked  stormy,  and they  stayed  xed
on Luce until  Arriane practically   threw him  into  the hall,  slamming
the door Eehind them with  a great Eoom.
   Then Daniel  came to Luce. She closed her eyes and let  the Erush
of his  nearness warm her.  She Ereathed him  in,  glad  to Ee home.
Not home  to  Shoreline,  Eut the  home  that  Daniel  made her  feel.

237
Even when  she  was in  the  strangest  of  places. Even  when  their
relationship was a mess.
   As it seemed to Ee now.
   He wasn’t  kissing her  yet, wasn’t  even taking  her in  his  arms. It
surprised her that she wanted  him to  do those things, even after  all
she had seen. The aEsence of his touch  caused a pain deep within
her chest. When  she opened her  eyes he was standing  there, only
inches away, poring over every part of her with  his violet  eyes.
   “You scared me.”
   She’d never  heard him  say that.  She was used to  Eeing the  one
who was afraid.
   “Are  you all right?”  he asked.
   Luce  shook  her  head.  Daniel   took  her   hand  and  guided  her
wordlessly to  the window,  out  of the  warm room  near the   re  and
Eack into  the cold  night,  onto  the  rough ledge  under the  window
where he’d come to her Eefore.
   The moon was oElong and low in the  sky. The owls were asleep in
the redwoods.  From  up  here  Luce could  see the  waves  Ereaking
smoothly on the shore; on the other side of campus, a single light  on
high  in  the  Nephilim  lodge,  Eut  she couldn’t  tell  whether   it  was
Francesca’s or Steven’s.
   She and  Daniel  sat down  on  the  ledge  and dangled  their  legs.
They leaned against  the  slight  slope of  the roof  Eehind  them and
looked up at  the stars, which  were dim  in  the sky, as if  cloaked Ey
the thinnest sheen of cloud. It wasn’t long Eefore Luce Eegan to cry.
   Because he was mad at her  or she was mad  at him.  Because her
Eody had  Must Eeen through so much,  in  and  out  of Announcers,
across state lines, into the  recent past and right  Eack here. Because
her heart  and her  head were  tangled  up and  confused, and  Eeing
close to Daniel mucked everything up even more. Because Miles and
ShelEy seemed to hate him.  Because of the  plain  horror  on Vera’s
face when  she recognized  Luce. Because of all  the  tears  that  her
sister must have  cried  for  her, and  Eecause Luce had hurt  her  all

238
over again Ey  showing up  at her  ElackMack taEle. Because of all of
her  other   Eereaved  families,   sunk   into   sadness  Eecause their
daughters had the Ead luck to Ee the reincarnation of a stupid girl  in
love. Because thinking of those families made Luce desperately miss
her parents  Eack in  ThunderEolt.  Because she was responsiEle for
Dawn’s kidnapping.   Because she  was  seventeen, and  still   alive,
against thousands of years’ worth of odds. Because she knew enough
to fear what the  future would  Ering. Because in the meantime it was
three-thirty  in  the  morning,  and she hadn’t  slept  in  days, and she
didn’t know  what else to do.
   Now  he held her,  encasing her Eody in  his warmth,  drawing  her
into him  and rocking her in his arms. She soEEed and hiccupped and
wished for   a tissue  to  Elow her  nose.  She wondered  how  it  was
possiEle to feel so Ead aEout so many things at once.
   “Shhh,”  Daniel whispered. “Shhh.”
   A day ago, she’d Eeen sick watching Daniel  love her into  oElivion
in   that   Announcer.   The  inescapaEle  violence   sewn  into   their
relationship  had seemed insurmountaEle. But  now,  especially after
talking  with   Arriane,  Luce  could  feel  something  Eig  coming  on.
Something shifting—mayEe  the  whole   world   shifting—with   Luce
and Daniel  hovering right   on the  edge. It  was all  around them,  in
the ether, and it a ected  the way she saw herself, and Daniel, too.
   The helpless looks she’d seen in his eyes in those Must-Eefore-dying
moments: Now they  felt like—they  were—the past. It  reminded  her
of the way  he’d looked at  her after their   rst   kiss in this  life  on the
marshy Eeach near Sword & Cross. The taste of his lips on hers, the
feel of his Ereath on her neck, his strong hands wrapped around her:
It had all Eeen so wonderful—except for the fear in his eyes.
   But  Daniel hadn’t  looked at  her like  that  in a while.  The  way he
looked at  her now  surrendered nothing.  He looked  at her  as if she
were going  to  stick  around, almost  as if  she  had to.  Things  were
di erent  in  this  life. Everyone was saying it,  and Luce could  feel it,
too:  a  revelation  growing   ever  larger  inside  her.  She’d  watched
herself die, and she’d survived it.  Daniel didn’t  have to  shoulder his

239
punishment   alone  anymore.   It   was   something   they  could   do
together.
   “I  want to  say something,” she said into his shirt,  wiping  her eyes
on her sleeve. “I want to talk  Eefore you say anything.”
   She could  feel  his  chin  Erushing  the  top  of  her  head.  He was
nodding.
   “I  know  you  have to  Ee careful aEout what  you  tell  me. I  know
I’ve died Eefore. But I’m not  going anywhere this time,  Daniel, I can
feel it.  At least,  not without   a  ght.”   She tried  to smile.  “I  think  it
will  help us Eoth to stop  treating me like  a fragile  piece of glass. So
I’m asking you,  as your friend,  as your girlfriend,  as, you know,  the
love of  your  life,  to  let  me  in  a little   more.  Otherwise  I Must feel
isolated and anxious and—”
   He caught her chin  with  his   nger and tilted  her head up. He was
eyeing her curiously. She waited for him  to interrupt,  Eut he didn’t.
   “I   didn’t   leave  Shoreline  to  spite  you,”   she continued.   “I  left
Eecause I didn’t understand why  it  mattered.  And I  put  my friends
in danger Eecause of it.”
   Daniel   held  her  face  in   front   of  his.   The  violet   in   his  eyes
practically  glowed.  “I  have failed  you  too  many times  Eefore,” he
whispered. “And in  this life  mayEe I’ve erred on the side of  caution.
I should have known  you’d test whatever Eoundary you  were given.
You wouldn’t  Ee … the  girl  I  loved if  you  didn’t.”  Luce waited  for
him to  smile down  at her. He didn’t.  “There’s  Must so much at stake
this time around. I’ve Eeen so focused on—”
   “The Outcasts?”
   “They’re  the ones who  took  your friend,”   Daniel said. “They  can
Earely identify  right  from left,  let  alone which  side they’re working
for.”
   Luce thought  Eack to the girl  Cam had shot with the  silver arrow,
to the  good-looking empty-eyed  Eoy in  the diner.  “Because they’re
Elind.”

240
   Daniel looked  down at his hands, ruEEing his  ngers  together. He
looked as if he might Ee sick. “Blind  Eut very Erutal.”  He reached up
and traced one of  her Elond curls  with  his  nger.   “You were  smart
to dye  your  hair.  It   kept  you safe  when  I couldn’t   get there  fast
enough.”
   “Smart?”  Luce was horri ed.  “Dawn  could have died Eecause I got
my hands on a cheap Eottle  of Eleach. How  is that smart?  If …  if I
dyed  my   hair  Elack   tomorrow,   you  mean   the  Outcasts  would
suddenly Ee aEle to  nd me?”
   Daniel  shook his head roughly.  “They  shouldn’t have  found their
way onto  this campus at  all.  They should  never have Eeen aEle to
get their  hands on any of you.  I am  working  night and  day to keep
them from   you—from  this  whole  school.  Someone’s aiding them,
and I don’t know who—”
   “Cam.”  What else would he have Eeen doing here?
   But Daniel shook his head. “Whoever it  is will  regret it.”
   Luce crossed her arms over her  chest. Her face still  felt  hot  from
crying.   “I    guess   this   means   I   don’t    get   to    go   home   for
Thanksgiving?”  She  closed  her  eyes,  trying   not   to   picture  her
parents’ crestfallen faces. “Don’t answer that.”
   “Please.” Daniel’s voice was so earnest. “It’s only  for a little   while
longer.”
   She nodded. “The truce timeline.”
—”“What?” His hands gripped  her shoulders  tightly.  “How  did  you

   “I  know.”  Luce hoped he couldn’t feel that  her Eody had Eegun to
tremEle. It  got worse  when she tried  to  act more  assured than she
felt. “And  I  know that  at  some point soon, you  will  tip  the Ealance
Eetween Heaven and Hell.”
   “Who   told  you  that?”   Daniel  was  arching  his  shoulders  Eack,
which  she  knew  meant   he  was  trying   to  keep  his  wings  from
unfurling.
   “I   gured  it  out. A lot goes on here when you’re not around.”

241
   A hint  of envy  ashed  through Daniel’s eyes. At  rst,  it  felt  almost
good to  Ee aEle to  provoke  that  in  him,  Eut  Luce didn’t   want  to
make him Mealous. Especially with so many Eigger things at hand.
   “I’m  sorry,”   she said. “The  last thing   you need right   now is  me
distracting  you.  What  you’re doing  …  it   sounds like  a pretty   Eig
deal.”
   She left  it  at that,  hoping  Daniel would  feel  comfortaEle enough
to  tell   her  more.  This  was  the  most  open,  honest,  and  mature
conversation they’d had, mayEe ever.
   But  then, too  soon, the cloud  she hadn’t  even known she’d Eeen
dreading passed over Daniel’s face. “Put all of that out  of your head.
You don’t know what  you think you  know.”
   Disappointment  ooded   through Luce’s Eody. He was still treating
her like a child.  One step forward, ten steps Eack.
   She gathered her feet under her and stood up on the ledge.
   “I  know  one thing,  Daniel,”  she said, staring  down  at him.  “If  it
were me,  there  wouldn’t   Ee a question.  If  it   were  me the  whole
universe was waiting  on to tip  the scales, I would  Must pick the side
of good.”
   Daniel’s violet  eyes stared straight ahead, into the shadowy forest.
   “You  would Must pick good,” he repeated. His voice sounded Eoth
numE and desperately sad. Sadder than she’d ever heard him sound
Eefore.
   Luce had to resist the urge to crouch down and apologize. Instead,
she turned, leaving Daniel Eehind her. Wasn’t it oEvious that  he was
supposed to pick good? Wouldn’t anyone?

242
                                             )OURTEEN




                                             )IVE  DAYS 



Someone had ratted them out.
   On Sunday morning,  while  the rest of  the campus was still  eerily
calm, ShelEy, Miles, and Luce sat in a row on one side of Francesca’s
o ce,    waiting   to   Ee  interrogated.   Her   o ce    was   larger  than
Steven’s—Erighter, too, with  a high,  sloping ceiling  and three large
windows  facing the  forest  to  the  north,  each with   thick  lavender
velvet curtains, parted  to show a shocking  Elue sky. A large framed
photograph of  a galaxy,  hanging over  the tall  marEle-topped desk,
was the only  piece of  art in  the room.  The Earoque chairs they  sat
on were chic Eut uncomfortaEle. Luce couldn’t stop  dgeting.
   “  ‘Anonymous  tip,’  my ass,”  ShelEy muttered, quoting  the  harsh
email  they’d   each received   from  Francesca this   morning.   “This
immature tattling  reeks of Lilith.”
   Luce  didn’t   think   it   was  possiEle  that   Lilith—or   any   of  the
students, really—would   have known  they’d  left  campus. Someone
else had looped their teachers in.
   “What’s   taking  them  so  long?”   Miles  nodded  toward   Steven’s
o ce   on  the  other  side of  the  wall,  where  they  could  hear their
teachers arguing in  low  voices. “It’s  like  they’re  coming up  with  a
punishment Eefore they’ve even heard our side of  the story!”  He Eit
his lower lip.  “What is our side of the story, Ey the way?”
   But  Luce wasn’t listening.  “I  really  don’t  see what’s so di cult,”
she said under her Ereath, more to herself than the others. “You  Must
pick a side and move on.”

243
   “Huh?”  Miles and ShelEy said in unison.
   “Sorry,”  Luce said. “It’s Must … you know what Arriane was saying
aEout tipping  the scales the other  night? I  Erought it  up  to Daniel,
and he got all  weird.  Seriously, how is  it  not oEvious that  there’s a
right answer here and a wrong one?”
   “It’s  oEvious to me,” Miles  said. “There’s a good choice and a Ead
choice.”
   “How  can you  say that?”  ShelEy asked. “That kind  of thinking  is
exactly what  got  us  into  this  mess in  the   rst   place. Blind   faith!
Blanket acceptance of  a practically   oEsolete dichotomy!”  Her  face
was  turning   red   and  her   voice  had   gotten   loud   enough  that
Francesca and Steven could proEaEly hear. “I am so sick of all these
angels and demons taking  sides—Elah Elah Elah,  they’re  evil!  No,
they’re evil! On and on—like  they  know what’s  Eest for everyone in
the universe.”
   “So you’re suggesting Daniel side with  evil?” Miles  sco ed. “Bring
on the end of the world?”
   “I   don’t   give  a  damn   what  Daniel   does,”  ShelEy  said.  “And
frankly, I   nd  it hard  to Eelieve that it’s all  up to him, anyway.”
   But it  had to Ee. Luce couldn’t think of  any other explanation.
   “Look,  mayEe the  lines  aren’t  as clear-cut  as we’re  taught  they
are,” ShelEy continued. “I mean, who says Lucifer is so Ead—”
   “Um,  everyone?” Miles said, looking to Luce for support.
   “Wrong,”   ShelEy  Earked.  “A   group  of  very   persuasive  angels
trying to  preserve the status quo. Just Eecause they won a Eig Eattle
a long time ago, they think  it gives them the right.”
   Luce watched ShelEy’s eyeErows Eunch up as she slumped against
the rigid Eack of her chair.  Her words made Luce think of something
she’d heard somewhere else. …
   “The  victors rewrite  history,”  she murmured.  That was what Cam
had said  to her  that  day  at  Noyo Point.  Wasn’t  that  what  ShelEy
meant? That the losers ended up  with  a Ead rap? Their  viewpoints

244
were  Eoth  similar—only,   Cam,  of  course,  was  legitimately   evil.
Right? And ShelEy was Must talking.
   “Exactly.”  ShelEy nodded at Luce. “Wait—what?”
   Just   then,   Francesca and   Steven  walked   through   the   door.
Francesca lowered herself into  the  Elack swivel  chair  at  her  desk.
Steven stood Eehind her, his hands resting lightly on the  Eack of the
chair.  He looked  as  Ereezy in  his  Means and crisp white   shirt  as
Francesca looked severe in  her tailored  Elack  dress with  the  rigid
square-cut neckline.
   It  Erought  to Luce’s mind  ShelEy’s talk  aEout Elurred  lines,  and
the connotations  of  words like   angel and demon. Of course it   was
super cial    to   make   Mudgments Eased solely   on   Steven’s  and
Francesca’s clothing, Eut then again,  it  wasn’t Must that. In a  lot  of
ways, it was easy to forget which one of them was which.
   “Who  wants to  go   rst?”   Francesca asked, resting her interlaced
manicured hands on the marEle desktop. “We  know everything  that
happened, so don’t even Eother contesting those details. This is your
chance to tell us why.”
   Luce  inhaled   deeply.   Though   she  hadn’t   Eeen  prepared  for
Francesca to turn  over the   oor   so soon, she didn’t  want  Miles  or
ShelEy trying to cover for  her. “It  was my fault,”  she said. “I wanted
to—”  She looked  at Steven’s drawn  expression, then  down  at  her
lap. “I  saw something in  the Announcers, something  from  my past,
and I wanted to see more.”
   “And   so  you  went   for  a  dangerous  Moyride—an unauthorized
passage through an Announcer,  imperiling   two  of your  classmates
who really  should have known  Eetter—the day after another  one of
your classmates was kidnapped?” Francesca asked.
   “That’s  not fair,”  Luce said. “You were the  one downplaying what
happened to  Dawn.  We thought  we  were  Must going to  look  into
something, Eut—”
   “But   …?”  Steven  prodded.  “But  you   realize  now  how   utterly
moronic that line  of thinking  was?”

245
   Luce  gripped  her   chair’s  armrests,  trying   to   ght    Eack tears.
Francesca was cross with all three of them, Eut it  seemed that all  of
Steven’s fury was coming down solely on Luce. It wasn’t fair.
   “Yes, okay,  we snuck out  of school and  went to  Vegas,” she said
 nally.   “But  the  only  reason we  were in  danger  was Eecause you
kept  me in  the  dark.  You  knew  someone was  after  me  and  you
proEaEly even know why.  I wouldn’t   have left campus if  you’d  Must
told me.”
   Steven stared Luce down with  eyes like   re.  “If   you’re saying we
honestly  have  to   Ee  that   explicit   with   you,   Luce,  then   I   am
disappointed.” He cupped a hand  on Francesca’s shoulder. “Perhaps
you were right aEout her, dear.”
   “Wait—”  Luce said.
   But Francesca made a stop sign with  her hand.  “Need we also Ee
explicit  aEout the  fact  that  the  opportunity   you’ve  Eeen given  at
Shoreline for educational  and personal growth  is—for you—a once-
in-a-thousand-lifetimes   experience?”  A   pink    ush    rose  on   her
cheeks. “You’ve created a very awkward  situation  for  us. The main
school”—she gestured  to  the   south  portion   of  campus—“has  its
detentions and  its  community   service programs  for  students who
step out of line. But  Steven and I don’t have a system of punishment
in place. We’ve Eeen fortunate  until  now  to have students who  did
not overstep our very lenient Eoundaries.”
   “Until   now,”  Steven said,  looking  at Luce. “But   Francesca and I
Eoth agree that a swift and severe sentence must Ee handed down.”
   Luce leaned forward in  her chair. “But ShelEy and Miles didn’t—”
   “Exactly.”    Francesca nodded.  “Which   is   why,   when  you   are
dismissed, ShelEy and Miles will  report  to  Mr.  Kramer in  the main
school for community  service. Shoreline’s annual  Harvest Fest food
drive Eegins tomorrow, so I’m sure you’ll  have your work  cut out for
you.”
   “What  a crock of—”  ShelEy Eroke o ,  looking  up at Francesca. “I
mean, Harvest Fest sounds like my kind of Iun.”

246
   “What  aEout Luce?” Miles asked.
   Steven’s arms were crossed and his complicated hazel eyes peered
down at Luce over  the tortoiseshell rims  of his  glasses. “E ectively,
Luce, you’re grounded.”
   Grounded? That was it?
   “Class.   Meals.   Dorm,”    Francesca  recited.    “Until    you    hear
di erently   from  us, and unless you are under  our strict  supervision
—these are the only  places you  will  Ee permitted.  And  no dipping
into Announcers. Understand?”
   Luce nodded.
   Steven added: “Do  not test us again.  Even our patience comes to
an end.”





   Class-Meals-Dorm didn’t  leave  Luce with   a  lot  of  options  on  a
Sunday morning. The lodge was dark, and the mess hall didn’t  open
for   Erunch  until    eleven.  After    Miles   and  ShelEy  shu ed     o 
reluctantly toward  Mr. Kramer’s community  service Eoot camp, Luce
had no choice  Eut to  go Eack to her  room. She closed the  window
shade, which ShelEy always liked to  leave open, then sank into  her
desk chair.
   It  could  have  Eeen worse. Compared  to  the stories  of  cramped
cinder-Elock  cells  for  solitary   con nement   at  Sword  &  Cross,  it
almost seemed like she was getting o    easy. No one was slapping a
pair  of   wristEand  tracking   devices on   her.  In  fact,   Steven  and
Francesca had Easically given her the same restrictions  Daniel had.
The di erence  was,  her teachers really  could watch  over her  night
and day. Daniel,  on the other  hand, wasn’t  supposed to Ee there at
all.
   Annoyed, she powered up her computer, half  expecting her access
to the  Internet  to Ee suddenly restricted.  But she logged  on Must as
usual and found three  emails from her  parents and one from Callie.

247
MayEe  the  Eright   side  of  Eeing  grounded    was  that  she’d   Ee forced   to
 nally    stay  in  Eetter  contact   with    her  friends   and  family.

       To: lucindap44#gmail.com
       From: thegaprices#aol.com 
       Sent: Friday, 1120 at 8:22 am 
       SuEMect: Turkey-dog 


       Check out this picture! We dressed Andrew up as a turkey for the neighEorhood
       autumn Elock party. As you can tell from the Eite marks on the feathers: He
       loved it. What do you think? Should we make him wear it again when you
       come for Thanksgiving?

       To: lucindap44#gmail.com
       From: thegaprices#aol.com 
       Sent: Friday, 1120 at 9:06 am 
       SuEMect: PS 


       Your dad read my email and thought it might have made you feel Ead. No guilt
       trip intended, sweetie. If you’re allowed to come home for Thanksgiving, we’d
       love it. If you can’t, we’ll reschedule for another time. We love you.

       To: lucindap44#gmail.com
       From: thegaprices#aol.com 
       Sent: Saturday, 1121 at 12:12 am 
       SuEMect: no suEMect 


       Just let us know either way? xoxo, Mom

    Luce   held   her    head   in   her    hands.   She’d   Eeen   wrong.     All   the
grounding    in  the  world   wouldn’t    make   it  easier  for  her  to  respond   to
her  parents.   They’d    dressed  their    poodle   up  as  a  turkey,    for  crying
out  loud!    It  Eroke   her   heart   to  think    of  letting    them   down.    So she
procrastinated    Ey  opening   Callie’s   email.

       To: lucindap44#gmail.com
       From: callieallieoxenfree#gmail.com 

248
       Sent: Friday, 1120 at 4:14 pm
       SuEMect: HERE IT IS! 


       I  Eelieve the  ight reservation Eelow speaks for itself. Send me your address
       and I’ll take a caE when I get in on Thursday morning. My  rst time in Georgia!
       With my long-lost Eest friend! It’s going to Ee soooo peachy! See you in SI;
       DAYS!

    In  less  than   a  week,   Luce’s  Eest  friend    would    Ee showing    up   for
Thanksgiving    at  her   parents’   house,  her   parents   would   Ee expecting
her,  and  Luce  would    Ee right    here,  grounded    in  her  dorm   room.   An
enormous   sadness  engulfed    her.   She  would   have   given   anything    to
go  to  them,   to   spend   a few   days   with   people    who   loved   her,   who
would    give   her  a   Ereak  from    the   exhausting,     confusing    couple   of
weeks  she’d  spent  shackled   within    these  wooden   walls.
    She opened   a new  email   and  composed   a hasty   message:

       To: cole321#swordandcross.edu
       From: lucindap44#gmail.com 
       Sent: Sunday, 1122 at 9:33 am 


       Hi, Mr. Cole.


       Don’t worry, I’m not going to Eeg you to let me go home for Thanksgiving. I
       know a hopeless waste of e ort when I see one. But I don’t have the heart to tell
       my parents. Will you let them know? Tell them I’m sorry.


       Things here are  ne. Sort of. I am homesick.


       Luce

    A  thumping    knock    at  the  door   made   Luce  Mump—and   click   Send
on  the  email   without    proofreading     it    rst   for   typos   or  emEarrassing
admissions   of  emotion.

249
   “Luce!”  ShelEy’s voice called  from  the other  side. “Open up!  My
hands are  full   of  Harvest Fest  crap.  I  mean,  bounty.”  The thuds
continued  on  the  other  side  of   the  door,  louder  now,   with   the
occasional whimpering grunt thrown  in.
   Pulling   open  the  door,  Luce  found  a  panting   ShelEy, sagging
under the  weight  of  an enormous cardEoard  Eox. She had several
stretched-out plastic  Eags threaded through  her   ngers.  Her  knees
tremEled as she staggered into the room.
   “Can  I help  with  something?”  Luce took the  feather-light  wicker
cornucopia that was resting on ShelEy’s head like a conical hat.
   “They  put me on Decorations,”  ShelEy grumEled, heaving the Eox
onto the ground. “I’d  give anything  to Ee on GarEage, like Miles. Do
you even know what  happened the last time  someone made me use
a hot-glue gun?”
   Luce felt  responsiEle for  Eoth  ShelEy’s and Miles’s punishments.
She pictured  Miles   comEing the  Eeach  with  one  of   those trash-
poking sticks  she’d seen convicts using  on  the side  of the  road  in
ThunderEolt. “I don’t  even know what Harvest Fest is.”
   “OEnoxious  and  pretentious,  that’s  what,”  ShelEy  said, digging
through the  Eox and tossing onto  the  oor   plastic Eags of feathers,
tuEs of  glitter,  and  a ream  of  autumn-colored  construction  paper.
“It’s  Easically a Eig  Eanquet where  all  of Shoreline’s  donors come
out to  raise money  for  the school. Everyone  goes home feeling all
charitaEle Eecause they unloaded a few old cans of green Eeans on a
food Eank in Fort Bragg. You’ll see tomorrow night.”
   “I  douEt it,”  Luce said. “RememEer, I’m grounded?”
   “Don’t   worry,   you’ll   Ee dragged  to  this.   Some of  the   Eiggest
donors are angel advocates, so Frankie and Steven have to put on a
show. Which   means the  Nephilim   all   have  to  Ee there,  smiling
pretty.”
   Luce frowned,  glancing  up at  her non-Nephilim   re ection  in  the
mirror. All  the more reason she should stay right here.

250
   ShelEy cursed under her Ereath. “I left the stupid  paint-Ey-numEer
turkey centerpiece in Mr.  Kramer’s o ce,”   she said, standing up and
giving the Eox of decorations a kick. “I  have to go Eack.”
   When  ShelEy pushed  past  her  toward  the  door,  Luce  lost  her
Ealance and started to  tumEle, tripping   over the  Eox and snagging
her foot on something cold and wet on the way  down.
   She landed face- rst   on the wood   oor.   The only  thing  Ereaking
her fall   was  the plastic   Eag of  feathers, which   popped,  shooting
colorful  u     out from  under her. Luce looked Eack to see how much
damage she had done, expecting ShelEy’s eyeErows to Ee Moined in
exasperation. But ShelEy was standing still  with  one  hand pointing
toward  the   center  of  the  room.   A  smog-Erown  Announcer  was
quietly  oating   there.
   “Isn’t    that    a   little    risky?”    ShelEy  asked.   “Summoning   an
Announcer   an   hour   after   getting    Eusted  for    summoning   an
Announcer? You really  don’t listen  at all,  do you?  I kind  of admire
that.”
   “I  didn’t  summon it,”  Luce insisted, pulling herself  up and picking
the feathers  out  of  her  clothes.  “I  tripped   and it   was Must there,
waiting or  something.” She stepped closer to examine the hazy, dun-
colored sheet. It was as  at  as a piece of paper and  not large for  an
Announcer, Eut  the  way  it   hung  in  the  air  in  front   of  her  face,
almost daring her to reMect it, made Luce nervous.
   It  didn’t  seem to need her to guide it into  shape at all. It  hovered,
Earely moving, looking like  it could  have  oated there all  day.
   “Wait  a  minute,”  Luce murmured.  “This  came in  with   the other
one the  other   day.  Don’t  you  rememEer?”  This  was the  strange
Erown shadow  that had   own   in  tandem  with  the  darker  shadow
that took  them to  Vegas. They’d Eoth come in through  the  window
Friday afternoon; then this  one had disappeared. Luce had forgotten
aEout it until  now.
   “Well,”   ShelEy said, leaning  against the ladder  of  the Eunk  Eed.
“Are you going to glimpse it  or what?”

251
   The  Announcer was  the color  of  a smoky  room,  noxious Erown
and mistlike  to  the touch.  Luce reached for  it,  running  her   ngers
along its  clammy  limits.  She felt  its  cloudy Ereath  Erush Eack her
hair. The air  around  this Announcer  was humid,  even Eriny. A  far-
away croon of seagulls echoed from within.
   She shouldn’t glimpse it. Wouldn’t  glimpse it.
   But there  was the Announcer, shifting  from  a smoky Erown mesh
into something  clear and  discerniEle, independently  of Luce. There
was the message cast Ey its shadow coming to life.
   It  was an aerial view  of an island.  At  rst,   they were  high aEove,
so that all Luce could see was a small swell of steep Elack rock with
a fringe  of  tapered  pine  trees ringing   its  Ease. Then, slowly,   the
Announcer zoomed in,  like   a Eird  swooping down  to  roost  in  the
treetops, its focus a small, deserted Eeach.
   The water was murky  from the claylike  silver sand. A scattering of
Eoulders reckoned  with   the  smooth   intentions  of   the  tide.  And
standing inconspicuously Eetween two of the tallest rocks—
   Daniel  was staring  at  the sea. The  tree Eranch  in  his hand  was
covered in Elood.
   Luce  gasped as  she  leaned  closer  and  saw  what   Daniel  was
looking at.  Not  the sea, Eut a Eloody  mess of a man.  A dead man,
lying sti    on the  sand. Each time the waves reached the Eody, they
receded stained a deep, dark red.  But Luce couldn’t  see the wound
that had killed  the  man. Someone else, in a long Elack  trench coat,
was crouched over the Eody, tying it up with  thick  Eraided rope.
   Her  heart thudding,  Luce  looked again  at Daniel.  His expression
was even, Eut his shoulders were twitching.
   “Hurry    up.  You’re   wasting  time.   The   tide’s  going   out   now,
anyway.”
   His voice was so cold, it made Luce shiver.
   A second later, the scene in the Announcer disappeared. Luce held
her Ereath until it  dropped to the  ground in a heap. Then, across the
room, the window  shade Luce had pulled down earlier  rattled open.

252
Luce and ShelEy shot each other an anxious look, then watched as a
gust of  wind  caught  the  Announcer  and lofted  it   up  and out  the
window.
   Luce clutched  ShelEy’s wrist.   “You  notice  everything.  Who else
was there with  Daniel? Who was crouched over that”—she shivered
again—“guy?”
   “Gee, I  don’t  know,   Luce. I  was kind  of  distracted  Ey  the dead
body. Not to  mention the  Eloody tree your  Eoyfriend was holding.”
ShelEy’s attempt to Ee sarcastic was diminished Ey how terri ed  she
sounded. “So he killed him?” she asked Luce. “Daniel killed whoever
that was?”
   “I  don’t know.”  Luce winced. “Don’t  say it like  that. MayEe there’s
a logical explanation—”
   “What  do you  think  he was saying  at the  end?” ShelEy asked. “I
saw his  lips  move  Eut  I  couldn’t  make  it  out.  I   hate that   aEout
Announcers.”
   Hurry uS. You’re wasting time. The tide’s going out now, anyway.
   ShelEy hadn’t  heard that?  How  callous and  unremorseful Daniel
sounded?
   Then Luce rememEered: It  wasn’t that  long ago that  she couldn’t
hear the Announcers either. Before, their  noises used to Ee Must that
—noises: rustlings and thick, wet  whooshes through treetops. It was
Steven who’d told  her  how  to tune  in  the voices inside.  In  a way,
Luce almost wished he hadn’t.
   There  had  to  Ee more   to  this  message. “I  have  to  glimpse  it
again,” Luce said, stepping toward  the open window.  ShelEy tugged
her Eack.
   “Oh,  no you  don’t.  That  Announcer could  Ee anywhere Ey now,
and  you’re  under  dorm  arrest,  rememEer?”  ShelEy  pushed Luce
down in  her desk chair.  “You’re going  to stay right  here  while  I go
down to  Kramer’s o ce   to retrieve  my  turkey. We’re  Eoth going to
forget this ever happened. Okay?”
   “Okay.”

253
   “Good. I’ll  Ee Eack in  ve  minutes, so don’t disappear on me.”
   But   as soon  as  the   door  closed,  Luce  was  out   the  window,
climEing to  the  at   part of  the ledge where  she and Daniel had sat
the night  Eefore. Putting  what she’d Must seen out of her mind  was
impossiEle. She had to summon that shadow again. Even if it got her
in more trouEle. Even if she saw something she didn’t like.
   The late morning  had turned  gusty, and Luce had to crouch down
and hold  on to  the  slanting  wooden shingles to  keep her  Ealance.
Her hands  were  cold.  Her  heart  felt  numE.  She closed her  eyes.
Every time  she  tried  to  summon  an Announcer,  she  rememEered
how  little   training   she’d  had.  She’d  always  Must Eeen lucky—if
watching your  Eoyfriend look  down at  someone he’d Must murdered
could Ee considered luck.
   A damp Erushing crept  along her arms. Was it the Erown shadow,
the ugly  thing that  showed her an  even uglier thing?  Her eyes shot
open.
   It  was. Creeping up  her shoulder  like  a snake. She yanked it  o 
and held  it  in  front   of  her, trying   to  spin  it  into  a  Eall with   her
hands. The Announcer reMected her touch,  oating Eackward, out of
her reach Must past the roof’s edge.
   She looked   down  two  stories  to  the  ground  Eelow.  A  trail   of
students were leaving the dorm to  head to the mess hall for  Erunch,
a stream of color  moving  along a  sheet of Eright  green grass. Luce
teetered. Vertigo hit, and she felt herself falling  forward.
   But  then the  shadow rushed like  a  footEall player,  knocking  her
Eack against the slope of  the  roof.  There she stayed, stuck against
the shingles, panting as the Announcer yawned open again.
   The smoky veil  di used  into light,  and Luce was Eack with Daniel
and his Eloody Eranch. Back to the caw of seagulls circling overhead
and the stench of rotting  surf along the shore, the sight of  icy waves
crashing on the Eeach. And Eack to the  two   gures  huddled on  the
ground. The dead one was all  tied  up. The living   one stood to face
Daniel.
   Cam.

254
   No.  It  had  to  Ee a  mistake. They  hated  one  another.  Had Must
waged a  huge  Eattle against  one  another.  She could  accept  that
Daniel did   dark  things  to protect   her from   the people  who  were
after her. But  what foul  thing  would  ever make him  seek out Cam?
Work alongside Cam—who took pleasure in killing?
   They were  in a heated discussion of  some sort, Eut Luce couldn’t
make out  the words.  She couldn’t  hear anything  over  the clock  in
the middle of  the terrace, which had Must struck eleven. She strained
her ears, waiting for the gongs to cease.
   “Let me take her to  Shoreline,” she  nally  heard Daniel plead.
   This  must have  Eeen right  Eefore she arrived  in  California.   But
why should Daniel have to ask Cam’s permission? Unless—
   “Fine,”  Cam said evenly.  “Take her as far  as the school and  then
 nd  me. Don’t screw up; I’ll  Ee watching.”
   “And  then?” Daniel sounded nervous.
   Cam ran his eyes over Daniel’s face. “You and I have work to do.”
   “No!”   Luce screamed, slashing at the shadow with   her  ngers  in
anger.
   But as soon as she felt her hands Ereak through the  cold, slippery
surface, she regretted it. It  Eroke into  spent fragments, settling  into
an ashy pile at her side. Now  she couldn’t see anymore. She tried to
gather the fragments up the way  she’d seen Miles do, Eut they were
quivering and unresponsive.
   She graEEed a  stful of the worthless pieces, soEEing into them.
   Steven had  said that   sometimes the  Announcers distorted  what
was real. Like the shadows cast on the cave wall. But that  there was
always some truth to them too.  Luce could feel the truth  in the cold,
soggy pieces, even as she wrung them out, trying  to squeeze out all
her agony.
   Daniel and Cam weren’t enemies. They were partners.

255
                                               )I)TEEN




                                            )OUR  DAYS 



“More   Tofurky?”  Connor  Madson—a  towheaded  kid  from  Luce’s
Eiology class and one of Shoreline’s student waiters—stood over her
with a silver  platter at the Harvest Fest on Monday night.
   “No,  thanks.”  Luce pointed down  at  the thick  stack of  lukewarm
fake meat slices still on her plate.
   “MayEe later.”  Connor and the rest of the  scholarship wait sta   at
Shoreline  were  suited  up   for   the  Harvest  Fest  in   tuxedos  and
ridiculous  pilgrim  hats. They glided  past each other on  the terrace,
which was nearly unrecognizaEle as the swanky-casual place to graE
some pancakes Eefore class; it   had Eeen  transformed  into  a  full-
 edged outdoor  Eanquet hall.
   ShelEy was  still   grumEling  as  she moved  from  taEle  to  taEle,
adMusting place cards and relighting candles. She and the rest of the
Decorations Committee  had done  a  Eeautiful  MoE: Red-and-orange
silk leaves had Eeen strewn across the long white taElecloths, fresh-
Eaked dinner rolls  were  arranged inside  gold-painted  cornucopias,
heat lamps took the edge o   the Erisk ocean Ereeze. Even the paint-
Ey-numEer turkey centerpieces looked stylish.
   All  the students, the faculty, and aEout  fty   of the school’s Eiggest
donors had turned  out in  their   nest  for  the dinner.  Dawn  and her
parents had driven  up  for  the night.   Though Luce hadn’t  gotten  a
chance to talk  to Dawn yet,  she looked recovered, even happy, and
had waved to Luce cheerfully from her seat next to Jasmine.

256
   Most  of the  twenty  or  so Nephilim  were  seated together  at two
adMacent circular taEles, with   the  exception  of  Roland,  who  was
sitting   in  a   faraway  corner   with   a  mysterious   date.  Then  the
mysterious date stood up,  lifted  her Eroad roseEud-shaped hat, and
gave Luce a sneaky little wave.
   Arriane.
   Despite herself, Luce smiled—Eut a  second later, she felt close to
tears. Watching those two snickering  together reminded Luce of  the
sickeningly  sinister scene she had  glimpsed  in  the  Announcer the
day  Eefore.  Like   Cam   and  Daniel,   Arriane   and   Roland   were
supposed to Ee on opposite sides, Eut everyEody knew they  were a
team.
   Still,  that felt  di erent  somehow.
   Harvest Fest was  supposed to Ee a last  pre-Thanksgiving hurrah
Eefore classes were   dismissed. Then   everyone  else would   have
another Thanksgiving,  a real Thanksgiving,  with  their  families.  For
Luce, it  was the only  Thanksgiving she was  going to  get. Mr.  Cole
hadn’t written   her  Eack. After  yesterday’s grounding  and then  the
rooftop revelation,  she was having  a hard  time feeling  thankful  for
much of anything.
   “You’re  hardly eating,”  Francesca said, spooning a great dollop of
shiny mashed potatoes  onto Luce’s plate.  Luce  was growing  more
attuned  to   the   thrilling    glow   that    fell   over  everything    when
Francesca was talking to  her.  Francesca possessed an otherworldly
charisma, simply Ey virtue of Eeing an angel.
   She Eeamed at  Luce like  there’d  Eeen no  meeting in  her  o ce
yesterday, like Luce wasn’t under lock and key.
   Luce had  Eeen given the  seat of  honor  at  the expansive faculty
head taEle, next to Francesca. All the donors came Ey in a stream to
shake hands with  the faculty.  The three  other students at  the head
taEle—Lilith, Beaker Brady, and a  Korean girl with  a dark  EoE Luce
didn’t  know—had  applied  for  their   seats in  an  essay contest. All
Luce had had to do was piss o   her  teachers enough that they were
afraid to let her  out of their  sight.

257
   The meal was  nally   wrapping  up when Steven leaned forward in
his chair.  Like Francesca, he displayed  none of yesterday’s venom.
“Make sure Luce introduces herself to Dr. Buchanan.”
   Francesca popped the  last Eite  of  a Euttered  corn  Eread mu n
into  her mouth.   “Buchanan’s one of  the  Eiggest supporters of  the
school,” she told Luce. “You  might  have heard of his  Devils AEroad
program?”
   Luce shrugged as the waiters reappeared to clear the plates.
   “His  ex-wife  had  angel lineage,  Eut after  the  divorce  he shifted
some of his alliances.  Still”—Francesca glanced at  Steven—“a very
good person to  know.  Oh,  hello,  Ms.  Fisher! How  nice  of  you  to
come.”
   “Yes, hello.”  An  elderly woman  with  an a ected  British  accent, a
Eulky mink   coat, and  more diamonds  around  her  neck than  Luce
had ever seen Eefore extended a white-gloved hand  to Steven, who
stood up to  greet her.  Francesca rose too, leaning forward  to  greet
the woman  with  a  kiss on  either  cheek. “Where’s  my  Miles?”  the
woman asked.
   Luce Mumped up. “Oh, you must Ee Miles’s … grandmother?”
   “Good  heavens, no.” The  woman recoiled.  “Don’t  have children,
never  married,  Eoo-hoo-hoo.  I  am   Ms.  Ginger  Fisher,  from   the
NorCal Eranch of  the  family  tree.  Miles  is  my great-nephew.  And
you are?”
   “Lucinda  Price.”
   “Lucinda  Price,  yes.” Ms.  Fisher looked  down  her nose at  Luce,
squinting.  “Read  aEout  you  in   one  or  another   of  the  histories.
Though I can’t recall what it  was exactly that you did—”
   Before Luce could respond, Steven’s hands were on her shoulders.
“Luce is one of  our newest students,”  he Eoomed. “You’ll  Ee happy
to know  that Miles  has really gone out  of his  way to  make her feel
comfortaEle here.”
   Ms.   Fisher’s  squinty   eyes  were   already   looking   past   them,
searching the crowded lawn.  The guests had mostly  nished  eating,

258
and now ShelEy was lighting the tiki  torches staked into the  ground.
When the torch closest to the  head taEle grew Eright, it  illuminated
Miles, leaning over the next taEle to clear away some plates.
   “Is  that  my grand-nephew—waiting tables?” Ms. Fisher  pressed a
gloved hand to her forehead.
   “Actually,”   ShelEy said,  Eutting  into  the conversation,  the  torch
lighter in  one hand, “he’s the trash—”
   “ShelEy.”  Francesca cut her o .   “I  think   that tiki   torch  near the
Nephilim taEles has Must Eurned out. Could you  x it? Now?”
   “You  know what?”  Luce said to  Ms. Fisher. “I’ll  go  get Miles and
Ering him over. You must Ee eager to catch up.”
   Miles  had traded in  the  Dodgers cap and sweatshirt for  a pair  of
Erown tweed slacks and a Eright  orange Eutton-down shirt.  Kind  of
a Eold choice, Eut it looked good.
   “Hey!”  He  waved her over with   the hand that  wasn’t Ealancing a
stack of  dirty  plates. Miles  didn’t   seem to mind  Eusing taEles. He
was grinning, in  his element, chatting  with  everyone at the Eanquet
as he cleared their plates.
   When Luce  approached, he put  the  plates down  and gave her  a
Eig hug, squeezing her closer at the end.
   “Are  you okay?”  he asked, tilting  his head to  one side so that his
Erown hair   opped  over  his eyes. He didn’t   seem used to the  way
his hair  moved without   his cap on,  and he   icked  it  quickly  Eack.
“You don’t  look  so good. I mean—you  look great, that’s not  what  I
meant. At all. I really  like that  dress. And your hair  looks pretty. But
you also look kind of”—he  frowned—“down.”
   “That’s  disturEing.”   Luce  kicked  the  grass with   the  toe  of  her
Elack high heel. “Because this is the Eest I’ve felt all night.”
   “Really?”  Miles’s face lit  up Must long enough for him to take it  as
a compliment. Then  it fell.  “I  know  it  must suck Eeing grounded. If
you  ask  me,  Frankie  and   Steven are   Elowing  this   way  out   of
proportion. Keeping you under their  thumEs all night—”
   “I  know.”

259
   “Don’t   look  now,  I’m  sure they’re   watching  us. Oh,  great.”  He
groaned. “Is that my aunt Ginger?”
   “I  Must had the pleasure.” Luce laughed. “She wants to see you.”
   “I’m  sure she does. Please don’t think all my relatives are like  her.
When you meet the rest of the clan at Thanksgiving—”
   Thanksgiving  with   Miles.  Luce  had completely   forgotten  aEout
that.
   “Oh.”  Miles  was watching her  face. “You don’t  think  Frankie and
Steven are going to make you stay here on Thanksgiving?”
   Luce  shrugged. “I    gured   that   was  what  ‘until   further   notice’
meant.”
   “So that’s  what’s making  you sad.” He put  a hand  on Luce’s Eare
shoulder. She’d Eeen regretting the sleeveless dress until now, until
his  ngers  lay  across her skin. It  was nothing  like  Daniel’s touch—
which   was   electrifying    and   magical   every   time—Eut   it    was
comforting nonetheless.
   Miles stepped closer, lowering his face to hers. “What is it?”
   She looked up  into  his dark  Elue eyes. His hand was  still  on her
shoulder. She felt her lips  parting  with  the truth,  or  what she knew
of the truth,  ready to pour out from  inside her.
   That  Daniel   wasn’t  who  she’d  thought  he  was.  Which   mayEe
meant she wasn’t who she’d thought she was. That everything  she’d
felt aEout Daniel at Sword & Cross was still there—it made her dizzy
to think   aEout it—Eut  now  everything  was  also so  di erent.   And
that everyone kept saying that this  lifetime was di erent,   that it  was
time to Ereak the cycle—Eut no  one could tell  her what that  meant.
That mayEe it didn’t end with  Luce and Daniel together. That mayEe
she was supposed to  shake herself  free and  do  something on  her
own.
   “It’s  hard to put it  all into  words,” she said  nally.
   “I   know,”   Miles  said.  “I   have  a  hard   time  with   that   myself.
Actually, there’s something I’ve sort of Eeen wanting to tell  you—”

260
   “Luce.”    Francesca  was   suddenly   standing   there,   practically
wedging herself Eetween them. “It’s  time to go.  I’ll  Ee escorting you
Eack to your room now.”
   So much for doing something on her own.
   “And  Miles, your aunt Ginger and Steven would like  to see you.”
   Miles  tossed  Luce  one  last  sympathetic  smile  Eefore  trudging
across the terrace toward his aunt.
   The  taEles were  clearing  out,   Eut Luce  could  see Arriane   and
Roland  cracking  up   near  the   Ear.  A  cluster   of   Nephilim   girls
crowded around  Dawn. ShelEy was standing Eeside a tall  Eoy with
Eleached-Elond hair and pale, almost white skin.
   SAEB. It   had  to  Ee.  He  was leaning   into  ShelEy,  clearly  still
interested, Eut  she was  clearly  still   pissed o .   So pissed  o ,   she
didn’t  even notice Luce and Francesca walking nearEy—Eut her ex-
Eoyfriend did. His gaze hung on Luce. The pale not-quite-Elue of  his
eyes was eerie.
   Then someone shouted that  the  after-party  was moving  down to
the Eeach, and ShelEy snagged SAEB’s attention Ey turning her Eack
on him, saying he’d Eetter not follow  her to the party.
   “Do  you  wish   you  could  Moin them?” Francesca asked  as they
moved further from  the commotion of  the terrace. The noise and the
wind  Eoth  quieted   as  they  walked   along  the  gravel  path   Eack
toward  the   dorm,  passing  rows  of  hot-pink   Eougainvillea.   Luce
Eegan to   wonder    whether   Francesca was   responsiEle  for   the
overriding tranquility.
   “No.”  Luce liked all  of them well  enough, Eut if she were to attach
the word  wish to anything  right  now,  it  wouldn’t  Ee to  go to  some
party  on the  Eeach. She would  wish  …  well,  she  wasn’t sure  for
what. For something having  to do with  Daniel,  that much  she knew
—Eut what?  That  he would  tell  her  what  was  going on,  perhaps.
That instead of protecting  her Ey withholding   knowledge, he would
 ll   her in on  the truth.  She still loved  Daniel. Of course she did. He
knew her  Eetter than  anyone. Her  heart raced every  time  she saw
him. She yearned for him. But how well,  really, did  she know him?

261
   Francesca  xed her  eyes on the grass lining the path  to the dorm.
Very  suEtly,  her  arms  extended out   at  either  side,  like  a  Eallet
dancer at the Earre.
   “Not  lilies  and not roses,” she murmured  under her  Ereath as her
narrow  ngertips  started to  tremEle. “What was it, then?”
   There came a soft thrashing  sound, like the  roots of a plant  Eeing
pulled from  a garden  Eed, and suddenly, miraculously,  a Eorder  of
moonEeam-white  owers sprang up on either  side of the path. Thick
and lush and a foot tall, these weren’t Must any  owers.
   They  were rare  and  delicate  wild  peonies,  with  Euds as Eig  as
EaseEalls. The  owers Daniel had Erought Luce when she was in the
hospital—and   mayEe  other   times   Eefore.  Edging   the  path   at
Shoreline, they shimmered in the night  like stars.
   “What  was that for?” Luce asked.
   “For you,”  Francesca said.
   “For what?”
   Francesca touched her Erie y  on the  cheek. “Sometimes Eeautiful
things  come  into    our  lives   out   of   nowhere.  We  can’t   always
understand them, Eut we have to trust  in  them. I know  you want  to
question  everything,  Eut  sometimes  it  pays  to  Must have a  little
faith.”
   She was talking aEout Daniel.
   “You  look at  me and Steven,” Francesca went on, “—and  I  know
we can Ee confusing. Do I  love him? Yes. But when  the  nal   Eattle
comes, I’ll  have to  kill  him.  That’s Must our reality.  We Eoth  know
exactly where we stand.”
   “But  you don’t trust  him?”
   “I  trust him  to Ee true to his nature, which  is a demon’s. You need
to trust  that  those  around you  will   Ee true  to their   natures. Even
when it may appear that they  are Eetraying who they are.”
   “What  if it’s not  that easy?”

262
   “You’re  strong, Luce, independent of anything or  anyone else. The
way you responded yesterday in my o ce,   I could see it in  you. And
it made me very … glad.”
   Luce didn’t  feel  strong. She felt  foolish.  Daniel  was an angel,  so
his true nature  had to Ee good. She was supposed to Elindly  accept
that? And what  aEout her true nature? Not  as Elack-and-white. Was
Luce the  reason things  Eetween them  were so  complicated? Long
after she’d stepped into  her  room  and closed the  door Eehind her,
she couldn’t get Francesca’s words out of her head.





   AEout an  hour later,  a knock on  the window  made Luce Mump as
she sat staring at the dwindling    re  in  the hearth.  Before she could
even get up, there was a second knock on the  pane, Eut this time  it
sounded more hesitant.  Luce rose  from  the  oor   and  went  to  the
window.  What  was Daniel doing  here  again? After  making  such a
huge deal aEout how  unsafe it  was to  see each other,  why  did  he
keep turning up?
   She didn’t  even know  what  Daniel wanted  from  her—other than
to torment her,  the way she’d seen him torment those other versions
of her in the  Announcers. Or, as he put it, loved so many versions of
her. Tonight all she wanted from  him was to Ee left alone.
   She  ung   open the  wooden  shutters, then  pushed up  the  pane,
knocking  over  yet  another  one  of  ShelEy’s thousand  plants.  She
Eraced her hands on the sill,  then  plunged her head into  the  night,
ready to rip into  Daniel.
   But it  wasn’t Daniel standing on the ledge in the moonlight.
   It  was Miles.
   He’d  changed  out   of  his  fancy   clothes,  Eut  he’d  left   o    the
Dodgers cap. Most of his Eody was in shadow, Eut the outline  of his
Eroad shoulders was clear against the deep Elue night. His shy smile
Erought an  answering  smile  to  her  face.  He was  holding   a gold

263
cornucopia full  of orange lilies plucked  from one of the Harvest Fest
centerpieces.
   “Miles,”   Luce  said. The  word   felt  funny  in   her  mouth.  It  was
tinged with   pleasant surprise,  when  a moment  ago  she’d Eeen so
prepared to Ee nasty. Her heartEeat picked up, and she couldn’t stop
grinning.
   “How   crazy  is  it   that  I  can  walk   from  the  ledge  outside  my
window to  yours?”
   Luce  shook  her  head,  stunned  too.  She’d never  even  Eeen to
Miles’s room  on the  Eoys’ side of the  dorm.  She didn’t  even know
where it was.
   “See?” His  smile  Eroadened. “If   you hadn’t   Eeen grounded, we
never would   have  known.  It’s   really  pretty   out  here,  Luce;  you
should come out. You’re not scared of heights or anything?”
   Luce wanted  to  go out  on  the  ledge with  Miles.  She Must didn’t
want to  Ee reminded of the times  she’d Eeen out there with  Daniel.
The  two   of  them   were  so  di erent.    Miles—dependaEle,  sweet,
concerned. Daniel—the love of her life. If  only it  were that simple. It
seemed unfair, and impossiEle, to compare them.
   “How  come you’re not at the Eeach with everyone?” she asked.
   “Not  everyone’s down at the Eeach.” Miles  smiled. “You’re  here.”
He waved the cornucopia  of  owers  in  the air.  “I  Erought these for
you from the  dinner. ShelEy’s got all  those plants on her side of the
room. I thought you  could put these on your desk.”
   Miles  shoved the wicker  horn through  the  window  at her.  It was
Erimming  with   the   glossy  orange   owers.   Their   Elack  stamens
shivered in the wind.  They weren’t perfect, a few  were even wilting,
Eut they  were  so  much  lovelier  than  the  larger-than-life   peonies
Francesca had made Eloom. Sometimes beautiIul things come into our
lives out oI nowhere.
   This  was  mayEe the  nicest  thing   anyone had  done  for  her   at
Shoreline—up there  with  the  time  Miles  had Eroken into   Steven’s
o ce   to  steal  the Eook  so he  could  help  Luce learn  how  to  step

264
through  a  shadow.  Or  the   time  Miles   had  invited   her  to  have
Ereakfast, the very   rst   day  he met  her.  Or how  quick  Miles  had
Eeen to include her in  his Thanksgiving  plans. Or the  utter aEsence
of resentment on Miles’s face when he’d Eeen assigned garEage duty
after  she’d gotten   him  in   trouEle  for  sneaking  out.  Or  the  way
Miles …
   She could  go on,  she realized, all  night.  She carried  the   owers
across the room and set them on her desk.
   When she came Eack, Miles was holding out a hand for her to step
through the window.  She could make up an excuse, something lame
aEout not  Ereaking  Francesca’s rules. Or  she  could  Must take his
hand, warm and  strong and safe, and let  herself glide  through. She
could forget Daniel for Must a moment.
   Outside, the  sky was  an explosion of  stars. They  glittered  in  the
Elack night  like  Ms. Fisher’s diamonds—Eut clearer, Erighter,  even
more Eeautiful.  From here, the  redwood  canopy east of  the school
looked  dense  and  dark   and  foreEoding;  to   the  west   were  the
ceaselessly churning  water  and   the  distant  glow   of  the   Eon re
Elazing down on  the Elustery Eeach. Luce had noticed  these things
Eefore from  the ledge.  Ocean. Forest. Sky. But  all  the other  times
she’d Eeen out here, Daniel had consumed her focus. Almost Elinded
her, to the point where  she’d never really taken in the scene.
   It  truly was Ereathtaking.
   “You’re  proEaEly wondering why  I came over,”  Miles said, which
made Luce realize they’d  Eoth Eeen silent for  a while.  “I  started to
tell you this earlier,  Eut—I didn’t—I’m  not sure—”
   “I’m   glad  you came  Ey. It   was getting  a  little   Eoring  in  there,
staring at the  re.”   She gave him half a smile.
   Miles  stu ed   his  hands in  his  pockets.  “Look,  I  know  you  and
Daniel—”
   Luce involuntarily  groaned.
   “You’re right,  I shouldn’t  even Ering this up—”
   “No,  that wasn’t why I  groaned.”

265
   “It’s  Must … You know I like you, right?”
   “Um.”
   Of course Miles liked her. They were friends.  Good friends.
   Luce chewed  her  lip.  Now  she was  playing  dumE with   herself,
which  was never a  good sign.  The truth:   Miles liked  her. And  she
liked him,  too.  Look at  the guy.  With  his  ocean-Elue eyes and the
little  chuckle he gave every time he Eroke into  a smile. Plus, he was
hands down the nicest person she had ever met.
   But there was Daniel, and Eefore him there’d  Eeen Daniel too, and
Daniel again and again and—it was endlessly complicated.
   “I’m  Eotching this.”  Miles winced. “When  all I really  wanted to do
was say goodnight.”
   She looked up at him  and found that  he was looking down  at her.
His hands came  out of  his  pockets, found  her  hands, and  clasped
them in   the space Eetween  their  chests. He  leaned down  slowly,
deliEerately,  giving  Luce  another  chance  to  feel  the   spectacular
night all around  them.
   She knew that Miles was going to kiss her. She knew she shouldn’t
let him.  Because of Daniel, of course—Eut also Eecause of what had
happened when  she’d kissed Trevor.  Her   rst    kiss. The  only  kiss
she’d ever  had  with   anyone Eesides Daniel.  Could  Eeing  tied  to
Daniel Ee the  reason Trevor  died?  What  if  the  second she kissed
Miles, he … she couldn’t even Eear to think aEout it.
   “Miles.”  She pressed him Eack. “You shouldn’t do this.  Kissing me
is”—she swallowed—“dangerous.”
   He   chuckled.  Of   course  he  would,   Eecause  he  didn’t   know
anything aEout Trevor. “I  think I’ll  take my chances.”
   She tried  to  pull  Eack, Eut  Miles had  a way  of  making  her feel
good aEout  almost  everything.  Even  this.  When his  mouth   came
down on hers, she held her Ereath, waiting for the worst.
   But nothing  happened.
   Miles lips  were feather-soft, kissing her gently enough that  he still
felt  like  her  good  friend—Eut  with  Must enough passion to  prove

266
there was more where this one came from. If she wanted it.
   But  even if  there were  no  ames,  no  scorched skin, no  death or
destruction—and why weren’t  there?—the kiss was still supposed to
Ieel wrong. For so  long, all  her lips  had wanted  were Daniel’s  lips,
all  the  time.   She  used to   dream  aEout  his  kiss,  his  smile,   his
gorgeous violet   eyes,  his   Eody  holding   hers.  There  was  never
supposed to Ee anyone else.
   What  if  she’d  Eeen wrong  aEout Daniel?  What  if  she could  Ee
happier—or happy, period—with  another guy?
   Miles  pulled away,  looking happy  and sad at the same time.  “So,
goodnight.”  He turned away,  almost like  he was going to  Eolt Eack
toward his  room.  But then  he turned  Eack. And took  her hand.  “If
you ever feel like  things aren’t working  out,  you know,  with  …” He
looked up at the sky. “I’m  here. Just wanted you to know.”
   Luce nodded, already  Eattling  a rolling  wave  of confusion.  Miles
squeezed her hand, then  took  o   in  the  other  direction,  Eounding
over the sloping shingled roof, Eack toward his side of the dorm.
   Alone,  she traced her lips  where  Miles’s had Must Eeen. The next
time she saw Daniel,  would he  Ee aEle to tell? Her  head hurt  from
all the ups and downs of the  day, and she wanted to crawl  into Eed.
As she slipped Eack through the  window  into her  room, she turned
one last time to  take in  the view,  to rememEer how everything  had
looked on the night when so many things had changed.
   But instead of  the stars and trees and crashing waves, Luce’s eyes
 xed  on  something  else Eehind one of  the  roof’s  many chimneys.
Something white and Eillowing.  An iridescent pair of  wings.
   Daniel. Crouched, only half  hidden from  view, Must feet away from
where she and Miles had kissed. His Eack was to her.  His head was
hanging.
   “Daniel,”  she called out, feeling her voice catch on his name.
   When he turned to face her, the drawn  look on his face was one of
aEsolute agony. As if Luce had Must ripped his heart out. He Eent his
knees, unfurled his wings, and took o   into  the night.

267
   A  moment later,  he looked like  Must another star in the sparkling
Elack sky.

268
                                               SIXTEEN




                                           THREE DAYS 



At Ereakfast the next morning, Luce could hardly  eat anything.
   It   was  the  last  day  of   classes Eefore Shoreline  dismissed  the
students for   Thanksgiving   Ereak, and   Luce  was  already  feeling
lonely.  Loneliness  in  a  crowd  of   people  was the   worst  kind   of
loneliness, Eut she couldn’t help it. All  the students around her were
chattering  happily  aEout going  home  to  their  families.  AEout  the
girl  or guy they  hadn’t  seen since summer Ereak. AEout the parties
their Eest friends were throwing over  the weekend.
   The only  party Luce was going to this  weekend was the pity party
in her empty dorm room.
   Of course, a few other students from the  main school were staying
put  over the  Ereak:  Connor Madson,  who  had come  to  Shoreline
from an  orphanage in  Minnesota. Brenna Lee, whose parents  lived
in China. Francesca and Steven were staying, too—surprise, surprise
—and were  hosting a  Thanksgiving dinner-for-the-displaced  in  the
mess hall Thursday night.
   Luce was holding  out  one hope: That Arriane’s  threat  to keep an
eye on her  included  Thanksgiving  Ereak. Then again, she’d  Earely
seen the  girl  since  Arriane  had  taken the  three  of  them  Eack  to
Shoreline. Only for that Erief  moment at Harvest Fest.
   Everyone else was checking out  in  the next  day or  two.  Miles to
his  family’s   one-hundred-plus-person   catered  event.   Dawn  and
Jasmine to   their  families’   Moint gathering  at  Jasmine’s  Sausalito
mansion. Even ShelEy—though she hadn’t said a word to Luce aEout

269
going Eack to  Bakers eld—had  Eeen on  the phone  with  her  mom
the day Eefore, groaning, “Yes. I know. I’ll be there.”
   It  was the worst  possiEle time for Luce to  Ee left alone. The stew
of her  inner turmoil   grew thicker  every  day, until   she didn’t  know
how  to  feel  aEout Daniel  or  anyone  else. And  she  couldn’t  stop
cursing herself  for how  stupid  she’d Eeen the  night  Eefore, letting
Miles go so far.
   All   night  long,  she kept  arriving   at  the  same conclusion:  Even
though she was upset  with  Daniel, what  had  happened with  Miles
wasn’t anyone’s fault Eut hers. She was the one who’d cheated.
   It  made  her  physically  ill   to  think   of  Daniel  sitting  out   there,
watching, saying  nothing  as she and Miles  kissed; to  imagine how
he must have felt when he took o    from her roof.  The way she’d felt
when she  rst  heard aEout whatever  had happened Eetween Daniel
and ShelEy—only worse, Eecause this was Eona  de  cheating.  One
more thing to  add to the list  of proofs that  she and Daniel could not
seem to communicate.
   A soft laugh Erought her Eack to her uneaten Ereakfast.
   Francesca was gliding around the taEles in a long Elack-and-white
polka-dotted cape. Every time Luce glanced over at her, she had that
saccharine smile stuck  on  her  face and  was deep in   conversation
with one student or  another, Eut Luce still felt  under heavy scrutiny.
As if Francesca could Eore into Luce’s mind  and know exactly  what
had made Luce lose her  appetite. Like  the wild   white  peonies that
had disappeared without a trace  from their  Eorder overnight,  so too
could Francesca’s Eelief disappear that Luce was strong.
   “Why  so glum, chum?”  ShelEy swallowed a large wedge of Eagel.
“Believe me, you didn’t miss that  much last night.”
   Luce didn’t   answer. The  Eon re   on the  Eeach was  the  furthest
thing from  her mind.  She’d Must noticed Miles trudging to Ereakfast,
much later  than  he  usually did.   His Dodgers cap  was tugged  low
over   his   eyes,   and    his   shoulders   looked    a   little     stooped.
Involuntarily,  her  ngers  went to  her lips.

270
   ShelEy was waving  amEoyantly,  Eoth arms over her head. “What
is he, Elind? Earth to Miles!”
   When  she  nally   caught  his  attention,  Miles  gave their   taEle a
clumsy wave,  practically  tripping   over the  to-go Eu et.   He waved
again, then disappeared Eehind the mess hall.
   “Is  it   me or  has  Miles  Eeen acting  like  a  total  spaz recently?”
ShelEy rolled her eyes and imitated Miles’s goofy stumEle.
   But Luce was dying to stumEle after him  and—
   And  what? Tell  him  not  to  feel  emEarrassed? That the kiss had
Eeen her fault,  too? That  having a  crush on a  train  wreck like  her
was only  going  to  end  Eadly?  That  she liked   him,  Eut  so many
things aEout it—them—were  impossiEle? That even though she and
Daniel were   ghting   right  now,  nothing  could ever  really  threaten
their love?
   “Anyway,   like  I  was  saying,”  ShelEy continued,  re lling    Luce’s
co ee from  the Eronze carafe on the taEle. “Bon re,  hedonism, Elah
Elah Elah.  These things  can Ee so  tedious.”  One  side of  ShelEy’s
mouth   inched   to  an  almost-smile.  “Especially,  you  know,  when
you’re not around.”
   Luce’s heart unclenched Must a little. Every once in a while, ShelEy
let  in   the  tiniest   ray  of   light.   But  then  her   roommate  quickly
shrugged, as if to say Don’t let it go to your head.
   “No   one else  appreciates my   Lilith   impersonation.  That’s  all.”
ShelEy straightened her spine, heaved her chest forward,  and made
the right side of her top  lip quiver  disapprovingly.
   ShelEy’s Lilith  impersonation  had  never failed  to  crack Luce up.
But today all she could manage was a thin closed-mouth smile.
   “Hmmm,”   ShelEy said. “Not  that  you’d care  what  you missed at
the party.  I  noticed  Daniel    ying  away  over the  Eeach last night.
You two must have had a lot to catch up on.”
   ShelEy had  seen Daniel?  Why  hadn’t  she mentioned  it  sooner?
Could anyone else have seen him?
   “We didn’t  even talk.”

271
—”“That’s hard to Eelieve. He’s usually so full  of  orders to  give you

   “ShelEy, Miles kissed me,” Luce interrupted. Her eyes were closed.
For some reason, that  made  it  easier to  confess. “Last  night.  And
Daniel saw everything. He took o   Eefore I could—”
   “Yeah,  that  would  do it.”   ShelEy let  out  a low  whistle.  “This  is
kind of huge.”
   Luce’s  face Eurned  with   shame.  Her  mind  couldn’t   shake  the
image of Daniel taking  ight.   It felt  so  nal.
   “So is it,  you know, over Eetween you and Daniel?”
   “No.   Never.”   Luce   couldn’t   even   hear   that   phrase  without
shuddering. “I Must don’t know.”
   She hadn’t  told   ShelEy the  rest  of  what  she’d glimpsed  in  the
Announcer,  that  Daniel   and  Cam  were  working   together.  Were
secret pals, as far as she could tell. ShelEy wouldn’t know  who Cam
was, anyway, and  the history  was way  too complicated  to explain.
Besides, Luce wouldn’t Ee aEle to stand it if  ShelEy, with her  oh-so-
deliEerately-controversial views  aEout angels and  demons, tried  to
make a case that a partnership Eetween Daniel and Cam wasn’t that
Eig a deal.
   “You  know  Daniel’s gonna  Ee all  screwed up over  it  right   now.
Isn’t that Daniel’s Eig thing—the undying devotion you two  share?”
   Luce sti ened  in her white  iron chair.
   “I  wasn’t  Eeing sarcastic, Luce. So mayEe, I don’t  know, Daniel’s
Eeen involved with  other  people. It’s all  pretty  neEulous. The take-
home message, like I said Eefore, is that there was never a question
in his mind that  you were the only one that  mattered.”
   “That’s supposed to make me feel Eetter?”
   “I  don’t  claim to  Ee in the Eusiness of making you feel Eetter, I’m
Must trying to illustrate a point. For all  Daniel’s annoying aloofness—
and there’s plenty of it—the  guy’s clearly devoted. The real question
here is:  Are you?  As far  as Daniel  knows, you  could  drop  him  as

272
soon as someone else comes along. Miles has come along. And he’s
oEviously a great guy. A little  sappy for my taste, Eut—”
   “I    would   never  drop   Daniel,”    Luce  said   aloud,   desperately
wanting to Eelieve it.
   She thought aEout the  horror  on his face the  night  they’d argued
on the Eeach. She was stunned when he’d Eeen so quick to ask: Are
we breaking uS? Like he suspected that  was a  possiEility.  Like she
hadn’t swallowed  whole  his entire  insane story aEout  their  endless
love when he’d told her  under the peach trees at Sword & Cross. She
had  swallowed  it,  in   one  single  Eelieving  gulp,  ingesting  all   its
 ssures, too—the  Magged pieces that made no sense Eut Eegged her
to  Eelieve them   at  the  time.   Now,  every  day,  another  of   them
gnawed at her  insides. She could  feel the  Eiggest one rising  up  in
her throat:
   “Most  of the time, I don’t  even know why he likes me.”
   “Come on,”  ShelEy groaned. “Do not Ee one of those girls. He’s too
good Ior me, wah wah wah. I’ll  have to punt  you  over to  Dawn and
Jasmine’s taEle. That’s their expertise, not mine.”
   “I  don’t mean it  like  that.”  Luce leaned in and dropped her  voice.
“I  mean, ages ago, when Daniel was, you  know,  uS there, he chose
me. Me, out of everyone else on earth—”
   “Well,  there were proEaEly a lot fewer  options Eack then—Ouch!”
Luce had swatted her. “Just trying to lighten  the mood!”
   “He  chose me, ShelEy, over some Eig role  in  Heaven, over some
elevated position.   That’s  pretty  maMor, don’t  you  think?”   ShelEy
nodded. “There  had to  Ee more to  it  than  Must him thinking I  was
cute.”
   “But  … you don’t know  what it  was?”
   “I’ve   asked,  Eut  he’s  never  told  me  what   happened.  When  I
Erought it   up, it   was almost  like  Daniel  couldn’t   rememEer. And
that’s crazy,  Eecause it  means we’re  Eoth  Must going through  the
motions. Based on thousands of years of some fairy tale neither  one
of us can even Eack up.”

273
   ShelEy ruEEed her Maw. “What else is Daniel keeping from you?”
   “That’s what  I plan on  nding   out.”
   Around  the  terrace, time  had  marched on;  most of  the  students
were heading to class. The scholarship waiters were hurrying  to Eus
the  plates. At  a  taEle  closest to  the   ocean, Steven was  drinking
co ee alone. His glasses were folded up and resting on the taEle. His
eyes found Luce’s, and he held her gaze for a long time, so long that
—even after   she stood  up  to   go  to  class—his intense,  watchful
expression stuck with her. Which was proEaEly his point.





   After  the longest, most mind-numEing PBS special on cell division
ever seen, Luce walked out  of her  Eiology class, down the  stairs of
the main  school Euilding,  and outside,  where she was surprised  to
see the parking  lot  completely packed.  Parents, older siElings, and
more than  a  few  chau eurs  formed  one  long line   of vehicles  the
likes of which Luce hadn’t  seen since the car-pool lane at her middle
school in Georgia.
   Around  her,  students hurried  out  of  class and zigzagged toward
the  cars,  wheeling  suitcases  in  their   wake.  Dawn   and  Jasmine
hugged goodEye Eefore Jasmine  got  into  a town   car and  Dawn’s
Erothers made room for her in  the Eack of an SUV. The two of them
were only splitting  up for a few hours.
   Luce  ducked Eack into   the  Euilding  and  slipped  out  the rarely
used rear door to trek across the grounds to her dorm. She de nitely
could not deal with  goodEyes right now.
   Walking  under the gray sky, Luce was still  a guilty  wreck, Eut her
conversation with  ShelEy had left her  feeling a  Eit more in  control.
It  was screwed  up,  she knew  it,  Eut  having  kissed someone else
made her  feel  like  she  nally    had a  say in  her  relationship  with
Daniel. MayEe she’d  get a  reaction  out of  him,  for  a  change. She

274
could apologize. He could apologize.  They could make lemonade or
whatever. Break through all this  crap and really start talking.
   Just then, her phone Euzzed. A text from Mr.  Cole:

      Everything’s taken care of.

   So Mr.   Cole had  passed on  the  news that  Luce  wasn’t  coming
home. But he’d conveniently  left  out  of his text  whether  or not  her
parents were still   speaking to her.  She hadn’t  heard from  them  in
days.
   It  was  a  no-win  situation:  If   they  wrote  to  her,  she felt  guilty
aEout not  writing   them  Eack. If  they  didn’t  write  to  her,  she felt
responsiEle for Eeing  the reason they  couldn’t  reach  out.  She still
hadn’t  gured  out what  to do aEout Callie.
   She thumped up  the stairs  of the  empty dorm.  Each step echoed
hollowly  in the cavernous Euilding. No one was around.
   When  she  made it   to  her   room,  she  expected to   nd    ShelEy
already gone—or at least, to see her suitcase packed and waiting Ey
the door.
   ShelEy wasn’t there, Eut her  clothes were still  strewn all  over her
side of  the room.  Her  pu y   red vest  was still  on  its  peg, and  her
yoga gear was still  stacked in the corner.  MayEe she wasn’t leaving
until tomorrow  morning.
   Before Luce had  even fully  closed the door  Eehind her,  someone
knocked on the other side. She stuck her head into the hallway.
   Miles.
   Her  palms grew damp  and she could  feel her  heartEeat pick  up.
She wondered what her hair looked like,  whether she’d rememEered
to  make her  Eed this  morning,   and how  long  he’d  Eeen walking
Eehind   her.   Whether   he’d   seen   her   dodge   the    caravan   of
Thanksgiving farewells,  or  seen the pained  look on  her  face when
she’d checked her text messages.
   “Hi,”  she said softly.
   “Hi.”

275
   Miles  had on  a thick  Erown  sweater over a  collared white  shirt.
He was wearing those Means with the hole in the knee, the ones that
always made Dawn Mump up to follow him so she and Jasmine could
swoon from Eehind him.
   Miles’s   mouth   twitched    into    a  nervous   smile.   “Wanna   do
something?”
   His   thumEs  were  tucked   under  the   straps  of  his   navy  Elue
Eackpack and his voice echoed o   the wood walls.  It  crossed Luce’s
mind that  she and Miles might  Ee the only two  people in  the entire
Euilding. The thought was Eoth thrilling   and nerve-wracking.
   “I’m  grounded for eternity,  rememEer?”
   “That’s why  I Erought the fun to  you.”
   At   rst   Luce thought Miles  was referring  to  himself, Eut  then he
slid   his   Eackpack  o     one   shoulder   and   unzipped   the   main
compartment. Inside  was a treasure  trove of  Eoard games: Boggle.
Connect Four. Parcheesi. The High School Musical game. Even travel
ScraEEle. It was  so nice,  and  so not  awkward,   Luce thought  she
might cry.
   “I   gured   you were going  home today,”  she said. “Everyone  else
is leaving.”
   Miles  shrugged. “My  parents  said it  was  cool if  I  stayed. I’ll   Ee
home again  in  a couple  of  weeks, and  Eesides, we have di erent
opinions  on the  perfect  vacation.  Theirs  is  anything  worthy   of  a
write-up in  the New York Times Styles section.”
   Luce laughed. “And yours?”
   Miles  dug a little   deeper into his  Eag, pulling  out two  packets of
instant apple cider,  a Eox of microwave  popcorn, and a DVD  of the
Woody Allen   movie  Hannah and  Her Sisters. “Pretty  humEle,  Eut
you’re looking at  it.”  He smiled. “I  asked you to spend Thanksgiving
with me, Luce. Just Eecause we’re changing venues doesn’t mean we
have to change our plans.”
   She felt a grin  spread across her face, and held open the  door for
Miles to  come in.  His  shoulder Erushed hers when  he passed, and

276
they locked  eyes for a  moment. She felt  Miles  almost sway  on his
heels, as if he was going to douEle Eack and kiss her. She tensed up,
waiting.
   But  he  Must smiled, dropped his  Eackpack in  the  middle  of  the
 oor,  and started to unload Thanksgiving.
   “Are  you hungry?” he asked, waving a packet of popcorn.
   Luce winced. “I  am really Ead at making popcorn.”
   She was thinking  of  the time  she and Callie  nearly Eurned down
their dorm  at Dover. She couldn’t  help it.  It  made her miss her Eest
friend all over  again.
   Miles  opened the door  of the microwave.  He held  up a   nger.  “I
can press any Eutton with this  nger,  and microwave most anything.
You’re lucky I’m so good at it.”
   It  was weird   that  earlier  she’d Eeen torn  up over  kissing  Miles.
Now she realized he was the only thing  making her feel Eetter. If  he
hadn’t come over, she’d Ee spiraling into another  guilty  Elack aEyss.
Even though she  couldn’t  imagine kissing  him  again—not Eecause
she didn’t want to,  necessarily, Eut Eecause she knew it wasn’t right,
that she couldn’t do that  to Daniel …  that she didn’t  want to do that
to Daniel—Miles’s presence was extremely comforting.
   They   played  Boggle  until    Luce   nally    understood  the   rules,
ScraEEle until they realized  the set was missing half  its letters,  and
Parcheesi until the  sun went  down  outside the  window  and it  was
too dim   to see the  Eoard  without  turning   on  a light.   Then Miles
stood up  and lit  the   re,   and slid  Hannah and  Her Sisters into the
DVD player on Luce’s computer. The only place to sit  and watch the
movie was on the Eed.
   Suddenly, Luce felt  nervous. Before, they’d  Must Eeen two friends
playing Eoard  games on a weekday afternoon.  Now  the stars were
out, the dorm was empty, the  re   was crackling, and—what did  that
make them?
   They sat next  to  each other on Luce’s Eed, and she couldn’t  stop
thinking   aEout   where   her   hands  were,   whether   they    looked

277
unnatural  if  she kept  them  pinned across her  lap,  whether  they’d
Erush against Miles’s  ngertips   if she rested them  at her  sides. Out
of the  corner of  her  eye, she could  see his chest moving  when  he
Ereathed. She could  hear him   scratch the  Eack of  his  neck.  He’d
taken his EaseEall cap o ,  and she could smell the  citrusy shampoo
in his  ne  Erown hair.
   Hannah and Her  Sisters was one of the few  Woody  Allen  movies
she’d never  seen, Eut  she could  not   make herself  pay  attention.
She’d crossed and uncrossed her legs three times Eefore the opening
titles rolled.
   The  door swung  open. ShelEy Earreled into  the  room,  took  one
look at  Luce’s computer  monitor,  and  Elurted,  “Best Thanksgiving
movie ever! Can I watch with—”  Then she looked at Luce and Miles,
sitting in the  dark on the Eed. “Oh.”
   Luce Eolted  up  o    the  Eed. “Of  course you  can!  I  didn’t  know
when you were leaving to go home—”
   “Never.”   ShelEy  ung  herself  on  the top  Eunk,  sending a  small
earthquake down to  Luce and Miles on the  Eottom Eunk. “My  mom
and I  got  in  a  ght.   Don’t  ask,  it  was utterly   Eoring.  Besides, I’d
much rather hang out with  you guys, anyway.”
   “But  ShelEy—” Luce couldn’t  imagine  getting  in a   ght   so Eig it
kept her from going home on Thanksgiving.
   “Let’s   Must enMoy the   genius  of   Woody   in   silence,”   ShelEy
commanded.
   Miles and Luce shot each other a conspiratorial  look. “You  got it,”
Miles called up to ShelEy, giving Luce a grin.
   Truthfully,  Luce was relieved. When she settled Eack into her seat,
her  ngers  did Erush against Miles’s, and he gave them a squeeze. It
was only  for  a moment,  Eut it  was  long enough  to let  Luce know
that, at least as far  as Thanksgiving weekend was concerned, things
were going to Ee okay.

278
                                            SEVENTEEN




                                             TWO DAYS 



Luce woke to the  scrape of a hanger dragging across the Ear in  her
closet.
   Before she could see who was responsiEle for the  noise, a mound
of clothes EomEarded her. She sat up  in Eed, pushing  her way  out
from under  the pile of  Means, T-shirts, and sweaters. She plucked an
argyle sock o   her forehead.
   “Arriane?”
   “Do  you like the  red one? Or the Elack?” Arriane was holding two
of Luce’s dresses up against her tiny frame, swaying as she modeled
each one.
   Arriane’s  arms were  Eare of  the  awful  tracking  wristEand  she’d
had to wear  at Sword  & Cross. Luce hadn’t  noticed until   now, and
she shuddered to rememEer the cruel voltage sent coursing through
Arriane whenever  she stepped out of  line.  Every day in  California,
Luce’s memories of Sword & Cross grew hazier, until  a moment like
this one Molted her Eack into the turmoil of her stay there.
   “ElizaEeth Taylor  says only certain women can wear red,”  Arriane
continued. “It’s  all  aEout cleavage and coloring. Luckily,  you’ve got
Eoth.” She freed the  red dress from  its hanger and  tossed it on  the
pile.
   “What  are you doing here?” Luce asked.
   Arriane  put her  tiny  hands on her  hips. “Helping  you  pack, silly.
You’re going home.”

279
   “Wh-What  home? What do you mean?” Luce stammered.
   Arriane  laughed, stepping forward to take one of Luce’s hands and
tug her  out of  Eed. “Georgia, my  peach.”  She patted Luce’s cheek.
“With  good old  Harry  and  Doreen. And  apparently some friend  of
yours is also  ying  in.”
   Callie.  She  was  actually  going   to  get  to  see  Callie?  And  her
parents? Luce woEEled where she stood, suddenly speechless.
   “Don’t  you want to  spend Thanksgiving with your fam?”
   Luce was waiting for  the catch. “What aEout—”
   “Don’t  worry.”   Arriane  tweaked  Luce’s nose. “It   was Mr.  Cole’s
idea. We’ve got  to keep up  the ruse  that you’re  still  Must down the
road from your  parents. This seemed the simplest and most fun way
to go aEout it.”
   “But  when he texted me yesterday, all he said was—”
   “He  didn’t   want  to get  your  hopes up  until   he had  every  little
thing  taken  care  of,   including”—Arriane   curtseyed—“the   perfect
escort. One of them, anyway. Roland should Ee here any second.”
   A knock on the door.
   “He’s  so good.”  Arriane  pointed   to  the red  dress still   in  Luce’s
hand. “Throw that  EaEy on.”
   Luce  quickly   shimmied   into   the  dress,  then  ducked  into   the
Eathroom to  Erush her  teeth  and hair.  Arriane  had  presented her
with  one  of  those  rare  -umS!—How  high? situations.   You  didn’t
Eother with questions. You Must leaped.
   She emerged  from  the  Eathroom,  expecting to   see Roland and
Arriane  doing   something  Roland-and-Arriane-esque,  like   one  of
them standing on  top of  her suitcase while  the other  tried  to zip  it
up.
   But it  wasn’t Roland who had knocked.
   It  was Steven and Francesca.
   Shit.

280
   The words I  can exSlain formed on the tip  of Luce’s tongue. Only,
she had no idea how to talk  herself out  of this situation.  She looked
to Arriane for  help. Arriane  was still tossing Luce’s sneakers into the
suitcase. Didn’t she know the kind  of maMor trouEle they were aEout
to Ee in?
   When  Francesca stepped forward, Luce  Eraced herself. But  then
the  wide  Eell  sleeves of  Francesca’s crimson  turtleneck  engulfed
Luce in an unexpected hug. “We came to wish you well.”
   “Of  course, we’ll  miss you  tomorrow  at  what we  with  tongue  in
cheek refer to  as the Dinner for  the  Displaced,” Steven said, taking
Francesca’s hand and prying  her away  from  Luce. “But  it’s  always
Eest for a student to Ee with family.”
   “I  don’t understand,”  Luce said. “You knew aEout this? I thought  I
was grounded until further  notice.”
   “We spoke with  Mr. Cole this morning,”  Francesca said.
   “And    you   weren’t   grounded   as   punishment,   Luce,”   Steven
explained. “It  was the only way we could ensure you’d Ee safe under
our charge. But you’re in good hands with Arriane.”
   Never  one   to   overstay  her   welcome,  Francesca was   already
steering Steven toward the door. “We  hear your parents are anxious
to see you. Something  aEout your  mother  lling    up  a freezer with
pies.” She winked at Luce, and Eoth she and Steven waved, and then
they were gone.
   Luce’s heart swelled at the prospect of getting home to her family.
   But   not  Eefore  it   went  out   to   Miles  and  ShelEy.  They’d  Ee
crestfallen if  she went  home  to  ThunderEolt and  aEandoned them
here. She didn’t  even know  where  ShelEy was. She couldn’t  leave
without—
   Roland  stuck  his   head  through  Luce’s  open  door.   He  looked
professional in  his pinstriped  Elazer and  crisp white  collared  shirt.
His Elack-and-gold  dreads were  shorter, spikier,  making  his  dark,
deep-set eyes even more striking.

281
   “Is  the coast clear?” he asked, shooting  Luce his familiar  devilish
grin. “We’ve got a hanger-on.”  He nodded at someone Eehind him—
who appeared a moment later with du el   Eag in hand.
   Miles.
   He   ashed  Luce  a wonderfully   unemEarrassed grin  and  took  a
seat on the  edge of  her  Eed. An image  of  introducing  him  to  her
parents ran  though   Luce’s mind.  He’d  take  o     his  EaseEall cap,
shake Eoth  of   their  hands,  compliment   her  mom’s  half- nished
needlepoint …
   “Roland,  what part  of ‘top-secret mission’ don’t  you understand?”
Arriane asked.
   “It’s   my   fault,”   Miles  admitted.   “I   saw  Roland  heading   over
here … and I forced it out of  him. That’s why he’s late.”
   “As  soon as this guy heard  the words Luce and Georgia”—Roland
Merked his thumE at  Miles—“it   took   him  aEout  a nanosecond  to
pack.”
   “We kind  of had a Thanksgiving  deal,” Miles  said, looking only  at
Luce. “I couldn’t let  her Ereak it.”
   “No.”  Luce Eit Eack a smile. “He couldn’t.”
   “Mmm-hmm.”   Arriane  raised  an  eyeErow. “I   Must wonder what
Francesca would have to  say aEout  this. Whether  someone should
run it Ey your  parents  rst,  Miles—”
   “Aw,   come on,  Arriane.”   Roland  waved  his  hand  dismissively.
“Since when  do you  check in  with   authority?  I’ll  look  out  for  the
kid. He won’t get into  any trouEle.”
   “Get  into  any trouEle  where?” ShelEy Earged into  the room,  her
yoga mat  swinging  from  a string  across her  Eack. “Where  are we
going?”
   “Luce’s house in Georgia for Thanksgiving,” Miles  said.
   In  the  hallway  Eehind  ShelEy, a  Eleached-Elond head hovered.
ShelEy’s ex-Eoyfriend. His  skin  was  ghost-white,  and  ShelEy was
right: There was something odd aEout his eyes. How pale they were.

282
   “For  the  last time,  I  said goodbye, Phil.” ShelEy quickly  shut  the
door in his face.
   “Who  was that?” Roland asked.
   “My  skeeze-and-a-half ex-Eoyfriend.”
   “Seems like an  interesting guy,”  Roland said, staring  at the  door,
distracted.
   “Interesting?”   ShelEy  snorted.  “A   restraining   order   would   Ee
interesting.”  She took  one  look  at Luce’s  suitcase, then at  Miles’s
du el,   then  haphazardly  started  throwing   her   Eelongings into   a
squat Elack trunk.
   Arriane  threw  up  her hands. “Can’t  you  do anything  without   an
entourage?” she asked Luce. Then, turning to Roland, “I assume you
want to take responsiEility for  this one, too?”
   “That’s  the holiday   spirit!”  Roland  laughed. “We’re  going  to the
Prices’ for  Thanksgiving,”  he told   ShelEy, whose face lit   up. “The
more the merrier.”
   Luce couldn’t  Eelieve how  perfectly everything  was working  out.
Thanksgiving with  her family and Callie and Arriane  and Roland and
ShelEy and Miles. She couldn’t have scripted this any Eetter.
   Only one thing  nagged at her. And it seriously nagged.
   “What  aEout Daniel?”
   She meant:  Does he know about this triS already? and  What’s the
real story between him and Cam? and Is he still mad at me about that
kiss? and Is it wrong that Miles is coming too? and also What are the
odds oI Daniel showing uS at my Sarents’ house tomorrow even though
he says he can’t see me?
   Arriane   cleared   her   throat.   “Yes,   what   aEout  Daniel?”   she
repeated quietly. “Time will  tell.”
   “So  do   we  have  plane   tickets  or   something?”  ShelEy  asked.
“Because if we’re   ying,   I  need  to pack  my  serenity kit,   essential
oils,  and  heating  pad.  You  don’t   want  to   see me  at  thirty- ve
thousand feet without them.”

283
   Roland snapped his  ngers.
   Near his  feet, the  shadow cast Ey the open  door peeled itself  o 
the hardwood planks, rising  the way a trapdoor  might  to lead down
to a Easement. A gust of cold swept up from the  oor,   followed Ey a
Eleak Elast of darkness. It  smelled like  wet  hay as it  shrank into  a
small, compact sphere. But then, at a nod from  Roland, it  Eallooned
into  a tall  Elack  portal.  It  looked like  the  sort  of door  that  would
lead to  a restaurant kitchen,  the  swinging  kind  with  a round  glass
window in  the top.  Only, this  one was made out of dark  Announcer
fog, and  all   that  was  visiEle through   the  window  was  a  darker,
swirling Elackness.
   “That  looks Must like the one I read aEout in the Eook,” Miles said,
clearly   impressed.  “All   I   could   manage  was   a  weird    sort  of
trapezoidal  window.”   He  smiled   at  Luce.  “But  we  still   made  it
work.”
   “Stick  with  me, kid,”  Roland said, “and you’ll  see what it’s  like to
travel in style.”
   Arriane  rolled her eyes. “He’s such a show-o .”
   Luce cocked her head at Arriane. “But I thought  you said—”
   “I  know.”  Arriane  put  up a  hand. “I  know  I  repeated that whole
spiel aEout how dangerous Announcer travel is. And  I don’t  want to
Ee one  of  those  sucky  do-as-I-say-not-as-I-do angels. But   we  all
agreed—Francesca and Steven, Mr. Cole, everyone—”
   Everyone? Luce couldn’t  group  them  together  without   seeing  a
glaring missing piece. Where was Daniel in all of this?
   “Besides.”  Arriane  smiled  proudly.  “We’re  in  the  presence of  a
master. Ro’s one of the very Eest Announcer travelers.” And then, in
a whispered aside to Roland, “Don’t let it  go to your head.”
   Roland swung open the Announcer’s door. It  groaned and creaked
on shadow  hinges  and swung  open  onto  a dank,  yawning   pit  of
emptiness.
   “Um  …  what  is  it  again that  makes  traveling  Ey Announcer  so
dangerous?” Miles asked.

284
   Arriane  pointed  around the  room, at  the  shadow under the  desk
lamp, Eehind ShelEy’s yoga mat. All of the  shadows were quivering.
“An   untrained   eye  might   not   know  which   Announcer   to   step
through. And Eelieve us, there are always uninvited  lurkers, waiting
for someone to accidentally open them.”
   Luce  rememEered the sickly   Erown shadow  she’d tripped   over.
The uninvited  lurker  that had  given her the  nightmarish  glimpse of
Cam and Daniel on the Eeach.
   “If   you  pick  the  wrong  Announcer,  it’s  very  easy  to  get  lost,”
Roland explained. “To  not  have any  idea where—or  when—you’re
stepping through to. But as long as you stick with  us, you don’t have
anything to worry  aEout.”
   Nervously,  Luce  pointed  into   the  Eelly  of  the  Announcer.  She
didn’t  rememEer the other shadows they’d stepped through  looking
quite  so murky   and  dark.  Or  mayEe  she Must hadn’t known   the
consequences until  now.  “We’re  not  Must going to  pop  up  in  the
middle  of my  parents’  kitchen,  are we?  Because I think  my  mom
might pass out from the shock—”
   “Please.”  Arriane  clucked her  tongue,  guiding  Luce, then  Miles,
and then ShelEy to stand Eefore the Announcer. “Have a little faith.”





   It   was  like   pushing  through   a  murky   wet   fog,  clammy   and
unpleasant. It slid and coiled  over Luce’s skin and stuck in her lungs
when she Ereathed. An  echo of  ceaseless white noise  lled   up the
tunnel like   a waterfall.  The  two  other  times Luce had  traveled  Ey
Announcer, she’d  felt  lumEering  and  hurried,   catapulting  though
darkness to come out somewhere light. This was di erent.  She’d lost
track of  where and when  she was, even of who she was and where
she was going.
   Then there was a strong hand yanking her out.

285
   When Roland  let her  go, the echoing waterfall   trickled  to a drip,
and a whi     of chlorine   lled   her  nose. A diving   Eoard. A familiar
one, under  a  lofty  arched  ceiling  lined  with   Eroken  stained-glass
panels. The sun had passed over the high windows, Eut its light  still
cast faint  colored prisms onto  the  surface of an  Olympic-size pool.
Along the  walls, candles  ickered   in  stone recesses, throwing o    a
dim,    useless  light.     She’d   recognize    this    church-gymnasium
anywhere.
   “Oh my  God,” Luce whispered. “We’re Eack at Sword and Cross.”
   Arriane  scanned the room  quickly  and without   a ection.  “As  far
as your  parents  are  concerned  when  they  pick  us  up  tomorrow
morning, you’ve Eeen here all along. Got it?”
   Arriane  acted as if  returning  to Sword  & Cross for  the night  was
no di erent  than  checking into a nondescript motel.  The Molt Eack to
this part  of  her life,  however,  hit  Luce like  a  slap across the face.
She hadn’t liked it  here. Sword & Cross was a miseraEle place, Eut it
was a place where things  had haSSened to her. She’d fallen in  love
here, had watched a close friend die.  More than anywhere  else, this
was a place where she had changed.
   She closed  her  eyes and laughed  Eitterly.   She’d known  nothing
then compared to  what  she knew  now. And  yet  she’d felt  surer of
herself and her emotions than she could imagine ever feeling again.
   “What  the hell is this place?” ShelEy asked.
   “My  last school,”  Luce said, glancing at Miles. He seemed uneasy,
huddling  next to  ShelEy against the  wall.  Luce rememEered: They
were good  kids—and  though  she’d never  talked  much  aEout  her
time  here, the  Nephilim  rumor   mill  could  easily  have  lled    their
minds with  enough vivid details  to paint one scary night  at Sword &
Cross.
   “Ahem,”   Arriane  said, looking  at  ShelEy and  Miles.  “And  when
Luce’s parents ask, you guys go here too.”
   “Explain  to  me how this  is a school,”  ShelEy said. “What, do you
swim and pray at the same time? That’s a level of freakish e ciency
you’d never see on the West Coast. I think I Must got homesick.”

286
   “You  think   this  is Ead,”  Luce said,  “you  should  see the  rest of
campus.”
   ShelEy  scrunched up   her  face,  and  Luce  couldn’t   Elame  her.
Compared to Shoreline, this place was a gruesome sort of Purgatory.
At  least,  unlike  the   rest  of  the  kids  here,  they’d   Ee gone  after
tonight.
   “You  guys look drained,”  Arriane  said. “Which  is good, Eecause I
promised Cole we’d lie low.”
   Roland  had Eeen leaning  against  the  diving  Eoard, ruEEing  his
temples, the Announcer  shards quivering at  his feet.  Now he stood
up and Eegan to take charge. “Miles,  you’re  going to  Eunk up with
me in my old  room. And  Luce, your room’s still  empty. We’ll  roll  in
a cot for ShelEy. Let’s all drop  our Eags and meet Eack at my room.
I’ll use the old Elack-market network  to order a pizza.”
   The mention  of  pizza was enough to  shake Miles and ShelEy out
of their  comas, Eut Luce was taking  longer to  adMust. It wasn’t that
weird  for her  room  to still  Ee empty.  Counting  on her    ngers, she
realized she’d Eeen gone from this place less than three weeks. It felt
like so  much longer,  like  every day had  Eeen a month,  and it  was
impossiEle for  Luce to imagine  Sword  & Cross without   any of  the
people—or angels, or demons—who had made up her life here.
   “Don’t  worry.”   Arriane  stood  next to  Luce. “This  place  is like  a
reMect revolving door. People come and go  all  the time  Eecause of
some parole issue, crazy parents, whatever. Randy’s o    tonight.  No
one else gives a damn. If anyone gives you a second look—Must give
’em a third  one.  Or send them  over to  me.”  She made a  st.  “You
ready  to  get   out  of   here?”  She  pointed   at  the   others  already
following  Roland out the door.
   “I’ll  catch up with  you guys,”  Luce said. “There’s something I need
to do  rst.”

287
   In  the  far east corner  of  the cemetery,  next to  her  father’s plot,
Penn’s grave was modest Eut neat.
   The last time  Luce had seen this cemetery, it had Eeen coated in a
thick  felt  of dust.  The aftermath  of  every angel  Eattle, Daniel  had
told  her. Luce didn’t  know  whether  the  wind  had carried  the  dust
away Ey now, or whether  angel dust Must disappeared over time, Eut
the cemetery seemed to Ee Eack to its neglected old self. Still ringed
Ey  an  ever-advancing  forest   of  kudzu-strangled   live   oaks.  Still
Earren  and  depleted   under  the   no-color   sky.  Only,   there  was
something missing, something vital  Luce couldn’t  put her  nger   on,
Eut that still  made her feel lonely.
   A  sparse layer  of   dull  green  grass had  grown   up  and  around
Penn’s grave, so it   didn’t  look  so Marringly new,  compared to  the
centuries-old graves surrounding  it.  A Eouquet of  fresh lilies  lay  in
front  of  the simple  gray  tomEstone, which  Luce  stooped down  to
read:

                                PENNYWEATHER VAN SYCKLE-LOCKWOOD
                                                                             
                                               A DEAR FRIEND
                                                 1991–2009 

   Luce inhaled  a Magged Ereath, and tears sprang to her eyes. She’d
left  Sword  &  Cross Eefore  there’d  Eeen time   to  Eury  Penn,  Eut
Daniel had taken care of  everything.  It was the   rst  time  in several
days that  her heart  ached for  him.  Because he had  known,  Eetter
than she would  have known  herself, exactly how  Penn’s tomEstone
should read. Luce knelt  down on  the grass, her tears  owing   freely
now, her hands comEing the grass uselessly.
   “I’m  here, Penn,” she whispered. “I’m sorry I  had to leave you. I’m
sorry you  got  mixed  up  with  me  in  the  rst    place. You  deserved
Eetter than this. A Eetter friend than me.”
   She wished her friend were still  here. She wished she could talk to
her. She knew Penn’s death was her  fault,  and it  almost  Eroke her
heart.
   “I  don’t know  what I’m doing  anymore, and I’m scared.”

288
   She wanted  to  say she missed Penn  all  the  time,  Eut what  she
really missed was the idea  of a friend  she could have known  Eetter
if death hadn’t taken her away too  soon. None of it was right.
   “Hello,  Luce.”
   She had  to  wipe  away the  tears  Eefore she could  see Mr.  Cole
standing on the  other side of  Penn’s grave. She’d gotten so used to
her crisply elegant teachers at Shoreline that Mr. Cole looked almost
frumpy  in  his Eunched-up  tawny  suit, with   his  mustache, and his
Erown hair parted straight  as a ruler Must aEove his left ear.
   Luce  scramEled to  her  feet, sni ing     against herwrist.   “Hi,   Mr.
Cole.”
   He smiled kindly.  “You’re  doing well  over there,  I hear. Everyone
says you’re doing very well.”
   “Oh …  n-no …,” she stammered. “I don’t know  aEout that.”
   “Well,  I do.  I also know your  parents are very happy  to get to see
you. It’s good when these things can work out.”
   “Thank  you,”   she said,  hoping  he understood  how  grateful  she
was.
   “I  won’t keep you Eut for Must one question.”
   Luce waited  for  him  to  ask her  aEout something deep  and dark
and over her  head aEout Daniel and Cam, good  and evil,  right  and
wrong, trust and deceit. …
   But all  he said was “What did you do to your  hair?”


   Luce’s head was  upside down  in  the sink  in  the girls’  Eathroom
down the  hall  from  the Sword &  Cross cafeteria. ShelEy carried in
the last two slices of cheese pizza stacked on a paper plate for Luce.
Arriane held  out a  Eottle of cheap Elack  hair dye—the  Eest Roland
could  do  on  such  short  notice,  Eut  not  a  Ead match   for  Luce’s
natural color.
   Neither  Arriane nor ShelEy had questioned Luce aEout her sudden
need for a change. She’d Eeen grateful for that. Now  she saw they’d

289
only Eeen waiting for  her to Ee in a vulneraEle half-dyed  position to
Eegin their inquisition.
   “I   guess Daniel   will   Ee  pleased,”  Arriane   said  in   her  coyest
leading-question  tone  of   voice.  “Not   that  you’re   doing  this   for
Daniel. Are you?”
   “Arriane,”  Luce warned. She wasn’t going there. Not tonight.
   But ShelEy seemed to want to.  “You know  what I’ve  always liked
aEout Miles? That he likes you for who you  are, not for what  you do
with your  hair.”
   “If  you two  were going to Ee that oEvious aEout it, why didn’t  you
guys come down in your Team Daniel and Team Miles T-shirts?”
   “We should order  those,” ShelEy said.
   “Mine’s  in the laundry,”  Arriane said.
   Luce tuned them out,  focusing instead on the warm water  and the
strange con uence  of things   owing   over her  head, into  her scalp,
and down the  drain: ShelEy’s stuEEy  ngers had helped with  Luce’s
 rst  dye MoE, Eack when Luce thought that was the only way to start
afresh. Arriane’s   rst   act of  friendship   toward  Luce had  Eeen the
command to  chop o    her  Elack hair,  to  make  her look  like  Luce.
Now their  hands worked through Luce’s scalp in the same Eathroom
where Penn had rinsed her clean of the meat loaf Molly had dumped
on her head her  rst  day at Sword & Cross.
   It  was  Eittersweet,  and  Eeautiful,  and  Luce couldn’t   gure   out
what any of  it  meant. Only that  she didn’t  want to  hide anymore—
not from herself, or  from her parents; not  from Daniel, or  even from
those who sought to harm her.
   She’d Eeen seeking a cheap transformation when she  rst   got out
to  California.  Now  she realized  that  the  only  worthwhile   way  to
make a change was to earn a real  one. Dying her  hair  Elack wasn’t
the answer  either—she knew  she wasn’t  there yet—Eut  at  least it
was a step in the right direction.
   Arriane  and  ShelEy stopped arguing  over which  guy  was Luce’s
soul mate. They looked at her silently  and nodded. She felt it  Eefore

290
she even  saw her  re ection    in  the  mirror:   The  heavy weight   of
melancholy, one  she hadn’t even  known  she was shouldering,  had
lifted from  her Eody.
   She was Eack to her roots. She was ready to go home.

291
                                             EIGHTEEN




                                         THANKSGIVING 



When Luce stepped through the  front  door of  her parents’ house in
ThunderEolt,  everything  was  Must the same: The  coatrack  in  the
foyer still  looked like  it was aEout to topple  under the weight  of too
many Mackets. The smell of dryer  sheets and Pledge still  made the
house feel cleaner than  it was.  The  oral   couch in  the living   room
was faded from the morning sun that  fell through  the Elinds. A stack
of  tea-stained southern  decorating   magazines covered  the  co ee
taEle, favorite   pages Eookmarked  with   grocery   receipts,  for  the
distant time  when  her parents’ dream  came true  of the  mortgage’s
Eeing paid  o     and  their     nally  having  a  little   extra   money  for
remodeling. Andrew,  her mom’s  hysterical toy  poodle, trotted  over
to  sni    the  guests and  give  the  Eack  of  Luce’s ankle  a  familiar
chomp.
   Luce’s dad set down  her du el   in the  foyer, draping  an easy arm
around her  shoulder.  Luce watched  their  re ection   in  the  narrow
entryway mirror:  father and daughter.
   His  rimless  glasses slipped down  on  his  nose as  he  kissed the
crown of  her  Eack-to-Elack hair. “Welcome  home,  Lucie,” he  said.
“We missed you around here.”
   Luce closed her eyes. “I  missed you, too.”  It  was the  rst   time in
weeks she hadn’t lied to her parents.
   The house was warm and full  of intoxicating  Thanksgiving  scents.
She inhaled  and  could   instantly  picture   every  foil-wrapped   dish
staying hot in the oven. Deep-fried turkey  with mushroom stu ng—

292
her dad’s  specialty. Apple-cranEerry  sauce, light-as-air  yeast  rolls,
and enough  pumpkin-pecan  pies—her  mom’s—to  feed the  whole
state. She must have Eeen cooking all week.
   Luce’s mom took  hold  of her  wrists.  Her hazel eyes were a  little
damp around the  edges. “How are you, Luce?”  she asked. “Are you
all right?”
   It  was such  a relief  to  Ee home.  Luce could  feel her  eyes grow
damp too. She nodded, folding into her mom for  a hug.
   Her mother’s chin-length  dark hair  was sculpted and sprayed, like
she’d Must Eeen to the Eeauty parlor the day Eefore. Which, knowing
her, she proEaEly had.  She looked younger  and prettier  than  Luce
rememEered. Compared to the elderly parents she’d tried  to visit  in
Mount Shasta—even compared to Vera—Luce’s mom seemed happy
and alive, untainted Ey sorrow.
   It  was Eecause she’d never had to  feel what  the  others had  felt,
losing a daughter.  Losing Luce. Her  parents had made  their  whole
life around her. It  would destroy them if  she died.
   She could  not  die  the  way  she had  in  the  past. She could  not
wreck her  parents’ life  this  time  around, now  that  she knew  more
aEout her past. She would do whatever it took to keep them happy.
   Her mom  gathered the coats and hats of  the four  other teenagers
who were standing  in her  foyer. “I  hope  your friends  Erought their
appetites.”
   ShelEy Merked her thumE at Miles. “Be careful what you wish for.”
   It  was Must like Luce’s parents not to mind a  carful of  last-minute
guests at their Thanksgiving taEle.
   When her dad’s Chrysler New Yorker  had rolled through  Sword &
Cross’s tall  wrought   iron  gates Must Eefore noon,  Luce had  Eeen
waiting  for   him.  She hadn’t   Eeen aEle to   sleep at  all   the  night
Eefore. Between the strangeness of Eeing Eack at Sword & Cross and
her nerves aEout mingling  such an odd Thanksgiving  crew the next
day—her mind would  not settle down.

293
   Luckily,  the morning had passed without  incident; after giving  her
dad  the  longest,  tightest   hug   she’d  ever  given  someone,  she’d
mentioned that  she had a  few friends  without  places to  go for  the
holiday.
   Five minutes later, they  were all in the  car.
   Now they  were milling  around Luce’s childhood home, picking  up
framed pictures  of  her  at  di erent   awkward  ages, gazing  out  the
same French windows she’d Eeen gazing out over Eowls of cereal for
more than a decade. It was kind of  surreal. As Arriane Eounded into
the kitchen to  help her  mom whip  some cream, Miles peppered her
dad with   questions aEout the  enormous piece-of-Munk telescope in
his  o ce.    Luce felt   a  swell  of  pride   in  her  parents  for  making
everyone feel welcome.
   The sound of a car horn outside made her Mump.
   She perched on the sagging couch and lifted  a slat of the  window
Elind. Outside, a red-and-white taxi  was idling  in front  of the house,
coughing exhaust into  the  cold  fall  air.  The windows  were  tinted,
Eut the passenger could Ee only one person.
   Callie.
   One  of  Callie’s knee-high  red  leather  Eoots  extended from   the
Eack door, planting  itself  on the concrete  sidewalk. A  second later,
Luce’s Eest  friend’s   heart-shaped  face  came  into   view.   Callie’s
porcelain skin  was  ushed,  her  auEurn hair  shorter,  cut at  a sleek
angle close  to  her  chin.   Her  pale  Elue eyes  glittered.  For  some
reason, she kept glancing Eack inside the caE.
   “Whatcha  looking  at?”  ShelEy asked, pulling   up another  slat  so
she could see. Roland  slid  in on  Luce’s other  side and  looked out
too.
   Just in time  to see Daniel slide out of the taxi—
   Followed Ey Cam, from the front  seat.
   Luce sucked in her Ereath at the sight of them.
   Both  guys were  wearing  long,  dark  coats, like   the coats  they’d
worn on  the shore in  the scene she’d glimpsed. Their  hair gleamed

294
in the sunlight. And  for a moment, Must a moment, Luce rememEered
why she’d originally  Eeen intrigued Ey them  Eoth at Sword & Cross.
They  were  beautiIul. There  was  no  getting   around  it.   Surreally,
unnaturally stunning.
   But what  the hell were they doing  here?
   “Right  on time,”  Roland murmured.
   On her other side, ShelEy asked, “Who invited them?”
   “My  thoughts exactly,”  Luce said, Eut she couldn’t  help swooning
a little   at  the  sight  of  Daniel.  Even though  things  Eetween them
were a mess.
   “Luce.”  Roland  was chuckling  at  her expression as  she watched
Daniel. “Don’t you think  you should answer the door?”
   The doorEell rang.
   “Is that  Callie?” Luce’s mom called from the  kitchen over the whir
of the stand mixer.
   “Got  it!”   Luce shouted Eack, feeling  a cold  pain  spread through
her   chest.   Of   course   she  wanted    to   see  Callie.    But   more
overwhelming  than her  Moy at seeing her Eest friend,  she realized,
was her  hunger  to   see Daniel.  To  touch  him,   to  hold   him  and
Ereathe him in. To introduce him  to her parents.
   They would  Ee aEle to see, wouldn’t  they? They’d  Ee aEle to tell
that Luce had found the person who had changed her life forever.
   She opened the door.
   “Happy  Thanksgiving!”  a high  southern  voice drawled.  Luce had
to Elink  a few  times Eefore her  Erain could  connect with  the  sight
Eefore her eyes.
   GaEEe, the most Eeautiful and the most perfectly  mannered angel
at Sword  & Cross, was standing  on Luce’s porch  in  a pink  mohair
sweater dress.  Her  Elond  hair  was  a  gorgeous frenzy   of  Eraids,
pinned up into  little   swirls on top  of her  head. Her skin  had a soft,
lovely  shimmer—not   unlike   Francesca’s. She held  a  Eouquet  of
white gladiolas in  one hand and a frosty  white plastic  ice cream tuE
in the other.

295
   Next  to her,  her  Eleached-Elond hair grown  Erown  at  the roots,
stood the  demon  Molly   Zane. Her  torn   Elack Means matched her
frayed Elack  sweater, like  she was still   following  Sword  &  Cross’s
dress code. Her facial  piercings  had multiplied   since  the last  time
Luce had seen her. She had a small Elack cast iron kettle Ealanced in
the crook of her arm. She was glaring at Luce.
   Luce  could  see the  others  walking  up  the  long,   curving  walk.
Daniel had Callie’s suitcase hoisted up over  his shoulder, Eut it  was
Cam who was leaning in, smiling,  his hand on  Callie’s right forearm
as he  chatted with   her.  She didn’t   seem to  know  whether  to  Ee
slightly nervous or aEsolutely charmed.
   “We  were Must in the neighEorhood.” GaEEe Eeamed, holding out
the  owers  to  Luce. “I  made my  homemade vanilla  ice cream, and
Molly Erought an appetizer.”
   “Shrimp  DiaElo.”  Molly  lifted   up the  lid  of  her  kettle,  and Luce
Ereathed in a spicy garlic  Eroth. “Family  recipe.”  Molly  slapped the
lid Eack down, then pushed past Luce into the foyer,  stumEling over
ShelEy in her path.
   “Excuse you,”  they   said gru y     at  the  same time,  eyeing  each
other suspiciously.
   “Oh,  good.” GaEEe leaned in to give Luce a hug. “Molly’s   made a
friend.”
   Roland took  GaEEe into the kitchen,  and Luce had her   rst  clear
view   of   Callie.   When   they   locked    eyes,  they   couldn’t    help
themselves: Both girls Eroke into  involuntary   grins and  ran toward
one another.
   The impact  of Callie’s  Eody knocked the wind  out  of Luce, Eut it
didn’t  matter. Their  arms were  ung   around each other,  each girl’s
face Euried  in  the  other’s  hair;  they  were  laughing  the  way  you
laugh only after too long  a separation from a very good friend.
   Reluctantly,   Luce  pulled   away   and  turned   to   the   two   guys
standing a few  feet Eack. Cam looked  as he always did:  controlled
and at ease, slick and handsome.

296
   But Daniel  looked uncomfortaEle—and he had good reason to  Ee.
They hadn’t  spoken since  he’d seen her  kiss Miles,  and  now they
were   standing   with    Luce’s  Eest   friend   and   Daniel’s   enemy-
turned- … whatever Cam was to Daniel now.
   But—
   Daniel  was in her home. Within  shouting  distance of her  parents.
Would they  lose it  if  they  knew  who  he really  was? How  did  she
introduce the guy who  was responsiEle for a thousand of her deaths,
whom she was magnetically  drawn to  almost all  the time, who  was
impossiEle and  elusive  and  secretive and  sometimes  even mean,
whose love she didn’t   understand, who  was working with  the devil,
for  crying   out  loud,   and  who—if   he  thought   showing  up  here
uninvited  with   that  demon was  a good  idea—mayEe didn’t  know
her very well at all.
   “What  are you  doing here?” Her  voice was Eone-dry Eecause she
couldn’t talk  to Daniel without  talking  to Cam, too, and she couldn’t
talk to Cam without  wanting to  throw something heavy at him.
   Cam spoke  rst.  “Happy  Thanksgiving to you, too.  We heard your
house was the place to Ee today.”
   “We ran  into your  friend  here at the airport,”  Daniel  added, using
the  at   tone he spoke in  when  he and Luce were  in  puElic. It  was
more formal,  making her  yearn to Ee alone with  him  so they could
Must Ee real. And so she could graE him Ey the  lapels of  his stupid
coat and shake him until  he explained everything.  This had gone on
long enough.
   “Got to  talking, shared a caE,” Cam picked up, winking at Callie.
   Callie   smiled  at   Luce.  “Here   I  was   picturing   some  intimate
gathering at the  Price household, Eut this  is so much  Eetter. Now I
can get the real scoop.”
   Luce could feel her  friend searching her face for  clues aEout what
the deal  was with  these two  guys.  Thanksgiving was  aEout to  get
really  awkward,   really   fast.  This  was  not  the  way   things  were
supposed to go.

297
   “Turkey  time!”   her  mother  called  from  the  doorway.  Her smile
changed into a  confused grimace when she saw the  crowd outside.
“Luce? What’s  going  on?”  Her  old  green-and-white-striped  apron
was tied around her waist.
   “Mom,”   Luce said,  gesturing with   her hand,  “this  is  Callie,  and
Cam, and …”  She wanted to  reach out  to put  her hand  on Daniel,
something, anything  to let  her mom know  that  he was special, that
this was the one. To let him  know, too,  that she still  loved him, that
everything  Eetween them was  going to  Ee okay.  But she couldn’t.
She Must stood there. “ …    Daniel.”
   “Okay.”  Her mom  squinted at each of the  newcomers. “Well, um,
welcome. Luce, honey, can I have a word?”
   Luce went to  her mother  at the front  door,  holding up  a  nger  to
let  Callie   know  she’d  Ee  right   Eack.  She followed   her   mother
through  the  foyer,   through   the  dim  hallway   hung  with   framed
pictures from  Luce’s childhood,  and into  her  parents’ cozy, lamplit
Eedroom. Her mom  sat down  on the  white  Eedspread and crossed
her arms. “Feel like telling  me anything?”
   “I’m  so sorry, Mom,” Luce said, sinking down on the  Eed.
   “I   don’t  want  to  shut  anyone out  of  a  Thanksgiving  meal,  Eut
don’t you  think  we  need to  draw the  line  somewhere? Wasn’t one
unexpected carful of people enough?”
   “Yes, of  course you’re right,”   Luce said. “I  didn’t   invite  all  these
people. I’m as stunned as you are that they all showed up.”
   “It’s  Must that we have  so little  time  with   you.  We love  to meet
your friends,”  Luce’s mom  said, stroking  her hair.  “But  we  cherish
our time with  you more.”
   “I  know  this  is such a  huge imposition,  Eut Mom”—Luce  turned
her cheek  into  her  mother’s  open palm—“he   is special.  Daniel.  I
didn’t  know he  was going to  come, Eut now  that  he’s here, I  need
this time with  him  as much as I need it with you  and Dad. Does that
make any sense?”

298
   “Daniel?”  her mom  repeated. “That Eeautiful Elond  Eoy? You two
are—”
   “We’re   in  love.”   For  some  reason, Luce  was  tremEling.   Even
though she had her douEts aEout their relationship, saying out  loud,
to her mother,  that  she loved Daniel  made it  seem true—made her
rememEer that she did, despite everything, truly love  him.
   “I  see.” When her mom nodded, her sprayed Erown curls stayed in
place. She smiled. “Well,  we can’t  very well  kick  out everyone else
Eut him, can we?”
   “Thank  you, Mom.”
   “Thank  your   father,  too.  And  honey?  Next  time,  a  little   more
advance notice, please. If  I’d  known  you  were Eringing  home  ‘the
one,’ I  would  have graEEed your  EaEy alEum from  the attic.”   She
winked, planting  a kiss on Luce’s cheek.





   Back in the living  room, Luce ran into  Daniel  rst.
   “I’m  glad you got to Ee with  your family  after all,”  he said.
   “I  hope  you’re not  mad at  Daniel  for Eringing  me,”  Cam put  in,
and Luce searched for haughtiness in his voice Eut found none. “I’m
sure you’d Eoth rather I weren’t  here, Eut”—he looked at Daniel—“a
deal’s a deal.”
   “I’m  sure,” Luce said coolly.
   Daniel’s  face gave  nothing  away.  Until   it   darkened. Miles  had
come in from the dining  room.
   “Um,  hey,  your  dad’s aEout to  make a toast.”  Miles’s  eyes were
 xed  on Luce in  a way that  made her think  he  was trying  hard not
to meet Daniel’s stare. “Your mom told  me to ask where you wanted
to sit.”
   “Oh,  wherever. MayEe next  to Callie?”  A  mild  panic struck  Luce
as she thought aEout all the other guests and the need to keep them

299
as far away from  each other as possiEle. And Molly  away from  Must
aEout everyone. “I should have done a seating chart.”
   Roland and  Arriane  had made quick  work  of setting  up the  card
taEle at  the  edge of  the  dining   room  taEle, so  the  Eanquet now
stretched into  the living   room. Someone had thrown  down  a gold-
and-white  taElecloth,  and  her  parents had  even  Eusted out  their
wedding  china. Candles were  lit   and goElets of  water   lled.    And
soon ShelEy and  Miles were  carrying  in  steaming  Eowls of  green
Eeans and mashed potatoes while Luce took her seat Eetween Callie
and Arriane.
   Their  intimate  Thanksgiving dinner  was now serving twelve:  four
humans, two Nephilim,   six fallen  angels (three each on  the side of
Good and Evil),  and one dog  dressed as a turkey, with  his  Eowl of
scraps under the taEle.
   Miles  went  for  the  seat directly   across from  Luce—until  Daniel
 ashed him  a menacing look.  Miles Eacked o ,  and Daniel  was Must
aEout to  sit down  when  ShelEy slid  right  in.  Smiling  with  a  little
look of  victory,  Miles sat on  ShelEy’s left, across from Callie,  while
Daniel,  looking   vaguely  annoyed,  sat  to   her  right,   across from
Arriane.
   Someone was  kicking   Luce under  the   taEle, trying   to  get  her
attention, Eut she kept her eyes on her plate.
   Once everyone was seated, Luce’s father stood  up at  the head of
the taEle, facing her mother  at the foot.  He clanked his fork  against
his glass  of  red  wine.  “I’ve  Eeen known   to  make  a long-winded
speech or two  this  time   of year.”   He chuckled.  “But  we’ve  never
served so many  hungry-looking  kids  Eefore, so  I’ll  Must cut to the
chase. I’m thankful  for  my sweet wife,  Doreen, my  Eest kid,  Lucie,
and all of  you for  Moining us.” He  xed on Luce, drawing  his cheeks
in the way  he did  when he was especially proud.  “It’s  wonderful  to
see you prospering,  growing   into  a Eeautiful   young lady  with   so
many  great   friends.   We  hope   they’ll   all   come  again.   Cheers,
everyone. To friends.”

300
   Luce forced  a smile, avoiding  the  shifty  glances all her  “friends”
were sharing.
   “Hear,   hear!”   Daniel   Eroke  the  exquisitely   awkward   silence,
raising his glass. “What good is life without  trusty,  reliaEle friends?”
   Miles  Earely looked  at  him,  plunging  a serving  spoon deep into
the mashed potatoes. “Coming from Mr. ReliaEle himself.”
   The Prices were  too  Eusy passing dishes at opposite ends of  the
taEle to notice the dirty  look Daniel directed at Miles.
   Molly  was spooning  the Shrimp  DiaElo appetizer no  one had yet
touched in  a growing  heap  on Miles’s plate.  “Just  say uncle  when
you’ve had enough.”
   “Whoa,  Mo.  Save some heat  for  me.”  Cam reached to  take  the
kettle of  shrimp. “Say,  Miles. Roland told  me you  showed o   some
mad skills  fencing  the  other  day.  I  Eet the  girls  went  crazy.”  He
leaned forward. “You were there, right,  Luce?”
   Miles  had his  fork  poised  in  midair.  His  large Elue  eyes looked
confused aEout Cam’s intentions,  and as if  he  was hoping  to  hear
Luce say  that  yes,  the  girls—herself  included—had   indeed  gone
crazy.
   “Roland  also said Miles lost,”  Daniel  said placidly,  and speared a
piece of stu ng.
   At  the other  end of  the taEle, GaEEe cut the tension  with  a loud
and satis ed  purr.  “Oh  my God,  Mrs. Price. These Brussels sprouts
are a little taste of Heaven. Aren’t they, Roland?”
   “Mmm,”   Roland agreed. “They really  Ering  me Eack to a simpler
time.”
   Luce’s mother Eegan reciting the  recipe while  Luce’s dad went on
aEout local  produce. Luce was  trying  to  enMoy this rare time  with
her family,  and  Callie leaning  in  to whisper  that  everyone seemed
pretty cool,  especially Arriane  and Miles—Eut there were  too many
other situations to monitor.  Luce felt like  she might have to defuse a
EomE at any moment.

301
   A  few   minutes  later,  passing  the  stu ng     around  the  taEle  a
second time, Luce’s mother said, “You  know, your  father  and I met
when we were right around  your age.”
   Luce had heard the story thirty- ve   hundred times Eefore.
   “He  was the quarterEack at  Athens High.”  Her mother  winked  at
Miles. “The athletic ones drove the girls wild  in  those days, too.”
   “Yep,  the TroMans were twelve and two  my  varsity  year.”  Luce’s
dad laughed, and she waited  for his  token line.  “I  Must had to show
Doreen I wasn’t as much of a tough guy o   the  eld.”
   “I  think   it’s  great what  a strong  marriage  you two  have,”  Miles
said, graEEing yet  another  of  Luce’s mother’s  famous  yeast rolls.
“Luce is lucky  to have parents who  are so honest and oSen with her
and each other.”
   Luce’s mom Eeamed.
   But  Eefore she  could  respond, Daniel  Eutted  in.  “There’s much
more to  love than  that,  Miles. Wouldn’t  you  say, Mr.  Price, that  a
real relationship is more than  Must easy fun and games? That it takes
some e ort?”
   “Of   course, of   course.”  Luce’s father   patted  his  lips   with   his
napkin. “Why   else would  they call  marriage  a commitment?  Sure,
love has its ups and downs. That’s life.”
   “Well   said, Mr.  P.,”  Roland  said, with   a soulfulness Eeyond  his
smooth seventeen-year-old-looking face. “God knows, I’ve seen some
ups and downs.”
   “Oh,  come on,”  Callie  chimed in,  to  Luce’s surprise. Poor Callie,
taking  everyone here  at  face value.  “You  guys  make it   sound so
heavy.”
   “Callie’s   right,”   Luce’s  mom   said.  “You   kids   are  young  and
hopeful, and you really should Must Ee having fun.”
   Fun. So that  was the  goal right   now? Was fun  even possiEle for
Luce? She glanced at Miles.  He was  smiling.  “I’m  having  fun,”  he
mouthed.

302
   That made all the  di erence  to Luce, who looked around the  taEle
again and realized that  despite everything,  she was having fun  too.
Roland was  making  a show  of  tonguing  a  shrimp  at  Molly,   who
laughed for  possiEly the  rst   time  in  history.  Cam tried  doting  on
Callie,  even o ering    to  Eutter  her  roll,  which   she declined  with
raised eyeErows and a  shy shake of  her head.  ShelEy ate like  she
was training    for  a  competition.   And  someone  was  still   playing
footsie with  Luce underneath the taEle. She met Daniel’s violet eyes.
He winked, giving her  Eutter ies.
   There was something remarkaEle aEout this  gathering. It  was the
liveliest Thanksgiving they’d  had since Luce’s grandmother died and
the Prices stopped going to the  Louisiana Eayou for the  holiday.  So
this  was  her  family  now:   all  these  people, angels,  demons,  and
whatever   else  they   were.   For   Eetter   or   worse,   complicated,
treacherous, full of  ups and downs, and even at  times fun.  Just like
her dad had said: That was life.
   And  for  a girl   who had  had  some experience with  dying,  life—
period—was the thing for  which Luce was suddenly overwhelmingly
thankful.
   “Well,  I’ve had  Must aEout enough,” ShelEy announced after a few
more minutes.  “You  know.  Food.  Everyone else done?  Let’s wrap
this up.” She whistled and made a lasso gesture with her   nger. “I’m
eager to get Eack to that reform school we all go to—um—”
   “I’ll   help clear  the taEle.”  GaEEe Mumped up and started stacking
plates, dragging a reluctant Molly  into the kitchen  with her.
   Luce’s mom  was still  shooting  her  furtive  glances, trying   to see
the gathering  through  her  daughter’s eyes. Which  was impossiEle.
She’d latched on to the  Daniel idea pretty  quickly  and kept  looking
Eack and forth  Eetween the two  of them.  Luce wanted a chance to
show  her  mom   that   what  she  and   Daniel  had   was  solid  and
wonderful and unlike  anything  else in the world,  Eut there were too
many other  people around.  Everything that  should  have Eeen easy
felt hard.

303
   Then  Andrew  stopped  chewing  on the  felt   feathers around  his
neck and  started  yipping   at  the  door.   Luce’s dad  stood  up  and
reached for  the  dog’s leash.  What  a  relief.  “SomeEody wants  his
after-dinner walk,”  he announced.
   Her mother  stood up, too,  and Luce followed  her to the  door and
helped her into her  pea coat. Luce handed her dad his scarf. “Thank
you guys for Eeing so cool tonight.  We’ll  do the dishes while  you’re
gone.”
   Her  mom  smiled.  “You  make us  proud,  Luce. No  matter  what.
RememEer that.”
   “I  like  that Miles,”  Luce’s dad said, clipping Andrew’s  leash to his
collar.
   “And  Daniel is …  Must remarkaEle,” her mom said to her dad in a
leading tone of voice.
   Luce’s cheeks  ushed and she glanced Eack at the taEle. She gave
her parents a  please-don’t-emEarrass-me look. “Okay!  Have a  nice
long walk!”
   Luce  held open  the  door  and  watched them  walk   out  into  the
night with   the eager dog practically  choking  on his leash. The cold
air through  the open door  was refreshing. The house was hot,  with
so many  people  lling    it  up.  Just  Eefore her  parents disappeared
down the street, Luce thought she saw a  ash of something outside.
   Something that looked like  a wing.
   “Did  you see that?” she said, not sure who she was addressing.
   “What?”   her father  called,  turning   Eack. He looked  so  full  and
happy that it  almost Eroke Luce’s heart.
   “Nothing.”   Luce forced a smile  as she closed the door. She could
feel someone right Eehind her.
   Daniel. The warmth  that made her sway where she stood.
   “What  did you see?”
   His voice  was icy, not  with  anger Eut with  fear. She looked up at
him, reaching for his hands, Eut he had turned the other way.

304
   “Cam,”  he called. “Get your Eow.”
   Across the room, Cam’s head shot up. “Already?”
   A whizzing  sound outside the house silenced him. He moved away
from the  window  and reached inside his  Elazer. Luce saw the  ash
of silver,  and she rememEered: the  arrows he’d  collected from  the
Outcast girl.
   “Tell  the others,”  Daniel said Eefore turning  to face Luce. His lips
parted and  the desperate look  on  his face made  her think  that  he
might kiss her, Eut all he did was say, “Do you have a storm cellar?”
   “Tell   me  what’s  happening,”  Luce  said.  She could   hear water
running  in  the   kitchen,  Arriane  and  GaEEe singing  harmony  on
“Heart  and Soul”  with  Callie  while  they  did  the dishes. She could
see Molly’s  and  Roland’s skittish   expressions as they  cleared  the
taEle. And suddenly,  Luce knew that  this  Thanksgiving dinner  was
all an act. A cover-up. Only, she didn’t know  for what.
   Miles appeared at Luce’s side. “What’s going on?”
   “Nothing  you  need to Ee concerned with,”   Cam said. Not rudely,
Must stating the facts. “Molly. Roland.”
   Molly  put down her  stack of dishes. “What do you need us to do?”
   It  was Daniel  who  answered, speaking to  Molly   as if  they  were
suddenly on the same side. “Tell the others. And  nd  shields. They’ll
Ee armed.”
   “Who?”  Luce asked. “The Outcasts?”
   Daniel’s eyes landed on her and his face fell. “They shouldn’t  have
found us tonight.   We knew there  was a chance, Eut  I really  didn’t
want to Ering this here. I’m  sorry—”
   “Daniel.”   Cam interrupted  him.  “All  that  matters now  is  ghting
Eack.”
   A  heavy knocking  thudded  through  the  house. Cam  and Daniel
moved instinctively  toward the  front door, Eut Luce shook her head.
“Back door,” she whispered. “Through the kitchen.”

305
   They all  stood for a moment  and listened to the creak of  the Eack
door opening. Then came a long and piercing scream.
   “Callie!”    Luce   took    o     running    through   the   living     room,
shuddering to imagine what scene her Eest friend was facing. If Luce
had known  the  Outcasts would  show  up,  she would  not  have  let
Callie come. She would  never  have come home  at all.  If  anything
Ead happened, Luce would never forgive herself.
   Swinging  through   her  parents’  kitchen   door,  Luce  saw  Callie,
shielded Eehind  GaEEe’s narrow frame.  She was safe, at  least  for
now.  Luce exhaled,  almost  collapsing  Eackward  into  the  wall   of
muscle that Daniel, Cam, Miles, and Roland had formed Eehind her.
   Arriane  stood in the  whitewashed doorway, a giant  Eutcher Elock
raised high  in  her hands. She looked  ready to  Eash someone Luce
couldn’t quite see yet.
   “Good evening.”  A guy’s voice, sti   with  formality.
   When Arriane  lowered  the Eutcher’s Elock, there  in  the doorway
stood a tall, lean Eoy in a Erown trench coat. He was very pale, with
a  narrow  face  and  a  strong  nose.  He  looked  familiar.   Cropped
Eleached-Elond hair. Blank white eyes.
   An Outcast.
   But Luce had seen him somewhere else Eefore.
   “Phil?”  ShelEy  cried.  “What  the  hell   are you  doing  here?  And
what happened to your eyes? They’re all—”
   Daniel turned  on ShelEy. “You know this Outcast?”
   “Outcast?” ShelEy’s voice quaked. “He’s not  a—He’s my sorry-ass
ex—He’s—”
   “He’s Eeen using you,”  Roland said,  as if he knew  something the
rest of them  didn’t.  “I  should have known.  Should have recognized
him for what  he was.”
   “But   you  didn’t,”   the   Outcast said,  his   voice  eerily  calm.  He
reached inside his trench coat and, from  an inner pocket, pulled  out
a silver Eow.  From his other  pocket came a silver  arrow,  which  he
swiftly   nocked. He  pointed   it   at  Roland,  then  swept  across the

306
crowd, aiming  at each of  them  in turn.  “Please forgive  my Earging
in. I’ve come to fetch Lucinda.”
   Daniel  stepped  toward   the  Outcast.  “You’ll   Ietch  no  one  and
nothing,” he said, “except a swift  death unless you leave right now.”
   “Sorry,  no,  can’t do  that,”  the  Eoy responded, his muscled  arms
still  holding  the silver  arrow  taut.  “We’ve  had time  to  prepare for
this night of Elessed restitution. We will  not leave empty-handed.”
   “How   could  you, Phil?”   ShelEy whimpered,  turning  to  Luce.  “I
didn’t  know  …  Honestly,  Luce, I  didn’t.   I  Must thought he  was a
creep.”
   The Eoy’s lips  curled up  in a  smile. His horriEle,  depthless white
eyes were straight  out  of a  nightmare.  “Give  her to  me  without  a
 ght,  or none of you will  Ee spared.”
   Then  Cam Eurst  out  in  a  long,  deep Eelly  laugh.  It   shook the
kitchen and made the Eoy in the doorway twitch  uncomfortaEly.
   “You  and what  army?”  Cam said. “You  know,  I think   you’re the
 rst   Outcast  I’ve  ever  met  with  a  sense of  humor.”   He  glanced
around  the   cramped  kitchen.   “Why  don’t   you   and  I   take  this
outside? Get it over with, shall  we?”
   “Gladly,”  the Eoy replied, a  at   smile on his pale lips.
   Cam rolled  his shoulders Eack as if he were working  out a knot—
and  there,  right    where  his  shoulder   Elades  came  together,  an
enormous pair   of  golden  wings  split  through   his  gray  cashmere
sweater. They unfurled  Eehind him,  taking  up most of  the kitchen.
Cam’s wings  were  so  Eright  they   were  almost  Elinding   as they
pulsed.
   “Holy  Hell,”  Callie whispered, Elinking.
   “More  or  less,” Arriane  said  as Cam arched his  wings Eackward
and plowed  past  the Outcast  Eoy, through   the door  and  into  the
Eackyard. “Luce will explain,  I’m sure!”
   Roland’s wings  unfurled  with  a  sound like  a great  ock   of  Eirds
taking   ight.   The  lamplight  in   the kitchen  highlighted   their  dark
gold and  Elack  marEling as  he squeezed out  the  door  after  Cam.

307
Molly  and Arriane  were right  Eehind  him,  Eutting into  each other,
Arriane  pressing  her  glowing   iridescent  wings  ahead  of   Molly’s
cloudy  Eronze  ones, sending  o     what  looked   like  little   electric
sparks as they hustled out  the  door. Next  was GaEEe, whose  u y
white wings spread open as gracefully as a Eutter y’s,  Eut with  such
speed they sent a rush of  oral-scented wind through  the kitchen.
   Daniel  took Luce’s hands in  his. He closed his  eyes, inhaled, and
let his massive white wings  unfurl. Fully  extended, they would  have
 lled   the  entire  kitchen,  Eut  Daniel  reined  them  in,  close  to  his
Eody.  They  shimmered  and   glowed  and   looked  altogether   too
Eeautiful.  Luce reached  out  and  touched  them  with   Eoth hands.
Warm and  satin smooth  on  the outside,  Eut inside,  full  of  power.
She could feel it coursing  through Daniel,  into her.  She felt so close
to him, understood him  completely. As if they’d Eecome one.
   Don’t worry. Everything’s going to be  ne. I’ll always take care oI you.
   But what  he said aloud was “Stay safe. Stay here.”
   “No,”  she pleaded. “Daniel.”
   “I’ll   Ee right Eack.” Then he  arched his wings Eackward and  ew
out the door.
   Left  alone  inside,   the  unangelic  gathered  together.  Miles   was
pressed against the Eack door, gaping out  the  window.  ShelEy had
her  head   in  her   hands.  Callie’s   face  looked   as  white   as  the
refrigerator.
   Luce slipped a  hand into  Callie’s. “I  guess I have a  few things  to
explain.”
   “Who  is  that  Eoy  with  the  Eow  and  arrow?”  Callie  whispered,
 inching  Eut still  holding tight  to Luce’s hand. “Who are you?”
   “Me?  I’m   Must …  me.”  Luce  shrugged,  feeling  a   chill   spread
through her. “I  don’t know.”
   “Luce,”  ShelEy said, clearly  trying  not  to  cry. “I   feel like  such a
chump.  I  swear I   had no  idea.  The  stu    I   told  him,  I   was Must
venting.  He  was  always  asking  aEout  you,  and  he  was  a  good

308
listener, so I … I mean, I  had no idea what he really  was … I would
never, never—”
   “I   Eelieve you,”  Luce  said. She  moved to  the  window,   next  to
Miles, looking  out onto  the small  wooden deck her  dad had Euilt  a
few years ago. “What do you think  he wants?”
   In  the yard, fallen  oak leaves had Eeen raked into  neat piles. The
air smelled  like  a Eon re.  Somewhere in  the  distance, a siren  was
going o .  At the  foot of the deck’s three steps, Daniel, Cam, Arriane,
Roland, and GaEEe stood side Ey side, facing the fence.
   No,  not  the  fence,  Luce realized.  They  faced  a  dark  crowd  of
Outcasts, standing at attention with  their  silver  arrows aimed at the
row  of  angels. The Outcast  Eoy was  not  alone.  He’d amassed an
army.
   Luce had  to steady herself  against the counter.  Aside from  Cam,
the angels were unarmed. And she’d already seen what those arrows
could do.
   “Luce,  stop!”  Miles called  after her,  Eut she was already  rushing
out the door.
   Even in   the darkness, Luce  could  see that  all  the  Outcasts had
similar  expressionless good looks. There were Must as many girls as
Eoys, all of them  pale and dressed in the  same Erown trench coats,
with  closely  cropped  Eleached-Elond hair  for  the  Eoys and  tight,
almost white  ponytails for  the girls.  The Outcasts’ wings arched out
from their  Eacks. They were in  very,  very Ead shape—tattered and
frayed and revoltingly   lthy,   practically   caked with dirt.  Nothing  at
all like  the  glorious  wings  of Daniel  or  Cam, or  any of  the angels
and demons Luce knew.  Standing  in  solidarity,  with   their  strange
empty eyes staring out, their  heads tilted in  di erent   directions, the
Outcasts made a horriEle  nightmare  of  an army.  Only,  Luce could
not wake up.
   When Daniel noticed  her standing with  the others on the deck, he
douEled Eack and  seized her  hands. His  perfect  face looked  wild
with fear. “I  told you to stay inside.”

309
   “No,”  she whispered. “I won’t  stay locked up while  the rest of you
 ght.   I   can’t  Must keep watching   people  around  me  die  for   no
reason.”
   “No  reason? Let’s have  this   ght   another  time,  Luce.”  His eyes
kept darting toward  the dark line of  Outcasts near the fence.
   She Ealled up her  sts at her sides. “Daniel—”
   “Your  life  is  too  precious to  squander in  a temper  tantrum.  Get
inside. Now.”
   A loud  shriek rang out in  the middle  of the yard.  The front line  of
ten  Outcasts raised  their  weapons  toward  the  angels and  loosed
their arrows.  Luce’s head shot up  Must in time to catch  the sight  of
something—someone—catapulting o  the roof.
   Molly.
   She  ew   down  from  it,  a  dark  clot  wielding  two  garden  rakes,
twirling  them like  Eatons in each of her hands.
   The Outcasts heard Eut couldn’t see her coming. But Molly’s  rakes
twirled,  tilling   the  arrows from  the  air  as if  they  were  crops in  a
 eld.  She landed  on her  Elack comEat Eoots, the  dull-ended silver
arrows  thudding  and  rolling   along  the  ground,  looking  aEout  as
harmless as twigs. But Luce knew Eetter.
   “There  will  Ee no mercy now!”   an Outcast—Phil—Eellowed from
the other side of the yard.
   “Get  her  inside, and  get the  starshots!”  Cam shouted at  Daniel,
mounting the railing  of the  deck and pulling out  his own silver Eow.
In quick succession, he nocked and loosed three streaks of light. The
Outcasts writhed as three of their ranks vanished in pu s  of dust.
   With  lightning  speed, Arriane and Roland darted around the yard,
sweeping up arrows with their  wings.
   A second line of Outcasts was advancing, readying a new volley of
arrows. When  they  were  on  the Erink  of  shooting,  GaEEe leaped
onto the railing  of the deck.
   “Hmmm,  let’s see.” With a  erce  look  in her  eyes, she pointed the
tip of her right  wing  at the ground Eelow the Outcasts.

310
   The lawn  shuddered, and then  a clean seam of earth—the length
of the Eackyard and a few feet wide—split wide  open.
   Taking at least twenty  Outcasts deep into the Elack chasm.
   They  Eellowed hollow,   lonely  cries on  the  way down.  Down  to
God-knew-where. The Outcasts Eehind them skidded, halting Must in
front  of  the  awful  gorge  GaEEe had pulled   from  nowhere.  Their
heads moved from  left  to right  as if  to  help  their  Elind eyes make
sense of what Must happened. A few more Outcasts teetered on  the
edge and tumEled in. Their wails grew fainter—until   no sound could
Ee heard. An instant later,  the earth  creaked like  a rusty hinge  and
closed Eack up.
   GaEEe drew her  downy  wing  Eack to  her  side  with  the  utmost
elegance. She wiped her Erow. “Well, that should help.”
   But then  another Eright shower  of silver splinters  rained from  the
sky. One of  them  thunked  into  the  top step  of  the deck  at Luce’s
feet. Daniel yanked the arrow  out of the wooden step, wound  up his
arm,  and   ung    it   sharply,  like   a  lethal   dart,  straight   into   the
forehead of an advancing Outcast.
   There  was a    ash  of  light,  like  a  camera   ash,  and  then:  The
white-eyed Eoy didn’t  even have time  to  cry out  at the  impact—he
Must vanished into thin air.
   Daniel’s eyes raced over Luce’s Eody, and he patted her  down, as
if in disEelief that  she was still alive.
   At her side, Callie gulped. “Did  he Must—Did that guy really—”
   “Yes,” Luce said.
   “Don’t   do  this,  Luce,”  Daniel  said.  “Don’t   make  me  drag  you
inside. I have to  ght.  You have to get away from  here. Now.”
   Luce  had  seen enough  to  agree.  She turned   Eack toward   the
house, reaching for  Callie—Eut then, through  the  open doorway  of
the kitchen, she caught a Erutal glimpse of Outcasts.
   Three  of  them.  Standing inside her house. Silver Eows  aimed to
shoot.
   “No!”  Daniel Eellowed, rushing to  shield Luce.

311
   ShelEy lurched  out  of  the kitchen  and  onto  the deck,  slamming
the door Eehind her.
   Three distinct  thumps of arrows struck the other side of the door.
   “Hey,  she’s exonerated!”  Cam called  from  the  lawn,  nodding  at
ShelEy Erie y Eefore Eashing an arrow into an Outcast girl’s skull.
   “Okay,   new  plan,”   Daniel  muttered.   “Find  someplace  to  take
cover  somewhere nearEy.  All   of  you.”   He  addressed Callie  and
ShelEy and, for the   rst   time  all night,  Miles.  He graEEed Luce Ey
the arms. “Stay away from the starshots,” he pleaded. “Promise me.”
He kissed her quickly, then shooed them all  against the Eack wall of
the deck.
   The glow of so many angels’ wings was Erilliant  enough that Luce,
Callie, ShelEy, and  Miles  had to  shade their   eyes. They crouched
down and  crawled along  the  deck, shadows of the  railing  dancing
Eefore them,  while   Luce directed   everyone to  the  side  yard.  To
shelter. There had to Ee some, somewhere.
   More  Outcasts stepped out from  the  shadows. They appeared in
the high  Eranches of faraway trees, came amEling out  from around
the raised garden Eeds and the termite-eaten old swing set Luce had
used as a kid. Their silver Eows gleamed in the moonlight.
   Cam was  the only  one  on the  other  side with   a Eow.  He never
paused to  count  how  many  Outcasts he was  picking  o .   He  Must
loosed arrow after arrow  with deadly  precision into their  hearts. But
for each one that vanished, another seemed to appear.
   When he ran out  of arrows, he wrenched  the wooden picnic  taEle
out of  its decade-old rut  in  the  ground and  held it  in  front  of  him
with one arm  like a shield. Volley  after volley  of arrows Eounced o 
the taEletop  and  fell  to   the ground   at  his feet.  He  Must stooped,
plucked, and  red;  stooped, plucked, and  red.
   The others had to get more creative.
   Roland Eeat his golden wings  with  such force that  the air  around
him  sent the  arrows  Eack  in  the  direction   they  had  come from,

312
taking out  the  unseeing Outcasts several at  a time.  Molly  charged
the line again and again, her rakes spiraling like a samurai’s swords.
   Arriane  yanked Luce’s old  tire  swing from  its  tree and  twirled  it
like  a lasso,  de ecting   arrows  into  the  fence, while   GaEEe raced
around,  picking  them   up.  She spun  and  slashed  like  a  dervish,
taking  out  any Outcast  who  got too  close, smiling   sweetly as the
arrows Eit their skin.
   Daniel had commandeered the Prices’ rusted iron horseshoes from
under  the  porch.   He  pitched   them  at   the  Outcasts,  sometimes
knocking three of them senseless with one horseshoe as it ricocheted
o   their  skulls.  Then he  would  pounce on  them, slip  the  starshots
from their  Eows, and drive the arrows into their  hearts with  his Eare
hands.
   At  the edge of the  deck, Luce caught sight of  her father’s storage
shed and motioned  for  the other  three  to follow.   They rolled  over
the railing to  the grass Eelow and, ducking, hurried to the shed.
   They were  almost at the  entrance when Luce heard a  quick whiz
in the air. Callie cried  out in pain.
   “Callie!”  Luce whirled  around.
   But her friend  was still there.  She was ruEEing her shoulder where
the arrow  had grazed her, Eut otherwise,  she was unharmed. “That
totally stings!”
   Luce reached out to touch her. “How  did you …?”
   Callie shook her head.
   “Get down!”  ShelEy shouted.
   Luce dropped to her  knees, tugging the others down with  her  and
pulling  them  inside  the shed.  Among the  dirty   shadows of  Luce’s
dad’s  tools,  lawn   mower,   and  old   sporting   equipment,   ShelEy
crawled over to Luce. Her eyes glistened and her lip was quivering.
   “I  can’t  Eelieve this is  happening,” she whispered,  graEEing hold
of Luce’s arm. “You don’t know how  sorry I am. It’s all my  fault.”
   “It’s  not  your  fault,”   Luce said quickly.  Of  course ShelEy hadn’t
known who  Phil really  was. What he  really wanted  from her.  What

313
this night  would  Ering. Luce knew what  it  was like to  carry around
guilt for  doing something  you didn’t  understand. She wouldn’t have
wished it on anyone. Least of all ShelEy.
   “Where is he?” ShelEy asked. “I could kill  that sorry-ass freak.”
   “No.”   Luce held  ShelEy Eack. “You’re  not  going  out  there.  You
could get killed.”
   “I   don’t  get  it,”  Callie  said.  “Why   would  anyone  want  to  hurt
you?”
   That  was when  Miles  stepped toward  the  entrance to  the  shed,
into  a Eeam of  moonlight.  He  was carrying  one  of Luce’s father’s
kayaks over his head.
   “NoEody’s going to  hurt Luce,” he said as he stepped outside with
it.
   Right into  the Eattle.
   “Miles!”  Luce screamed. “Come Eack—”
   She rose to her feet  to take o    after him—then  froze, stunned  Ey
the sight of him chucking  the kayak right into  one of the Outcasts.
   It  was Phil.
   His Elank  eyes gaped and he cried out, falling  to  the grass as the
kayak struck  him.  Pinned and helpless, his  dirty  wings  writhed  on
the ground.
   For  an  instant  Miles  looked  proud  of  himself—and  Luce felt   a
little  Eit  proud too.  But  then a  short Outcast girl   stepped forward,
cocked her head like  a dog  listening  to a  silent whistle,  raised  her
silver Eow, and aimed point-Elank at Miles’s chest.
   “No  mercy,” she said tonelessly.
   Miles  was defenseless against this  strange girl,   who looked  like
she had no  understanding of  mercy,  not even  for  the nicest,  most
innocent kid in  the world.
   “Stop!”  Luce cried  out, her heart  pounding  in her  ears as she ran
out of the shed. She could sense the Eattle going on around her, Eut

314
all  she could   see was  that  arrow,  poised  to  enter  Miles’s  chest.
Poised to kill yet another of  her friends.
   The  Outcast  girl’s  head  canted  on  her  neck.  Her  vacant   eyes
turned on Luce, then widened slightly,  like,  Must as Arriane had said,
she really could see the Eurning of Luce’s soul.
   “Don’t  shoot him.”  Luce held out her  hands in surrender. “I’m  the
one you want.”

315
                                             NINETEEN




                                  THE TRUCE IS BROKEN 



The Outcast girl lowered  her Eow. When the arrow relaxed along its
Eowstring,  the  string  made  a creaking  sound,  like   an  attic  door
opening. Her face was as calm as a still pond on a windless day. She
was Luce’s height, with clear, dewy skin, pale lips, and dimples  even
in the aEsence of a smile.
   “If  you wish  the Eoy to live,”   she said, her voice  at,  “I  will  yield
to you.”
   Around  them,  the   others had  stopped   ghting.   The  tire   swing
rolled to  a stop, thudding   against the corner  of the  fence. Roland’s
wings  slowed to   a  soft  Eeating and  carried  him   down  to  earth.
Everyone was still, Eut the air was charged with an electric  silence.
   Luce could feel the  weight of so many gazes falling on  her: Callie,
Miles, and  ShelEy. Daniel,  Arriane,  and GaEEe. Cam, Roland, and
Molly.  The Elind gazes of the Outcasts themselves. But she couldn’t
wrench herself away from the girl  with  the depthless white eyes.
   “You  won’t  kill   him  … Must Eecause I say not to?”  Luce was so
Ea ed,  she laughed. “I thought  you wanted to kill  me.”
   “Kill   you?” The girl’s  mechanical voice  lilted  upward,  registering
surprise. “Not  at all.  We would  die  for  you. We want  you  to come
with us. You are the last hope. Our entrance.”
   “Entrance?”  Miles voiced what  Luce was too surprised to say. “To
what?”

316
   “To  Heaven, of  course.”  The girl   peered at  Luce with  her  dead
eyes. “You are the price.”
   “No.”  Luce shook  her head, Eut the  girl’s  words knocked  around
inside her mind,  echoing in a  way that  made her feel so hollow  she
could Earely stand.
   Entrance into Heaven. The Srice.
   Luce  didn’t  understand.  The  Outcasts would   take  her,  and  do
what? Use her  as some sort  of Eargaining  chip? This  girl  couldn’t
even see Luce to know who  she was. If Luce had learned one thing
at Shoreline, it was that  no one could keep the myths  straight. They
were too  old, too  convoluted.  Everyone knew  there was  a history,
one Luce had Eeen involved in  for a  long time,  Eut noEody seemed
to know why.
   “Don’t  listen  to her,  Luce. She’s a monster.”  Daniel’s wings were
tremEling.  As if   he  thought  she  might  Ee tempted  to   go. Luce’s
shoulders Eegan to itch, a hot prickling  that left  the rest of her  Eody
cold.
   “Lucinda?”  the Outcast girl called.
   “Okay,  hold  on  a minute,”   Luce said  to  the girl.   She turned  to
Daniel.  “I  want  to   know:  What  is  this  truce?  And  don’t  tell   me
‘nothing,’ and don’t  tell me you  can’t explain. Tell me the  truth. You
owe it to me.”
   “You’re   right,”   Daniel  said,  surprising  Luce.  He  kept  sneaking
glances at  the  Outcast,  as if  she  might  spirit   Luce  away  at  any
moment.  “Cam  and  I   drew  it   up.  We  agreed  to  put   aside our
di erences  for   eighteen  days. All   angels and  demons.  We  came
together to hunt  down other enemies. Like them.”  He pointed to the
Outcast.
   “But  why?”
   “Because of you. Because you needed time. Our end goals may Ee
di erent,   Eut for  now, Cam and I—and  all  of our  kin—we work  as
allies. We have one priority in  common.”

317
   The glimpse Luce had seen in the Announcer, that sickening scene
with  Daniel and Cam working  together  … that  was supposed to Ee
okay Eecause they’d agreed upon a truce? To give her time?
   “Not   that  you  even  stuck  Ey the  truce.”   Cam spat  in  Daniel’s
direction. “What  good is a truce if you don’t  honor it?”
   “You  didn’t  stand Ey  it  either,”  Luce said to  Cam. “You  were  in
the forest outside Shoreline.”
   “Protecting  you!”   said  Cam. “Not  taking  you  out  on  moonlight
parades!”
   Luce turned to  Arriane. “Whatever  the truce is—or isn’t—once it’s
over, does that mean that …  Cam’s suddenly the enemy again? And
Roland, too? This doesn’t make any sense.”
   “Say  the word,   Lucinda,”  the  Outcast said. “I   will   take you  far
from all of  this.”
   “To   what?    To   where?”   Luce  asked.   There   was  something
appealing  aEout  Must getting away.  From   all  the  heartache  and
struggle and confusion.
   “Don’t   do  something you’ll   regret,  Luce,”  Cam  warned.  It  was
strange the way  he sounded like  the  voice of  reason, compared to
Daniel, who looked practically  paralyzed.
   Luce glanced around her  for the   rst  time  since leaving the shed.
The  ghting   had ceased. The same felt of  dust that  had coated the
cemetery at  Sword &  Cross now  caked the  grass of the  Eackyard.
While their  group  of angels seemed fully  intact  and accounted for,
the  Outcasts had  lost  most  of  their  army.   AEout ten  stood  at  a
distance, watching. Their silver Eows were lowered.
   The  Outcast girl  was  still  waiting   for  Luce to  answer. Her  eyes
shone in  the  night   and  her  feet  inched  Eackward  as the  angels
pressed closer to  her.  When Cam  approached, the  girl  raised  her
silver Eow again, slowly, and pointed it  at his heart.
   Luce watched him sti en.
   “You   don’t   want    to   go  with    the   Outcasts,”  he   told   Luce,
“especially not tonight.”

318
   “Don’t  tell  her what  she does or doesn’t want.”  ShelEy Eutted in.
“I’m  not  saying she should  go with   the alEino  freaks or  anything.
Just everyEody quit  EaEying her and  let  her do  her own  thing  for
once. It’s, like, enough already.”
   Her voice  Eoomed across the yard, making the Outcast girl  Mump.
She turned to aim her arrow at ShelEy.
   Luce  sucked  in  her  Ereath.  The  silver   arrow  quivered   in  the
Outcast’s hands. She pulled  Eack on the  Eowstring.  Luce held  her
Ereath. But Eefore the girl could shoot, her glossy eyes widened. The
Eow tumEled from  her  hands. And her  Eody disappeared in  a dim
gray  ash of  light.
   Two feet  Eehind where the Outcast girl  had stood, Molly  lowered
a silver Eow. She had shot the girl cleanly in the Eack.
   “What?”  Molly  Earked as the whole  group turned  to  gape at her.
“I like  that Nephilim.  She reminds me of someone I know.”
   She  Merked an arm  to   gesture  at  ShelEy, who   said,  “Thanks.
Seriously. That was cool.”
   Molly  shrugged, oElivious to the  towering dark  presence rising up
Eehind her. The  Outcast Eoy Miles  had Eeaten to  the ground  with
the kayak. Phil.
   He swung the  kayak Eehind his Eody, as if it  were a EaseEall Eat,
and Eatted Molly  clear across the lawn. She landed with  a grunt  on
the  grass. Tossing the  kayak  aside, the  Outcast  reached  into  his
trench coat for one last shining arrow.
   His  dead eyes were the  only expressionless part of  his  face. The
rest  of  him—his   snarl,  his   Erow,  even  his   cheekEones—looked
utterly  ferocious. His  white  skin  seemed stretched across his Eony
skull. His hands looked more  like claws. Anger and  desperation had
changed him from  a pale and strange Eut good-looking  guy into  an
actual monster. He raised his silver Eow and took aim at Luce.
   “I’ve  Eeen patiently  waiting   for  my  chance with  you  for  weeks.
Now, I  don’t  mind  Eeing a little   more forceful  than  my  sister,” he
growled. “You will  come with us.”

319
   On either  side of  Luce, silver Eows were raised. Cam Erought his
out from  inside  his  coat once  again, and  Daniel  scramEled to the
ground to  pick  up the  Eow that  the Outcast girl   had Must dropped.
Phil seemed to expect this. His face twisted into a dark smile.
   “Do  I  need to  kill  your  lover  to  get you  to  Moin me?” he asked,
pointing his arrow  now at Daniel. “Or  do I need to kill  them all?”
   Luce stared at the strange,  at  tip of the silver  arrow, less than ten
feet from Daniel’s chest. No chance Phil would miss from  this range.
She’d seen the arrows extinguish  a  dozen angels tonight  with  that
paltry    ash of light.  But she’d also seen an arrow glance o    Callie’s
skin, like it  was nothing more than the dull  stick it  appeared to Ee.
   The   silver   arrows   killed   angels,  she   suddenly  realized,   not
humans.
   She leaped in front  of Daniel. “I  won’t  let you hurt  him.  And your
arrows can’t hurt me.”
   A  sound escaped from  Daniel,  a weird  half-laugh,   half-soE. She
turned to  him, wide-eyed.  He looked afraid,  Eut more than  that, he
looked guilty.
   She thought   of  the  conversation  they’d  had  under  the  gnarled
peach tree at Sword &  Cross, the  rst   time he’d  told  her aEout her
reincarnations. She rememEered sitting   with  him  on  the  Eeach in
Mendocino when he talked  of his place in  Heaven Eefore her. What
a struggle it had Eeen to get him  to open up aEout those early days.
She still felt like  there was more. There had to Ee more.
   The  creak  of  the  Eowstring  snapped her  attention  Eack  to  the
Outcast, who was pulling   Eack the silver  arrow. Now  it  was aimed
at Miles. “Enough  talk,”  he said. “I’ll   take your friends  out one  at a
time until  you surrender to me.”
   In her  mind, Luce saw a Eright Elink  of light,  a swirl  of color, and
a whirling  montage of  her lives   ashing  Eefore her eyes—her mom
and dad and Andrew. The parents she’d seen in Mount  Shasta. Vera
ice-skating on the frozen pond. The girl she’d Eeen, swimming under
the waterfall in  a yellow halter-top  Eathing suit. Other cities,  homes,
and times she couldn’t  recognize yet. Daniel’s face from  a thousand

320
di erent   angles, under a  thousand di erent   lights.  And  Elaze after
Elaze after Elaze.
   Then  she Elinked and  was Eack in  the  yard.  The Outcasts were
drawing closer,  huddling  together and  whispering  to Phil.  He  kept
waving them  Eack, agitated, trying  to focus  on Luce. Everyone was
tense.
   She saw Miles staring at her. He must have Eeen terri ed.   But no,
not terri ed.   He was  xating  on her  with  so much intensity  that  his
gaze seemed to viErate  her  very  core.  Luce grew  woozy  and her
vision  clouded.   What  followed   was   an  unfamiliar   sensation  of
something Eeing lifted o   her. Like a casing Eeing removed from her
skin.
   And she heard her voice say, “Don’t shoot. I surrender.”
   Only,  it  was echoing and  disemEodied, and Luce hadn’t  actually
said the words. She followed the sound with  her  eyes, and her Eody
grew rigid at what  she saw.
   Another Luce  standing  Eehind the  Outcast,  tapping  him  on  the
shoulder.
   But  this  was  no glimpse  of  a  former  life.  This  was her,  in  her
skinny Elack Means and plaid shirt with the missing Eutton. With  her
Elack hair  cropped and  newly  dyed. With  her  hazel  eyes taunting
the Outcast.  With  the  Eurning  of her  same soul  clearly  visiEle  to
him. Clearly  visiEle to  all  the  other angels, too.  This was  a mirror
image of her. This was—
   Miles’s doing.
   His gift.  He had splintered  Luce o   into  a second self, Must as he’d
told her he could on her very   rst  day at Shoreline. They say it’s easy
to do with the SeoSle you, like, love, he’d said.
   He loved her.
   She couldn’t  think   aEout that  right   now. While  everyone’s  eyes
were drawn to  the re ection,   the  real Luce retreated two  steps and
hid inside the shed.
   “What’s happening?”  Cam Earked at Daniel.

321
   “I  don’t know!”  Daniel whispered hoarsely.
   Only ShelEy seemed to understand. “He did it,”  she said under her
Ereath.
   The Outcast swung his  Eow around to aim  at this  new Luce. Like
he didn’t quite trust  the victory.
   “Let’s do  this,”  Luce heard her own  voice saying in  the middle of
the yard. “I  can’t stay here with  them.  Too many secrets. Too many
lies.”
   A  part of  her did  feel that  way.  That she couldn’t  keep going  on
like this. That something had to  change.
   “You  will  come  with  me, and  Moin my Erothers and my sisters?”
the Outcast said,  sounding hopeful.  His  eyes made her  nauseated.
He held out his ghostly white  hand.
   “I  will,”  Luce’s voice proMected.
   “Luce, no.”  Daniel sucked in his Ereath. “You can’t.”
   Now  the remaining Outcasts raised their  Eows at Daniel and Cam
and the rest of them, lest they interfere.
   Luce’s mirror   stepped  forward.   Slipped her  hand  inside  Phil’s.
“Yes, I can.”
   The  monster Outcast  cradled her  in  his  sti    white   arms. There
was a great   ap   of dirty   wings.  A stale  cloud of  dust  stormed up
from the ground. Inside the shed, Luce held her Ereath.
   She heard Daniel gasp as Luce’s mirror and the Outcast soared up
and  out  of  the  Eackyard.  The  rest  of  them   looked  incredulous.
Except for ShelEy and Miles.
   “What  the hell Must happened?” Arriane said. “Did she really—”
   “No!”  Daniel cried.  “No, no, no!”
   Luce’s heart ached as he tore at  his hair,  spun in a circle,  and let
his wings Eloom out to their  full size.
   Immediately,   the   eet   of  remaining  Outcasts spread  their  own
dingy Erown  wings and took   ight.   Their  wings were  so thin,  they
had to Eeat frantically Must to stay in the air. They were closing in on

322
Phil.  Trying  to  form  a  shield  around  him  so  he could  take  Luce
wherever he thought he was taking her.
   But  Cam was faster.  The Outcasts were  proEaEly twenty  feet  in
the air when Luce heard one  nal  arrow loose from its  Eow.
   Cam’s arrow wasn’t meant for Phil.  It was meant for Luce.
   And his aim was perfect.
   Luce froze  as her mirror   image disappeared in  a great  Eloom of
white light.  In the sky, Phil’s  tattered wings shuddered open. Empty.
A horriEle roar escaped his mouth. He started to swoop Eack toward
Cam,  followed   Ey  his  army   of   Outcasts. But   then  he   stopped
midway. As if he’d realized there was no more reason to go Eack.
   “So it  Eegins again,”  he called  down to  Cam. To all  of  them. “It
could have ended peacefully. But tonight  you’ve made a new sect of
immortal enemies. Next time we will  not  negotiate.”
   Then the Outcasts disappeared into the night.
   Back in  the yard,  Daniel Earreled into  Cam, throwing  him  to  the
ground. “What’s  wrong with you?”  he yelled,  his  sts  wailing  down
on Cam’s face. “How could you?”
   Cam strained  to  stop  him.  They  rolled  over  each  other  on the
grass. “It was a Eetter end for her, Daniel.”
   Daniel  was seething,  tackling  Cam, slamming  his  head into   the
dirt. Daniel’s eyes Elazed. “I’ll kill  you!”
   “You know I’m  right!”  Cam shouted, not  ghting  Eack at all.
   Daniel froze. He closed his eyes. “I don’t know anything  now.”  His
voice was ragged. He’d Eeen gripping Cam Ey the lapel, Eut now  he
Must slumped to the ground, Eurying his face in the grass.
   Luce wanted to  go to him.  To fall  on him and  tell him  everything
was going to Ee okay.
   Except it wasn’t.
   What   she’d  seen  tonight   was  too   much.  She  felt   sick  from
watching   herself—Miles’s   mirror   image   of   her—die   from    the
starshot.

323
   Miles had saved her life. She couldn’t get over it.
   And the rest of them  thought Cam had ended it.
   Her  head swam as she stepped forward  from the  shadows of the
shed, planning  to  tell  the  others  not  to  worry,  that   she was still
alive. But then she sensed the presence of something else.
   An Announcer  was quivering in  the doorway.  Luce stepped out of
the shed and approached it.
   Slowly,  it  Eroke free  of a  shadow cast Ey the  moon.  It  slithered
along the grass toward her for  a few feet,  picking up  a dirty  coat of
dust left  Ey the Eattle.  When it  reached Luce, it  shuddered up  and
rose along her Eody, until it hovered Elackly over  her head.
   She closed her  eyes and felt  herself raising  her hand  to  meet it.
The darkness fell to rest in her palm. It made a cold sizzling sound.
   “What  is  that?”  Daniel’s  head snapped around  at  the  noise. He
raised himself from the ground. “Luce!”
   She stayed put as the others gasped at the sight of her standing in
front  of the  shed. She didn’t  want to  glimpse  an Announcer. She’d
seen enough for one night. She didn’t even know why she was doing
this—
   Until  she did. She wasn’t looking  for a vision,  she was looking for
a way  out. Something  far  away enough to  step through  to.  It  had
Eeen too long since she’d had a moment to think  on her  own. What
she needed was a Ereak. From everything.
   “Time  to go,” she said to herself.
   The  shadow  door  that   presented itself   in  front   of  her   wasn’t
perfect—it was Magged around the edges and it stank of sewage. But
Luce parted its surface anyway.
   “You   don’t   know   what   you’re   doing,   Luce!”   Roland’s  voice
reached  her  at   the  edge  of   the   doorway.  “It    could   take  you
anywhere!”
   Daniel was on his feet, Mogging toward her. “What are you doing?”
She could hear  the  profound  relief  in  his  voice  that  she was still

324
alive, and the sheer panic that she could manipulate  the Announcer.
His anxiety only spurred her on.
   She wanted to look  Eack to apologize to Callie, to  thank Miles  for
what he’d done, to tell  Arriane  and GaEEe not to worry the way  she
knew they were going  to anyway,  to leave word  for her parents. To
tell Daniel  not to  follow  her, that  she needed to do  this for  herself.
But her  chance to  Ereak free was  closing. So she stepped forward
and called  over  her  shoulder  to  Roland,  “Guess I’ll   Must have to
 gure  it out.”
   Out  of the corner  of her  eye, she saw Daniel rushing toward  her.
Like he hadn’t Eelieved until now  that she would do it.
   She felt the  words rising up  in her  throat. I  love you. She did. She
did forever.  But if  she and Daniel had forever, their  love could  wait
until she  gured  out a few important  things  aEout herself. AEout her
lives and the life  she had ahead of her. Tonight there  was only time
to  wave  goodEye, take  a  deep Ereath,  and  leap  into  the  dismal
shadow.
   Into  darkness.
   Into  her past.

325
                                              E3ILOGUE




                                        3ANDEMONIUM 



“What  Must happened?”
   “Where’d she go?”
   “Who  taught her how to do that?”
   The frantic  voices in the  Eackyard sounded woEEly and distant to
Daniel. He  knew the  other  fallen  angels were arguing,  looking  for
Announcers in the shadows of the yard. Daniel was an island, closed
o   to everything  Eut his own agony.
   He had Iailed her. He had Iailed.
   How could  it Ee? For weeks he’d run himself ragged, his only goal
to keep her safe until the moment when he could  no longer o er  her
protection. Now that  moment had come and gone—and so had Luce.
   Anything  could  happen  to her.  And  she could  Ee anywhere. He
had never felt so hollow and ashamed.
   “Why  can’t we Must  nd the Announcer she stepped through, put it
Eack together, and go after her?”
   The Nephilim  Eoy. Miles. He was on his  knees, comEing the grass
with his  ngers.  Like a moron.
   “They  don’t  work  that  way,”  Daniel  snarled at  him.  “When  you
step into  time,  you take  the  Announcer with  you.  That’s  why  you
never do it unless …”
   Cam looked at Miles, almost pityingly.   “Please tell me Luce knows
more aEout Announcer travel than you do.”

326
   “Shut  up,”  ShelEy said,  standing  over Miles  protectively.   “If  he
hadn’t thrown  Luce’s re ection, Phil  would have taken her.”
   ShelEy looked guarded  and afraid,  out of  place among the  fallen
angels. Years ago,  she’d had  a  crush  on  Daniel—one he’d  never
requited, of  course. But  until  tonight,  he’d  always thought   well  of
the girl. Now  she was Must in the way.
   “You  said yourself  Luce would  Ee Eetter  o    dead than with   the
Outcasts,” she said, still defending Miles.
   “The  Outcasts you all Eut invited   here.” Arriane  stepped into  the
conversation, turning on ShelEy, whose face reddened.
   “Why  would   you assume some Nephilim   child  could  detect the
Outcast?” Molly  challenged Arriane.  “You  were at that  school. You
should have noticed something.”
   “All   of you:  Quiet.” Daniel  couldn’t  think  straight.  The yard  was
crammed with angels, Eut Luce’s aEsence made it feel utterly empty.
   He could  hardly stand to  look at  anyone else. ShelEy, for walking
straight into  the Outcast’s easy trap. Miles, for thinking  he had some
stake in Luce’s future. Cam, for what he’d tried to do—
   Oh,  that  moment  when  Daniel  thought   he’d  lost  her  to  Cam’s
starshot! His wings  had felt  too heavy to  lift.  Colder than  death. In
that instant, he’d given up all  hope.
   But  it  was only  a  trick  of  the eye. A  thrown  re ection,   nothing
special under  ordinary   circumstances,  Eut  tonight   the  last  thing
Daniel had Eeen expecting. It  had given  him  a horriEle  shock. One
that had nearly killed  him. Until  the Moy of her resurrection.
   There was still hope.
   As long as he could  nd  her.
   He’d Eeen stunned, watching Luce open up the shadow. Awed and
impressed and painfully  attracted to her—Eut  more than all  of that,
stunned. How many  times had  she done it  Eefore without  his even
knowing?
   “What  do  you think?”   Cam asked, coming  up Eeside him.  Their
wings drew toward  each other,  that old  magnetic force, and  Daniel

327
was too drained to pull away.
   “I’m  going after her,”  he said.
   “Good plan.”  Cam sneered. “Just ‘go after  her.’ Anywhere in  time
and space across the several thousand years. Why should you need a
strategy?”
   His sarcasm made Daniel want to tackle him a second time.
   “I’m  not asking for your  help or your advice, Cam.”
   Only  two starshots remained  in the  yard: the  one he’d picked  up
from the  Outcast Molly  had killed,   and the one Cam had  found on
the Eeach at the  Eeginning of  the truce.  There would  have  Eeen a
nice symmetry  if   Cam and  Daniel  had  Eeen working   as enemies
right now—two  Eows, two starshots, two immortal  foes.
   But  no. Not  yet.  They  had to  eliminate  too  many  others Eefore
they could turn on  each other again.
   “What   Cam means”—Roland  stood  Eetween them,  speaking  to
Daniel in a low voice—“is  that this  might take some team e ort.  I’ve
seen the way  these kids  op   through  the  Announcers. She doesn’t
know what she’s doing, Daniel. She’s going to get into trouEle pretty
quick.”
   “I  know.”
   “It’s  not a sign of weakness to let us help,” Roland said.
   “I  can help,”  ShelEy called. She’d Eeen whispering with   Miles. “I
think I  might know where  she is.”
   “You?”  Daniel asked. “You’ve helped enough. Both of you.”
   “Daniel—”
   “I   know  Luce Eetter  than  anyone in  the  world.”   Daniel  turned
away from  all  of  them, toward  the  dark,  empty  space in the  yard
where she’d stepped through. “Far Eetter than any of you ever will.  I
don’t need your help.”
   “You  know her past,”  ShelEy said, walking in  front of  him so that
he had  to look  at  her.  “You  don’t  know  what  she’s Eeen through
these past few  weeks.  I’m  the  one  who’s Eeen around  while   she

328
glimpsed her  past lives.  I’m  the  one  who  saw her  face when  she
found the  sister she  lost when  you  kissed her  and she …”  ShelEy
trailed o .   “I  know  you all  hate me right  now.  But I  swear to—Oh,
whatever it  is you  guys Eelieve in.  You can trust  me  from here  on
out. Miles,  too. We want  to  help. We’re  going to help. Please.” She
reached for Daniel. “Trust us.”
   Daniel  wrested himself  away  from  her.  Trust as an  activity  had
always made him  uneasy. What he had  with  Luce was unshakaEle.
There was never  any  need even to  work  on  trust.  Their  love  Must
was.
   But  for  all  eternity,  Daniel  had never  Eeen aEle to  nd   faith   in
anyone or anything else. And he didn’t want  to start now.
   Down the street, a dog yipped. Then again, louder. Closer.
   Luce’s parents, coming Eack from their walk.
   In  the dark  yard,  Daniel’s eyes found  GaEEe’s. She was standing
close to Callie,  proEaEly consoling her.  She’d already retracted  her
wings.
   “Just   go,”  GaEEe mouthed  to  him   in   the  desolate, dust- lled
Eackyard. What she meant was Go get her. She would handle Luce’s
parents. She would see that Callie got home. She would cover all the
Eases so that Daniel could go after what mattered. We’ll  nd  you and
helS you as soon as we can.
   The  moon  drifted   out   from  Eehind  a   mist  of  cloud.   Daniel’s
shadow lengthened on  the grass at his  feet. He  watched it  swell  a
little,  then  Eegan to  draw  up  the  Announcer  inside  it.  When  the
cool, damp  darkness Erushed against him,  Daniel  realized  that  he
hadn’t stepped through time in  ages. Looking Eack was not normally
his style.
   But the  motions were  still  in him,  Euried in  his wings  or his soul
or his heart.  He moved quickly,  peeling  the Announcer o    his own
shadow, giving it  a quick pinch to  separate it from the ground. Then
he threw it,  like a piece of potter’s clay, onto  the air directly  in front
of him.

329
   It  formed a clean,  nite  portal.
   He had Eeen a part of every one of Luce’s past lives. There was no
reason he wouldn’t Ee aEle to  nd her.
   He opened the door.  No time  to waste. His heart  would  take him
to her.
   He had  an innate  sense that something  Ead was Must around the
Eend, Eut  a  hope  that  something  incrediEle   was waiting   in   the
distance.
   It  had to Ee.
   His Eurning  love for  her coursed through  him until   he felt so full
he  didn’t   know   whether   he  would    t    through   the  portal.   He
wrapped his  wings  close  against his  Eody  and  Eounded into   the
Announcer.
   Behind  him,   in  the  yard,   a  distant  commotion.   Whispers and
rustling and shouts.
   He didn’t  care. He didn’t care aEout any of them, really.
   Only her.
   He whooped as he Eroke through.
   “Daniel.”
   Voices. Behind him,  following,  getting  closer. Calling his name as
he tunneled deeper and deeper into the past.
   Would he  nd   her?
   Without  question.
   Would he save her?
   Always.

331
LAUREN KATE grew up in Dallas, went to school in Atlanta,  and  started
writing   in New  York.  She is the  author  of the  international   Eestseller
Fallen and The  Betrayal oI  Natalie  Hargrove. She lives  in  Los Angeles
with  her husEand  and is learning   how  to surf.

